Summa Totalis OR, All in All, and, the same for ever: Or, an Addition to Mirum
in Modum.

By the first Author, John Dauies.

Those Lines which all, or none perceive aright
Have neither Judgment, Art, Wit, Life, or Spright.
LONDON Printed by William Iaggard dwelling in Barbican. 1607.

To the right Honorable mine approved good Lord and Master, Thomas Lord
Elsmere, Lord Chancellor of England: and to his Right Noble Lady, and Wife
Alice, Countess of Derby, my good Lady and Mistress, be all felicity,
consisting in the sight of the Obiectiue Beatitude.
THe Time, my duty, and your dear desert,
(Deservedly Right Noble) do conspire,
To make me consecrate [besides my Heart]
This IMAGE to you, forged with heavenly Fire!
The Exodus, 33, 23
Backe-parts of his FORM, who formed this ALL,
(Characterd by the Hand of loving Fear)
Are shaddovv'd here: but (ah) they are too small
To show their greatness, which never Job, 36 29
compast were!
But, though that Greatness be past Psalm, 86, 8
quantity,
And Goodness does all quality exceed,
Yet I, this Form of Formelesse DEITY,
Drew by the Squire, and Compass of our CREED:
Then (with your greater GVIFTS) accept this small;
Yet (being right) it is more then ALL in All!
Your Honors in all duty, most bounden;

John Dauies of Here ford.

SUMMA TOTALIS.
MY Soul, sad Soul, now sommon al thy Povvres
To seek out Mysteries past finding out!
But first, inuoke the Heavens to stream their Showers
Of Divine Graces on thee, to disrout
The Clouds of darkness, which ingirt thy Head, and Heart
Towers,
And that vncompast god
Round thou go about!
If traveling by Night we pray for Day,
Now must we going [blind] a wailesse Way.
O Thou great Kindler of Divine desire,
(Dear Light of James, 1, 7,
Lights, without which all is Hell)
Before me Psalm, 5. 8
go, with Flames of Heavenly Fire,
By which I may my Compass keep so well
That on these groundless, boundless Seas that swell
To ouerwhelme me, I may safely go,
The Psalm, 107 23 24, 25. 26
Wonders of those Deepes abroad to tell:
Calm Fancies Storms, and let my Course be slow:
For have therein may speed mine overthrow.
Erect my Thoughts, direct my Judgment so
That neither, either do misgo, or tire;
And let my Numbers with that fury flow
Which thou alone in Wisdom, set'st on fire;
Make all my Measures meet in Truth entire:
That is in thee (Sole god only is true, and eve ry man a lier
Truth:) for out of Thee
Are naught but Errors Rocks, and Vices Mire,
To wrack al those that travel Truth to see
Without thy Compass, wherein compass me.
First, forthy Name! (since It al Thoughts transcends,
Much more all Words) here, at my setting out,
(Since thy WORD only thy name comprehends)
I Will balke It, as a Gulf of deepest God can have no proper name for his nature.
doubt!
Therefore a further way I Will go about
To seek thy nature: so, thy name to find;
And, as I go I Will send forth Care my Scout,
To see my passage clear before, behind,
Wherein my Muse must glide to know thy kind.
Then, at thy Properties I will begin,
(Now bless my Course; for, I am lau^cht From God, to God.
from Land)
Which are (as they eternally have been)
Of thy mere Essence: where they do not stand
As Accidents in Substance: for, thy Hand
Thrusts from thy Substance, Accidents, and all
That seek to bring thy boundless Power in Band:
For, thou art free, and hold that in thrall
(How ever great) that seeks to make thee small.
Thy Porperties, and Attributes are Gods Properties, and Attributes are one,
and why?
one:
For, all is proper, that attributes ought
To thee, if free from imperfection,
Hate, Anger, and the like, in us are naught;
But in thee good, and just, and as they ought
Thou can love ardently, and never dote!
And hate extremely, without hateful There is no passion in the Deity.
thought!
But, they in us can never escape the note
Of both, when both those Passions are aflote.
Thou give thy self those Titles in thy Style:
And not so much to stoup to us thereby.
(To make us know thee, by ourselves, the while)
But, for they are in thee most really;
yet, not [as in vs] Ill, and diversely:
In us they Qualities, and Virtues be;
But in Thee they are most essentially!
Many in us, but only one in Thee;
Since with thy simple Essence they agree,
Thou art omnipotent, just, gracious, wise;
yet not as they are diverse, but as one: God is good, gracious, wise etc only
by his simple Essence.

For these be thine essential Properties,
Which in thee meet in perfect Union
To make Thee simply great, and good alone!
Then from thee, great- Good, now I Will turn my speech
Unto mine Equals in Creation;
Since Folly fears to Wisdoms Sp'rit to preach
Myself, and others, teach me then, to teach.
Then, even- Christians, let an abject one
(With your allowance) spend his powrelesse might
In ernest search of this Trin-vnion,
As far as of himself he gives me sight,
Either by Natures, or diuiner light,
Whereby I see his Actions fixed are still
Unto his Properties, which act aright: Gods actions are tied unto his
properties.

For through Love he does love, and will through Will:
And, so he does, what he does else fulfill.
Which Properties are two fold: some there be
Every way proper to his nature blessed:
As his Omnipotence, Vbiquitie,
Eternity, sole- Wisdom, and the rest:
With these nor Men, nor Angels can be dressed.
Others in part, and by Comparison;
As Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, may inuest
Man, his viue Image, (Brother of his Son)
But, not (as in Them) in perfection!
For, since they are Substantially in God Wisdom, Justice, etc. are
substantially in God: but in man, accidentally.

(And not, as in Man, casually they be)
They must be odly even, since eu'nly odd
Is He, in whom they are no Trinity,
Though so He be in strictest Unity:
But being of Him, wholly infinite,
They must be One by their infinity:
For, were they many, they were definite;
And for the weight of his Worth too too light.
Who is a NATVRE supernatural! God is a supernatural nature.

So say Divines, so says Philosophy:
Which call God, Nature, naturizing all
That was, or is, or shall, in nature, be:
The Creature then, is so of Him that he
Is not his nature; nor, may he be Styled
Nature her self: though as she is a She
She Is but a Creature, now with sin defiled,
Yet makes she All for Prou. 16, 4
God; and Man's her Child.
So, Nature made, the Maker made to make
All Things beneath his Seat, for him alone:
Not that He after toil need rest to take;
Nor can He toil, though still in Action,
Yet acts by subordination.
To NATVRE, nature's then, subordinate;
That made, to that without Creation:
The first, makes by the last (in love or hate)
What is in natural, or monstrous state.
In which respect some wicked Maniches
Ones there were
Affirmed two Natures in the Diety:
That Is good, and bad; since so it seems t'appeare
In things created Angels were not without iniquity.
universally:
But unto GOD they did great injury
To multiply his nature, being One;
And so make Gods by such plurality:
Then in that Nature, purely good alone,
To put in Ill, does put him from his Throne.
Though to him often, Hate ascribed be,
Yet that in him, is simply, good, and just,
For, he thereby impugns Impiety:
And, in his wrath, he does (what Justice must)
Scowre, Ill from Good; since Evil, Good does rust:
Yet, he to Wrath still goes with Joel, 2, 13
Leaden feet,
Since his Wrathes hands are iron that bray to dust:
But he, in mercy, flies the Meek to meet,
On feet that winged are to make them fleet.
When he Exodus 34, 6, 7.
proclaimed his Styles magnificence
To Moses.
him, to whom he gave his Laws for us,
He used more words in Merciful, gracious flo to anger, and abundant in
goodness and truth; compared with not making the wicked innocent, and visiting
of in iquity.
number, more in sense
To note his Mercy, then his Justice; Thus
His Mercy, ore his Wrath's victorious:
But yet his Justice to extenuate
To graund his Grace is sacrilegious:
Both are most great, and good; and most do hate
Comparisons unequal, breeding bate.
For, as a perfect Circle does contain
Full as much length, as breadth; and depth as height: Simil.

So, in God.
Him all things equal do remain
By his infinity, and boundless might,
That in themselves do keep on compass right!
Then, all in God, is GOD; since he is all:
One, and the same: that is, all infinite;
And, of himself super-substanciall
Being all one Cause of All in general!
But, with Truths warrant we may this avouch,
That since christ Jesus the God of grace.
GRACE did his Justice satisfy
(For his Elect) it is contracted much;
Nay taken away; at least made temporary:
Yet both do meet in one infinity
In the salvation of each chosen-One:
For, just he deemes it (and most righteously)
To save th'vniust, made most justin his Son,
Who is the Sum of all perfection!
Then, here is place, great place, for Hope, and Fear;
But more for Hope, then Fear: and yet the lack
Of Fear, through Hope, does make us often appear
As unjust Judges, that do Justice Rack
While they for it (by it) go quite to wrack.
To hope, and not hate sin, most fearful is;
As Fear is when no Hope, no Sin does back:
"But when Love fears to sin, Hop's nere amiss:
Then, kind are Hope, and Fear, when thus they kiss.
Then, as the right use of this knowledge hy
[The knowledge of the highest EXCELLENCE!]
Is sweet, and safe: so, the abuse does lie
Wide open to the spoils of foul Offense;
Which does his Justice most of all incense:
The use is; not to know him as he is;
But, him to love, and serve with reverence:
The Abuse is; making his just Propertis
Unequal; while we live, and hope amiss.
For lesse'ning of his Justice, we presume
Upon his mercy most unjustly; whence
Come all the shapes of sin our Souls assume,
Worse then the effects of too much diffidence:
For, sins presumptious, Justice most incense.
To mind great mercy, when great fears affright
Is meet, if meet be [likewise] penitence;
But, when we ween such mercy is our right,
To mind great Justice then, does mend our plight.
To hope, and live well, fearelesse, still we may;
To hope, and live ill's, worse then mortal Fear;
For, it, to death, our Souls does soon'st betray:
"Then hope we well, when well our selves we bear;
But, when we fall, let Fear with Hope us rear.
To know if we be worthy Hate or Love,
Does not still easily to us appear:
Then still to know, it does us still behoue
Lowly to move to God is charity
Love, Hate to remove.
For, some have made their nests Obediah, 1 4.
the Stars among
That soon'st have down bin ding'd to lowest Deepes:
And othersome, from lying but in Psalm, 113. 6
dung,
Above the Heavens are heau'd: for, low he creepes
(Strange Paradox) that soonest climb those Steepes!
When we do creep (though high we climb withal)
We seldom slide; for, care our footing keeps:
But when we stand on Tip-toe, on a Ball,
(Though sliding still) we Die reprobates.
finally must fall.
But here my Muse, repose thee with Apollo,
That now is fallen asleep in Tethis Bed;
That as he does, so thou thy work may follow;
Then sleep with him, while Angels hold thy head,
And heavenly visions may therein be bred:
Go soft and fair; thus much at once is much,
In ways that Mists, and Brambles ouerspred,
Where have makes waste: for, Briers entangle such
That there would post, and make their Souls to gruch.
NOw rouse thee Muse, prevent Apollos rising,
And ruminate on that which thou have seen:
Thy Way is old, then shun new ways devising:
For all devises from this way have been,
The ways to wrack, though nere so gaudy green:
And though it be obscure as it is steep,
(And thou in it may soon be ouerseene)
Yet (Snaile-like) cling to it, and climbing creep,
But fall not off it; for, the fall is deep.
This sovereign NATVRE, (nature Styled is he
When that first Person often is understood
That is the Fountain of the Trinity)
The substance cannot share of his Godhood
But to his Son, and to their Spirit, his brood:
Nor can he to his Son, as he is Man,
His essence give, in truth or likely hood:
For he that is Eternal never can
His Being give to that which once began.
Nor yet can he beget another Son
Of his own substance: for, if so he could
He should be mutable by generation;
And so could Diety no longer hold:
For, that nere changes as the other should.
Or, could two Spirits come from the Sire' and Son
As they are God, then God were manifold;
But he is merely, singly-simply One,
One Trinity in perfect Union.
And if he could himself to ought impart
But them; in part, or whole it needs must be:
In part he cannot: for, he has no part;
And much less wholly: for, he then should see
His Creature wholly God as well as he:
And were our Souls (that he made to his Form)
Part of his Form, it sins as well as we;
But sin he cannot, nor himself deforme
To share himself to Man, is said to be man, in respect of his form; which is
his Soul.
man, a sinful worm.
And though we are his Acts, 17. 28
Generation,
And are partakers of his 2. Pet 1, 4
Nature to:
Yet, are we not so of that only One.
As of his Substance; so, to make him two:
But, we are borne of him when Do virtuously.
well we do:
That Is of his grace, by his uniting Sp'rite:
And, when our Souls that Spirit is come into,
He makes us act his Motions with delight:
And so are said to have one Nature right.
But where some say, GOD, is Man, really;
And Man is God: thence falsely gathering
That the whole Essence of the Diety
Is grow'n to Man, though it from God did spring,
As if the personall-Vnion wrought the thing:
But, though that God, and Man one person be,
Yet they to either no confusion bring;
But are so bound, as they are ever free
From all confusion in their unity.
Man's Body has a Soul; both, make one Man;
Yet each in each does not themselves suffuse:
His Soul's immortal, (though it once began)
His Body's mortal; which the Soul does use;
And, in the seu'rall parts does life infuse:
So, Man, and God, one compound person make;
And yet their compound does not them confuse:
For, neither ^eithers Essence does partake,
Yet eithers Essence neithers can forsake.
For, though, the persons of the Godhead are
Distinguished, It must not divided be:
So, does it with that Man-Gods natures fare;
Which we divide not, for diversity,
But them distinguish, for their unity!
Division argues imperfection;
But, true distinction still, the contrary;
Since it discernes what is proper to each One;
And so preuenteth all confusion.
Then God, as Man, was synlesse passionate:
And, Man, as God, no passion can effect:
God, suffered in the flesh, in wretched state;
But Man, as God, is free from such effect:
For, in Omnipotence is no defect!
True Miracles raisd hythe Godheads fame;
The Manhoods, injuries did quite dyiect:
God died in flesh; as God, revived the same;
Thus, neithers Form transformeth eithers Frame.
And, of the whole Compound, that is said, and meant,
That Is said of any one; for, the Man-Christ
Is perfect God; and so omnipotent;
And perfect Man; so, lower then the highest:
Yet happy Thou, that on the low'st reliest:
For, if the Compound cannot parted be
Thou diestin God (who ere thou art) that die
In Christ, the Man: since God, and Man is he
But, altogether, God in highest degree.
If so, then so he must be every where;
He is, and is not so: but since this Strain
May strain my wit, I will the same forbear,
While greater Clerks about it beat their brain:
For Life, or Deaths Lifeblood, lies in this vain.
From questions of this kind, (since questionless
They endless seem) I willingly refrain,
And seek a Power expresseles to express,
That is, to show what God I do profess.
But some may say I cannot that effect,
Unless I show what God my Jesus is:
I grant no less, confessing my defect;
Nay, willingly confess much more then this
I am unworthy the least grace of his:
Yet by his power, my silly strength i will strain
To show, as he is God, his properties;
And though they be too high to be too plain,
I hope i will touch with truth, though try with pain.
Plato (surnamed Divine, for his deep sight)
(Though seeing by nature in Divinity)
Put God into the world (though most unright)
But as the Soul thereof, and yet his eye
Espied withal a higher Diety;
Which he the first Mind styled, or this Souls Sire,
But here is no Unity in Trinity,
Here Is truth in part, but not Faiths truth entire,
Then this Truth is not squared by Platoes squire.
He thought that as Man's Soul his Body swaid,
So, God, the World: but, here he truth deformes:
And, by her Test, appears too much alaid:
For, our Souls rule our Bodies as their Forms;
But God, as th'acting Cause, the same performs:
How ever true; an universal God, is the Soul of the World; not fomally, but
effectually.
Soul
May sway the Universe; yet he informs
That Soul with Skill, who all in all does rule,
Else Order fair, would be disorder foul.
Then, He Is the God of Order, ordering
All that does Order keep in all this All:
And yet, most simple is in every thing;
For, nothing Spiritual, or Corporal
Into his Substance infinite, can fall!
He is a Spirit so spiritual, that he
(Of purpose) does himself Jehovah call:
The Letters of which Word all Spiritual be,
Since from our Spirit, or Breath alone they flee.
No Spirits are mixed; then, much less their Sire:
Our Souls are simple, though by sin impure:
For, were they mixed, they should again retire
To their first Compound; so, could not endure
Immortally; and so were Faith unsure.
And naught can mix, or make it self: for, then
It is, before it is, in act, or power:
Which cannot be in neither: and again
No Time, or Place were for it, where, or when:
For, Place was made in time, and Heb, 1, 2
Time was made
By motion of the Heaven (the cheifest place)
And naught does move (as Reason does persuade)
That moves not by a greater Power, and Grace:
Which [without blending does All enterlace:]
Yet there was Place e're Time, where er'e it were;
For, God was somewhere, who does both embrace:
But, if Place compast him, It should appear
More then most infinite which naught can bear.
Then was he no where? No, somewhere he was;
That is, himself within, that is Place without:
So, kept, eternally, his own Compass:
Where he That which is made in time, is made before, and after some time:
therefore the World was made neither before, nor after, but, even with time.
(with time) brought Time, and Place about;
Whereof the Eye of Reason cannot doubt:
For, past a boundless Compass what can go
Though it were strong, as Strength, as Courage Stout)
No, not Omnipotence (and he is so:)
Can, past it self, the least appearance sho.
And, were he mixed, eternal were he not:
For, ere he could be ming'd, he was unmixed:
If so it be; then, Time has him begot:
For, as he is, he was not ever (fixed)
Since Time must needs his compound come The parts are ever before the whole in
na ture, and order.
betwixt:
But He (Prime- Cause, effecting all Effects!)
From all eternity was thus confixt;
Three Persons, and one God [without Affects]
Bee'ng a Pure ACT, that mixture still reiects!
Mixion, unites Things mixible, by change;
Or intermingling of their Substances:
Things mixible, are they, which, though they range,
Are yet contained in eithers Essences;
Suffering of other in their passages:
(As the Elements each one, by other, do)
And, may be seuer'd through their diffrences;
Then, were it so with God, it might undo
That undivided ONE, and make him two:
For, if his Substance were deuisible
A Body it were: for, so is every such:
But were it so, then t'wer not possible,
But PLACE should hold it, were it never so much;
Since Nature there, of force, the Same must couch:
For, then t'had Magnitude, and Quantity,
Whose vtt'most bounds PLACE should, containing,
If so, it could not have Immensity; (touch
And, if not That, it cannot Diety.
Since God is then so simply infinite,
Filling each Ierem, 23, 24
place incomprehensibly,
What need Saints fear, by death, their Spirits flight
Since in the Sphere of his Vbiquity
They needs must fall to rest eternally:
In him* in whom, before, they lived by grace;
To him, in whom, they shall live gloriously:
Being Center to the Souls he does embrace,
And of the highest Rest, thelowest Base?
Seeing then he is pure, and purely every where,
We him, as much as in us lies, defile
When we do sin; since in him we do steer
And have our being, (though we sin the while,
And so in greatest Goodness are too vile:)
Yet sin distracts us, from his Grace, at least;
Did not that Grace again us reconcile:
So, Grace being wronged, the injury does wrest
To humble us; so, makes our worst, our best!
He is in all alike essentially,
Or else he could not every where remain:
But not in all alike effectually:
For, then the good should naught by goodness gain,
More then the ill, by ill: So, grace were vain:
But, where so e're he absent is, by Grace,
He present is by Justice, and by pain:
So, he is present still, in every place;
Then, blessed they that do him best embrace.
But, to return to his simplicity
To answer one Objection which some make Object.

Who say, that he must needs compounded be
Since that his Being, Compounded of Being and Essence.
Essence does partake;
Then composition he cannot forsake:
Being, and Essence they distinguish, then,
As well they may: for, fowly they mistake
Which ween them one (though they be Brethren)
Whose difference Reasons Eye does clearly ken:
For, that which actually Is, is said to Be,
Be it a Substance, or an Accident:
But, that is an Essence which is really
That which it is, in its kind remanent;
As by our humane nature's evident:
In Soul, and Body Man is said to Be;
But, in his nature is his Essence pent:
But yet, this Compound never can agree Ansvv

(Though nere so subtle) with Simplicity.
And though that This, and That do seem to show
A mixture in the Things wherein they are,
Yet in this simple Essence it is not so;
Though This and That same person, still be there:
For, al three persons but one Substance share.
If so; then, though the Persons diverse be,
Their Essence is as pure, as it is rare:
As in the Sun a Beam we likewise see;
Yet both make but one light essentially.
Yet Sun and Beam are diverse; since they do
In their subsisting differ really:
For, both subsist; then both must needs be two;
Yet differ nothing but respectively,
As do the Persons of the Trinity:
Then by subsisting, in a diverse kind,
The Persons differ in the Diety;
Which three In-beeings in one single Mind
One simple Substance does together bind!
Now, sets the Sun that lights our pen to write;
Then, with him, Muse, set down thy weary Pen:
And in the Sun, God.
that lights thee to indite,
More Wonders mark, till the other rise again;
And then with care divulge the same to Men.
These Steepes have made thy travel hard to day:
That thou may hold out, thy flight favor then:
For, naught they do, that more do then they may,
Then Wit must rest, when Wisdom bids it stay.
NOw Heaue'ns bright Eye (awake by Vespers sheene)
Peepes through the purple windows of the East,
While Night does sink beneath the Earth unseen;
Fearing with lightness to be sore oppressed;
Then up my wakefull Muse to work for Rest.
Thou shall not soundly sleep till thou have viewed
Thy iournies end; wherein who ends are blessed:
Then, let thy course be zealously pursued
To find the rest of true Beatitude.
Which is Eternal; and alone is so:
Without Beginning, and can have none End:
Which has nor First nor Last: for, that does grow
From First to Last; so rise, and then descend:
But this does no such Motion comprehend:
For, that is Eternal, that not only Is,
But still is such; and does not pair or mend:
Then, must he needs be Alpha, and Omega. Revel 1, ^.
First, and Last by this,
Because Eternal is that state of his.
Our Mind alone, confusedly conceiues
Th'unbounded compass of ETERNITY:
It Is past conceit, since Notion none it gives;
Being as free from mutability,
As from beginning, end, or quantity!
It ever Was: that was, e're Time had room
To stir it self, by Heavens propulsity:
To which there is naught past, nor ought to come,
But all is present in her boundless Womb!
Our Souls, and Angels are eternal too;
But, their eternity with Time was made:
As were the Places where reside they do;
Which both Beginning and Succession had;
So, seem to vanish, though they cannot fade:
But, these There is a created, and an uncreated Eternity
created were Eternities;
Which Time, from time, to time still forwards ladd
And, though Eternal, yet Were otherwise:
But GODS Was ever, Is, and never dies!
He is the Author of Eternity:
Then, was before it, else it could not be:
He was before that made, Eternally:
So, is eternal in the highest degree:
Yet not the Author of his own is he:
His own Eternity and He are one;
(Since that is himself, that is his Property;)
So, could not be his own creation:
And so (unmade) eternal is alone.
Angels and Souls, though they eternal be;
Yet either may, by nature, have an end,
That of an Act consist, and Potency;
Which Compound does to disolution tend;
Did it not on Gods simple POWER depend.
The Compound is the Cause that so it may;
"For naught is rent, without a Cause it rend;
But there can be no Cause of his decay
Who is the chiefest Cause, and his own Stay.
And by that Stay, un constant Man he stays
From a relapse to nothing, which he was:
Yet falling finally, he still decaies
But nere determines: for, he still does pass
From ought, to naught; yet naught is ne'rethelasse:
For, (as was said) Man is eternal made;
Though here he flourishes and fades like Grass;
Yet shall he rise again; and never fade,
To Joy, or Woe, as he is Good or Bad.
What! shall he live in woe Eternally Object.

If here he live, and die in graceless state;
So, for a short bad life, for ever die:
Or, live in death, life still t'excruciate?
This seems all Mercy quite to ruinate:
For, all need Grace; since seven times sins the best
Ere once the Sun his Round perambulate;
But seventy seven times do the worst, at least,
Then, if Grace fail, none die to live in rest.
If for an hundred years offending here
[For, that is the longest date of our lives lease]
Millions of Ages we were plagued there
with pains past pain, yet that, in time, should cease
And we for That, in mercy have release:
So, Justice might with Mercy sympathize;
But, for a short time of our crimes increase
Ever to live, in death that never dies,
Ah! this makes Justice seem to tyrranize!
But stay frail flesh, and blood, here Truths reply:
Thou speak thus much as prompted by the Fiend;
But Truth this Justice well may justify:
For, had thou lived still, still thou would have syn'd;
And, to thy passions evermore been pynn'd:
Then since thou sinn'st in thine eternity
It Is just thou should in Gods, in Hell be Inn'd:
For, he the Will, for Deed takes commonly,
As well when it wills* well, as wickedly.
And, synne's gain'st Goodness most-most infinite
Are made most infinite, in ill, thereby!
Then, no proportion hold pains definite
To scourge the ill that has infinity;
Which must be punished in eternity.
Then O! what life ought mortal Men to lead
That leads to endless bliss, or misery?
Then live w'in Hell, for Heaven (as did our Christ our ghostly head
Head)
Not live in Heaven, for Hell, when we be dead.
O how it ought to make flesh freeze with fear,
Or flame in all devotion of the Sp'rite,
Since the Word EVER ever does appear
So bottomless! in length so infinite!
Ever in utter darkness! never light!
Ah! this is it, that is able to dissolve
Both Soul, and Body with eternal fright!
And yet to sin some ever do resolve;
And, EVER, never in their thoughts reuolue.
Ever to dye, and never to be dead;
Ever to Be, and never be at rest;
Ever in fire, yet never minished
Which (EVER) Patience never can digest:
Since it is most bad when it is at the best!
If ever we did think aright of this,
This Fire would never cease to move, at least.
And if we be not moved with endless Bliss:
Such pains will move aright, or most It will cause true penitency, or
desperation.
amiss.
Then fleshly wisdom no let can be more
To let this motion stay a Spirit unstaid:
For, that Egeriaes doctrine deemes this lore,
And thinks all holy fraud which Truth has said;
That Laws may so the better be obaid.
This wisdoms Eyes are dull, yet sharply see
To go past Truth for Errors greater aid:
"For, like old Eyes, at hand they blinded be;
"But far off falsely graunds each quantity.
After this wisdom comes presumption;
After Presumption, blindness of the mind:
And after all these foul Affection;
Then Custom comes insensibly behind,
And makes these ils unfelt, with craft unkind:
So, have the lewd no feeling of offense,
Their power of feeling Custom so does bind:
Thus fleshly wisdom is the Root from whence
Spring greatest Sins, withal impenitenee!
These thrust out Reason of her Signiorie
(The Brains) where erst she sat in Silver Throne;
Ruling with Scepter of pure Iuory;
That is; Commanding naught but Right alone:
For, right is clear from all corruption.
Upon which Scepters Top an Eagle's fixed
To note that Reason, bee'ng her Wings upon,
Transcends the Spheres, to see the Heaven.
world unmixed,
With Eyes that see the subtill'st parts betwixt.
If Reason then, retain her Power, and Place
She does aright inform the Intellect;
Which counsels well the Will in every case,
That it commands the Members, with effect,
To do as she, by Reason, does direct.
So, wild Affections truly tamed be:
For, by the Reign of Reason they are checked,
Then, the Minds Kingdom is as fast, as free,
Being a World of all Felicity.
Yet when all Vice is brought in Virtues Bounds,
[Ah! see how Man is here still millitant!]
Pride (Hydra-like] has strength from her own wounds,
So, growing an unconquered Combatant,
Does make the Soul, with endless strife, to pant:
Unless she seares Prides euer-springing Heads
With the hot Iron of the Law, to dant,
Her haughty heart (which with that Sharpness bleeds)
For, she is conquered by her own misdeeds.
Thus, when we have subdued every Sin
The Conquest does beget Pride.
sin, to subdew:
So, lose we more, by how much more we wyn;
To gain which loss, we must the Fight renew;
Or else lose all that should to us acrue:
For, not a moment may we cease to fight,
Lest mortal Sin, to death, should us pursue:
Since Hydra-headed Sin gets greatest might
When we have brought her to the weakest plight.
She Is strongest to destroy, when we suppose,
We have destroyed her by our hardynesse:
So, worst we fall, by her worst Overthrows;
Because we glory in our great success;
So, make it not so much, or nothing less.
O Sin, [damn'd Nothing) that do all things dam'n
Which thou do touch) where lies thy mightiness?
If in thy Head, our Christ.
Head has bruz'd the same;
Yet live thou in his spite who thee or'came.
If maugre him thou live, that is Lord of Might,
[Whose only frown can Hell it self confound]
How shall we, froth of Frailty, foil thee quite
Who art more whole, the more we thee do wound;
And make us sore, by making thee unsound!
O help us Weaklings, Lord of Hoasts, to fight,
Else we to Nothing must be captiue-bound:
For, Nothing (Sin) does nothing day and Night.
But make us worse then Nothing by her spite.
The Fount of Goodness, goodness makes to flow
from out the worst of Ils, which we fulfill:
For, he thereby makes us our selves to know;
And humbles us, in goodness, by that Ill;
So, thereby betters both our Works, and will:
But, the cursed The Devil, cause of ma^s fall.
Cause of all impiety
Out of our Best, the Worst extracteth still;
Who draws highest Pride, from low'st Humility;
So, draws most ill, from Ills most contrary.
Thus, from the highest entire ETERNITY,
Our Muse has stoopt unto the low'st Ills;
Thereby to show their inequality;
Yet each is such, as fills, yea, ouerfils,
The Soul with weal, or woe: so, saues, or spils.
But, Phoebus Horses now their swift Careere
Have staid, for this day, on the highest Hills;
And fallen to rest beneath our Hemyspheare;
Therefore, with them, tired Muse, thy toil forbear.
LO how Apollos Pegasses prepare
To rend the ring-hedge of our Horizon:
Be ready Muse, since they so ready are
To flee with them in such proportion,
That both may move by heavenly motion:
And yet their Mouer moves not, but does rest
In restful-restlesse perfect Action;
By which the worst still falls out for the best
For him, and them that by him still are blessed.
He changes not that truly ever Is;
Since what Is truly, cannot changed be:
For, what is sometimes That, and sometimes This
Is mixed of Simples which do disagree;
But he is simply self Simplicity:
Then, That Is not, that is not simply so;
Since, in an Instant, It from Is does flee:
And as the restless Seas do ebb and flow:
So, that twixt Was and Is, does come and go.
But, he is never moved; and so can never change:
For what should move him in whom all do move?
He fills each Place, then can he never range:
And so is fixed, all Time and Place above;
So, still Exodus 3 14
I AM he does himself approve.
I AM; that Is: which is, That which He is:
Ever the same; as firm in hate, as love:
Who could not be immortal but for This:
"For, who does change, dies through that change of his.
Each Essence changeable, is said to die
To what it Was, when it Is otherwise:
So may man's Soul, in immortality,
Be said to die when it from Virtue flies;
And live aright when it to Vices dies:
So, may immortal Spirits Augelicall
Die through such change, and tumble from the skies
As some have done; and so [no doubt] may all
But that a Power still fixed preuents their fall.
For, what may sin, may die: and die they must
That sin, if Grace do not their death prevent:
If any Creature cannot be unjust,
That Justice is not All are con cluded under sin, that God might have mercy
upon all.
his, it is but lent;
Only the Lender's just, of his own bent:
Who, by no change can possibly offend;
And much less die: for, He Is still permanent
The Fount of Grace, and Life; on whom depend
Al Changes, since he is changelesse without end!
But, if he might be changed, it needs must be
By active power of some himself without;
Or, by himself, through passive Potency,
But, naught can ever bring this change about:
For, nought's more strong, then Power most absolute
Nor, can a simple Act be passive; so,
It puts the question clearly out of doubt
That neither can another Agent, no
Nor he himself, himself change too and fro.
For, that is changed, that not remains the same:
But he is the same he was, and ever is;
And That still Is, that never alters frame:
But such, alone, is that firm state of his,
That changes all, yet changes not by this!
He 's Glories Sun, whose In him is no darkness.
Shade is constant sight;
Then can no Shade of change eclipse his Bliss,
In whom's no darkness; for, he blinds the sight
Of bright-Ey'd Angels, with his glory bright.
Though he assumed our Shape; (so seemed to change
Since what he is, he was not) yet, the same
He was, he is: and, though the case be strange,
Yet is it true in nature; though his Name
Be God and Man.
doubled, by his confixt double Frame.
He came to take our Nature to his own;
Yet ours into his nature never came:
But, ours from His, by eithers Acts, is known:
Then, by, that change, no Changling is he grown.
That Hypostaticall rare Union
Which Pers'nally unites both God and Man,
Is two in Nature, though in Person, one:
For, God his nature never alter can;
And once begin, that never once began:
It is against Gods nature Man to be;
Since one's eternal, the others life a Span:
Yet Man is God, by God; and, God is he
That Is Man, for Man; but, both keep their degree!
For, that is not changed that keeps itself entire
From ought that may with it united be:
And, though thereat Man's reason may admire;
Yet God only wise.
only Wisdom does it, which does see
How Two in One, unchanged, may well agree:
As erst we said Man's Soul, and Body did;
Which truly differ in true Unity:
and, though they change their states, their kinds forbid
That they should change their kinds in either hid.
So, did the WORD remain that which it was,
And truly That assumed which it was not:
But yet, no change thereby was brought to pass
More then they change, that have new garments got
In Name or Nature, though they change their Lot:
And to descend, and ascend, come, and go,
And now become more cold, and then more hot,
These Words are Tropes [for, that Word does not
That by our own, his Rom, 1, 20
Actions we may know. so]
When he draws near us, we are drawn by Him,
While still He stands: for, as the Magnes draws
Without bee'ng moved, the Iron to his Brim;
Or, as the Iett, vnstirr'd, attracteth Strawes:
So, GOD, unmoved, does our motion cause.
They that are Shipped, in saillng from the Shore,
Do think they move not, maugre Eolls Flawes,
But that the Land moves, which stands as before,
So God moves not: but we So are* We moved to and from God.
do evermore.
Nor yet, by local motion are we brought
To God, when, to himself he us does bring;
Because without his Compass there is naught:
For, all that is, is compast in that RING;
This motion then, is not by altering
The Place, but Person of the altered;
Yet, that not altered, but by governing,
The wil'de Affections, erst ungoverned;
So, moves this unmoved Motion, motioned!
Thus, when God seems to change, by changing us,
The change is not in Him, but us alone;
So then, though Reth'ricke says he is various,
yet says Divinity, He Is ever One;
And, holds up all things by Genesis 1, 2
his Union:
He, in the CHAOS, on the Waters moved,
But that was but by Heb. 1, 3
preservation;
Which by his WORD alone, he did unmoved,
As by his Word may pregnantly be proved.
Then, since he is ever changlesse, as he is good
We Worms, most mutable (in spite of change)
May ever stand in him that ever stood,
By Faith, and Hope, and Love; and, never range,
But when, through him, we go to Places Heavenly mantions.
strange.
And though, by nature, mutable we be,
Yet may His Grace from us, that state estrange.
And match us to immutability,
In the Bride-chamber of Felicity.
He Is true of promise, since he cannot change;
Then, why should sorrowing-Synners fear to dye?
Since Earths familiars are to Heaven strange;
Then, Heaven we cannot have, while here we lie:
And he that is free from all uncertainty
Has (in his euer-neuer-failing Word)
Given us, by Deed, (with his Blood sealed) an hie
And Heavenly Mantion, which he does afford
To all whose Wills do with his Will accord.
The everliving GOD, sole Lord of Life
He Was, and is, from all Eternity:
If he be such a Husband, shall his Wife
Or any Member of her, fear to dye,
In him, with whom is Immortally?
He Is life it self; then, of himself, he moves,
And, all his Members moves immediately
To rest in him, the rest from him he shoues;
So, all move by him which he hates, or loves.
Thus all that move have life: for, lif's the Cause
And Motion the Effect: for, we enstile
A flowing Fount, a lively Spring, because
It is in motion: and, That dead the while
It stands still, as do some Waters vile.
Silver selfe-mouing, we call Siluer-quick;
But, Coin, though current, we from life exile;
Because, of it is own kind, it still does stick
Where it is set, without some Chance it nick.
Yet though they live, that move, they live as dead
(Much like Quicksilver; dead, although it moves)
That not as Members move of Him their Head
That moves to grace, and glory whom he loves:
So, in them, his own motions he approues:
Which does infer no motions lively be
That, from this Mark, Sin all at pleasure roues:
For, such move still through mutability;
And, that still moves to mortality.
For, Motion, in the Creatures, moves to naught;
And, naught is nothing but the rest of Ill:
But where Ill rests, That Is to confusion brought
That so is moved; and, so it rests still:
Which rest, that moved with all disease does fill:
For, that is restless rest, that ill does rest;
And ill that rests, that rests with evil will;
But, ill's that will by which the Mind is pressed
By motion ill, to rest in state unblessed.
Creatures move not themselves: for, moved they be
By the First-mouer (moving first of all)
Then by the End he moves them mediatly,
Which moves the Agent to be actual:
Then, Nature, and the Orbes-Celestiall
with the Host, that still, vnweary, walks those Rounds
Do move them too, till they to rest do fall:
And rest they do, when Time their course confounds:
So, Motion rests in Confusions Bounds.
Yet all must rest in him, from whom they came:
And He Is the Soul of Order, ordering
Confusion, to the glory of his Name;
So, He Confusions does to order bring;
And, order keeps in each confused Thing:
Within their Center diverse Lines are one
Though out, they may be Millions, in the Ring:
And, in the Center, by Conversion,
They meet again in perfect Union!
Yet good, and bad, in Him, are not all one,
Though out of him be neither good, or bad;
But, both, in Him, so make an Union
As those which Syn has marred, and he has made:
Yet out of Him [meere ONE) they cannot gadde.
But yet the vvorst He loathes, and loves the best;
Since one grieves him, the other makes him glad:
And so, though both are said in Him to rest,
Yet rest they restless that do him molest.
As when, with good, bad Humors are in us
In one united, working diversely,
We to the bad are ever troublous
[Because they vex us with their Malady)
By reauing of their rest where they do lies
So, though we be not of Gods nature pure,
Yet Good, and Bad, in him have Unity;
But He the Bad molests, since they procure,
His Spirits grief, which he cannot endure.
Thus, still He lives all One; and, in him still
All are but One; though many still they be;
All are his work; whose Work is but his will;
Which will is good: and good (in their degree]
He made his works, which he did, Gen 1
blessing, see.
Themselves they marred, because themselves they
Subject to death, by unmade perfidy: [made
So they from ought, to naught, do growing fade,
Since Naught, that ought does, marring, ouerlade.
This GOD that lives then, yea, for ever lives,
Is yesterday, to day, and ere the same:
Which constancy of state a difference gives
Betwixt the Pagan Gods, which he did frame,
To be but half- Gods; that is, Gods in name.
The nearer then, to this true God we draw
The more his Sonnes-beames feed our vital flame,
Which, frozen in our dregs, that frost does thaw;
And, make us hot with love, and cold with awe.
Thus, no less good is he, he then is great
Which are past Quality, and Quantity;
Both bee'ng much more then more then most com-
For, so they must by his Immensitie, pleat:
Which is the cause of his Vbiquity:
For, naught but Greatness simply infinite
Can fill, and ouerfill All, really;
That is, as well in Essence as in might;
Since either are alike indefinite.
And, say'ng he fills all (who is all in all)
I mean not only all his hands have wrought,
As Heaven, Earth, Hell; in part, or general;
And, all they hold; but all that may be thought
(If Thought may reach it) that have further raught,
Either in deed, or possibility:
For, He that in his Compass all has brought,
Not only fills That Vninersity;
But, ouerfils far more Capacity.
The Creatures finite are, since they may be
Drawn to a general or special Head,
By eithers Form, or their Diversity;
But, no Predicament ere compassed
His Largeness, that is still unlimited!
The Heathen Sages (led by Natures light)
Held the first CAUSE could not be measured,
Since it, in greatness, was most infinite,
But what it was, they could not tell aright.
So, he is each where in Essence, and in Power,
Since all is One in Him, the only ONE:
Like as the Soul though in the Head [her Tovvre]
She cheefely sits: yet, is she in that Throne
And every Member, totally alone!
Then, in each Part her Povv'r with her appears
T'inspire those Organs which she plays upon;
Yet, from the filthy Pipes no filth she bears,
Nor wears she ever, as the Organ wears.
So, in a sort, [but far more excellent!]
Is God, in his whole Essence, povv'r, and all,
In all that is in this ALL resident,
And over all, that ALL in general,
Without bee'ng touched with Matter corporal:
Though so me grope for him, he is not tangible,
Bee'ng a Sprit most simply Spiritual:
Which to the Soul alone is sensible,
But of the Sense incomprehensible.
And, Things are said to Be, that be in Power
In any thing wherein their power has port:
Our Caesar's so, are chiefly in the Tower
Which CAESAR built, as in their cheifest Fort:
But God is all in all, in other sort:
For in his Substance, totally entire,
He is in all that is living, or amort,
Be It great or small, Earth, water, Air, or Fire,
Or what else is, or can have Being hier!
Look what our Bodies, by our Senses know
Our Souls, but by one Power, perceive the same:
Which sowed in our Understanding, grows
More purely there, then in out Bodies frame,
[Although our Intellect may be too blame]
For, it does purge the Objects of the Sense;
And, make that upright, which the Sense made lame:
Even so, in GOD Things have more excellence
Then in our dull, and base Intelligence.
Thus, is his Power where ere his Essence is;
Which Power is twofold, as some Doctors teach:
That Is Absolute, and Actual, by this
He does what ere he will within his reach;
Then, does he All, since it past all does stretch!
By his Power absolute he can fulfill
What may be done, without his Natures breach:
And so his Power extends beyond his Will,
Which could save All: yet, some it saues to spill.
That which he does is no less definite
Then it is certain: but, what he can do
Is as uncertain as it is infinite:
For, he can make more Heavens, and fill them too;
But, that he will not so his Word undo:
Who by his Actual power can naught fulfill
But what his clear Foresight did reach unto:
But, his Power absolute (beyond his Will)
Is able to do all, that is not ill!
Then, if his Will and Povv'r unequal be *Gods will, and power are equal: yet
there are ma ny things in his power, which are not in his vvil.

How shall we equal make his Properties?
Here is a Cloud, through which I cannot see
With Humane Reasons most unequal Eyes;
Which make such Equals, Inequalities:
But, light me Lord of light, the Truth to view
Which in this Mystery ecclipsed lies;
And let me in thy Paths this Truth pursue
Till it I find: for, all thy Ways be true.
Thy Will, and Povv'r are equal (as thou art)
Both alike absolute, in their true kinds:
Yet have thou bound them both, by heavenly Art,
To Will, and do no more then Infinite wis dome, directs infinite power.
WISDOM finds
Within her Bounds, which both the other binds:
There they are Equal, since that each extends
To Wisdom utmost Compass; and, that winds
About all Works that have all holy Ends:
And so, thy Will, and Povv'r are equal friends!
And, where thy Povv'r does ouer-reach thy Will
There only Wisdom wills it should do so:
That Is in some Cases, by Her bounded still;
That Is when thy will does let thy Creatures know
What thy Povv'r could, did not thy Will say Gods Will limits his vnlimitable
power.
no.
But, thou can make thy Will to match thy Might
[If so thou would'st] but Wisdom cries ho
In thy Wills motion, it to stay aright;
And so thy Will, and Povv'r have equal height.
Now, down the Days Eye goes, though yet it looks
All fiery read, as chaft with Nights approach:
For, Light could never ugly Darkness brook,
No more then bright Renown can black Reproach;
Then halla here, my Muse with Phoebus Coach:
This day too much thou have bestowed thy wings;
Too much thou do on Secrets dark encroch;
Fly high; yet not too nigh In respect of the reach of our capa city
too lofty Things,
Which naught comes nere for Clouds and Glitterings.
NOw, mantle Muse, since now thou strait must Tower:
For lo, the modest East does blush for shame
That shameless Night on it should have such power
To lie'with It, till Phoebus sees the same,
And parts them with a far more blushing flame:
By which our Hemisphere Inhabiters
May see to toil in Ernest, or in Game:
Then, up betimes, above the pale-fac'st Stars,
(Feared with that flame) to find their * Gouerners.
Which is that blessed Essence, (Three, in One)
Blessed I well may call it: for, the same
Is truly blessed (past comparison)
For, what Bliss can the highest Wisdom name,
But is most In God is true and most complete felicity
perfect in his formelesse Frame!
All that delights the Soul, or joys the Sense,
Or, makes Self-love refinde, in him to flame;
yea, all that can excel Selfe-EXCELLENCE,
Is truly in his ALL-SVFFICIENCE!
Ist't health of Body which thou do desire?
He is the Fount of al Salubritie!
Ist' strength, or Valor? He is both entire!
Ist' Fairenes? Then he is selfe-FORMOSITY:
To see whose face is highest FELICITY:
Is It Pleasures? They, as in their Center, in Him rest!
Or Glory is it? Him, Angels glorify!
Is It Riches? More then All is his, at least:
For, he has more then can be all expressed!
Kings of the Earth, seem blessed in their Crowns;
Yet, they but only seem, but are not so:
Since they sit reeling in their fastest Thrones,
That every moment, threats their overthrow; (we
which makes them sit on thorns, through pierced with
And, though all mortal Knees to them do bow
The adore their Chairs, not them; though to, and fro
Both reeling stand, till both are fallen too low;
And then those Bowers none of Edward and Richard the second.
both will know:
For, Men [like Paphflagonean Partriges)
Bear in their single Breast a double Heart:
With one of which, they seem Gods Images;
But, with the other play the Devils part;
Who, to all Shapes, for ill, themselves convert:
These are the Things, [the Things I them do call,
Since, for such Artists, I want Terms of Art)
That crouching stand by Kings till Kings do fall;
Then fly these Swallows lest they fall withal.
What blessedness is then in Regal state,
That, as accursed, such cursed Things attend?
And, naught more subject to the shocke of Fate;
Nor, sooner brought, untimely to an end:
For, often they bow to them, that make them bend.
But, this eternal most almighty KING,
(That's KING of Kings] on whom they all depend,
Is truly blessed; since there is no altering,
Of his State, Povv'r, Life, Bliss, or any thing!
Then, since this unborn KING, that all vp-beares.
Is only blessed; how accursed are those
That fall from Him, to rest on Prince, or Peers
Who still are fairest for foulest overthrows:
"But, Carrion still, is best beloved of Crows:
"And, where it is, the Eagles do resort:
Kites (I would say) like Eagles in their Nose
And Claws; to smell and scratch for Budge of Court;
And so, in others spoil, make ever sport.
These, false to God, can never be true to Men:
If false to him, that is as Good, as GREAT,
How can they trusty be to Nothing, then?
For, Kings are (worse then Nothing) Vermins meat:
Then, what are they compared with Worth complete?
These light Court-Locusts here, and there, do skippe
(Like Fleas) to suck blood; so, make Men their meat
(Like Cannibals;) for, if they on the Hip
Have friend, or foe, that Standard they will rip.
There is no trust in Men: for, Men, to Men
Are but mere Wolves, that one another rends:
Nay, worse, much worse, the The best is a Brier.
best are now and then:
"For Man to Man, in fury, are but Fiends;
Who often in virtue viciously contends.
Then, none are blessed, without they well do know
They are accursed, till their blessed Ends:
The End makes All; because the End does show
Unto the blessed, Gods euer-blessed Brow!
The Act of seeing God, is The obiectiue Beatitude is the chief blessedness.
Blessedness;
For, we cannot be blessed till him we see:
Which Act is ours, not his; yet, nevertheless
His Gift it is: but yet, he cannot be
Our Act, though it with Him (pure ACT!) agree:
For, ours is but the Effect of him, the Cause;
So then, it Caused is; so is not He:
Who draws still; yet, but the willing draws:
Yet makes us willing by his Graces Laws!
So, all we have, if good, he does effect:
For, what we have, that is not his, is Ill:
Which still we give him, though he it reject;
Yet, for that Gift against, gives, by his WILL,
Our Greatest GOOD; so, good he is to us still!
With Goodness thus, He does our il ore'come:
Yet we, overcome with ill, It still fulfill;
But though that wrong incurs his righteous doom,
Yet, when we straie, his Mercy brings us home!
How far that Mercy reaches erst we touched,
Then needelesse were it eft to handle it:
As Divine mer cy is as great as gods diuity.
powerful as him self we It auoucht;
And He Is omnipotent: then, if it fit
His Power, it is at least most infinite!
Which Attribute of his Omnipotence
(That most is mentioned in Holy-vvrit)
Is the firm'st Pillar of our Confidence,
Since it to Grace has ever referrence.
Almightinesse includes whatso'ere
That is most absolutely good, or great:
Then it is the Prop, that all, in All, does bear,
More then most active in each glorious Feate;
Which, by still active good, does Ill defeat;
Though it seemed Passive when in flesh it was show'n,
Yet in that flesh that Passion had her Seat:
God's a pure Act [which never was Passive know'n]
Who made that flesh he took; and held his His own properties.
own!
He is most perfect; but, he were not so
If he were Passive; which, imperfect is:
Then is he simply Active? simply? No:
Active, nor passive so, is He, or His;
Since his strict Pureness will not carry This. Simple pure nesse will brook no
mixtion.

His Action then, his Essence is, alone;
Which is his Power, grace, wisdom, Justice, bliss,
And what be sides he is, since he is but One,
Which brooks no shade of Composition.
But yet, the Son is said to have received Object:

All that he has, or is of Him, his Sire:
If He his Essence then, of him received,
His Povv'r he must: for, both are most entire:
Then, must his Povv'r be Passive, as its cleire:
But, so to say, is foulest Heresy Answ.

For, like as without heat, can be no Fire;
Even so, without a Son, no Sire can be.
Thus, Sire, and Son are equal in degree:
For, both are one self Substance; so, are One:
The sire is, of himself, omnipotent:
Then so, since one in substance, is the Son;
Who with the Sir'es alike magnificent:
For, both Eternal are in their extent!
The Son is of the Father, most entire;
[As heat is of the Fire; both which are pent
In but one Substance of, but only Fir^:)
So, equall's their degree, and their Their will, and power are one.
desire.
The Son, not only of himself, is such,
But, by himself he is, what ere he is:
Eternal generation still does touch
The vtt'most Equal in Essence,
reach of his Sires Properties:
He is begotten still: but yet, by This
His Generation's not deficient:
For, as the Sun still gets those Beams of his
yet perfect are as That from which they went:
So, GOD, begotten's, all- sufficient!
Then, this begetting Power has the Sire Take away Gods proper ties, or
Persons, and take away his Diety

Beyond the Son; since that is his Property:
And personal Properties (though God's entire)
Cannot be common to the Diety,
Least that confusion follow instantly:
Yet, this Powers want, in this almighty SON,
Is far off from the least infirmity:
But, it does strengthen that Relation
That truly shows Gods threefold Union!
Then, take away the Pers'nall properties,
And take away the Persons: so, we shall
Be Godless quite: for, God's none otherwise
Then Three in Persons: and, one God in all:
So, pers'nall Powers cannot be mutual:
In Nature, not in Order, then they be
Omnipotent, alike, in general:
So, is all Povv'r, that does with POWER agree,
Alike, and not alike, in their degree!
The Sire, of his own Substance, gets the Son:
Then, must the Son have self-same Diety:
Because that Substance is so strictly One,
That, by it is Povv'r it cannot parted be:
Though most almighty in the That is, actu al, or ordinary power.
lowst degree.
This shows the Sires complete Omnipotence;
That still begets a Son as great as He:
Which Son is but the Sires Intelligence,
Making another one Omnivalence.
The Sonn's yet, said to be less then the Sire
Not in true Substance; but since he receives
Of his own Essence, what it does require,
Which the first Person to the second gives:
Geu'n and received From all eternity
when each himself perceaues:
So that that Povv'r which in the first does woone,
Shorts not the seconds, which the same conceaues;
But, as the Sire it holds, and not the Son,
It is the Sires, not Personal propertis are not common to the Diety
Gods: for, God is One.
Thus, personal Properties are still distinct
As are the Persons by those Properties:
Then, with the last the first must be extinct:
For they can never be parted; otherwise
Each might be each; and so, Disorder rise.
And, that the Sire cannot begotten be
It Is no defect of Povv'r which in him lies;
Nor that the Son gets not as well as he,
It Is not Povvres want, but Orders Regency.
Their Spirit (no more then They) Povv'r wants not:
Though he proceeds, which is his Property:
And, though he'gets not; nor is he begot;
Yet, holds he, with them equal Diety:
And, what he works, they work Their inter nall works differ not but in manner
of doing
in sep'rably:
And yet, three several Functions to them Three
Themselves assign, their works to varifie;
The Sire Creates: The Son Redeemes, And he
That is the Holy Spirit does Sanctify.
For, as the Sire is of himself, he acts
As of him self; yet by the other Two; Nota.

None working by him, through their strait contract:
The Son, as of his Sire, does of him do;
yet, by their equal Spirit, he works too.
The Father works by him, He by that Sp'rit;
Which Sp'rit, as he proceeds from Them, so
He works from both, with euer-equall might;
Thus, these Respects their Works in one, unite!
Then in respect of there Power, Wisdom, Will,
Their Works are One, as they are One in Three:
But, in respect their Persons differ still
Their Works, (in sort of doing) diverse be;
But their Gods eternal Works are ever one, the internal diverse in manner of
doing.
external deeds never disagree:
For, by their common Essence they are done;
That Is in their Unity, not Trinity:
The Sire Creates, as God, so does the Son,
And so their Sp'rit, without distinction!
The Father does Redeem; yet, by the Son:
They Sanctify; yet, by their holy Sp'rit:
So though their Works in unity be done,
yet due distinctions do their works unite,
Which make their Works to be most exquisite.
To eat much Honey has no svveet effect: Prou, 15, 27

And who too near does search Power infinite
Shall be [with Glory ouerwhelmed] checked.
Then hold rash Muse, They fight with God that pry further into his secrets
then he would have them
retire ere thou be wreckt.
This wondrous Trinity in Unity,
Is understood to Be; but how, o here
Is such a Gulf of deepest Mystery
As none (without bee'ng quit orewhelm'd with fear
Can look therein to tell the secrets there!
For, what beseeming that Good-evrie- Thing a Gods glory and goodness is most
inexplicable

Can we immagin, (though we Angels were)
That is as far past all immagining
As we are short of Paceing with his Wing.
We err in naught with danger more extreme,
Nor, in ought labor with more hard assay:
yet, naught we know with more hearts joy then Them
But, in their search, if once we lose our Way,
We may be lost, and utterly decay:
It Is deadly dangerous then, for them to look
[Through Ways more sullen then the Foe of Day]
without Faiths Lanthorn, Truths most blessed Book;
Which none ere left, but straight the way forsook:
For, Justice SON was sent by Grace his Sire,
The Gospel to promulgate, from his BREAST:
His Councels to As far forth as concerns our Souls welfare
disclose, our doubts to cliere:
Then if we go to seek this BEING blessed
Without these Helps, we strayeng, never rest:
But now, the Eye of Heaven begins to close;
Since rest it would, being weary, in the West:
Then, weary Muse, with It, thy self repose,
And wake with It, and go still as it goes.
NOW, over the Earstern Mountains Headles height
we see that EYE (by which our Eyes do see)
To peep, as it would steal on Theeuish Night,
which from that EYES-sight, like a Thief, does flee,
Least by the Same it should surprised be:
Then, is it time (my Muse) thy wings to stretch
(Since they are short, too short, the worse for thee)
For, this days Journey has a mighty Reach,
And many a compass thou therein much fetch.
Thou should be powerful in thy Wings [too weake]
Since thou flee'st after Power omnipotent:
which may with labor, both thy Pinions break:
And spend thy strongest Spirits ere they are spent:
Then, recollect them to pursue thy intent.
This Powr's almighty, endless, infinite,
Still most unknown, yet, still most eminent:
Which none but ONE can hold by wrong, or right;
For, if two had it, it were definite.
Of this, no No Creature is capable of omnipotence.
Creature can be capable:
For, it can but receive what it can hold:
And it can hold no more then it is able:
For, if a Bucket in the Sea we should
Let down, at once, t'exhaust it, if we could, Simil:

Yet that therein ingulph'd, could take no more
Then merely but so much as fill it would;
Which in respect of that Floods boundless Store,
Is, as no drop at all, the Bucket bore.
This Power is evermore accompanied
With two Consociates, that still glad, or griue;
Which Grace, and Justice are entitled:
Yet more that Power, by Manasses, Nabuchadne zer, S. Paul.
Grace with some does strive
Then does, at other some, his Justice drive.
Which Power, by either, is not ever like:
(Though in it self, it still alike does thrive)
For, sometimes more, (as well in proud, as meek)
Then other some, they do Stroke is an action of much indulgence; strike, of
much anger.
or stroke, or strike.
And in the Gifts of highest Beneficence
This well appears, which in themselves are pure:
But yet, in us not so: for, much offense
They give the Giver, by their state impure;
And such They be, since it is not in our power
So to receive Them, as they simple be;
But as we can: and, we can but immure,
Those Sp'rituall Gifts with Fleshes sluttery:
Thus Finite never can hold Infinity.
Then, to be God, and be Omnipotent
Is both in substance, one thing really:
Yet is that Power (though never so preualent)
Not able Gods to make; move Locally;
Deny himself; change, be unjust, or lie:
And many more such As he cannot, eat, drink, grow, sleep, or any corporal
action: for he is a most pure Spirit, yet is there in him nothing but substance.
like he cannot do;
Since in his Power, is none Infirmity:
For, if he could do these; then, were he Two;
Both good, and bad; and, either finite too.
Nor, is it (as some dream) that by his Might
He can do all Somethings impossible to be done by omnipotence
Impossibilities
Since nought's impossible (be it wrong, or right
As they suppose) to Power without Comprise;
So, in his Will [they say) his Goodness lies.
As if he would, he could do passing Ill,
But, that he will not: fond thought! most unwise!
Can perfect goodness, perfect ill fulfill?
If so it can, it is most imperfect still.
His Power (I grant) has force it self t'extend
To endless Things, for number, infinite:
Though in his changelesse Will now all have end:
So, cannot (for his Will) do all he might;
Nor, cannot (for To do unright ly is great infirmity.
Power) do ought unright.
Nor yet, does he his freedom lose hereby,
That, to his Will, does so himself unite;
Since still his Will, and He hold unity,
Then, bee'ng but ONE have onelyest Liberty!
Nor, can He make that That which Is, is not:
For, then he Naught should make; which cannot Be:
For, Naught can never be made, much less be'got;
Since it is less then Privation in degree;
Though He of Naught made all Things perfectly:
Yet, could he cause that Christ Is not, and Is,
Then could he cause Naught Men should instifie;
Which were repugnant to that The scriptures.
Truth of his,
That flat affirms, Christ cheefely works This.
His Povv'r to two Things He has fastened then, God has tide his omnipotency
to two things: to nature for orders sake, and to bis word for his promise sake.

That is to Nature still, for Orders sake:
And to his WORD, for his Words sake to Men;
That so they might his Word the rather take;
Who can as well himself, as it forsake:
yet, NATVRES Bounds his Power does often tra^scend,
When it works Miracles, Men good to make:
But, past his WORD it never can extend:
Since it is That, which never can have end.
So then, he can do whatsoere he will;
But yet he will not do what ere he can:
For he could melt the Heavens the Earth to spill:
But will not, nor destroy the Noah a preacher of righteousness
righteous Man,
Though all the World a Deluge over ran.
He will not do so since he will not so:
The reason of his Will, his Will does scan:
But, he that would the same yet further kno,
Look in his Word, but no step further go.
He can do naught but what is good, and just;
And though that all he does be simply so,
yet does it not ensue, that needs he must
Do what he does; and, likewise do no mo
Lest he his Grace and Justice should forgo:
No: if he would do more, or otherwise;
All should be good, and just which he should do:
For, he is the Psalm. 3a, 9
fount of GOOGDNES, whence does
Power infinite, all good to exercise! (rise
But, some affirm that he can do no mo,
But what he did foresee he should perform.
By his Power actual the same is so:
But his Power Absolute can that reform;
And make much more, in much more better form:
So, though he, through his Purpose, did foresee
What he would do; yet did himself inform
That he could do much more, then now can Be
Because his Purpose is as fast, as free.
But he saw all, he made, was perfect Genesis 1, 12
good:
Then could they not, by nature, better be:
He must have changed their Essence, with their mood,
If he had made them better in degree;
Since, in their kinds, he Them did perfect see:
No Power can multiply a Numbers Store
But it must change the Number really:
So Man, as he was made his Fall before,
Was good: if better; then, a Man no more.
We mean, as he was good essentially:
For, Man might have been made more perfect accidentally but not essentially.
accidentally, no doubt, he might
Have bin complish't much more perfectly,
With neither Will, nor Povv'r to do unright:
And, have continued in that perfect plight:
yet, as Immortal Saints are Men no more
Then we: so we, though made more exquisite,
Should be but Men (as we were made before)
For, Fools are Men as well as Or any other Philoso pher.
Isidore.
But O! had he so pleased to have made Man staid,
Man had been staidly-blest, till his remove:
For, hence, at last, he should have been conuai'd
To stay for ever Motion far above;
But how removed, God knows; I cannot prove,
Assumpted, some Curiosity
suppose; but, howsoever,
It should have bin as best should Man behoue:
The Way could not have bin through Death or Fear:
For, Sin made Them, else they had bin no By Sin came Death and Fear
where.
But, why he made Man to His constant Form,
yet, made him changeable; so, most unlike:
And why his Son endured his Angers Storm
Since so Man chan'gd; I am herein to seek;
But sure I am for It He Him did strike.
Could He resolve before he gave the VVound
with his own Pains (past Pains) to heal the Sick,
when with more ease he might have keptthem sound?
He did; and what he does has perfect Infinite wise dome can do nothing with
out like reason
ground.
Though he were GOD: yet suffe'rd he in Flesh:
Such Agonies, as made that Flesh to sweat
Both Blood and Water: which came streaming fresh
From all his Parts, to cool his Angers heat,
As he was God: which is as hot as great!
Nay, it was such, that, though true GOD he were,
yet, that the Cup might pass, he did entreat;
So much he did ensuing Torments fear,
which he came to sustain; yet, feared to bear!
His Glory was the Mark whereat did aim
The Shame and Torments which he did sustain!
yet, why? since he all glory well might claim
As his own Right, without so strange a Strain
As to endure for Glory shameful pain:
But O! the depth of al Profundity
His Judgments! o who can attain
To know his Councels, full of mystery!
Not one, not God, as Man; then much less I!
It was his suffrance, and it was his Gods will and suffrance are near of kin
will,
That man, made stailesse, so should fall, and rise:
So he permitted, not desired ill;
Or, if he Ill desired, it was Good precise:
For ill he cannot will, that's only wise*
Damnation's ill but in respect of us:
But, in regard of him, quite otherwise!
Then, if he willed it, it were righteous,
which makes (as well as Grace) him glorious!
Man's Free Will was the Cause of all the ill
Beneath the Sun; which God did well foresee:
yet, since Man's dignity required Free-vvil,
No Man without it, could his Essence be;
Much less, with Gods Form could his Form agree:
For, by his Free-vvil, and Intelligence
He is the Image of the Diety:
And having over All creature
All pre-eminence,
It Was fit he should command his Will, and Sense.
And though the Divine wisdom did foresee
He would abuse Free-vvil, to his decay;
yet, with that Wisdom, it does well agree,
To let him on his own Supporters stay;
To stand upright, or downeright fall away:
That so Gods Grace, and Justice might appear,
which due Rewards and Punishments bewray:
Both which (as vselesse] quite extinguished were,
If Man from his foul Fall, had still bin clear.
He knevv that, through temptation, Man would sin,
yet, made him apt in foulest sin to slide;
Since he foresaw the good that Ill within
Made for his greater Glory; since he did,
That Man then dead, might still in life abide
Deeming it better ill should still consist,
That he through it might more be glorifi'de
By doing highest Good, for Evil highest,
Then that there should no Ill at all exist.
yet he gave Man not only freest Will,
But, with it, Reason and Intelligence;
To choose the Good, and to reject the Ill,
Since, he had heard ^en, 2, 17.
it would wound his Conscience,
And Divine Instice mightily incense:
So, had he Means the force of Ill to foil,
Had he but used them with full confidence;
But willingly he fell before the Broile:
So, freely did [though charged to fight) recoile.
yet, was he framed so, that if he had
On God relide, as he both might and should,
He had overcome in fight; but, being mad
With Diulish pride; fell as the Devil would:
Since willingly of God, he loost his hold.
That man might see, God could not be distressed
For want of him, or what perform he could,
He made him free, to serve whom he likt best,
So, Sin he served, at his Freewils request.
But yet, the good which we by Sin receive,
Does far surmount the Ill that comes from thence
If God, the World of Ill should quite beraue
There were no Tossed to try our Sapience;
So, might want Reason, and Intelligence:
But, we have both to know the Good from Bad;
So, know we God, and our Souls safe defense;
Then since, by Ill, we are so well bestad,
We cannot grieve for To grieve for siune, is a joyful sorrow
ill, but must be glad!
For, were there no Temptation, then, no Fight:
And if no fight; no Victory could be:
No Victory; no Palms, nor Revel, 35.
Virtues white:
No Cross; no Crown of immortality;
And thus from Il comes good abundantly:
For, by the Conquest of it, we are Crowned
With glory, in secure felicity:
So, from great Ills, more Goods to us redoun'd,
As often most Sickness makes us most sound!
Ill (like a Mole upon the WORLDS fair Cheek) Simil.

Does still set forth that Fairenes much the more:
She were to seek much Good were Ill to seek:
For, Good by Ill increases strength, and store;
At least in our Conceit, and Vertucs Lore.
"There Is naught so evil that is good for naught:
[God giving us a Salve for every Sore)
The Good are humbled by their a yet we must not do evil, in any case, that
good may come of it, but when unwillingly it is committed, draw good out of
it. b Its better to say that impossibilities cannot be don then that God cannot
do them
euil'st Thought:
So, to the Good, all is good that Ill has wrought!
Then, better say some things cannot be done
Then that he cannot do them: For, he can
Do all that can be done; whose Povv'r is One
With his own Essence infinite; and than
He can do more then can be thought by Man.
If he could, sin could fear, could Wear, could Die;
These Coulds are sick; no Paraclesian
Can cure them of their great infirmity:
For, to be able, so's debility;
And not so able, highest Potency!
So can his Povv'r, his Will nor strain, nor bow,
How ere it seems to do it to our Sense:
Nor, can it do it, truly, but in show;
If truly we could see the Cause from whence
(...) That show proceeds by our Intelligence:
For, he is real; and, does hate to seem:
Since it does strongly argue Impotence;
But when he seems to mis do, we misdeeme,
That still, his works of Justice, disesteeme.
Nor, changed he state, when He, in fiery Tongues,
Descended on his Darlings: for, that Show
To us, as Men, not him, as God, belongs;
Who cannot see him otherwise then so:
But, He, in form confined, cannot go:
For if he were confined, he were no where;
Since, by the same, he should his state forgo:
But, he to us, does often so appear
(His state unchanged) as our weak state may bear.
Nor changed he mind when as his Will revealed
He altered; as he did for God does often change his open sentence, but ne uer
his secret decree: for the sentence is ever condicionall.
Niniuy;
Because he changed not then his Will concealed;
Which was to save it, through his Clemency:
Who knew they would repent, er'e they should die.
And, touching Ezechias
him, for whom the Sun went back
To cross his will, erst show'n apparently,
His secret Will, did That revealed, wrack,
That one might firmly live, by the others lack. * Yet both wills are one in
effect: for, the judgment against Nyni ute was condicionall (as are all Gods
threats) if it did not repent.

Here am I Clouded with a Mystery,
That makes my Muses Eyes quite lose their fight:
O Heavenly Wisdom, Son of Verity,
Disolue this Cloud, and lend those Eyes thy light,
To find this Truth, which is obscured quite:
For, only- Goodness can no God simply good, cannot will evil sim ply.
Evil will;
Yet, Ill it wills: but turns that wrong, to right:
But, how he should a Wrong a right fulfill
Here lies the Maze, my Muse amazing still!
Yet, by the Clew of his directing Word
We Are led to say, he suffers Ill to Be
With right good will; to make Ill more abhord
When it is Parraleld with Piety;
yet, wills, what he permits, unwillingly:
For, Ill he wills not, that good thence shouldspring,
Which to his Will, and Word were contrary
And yet, against his Will can Be no Romans 9, 19, In a diverse consideration,
God will diversely.
thing:
So, wills a cross, in cross considering.
Yet Contradictions, in one kind of Sense,
He cannot [though he most almighty be]
Cause to exist: for, that were violence,
To Nature, Truth, and his own Equity;
Which in great Power, were great Infirmity:
But, since the Rule of Goodness, is his Will, Gods will is the rule of Justice.

Ill, is not Ill, that he wills willingly;
Because his Will to good conuerteth Ill:
So, ill is good if he perform it still.
He did command Abraham.
him, who did hope, past hope,
To kill his only Son; which was not ill:
Because that evil has no evil Scope
That is confined by his exact good Will:
"The Judge that doomes death justly, does not kill:
Shimey Cursed David by the like command; 2 Samuel 16, 5

And yet the same he justly did fulfill:
For, in the Bidders will no Ill can stand,
Since by it Right is ruled, with upright Hand.
In Sin two Things we chiefly must respect, Two things to be noted in Sin.

The Act it self; and Its deformity:
The Act (though it be evil in effect)
yet, has a Being; so, is good thereby;
For GOODNESS, Beings made most righteously:
But, as it is deformed, it is a Defect:
So, not of GOD (free from Deficiency)
Who is an ACT; and works, without neglect,
All Beings Being, be they low, or hye,
So, though we lie in Him, He does not lie.
For, as one managing a Courser lame Simil.

Does put him to it, to use those Limbs of his,
That he does stir, his Rider works the same;
But, that he lamely stirs, his fault it is;
That through his lamenesse stirs still amiss:
So: That we do; of God the cause is still;
But, that we do Ill; we, too blame for This:
Then, not for doing, but, for doing Ill,
We are condemned, as Steedes that stumble will.
We are condemned, and We are con de mned for violation of Gods revealed will.
justly so we are;
Since Synn's the high contempt of his good Will:
Sin is the Cause effecting all our care;
And with Confusion all the World does fill,
Which is the Ill, producing every Ill:
All breake-backe Crosses, which we undergo,
Are cast upon us, by this Evil still:
In Sum, it makes this World a Sea of Woe,
Wherein we, fincking, swim; tossed to, and fro.
When I behold a Town (erst fairly built]
Which Time (dissmantling) does in Heaps confuse,
Thus say I to my self; Here, Men have dwelled;
And, where Men dvvell, there Syn to reign does use;
And where Syn reigns All confusi on springs from sin.
Confusion still ensues!
Thus, from beginning to the End, I fall
Of this rude CHAOS, (whereon moves my Muse)
And all the way I see Sin ruined all;
"So Synn's the Soul of Ills in general.
The Plague (which late our Mother-CITTY London.
scoured
And erst the KINGDOM made half Therefore I will make thee sick in smiting
thee, and make thee desolate because of thy Syns. Micha. 6, 13.
desolate! (
The HEAVENS (through Air contagious) on it poured
For odious Syns, which them exasperate,
For which they often dissolve the Crowns of STATE
Likewise the DELVGE (that did rince this ROVND)
Came, (since foul Sin did it contaminate)
To make it clean, and so to keep it sound, * Make Anarchies of Monarchies

Else filthy Sin that BALL would clean confound.
Then, o how blessed are they that dye to Sin,
And live to never dying Rightousnesse!
They, in this Sea of Misery, begin
To enter in the Hau'n of happiness;
Though ouerwhelm'd the while withal distress:
For, in a Calm we fall to frolike it;
Or sleep secure in Pleasures idleness:
Which does peruent the Will, corrupt the Wit
Until our Stearne be torn, and Keele be split.
With Hosea: 2: 6
Thorns he Hedgeth in his Minions Way,
That if they tread awry, they prick their feet:
So, thus Hedged in, they cannot go astray;
Or, if they do, their feet with Thorns do meet,
That make the^ strait go right, through sharp regreet.
But, with the Reprobate it is not so:
Their ways are wide, and fair, and smoth, and Eccles 12
sweet:
So that, in all lose liberty, they go
Through Worlds of Pleasure, to a World of VVo.
Thus, is this Povv'r divine, to Grace connext
For those that are to Glory preordain'd!
Yet, by that Povv'r, and It is Gods grace to punish his chil dren in the
World, least they should be condem ned with the World.
Grace they still are vexed,
for, want of Power, and Grace to have refrained
Some Sin which they perhaps have intertain'd,
But touching the remorceles Reprobate
This Povv'r to Justice evermore is chained:
yea often Gifts of Grace, through secret hate,
Do fat them up for death in frolic state. Rom, 9, 18 1. Cor, 12, 11

Now, on this Povv'r of his Almightines
Hangs that great Real presence.
Question in Religion
For which so many [with rare hardines)
Their Liuelihoods, and Lives have erst forgon:
"But though Men's Faiths be diverse: Truth's but One.
To urge his Power, our Faith to strengthen still,
In that wherein his will is simply show'n
We justly may: else, do we passing ill,
To press his Power against his holy Will.
Hence may we take incoragement to give From Gods power we may take
encouragement to be liberal to the poor

(with open hand) to those that are in need:
For supernaturally he can relieve
Those that fast often, the hungry Soul to feed,
Since they are rarely constant in their Creed!
But now (alas) this free Benevolence
Is shunned as a superstitious deed:
To offer [as some ween) the Poor our Pence
We make an Idol of their Indigence.
yet, nought's more sure then that that Members dead
That has no feeling of his Fellows pain:
So, if this fellow-feeling once be fled
From those that Faith profess, their Faith is vain:
And they in Death insencibly remain;
A faithful Heart, does make an open Hand;
And, in all hearts, an open Hand does reign:
For, they by Reasons rule should most command
That (like God) most relieve, on Sea and Land.
Riches (like Thorns) laid on the open Hand
Do it no hurt; but, gript hard, wouud it deep: Simil:

So, while a Man his Riches can command
He may command the World, and safely sleep:
For, all men bound to him, to him will stand;
And from all Wants, and Woes him safely keep:
But, they whose hands are closed by Avarice,
Ly open to all Hate, and Prou, 11, 24
Prejudice.
From this almighty Povv'r, in deep'st distress,
We fetch our Anchor (Hope) our selves to stay;
Where safe we lie (though plunged in wretchednes]
For, well we wot, we never can decay
While, neuer-falling Povv'r our Stern does sway:
And, since it is mighty, most in Clemency
(If wilfully we do not fall away]
We are secur'st in greatest iobardy,
Since on that Povv'r alone we then rely.
All that GOD promises he has a Will
(A willing will) to make God is infi nite in truth
good every way:
And, what his Will is willing to fulfill,
His Povv'r performs; and so his Will does sway
Almighty Povv'r; which freely, does obey:
Then, none can fear his Promises can fail
That his Omnipotency well does weigh,
Since as he wills that Povv'r does still prevail;
Then, Cross we both, when we in Crosses quail.
It that, of Nothing (only with a Word]
Made this huge twy-form'd Fabric which we see,
Can all assure; that is by It assu'rd: Heaven and Earth

For, what It wills, it can; what ere it be!
Who doubts hereof denies the Diety.
Then, as we would not Athiests be in fact,
We must (like God] to all his Likes, be free:
For though our Sanctity does seem exact,
If naught we give, naught is our Our prayers are turned in to sin, if we have
not cha rity
holiest Act.
For, to believe alone, God died for Man,
And not to live as we, in God, should die,
Our Faith is thus, but an Historian;
Living to Truth, and dead in Verity;
For, Faith lives not, if dead in Charity:
Who speak like God, and yet like Devils do,
Speak Truth to their Damnation; for, his Eye
That sees their Words, and Deeds are ever two
Does doom them by their words, and damn them too.
Whose Povv'r does muzzle Dan, 6, 16
Lions, Deepes Exodus 14 25
divide,
Make forceles Dan: 3, 25
fire, from scath to save his John 15. 15
Friends;
And, none that ever on the same relide
Had worse then heavenly, if untimely ends:
For it, in death, from Death his Saints defends!
It, from the dust of the obscurest Grave,
Does raise to Glory What on It depends:
And from the deepnesse of the swelling Wave,
Does lift to Heaven all those It wills to save.
In Sum, since nothing is impossible
That good is, to his all-performing Povv'r
We should (with Hope and Frailties Jonas
Spectacle
Which that Sea-damming Monster did deuou'r)
Depend thereon; and so, in Death be sure.
But now the greatest Taper in the Sky
Does, like a Candle in the Socket dure;
Which seems as it were at the point to die,
Then die a while (dul'd Muse) for Company.
NOw [in the the resurrection of his Light
That late lay buried in the Ocean Lake] Sol

Arise dead Muse, resume thy wonted Spright,
And once again, with Him, thy Iourny take
Through Heaven, to find him out, that All did make:
yet knows he more then he did ere God knows more then he ever did or will make
create:
For all created Was when as he spoke
with Time; whose Term had no eternal state:
But, he knows more then Time can circulate.
He knows those Things that are not, nor shall be;
And calls That which Is not, as though it Were:
For, in him Self, he more then All does see;
And, though they be not, there, he knows them there:
That is, he knows them though they never apeare;
For, since his Knowledge and himself are One,
He knows well what he can, though will do nere:
So, That may in his knowledge Be alone,
That never shall Be by Creation!
This knows he simply by his Intellect,
As That which here shall be but in his might:
But, That which he does purpose to effect
Is evermore existing in his sight:
For, all is present to his VVisedoms Sp'rite! Whatsoever god means to do he
sees as on from all eternitye.

And though of that That which Is not, nor shall Be
Can be no Notion; so, no knowledge right,
yet, Creatures only know in that degree;
But God knows (Notionlesse] Essentially.
Those Things have ever an un being Being *Things which only Be in Gods
understanding or power have an vnbeeing being

which in his Understanding only Be:
And never object made to his All seeing,
But Them he intellectually does see,
As though they were, yet are but virtually:
As Pictures are in Painters Fantasies;
Although they never make them actually:
So, without Notion (since all in Him lies)
These are in Him, as Things he could devise.
So then we must observe a difference
Between the knowledge of what once shall Be, Nota.

And that which shall not: for, as t'wer, by sense
God sees the first, the last he does not see
But as they are in Possibility.
Yet some may urge, what truth can be of Those
That never shall be? Yes, They, with truth agree
That truly are in Gods power to disclose:
So, in that Power, with truth, they still repose.
For, since his knowledge is indefinite The things which God knows must be
infinite like his know ledge.

To Things indefinite it must extend:
And since his Power can make Things infinite.
He needs must know them, since he knows the end.
Of All that on his endless Power depend:
But all that is or ever shall be made
Is finite; then, his knowledge must transcend
Their highest Reach; as Reason does persuade:
For, it is infinite, and cannot fade.
ONE is an Unity, which can extend
To Numbers infinite [if multiplide)
For, every Number does thereon depend:
Then, if that Unity did know how wide
It could extend, it knew the rest beside.
Man, in Conceit, can multiply this One
To Numbers infinite: for, such abide
Still subject to increase, by Union:
Then, God must know past limitation.
He knows distinctly, and in general:
For, knowledge indistint imperfect is:
He counts the Psalm. 147, 4
Stars, and by their names them call;
Numbers our Math: 10, 30 Luke 12, 7
Hairs, and knows when one we miss:
Then, must his knowledge be distinct by This.
He in their Causes sees Contingent Things
Yet nought's contingent to that sight of his:
For, he that all in All to Being brings
Must hatch them ere they Be, beneath his Wings.
In him that did Judas
betray the Lord of light
It was Contingent; since in him it was
To do, or not to do that damned dispight:
But, God did in himself [as in a Glasse]
Past Time, see It, in Time, should come to pass. a God is a Mirror where in all
things are seen.

Then, in the second and Contingent Cause,
Contingently he knows: but, if it has
Relation to his preordaining Laws,
Necessity it on the Action draws!
Then must he needs knows Ill as well as good:
But, Ill is nothing, but a mere Defect;
Which has no Notion, by a Likelihood,
So naught can know the same in true Effect; Ill has no notion to know it by.

And naught to know, Gods knowledge does reject.
Then Ill is known by good (as death by life)
Though by no Notion it can Sense direct:
For though Ill nothing be, it is still at strife
With Goodness: so this knowledge still is rife.
God knows not Evil by receiving in
A Notion to his Mind; which knows not so:
For if he so should do, so should he sin;
But since he knows himself, he Ill does know
By his own goodness: so, knows Ill, his foe.
But if, by Notions, he did ought perceive,
The^ that perceived, those Whatsoever is ordinarily by the under standing
perceived is per ceiued by no tions.
Notions needs must show;
So, should he more then erst before conceive
And so might be deceived, and deceive.
But his high knowledge is the Cause of all:
Then, must it before All Actually:
His Providence could not be general
If ought there were he knew not Gods providence were imperfect if he knew not
particular things.
specially:
But, he knows All from all Eternity:
Then, must he needs know Ill, that all does mare,
By his own goodness, most essentially:
But, if that Ills do stretch themselves so far
To yield such knowledge, more then naught they are.
This knowledge knows together what it knows;
So does it not augment much less decrease:
Himself (the Medium of his knowledge) shows
The state of Things, at once (not piece, by piece;
As men do know, their knowledge to increase:
Then is his Knowledge firm, ^^ as infinite,
And can no more be changed, then it can cease:
So, to his undeceivable foresight
All Haps on All Nothing is contingent with God.
inveitably light.
If so; it seems this Knowledge does impose
On all Men's Acts a mere necessity:
Not so; for his foresight does not dispose
The wills of Men, nor lets their liberty;
But what they do, they do most willingly:
Though second Causes, by their natures course,
Make us to do some things unwillingly;
Yet, Gods Foresight does not those Causes force:
No more then ours makes great Loads lame an Horse.
So, Gods foreknowledge may two ways be wai'd:
First, as he did foresee what ere should Be;
Last, as his foresight in his Will is staid:
And so his foresight is his Wills decree;
Which must be acted of necessity:
So, al Things, of necessity, are such;
Though they be such perhaps condicionally:
For God does move them but by natures touch
So, moves them as they will, lest She should gruch.
Two Causes in the World his Power has set God has set two second causes in
the world, to pro duce all effects.

To Cause (as second Causes) all Effects:
The first are certain, and Effects beget
As certain: As the fire with heat affects,
The Sun gives light: and so of other Sects:
The later Causes are indefinite,
And their Products uncertainly respects:
Those are Contingent, and extend their might
Unto Men's Wills, and Actions, wrong, or right.
Now, though Gods foresight, joined with his Will,
Be such, as by no Power can changed be;
Yet we thereby are not enforced to Ill,
But merely do it of our own decree,
As moved by nature, to Iniquity:
Yet can we not do other then we do,
If it we weigh as God did it foresee:
And so, foreseeing, justly willd it too:
For, what he does, he justly may We are undone by illdoing.
undo!
Say we fore-knew the nature of a Friend
Would credit us in all that we should say
Should our foreknowledge so his nature bend
As it were bound; and so must needs obey,
It having liberty itself to sway?
Not so: no more does Gods Gods fore knowledge foreeth not our wills
Foreknowledge force
Men's Wills against their Nature any way:
But still their Wills by Nature have their Course,
yet naught their Wills from Gods will can deuorce.
For, as we freely in a Ship do walk, Simil.

And yet our walking hinders not her Way;
But, holds her Course (welstir'd] and Lets does balke
Till she arriues where she is designd to stay,
By him whose Goods she safely does convay:
So, in the surest Ship of Gods DECREE
Wherein we sail, (and cannot fall away]
Though our Will cross the Course, yet cannot we
That Course auert, but needs must with it flee.
And, as one having fastened a Boat Simil.

Unto a Rock, hales at the rope to draw
The Rock to him; yet, so himself does float
Unto the Rock (unmoved) by Natures law:
So, we being fast to That which God foresaw
Do strive to pull his Ephesians, 1, 8
Purpose to our Will;
yet are we driven thereby (as by a Flaw)
Unto his Purpose, which is * steadfast still:
So though we seek our Wills, we His fulfill!
But though Man works, as of necessity,
According unto Gods most staide deeree,
yet works he at his Natures liberty;
And so he works as being bond and free;
Both which Gods wisdom could not but foresee:
So then he might Man's nature have restrained
From working ill, but then it bound should be:
For though Man's Works to Gods Decree are chained
yet works he by his nature vnconstraind.
Then, though he knows from al eternity
What we would do; that caused not our Deed: * Gods prescience cau seth not
our Actions

But what he wil'd imposed necessity
Upon our works (who works as he decreed]
Which Works, his practicke knowledge do succeed
His Will and Knowledge then is cause of All
At once: For, all at once from them proceed:
Since in Him naught we first, and last must call
But, He is all One Cause in general.
Then in this fearful Sea which we be in
we must beware two Rocks: That is to wit,
we must make God no Cause of any sin:
which we do if we say he Simply
wills it:
For, as its Ill, he does it but permit.
The other is, when that withour his Will
And his Foreknowledge we do Ill admit:
For, so we do his perfect knowledge spill;
As in the other make his Goodness ill.
Our Soul does move our Body, being lame,
And yet our Soul is whole in every Limb:
Then God is not for our misdeeds to blame, * God moves us well, But being
Lame, in our affecti o^s, we move ill

Though he Works all in All as pleases Him:
Who makes the sinful in their sins to swim
Until they sink to Hell: so, punnisheth
Much Sin, by Sin: for, he their Eyes does dim,
That they should not perceive the Snares of Death,
Until they fall those mortal Snares beneath.
He moves aright the most peruersest Will;
But, by that crooked Will it waxes Wrong:
As good meat put into a Stomach ill
Turns to bad Humors, with disease among: Simil

So, Good, to God; and Ils to Men belong.
He works all in All: or good, or bad:
Either, as either are, or weak, or strong:
And so we are or ill or well bestad,
As our demerits him do grieve, or glad.
Then, wicked Actions, as they Actions are,
(And not as they are wicked] God does will:
For, they are Beeings; but we must beware
(Since ere our fall we well could them fulfill)
We make him not the Author of their 1, Ioh, 4. 13
Ill:
For, he may willingly still suffer sin,
Though to his Will it he repugnant still;
Which suffering, by indulgence, seeks to win
The lost Sheep, though astray the more it ryn.
Then, willing suffrance, needs must be his VVil:
So then in God two ouert Wills we prove: Willing suffe* rance is gods will

The Greater, and the Less; yet neither il;
Although the less to suffer Ill does love,
which yet the Greater ever does reprove:
He, by the Greater, would we should dowel;
And, if by Ill, the Less we more approve,
Against the Greater then we do rebel,
By doing his will that does not so excel.
He suffers us to sin, when by his grace, *God does will sin as it is an act
where on to show his divine goodness ei there by Justice or mercy

He might restrain us from transgression:
So, willingly does Will it, in this Case,
As it is an Act, to show his Goodness on;
Either by Justice, or Remission:
The lesser Good is th'obiect of his Will
As Well as that Good past Comparison,
But this does save; and that does often spill,
yet glory gains when he does each fulfill.
So, though his Will be one, yea, simply One,
yet, is he said to will both Good, and Ill:
Most properly he wills good alone;
But, Ill he wills as it were against his Will
Improperly; against his nature still.
He wills all that to himself pertaines
Urged by his nature, not by Force, or Skill:
But, his free will his Creatures state maintains;
Whose Good, or Il in his free choice remains.
No Man does good or ill against his will;
Though some do il (in sort) unwillingly: *Touchinga the intention

yet, in so doing, do their Lusts fulfill;
Therefore the VVilexcludes Necessity,
Since it, by nature, has free liberty.
Then none are damned but for wilful sin;
Nor, saved but for willing Piety:
So, the VVil's free, as it has ever bin,
From al Constraint, save Sin the same within.
Then, Reprobates unjustly do complain
Of being preordain'd for Castawaies:
For, though to perish, God did them ordain;
yet die they not, but for their wicked Ways;
And so the unjust justly still decaies:
They freely sin, by nature, which is free;
Then God, Sins wages, ever justly paies:
So, Sin steps in betwixt his just Decree
And the excution, that he just might be!
There Is no Discourse nor Motion in his will
That he should now will This, then That again; No discourse or motion in the
will of God

His Will is even with his Knowledge still;
Though it in Order do behind remain;
For, naught but God, Gods Substance can contain:
Then, from eternity, He wills their wrack
On whom, by Justice, He does glory gain:
Yet dye they for their sins (since grace they lack)
So, God does judge, and never Justice Rack!
His Judgments then, are all just, strange, and deep:
For (in a most unutterable kind)
They that transgress his Will, his Will do The transgressors of Gods revealed
will, keep his secret will
keep:
For naught is simply done against his Mind;
And all falls out, as he has fore-disignde!
He suffers Ill, and that most willingly;
But would not suffer it, did he not find
His Might can make Ill, Good almightly:
So, Ill he wills, to make it good thereby!
HE, and his Glory is the End of all;
And all that are, are means unto that End;
For, as they are by Him, in general:
So, are they for him; and on him depend!
For him: That is, his glory to defend.
But yet, this End does not so move his Will,
As by the End ours move, and to it tend:
To seek a a No cause of gods will, but his mere good pleasure
Cause of his good Will, is ill,
More then his only most good Pleasure still!
Then, no Cause is there why he saves some,
But only that good pleasure, which is free
To save, or spill his Works, by upright doom:
Since through all freedom, all Deaths Vassals be;
Then, some to save, is freest Clemency.
And, as of All, he freely some ellects:
So, by his eviternall sure DECREE
Ordaines them to the END, and the Effects;
And, so his own free Gifts in them Affects.
Then, in his Will, remains our Weal, or Woe;
Yet, still we pray his will may still be done: God, by one act of willing,
wills his glory, and our confusion.

Who by that Act does will our overthrow,
By which he wills his own dominion;
To which all Povv'rs are in subjection!
Then must we needs submit us to his will,
Although it be to our Confusion:
(Since that is good for him, though for us ill)
And seek, for life, his know'n-will to fulfill.
But let no temprall Torment, or anoy
Persuade us, he is not our willing friend:
For, as the Persians punishments employ Simil.

Upon their Nobles Weeds, when they offend,
That by that grace, they may their manners mend:
So, God does deal with those he loves best,
whose Rods he on their Corpse, and State does spend,
To save their Souls; and, those he loves least,
He plagues, in Soul, and lets their Bodies rest.
For, as an ouer-gorged Stomach makes
Anaking Head, by Vapors that arise, Simil.

So, too much Weal the staidest Judgment shakes;
And quite smoks out the Understandings Eyes:
For, Overmuch makes fondlings of the Wise.
Then let all outward griefs be heapt on me,
So inward Comforts give my wants supplies:
for so, by Justice, God still makes me free
from his just vengance, in great Clemency!
The higher we from Earth vp-lifted be
The lesser will all Earthly Things appear;
And so the nearer we to Heaven do flee,
The less we value Things that Earthly are;
But, Cloggd with Earth, that Clogg is all our care.
Then (with that Heu'n-rapt S. Paul
Saint) rapt Muse, ascend
That third aethereall Heau'n-reuealing Sphere!
Yet, lo, quite spent, before our Iournies end,
We must t'a lower full Point Will exceeds power herein.
now descend.
And, though we must confess all Helps we took
That God, and Men affoorded us herein,
Out of Men's VVritings, and Gods blessed Book
Yet to our Muse, it has so weighty bin
That now she (fainting) sincks, for fear to sin:
Then, here an End, before an endless End,
Since we may lose, if more we seek to win:
And what is done, we meekely do commend
To mortal The church millitant.
Saints; to use, refuse, or mend.
FINIS.
He that loves pureness of heart for the grace of his lips, the King shall
be his Friend. Prou. 13, 11.
GOod Preachers, that live ill [like Spittlemen)
Are perfect in the way they never went:
Or like the Flame that led Gods Children,
It self not knowing what the matter meant:
They be, like Trumpets making others fight,
Themselves not striking stroke; since liuelesse Things:
Like Landmarks, worn to naught, being in the Right:
Like well-directing ill-affected Kings:
Like Bells that others call where they come not:
Like Soape, remaining black, and making white:
Like Bows, that to the Mark the Shafts have shot,
While they themselves stand bent, unapt for flight:
For, where their Words and Works are not agreed,
There what they mend in Word, they mar in Deed,
Blessed be the merciful: for they shall obtain Mercy. Math. 5. 7.
WHat wit has Man to leave that Wealth behind
Which he might carry hence when hence he goes?
What Alms he gives alive, he, dead, does find;
But what he leaves behind him, he does lose.
To give away then, is to bear away;
They most do hold, who have the openest Hands:
To hold too hard makes much the less to stay:
Though stay there may more then the Hand commands.
The Beggars Belly is the batful'st Ground
That we can sow in: For, it multiplies
Our Faith, and Hope, and makes our Love abound;
And, what else Grace, and Nature dearly prize:
So thus, may Kings be richer in their Grave
Then in their Thrones; though all the world they have!

