TWO SERMONS PREACHED AT the Assizes holden at CARLISLE, touching sundry
corruptions of these times.

By L. D. sometimes fellow of Queens Coll. in Oxford.

ISAIAH 62.1. For Sions sake, will I not hold my peace.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN God the Lord Bishop of CARLIL.
RIGHT REVEREND,
WHen I preached at Carlil at the last Assizes, I made no other account, but
that my sermon should (like Aristotle's Arist. de hist. animal. lib. 5. cap. 19
Ephemeron) have died the same day that it took breath. Since which time I
have been entreated by diverse to make it common: to whom I would not yield
the least assent, as doubting that their desires proceeded rather from
affection toward the speaker, the^ from a sound judgment of the things
spoken. But when I perceived how distasteful it was to some, that bear Romish
hearts in English breasts; I resolved, as David did when Micol mocked him for
dancing before the arc, to be yet more vile, by publishing that unto their
eyes, which before was delivered to their ears; hoping that the more it
displeases them the better acceptance it shall find with the true Israelite.
Which now at length I have effected. So that as before they heard it (or at
least heard of it) so now they may read it. And if I have evil spoken let the^
bear witness of the evil, but if I have said well, why do they smite me? It
seems to the^ a mere calumniation to say that there is no probability that a
Papist shall live peaceably with us, and perform true and sincere obedience
toward our Prince. To whom I might return the short answer of the Lacones
to their adversary, Si: if it were so, my speech was not to no purpose, because
not only rebels to the king, but much more to God and his true worship and
service, are to be rooted out of a Christian commonwealth. And if those be
worthy a sharp censure which agreeing with us in the fundamental points of
Divinity, cannot away with the carved work of our temple, but cut it down as
it were with axes and hammers: how much more those Sanballats and Tobiahs, that
strike at the foundation thereof, and say of it, as did the children of Edom in
the day of Jerusalem, down with it, down with it, even to the ground.

But I rather say, O si, I wish it were so, and that there were no fear of
danger by their means and devises. But this I doubt cannot be effected,
unless there be, I will not say with the Orator, a wall, but a sea between
them and us. Till then there is as great probability of peace between us as
there was of old between the Catholics and the Donatists, the Orthodoxall and
the Arians, the Hebrews and the Egyptians, the Jews and the Samaritans:
Immortale odium and nunquam sanabile vulnus. And for true loialty, and faithful
obedience there is as great probability, as that the two poles shall meet. The
King and the Pope are two contrary masters none can truly serve them both;
Either he must hate the one, and love the other, or he must lean to the one
and despise the other. The obedience which either of the^ requires is so
repugnant, that they cannot lodge within one breast. This loialty which our
adversaries do outwardly pretend is but equivocall, no more true loialty, the^
a dead hand is a hand; it wants the very form and soul (if I may so speak)
of true dutifulness, which is to perform obedience voluntarily and with a
free heart for Gods cause, as to Christ's immediate Vicar over all persons
within his dominions. It is with some secret reservation, till their primus
motor, the man of sin, upon whom their obedience depends, shall sway them an
other way: or rebus sic stantibus, the state standing as it does, and donec
publica bullae executio fieri possit, until they may have power and strength
to resist. So that I may use the same words unto the^ which Austin does to the
Rogatists, Aug. ep. 48.
Saevire vos nolle dicitis, ego non posse arbitror; ita enim estis numero
exigui, vt movere vos contra adversarias vobis multitudines non audeatis, etsi
cupiatis. I speak chiefly of such as are grounded in the principles of Popish
divinity, and take for current whatsoever is stamped in Romes mint. As for
their ignorant followers I only give them that censure, which S. Paul gives the
Jews; They have the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge, for they
being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going about to stablish their
own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God.

I have adventured to join with this an other Sermon preached before upon a
like occasion (so far as I could gather it out of a few scattered papers
flying abroad like Sybilla's leaves, -- rapidis ludibria ventis. Which I have
the rather done, because my experience these few years in the country, has
taught me how common those sins are which I have herein endeavored to reprove.
If these my labors shall not be distasteful, I shall be willing to go
forward in a greater subject. Howsoever they shall be taken, I submit them to
the censure of your Lordship, and of every indifferent Reader (not counting
what carping Momus can say against the^) in the words of judicious Vives; Lud.
Vives in August. de de Civit Dei li. vlt. c. vlt*
Si quid dixi quod placeat, habeat lector gratiam Deo propter me; si quid quod
no^ placeat, ignoscat mihi propter Deum and male dictis det veniam propter been
dicta; and of holy Austin in the conclusion of his long discourse de Trinitate,
Domine Deus vnus and trinitas, quaecunque dixi de tuo agnoscant and tui, si qua
de meo and tu ignosce and tui.

Your Lordships in Christ to be commanded LANCELOT DAWES.

MATH. 26.15. What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you?


I have elsewhere, in a great and populous auditory, discoursed of our Saviors
mildnes, and humility, and of the deceit and hypocrisy of the Iudasses of
these times, from these words of our Savior: Judas betrayest thou the son of
man with a kiss? Luke 22.48*
Being commanded to supply this place, I thought it not unfit for this present
occasion, to look back into the story of our Saviors passion, and to seek
out the cause of Judas his cruel, and more then hellish fact, in betraying his
Master, which I find wrapped in the words already delivered unto you.

These two questions, what will ye give me? and what shall I give you? be two
evils at this day much reigning amongst men; which though they may stand
somewhat upon their antiquity, yet they have little reason to brag of their
petigree. For the one may be fathered upon Simo^ Magus, who offered to buy the
gifts of the holy Ghost for money: Act. 8.19.
What shall I give you, that upon whomsoever I shall lay my hands, he may
receive the holy Ghost? the other upon Judas the traitor, who offered to sell
the giver of the holy Ghost for a small sum of money. What will ye give me,
and I will deliver him unto you? Both of the^ wicked, but the speech of Judas
the more heinous. Who not contented with that which he gat by stealth out of
the bag which he bare, and being disappointed of a profit which he expected, in
regard that that box of ointment which he purposed to have sold, (that he
might have converted a good part thereof to his own proper use,) was powered
upon our Saviors head: and perceiving our Savior to defend the fact of the
woman, anon he goes out; and because he was frustrated of his hope of gain
by selling the ointment, he offers for a small sum of money to sell the
anointed. What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you? As if he
should have said, I perceive that ye are marveilous desirous to apprehe^d my
master, but ye cannot easily effect your purpose, by reason of the people,
which make such account of him, that percha^ce they would make an vproare, if
any open violence should be offered unto him: yet if ye will listen unto me,
and follow my counsel, I will quickly ease you of that care, upon this
condition, that ye will afford me any reasonable reward for my pains; tell me
therefore before I go, what shall my recompense be, and I will undertake
without any tumult to deliver him into your hands. In which words observe
these two points, 1. Judas his question, what will ye give me? 2. His promise
to deliver his master, so that he may be rewarded: and I will deliver him unto
you.

In the question we see, that though Judas was an Apostata, fallen from God,
and led by Satan to betray his master, whom he little esteemed, as appears
by the price he sold him for; yea though he had a desire to make his master
away, least he should afterward get knoweledge of his theft, yet he will not
betray him unless he have something for his pains. And therefore before he
make any promise of delivering him, he covenanteth for a price: whence arises
this note, that even the wicked, and reprobate will abstain from horrible and
gross sins when there is no provocation offered, and when they see no end of
committing them. There are in every sin which is voluntarily committed two
causes. An inward impulsive moving them; and something which may have the name
of a final cause or else an external object, alluring them. The impulsive cause
in Judas was covetousness. The final cause was to obtain some money. The
impulsive cause kept it self close, and like a thief, lurked in a corner, til
a fit opportunity was offered, and a reward was expected. As it was in Judas,
so was it in Achan; no doubt but Achan had given lodging to covetousness
before the overthrowe of Jericho: but then he had the opportunity offered him.
He saw amongst the spoil a goodly Babylonish garment, I^s. 7.21.
and two hundred shekles of silver, and a wedge of gold, and because he coveted
them he took them (contrary to the Lords commandment) and hid them in the
midst of his tent. As it was in these two, so was it in Gehazi. I make no
question but an inordinate desire of having had possessed his heart, before
that Naaman the Syrian, came to his master, to be healed of his leaprosie. But
never such an opportunity was offered, as was the^: for when he saw Naama^
offer his master some rich rewards for curing him, and his master absolutely
refusing them, 2. Kin. 5* 20.
he thought then was the golden occasion offered him to satiate his greedy
desires, and therefore posts after Naaman to get something of him. Wicked Ahab
who (as the holy Ghost speaks) sold himself to work wickedness, did not
shed the blood of Naboth the Israelite, but to this end, that he might
obtain the vineyard which lay near unto his house. Now as it is in
covetousness, so with other sins. And the reason is very plain: for though the
understandings of the wicked be so darkened, that they call good evil, and
evil good, sower sweet, and sweet sower; Isa. 5.
though their appetites and affections be so perverted, that they swallow up
sin with greediness, and drink iniquity like water: yet there is some
relics of the image of God in their understanding, whereby they have a
glimpse of good and evil, which though it cannot moderate the will, and
affections from running into sin, yet it does so far forth bridle them, as
that they will not commit any heinous impiety, but when some thing is offered
which puts as it were a vizard upon the object of the will, and makes it choose
that which otherwise it would refuse. For the will by nature is always carried
unto his proper object, which is good, and abhors that which is evil. So
that when it chooses evil, it is not as it is a will, but as it is depraved,
and as the understanding, which judges of the object, before the will choose
or refuse it, cou^teth that good which indeed is evil. must be pardoned. The
adulterer will plead for himself, that his own corrupt affection has moved
him, and that the circumstances of time and place have caused him, and
therefore he must be excused. But these excuses are such, as that, if they
would serve the turn, the wickedest reprobate upon the face of the earth might
be found not guilty. For might not Judas have pleaded for himself, that he
would never have betrayed Christ, but that he expected some reward from the
high Priests? Might not Ahab have sworn that he would never have sought
Naboths blood, if it had not bin for his vineyarde which was so commodious for
his house? Might not Achan have avouched that he would never have tra^sgressed
the Lords commandment by taking of the excommunicate thing, but that it so
offered it self that he thought he might have taken it, and none bin privy to
it? Might not Cain have excused the slaughter of his guiltless brother, that
he would not have killed him, if the Lord had not had a greater respect unto
Abels sacrifice, the^ unto his? It is true indeed, that such objects may
occur, such induceme^ts may happen, as that the dearest of Gods children
(which as long as they remain in these houses of clay do taste too much of the
old Adam) may thereby be led to commit gross impieties. We know, that the
fear of death moved Peter to deny his Master: That idleness, and the sight of
Bathsheba, caused David to adultery: That Lots daughters brought their father
to commit incest: That Salomo^ by his wives was drawn to Idolatry: That the
fear of the Egyptians made faithful Abraham to distrust Gods providence, and
to say that his wife was his sister. But this ^onely shows their imperfectio^s;
it excuses not their facts, that they had sundry provocatio^s to these sins.
If Peter had thought that the fear that the Jews put him in, by reason of the
great cruelty which they used against his master, might have excused him for
denying Christ, Mat. 26.
he might have spared his tears. If occasion, and time and place, might have
purchased a pardon for David, Psalm. 51.1.
he would never have been so vehement, and passionate, in confessing his fault,
and craving a pardon for the same. And indeed this is the only course to be
freed from Gods plagues, not to excuse our sins, and say that such and such
provocations brought us to them: for so the wickedest reprobate might be
innocent) but to humble our selves before the Majesty of God, and to confess
our misery, that he may receive us to mercy.

Germans, Tacit^^.
that they abstained from the unlawful company of women, when by nature they
were not addicted to wantonness? What credit is it for a young child, or
withered old man, to abstain from carnal pleasure, when the heat of youth in
the one is quelled, and the other never knew what lust meant? What grace for a
weak spirited man, who was never moved with any excessive anger, not to be a
murderer? This is rather commendatio^ worthy, if we shall abstain from those
vices to which our corrupt nature does most propend: If the Dutch can leave his
drunkenness, the Italian his lustfulnesse, the French his factiousnes, the
Spaniard his hautinesse, the English his gluttony, and greedines: if the
choleric can lay aside his anger, and rashness; the phlegmatic his sloth,
and idleness; the melancholicke his hatred, and enviousnes; the sanguine his
concupiscence, and wa^tonnes; in a word, if Herod can be contented to part with
Herodias, and every man his beloved sin, to which by nature he is most addicted.

When a certain Physiognomer looking upon Socrates, gathered by his complexion
that he was given to l^st and wantonness, the people which knew the
continency, and virtuous life of Socrates, mocked him as unskillful of his
art, thinking that Socrates was not addicted to any such vice. But Socrates
acknowledged the judgment of the Physiognomer to be true, and confessed that
by natural disposition he was prone unto it; thinking it a greater virtue to
conquer, and keep under the corruptions of the flesh; then to keep himself
under, and within the bond of reason, when he had nothing to draw him away.
And yet this is little worth, unless it be at such time, when some external
means, and provocations do concur, for bringing that into act, which
depraved nature most affects. The drunkard will sometimes abstain from his
beastliness: but it is when he can get no wine. The oppresser from grinding,
and grating the faces of the poor; but it is when he lacks matter to work
upon. The wanton from his pleasures; but it is when he wants time, and place
to effect his desires. The glutto^ from his excessive cating: but it is in a
dearth, or scarcity, when he knows not how to fill his p^unch. It had been
praise worthy in Judas, if having a covetous mind, the high Priest had come
unto him, and offered him a large sum of money, upon this condition, that he
would have betrayed his master; and he should have replied, as Simon Peter did
to Simon Magus: your money perish with you, Act. 8.20.
because ye think that the son of God may be bought for money. It is a good
commendation which Tully gives to Muraena, that living amongst the effeminate
and luxurious Asians, he was not infected with their faults. Laus illi
tribuenda est, In Orit pro Mu^aena.
non quod Asiam viderat, sed quod in Asia continenter vixerat. And Ulysses
deserves the name of a sober and temperate man, not because he was so amongst
the Grecians, but because he kept himself sober in Circes cellar; where all
his fellows except Eurylochus were drunk. On the co^tra^y it argues
weakness in Anacharsis the Scythia^ Philosopher (who used to say in
commendation of his country that there were no A^ist. Post. Analyt. lib. 1
Pipers in Scythia because there were no vines) that fallng into the company of
some Cellar-knights which drank for a wager, he took their part, and was
first drunk under board himself. Psalm. 11.5.
The Lord, says the Psalmist, tries the righteous. He suffers such objects
to be offered unto them, as may be allurements unto sin; that by refusing
and forsaking thereof, they may make it known to the world, to whom they
belong. So was Lots righteousness tried, not when he dwelled with Abraham, but
when he was removed to Sodom: which though it was for the pleasantness of
the soil like the garden of Eden, yet for wickedness and unnatural
uncleanness it surmounted hell it self. And yet for all this it could not
infect righteous Lot, who dwelling amongst them, 2. Pet. 2.8.
from day to day vexed his righteous soul by their unlawful deeds. So was
David's innocence tried, not when he fled from Saul, but when he found him
asleep and might have killed him. 1. Sam. 26^
So likewise thou declarest thy righteousness, not when thou abstainest from
such sins as thy nature is averse from, or from such sins as thy flesh is
prone unto, at such times as fit means are wanting to accomplish thy desire:
but when thou abstainest from such as thy flesh inwardly desires, and some
external provocation urges and allureth thee unto. Thou must, when the high
Priest offers thee a rich reward, not be bribed to sell thy master. With
Ulysses thou must live sober at Cyrces table, with Lot thou may persist
honest amongst the Sodomites: otherwise if thou perswadest thy self, that thou
do well, if thou can abstain from gross sins, when there is no great
inducement to persuade thee to act them; this is but Judas his righteousness,
who would not betray his master but in hope of reward, what will ye give me,
and I will deliver him unto you?

5 And so I come unto the second general part: wherein observe 1. the person
delivering, I. 2. the action, deliver. 3. the party delivered, him. 4. the
parties to whom, unto you. Of which before I particularly entreat we may from
the promise as it has reference unto the question, gather this conclusion.
That a covetous mind, setting all respects aside, will not be afraid to commit
any sin, so that he may be rewarded for his pains.

Luke Luke 22.2.
and John Ioh 13 3.
tell us, that the Devil put it into the heart of Judas to betray his master.
He put it not into the heart of Peter, or John, or any other of the Disciples;
why? because this Philargyria, had only taken root in Judas his heart: the rest
were not infected with this disease. They were indeed weak, and feeble in the
faith, and therefore Peter though he followed him a far of, and came into the
high Priests hall, yet a poor damsel did so shake the rock of his faith, that
presently he denied him, the rest immediately after he was taken forsook him,
and fled: but none of them did entertain any such suggestio^ as to betray him,
save Judas Iscariot, who before was entangled with the chains and fetters of
covetousnes. So true is it which the Apostle says, those that will be rich
fall into snares and tentations of the devil; for so the vulgar adds 1 Timothy
6.4. Here then, if ever, the poets exclamation may have place, -- Quid non
mortalia pectora cogis Aen. lib. 3.

Auri sacra fames! --
What vice so scandalous; what thing so monstrous; what sin to God and nature
so odious, which the desire of money will not cause a man to commit? A man
betrayeth a man, a servant his master, a creature delivers his creator, the
Ioh. 17.12
son of perdition Matthew. 16.16.
the son of God; the Lord of life must be put to death for a little money.
Well therefore does the Apostle term covetousness the root of all evil. 1 Timothy 6.10
For as all the lines of a circle do take their beginning from one middle point
or ce^ter; so all other evils do spring from this fountain. Gal 5.20.^1.
The works of the flesh are manifest (says the Apostle) which are Idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions,
heresies, envy, murder; I may add lying, swearing, stealing, oppressing,
whence do they proceed, but from a covetous and infatiable heart? This is the
womb where they ordinarily are bred.

^aven.
-- Lucri bonus est odor ex re
Qualibet --
says the Poet: alluding to the fact of Vespasian, Sueton in Vespasiano.
in Suetonius, who gathered a tax from some homely matters, and told his
son Titus that it smelled as well, as any other silver did. Be it gotten, by
theft, lying, stealing, swearing, forswearing, usury, oppression, what way so
ever it be gotten, (says the covetous in his heart) if it be gain, it is well
gotten. Tacitus Tacit. hist. l. 3
tells us of a Roman knight, that killed his own brother, in hope to be rewarded
for his pains. Histories are full of the like, which I will pass over with
silence. I will only instance in one of our own country, (which me thinks in
all points, save in the difference of the parties betrayed, may be compared to
this of Judas) I mean Humfery Banister servant to the Duke of Buckingham: whom
the Duke had tenderly brought up, and above all loved and trusted, insomuch
that being pursued by K. Richard the third, he hid himself in Banisters
house, thinking it to be the only sanctuary, where he might safely repose
himself. But when K. Richard had promised 1000 pounds to those that would
find him out, the desire of gain so wrought with him, that presently he be
trayed his Lord and master into the kings hands. As the fact was like to that
of Judas, so the punishment has some resemblance with it. Judas though he had
no bond for payment, yet he got the money. The high Priests proved better of
their promise then the King Judas did not enjoy the money, for he went out, In
the life of Richard the 3 written by Sir Th. More.
and hanged himself. Banister was not executed, but was shortly after for a
murder condemned: his son and heir became mad, and died in a hogstie, his
daughter was infected with a leprosy, his second son deformed of his limbs;
his youngest son drowned in a puddle.

6 By this wh ch has been spoken, you see my conclusion plainly proved: that
a covetous man, setting al respects aside, will not be afraid to commit any
^^nne, so that he may be rewarded for his pains. And how can it be
otherwise? for he is like a hunger-starved man which will do any thing, so
that he may satiate his appetite. Covetousness like the pit of hell, is never
satisfied, and like the bar ren womb, it never says, I have enough.

Ovid. Fast. Prove. 30 15
Quo plus sunt potae, plus sitiuntur aquae. the more blood the two daughters of
the horseleech shall suck, the more eagerly they cry out* Hor.
give. give. This barren and dry earth is never satisfied with water; nec sitim
pellit, nisi causa morbi. Nothing will content this dropsy, but that which
more augmenteth the disease, as nothing will satisfy the fire, but that which
more augmenteth the flame. He is like unto him that has the Caninus
appetitus, the more he eats the more he hungreth. Some Physicians say that
gold is good for him that is in a consumption, but I never read that it is good
against a surfeit. But experience proves it true that a gold-hungring man, does
not only long for this metal when he is in a consumption, but far more
when he has taken a surfeit through abundance.

-- congesto pauper in auro est. The richer, the poorer: his mind hungereth as
much for gold, as Dionysius his belly hu^gred for flesh, who used to stand all
the day in the shambles, and quod emere non potuerat, oculis devorabat. Justin.
l. 2^.
That which he could not buy with his penny, he devoured with his eyes. And
here that comes in my mind which Herodotus records of Alcmaeon the Athenian,
who because he had kindly entertained the messengers which Croesus sent to the
oracle of Delphos: Herod. lib. ^.
Croesus sen^ for him and offered him as much gold as at one time he could bear
out of his treasure house. Alcmaeon not a little glad of the offer, prepared a
large doublet with wide fleeues, a pair of breeches reaching down to his
heels, both of them fitter for Hercules then for himself. This done he went
to Croesus his coffers, and first filled his breeches as full as he could
stuff them, then his sleeves, and bosom, then glued as much as he could to
the hairs of his head, and beard, and then lastly stuffed his mouth with as
much as he could thrust in it, and so with much ado, crept out of the
treasure house.

Ap^lication to magistrates
This sin, as of all men it is to be avoided, so especially of magistrates
which sit at the stern to direct our ship in this glassie sea: and which are
the pillars of justice to support her battered fabric. Ye must not give it
the least welcome in your hearts: but (like the wise traveller) stop your
ears at the songs of this Siren, and not give it the least attention though it
charm never so cunningly. You should have eyes like unto Lynceus, to ^iue into
the bottom of the most deep and abstruse controversies. Now hope of reward
blinds the eyes of the wise: so that as a blind man which has a pearl upon
his eyes, cannot see his way, but stu^bleth at every block, and falls
headlong into every pit: right so if you shall have this rich pearl (this
pearl of riches) before your eyes, you can never tread right in the way of
truth. The eye, or any faculty of the sensual, or in ellectuall part, if it
be busied about any one object neglects the rest: and if your eyes be
exercised about this object, it will make you negligent in public affairs.
Arist. de anima lib 3.
Intus apparens prohibet alienum: if the species of gold possess your hearts,
there will be no room for justice to lodge in them. For these two be (...),
non been convenient nec in vna sede mora^tur. They ca^ no more lodge within the
same breast then light with darkness, the arc with Dagon, God with Mammon. It
was Caesar's saying, borrowed from Euripides in his Phoenissa: If justice must
be broken, Cic. lib. 3. Offic.
it must be for reigning. But he might more truly have said, for gaining. For
gold could never away with justice, and therefore the Poets feign, that when
gold first began to be dug out of the earth, justice durst tarry no longer,
but presently fled into heaven. Exodus 18.21
Therefore Iethro describing the qual^tie of a good judge, says that he must
deal justly or truly, and the^ he adds, as it were by way of explication for
the better understanding of the former word, that he must hate covetousnes: as
if he had said, if he be a covetous, and gold-thirsting man he cannot be a
true and just dealer. And to this purpose David prays, Ps. 119. that the Lord
would incline his heart to his t^stimonies, and not to covetousness.

^ To lawyers
7 Now as this insatiable desire of gain, is not to sit on the bench with the
judge, so is it not to plead at the bar^e with the counselor, which with the
key of knowledge is to unlock the secrets of the law, and with a skillful, and
expert hand, to untie the knots of hard and difficult questions. It will make
him Pharisee-like to strain a Gnat, and to swallow a Camel; to tithe mint,
and cummin, and to let pass judgment and fidelity, it will make his tongue
play fast and loose with justice at its pleasure. A golden key commonly opens a
wrong lock. Auro loquente, nihil pollet quaevis oration. When Pluto speaks
Plato may hold his hand on his mouth like Harpocrates the Egyptian God, and
say nothing. It is a great come^dation which Tullie gives unto a Lawyer: De
orat. l. 1.
The mouth of a Lawyer is an oracle for the whole city. But if this mouth be
once corrupted with gold it will prove like the oracle of Delphos, of which
Demosthenes complained in his time, Tull. de divinat. lib. 2.
that it did (...), speak nothing but what Philip, which gave it a double fee
would have it to say. And such an oracle Demosthenes himself sometime proved:
Aul. Gel. l. 1^ cap 9.
who being feed to plead a cause, and immediately after receiving a large sum
of money of the other party for holding his peace, the next day comes into the
court in a rug-gowne, having his neck, and jaws all muffled with furs, and
warm clothes, and told the judges he was troubled with a squinancie that he
could not speak. Whereupon one that perceived his disease, said that it was not
a cold, but gold that hindered his speech. (...), an Ox, I warrant you, was
in his tongue. The Athenian coin which was stamped with the form of an Ox had
bunged up his mouth, no marvel if he was speechless.

8 But especially this sin is to be avoided of you that are witnesses, and
iurers, 3. To wi^nesses and Iurers,
which are the one by testifying the other by examining the truth to make a
final decision of controversies. If you shall entertain any such thought as
to say with Judas, What will ye give me? ye shall be sure to find some
Simon Magus ready to say? What shall I give you? Falsity and lying have ever
bin the handmaides to covetousness. And therefore when the Prophet Jeremy
complains, that from the least to the greatest they were al give^ to
covetousnes, Ier. 6.13.
it must needs be true which he adds in the next words, that from the Prophet
eve^ unto the Priest they all dealt falsely. As Judas was hereby moved to betray
his master, so were the soldiers persuaded to lie, and falsely to forswear
themselves, that his disciples stole him away when they were asleep; and that
most palpably too. For if they were asleep how knew they that it was his
disciples, and if they knew that it was his dis^iples, how were they asleep?

2. Pet. 2.15
9 Follow not then the ways of Balaam the son of Bosor which loved the wages
of unrighteousness. Only herein ye must keep his resolution, Number. 24.13
not for an house full of silver and gold to go beyond the word of truth to
say less or more. Equivocations and mental reservations which the Papists
make such reckoning off, are the ready way to renew that old tohu, and bohu,
to make a chaos and confusion of all things, Genesis 1.
to mix light and darkness, truth and falsehood, heaven and hell together.
Whosoever shall for filthy lucre sake, either wittingly co^ceale part of the
truth, or add any thing thereto, and thereby turn the truth into a ly, Eccl
6.3.
I say unto you that an untimely birth is better then he. And better it were
for him unless he repent, Mat. 18.6.
that a millstone were put about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
deep of the sea.

10 To end this point, 4 To all. Luk 12.13. Ephesians. 5.3.
let me speak unto you al in the words of our Savior, beware of covetousnes,
and with the Apostle, let it not be once named amongst you. But if ye will needs
be covetous, 1. Cor. 14.^
covet spiritual things: set not your hearts on the things that are below,
but on the thin^s that are above. Covet that which will satiate your hearts, and
that is nothing in this world. For the heart is triangular, and the world is
round, and a round body cannot fill a triangle, but there will remain some
empty corners: no more can the whole world fill the three corners of an heart,
nor any thing save he which is three, and one, God blessed for evermore.
Inquietu^ est cor nostrum O Deus postquam recessimus a te donec revertamur ad
te, says Austin, O God our heart is never contented when we turn from thee,
till we return to thee. Oh then as your hearts are, so let your hearts desire
be; that is, the Basis or broader part upward toward heaven, and heavenly
things, and the conus or narrow point toward earth and earthly things. Use
not your riches as Anacharsis said the Athenians did their money: Nummis ad
numerandum, Plut. de profect virt. sent.
only to count it over, and then to coffer it up. Enjoy the^, but joy not
immoderatly in them, knowing this that ye are not owners, but only users of
the things that ye possess. Alas why should a man, which is a little world of
himself, a man whose conversation should be in heaven, be wedded to these
base, and vile excrements of the earth? they deserve no better name. For what I
pray you is the best gold, but a congealed vapor? and the greatest possessions
but so much earth? and the finest silk, but excrements of silly worms, which
live but two or three months? Solomon had as much experience in them as any man
that ever lived. 1. Kings. 10 17.
For he gave in Jerusalem silver as stones, and Cedar trees, as the wild
fig trees that grow abundantly in the plains, yet in his old age, when he
became a preacher, and repented him of his former life, he took such small
comfort in this transitory trash, that in the beginning of Ecclesiastes, he
took this for his text, Vanity of vanities, Eccles. 1.^
and all is but vaniti: and if they be weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary,
they will want of weight. They are altogether vanity, nay they are lighter then
vanity it self. Let us then so love them, as that we care not to leave them:
and in all things, Plilip. 4.12
let us learn both to be hungry, and to be full, and to abound, and to have
want: accounting all things, but loss, and dross, and dung, that we may
win Christ. Which Judas for the desire of a little money promises to deliver
unto the high Priest: I will deliver him unto you. And so I come to the
particulars of the second general branch of my text.

11 And first we are to begin with the Person delivering, and that is Judas,
no Saducee, nor Pharisee which oppugned his doctrine, no professed enemy which
openly sought his destruction, but an Apostle, one of the twelve which he had
chosen unto himself, and sent abroad to preach the Gospel, and to cast out
Devils, and to heal the sick. Hence I infer this conclusion: that no calling
is so holy but that it has some wicked impes, and dissembling hypocrites
(which though for a space they may deceive the world with a vizard of
holiness, yet time will unmask and show them in their own colors)
intermixed with true professors. A conclusion which if the instances of our
time could not make good, the premises of all former ages do abundantly
demonstrate it. When as yet our first parents had no mo children then Cain and
Abel, Gen 4.
the elder of these two, the first that ever was borne of a woman, the heir
apparent of the whole world, was an Apostata: his hypocrisy was disclosed in
killing his brother. When the whole Church was compinged within the sides of
one arc, all were not sheep that were in this little fold, Genesis 7.
for -- Not lupus inter oves, there swamme one wolf among these sheep. As
there was a Sem which was elected; so was there a Cham which was rejected: his
apostasy declared in mocking his father. Of the same father (even of him, Genesis
16.
who was the father of the faithful) there came an Ishmael, as well as an
Isaac; of the same mother (even at one and the self same birth) came an Esau,
Rom 4 16.
as well as a Jacob. Genesis 25.24
The same kingdom had as well a Saul, as a David: the same place a Barrabas,
and a Barnabas, the same profession a Cephas, and a Caiphas, a Jude, and a
Iuda^: and as it was, so it shall ever be till the son of man come in the
glory of his kingdom, as long as the nett swims in the salt sea of this
world, till it be brought to land, it shall contain both good and bad fishes.
Till the reapers come there must grow wheat and tares together in this field:
till the shepherd come there must be sheep and goats in this fold. 2. Tim.
2.20.
This great house till it be builded a new, must contain vessels of honor,
and vessels of dishonor: the gold must be mixed with the dross, till the
great and terrible fire come to separate them. In this floor the wheat shall
be mingled with the chafe, till the Lord come with his fan in his hand to
winnow it, and shall blow the chafe, Psalm. 8.
and scatter it away from the face of the earth.

they do not learn godliness: but as those which walk in the sun, though
they change their outward color, yet they still retain their inward nature, so
these though they receive an outward tincture of godliness, yet they still keep
their inward corruption. Hereupon it is that Corazin and Bethsaida are more
inexcusable, Mat. 11.21. Mat. 12 41.
then Tyrus and Sidon: that the men of Niniue, and the Queen of the South
shall arise against the Jews and shall condemn them: Mat. 11.23
that it shall be better for them of Sodom in the day of judgment, then for
Capernaum.

2 The lord by this means effects the conversion of so^e, which are not yet
called. For as the Aramits, by walking with the Prophet, 2. King. 6.
were at unawares brought to Samaria: so many who are not as yet called by
walking with the righteous, are catched at unawares, and brought to Christ's
sheepfold.

3 The lord does hereby exercise his children and keeps them still fighting,
whereas otherwise they would be ready to fall a sleep in the cradle of carnal
security. The coldness of devotio^, that is in the worldlings, does by an
Antiperistasis oftentimes stir up the heat of zeal in Gods children. While the
wind strives to blow out the fire it increases the flame, and while the wicked
do endeavor to consume the heat of zeal in Gods children, and to make them
as cold as they themselves are, they often blow it up, and make it far
greater then it was before.

I told you before what Tully says of Muraena, that his chastity was more seen
in living amongst the effeminate Asians, then ever it was at Rome. And I am
sure Lots continency did far more appear when he lived amongst the
Sodomites, then when he was in the mountain with his two daughters. Genesis 19.
If Gods children should have none but such as Moses, and Elias to converse
with them, they would say as Peter did unto Christ, when he was transfigured
upon the mountain, Master it is good for us to be here: Mark. 9.5.
let us here (upon this mountain) build us tabernacles. They would never say
with the Psalmist: Psalm. 15.8.
Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, and who shall rest upon thy mountain?
Whereas now being vexed with these Cananites that dwell amongst the^, and are
thorns in their sides, Number. 33.59.
and pricks in their eyes: they are weary of the earthly Canaan, and long for
another, which flows with better things then milk and honey. They cry out as
Rebecca when she felt the two twins struggling in her womb: Genesis 25 22
if it be so, why are we thus?

Donatists, and the Brownists, and Anabaptists, which separate themselves from
the true Church, and say with those in the Prophet, Come not near us for we
are holier then ye? Socrat. hist. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Me thinks I may say unto them as Constantine said to Acesius a Novatian
Bishop: Let them make a ladder for themselves to ascend into heaven, here is no
place for them on earth, as long as this world shall last, the Lords wheat
shall grow up with the tares. Christ has spoken it, Mat. 13.29.
and Christ is truth, if there be in them any charity, they will assent to
this verity: Sit in illis charitas and congaudeant vernate Aug. Cor. 2.6.
yea but light has no communion with darkness, nor bitterness with honey,
nor life with death, nor the unbeliever with the infidel. It is the objection
of Petilian the Donatist against Austin. But his answer is, that when they
eschew the darkness, they forsake the light: when they flee from death they
flee from life also. Attendis Zizania per mundum, and triticum non attendis,
cum per totum vtraque sint iussa crescere? attendis semen maligni, quod ad
finem messis separabitur; and non attendis semen Abrahae, in quo benedicentur
omnes gentes? Do thou mark the darnell, and do thou not remember the
wheat? Do thou think upon the seed of the serpent, whose head shall be
crushed; and do thou not think upon the seed of Abraham, in whom all the
nations of the earth shall be blessed? when thou fleest from the chafe, thou
forsakest the good wheat, which is mingled with it. When thou separatest thy
self from the seed of the wicked, thou seperatest thy self from the seed of
Abraham. When thou thus dividest thy self from the hypocrites, that are in the
true Church, thou cuttest thy self from the Church, and a member taken from
the whole must needs perish. If thou will think upon this with that
heedfulnesse that thou should, thou will not forsake the green pastures of
the Lord, that are besides the waters of comfort, Psalm. 3.
because of the goats; nor leave Gods house, because of the vessels of
dishonor; nor run out of the Lords floor, because of the chafe; nor
separate thy self from the wheat, because of the tares, which shall at length
be bound in a bundle, and cast into the fire; nor burst the unity of the Lords
net, because of the bad fish, which swim in it, (which, when the net is
brought to land, shall be cast away:) but as a Father speaks tolerare potius
propter bonos co^mixtionem malorum, Aug lib. 3. contra litt. Petit. cap. 3.
quam violare propter malos charitatem bonorum; rather for the good to tolerate
the bad, then for the bad to forsake the good.

Psalm. 1.12.
yet thou must not walk in the counsel of the ungodly, much less stand in
the way of sinners, and least of all, sit down in the seat of the scornful.
Though thou dwell among wolves, thou must not vlulare cum lupis, howl with the
wolves: 1. Cor. 5.10
though thou accompany with the fornicators of this world, and with the
covetous, and with extortioners, and with Idolaters, (for else thou must go
out of this world) yet be not partaker with them in their sins, least thou
be partaker with them in their punishments. Though a corporal separation
cannot be had, yet in spirit thou must separate thy self: 2. Tim 2.19
for let every one that calls on the name of the Lord, separate himself from
iniquity. Thou see what is thy lot, if not with Lot, to dwell with
Sodomites: or with Naaman, to be amongst the Aramites: or with Joseph to live
amongst the Egyptians; if thou can not say with David, Ps. 120.5.
Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in Meshech, and to have mine abode
in the tents of Kedar: Yet may thou say with Esaias, Woe is me, Isa. 6.5.
for I dwell in the midst of a people of polluted lips. With Christ and his
Apostles, thou must converse with a Judas: with the Hebrews, thou must live
with the Cananites: with the Spouse in the Canticles, thou must be as an apple
tree amongst the wild trees of the forest, Cant. 2.2, 3
or as a lilie amongst the thorns. Let not these wild trees, which are moved
with every blast of wind, by the shaking of their boughs beat down thy fruit,
and though the thorns prick thee, yet keep still a lilies beauty. Thou must
touch pitch, but beware of being defiled with it. Thou must walk upon coals,
beware of burning thy feet: though thou lie among the pots, among the washpots
of the Lord (as Ps 108.9.
Moab is called) amongst the vessels of dishonor that are kept for the day of
wrath, yet must thou be as the wings of a dove, that is covered with silver
wings, Ps. 67.13.
and her feathers like gold. Be not like the Apothecarie, that carries the smell
of his shop about with him, nor like the river Jordan, which Plin. not. hist.
l. 5. c. 15
loses his sweet waters in the lake Asphaltites. But like the fish in the
salt sea, which still retain their freshnes; pass through the brinish Ocean
of this world, as Arethusa does under the Sicilian sea,

Virg. Eclog. 10.
Doris amara suam non intermisceat vnda^. In a word, though thou can not
wholly separate thy self from the workers of darkness, yet have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but even reprove the^ rather. Ephesians.
5.11.
Nay from such works, as much as thou may lawfully, separate thy self: for
thou will in time joy in the latter, if thou long enjoy the former, it is a
matter of some difficulty to be continually handling pitch, and birdlime, and
to have none cleave to thy hands. Arist. Met. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Aristotle notes it of his master Plato, that conversing long with the
Pythagorians, he learned from them many erroneous opinions, which afterward he
stiffly maintained. Q. Cur.
Alexander by conversing with the effeminate Persians, and Live. dec. 3. lib. 3.
Annibal by living in Capua, did abate so much of their former valor, that it
was doubted whether they were the same me^ they had been before. Sozom. l.
cap. 2.
Julian, in profession sometimes a Christian, by conversing with Libanius, and
Maximus, became an Apostata. To go no further with the examples of heathen
men, you know that Joseph living in Pharaohs Court, began to swear Ge^. 42.1.
by the life of Pharaoh. And the Hebrews dwelling among the Idolatrous
Egyptians (which Herod. l.
worshipped an ox) did meetly well imitate them, for they Exodus 3^
worshipped a calfe. And pitching for a time in the plane of Moab, they
sacrificed to Baal Peor, Numb. 25 Ps. 106.26
and ate the offerings of the dead. An infected sheep will sooner spoil a
whole flock, then a whole flock will cure an infected sheep. It is no hard
matter to change wine into vinegar, but to turn vinegar, onto change water into
wine, Hoc opus, hic labor est. This is such a miracle as will never be
wrought, unless Jesus be at the feast. It is an easy matter to be infected
with the plague of sin, if thou remove out of the fresh air into the company
of co^tagious persons. And though thou be regenerate, and the old man has got
his deadly wou^d, yet is there a sympathy between thee, and the wicked. Thy
affections are like tindar, ready to kindle with every sparkle, that the wicked
shall strike in them. And sin once kindled is like wild fire, it will not be
quenched with every kind of water. This poison perhaps will not be perceived at
the first, yet, like the biting of a mad dog, it will never cease infecting
thy blood till it come at thy heart. Beware the^ of dogs. Philip. 3.2.
Avoid (as much as is possible) such contagious places, as are dangerous to
infect, and keep thy self in the fresh air, where the spirit, that
quickneth, does blow. But whereas thou can not wholly avoid the company of
sinners (for as before was said, the good and bad fish swim together ^n Gods
net) avoid their sins. Prove. 1.10.11.
Harken unto Solomon, My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not. My
son, walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path;
but contrariwise when they entice thee to evil, persuade them unto that which
is good. Be to the^, as Noah was to the old world, a preacher of
righteousness; 2. Pet. 2.^. Verse. 8.
as Lot was to the Sodomites, who dwelling amongst them vexed his soul with
their unlawful deeds; as Christ was to the woman of Samaria, Ioh 4.
who by desiring of the water of Jacobs well to quench his thirst, brought her
to desire the water of life, whereof whosoever drinks shall never more
thirst; and as he was with Publicanes and sinners, who refused not to go to
their corporal banquets, that he might feed them with spiritual food; as
John was with the Pharisees and Saducees, Mat. 3.
who preached unto them faith and repentance; and as Paul was amongst the
idolatrous Athenians, who went with the^, through their idolatrous temples, and
red the titles and inscriptions written upon their altars, but to this end, to
take a text, and argument thence, Act. 17.23.
to persuade them to the worship of the true God.

So much of the person delivering. The action follows, (deliver.)

Deliver.]
13 Treason is a sin so odious, that even the heathen which were guided, but
with a glimpse of natures light, howsoever, sometimes for their own advantage,
they approved the fact, yet they could never away with the author of it. It
was Augustus his saying of Rimotalchus the king of Trace, which vanted himself
for the betraying of Antonie: (...). I may love the treason but I hate the
traitor. And it was the saying of Antigonus: Proditores tantisper amo dum
produnt, ast vbi prodiderint odi. I love a traitor when he co^mits the
treason, but when he has done it, I detest him. These speeches, though
plausible at the first, argue corruption in the speakers. For if the traitor
be evil, surely the treason cannot be good. The old Romans could abide
neither. For when Pyrrhus his physitia^, seeking to gratify the Roma^es,
promised to give his master poison, the Romans made Pyrrhus acquainted with
it, and willed him to look unto himself. And when the schoolmaster of the
Phalascides children offered to betray those which were committed to him, Live.
dec. 1. lib. 5.
to Camillus his hand: Camillus sent them back again, and made his own
scholars to beat him.

This fact, of it self so heinous, Him.
is further aggravated by the person betrayed. If Judas had betrayed one of his
fellows, the sin had bin horrible: but he makes it far worse, he betrayeth
his master. He goes yet further, for (behold whither man does fall, Unto you.
Luke 1.71.
if the spirit of God do not direct his steps) he delivers him into the hands
of his hateful enemies, who came to deliver us from our enemies and from the
hands of all that hate us. He delivers him to death, who came to restore us,
that were dead in our sins, to life; who to satisfy for our hunting after
vanities, was himself hunted like a Pelican in the wilderness; to satisfy
for our carnal, and sensual pleasures, left the bosom of his father with
whom is fullness of delights, and at whose right hand is pleasure forevermore:
to satisfy for our pride, humbled himself and took upon him the form of a
servant: Phil. 2.7.
to answer for our gluttony, tasted gall, and vinegar; to answer for our
covetousnes, paid not gold, nor silver, but the ransom of his own blood.
These things I do but point at, having discoursed of the^ elsewhere, when I
handled our Saviors mild speech unto Judas, when he went to betray him.
Therefore I pass them over, and come to apply this fact unto these present
times.

14 Judas is dead, and al men cry, fie upon him, and say that it if they had
bin in Judas his days, they would not have bin partners with him in the blood
of our Savior. And so said the old Pharisees, if they had bin in the days of
their fathers, they would not have bin partners with them in the blood of the
Prophets. Mat. 23.30.
And yet they fulfilled, nay they exceeded the measure of their fathers
wickedness. And now adays howsoever many will build the tombs of the Prophets,
and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous, yet we have Iudasses, which will
betray Christ unto the high Priests. I cannot recke^ the^ al, but there are 3.
transgressors, nay 4. which I cannot pass over. 1. the sacrilegious
Churchrobber, 2. the grinding oppressor. 3. the close briber. 4. the deceitful
lawyer. Al these do their best (nay their worst) to betray Christ, if not in
his person, yet in his members, into the hands of the hellish Caiphas. And me
thinks they do somewhat rese^ble those 4. great plagues mentioned in the 1. of
Joel: which were: the Caterpiller, the Locust, the Cankerworme and the
grasshopper. The Caterpiller eats the first fruits when they are in setting. To
him I compare the Church-robber, which lives of the first fruits and tithes,
which by the law are due to God. The Locust (as Naturalists describe him) is a
great fly, which lives upon the less, and with no difficulty can burst a
spiders web, wherein the smaller flies are quickly catched. To him I compare
the oppressor, which devours his inferiors, and will with no less difficulty
pass through those good statutes that are made against him, then a great
Locust will burst through a spiders web. The Canker-worme does secretly shave
off the tender barks of herbs and trees before he can be perceived. To him may
be likened the briber, which does so closely carry himself, that none ca^
perceive him, but the plant which he feeds upon. The Grasshopper has a chirping
voice to allure a man after him, but yet so nimble is his motion, that he which
follows him shall scarsely find him. Like to it, is the deceitful lawyer,
which with fair promises, and sugered hopes, draws his clients after him; but
so nimbly he hops up and down, for his own advantage, that ye shall perhaps
not find him twice in one tune, insomuch that ye shall be worse resolved in the
end, then ye were in the beginning. These 4. lie as heavy upon our land, as
those 4. plagues did upon Judah: so that we may say, that which is left by the
Locust, the grasshopper has eaten, and the residue of the grasshopper, has the
cankerworme eaten, and the residue of the cankerworme has the caterpiller
eaten. Before I begin to speak of these in particular, let me use the Apostles
protestation. I say the truth in Christ Jesus, I ly not, my conscience bearing
me witness in the holy ghost. Romans 9.1.
I do not seek the disgrace of any particular, it is the truths cause, and
Gods cause that moves me to speak (and let my tongue cleave to the roof of
my mouth when I shall be afraid to discharge a good conscience in Gods behalf.)
If then my music seem harsh, and unpleasant in the ears of any that hear
me, I would have the^ to know thus much, that the strings upon which a I am to
play are far out of tune. If any man shall find himself wounded with my
speech, I say unto him as our Savior did to the adulteress, Has no man
condemned thee? neither do I condemn thee; yet I add with John, if thine own
heart do condemn thee, Ioh. 8.10.11. 1. Ioh. 3.20
God is greater then thy heart and knows all things, and therefore I dismiss
thee with that speech of Christ to the impotent man: go thy way, and sin no
more, Ioh. 5.14.
least a worse thing happen unto thee. Now to the particulars.

15 In the first place come the Simoniacall patrons, the heirs and eldest sons
of Judas, the caterpillars of our church, and the notablest thieves in all our
land. Which will not part with that portion which is due unto the sons of
Levi, and which is committed unto them, as the golden apple was unto Paris,
with this motto engraven upon it, detur digniori, let the most worthy have it,
unless with Judas they covenant for a price before hand. Let a man's gifts of
mind be never so good, yet if he bring no gifts in hand; let his care, and
industry, and learning be never so rare, and extraordinary, yet if he do not
speak with the tongue of men, and angels yea arke-angels, he shall have little
hope to prevail in his suit. He that will insinuate himself into their favors,
must come, as Jupiter came into Danaes lap, per impluvium, secretly in at the
chimney top, (not in at the door) and he must come as Jupiter then came, in a
shower of gold. This is the way, this is the best means to effect his desire:
for he that is as blockish and stupid, Plut. Apoth.
as Philips Ass in Plutarch, if he be laden with gold (with that ass) oh he
is a man of excellent gifts, of rare endowments, no exception must keep him
back; that which he wants in learning, he has it in simplicity: as if it
were simplicitas Asinina, Mat. 10.16.
and not simplicitas columbina, which the Lord would have in his ministers. And
what if he lack Latin? he has gold enough, and that is a far more precious
metal. But if this way will not hold, then they will take another course, they
will act the parts of Ananias and Saphira* and keep back part of that
possession, which they should voluntarily lay down at the Apostles feet. Act.
4.12.
There must be an exception in the general rule, a reservation of their own
tithes, a limitatio^ of such a towneship, or such a field. Or they will say
with the harlot, 1. Kin. 3 Let it neither be thine nor mine, but let it be
divided. Here is treason in another kind; they do not sell the king of heaven,
by covenanting for a price before hand, as Judas did, but (which is all to one
effect) they clip his coin and make it so light, that it will not sustain the
sons of Levi. And this verily is a principal reason, that we have so many
mutes, and so few vowels in our cross row: that many lapwings which hopped
out of their neasts with their shells on their heads, before ever they get a
feather on their backs, have builded in those rocks where eagls should nestle;
and many which have never put down their buckets, into either of the two
fountains of this land (or if they have, it has been but tanquam canis ad
Nilum, they have only wet their lips, and taken a lap by the way) are
advanced to Ecclesiastical preferments, and made Pastors of flocks being not
able to feed themselves, and are become captains in the Lords field, being not
able of themselves to take one stone out of Gods brook to cast at the forehead
of the spiritual Goliath. I confess some of them will now and then be flinging
in the pulpit, but they be me^tita tela, other men's weapons they fight with:
they have, indeed, as good a property in them, as they have in their
benefices, and as Paulus in Martial had in his verses, Carmina Paulus emit,
iactat sua carmina Paulus: nam, quod emit, possit dicere iure suum. Judge. 18.
which he used to brag off. Such wa^dring Levites as these are the fittest
merchants that sacrilegious Iudasses ca^ meet withal: for they will be
contented to dwell with every base filching Michah: and will serve him for ten
shekles of silver by the year, and a suit of apparel, and meat, and drink,
and withal their hearts, will be contented to part with beautiful Rahel,
(though they serve for her) so that they may be assured of blear-eyed Leah.
Genesis 29.
They will never say as much as Jacob did to Laban: Wherefore have thou done
thus with me? did I not serve thee for Rahel? wherefore then have thou beguiled
me? Truth it is, that even these would gladly mend their estates (and who can
blame them?) but they are withholden with a triple cord, which, as the wise man
says, is not easily broken. 1. The Patrons bounty, which though it be
little, yet it is more perhaps then they deserve. 2. Their own promise, or
hand writing, which if it be not of sufficient validity, then comes a third
cord to make all sure, and that is want of ability. A spiders web (you
know) is strong enough to hang a silly fly withal. God forbid that I should
object this sacrilege, as a general fault of these times, not admitting any
limitatio^; or say that these devouring Caterpillars have eaten up all the
houses of God in the land. 1. King. 19.
I remember what the Lord answered Elias, when he complained against Israel,
that they had killed his Prophets, and dug down his altars, and that he was
left alone. To. 11.3.4.
I have (said the answer of God) reserved unto my self seven thousand men,
which have not bowed their knees unto Baal. Even so, at this present time, by
the grace of God, there is a remnant (though I think far fewer then seven
thousand) yet a remnant there is, which have never dug down the altars of
God to build their own houses with the ruins thereof; which have not bowed
unto their angle, nor sacrificed unto their net, nor burnt incense unto their
yarne, nor monopolized that unto themselves, which of right belongs unto Gods
ministers. So that in this case they may say with good Samuel, Whose ox have I
taken, 1. Sam. 12.3
or whose ass have I taken, or of whose hand have I received any bribe? They
hate such sins of unfaithfulness, and they will not suffer the least chip of Gods
bread to stick on their fingers. By the means of such faithful Nehemiahs
(thanks be to God, and remember them herein O God, and wipe not out that
kindness that they have showed on thy house, Nehem. 13 14.
and on the offices thereof) the glorious gospel of Christ does give a goodly
luster in many places of this land. But the great number of the other (which I
purpose not to leave as yet, for I would gladly make a rod of such small cords
as I have, to whip these buyers and sellers out of the Temple) is such, that it
does almost overshadow these, that they seem but as it were a handful, and do
bear (I take it) the like proportion, that Gedions army did to the huge host
of the Midianites. Iud. 7.


Hospin. de orig. templor.
16 The donation of Ecclesiastical livings, was at the first, for avoiding of
faction and confusion, amongst the ignorant and seditious multitude, which
otherwise should have made choice of their Pastors, commended to some
particulars, which for their worth, and wisdo^e, and vprightnes were thought
fittest, both to make choice of such, as could sufficiently discharge the
places, and to protect them, and their right against such ravenous harpyes, and
Eagle-clawed Nabuchadnezzars, as would scrape and gather into their hands the
vessels of the temple: and hereupon they were called Patrons. But time is like
a river, -- Nec enim consistere flumen,
Nec levis hora potest.
That is not my meaning, but as a river sinkes that which is heavy and
substantial, and carries down that which is light and naught, so has time in
this point. The uprightness and faithfulness, that is sunk long ago in a
great number: their carfulness in protecting the ministers right, that swims
not down so low as to our time: and yet as Tully said of a tyrant, that he
gives life to those that he does not kill; so we could willingly account them
worthy maintainers of the Levites portion, if they would take nothing from
them. But the name of patron, this is light, and the current of time has
co^veied it unto us. But (alas alas) it is but as he said, -- sine corpore
nomen. It is secunda not to, a shadow of a name; and yet a name is no more then
a shadow of a thing. And verily it may be feared that the great abuse of the
thing will in future ages make the word to be of a contrary signification: as
the name Isidor. orig lib. 9. cap 3.
tyrannus, which at the first signified any prince, which had a care of his
subjects safety, and protected them against their foes; by the cruelty of the
governors (handling the^, as 1. Sam. 8.
Samuel told the Jews their king should use them; or as the Storke in the
fable dealt with the frogs, when he was made their king; or as Sueton. in
Vespas.
Vespasian used his nobles squeazing them like a sponge, when they were full)
is now degenerate from its ancient sense, and used for the contrary. We have
occasion of doubting the same in this point. For Judas claims Christ's bag by
prescription. Is not now the Advouzan of a benefice accounted as a man's proper
inheritance? Is it not offered to him that will bid the most, as an Ox in the
sha^bles, or an Ass in the market? Is it not accounted a good patrimony to
many younger brothers, which scorn for sooth to be Priests; and would God they
would scorn the Priests portion too, then would they abate a little from the
height of their own conceits: and would at length be enforced, for their
delicate fare, to eat husks; and to turn their satin suits into country
russets. But they are of the same opinion that was William Rufus sometimes king
of this Realm, Mat. Parisiensis in vita Guil. 2 Rex in proprio tenebat, (die
qua obiit) Archiepiscopatum Ca^ 8. Episcopatus Wint. and Sarisb. cum 11.
Abbatiis.
who kept diverse bishoprics in his own hands as they fell, and would not
restore them unto ecclesiastical persons. Being demanded a reason hereof, he
said that Gods bread was sweet, and good for kings. Or like our old
countryman Justin.
Brenus, who (when he went about to rob the temple at Delphos) said that God
was rich, and therefore should part with something to supply his wants: and,
with Aelianus variae hist. l b 1
Dionysius, they count gold too cold to cloth Apollo with, a garment of
worse stuff is good enough. In Synodo, Triburiensi An. Do. 895.
When the question was proposed whether golden chalices or wooden were to be
used in the administration of the sacrament. Boniface bishop and afterward
Martyr, Beat. Rhenanus lib. 2. rerum Germanicarum.
made In Synodo, Triburiensi An. Do. 895.
answer that in former times they had golden ministers, and woodde^ chalices:
but in his time wooden Priests used golden chalices. I may say the contrary,
in the times of our forefathers were blockish, and wooden Priests, and then
they had golden cups. Then the people would eve^ have pulled out their own eyes
to have given to those blind guides; and were so ready to offer their free
gifts to the building of the tabernacle, that Exodus 36.5, 6.
Moses was constrained to say, the people bring too much, and more then is
enough: nay moreover, to make a proclamation, and enact a statute, (which yet
is in force, but needless) that neither man, nor woman should prepare any more
for the oblation of the sanctuary. But now (thanks be to God) we have golden
pastors, and wooden dishes are thought good enough for them.

Persius.
Dicite pontifices in te^plo quid facit auru^? What should the church do with
gold? Peter said unto the lame man, Act. 3 6.
gold and silver have I none. Ps, 45.14.
The kings daughter is al glorious within, (they forget what follows, her
clothing is of wrought gold) the ministers kingdom is not of this world, a
co^petent living is sufficient, that is 40. or 50l. ^ush, he must not be
troubled with the thorny cares of this world, Number. 16.
ye take too much upon you ye sons of Levi: thus would these wild asses
and fat bulls of Basan beat out of the manger the oxen that tread out the corn,
that they may have the best themselves, and leave only the orts for them, which
should have all. Alas beloved, that Gods legates, which should be harbarous, and
beneficial unto the poor, and provide for their family, should thus be stinted
by such, whose hearts are never satisfied with earth, till their mouths be
filled with gravel. But let them not think that the ministers living is ever
co^petent, where any part of his right is detained. And therefore let them
beware how they play the Judas in stealing out of the bag, which is committed
unto them, part of that relief, which should sustain Christ, and his
Apostles: or betray him in his maintenance, and by a co^seque^ce in his
members, the flock, by withdrawing their food. For if Succus pecori, then it
must needs follow that lac subducitur agnis: if the pasture be without the
fleece, the flock shall want their fodder. It is an objection which some would
fasten as a scandal upon our Universities, that many of our preachers
drone-like lurk in their own hiues, and flee not abroad; that they bury their
talent at home in their own studies as in the ground; whereas, by settling
themselves in some country charge, they might put it out to their masters best
adva^tage. But (shall I tell you?) the case is with the^ as it was with the
sick impotent man by the poole Bethesda in the 5. of John, gladly would they
be in the poole, but there is none to put them in: an angel troubles the
water, and presently, while they are coming, an other steps down before them.
The fountains are stopped; no stream can flow abroad unless Tagus-like it
have golden sands; or, like unto Eurotas and Alpheus, it pass under the earth
as it were by some slight and secret conveyance, and so burst up on the
sudden in some place where it cannot be preve^ted: or like unto Tigris, that
fierce and swift running river, which perforce will burst down such dammes, and
banks as would hinder his course: or last of all like unto Maander that
insinuating, and parasiticall river (as I may call it) which winds, and turns
it self into every pleasant valley, that it may, as it were, get the good will,
and favor of the places where it comes. These 4. rivers find the easiest
passage, rich Tagus, fierce Tigris, subtle Eurotas, and winding Maeandar. The
rest, for the most part, (for I speak not of all) though their waters be as
pleasant as the Genesis 2.10
4. rivers of Eden, yet shall they Ios. 3.
stand on a heap, like the waves of Iordane when the Israelites passed over; or
as a poole, or the dead sea without any vent: whereas if there might, at the
vacancy of livings, an offer be made unto one of the Universities, and a choice
made thence, no doubt but the gospel of Christ would flourish in every
quarter of this realm from Dan to Beersheba, from the river of Twede unto the
lands end. And God would for this cause even open the windows of heaven unto
the inhabitants thereof, and power down upon them a blessing without measure,
and rebuke the devourer for their sakes, that he should not destroy the fruits
of their ground, neither should their vine be barren in the field, as the
Lord speaks by the Prophet Mal. 3.10, 11.
Malachie.

17 I have dwelt too long upon this point. Only to end, I would these men
would remember Judas his end. Demiror te Antoni quorum facta imitaris eorum
exitu^ no^ phorrescere. It is the saying of Philippice 2.
Tully to Antony. I wonder Antony that thou art not afraid of those men's
deaths, whose lives thou imitatest. And it is strange that these men will be
like unto Judas in the premises, and never think of the conclusion that was
inferred thereupon. Amos 7.14.
I am not a Prophet, nor am I the son of a Prophet, that I should foretell
the manner of their particular ruins. Thus much upon good grounds I will say,
that these goods will in time profit them no more, then the price of him, that
was valued, availed Judas: they will be like Plin. lib. 10 cap. 3.
Eagles feathers; they will eat, and consume the rest of their substance: or
like equui Scianus and aurum Tolossanum in A Gell. lib. 10 cap. 9.
Gellius, which were still unfortunate to those that had them. And those goodly
buildings, which they make for themselves with the ruins of Gods house (I will
speak in the words of Isaiah against the enemies of the church) Isa. 34.11 13.
etc.
the Pelican and the hedgehogge shall possess them, the great raven, and the
owl shall dwell in them, and he shall stretch out upon them the line of
vanity, and the stones of emptiness: they shall bring forth thorns in the
palaces thereof, nettles and thistles in the strong holds thereof, and they
shall be habitatio^s for dragons, and courts for Ostriches: there shall meet
Zim, and Iim, and the faeries shall dance there, and the skrichowle shall rest
there, and shall find for her self a quiet dwelling: there shall the owl
make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather them under her shadow; there
shall the vultures also be gathered, every one with her mate. Seek in the
book of God and read: none of these shall fail. For more confirmation hereof,
consider the subversion of Abbeys: they were founded by religious men in their
generations, to a good purpose: their situation was as the Genesis 13.10.
garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt as thou go unto Zoar; as Moses
speaks of the plain of Jordan before the destruction of Sodom and Gomorah:
they stretched their towers up to the heavens, like the Pyramides of Egypt;
but, behold, the Lord has wiped them as a man wipeth a dish, which he wipeth,
and turns vpside down. They are now the fittest places for the raven to build
in, habitations for dragons, and courts for Ostriches, they stand, (but as
Phys. c.
Aristotle says, quod stat movetur, they stand so as they are moving to a
fall) in the pleasantest valleys of the land, as the relics of Babel in the
vallie of Sinar: or Isa. 7.8.
like a cottage in a vineyard, like a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, and like
a besieged and defaced city, dropping down by ioints, as a thief rotteth from
the gibbet. What were their sins which brought so heavy a judgment upon them?
suppose they were (as they were indeed) the sins of Sodom, Ezech. 16 ^3.
pride, fullness of bread, mercilesnesse toward the poor, and abundance of
idleness. Now if these sins of some few, or suppose the greater part
(certain it is that al were not such, some were industrious, some humble, some
merciful toward the needy, some of a moderate and spare diet,) if these
sins, I say, brought so heavy a judgment upon those houses, that they are,
in comparison of that they were before, like the stumpe of 1. Sam. 5.4.
Dagon, when his head, and the two palms of his hands were cut of upon the
threshold in Ashdod; or the remainders of Iezabel, when the hungry dogs had
eaten her up, so that 2. King 9.35.37.
there was no more found of her, then the skull, and the feet, and the palms
of her hands; insomuch, that none can say this is Iezabel; these be the houses
they were before: shall we think that their houses shall continue for ever,
which turn Bethel into Bethaven; the house of God, into a house of vanity;
which take the childre^s bread and cast it unto dogs? which, with the
consecrated things of the altar, maintain their own pomp, feed their Hawks,
their Horses, keep --? but I stay my self.

18 After the Church-robber comes the grinding oppressor, another great
plague, which sits sore upon the skirts of our land. He says unto his gold,
thou art my God, Job 31.24
and to the wedge of gold, thou art my confidence. And instead of counting 1.
Tim. 6.5, 6.
godliness great gain, he accounts gain great godliness: he adds house
to house, and land to land, as if the way to the spiritual Canaan laid all by
land, and not through a red sea of death. He brayeth the people as in a mortar,
and grindeth the faces of the poor. Amos 8.^
He sells the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes: he
eats up the poor as if they were bread.

-- Vt pisces saepe minutos
Magnu' come, vt aves enecat aceipter,
As a Pike devoureth the little fishes, and as a goshauke kills the smaller
birds: he gathers the livings of the poorer sort into his own hands, as the
great Ocean drinks the rivers: he enhaunceth his rents, and pilleth his
poor tenants, and doubleth, yea, treableth their fines, telling them, with
young Kin. 12.10
Rhehoboam, that his little finger shall be heavier then his fathers loins.
Not contented with this cruelty, he thrusts them out of their houses, and
depopulateth whole towns, and villages, making those streets which used to be
sown with the seed of men, Isa. 7.25.
Pastures for the sending out of bullocks, and for the treading of sheep. Apud
Ca^d. in descript. Northampt.
One justly co^plaineth of our English sheep: that whereas in former times,
they were the meekest beasts of the field, and contented themselves with a
little, are now become so fierce, and greedy, that they devour men, and town
fields, and houses, and villages, and lay all wast; insomuch that that which
the Psalmist speaks of Israel, spoiled by his enemies, may be verified of our
Jacob also: They have devoured Jacob, and laid wast his dwelling places.
Surely, the Hab. 2.11 12.
very stone out of the wall does cry against these men, and the beam out of
the timber does answer it: woe unto him that builds his house with blood, and
erecteth his walls by iniquity.

While the spleen swells, the body languisheth: and it may justly be
feared, that if our good Physician do not in time purge these tumorous, and
swelling members, they will cause a lienterie in the body politic. God forbid
that this flourishing kingdom, which sometime has deserved that title which
Justin
Cyneus, Ambassador unto Pyrrhus, gave unto Rome when he called it a City of
Kings, should ever deserve that title, which Aventinus
one gives unto France, when he calls it a kingdom of asses, by reason of the
burdens, that are laid upon the baser sort by their superiors.

19 Therefore it behoues you, and as mamy as sit at the stern of justice, not
to sleep with Jonas, while the ship is tossed with these mighty winds: nor to
be careless in a matter so nearly concerning the good of this Commonwealth.
Psalm. 48.4.5.
Gird you with your swords upon your thighs, O ye men of might, according to
your worship, and renown, ride on because of the word of truth, and
righteousness, and let your right hand teach you terrible things. But if you
shall be negligent herein, surely, as Mordecai said to Hester, Est. 4.14.
help, and deliverance shall come from another place. For doubtless the cry
of the afflicted, is already ascended, into the cares of the Lord of hosts, and
he will take the matter into his own hand. Believe it, it is his own promise:
Ps. 12.5, 6
Now for the comfortless troubles sake of the needy, and because of the deep
sighing of the poor, I will up, says God, and will deliver him from such as
vex him, and will restore him to rest. I will prosecute this point no further:
only let me tell these locusts, that their goods whereunto they trust 2. King.
28 21.
are but a broken staff of reed, whereunto if a man lean it w^ll pierce into
his hand: that their pleasures are but as Iud. 16.
Dalilah was to Samson even gives and fetters of Satan, to entangle them: that
their gold will be as a millstone about their necks, to carry them down
headlong into the pit: that their lands and goods are as a bunch upon a Camels
back, which will not suffer them to enter in at the needles eye, Mat. 19.24.
the narrow way that leads to heaven: that those goods, which by grinding,
and oppressing they have scraped together, the Lord will fan them away with the
fan of vanity, unless (as Dan. 4.24
Daniel said to Nabuchadnezzar) they break off their sins by righteousness,
and their iniquity by mercy toward the poor; and that which they have by
unlawful means gotten (with Zachaeus) Luke 19.8
they restore it again fourfold.

20 From the Locust, we come to the Cankar-worme; from oppressing Ahab, to
bribing Gehazi: of whom I may truly affirm that which Hist. lib. 8.
Tacitus speaks of the Astrologians in Rome, it is genus hominum pestilens,
and fallax, quod in hac republicae semper prohibetur, and semper retinetur; a
pestilent, and froward kind of people, which has been still gain said, and
yet never more common, and frequent then now; an offspring, not so degenerate
from the Ioines of Judas, as is the oppressor. Because the oppressor like the
fat Bulls of Basan, closes the poor on every side, and gapes upon him with his
mouth, as it were a ramping, and a roaring lion; whereas the briber Psa. 10.8.10.
lies closely in the theeuish corners of the streets, that he may ravish such
as he shall get into his net. The oppressor takes it perforce, the briber gets
all by secret compact* What will ye give me? Est 4.11.
None might come to the inner court of king Ahashuerosh, save he, to whom the
king held out his golden scepter. But none may come to the bribers inner court,
save he, that shall hold out a golden scepter unto him. Be thy cause never so
light in the balance of equity, it is not material, if thou can make it up
in gold, it shall be current through his liberties. Right and wrong, truth, and
falsehood are only distinguished by their attendants. If injustice get the
overthrowe, it is because she is not guarded with such companies, as are
expected. But I have not Elishaes eyes, to point out Gehazi, and to observe
what he has done in secret, and therefore I will pass him over: only thus
much I would have him to know, that Judas cannot so secretly compact with the
Priests, but Christ knows it. That speech of our blessed Savior (which that
worthy Martyr Hugh Latimer used for his posie) is an undoubted truth: There is
nothing so secret, but it shall be revealed. Thou may well flatter thy self
with an outward show of justice, like that monster in the Hor. epi^^* lib. 1.
ep. ^6.
Poet: -- Pulchra Laverna
Da mihi fallere, da sanctum iustumque videri:
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus obijce nubem.
O beautiful Laverna, grant that I may deceive the world with a counterfeit
show of holiness: cover my sins with a cloud of obscurity, that they may
be hid. Deceive the world thou may, but thou can not deceive God.

Ov^d. met.
Sol oculis hominem, quibus aspicit omnia cernit: God, whose eyes are ten
thousand times brighter then the sun, ca^ pierce through this cloud, if it were
darker then hell, and behold thy doing. It is no heathenish counsel, which a
heathen man gives, neither does it smell of Epicurisme, though it was his
dictate, who was the father of that swinish sect, Epicurus apud Sense.
that whatsoever thou art about to do, though never so secret, thou should
still imagine, that some does behold thee, and observe thy actions. Vt sic
tanquam illo spectante vivas, and omnia ta^quam illo vidente facias, says
Seneca. And therefore whatsoever thou art about to do, says the same writer,
imagine that Cato, a severe reprehender of the least vices, or (if this be too
much) suppose that Laelius, a man of a quiet disposition, but such as cannot
brook any notable offense, does behold thee. This is good counsel of a
heathen man, which knew not God aright. But thou, which do profess
Christianity, should go a step further, and fully assure thy self, that
not a sinful man, but that a sinne-revenging God does watch thee. Prope a te
Deus est, tecu^ est, intus est. And, Sacer in te spiritus sedet, bonorum
malorumque observator, and custos, as the heathen Stoicke divinely speaks:
there is a holy spirit within thee, which sees whatsoever thou do, good or
bad. Do not then deceive thy self like that Sophister in ^ost. anal. (...). 1.
cap. 1.
Aristotle, who thought it impossible to know by demonstration, the affections
of a number or triangle, because he kept some number or tria^gle in his fist,
which othe^s did not know of. Be it Nummus, or Numerus, triangle, or cross,
or whatsoever it be, thou can not keep it so closely in thy hand, but God
looks into it, and will one day call thee to an account for it.

21 In the last place, comes the Grasshopper, the cozening Lawyer, who feeds
his client with sugered words, and golden hopes, but al proves in the end for a
quid mihi dabitis? Here, as Tullie said unto the Romans touching the
Catilinarians; Cupio me Patres Co^scripti esse clementem, cupio non dissolutum
videri; I would gladly hold my peace, and not be judged by any to exceed the
limits of modesty. But Voces reip. imo totius regni me nequitiae inertiaeque
condemnarent: the voice of the whole kingdom, exclaiming against the great
abuses of these times, would condemn me of negligence. The time is protracted,
unnecessary delays are used, new doubts are daily invented, insomuch that
the causes are oftentimes more uncertain in the latter end, the^ they were at
the first beginning. What postings off from court to court! what delays and
procrastinations from term, to term, from year to year! in so much, that a
man may sooner travel about the whole globe of the earth, then pass through an
English court. The laws are made like a game at the cards, wherein all the
players are loosers, and all the gain comes to the butler, which found them
cards to play on. And the lawyers prove such arbitratours, as was Quintus
Fabius in Tullie; who, being appointed a daiesman between the Nolanes, and the
Neopolitanes, touching the borders of their grounds, took a great part of
their right from both: or rather like to Philip of Macedon; who, being chosen a
judge between two brethren, touching their fathers kingdom, took it from the^
both, and reserved it to himself. They take from both the parties, though not
the same numero, which they contend for, yet the same specie, (I mean the
value of the same) and gain it to themselves. The silly sheep in a tempest
runs to a briarbush for a shelter: when the storm is overblowne, he is so
clasped in the briars, that before he get out, he is enforced to leave some
good part of his fleece behind him, so that he is made unable to endure the
next storm. And yet better it is that he should endure it with patience, then,
by having recourse to such an harbor, have his skin ripped by the bramble. I
will not apply. I reverence the profession. It is good, and necessary for the
commonwealth and a calling warrantable by Gods word. And I make no question but
there are many of this profession, which do study to approve their doings in
the sight of God and man. And so I am persuaded of you all, though I thus
speak: but as the 1. Cor. 4.4
Apostle says of himself: I know nothing of my self, yet am I not justified,
so say I, though I know nothing by any of you, yet I am not justified. I do not
discharge a good conscience, unless I should admonish you of these things;
that if any be guilty of that which I have spoken, he may learn to amend it:
if not, he may do his endeavor to avoid it.

22 If I should speak unto you, (R. H.) and offer to instruct you in the
particular duties of a judge, I might perchance be judged by many, with Aelian.
Var. hist. lib. 2. ^ap. 2.
Megabizus to discourse of the art of painting, before the scholars of Zeuxis.
To say nothing, that my text gives me no fit occasion to discourse of this
subject, notwithstanding I beseech you, in one word give me leave to move you
to that, which ye both know, and are ready, I am sure, to put in practice. You
know the saying of the Poet, Qui rogat vt facias, quod iam facis, ipse rogando
Laudat, et hortatu comprobat acta suo.
The object of your office is either life, ^or living. About both these, it is
requisite you have 3 properties; an eagles eye, a ladies hand, and a lions
heart. An eagles eye, to diue into the bottom of such matters as shall come
before you: for the wound is never soundly cured, unless the bottom be first
searched. A ladies hand, to deal softly, and gently with your patients. A
lions heart, to be courageous, and resolute, when there is no place for lenity.
Herein ye must imitate a good Surgeon, who cuts the wound, though his patient
weep never so sore. Aug. in Mat. Ser. 15.
Plorat secandus and secatur plorat vrendus and vritur. The sick weeps, and
yet the Surgeon cuts, the sick laments, and yet the Surgeon seareth. Is this
cruelty in the Surgeon? none at all. For, saevit in vulnus, vt homo sanetur:
quia si vulnus palpetur, homo perditur. Where there is hope of cure without
sea^ing, or cutting, use there a ladies hand; in this case a plaster is better
then a knife. But where the member is incurable, and incorrigible, and like to
endanger the whole, cut it off, Melius est vt pereat vnus, quam vnitas. And, --
immedicabile vulnus Ense recide^dum, ne pars syncera trahatur. But yet Cu^cta
prius tentanda; fire must be the last medicine. All gentle means must be first
tried: and even in this act of justice, ye must not altogether exclude mercy.
Plutare. de audiendis poetis,
When many of the Lacedaemonians were drunk with wine, Lycurgus gave charge
that the vines should be cut down; but Platoes counsel was better, who
willed, that the fountains should be caused to run amongst the Vines, and
that the rage of Bacchus, should be tempered with the sobernes of Neptune, that
is, that the water should be mingled with the wine. Though the extremity of
justice make some desperate, (as did Draco's laws, which for their severity are
said to be written in blood) yet must it not therefore be taken away, but
rather the rigor of justice must be mixed with clemency, as his counsel was,
that the rage of wine should be assuaged with the coolness of the water.
For justice without mercy is bloody cruelty, mercy with out justice is foolish
pity; but justice with mercy is perfect Christianity. Oh then, those which God
would have joined together, do not you put asunder. But let them both be so
linked together, that ye may verify that of the Ps. 85.10.
Psalmist, Mercy and truth are met together, righteousness, and peace have
kissed each other. To this purpose, in all your consultations, and actions set
God before your eyes. Let him be on your right hands, and so ye shall not
greatly fall. A Poet, when he is to bring a person upon the stage, will have
this care, that the action, and speech be agreeable to the person.

Hor. de art Poet.
Intercrit multum, Davusne lo quatur, an Heroes: Cicero.
Id histrio videbit in Scena, quod non sapiens in vita? shall a stage player
observe that decoru^ on the theater, which a wise man will not look to in his
life? The world is a stage, and every man acts his part upon this stage. You
(R. H.) do act the part of God himself. The more wary ought ye to be in your
actions. Ever waiting, whether God, if he were in your places, would do thus,
or thus. Remember likewise, that, though ye be Gods, yet ye must die as a man.
The greatest judge of the earth must one day hold up his hand at the bar, and
answer for him self, when the judge of the world shall sit on the bench. This
do, and when it shall please God to call you hence, ye shall be advanced to a
higher court, the court of heaven, where, for your scarlet garments, ye shall
be invested Rev. 7.15
in long white robes, your bench shall be the throne, your attendants the
Angels, the parties ye shall judge, 1 Cor 6.^
the world, your sentence an Halleluiah: Amen, praise, and glory, and wisdom,
and thanks, and honor, and power, and might be unto our God for evermore
Amen.

PSALM. 82.6.7. I have said, ye are Gods; but ye shall die like men.


THere are 3. sorts of men, who, if they be faithful in their places, and
follow the direction of their books, are the chief pillars, to support a
Christian commonwealth: the Physician, the Divine, and the Magistrate. These 3.
are in the body politic; as the three principal parts, the liver, the heart,
and the brain are in the body of man. The Physician is the liver, the Divine
is the heart, and the Magistrate is the brain of the commonwealth. The liver
is called the beginning of the natural faculty; it segregareth the humors, it
ingendreth alimental blood, and by veins sends it into each part of the body,
whereby the whole is nourished, and preserved. Like unto it is the Physician,
who purges the body of man, from such noxious humors, as whereby it may be
endangered, and prescribes such a diet, as whereby it may be best nourished,
and kept in health. The heart is called the beginning of the vital faculty,
it ingendreth the vital spirits, and by arteries sends them into every
particular member. To which I compare the Divine. For as the heart is the
fountain of the vital spirits, and the beginning of the vital faculty: so
is the Divine the fountain and beginning, though not (...) of generation, nor
(...) of radication, yet (...) (to use the Physicians terms) of the
dispensation of the true vital spirit. He is the means to make thee, of a
natural man (such as the Physician leaves thee) a spiritual substance. The
brain, which is called the beginning of the animal faculty, is the chief
comma^der of the whole: it sits in the highest room, as in a stately
palace, being compassed about with the pericranium, the cranium, and the two
meninges, as so many strong castles, and countermures, against all foreign
invasion. It has the five external senses as intelligencers, to give notice,
what is done abroad, the common sense, the fantasy, and the understanding as
privy counselors, the memory as a book of records. But yet it is not idle,
but is continually busied in te^pering the spirits received from the heart:
which it sends by the nerves, through the whole body, thereby giving sense,
and motion to every part. A fit emblem of a good Magistrate, who as he has
his forts, and guard, and counselors, and records, etc. so must he remember
that he has not these for his own proper use, but for the whole, and
therefore should bestir himself, for benefitting the whole, especially in
tempering the spirits received from the heart; I mean in using those spiritual
admonitions, and instructions, which he shall receive from the minister of the
Gospel, for the good, and benefit of all those that are under him. As the body
is in best estate, when all these are well disposed, so it is most miserable,
when there is a dyscrasie, and distemperature in any of them. So in the state
likewise: Woe unto that Commonwealth where the Physician for wholesome physic
ministers hemlocke: and the Divine, for sound doctrine, broacheth heresy, and
the Magistrate turns justice into wormwood. Of all these three, the brain is
subject to most diseases: and of all these three, the Magistrate is most
obnoxious to falls; both because he has many incitements unto sin, which
others want; and because he is deprived of a benefit, which others have, that
is, he is not so freely reproved for his offenses, as commonly others are; And
lastly because of those Cubiculares consiliarij, (as Polit. lib. 3 cap. 9.
Lipsius calls them) tineae and sorices Palatij, (as Constantine termed them)
the very mothes and rats of a court, which live by other men's harms; a quibus
bonus, prudent, cautus venditur imperator, (as Vopi^c. in Aureliano.
Dioclesian an ill Emperor said well) which sell the magistrates favors, as
if one would sell smoke, (as did Lamprid. Ant. Heliog.
Zoticus the fair promises of Heliogabalus) and are always ready, for their
own advantage, to give an applause unto his worst actions. By these he is led
whithersoever they will have him, Hor.
Ducitur vt nervis alienis mobilc lignum. Eve^ as an arrow is led by the
bow-string. Therefore David in this Psalm makes a sharp sermon against the
corruption of Magistrates, out of which I have made choice of this one branch. I
have said, ye are Gods; but ye shall die like men. As if he had said: truth
it is, your authority is great, your power extraordinary, (ye are Gods) yet Ps.
75.6.
set not up your horns on high, and speak not with a stiff neck, ye are no
transcendents, ye have no more reason to boast of your superiority, then the
moon has to brag of the light, which she borrows from the sun, or the
wall of the beam, which it receaues in at the window; ye have it only from me
(I have said:) and though ye be Gods, yet ye are but earthly Gods, ye are
Gods in office, not Gods in essence, ye are made of the same metal that
others are, and your end shall be like other men's (you shall die like men.) In
which words, not to stand upon the diverse acceptio^s of any of them, may it
please you to observe these 3 points. 1. The party from whom Magistrates
receive their authority, it is from God, (I have said) and Gods saying is his
doing. 2. Their pre-eminence above others, in that they are called Gods (ye
are Gods) 3. The limitation of their dignity, ye shall die as men. Out of which
I collect these 3. propositions. 1 Magistrates and Judges of the earth do
receive their authority from God. 2. They are Gods deputies to minister
justice, and to judge between party and party. 3. Though they be extolled
above their brethren according to their office, yet they must die as other me^:
where is implied this general conclusion, that it is the lot of all men, once
to die. These are the pillars of my intended discourse: of which while I shall
plainly entreat, in the same order, that I have now proposed them, I beseech
you all to afford me your Christian attention.

2 Of all the corporeal creatures that God made, 1. Part.
none is more exorbitant then man. The highest moveable is constant in his
motion. He does not hasten, nor neglect his course. The sun is precise in his
course under the Eclipticke line, and turns not an hair breadth, unto the
right hand or unto the left, but Psalm. 19.5
comes forth as a bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices as a giant to
run his race. The rest of the Planets, though they turn to both sides of the
Zodiake, and are (the most of them) sometimes direct, and sometimes
stationarie, and sometimes retrograde (as Astronomers speak) by reason of
their motion in their imaginary Epicicles, yet they have their constancy in
this inconstancy. Thou (O God) have given them a law that shall not be broken.
The elements keep themselves within their bounds. The beasts of the forest,
in their kind, have their policy, and society. The raging sea goes not
beyond his limits: God has bound it (to use Job. 38.
Jobs words) as a child in swaddling bands: he has given it doors, and
bars, and said unto it, hither shall thou go, and thou shall go no further,
here shall thou stay thy proud waves. But man is more exorbitant then all
these: no bounds can keep him in. Therefore God has written in the heart, and
conscience of every man, that comes into the world, a law, which we call the
law of nature: as that God is to be worshipped, good is to be embraced, evil is
to be avoided. That which thou would not another man should do unto thee,
thou must not do to another man. And according to these general notions, he
would have every person to direct his actions. But this law (like an old
inscription upon a stone) is written in the stony heart of man in such blind
characters, that he is put to his shifts before he ca^ spell it. And howsoever
he understand it in Thesi, yet in Hypothesi, in the particular, he makes many
soloecismes, and oftentimes calls good evil, and evil good. Therefore God
has written with his own finger a paraphrase upon it, which we call the moral
law, and added a large commentary of judicial laws, by the hand of Moses.
Which benefit (though not the same numero) he has not only granted unto
Christian Commonwealths, but even to the heathen also, amongst whom, in all
ages, he has stirred up men of excellent spirit to make laws, for the better
government of their several states. The best of which did acknowledge that they
had them from God. Howbeit after the custom of nations, which held a
plurality of Gods, they did not all agree in one name; Diodorus Siculus.
Lycurgus affirming that he received his laws from Apollo, Mino^ from
Jupiter, Solon, and Draco from Minerva, Numa from the Nymph Egeria, Anacharsis
from Zamolxis the Scythian God.

3 But all this will not confine man within his bounds, for it is true of him,
which was spoken of the Athenians, that they knew what was to be done, and
yet did it not. And, which was objected by the Cynicke, against the old
Philosophers of Greece, that they gave good rules, but put none in practice.

-- Ovid. Met
video meliora proboque
Deteriora sequor, --
said Medea when she was overcome with passion. It is true of most men, though
they know the law, how that they which commit sin, are worthy of death, Romans
1.31
yet they do not only the same themselves, but also favor them that do it.
The law of it self is but a dead letter. It is like a sword in the wars
without a soldier to draw it. Many make no more account of transgressing it,
then Live. lib. 1. dec. 1.
Remus did of going over the furrow, which Romulus had caused to be drawn. Or
the frogs in the fable of skipping over the Lion, when he was fast a sleep.
Therefore God has added the Magistrate, as the life, and soul of the law, as
a Captain to manage this sword. Him he has made (if I may so speak) the
summum genus of the commonwealth, by two genericall differences of poena, and
praemium, to coarct, and keep his inferiors in their several ranks: that as
Iehu, and Iehonadab, went hand in hand together, for the rooting out of Ahabs
posterity, and destruction of Baals Priests; so the magistrate being (as
Ethicoru^, lib. 5. cap. 4.
Aristotle calls him) a living law, and the law, being a mute, and dead
Magistrate, should join hand in hand, and proceed valorously, to the rooting
out of sin, the suppression of Idolatry, the protection of justice, and
maintenance of true religion.

4 Now that they have this authority only from God, it is a point, which I hope
in this place, I shall not need long to insist upon. Iam 1.17
For if every good and perfect gift be from above, even from the father of
lights, much more this excellent, and superemine^t gift of governing Gods
people, must proceed from this fountain. And to think otherwise is but with
the Epicures, to be of opinion, that though God made the world, yet the
government thereof, he leaves to fortunes discretion, to be directed by her.
One of the styles wherewith God is invested, is this, that 1. Cor. 14
he is the author of order, and not of confusion: if of order then of Civil
government, seeing that an Anarchie is the cause of all disorder, and confusion
in the state. Insomuch that the reason of all the sins that were committed in
Israel, is often in the book of Judges ascribed unto this, that they wanted a
Magistrate: There was at that time no king in Israel. Judge. 17. 6. 18. 1. 19.
1. 21. 25.

It is a miserable life, to live under a Tyrant where nothing is lawful; but
far worse, to live in an Anarchie where nothing is unlawful. But I shall not
need to trouble my self, or to tire out your atte^tion, by heaping up
multituds of reasons for proving of this point, seeing it is a conclusion so
plainly averred by the holy Ghost: Prove. 8.15, 16.
by me kings reign (says the wisdom of God by the mouth of Solomon) and
princes decree justice; by me princes rule, and the nobles, and all judges of
the earth. As if he had said: it is not by the wit, and policy of man, that
the government of states is committed unto kings, and other inferior
Magistrates: it is effected by the wisdom, and providence of God. With which
the Romans 13.1.
Apostle agrees, when he tells us, that there is no power but of God, and the
powers that be, are ordained of God. It was sometime said of Dan. 5.19
Nabuchadnezzar, that great king of Babylon, that whom he would, he pulled
down, and whom he would, he set up. But it is always true of the king of
heaven, who is -- (...) the king of kings, and Lord of Lords; he pul^eth down
one, and sets up an other, he disposes of their rooms, at his pleasure:
For if Pro. 21.1
the hearts of kings, much more their kingdoms, are at his disposition. This is
a truth to which the very heathen themselves have subscribed. It was 2. Chr 9.8
God alone that did exalt Solomon unto the throne of his father David, so the
Queen of the South affirmed; that did exalt Cyrus to the kingdoms of the
earth, so 2. Chr. 36 23.
he himself confessed. Agreeing with that of the prophet Ps. 71.7.8
David, Promotion comes not from the East, nor from the West, no nor yet from
the South. And why? God is the judge, he puts down one, and sets up
another.

Anabaptists come to be censured, which withdraw their necks from the yoke of
civil government, and condemn it, as not beseeming the liberty of a
Christian man. A lesson which they never learned from the prophet Esaias, who
foretold, that in the time of the gospel (an assertion which they cannot away
with; for though they grant, that the Jews, at Gods appointment, had their
Magistrates, yet they think it not sit for a Christian to be subject to such
slavery) in the time I say of the gospel he will appoint kings to be patrons,
and propugnators of his Church. Is. 49.23.
Kings shall be thy nursing fathers and Queens shall be thy nurces. Nor from
our Savior Christ, who though he told his disciples, Luke 22.25.
when they strove for superiority amongst themselves, that one of the^ should
not domineere over another, as did the kings of the nations, yet it was never
his meaning to withdraw them from obedience to superior governors, but that
Mat. 22.21.
Caesar should have that which did belong to Caesar. Nor from 1 Pet. 2.17
Peter, who co^mandes us to honor the king. Nor from 1. Tim. 2.^
Paul, who commaundes us to pray for kings, and all that are in authority, and
that to this end, that we may lead a quiet, and peaceable life in all
godliness, and honesty. God knows better what is meet for christians the^ the
Anabaptists do. He knows that we are strangers on earth, and not angels in
heaven. And being 1. Pet. 2.11.
strangers and pilgrims, stand in as great need of these helps, as of fire, of
water, of air, of apparel, of any thing, which is necessary for the
sustentation of our lives; seeing that they are not only the means that we are
partakers of all these while they effect, that we may live together in civil
society, but also the promoters of true religion, the adva^cers of virtue, the
rewarders of piety, the punishers of sin, the destroiers of Idolatry,
superstition, and al misdemeanors amongst Christians. So that as God said
unto Samuel concerning the Jews, when they disliked their present government,
1. Sam. 8.7.
they have not cast thee away, but they have cast me away, that I should not
reign over them: so I may say of these fanaticall spirits, it is not the
Magistrate, but God himself, whom they have rejected, that he should not
reign over the^.

Anabaptists yet indirectly, and by a consequent, cross my proposition. I
mean the Papists. These do not altogether take away the civil Magistrate,
but they tie his thummes and abridge his authority. It must be only in
temporalibus: for spiritual matters, he must have no more dea^ings with the^,
the^ 2. Sam. 6^
Vzza had to touch the ark of God. This they willingly grant, that the
magistrates are Gods, but as the Aramits said of the Israelites, 1. King. 20.28.
that their Gods were Gods of the mountains, and not Gods of the valleys: so
say they, the civil Magistrates, are Gods of the mountains, and not Gods of
the valleys; they are Gods of the Laity, but not of the Clergy.

This is naught in respect of that which follows. For whereas God challenges
this as a prerogative unto himself, to bestow kingdoms on whomsoever he will,
and places the Princes of the earth in authority next unto himself, this
they have perforce taken from God, and bestowed it upon him, that 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
sits in the temple of God, and advances himself, above all that are
called Gods. It is he to whom (if ye will believe him, and his parasites) all
power is committed, both in heaven and in earth. He is that King of kings, and
Lord of Lords, by whom Princes rule, and on whom the right of kings depends:
all nations must fall down before him, and al kingdoms must do him homage.
The greatest Monarch of the earth must prostrat himself before him, and kiss
his holy feet. The Emperor, if he be present when he takes horse, must hold
the bridle, when he lights, he must hold the right stirrup, when he
walks, he must bear up his train, when he washes, he must hold the
basin, when he would be borne, he must be one of the 4 that must carry him
upon their shoulders in a golden chair.

7 And as he takes upon him to give kingdoms to whomsoever he will (like the
Devil, who told our Savior Christ Luk 4.6
that all the kingdoms of the world were his, and he gave them to whomsoever
he would (whereupon says an ancient father, Irenaeus.
mentitur diabolus, quia cuius iussu homines creantur, huius iussu reges
constituuntur, the devil is a liar, for by whose authority men were created,
by his are kings appointed) as he takes upon him, I say, to give kingdoms at
his pleasure, so will he take them away when he likes. So far is he from that
obedience, and revere^ce, which every soul should give to the higher power.
Who knows not that Chron. Charion lib. 3.
Leo Isaurus for putting in execution, a decree of a Council held at
Constantinople in his time, touching the taking away of images, was first
excommunicated, and then deprived of al his revenewes in Italy? That Pope
Zachary deposed Childericke, the French king, that he might gratify Carolus
Mertellus, and his son Pipin? That the proud Venetia^ peddler, Bonfin. rerum
Vng. dec. 4. l. 1.
Paul the second, by a public edict deprived of crown and kingdom, George
the king of Bohemia, because he was an Hussite, and stirred up Mathias the
king of Hungary, (his son in law) to war against him? What shall I tell you of
the indignities, offered in our own land, against Henry the second, and John,
king of England? or of the bulls of Pius Quintus, sent against Queen Elizabeth
of never dying memory, whereby he has excommunicated her, absolved her
subjects, from their oaths of allegiance, stirred up rebellions in these middle
parts of Britain, and taken upon him, to bestow the regal diadem upon
strangers. God be thanked Ps. 2.4.
he that dwells in heaven (and, of right, challenges the authority of disposing
the kingdoms of this world to himself) laughed all their devises to scorne^.
So that his Canons, though they made a terrible noise, yet no bullet was felt.
And his Bulls which sometimes had such a terrible aspect, that a whole
provincial Synod durst scarce ve^ture to bait them, proved such cowardly
dastards, that every single adversary has been ready to tugge them. Much
resembling the counterfeite shows of Semiramis, when she warred against the
king of India, which, a far off, seemed to be Elephants, and Dromedaries, but
when they were thoroughly tried, proved nothing but Oxen hides stuffed with
straw. Apoc. 16.7.
Even so Lord God Almighty true and righteous are thy judgments.

(R. H.) whom the Lord has placed at the seat of judgment. Have Magistrates
their authority from God? this concerns you in your places, as well as the
greatest pote^tate of the earth. And therefore as on the one side it should be
incouragment unto you, to hold on in all godly courses ye have begun; so on
the other side, it should work in you, an humble, and tha^kfull
acknowledgement of so rare a benefit. Say not then within your selves, that it
was your own deserts, the excellency of your wits, the ripeness of your
judgments, the deepnesse of your knowledge in the laws, the integrity of your
persons, that did adva^ce you, unto those rooms: It was none of al these, it
was God alone that did promote you. If these were means of your preferment,
yet have ye nothing whereof ye can justly boast, because ye have them al
from him. For Dei dona sunt, quaecunque bona sunt. Use then your places as
received from him, acknowledge God to be the author of your advancement, and
say with Luk 1.
Mary in her Song: he that is mighty has done great things for us, and holy
is his name. And so much of the first proposition. The second follows.

Magistrates are Gods deputies. 2. Propos.
8 God as he is jealous of his honor, so is he of his name too. He will not
give it unto any other, but only so far as he has some resemblance with him. I
find only 3 in Gods book, (to say nothing of that eternal essence, to which
it principally agrees) which have this name given the^. The first is Satan,
who, by reason of his great, and almost v^limited power, which he has for a
time, here on earth, by ruling and reigning in the hearts of the children of
disobedience, is called a God. The God of this world, 2. Cor. 2.4. The second
are the blessed Angels, those yeomen of the guard in the court of heaven, which
wait about the throne of God. These, by reason of their supereminent offices,
are called Gods. Thou have made him a little inferior to the Gods, Psalm. 8.5.
which the Apostle, following the Septuagint, translateth Angels, Heb. 2.7. The
third, is the Magistrate, who, both in this Psalm, and sundry other places of
Scripture, is called a God. His master shall bring him to the Gods, Exodus 21.6.
Thou shall not rail upon the Gods, Exodus 22.28. that is, the Judges: implying
thus much, that as they have a commandment, and authority from God; so they
have, in some sense, the authority of God, and do supply his room. Therefore,
said Moses unto the Judges which he appointed in every city, Deuteronomy. 1.36.
ye shall not fear the face of man, for the judgment is Gods. And Iehosophat
to those Judges, which he had set in the strong cities of Judah: 2. Chr. 19 6.
take heed what you do, for ye execute not the judgment of man, but of the
Lord.

Magistrate, yet in heart they scorn and contemn sundry of them: as perchance
not being able to equalize them in wealth, peradventure not discending of so
ancient a house as they.

Horat.
Tune Syri, Damae, aut Dionysi filius audes
Deijcere e saxo cives, et tradere Cadmo?
It was an old objection in the Satyrist: what? dare thou, being thus, and
thus descended, presume to give judgment upon a man that is better borne then
thy self? yes; why not? he is now in Gods place. He that lifts the poor
out of the mire, and raises the beggar out of the du^ghill, that he may set
him with the Princes of his people, has styled him, with his own name, and
set him in his room. I remember a story in Herod. l. 2 Arist. polit. lib 3.
Herodotus, of Amasis an Egyptian king, who, in the beginning of his reign,
was scorned of his subjects, by reason of the baseness of his parentage: which
when the king observed, he took a golden basen, wherein his guests were wont
to wash their feet, and use to some homely purposes, and thereof made an image
of one of their Gods, and set it in an eminent place of the city; which when
the Egyptians saw (as they were marveilous superstitious) they came flocking on
heaps unto it, and worshipped it. Hereupon Amasis, calling the people
together, told the^, that he was like unto that basen, which before was vile
and abject, yet now was worshipped, because of the form it bare: so he,
though before he was mean, and base, yet now was to be honored, because he
was the king, for the persons sake whom he did represent. It skilleth not, what
the Magistrate has been, or what hereafter he may be. For the present, be
thy reputation never so great, thou art to honor and reverence him, if not for
the man's sake, yet for Gods sake, whose person he bears. The story of Live.
dec. 3. lib 4. Plu* in vit. F^bii.
Quintus Fabius is very worthy the noting. Quintus Fabius was sent by the
Senate of Rome to his son, who was Consul, and resided at that time in
Apulia. The old man, either by reason of his age, or to try his sons
courage, went riding to his son: which when his son observed, he sent a
Sergeant, and commanded him to light, and come on foot, if he would speak with
the Consul. The bystanders thought it great arrogancy in the young man to be
so bold with his aged father. But old Fabius, who had experience, what it was
to be Consul, knew well, that he did no more then did beseem him: experiri
volui fili (said he) satin' scires Consulem te esse. It is not for a Magistrate
to debase himself: neither is it for others, of what reputation soever, to
equalize themselves with the Judge whom God has placed over the^: whom Solomon
would have to be feared; Prove. 24.21.
whom Pet. 2.14.
Peter would have to be honored; whom Romans 13.5.
Paul would have to be obeyed, not for wrath only, but even for conscience
sak^.

10 And this is not only meant of godly and religious Magistrates, such as are
described by Deuteronomy 17.
Moses, which make Gods law of their privy Counsel, and turn not aside to
the right hand, or to the left: but of wicked and ungodly governors too; such
as are described by 1 Samuel 8.
Samuel, which take men's sons, and appoint them to his charets, and to be his
horsemen, and to ru^ before his charets, and take their fields, and give them
to his servaunts, and their vineyards, and give them to his Eunuchs. The
reason, is, because as well the badde, as the good are of God. The one he gives
in his love the other in his anger. He that gave the regiment of a
Commonwealth to Caius Caesar, a mild, and gentle Prince, gave it also unto
Marius a bloody Consul. He that gave it unto Augustus, a myrrour of humanity,
gave it unto Nero, a monster of crudelitie. He that gave it unto Vespasian,
gave it unto Domitian. He that gave it unto Constantine, a religious defender
of Christianity, gave it unto Iulia^, an author of apostasy, says August. de
Civil Dei lib 5. cap. 21
Austine. And be they good or bad, we have no commandment from him, but
parendi, and patiendi: of obeying them, when their precepts are not repugnant
to Gods statutes, and of suffering with patience whatsoever they shall lay upon
us. It was a worthy saying of the mother of the two Bonsin. rerum Vag. dec. 3.
lib. 2.
Garaes, when they kept Sigismond in prison, that a crowned king, if he were
worse the^ a beast, could not be hurt without great injury done to God
himself. A lesson which she learned from 1. Sa^. 24
David, whose heart smote him, when he had cut the lap of Saul's garment,
because he was the anointed of the Lord: although he 1. Sam. 13 14.
himself was before that time anointed to be king over Israel, and was without
cause, hunted by Saul like a Pelican in the wilderness, and an owl in the
desert.

11 Then to draw thy sword, and to seek perforce to depose such as God has
placed over thee, either because they are not suitable to thy affections, or not
faithful in their places, what is it but, with the old giants, (...), to fight
with God: with the curre dog, to bite at the stone, and not regard who casts
it: or, with the rebellious child, to snatch at the rod, and never remember
who smiten with it. The weapons of a Christian, in this case (when such a case
does happen) must be preces and lacrymae, prayers, that either God would turn
the heart of an evil magistrate, or set in his room a man 1. Sam. 13 14.
David-like after his own heart: and tears, for his sins, which as they are
the cause of war, famine, pestilence, and all other calamities, so are they
also of wicked and ungodly magistrates. Otherwise they have reason to fear,
that, if God should displace an evil magistrate, he would set a worse in his
roo^e. According to that of the Val Max. lib. 6. cap. 2.
old wife of Syracuse, who when others prayed for the death of Dionysius the
Tyrant, she prayed for his long life, being sent for by Dyonysius, and
demanded wherein she was beholden unto him, that she so devoutly prayed for
him: in nothing, said she, am I beholden to thee, and yet I have great reason
to pray for thee. For I remember when I was a young wench, there was a cruel
tyrant, that reigned over us; and all of us prayed for his death, I as fast as
any: shortly after he was slain, and then came a worse in his room. Then we
prayed for his death, at length he was dispatched. Now after both these art
thou come, and thou art a thousand times worse then all thy predecessors. And
who knows but, when thou art gone, God may (if it be possible) send a worse
in thy room? This they may justly expect, which continue in their sins, and
think by their private endeavors to cross Gods ordinance. Thus much of those
duties, which are required at the hand of every private man toward the
Magistrate.

Magistrates, in that God has made the^ his deputies. As God has done great
things for them, so he requires much at their hands. But (alas) it often
falls out that those which owe God the most, pay him the least: and those,
who of al others should be most careful of their places, of al others make the
least conscience of their ways. Annal. l. 6
Tacitus reports of Claudius that he was a good subject, but an ill Emperor:
Hist. lib. 2.
of Titus, that he was an ill subject, but a good Emperor. Where one proves
like Titus; two prove like Claudius. Honors change manners. And those goodly
blossoms, which did appear in many when they were private men, when they come
in Gods place, like frost-eaten buds, wither away, and prove like
thunder-blasted fruit, not worth the touching, much less the tasting. It is
noted of Buchc^c. Ind. Chron.
Aeneas Syluius, that when once he became Pope, and got his name changed into
Pius secundus, he condemned diverse of those things which he had written, when
he was a private man. Whereupon one came over him with this quippe, quod Aeneas
probavit, Pius damnavit: that which Aeneas commended, Pius condemned. A fault
to which men of eminent place are too much subject, to condemn and dislike
those good things when they are in authority, which they approved when they were
private men. Quod Aeneas probavit, Pius damnabit. Thus, those who^ God calls
Elohim, change their natures, and prove Elilim idols, and vanities. The heathen
persecuters (as Abbas Visp.
some writers have recorded) in the place where Christ was crucified had placed
the image of Venus, a heathen idol, that if any should worship Christ, he
might seem to adore Venus. This is the devils practice, to set an idol in Gods
room; sometimes a Venus, a Cupid, that use their authority for the enjoying of
their own carnal pleasures; sometimes a Mars, using his power to blood and
revenge; sometimes a Saturn, that eats up his children (that is, his
inferiors, which he should affect as a father does his own children) as if
they were bread; sometimes a Mercury, who is eloquent in speaking, but withal
nimble in fingring, having a smooth tongue like Jacob, but rough hands like
Esau, nay Eagle claws like Nabuchadnezzar, to scrape, and scratch together
whatsoever comes in his way, using his place only for his own advantage. Here
is the undoing of all: for, besides that Gods place is polluted, and the people
wronged, there is an evil president given to private me^, to follow the wicked
example of their governors. For as the lower spheres, follow the motion of the
higher: so in the commonwealth, those that are of an inferior rank are ready
to follow the practice of those that are set over them. When a shrub, or
bramble falls, they hurt none but themselves; but when a Cedar of Lebanon, or
an oak of Basan falls, down goes all the underwood that grows about the^. It
is the nature of the plague to infect upwards, from a lower, to a higher room:
but the plague of sin is more forcible in infecting downwards, from an higher,
to a lower room. It discends from the top to the toe and from the head to the
skirts of the clothing. If Mat. 2.3.
Herod be troubled about the birth of Christ, all Jerusalem will be in an
vproare with him. And if 1. Kin. 12
Jeroboam be an idolater, -- Claud.
componitur orbis
Regis ad exemplum:
all Israel will go a whoring after him. And herevpo^ it is, that ye shall
seldom meet with his name in the books of Kings, but you shall find him
branded in the forehead with this mark, that he made Israel to sin.

13 God be thanked, we have no great occasion of complaint at this day;
especially in our chief Magistrates (and I wish, I might without check of
conscience say as much of those, that are of an inferior rank) The Lord has
set over us (his name for ever be blessed for it) a most godly and religious
King, of whom (as Rara tempo^um felicitate, vbi sentire qua velis and quae
sentis dicere licet Hist. lib. 1.
Tacitus ^aith of Traiane, and Cocceius Nerva) a man may think what he will,
and speak what he thinks. God has given him (as he did unto 1. King. 4 29.
Solomon) a large heart as the sand that is upon the sea shore to judge his
people according to right, and to 1. Kin. 3 9
discern between good and bad. Whose princely care is to observe the practice
of the old Romans, August. de Civ. Dei l. 5. cap. 12,
to set Honors temple close on the backside of Virtues temple and not wittingly
to suffer any to come into the Temple of Honor, which have not first done
their devotion in the Temple of Virtue: not to make his Judges, and chief
Magistrates (like f Ieroboams Priests) of the basest, 1 Kin. 12.31.
and lowest of the people; but such as Eood. 18.21.
Moses, at Iethro's persuasion, made Judges over Israel, men of courage,
fearing God, men dealing truly, and hating covetousness.

14 And such (R. H.) you have by good demonstrations evidently proved your
selves to be. So that to make any large discourse before you, of your
particular duties, may pervadventure seem unto some, as needless a piece of
work, as it was for Tull. de orat. lib. ^^
Ph^rmio, to make a military discourse before Annibal; or for Plotin to read a
lecture in Philosophy in the presence of Origin. Yet because it comes within
the limits of my text, I beseech you that you, will with patience hear me,
while I shall say somewhat of that duty which God requires at your hands, in
that he has seated you in those high rooms. Many will tell you of the
greatness of your places; but not so many will truly acquaint you with that
which God requires for the discharging of those places. For my part me thinks
I may say unto you, as Live. dec. 1. lib. 10.
Lucius Posthumous sometimes said unto the Senators of Rome: Non sum
Patres-conscripti adeo vestrae dignitatis memor, vt obliviscar me esse
Co^sulem. I am not so mindful of the greatness of your places, that I should
in the mean time forget mine own, how that God has made me his Ambassador,
and commanded me to acquaint you with some part of his will.

15 It is our parts, and duties, to give you that reverence, and honor, which
is due unto men of your place. But yet as the people said unto the Ass that
carried the image of Isis, when the beast seemed to be proud, because the people
bowed as it went along the streets, as if the honor had been given unto it,
and not unto the image: religioni no^ tibi, said they, it is not thee, but the
goddess, whom we worship. So it is not to you as ye are men, but as you are
in Gods place, and do bear, and resemble his person, that we exhibit this
reverence. You are Gods, but ye are Gods on earth, and Gods of earth, as we
shall hear anon. Mathematitians tell us, that the whole earth is but a point
in respect of the highest moveable: it is no more in respect of that heaven,
which is Gods throne, then Aelian. Var. hist. l. 3.
Alcibiades his lands were in that map of Greece that Socrates showed unto
him. The greatest Judge in the world, if his circuit should extend over the
whole globe of the earth, is but a God of Gods footstool. Your circuit is
far less: you are but Gods of an outcorner, nay, a little portion of an
out-corner of Gods footstool. Let me then speak unto you in the words of the
Tragoedian, Vos, quibus rector maris, Seneca in Thyeste.
atque terrae
Ius dedit magnum necis, atque vitae,
Ponite inslatos tumidosque vultus,
you whom the God of heaven, and earth has so highly extolled, as to make
Judges of life and death, be not proud of your autorities, but think with
your selves, that, Quicquid a vobis minor extimescit,
Mayor hoc vobis Dominus minatur.
What hurt soever your inferiors shall sustain by your means, there is a
greater God, that threatens the same (nay a worse) unto you. Psalm. 2.
Be wise now therefore O ye Gods: be learned ye that are Judges of the earth:
serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with trembling: kiss the
son, least he be angry. Let his word be a law to direct your sentences, his
will the line to measure your actions. With what conscience can those hands
subscribe to an untruth, which should be Gods instruments to confirm a right?
with what faces can those mouths pronounce an unjust sentence, which should be
the organes of God to confirm a right? When you do amiss, you are not only
injurious unto man whom ye wrong, but contumelious unto God, whose sacred
judgments ye pollute. Give me leave then to say unto you with good king 2.
Chr. 19 6, 7.10.
Iehosophat: take heed what ye do, for ye execute not the judgments of man,
but of the Lord, and he will be with you in the cause, and judgment. Wherefore
now let the fear of God be upon you; take heed and do it: for there is no
iniquity in the Lord our God, neither respect of persons, nor receiving of
reward. Therefore in every cause that shall come unto you, between blood and
blood, between law and precept, statute and judgment, ye shall judge the
people according unto right, and admonish them that they trespass not against
the Lord. Let me say with Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17.
Moses, Judge righteously between every man, and his brother, and the stranger
that is with him: ye shall have no respect of persons in judgment, but shall
hear the small, as well as the great. With Ier. 22.3.
Jeremiah unto the king of Judah: Execute judgment and righteousness, deliver
the oppressed from the hands of the oppressor, vex not the stranger, the
fatherless, nor the widow, do no violence, nor shed innocent blood in this
place. And finally with my Prophet in this Psalm: Defend the poor and
fatherless, see that such as be in need, and necessity have right, deliver the
outcast, and poor, save them from the hands of the ungodly.

16 I speak not this, as if I would have you to exceed the limits of justice,
for co^miserating the cause of the poor. I know the poor may offend as well
as the rich: and as the poor is to be pitied, so the rich is not to be
wronged. And he that has given this law unto the Magistrate, that he should
not respect the person of the mighty, has given this also, Lev. 19.15
that he should not favor the person of the poor. It is not the misery of
the one, nor the felicity of the other, that the Judge is to respect. For the
matters in question, sound them to the bottom, anatomize them to the least
particle, and sift them to the branne^ but for the parties whom they do
concern, further then this, that ye are to judge between a man and a man,
ye ought not to enquire. The (...) of (...).
law in the Greek tongue comes from a verb that signifies to divide,
because it divides to every man, that which is his own. You then which are
dispensers of the law should give to every one, poor or rich, that which is
his right. Hereupon it is that Arist. Eth. lib. 5. cap 4.
Aristotle calls the Judge in commutatiue justice (...), or as some copies have
it (...) medianus, or mediiurius, a mean between two; because he should not
propend to the one party, more then the other, but only so far as the weight
of the cause carries him, and should give to every man that which is his right,
and that not according to geometrical, but according to arithmeticall
proportion: that is, not with Xenophons young Cyrus give the greater coat unto
the greater man, and the lesser coat unto the lesser man, but to give the
greater coat (if it be his due) unto the lesser man, and let the greater man
(if he have right to no more) be contented with the lesser coat.

17 But the principal thing, which it beseems me to put you in mind of, and
which is chiefly required at your hands, as ye are factors for the God of
heaven, is the care of religion, and the true worship of God. Nothing is so
dear unto God, as his own worship. He that touches it, wounds him to the
heart, and pearceth the apple of his eye. It is an injury which he will not
put up at the hands of any man, but will come against him, as the fire that
burns up the stubble, and as the hammer that breaks a stone. Therefore it
most nearly concerns you, who are his deputies, to maintain his service, and
to put what strength you can unto the hammer of justice, that ye may (as far
as the laws will give you leave) burst into pieces, whatsoever shall advance
it self against his worship.

18 The sicknesses in religion, that are amongst us, are not Novatianisme,
Brownisme, Catharisme. No, no: these hot phre^zies are scarce heard of in this
cold climat wherein we live. They are cold Epilepsies and dead Apoplexies, and
sleepy Lethargies, and dangerous Consumptions, that vex us. The main root,
whence they al spring, is a disease, with which this land is sick. And that
is the bold profession of Popery: for hereby the true Christians are mightily
discouraged, those that are infected with Romish superstition take occasion, by
little and little, to fall away from us; The ignorant are doubtful, and know
not what to do, but are ready to embrace any religion, or no religion, as time
and occasion shall require; The Atheist (a vermin wherewith this whole
country swarms, though they cannot be well discovered, by reason that they
wear vizards upon their faces) is hardened and heartned in his impiety.

For us, we do what we can to cut in sunder this bitter root. Gladly would
we heal them of Babylon, but they will not be healed. For our private
conferences with any of them, if they want wit to answer our reasons, they
have will to let them alone. For our public work of the ministry, least we
should catch some of them they will not come within the compass of our nets.
The last weapon of the church is fulmen excommunicationis, to drive the^ out of
our Synagogues. And what care they for this, who will not come in them, no, when
we do entreat them? they count it but brutum fulmen, a thunder clap, without a
bolt, a canon-shot without a bullet: it hurts them no more then the dart which
old Priamus in the Virg Aen. li. 2.
Poet shot at Pyrrhus: -- Quod protinus aere repulsum,
In summo clypei, nequidquam vmbone pependit.
Further then this we cannot go: the weapons of our warfare are spiritual.
Coactiue jurisdiction is beyond our sphere. what is now behind? Vbi desinit
Philosophus, incipiat medicus; where the word leaves them, let the sword find
them. Brachium seculare, was the help, and assistance that the holy fathers of
the Council of Constance implored against the poor Hussites. And brachium
seculare is the help and assistance, that we implore against these Cananites,
that are amongst us. Which (howsoever unto the halting Mephibosheths, and
lukewarm Laodiceans of our time, which ca^ blow both cold and hot out of the
same mouth: and wear linen and woollen in the same garment, and yoke an ox,
and an ass in the same plowe, and care not if their fields be sown with
mingled seeds, they be never a whit noisome: yet unto the true Israelite,
Number. 33.55.
they are thorns in his sides and pricks in his eyes; and gives him just
occasion to exhibit that bill of complaint against the^ which the Jews framed
most falsely against the Act. 21.28
Apostle, ye men of Israel (nay ye Gods of Israel) help, these are the men
that teach all men every where, against the people, and the law, and this
place. Moreover they have brought (not Grecians, as it is in the text, but a
more pestilent sect) Romans into the land, and have polluted this holy place.

19 I speak not only of those children of Babylon, those sons of Belial, the
followers of the beast, the viperous brood of Rome, the Seminary Priests and
Jesuits, that crawle in every quarter of this land, like the Exodus 8.
frogs of Egypt; and Mat. 23 15
travel sea and land, to make one of their own profession, that he may be
twofold more the child of the devil, then they themselves are: but also of
these limbs of Antichrist, these factors, and panders for the great whore,
that are at home, and sit under their own fig trees, and drink the water of
their own cesterns. Cic. 2. Call.
Quos video volitare in foro, quos stare ad curiam, quos etia^ venire in
senatum, as the Orator speaks. These, these are nostri fundi calamitas, the
very moths of our region, and the cankarwormes of our religion. Wherefore gird
you with your swords, Ps. 45.4.
upon your thighs, and be not faint hearted (like Iud. 8.20.
Iether the first borne of Gedeon) but let your right hand teach you terrible
things. No doubt but they will complain of cruelty, and persecution (they do
that already, when they have no cause) but let not that discourage you, but
rather let it be a means that they may have the same law, which the old Tull.
pr^ Rosci^.
Capitolian dogs had: when they barked without a cause, their legs were to be
broken. If the difference between the^ and us, be de lana caprina, about toys
and trisles, let them be ashamed of their bloody cruelty, that have butchered,
and massacred so many thousands of our brethren, for toies and trifles. Yea,
and let us be ashamed likewise, that have continued so long in schism, and
divisio^ from the Roman church for matters of so small moment. If they be (as I
take the^ to be) fundame^tal points of Christianity, (alas) what worldly
respect shall be sufficient to cool the heat of our zeal in Gods cause? If our
religion be a new religion, and theirs the old, and Catholic, let us forsake
our new-fangles, and join with the^. The old, is the true religion. If ours be
the old, and Catholic religion, which the Apostles have taught us, the
martyrs have confirmed unto us, and the faithful till this day have
mainetained and taught: and theirs a new and an vpstar^ religion an hotch-potch
and Pandora composed of al religions in the world, scarce heard off (for any
material point of difference between them and us) in the church of God, for
six hundredth years after Christ: let them pare away these rotten rags, these
Is 64.6.
filthy and menstruous clouts, and Gal. 4.9.
beggarly rudiments, and let the^ join with us. Either let us all swear by
God or all by Zeph. 1.5.
Malcham. Either let us all serve God, or all Baal; if God be God, let us all
follow him, if Baal be God, let us al go after him.

20 I know what some will be ready to answer me, though in matters of religion
they be different from us, yet for civil duties they will be subjects good
enough. You say true, sir, and so the kite will be a dove good enough: but wot
ye when? marry Isto pacto and milv^s quando pullos rapere territus non
potuerit co^umbum se nominat. Aug. contra lit. ^etil. lib 2. c. 83.
when he cannot seize upon a chicken, and make her his pray, as Augustine
speaks. Is it likely that he will be true to an earthly king, that in matters
of religion is his opposite, who is false to the king of heaven? Philoso^hers,
though they hold that it is not the same virtue that makes bonum virum, and
bonu^ cive^, yet the best of the^ agree in this principle, that he cannot be
bonus civis, good in the duties of civil policy, which is not first bonus vir,
perfect in the general duties of morality: neither can he be true in practicing
the virtues of the second table, which is false in the first. Do thou think,
that the oath of Allegiance is a band of sufficient force to tie a Papist in
true allegiance unto his prince?

Horat.
Quo teneas vultum mutantem Protea nodo? Can thou bind Proteus, that turns
himself into every shape? Or can thou make a coat for the moon, that is
never at a stay? Was there ever oath so wisely contrived, so religiously taken,
but the slippery snakes, and stretching horseleaches of Rome, could find some
chinke to creep out at? or their Holy Father, out of his Papal, and
transce^dent power can dispense with it, or cut it, as (...)
Alexander did Gordians knot, or break it, as Iud. 16.12
Sampson did the new ropes, wherewith the Philistines had bound him, which he
brake from his arms, as a thread?

21 Verily I think there is no probability, to be a true Papist, and a true
subject. A few simple seduced creatures amongst us, that understand not the
mysteries of popery, but only in a generality, I speak not of them: (and yet I
know how easily the young cubbes may be taught to learn the tricks of the old
Foxes) but for the rest, the time past will help us to discover the^ in the
time to come. To say nothing of their damnable, and treacherous practices a
broad against foreign princes, and here at home against Queen Elizabeth of
never dying memory, and the breath of our nostrils King James; that one
gunpowder-plot, a devise set from the bottom of hell, may be an everlasting
memento of their disloialtie, Accipe nunc Danaum insidias, and crimine ab vno
Disce omnes --
By this one fact we may judge of all the rest, as an ass may be known by his
long ears, and as the bigness of Hercules might be gathered by the print of his
foot. And though P. R.
some of them, to make it less heinous, call it a particular fact of a few,
and that temerarious too, as though, forsooth, it had been far from their
hearts to have attempted any such cruelty against the Lords anointed: yet it
may be truly said of them al, as Tullie said of the Catilinarians, alijs
facultas defuit, alijs occasio, volu^tas profecto nemini. And he, that in
outward show seems most against it, would have lent both heart, and hand, and
put to the very match, so that he might have effected that matchless treason.
And why should it be otherwise? For what, I pray you, is any Prince in the
world, if he do not adhere to the Apostaticall See of Rome? shall I define him
unto you out of their Logique books? Bell. Sand. Creswell. Ba^^cherius.
Rainolds.
A wolf devouring the sheep; an Ahab or Iezabel, destroying the Lords
Prophets; an Holofernes, a prosessed enemy to the true Israelite; a Goliath,
reviling the host of the living God; a seducer, and deceiver of the people, as
our Savior was called by their old gra^dfathers. And must not such a one be
made away by one means or other, by open hostility, or secret conspiracy, it
makes no matter?

-- dolus an virtus quis in host requirit? Shall not the shepherd do well to
kill a wolf? shall not Iud. 13.8.
Iudeth be highly extolled if she can kill Holofernes though sleeping in his
bed? And if Sam. 18.7
David kill Goliath, deserves he not to be met with the women of Israel with
timbrels, and instruments of joy, singing thus, Saul has killed his thousand,
but David his ten thousand? In a word, is it not their assertion that Princes
must not be suffered to reign, when they draw the people into heresy, but
must be made away, yea by all means possible. And therefore I less marveile,
why that reviling Rabshekeh, that brasen-faced fugitive Parsons, who blushed not
to say any thing in his younger years, in his old age took upon him a kind of
modesty, and durst promise no more for his fellows then this; that there was
no impossibility for Papists to live in subjection, and dutiful obedience unto
the king of great Britain. For possibility it is not the question, but for
probability it is no more, the^ that the wind, and the sea, light, and
darkness, the Arc and Dagon, God, and Mammo^, the unbeliever and the infidel
shall be together. For what I pray you is it, which knits me^, as it were with
chains of adama^t, in love amongst themselves, and in loialty and obedience
unto their Prince? Is it fear of punishment? Oh no, for malus est custos
diuturnitatis metus. He never reigns long, whom every man fears; Cave^^
multos, quem time^t singuli, let him beware of a multitude whom every
particula^ dreadeth. Is it hope of reward? not that neither. For that is often
frustrated, and then follows an alteration in the affections. It is neither
of these. It is religion and the true fear of God. This, this is it which
knits the heterogeneall parts, of the same kingdom unto the prince, as the
several parts of man's body are by arteries knit, and united unto the heart,
and as the lines of a circle, though they be far distant about the
circumference, yet concur in one middle point: so must it be with them.
Though they be different about the circumfere^ce of worldly affairs, yet must
they concur in one common center of religion. A good Christian commo^wealth is
likevnto Act. 10.
Peter's sheet, wherein were al manner of four footed beasts, and creeping
things, and fowls of the heaven. There are in it all sorts of men. There are
nobles flying aloft, like the fowls of the heaven; there are of the baser
sort, creeping as it were below; and there are of a middle sort, men of all
conditions, and callings. But this sheet is knit together (as that was) at the
4 corners (the most distant and remote parts thereof) with the unity of
religion.

22 This is so plain, that Arist. Pol. lib. 5 cap. 11
Aristotle gives it as an especial rule for a Tyrant, if he mean to continue
his government, to make an outward show of religion. For such kings (says he)
as seem to be religious, are in least danger of treacherous practices by such
as are under them. Now where this unity of religion is wanting, (as wanting it
is, seeing we differ from the Papists, not in a few circumstances, but in
sundry fundamental points of Divinity) how can this knot be made fast? Nay,
seeing they are so far from counting any Protestant Prince religious, that
they count him an heretic; and the more diligent he is, in clensing and
refining his kingdom from the dregs of Romish superstition (as our Savior
Christ was in purging the law from the absurd glosses of the Scribes and
Pharisees) the greater persecuter he is holden with them to be of the
Catholic faith. Verily I see no probability, I had almost said, no
possibility, that they will hereafter prove true and dutiful subjects to the
King of great Britain. They may well make protestations, and outward shows,
of love, and duty, and obedience toward the Prince: but Lupus pilum, non
ingenium mutat, a wolf is a wolf though he be clothed in a sheepe-skinne;
well may he cast his old hair, but still he keeps his own nature. Shall their
fair speeches make us believe them?

-- sic notus Ulysses? Is the craft of the Romish foxes no better known unto
us?

timeo Danaos, and dona ferentes. I fear their fawning far more, the^ their
frowning, it was but a frivolous tale, which the people of Alexandria told
Timothy, etsi non communicamus tecum, tame^ amamus te, although we do not
communicate with thee, yet we love thee. For how can a man love him in his
heart, with whom he cannot find in his heart to communicate?

I am in a field, in which I might course at large, but I am mindful of the
time, and will not presume too long upon your patience. Some of our worthies do
stoutly with their pens oppose themselves against these men, and I pray God
every magistrate in his place would be as careful in unsheathing the sword of
justice against them. Catilin. 1a
Habemus in eos Senatusconsultum satis vehemens, and grave; we have an act, and
statute strong enough against the^. But their boldness, not waining, but daily
increasing, makes me almost say, as it follows in the orator, habemus
inclusum, in tabulis, tanquam gladium in vagina reconditu^. It is closed in the
book as a sword in the scabbart, or (as 1. Sam. 21
Goliahs sword was) wrapped in a cloth behind the Ephod. The best that I ca^
say in this case, is to use the prophecy of the Crow in Suet. in Domitiano.
Suetonius, (...), all will be well: Est been non potuit dicere, dixit erit.
Plin. not. hist. l. 8. c. 16
Pliny writes that the tricks of an ape, will so vex and move a Lyo^, that he
will disgorge, and cast up, whatsoever lies on his stomach. I doubt not but
their apish tricks will in time move the heart, and stomach, of our gracious,
and merciful Coeur de Lion, and other magistrates in their places, to cast up,
and show such tokens of their inward grief, as they shall have just occasion
to conceive against them; and to purge the body politic from these noxious
humors wherewith it is endangered. And without this there is no assurance of
peace. For as 2. King. 9.22.
Iehu said unto Iehoram when he went against the house of Ahab: is it peace
Iehu! (said Iehora^.) What peace said the other, while the whoredoms of thy
mother Iezabel, and her witchcraftes are great in number? So say I, what peace
can be expected, as long as the whoredoms of the Romish Iezabel, and her
witchcrafts, and enchanting cups, wherewith she withdraws the people from
their obedience to their Sovereign, and steals their hearts from him (as did
2. Sam. 1^.6.
Absolon the hearts of the Israelites, from David his father,) are in great
number. As long as the Pope can set any foot-hold in Britain, he will still
bestirre himself to molest the peace of our Sion.

Et si non aliqua nocuisset, mortuus esset. But enough (if not too much) of
this subject. It is a point which I vowed to handle; not out of any spleen to
any particular person whosoever (he that sees the thoughts of my heart,
knows that I lie not) but for the love of the truth, the zeal of Gods glory,
the integrity of my conscience, and the discharge of my duty. And herein
liberavi animam meam: look ye unto it. The third proposition follows.

23 Ye shall die.) What metal other creatures were made of, whether
immediately of nothing, or of some preexistent matter, I find no express
mention in Gods book. This I find, that man was made of a matter, and that
not gold, nor silver, pearl or precious stones, but of earth, the basest and
vilest of all the elements, yea of the dust of the earth, even of dry dust,
which is good for nothing: that if he shall with proud Phaeton in the Poet,
boast that Apollo, God is his father, he might presently call to mind, that
poor Clymene, the earth is his mother; that he was Genesis 2.7.
made of dust, that he is Ps. 103.14
but dust, and that Genesis 3.19
he shall return to dust. And yet I know not how it comes to pass, but I am
sure it is true, that many in authority resemble the dust in no property better
then one, that as the dry dust in the streets, is with every blast of wind
blown aloft into the air: so are their hearts blown aloft, and swelled up
with a windy tympanie of their own greatness. But let them climb as high as
they can, God will one day send a shower, and lay this dust. They are but
natural men; and the thread of nature (as a Poet fayneth) is tied unto the
foot of Jupiters chair: he can loose it, when it shall please him. Though
Adams wit was such, that he could give names unto every creature, according to
their natures, yet he forgot his own name. He did not remember that he was
called Adam, homo ab humo, by reason of that affinity that was between him and
the earth. These sons of Adam are very like their old grandfather, they are
witty in seeking out the names, and properties of other creatures, but they
forget their own names, and their natures too. And this is the cause why they
be so holden with pride, and overwhelmed with cruelties. They will with Is.
14.13.
Nabuchadnezzar, strive to advance themselves above the stars of God; and to
match their old grandfather, the first Adam, who though he was made of earth,
yet with the wings of pride and arrogancy would needs soar up into heaven,
and care little for resembling their elder brother, the second Adam, who took
upon him our weakness, that we might be strengthened: our poverty, that we
might be enriched; our nakedness, that we might be clothed; our baseness,
that we might be exalted; our mortality, that we might be invested in the
robe of immortality; and was contented to desce^d from heaven, to earth, that
he might make a way for us, to ascend from earth to heaven. But let them secure
themselves as much as they will; their houre-glasse is continually running; the
tide of death will tarry no man. Our E^ec. 18.
father has eaten a sower grape, and his childrens teeth are set on edge. Our
gra^dfather for eating of the forbidden tree, had this sentence denounced
against him; that he should return to dust. And his children are liable unto
it, till heaven and earth be renewed, and there be no more death.

Those great and mighty Gods of the earth, which cloth themselves Luke 16 19
in purple, and fine linen, and dwell in houses of Cedar, and Is. 5.8.
add house to house, and land to land, as if the way to heaven laid all by
land, have a time appointed them, when their insatiable desires shall be
contented with a Golgotha, a place of dead men's skulls, a little portion of the
great potters field, as much as will serve to hide, and cover a dead carcass
in it. You which sit on the seat of judgment, whom the Lord has so highly
extolled as to be called Gods, you have your days numbered, your months
determined, your bounds appointed which ye cannot pass. It is not the
ripeness of your wits, nor the dignity of your places, nor the excellency of
your learning, nor the largeness of your commission, that can add one inch
unto the thread of your days.

Hor. car. lib. 1. Od. 4.
Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas,
Regumque turres --
Deaths arrowe will as qui^kly pierce through the strong castle of a king, as
the muddie wall of a country swain. Were ye wiser then Solomon, stronger
then Sampson, richer the^ Job, mightier then the greatest mo^arch of the earth,
faithfuller in your places then Samuel, that faithful Judge of Israel; Ire
tamen restat Numa quo devenit and Ancus. This must be the conclusion; Ye must
die as men, and yield your bodies to deaths sergeant, to be kept prisoners in
the dungeon of the earth, till the great and general Assizes that shall be
holden by our Savior Christ, in the clouds of the sky, at the last day. The
conclusion is most certain, howsoever the premises be fallible, and doubtful.
Seneca.
Alexander, when by his followers he was called a God, forgot that he was to
die as a man, till by a poisoned arrow he was put in mind of his mortality,
and then he confessed the truth: Vos me Deum esse dixistis, sed iam me hominem
esse sentio. You said that I was a God, but now I perceive I am but a man. And
shortly after he perceived it with a witness, when he was poisoned by
Antipater, and then enclosed in a small parcel of ground, whose aspiring mind
the whole world could not fill.

Epitaph. Hen. ^. Regi^ Angl.
Cui satis ad votum non essent omnia terrae
Climata, terra modo sufficit octo pedum.
He, whom the whole earth could not content, was at length contented with a
parcel of ground of eight, yea of six foot long. Act. 12.
Herod when upon a day he was arrayed in royal apparel, and sat on the
bench, and gave such an excellent charge, that the people cried, -- non vox
hominem sonat -- It is the voice of God, and not of man, immediately after
proved neither God nor man. For he was eaten up of worms, and gave up the
Ghost. Rare examples for the Gods of the earth, to look down into their own
bosoms, and to remember that they must die as men. It is a good custom of the
Emperor of the Abyssenes (Prester John) to have every meal, for the first
dish, that comes on his table, a dead man's skul, to put him in mind of his
mortality. So was that which was used by Philip: namely, to have a boy every
day to put him in mind, that he was to die as a man. Not much unlike was the
old practice of the Munst. Cosmogr.
Egyptians, who when their Princes went to banquet, used to bear before them
the picture of a dead man, to put them in mind of their mortality.

24 Seeing then that ye must die, study to have your accounts in readiness,
that whenever the Lord shall call you hence, he may find you provided* Be
faithful in those high ^oon^es wherein God has placed you. 2. Chr. 19 ^.
Ye execute not the judgments of man, but of the Lord. Ask counsel therefore
of God, and weigh your proceedings in the balance of the sanctuary. Do
nothing but what God commands you, and the testimony of a good conscience will
warrant to be lawful, remembering that ye m^st one day (God knows how soon
that day will come) be summoned to appear before the common Judge of all
flesh; who is a burning, and H^b. 12.^9.
consuming fire, who is not blinded with sec^et closnesse, nor corrupted with
bribes, nor moved with friends, nor allured by flatterers, nor persuaded by the
importunity of intreaters, to depart an hairs breadth from the course of
justice: no though these Ezech. 14 14.
three men Noah, Daniel, and Job, should stand before him, and make
intercession in your behalf. These things remember, and do, and ye shall have
comfort in your lives, comfort at your deaths. And when your so^l^s shall be
removed from those earthly co^^^ges wherein they now dwell, they shall be tr^^^^ted
(...) ^verlasting habitations, and received with this joyful, and comfortable
welcome: Mat 25.21.
it is well done good servants and faithfull^ ye have been fa^thfull in a
little, I will make you rulers over much; enter into your masters joy.

25 Like men] It is employed in the conclusion of my text, that it is the lot
and condition of all men to die. And therefore as it concerns magistrates, so
it concerns al others to provide themselves for their end, because Eccl. 11.3.
as the tree falls, so it lies: that is, as the day of death shall leave them,
so the day of judgment shall find them.

Remember this ye that are to be witnesses, Application. 1. to witnessses, etc.
for giving testimony unto the truth, and iurers for giving a verdict according
to the truth. And as you love and revere^ce the truth it self, as ye desire
the benefit of your Christian brethren, which ye should love as your selves,
as ye wish the glory of God, which ye should tender more then your selves; let
it be a forcible motive unto you to deal uprightly in every cause with every
man, without declining to the right hand, or to the left, then shall ye
sanctify the name of God, by whom ye do swear to speak truly, to deal
truly: ye shall give occasion to good men to praise God for you, and ye shall
not need to be ashamed to meet God in the face, when he shall call you to a
reckoning for your doings. But on the other side, if rewards shall blind you,
or fear enforce you, or pity move you, or partiality sway you, or any respect
whatsoever draw you to smoother the truth, and favor an evil cause: ye
pearce your selves through with many darts. For first you are false witnesses
against your neighbor: secondly, ye are thieves, ye rob him of his right:
thirdly, ye are murderers, ye kill him in his body, or in his name, or in
his maintenance: fourthly, and which is worst of all, ye take the name of your
God in vain, yea as much as in you lies, ye take his godhead from him, and
make him who is the truth from everlasting, to be all one with the devil, who
is a liar from the beginning. If ye must be countable unto God, when he shall
call you hence, for every idle word that goes out of your mouths; and if the
least ungodly thought of your hearts, in the rigor of Gods justice, deserve
eternal death, how shall ye be able to stand in judgment under this po^derous
Chaos of so many crying sins. I cannot prosecute this point: only for
conclusion I say with Deuteronomy. 30.19 20.
Moses, behold this day have I set before you life and death, blessing and
cursing, choose life, and ye shall live. If not, I pronounce unto you this
day, ye shall surely perish. The mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

26 You, 2. To lawyers Atturnies, etc.
whose profession is to open the causes in controversy, and by your knowledge
in the laws to distinguish between right and wrong, truth and falsehood,
remember that ye must die. And therefore I beseech you in the fear of God, to
study to make the cause of your clients sure, as that ye do not in the mean
time forget S. 2. Pet. 1.10
Peter's counsel, to make your own election sure.

I urge this the rather, because ( -- absit reverentia vero) I will speak the
truth in despite of all scoffs, and I hope such as are ingenuous will bear
with my plainenes, if as Plut. Apot.
Philip said of the Macedonians, I call a boat a boat, and a spade a spade;
because it seems to be much neglected by many of your profession, who with
Martha trouble themselves about many businesses, but vnum necessarium, to meet
Christ, and talk with him, they scarce remember it. I remember the saying of
Demades touching the Athenians, when they refused to make Alexander one of
their Gods, and Cassander (who was his successor) threatened that unless they
would do it, he would presently overthrowe their city: the Athenians (said
Demades) have reason to look to themselves, least, while they are too curious
about heaven, they loose the earth. But these men have need to look to
themselves, least while they trouble themselves too much about the earth they
loose heaven: by whose means especially it is effected, that our courts, do
too much resemble the Lions den, which howsoever other beasts in simplicity
went flocking on heaps unto, yet the fox, that found by experience how others
sped, durst not come near it.

-- Quia me vestigia te^r^^t (said she)
Omnia te adversum spectantia nulla retrorsum.
All comes to them, little from them: they have as attractiue a force so^
silver, as the loadstone has for iron. Hom. Iliad lib. 6.
Glaucus made no good market with Diomedes, when he changed his golden armor,
for armor of brass: but many clients complain that they meet with worser
merchants, who for a purse full of angels give the^ nothing but a black box
full of papers. Procrastinations, and unnecessary delays, for filling of the
lawyers coffers, and pilling of the poor clients, is a fault which I have
glanced at heretofore, and might a thousand times hereafter yer ever it be
reformed. For never was it more spoken against then now, and never was it so
much practiced as now. Well fare the old Athenian laws, which (as Anacharsis
once said) were like unto spider-webs, that catched the little flies, and let
the waspe, ^^d the Be, and the Beetle burst through them* in respect of them
that hold w^^p, and B^^, and Beetle and al, and scarce any ca^ ^urst through
them. But what do I now? Condemn I the law? I do wrong. Is the law sin?
says Rom 7.6 7.12 14.
Paul (he speaks of the moral law.) Nay the law is holy, and just, and good,
but I am carnal, sold under sin. So say I, is our law sin? Nay our law is
just, and good. Here is the breaknecke of all: too many of our solliciters,
atturnies, and learned scribes, are merely carnal and sold under sin, using it
not to that end for which it is ordained, the glory of God, and the peace of
the commonwealth, but as the fowler does his not, for catching of plovers to
enrich themselves withal: making that which should be for the common good, a
monopoly for themselves, a profession of mockery, and a mere shop of most
horrible, and detestable covetousnes.

But it is the worst thriving in the world to rise with an other man's fall. It
was a short, but a sharp quip, which a captive gave unto Pompey the great,
Nostra miseria es Magnus, It is our misery that gave thee thy surname. It is so
in this case, Nostra misera es magnus, may the clie^t say to his cou^sellor. As
the swelling of the spleen argues the consumption of other parts: so the
enriching of the lawyer, the impoverishing of the client. If the^ his cause be
good (alas) why is it never ended? If it be naught, why is it still defended?
If the cause be naught, the defense is worse the^ naught. Understand me
rightly: it may be a Cou^sellours hap to be a speaker in an ill cause, and yet
he not worthy any blame. The party may misinforme him in the truth of the
cause. Judgments in the like case may be different, or some other circumstance
may deceive him. But where it plainly appears to be naught indeed, by
nimblenesse of wit, and volubility of tongue, to smooth it over with colorable
probabilities, thereby (as far as thou can) to give the truth an overthrow,
this is but to guild over a rotten post, to call good evil, and evil good, to
let loose Barabbas, and destroy Jesus, to make the devil, who is a feend of
darkness, to appear in the likeness of an angel of light, and therefore worse
then naught. Better with Papinian to have thy head parted from thy shoulders,
then to be a common Advocate in such causes.

There is a kind of men in the world, who though they know before they begin
their suits, or at least before they have waded far in them, as well as they
know their own names, and the number of their fingers, that the matter which
they prosecute, by extremity of law, is manifest wrong: yet either out of a
malicious humor, to give their adversaries an overthrow, or because their
ability is such, that it will hold them out, or because others do join with
them, and make it a common quarrel, or because they love ( Salamander-like) to
be broyling in the fire of contention, can by no means be dissuaded from
their wicked enterprise. This matter so wickedly, and mischievously begun, one
counselor or other, (that loves (with the eele-catchers in the old comedy)
to be fishing in muddie waters, and desires alife to bath himself in any
poole that an Angel shall trouble) must manage. He must find some probable
title in the law for it: he must as long as the law will afford him any
kind of weft, weaue it out in length, and when it fails, he must spider-like
spinne it out of his own bowels. He must prolong judgment, and defer the
matter from one day to an other, from one term to an other, from one year to
an other, from one court to an other; till at length he who has both God, and
the law, and a good conscience on his side, for very weariness, be enforced to
give it over, or be brought to extreme beggary, that he can follow his suit
no longer, or till Atropos have cut in sunder the thread of his days, and so
made an and of the quarrel. Well were it for the commonwealth if such
seditious quarrellers, and make-bates were by some severe punishment, taught
not to delude justice, and oppress the truth: that others by their example
might be terrified from such wicked attempts, and that honest and godly men
might live in more peace, and t a^quillity. If my words do sound harshly in the
ears of some of my hearers, I must say of them as Hierom^*
Hierom says of some in his epistle to Rusticus: dum mihi irascu^tur, suam
indicant conscientiam, multoque peius de se, quam de me iudicant. If they be
offended with me, they bewray their own guilty consciences, and have a far
worse opinion of themselves, then they have of me. I name none; I know none. I
speak in general against sin, and 1. Ioh. 3.20.
if any man's conscience condemn him, God is greater then his conscience, and
knows all things, and therefore Ioh. 5.14
let him go his way, and sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto him.
My hope is that all of you are of a better disposition. But I know ye are all
men, and therefore subject to the like passions, and infirmities that others
are. Let me therefore once again (to return to that from which I have a
little digressed) beseech you in all your pleadings, and legal proceedings to
remember that account, that ye must make unto God, when ye shall be called
hence. Remember that there is a woe denounced against them Is. 5.20.
that call good evil, and evil good. Remember the end of your profession; it
is not to sow dissension, to fill your own coffers, to make a mart to utter
your own wares, to show your ready wits, and voluble tongues in speaking
probably of every subject good or bad: but to help every man to his right, to
cut away strife and contention, and to restore peace and unity in the
commonwealth, that all the members of the body politic may be of one heart,
and one soul. Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
Even as there is one hope of our vocation, one Lord, one faith one baptism,
one God, and father of all, which is above all and through all, and in us all.
Remember that our God is called the 2. Cor 13 11.
God of peace, his Gospel, the Ephesians 6.15
Gospel of peace, his ministers the Is. 52 7.
Ambassadors of peace; his natural son, the Coloss. 1.
author of peace, his adopted sons, the children of peace: if then ye will
be the sons of the most highest, your endeavor must be this, Ephesians. 4.3.
to preserve the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. 2. Tim. 2.7
Consider what I say, and the Lord give you wisdom, and understanding in all
things.

Finally to speak unto all (and so to make an end of all) seeing that we are
all tenants at will, 3. To all.
and must be thrust out of the doors, of these earthly tabernacles, whenever
it shall please our great landlord to call us hence: let us have our loins
girt, and our lamps continually burning, that whenever the Lord shall call
us hence, in the evening, or in the morning, at noonday, or at midnight, he
may find us ready. Happy is that man whom his master when he comes, shall find
watching. Let us every day sum up our accounts with God. Hierom.
Ita aedificemus quasi semper victuri, ita vivamus quasi cras morituri: let us
build as if we would ever live, but let us live, as if we were ever ready to
die. Then may every one of us in the integrity of heart, and synceritie of
conscience, when the time of his departing is at hand say with the blessed
Apostle, I have fought a good fight, and have finished my course. 2 Timothy 4 7.8.
I have kept the faith; From hence forth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which God, the righteous Judge shall give me at that day. Unto
this God, one eternal, omnipotent, and unchangeable Jehovah in essence, three
persons in manner of subsistence, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, be
ascribed all honor, and glory, power, might, and majesty, both now and
forevermore. Amen.

FINIS.
The Principal points handled in the first Sermon.
The wicked abstain from sin when a fit opportunity is wanting. Sect. 1. 2.
3. 4. The danger of covetousness. Sect. 5. 6. 7. 8. Hypocrites are always
mingled with godly professors. Sect. 11. 12. Four Iudasses in these times.
Sect. 14. The first the simonical Patron. Sect. 15. 16. 17. The second the
oppressor. Sect. 18. 19. The third the briber. Sect. 20. The fourth the
deceitful lawyer. Sect. 21. The Magistrates duty. Sect. 22.
The principal points handled in the second Sermon.
Magistrates have their authority from God. Sect. 4. Which makes against the
Anabaptists Sect. 5. The Popes usurped power over secular Princes. Sect. 6. 7.
Magistrates be Gods deputies. Sect. 8. Therefore subjects must honor them
whether they be good or bad. Sect. 9. 10. 11. Magistrates do often abuse their
authority. Sect. 12. How careful they should be of discharging their duties.
Especially in maintaining true religion. Sect. 14. 15. 16. 17. Papists are not
to be suffered, both because of their differences from us in matters of
religion. Sect. 18. 19. And because there is no probability that they will be
true subjects. Sect. 20. 21. 22. Judges must remember that they must die and
then be judged. Sect. 23. The great abuse of the laws. Sect. 26.

