GODS MERCIES AND IERVSALEMS MISERIES.

A Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross, the 25. of June. 1609.

By Lancelot Dawes, Master of Arts and Fellow of Queens College in Oxford.

Matthew. 23.37.38. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would, etc.

Printed for Cle. Knight. 1609.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, Henry Lord Bishop of Carlisle.
Right Reverend,
THIS Sermon was made for the Cross, not intended for the Press. I was by
authority commanded the former, and by importunity of many have at length
consented to the latter. It may perchance hereafter complain with the
Satyrist. Har. lib. 2. Epist. 1.


Deferat in vitem vendentem thus, at odores,
Et piper, et quicquid chartis amicitur ineptis.
But that is no great disgrace in these days, it shall have Store of company,
perhaps some to whom it may deservedly give the wall. As for fault finding
carpers, I little account of their censure, it is well known whose livery they
wear, it were a strange piece of work that should have their approbation.
Some have charged nature af a gross oversight for placing the ox his horns
upon his head, and not upon his shoulders which are the stronger, an ingenuous
reader will wink at a fault, and approve that which is good. But let these
pass, my humble desire is, that this mite which I have cast into the treasury
(for my riches extend not to a talent) may find acceptance with your good
Lordship, who may justly claim the same interest in me which Paul did in
Philemon. Verse. 19. Seneca. lib. 1. de benefic. Cap. 8.
Thou owe unto me even thine own self. I willingly acknowledge it: and say
as Aeschines in Seneca said to Socrates: Seeing I have nothing to offer worthy
so reverend a Person. (for to dedicate a Sermon to your Lordshippe is but with
Chaerilus to present a few harsh verses to Alexander) I offer my self;
promising still to continue.

London the 27. of June. Your Lordships in all humble duty and Service.
Lancelot Dawes.

GODS MERCIES AND IERVSALEMS MISERIES.
JEREMY 5.1. Run two and fro by the streets of Jerusalem, and behold now,
and know and inquire in the open places thereof: if ye can find a man, or if
there be any that executes Judgment and seeks the truth and J will spare
it.


MAny means did the Lord use to reclaim JERUSALEM from her rebellion against
him, by sundry commemorations of his benefits he wooed her by the sweet
promises of the Gospel, he incited her by the captivity of her sister Samaria,
he forwarned her, but yet she continued like her forefathers, Psalm: 78.
a faithles and stubborn generation, a generation that set not her heart
aright, she runs still on a wrong Bias, in stead of being a faithful
Spouse, she becomes a filthy harlot, and Iere. 3.6.
plays the Whore upon every hie mountain, and under every green tree, her
Isa. 1.22.
wine is mixed with water, her silver is become dross, her Princes rebels and
companions of thieves, and as she grows in years, so she increases in all
impieties, she which at the first did only pull little sins with the small
Jsa. 5.18.
cords of vanity, does now draw greater transgressions with the huge
cart-ropes of iniquity, so that now Isa. 1.6.
from the sole of her foot to the crown of her head, there is nothing found in
her but wounds and swellings, and sores full of corruption. In this case God
Psalm. 5.4.
which cannot abide wickedness, neither can any evil dwell with him, (as the
Psalmist speaks) begins to loath her, and to give her up into the hands of
her most savage and cruel enemies, (the Chaldeans) who shall Psalm. 79.1.
defile the holy Temple, and make Jerusalem a heap of stones. Oh, but shall
the husband be so unkind to his Spouse Ier. 2.2
whom he has married unto himself? shall a Father be so severe to his
child? shall the God of mercy be so unmerciful unto his chosen? Genesis 18.25
Shall not the judge of the world do right? far be it from God, that he
should slay the righteous with the wicked. God answers, that there is no
reason, why she should repine against him, or accuse him of cruelty: her
Apostasy is so general, her disease (like a Gangraena) is spread through
every member of the body, her malice is so incurable, that he cannot without
impeachment of his justice, spare her any longer. Run to and fro by the
streets of Jerusalem, etc. v. 8. O ye men of Judah and inhabitants of
Jerusalem, do not say that your teeth are set on edge, because Ezech. 18
your fathers have eaten sour grapes, do not object, that my ways are not
equal, it is your ways that are unequal: it is your sins that bringes this
heavy doom upon your heads: whether this be so or not, you your selves be
Judges: for I beseech you seek up and down, not in the Country towns
only, and villages of Judah, but in the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, in
the Math. 4. Isa. 52.1.
holy City, run through every corner of it, search and enquire in the
houses and allies and backe-lanes, and high streets thereof, mark their
conditions, observe their practices, consider their behavior, take a full view
of their whole carriage, if after such inquiry, there be found but one man
amongst the whole multitude that fears me, or makes any conscience of his
ways, and I will spare the whole City for that one man's sake: but if after you
have sought man by man, there be not one godly man found amongst them all,
think it not cruelty, if now at length I inflict (in justice) my judgments
upon her: the sum is contained in this short proposition: I will spare
Jerusalem, if there can one righteous man be found in her.

Wherein we may observe these two principal points: Gods mercy, in that he
would have spared Jerusalem for one man's sake; Ierusalems misery, in that not
one righteous man can be found in her; the former I deliver in this
proposition; Gods mercy in sparing does exceed his justice in punishing, and
with this we will begin.

Tull de. natu. deorum.
if the Heathen Simonides after three days study how to describe God, was
further from any resolution in the latter end, then when he first began:
nay, if Exodus 33.
Moses (a man more familiar with God then any that ever lived upon the face of
the earth) when he was put in a clift of a rock, and covered with Gods hands,
could not behold the glory of his face; then may it not seem strange, if the
tongues of men and Angels fail in describing the very back parts of this one
attribute, being more proper and essential unto God then any whatsoever.
Justin lib. 18.
That Tyrian proved the wisest in the end, who having concluded in the Evening
with his fellows, that he which could first in the next morning behold the
Sun (which they worshipped as a God) should be King; looked not toward the
East where he rises, but toward the western mountains where his rays did
first appear. We will follow his Example and seeing we cannot seek into the
fountain at which the Cherubs did cover their faces: let us behold it in the
mountains, that is, the Prophets and Apostles, Hierom. lib. 110. Comme^t in
Ezech.
as Jerome expounds the word, or the mountains, that is the creatures and
works of God, in all which it does most clearly shine: there is no work of
God in all which there does not appear such manifest Characters of his mercy,
that he which runs may read them. Those benefits in tended toward his
children, as namely Election before all time, creation in the beginning of
time, Vocation, Redemption, Justification in the fulness of time, Glorification
after all time, etc. To prove them to be so many rivers of the bottomless Ocean
of Gods never dying mercy; it were but to busy my self about a principle,
which I hope none of you will call into question: Gods almighty power is
manifested unto us, in that he has created the world of nothing, Psalm. 33.6.
and made all the host of heaven by the breath of his mouth, and it is a
property in describing of which Gods Secretaries do strive to be eloquent, Job
to show it says that Job. 9.
he spreads out the heavens like a Canopie, and walks upon the the height
of the Sea, that he makes the stars Arcturus and Orion, and Pleiades, and
the climates of the South. Elihu sets it forth under Benoth, whose tail is
like a Cedar, Job. 40.
and his bones like staves of brass, yet the Lord leads him whither soever
he will; and under Leuiathan, which makes the depth to boil like a pot, and
the sea like a pot of ointment, and yet the Lord can put a hook in his nose,
and pearce his jaws with an Angle. David to show it, says that he makes the
mountains to skippe like Rams, and the little hills like young sheep: Psalm.
114.
I say, to express it says, that Isa. 40.
all nations before him are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the
dust of the balance, that he takes away the Isles as a little dust, that he
has measured the waters in his fist, and counted heaven with a span, and
comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in
a weight, and the hills in a balance, and yet his mercy goes beyond his
power, in that his omnipotency has made nothing but what his mercy moved him
to create, and it comes after too, in preserving, and guiding, and protecting,
by his heavenly providence (a branch of his mercy) whatsoever his powerful
hand has made, if he should but once stop the influence of his mercy, all the works of his hands should presently be annihilated. Psalm. 33.5.
The earth is full of the mercies of the Lord (says the Psalmist) he says
not the heavens says Austen, Quia non indigent misericordia vbi est nulla
miseria: they needed no mercy where there is no misery; Augustine in illum
locum.
and yet in another place he adds the heavens to thy truth (an other of his
attributes) goes unto the clouds, there it stays, but thy mercy goes
further: Psalm. 14.5.9
it reaches unto the heavens, in fewer words: It is over all his works.

But my text leads me to entreat of his mercy, as it has reference unto his
justice; where you shall find that of two infinites one does infinitely
surpass an other, to be called a merciful God, and the father of mercy is a
title wherein God especially delights, but he is almost never called the God
of judgment: hear how he proclaims himself: The Lord, the Lord strong,
there is one Epithet of his power; merciful, gracious, slow to anger,
abundant in goodness, and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity and transgression and sin: there are six of his mercy. Then comes
his justice in punishing of offenses: not making the wicked innocent, visiting
the iniquity of the Fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation: there he confines his justice, he says unto us as he does unto
the seas in Job: Job. 38.11.
Hither shall thou go, and thou shall go no further, here shall thou stay thy
raging waves, it shall not pass the fourth generation, and that is more then
Ordinary, if it come so far, it is but at a high spring, Exo. 20.5.6.
upon such as hate him: but his mercy follows like a boundless Ocean, upon
thousands of those that love him. Nay the Prophet tells us that to punish, is
with God a rare and extraordinary work. Esa. 28.21.
The Lord (says he) shall stand as in as in mount Perazim, he shall be angry
as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work, and
bring to pass his act, his strange act. This is an act of judgment, where you
see that to punish, with him is an uncouth and strange work, an act indeed,
unto which without compulsion of justice, he could not be drawn; he is more
loath to put out his hand for to inflict a judgment, then ever was Octauius to
subscribe his name to the execution of any public offender, whose usual
speech was this, Sueton.
Vtinam nescirem literas, I would to God I could not write. How often does
miserable man offend against his maker? surely if the just man fall seven
times, then the wicked falls seventy times seven times, and yet he makes
his Sun to shine upon them both, he makes his rain to fall upon them both,
still almost he contains the sword of his justice within the sheath of his
mercy: if in case he be enforced to draw it, he is as it were touched with a
feeling of that which the wicked suffer; hear himself speak, Therefore thus
says the Lord of hoastes, Isa. 1.24.
the holy one of Israel, ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me
of mine enemies: it is a kind of ease to be avenged of thine enemy, and
therefore God when the Jews continue still to provoke him to his face, will
ease himself by inflicting his judgments upon them, I will ease me of mine
enemies, but it comes with an (ah) or (alas) it is pain and grief to him, he
is wounded to the very heart, his bowels are rolled and turned within him; a
few tears might have made him sheath his sword, and defer his punishments;
the history of Ahab will prove as much, who was one that had sold himself to
work wickedness, that provoked the Lord God more then all the Kings of Israel
that were before him, 1. King. 16 30.
then Baasha, then Omri, then Jeroboam the son of Nebat that made Israel to
sin, therefore the Lord sends unto him the Prophet Eliah telling him, that in
the field where the dogs licked up the blood of Naboth, 1. King. 21.19.21.
they should lick his blood also, and that he would wipe away his posterity as
one wipeth a dish, when it is wiped and turned vpside-downe. Ahab has no
sooner rented his clothes at the Prophets words, then God repents him of what
he had threatened: See thou how Ahab is humbled before me? verse. 29.
a simple humiliation God wot, only in outward show, and yet it shall suffice
to revoke part of Gods judgments against him, because he submits himself
before me, I will not bring that evil in his days upon his house. Niniuie had
multiplied her transgressions as the sand upon the sea shore; she had by her
sins blown up the coals of Gods anger against her; but yet he will not come
upon her as a thief in the night to destroy her, she shall have forty days
warning, and if in the mean time she will turn her plaiing into praying, and
her feasting into fasting, and by covering her self with sackcloath, hide from
his eyes her broad sails of pride, he will make it known unto her, that he
was not so ready before, to lend a left ear of justice to her crying sins,
as he is now to afford a right ear of mercy to the cry of her sinners: Jonah.
3.10.
he will repent of the evil that he had denounced against her, and will not
do it. The old world had so defiled the earth with her cruelties, and the
smoke of her sins did so fume up to heaven into the nostrils of God, Genesis
6.6.
that he was sorry in his heart that ever he had made man: yet he will not
presently destroy this wicked generation, there shall be an hundredth and
twenty years for repentance, Verse. 3
before he will purge this Augaeum stabulum, with a deluge of waters.

Nay, such is the never drying stream of his mercies, Ruffin hist. Eccles.
lib. 2. Cap. 18.
that for the righteous sake, the wicked though they do not repent, shall fare
the better. God is not like to the Emperor Theodosius, who for the offense of
a few, put all the Thessalonians to the sword: but rather (if without offense
the Potter may be compared to the clay) like to that Persian General, Herod.
lib. Plut. in Caesare.
who spared Delos because that Apollo was borne there; or Caesar who made the
Cindians free men for Theopompus his sake: it was an opinion of the Heathen,
that for one evil man's sake, many good men were put to the worse, -- Pallas
exurere gentem
Virgil. 1. lib AEn.
Argiuum atque ipsos voluit submergere ponto:
Pallas overthrew the whole navy of the Argiues.

Vnius ob noxam and furias Aiacis Oilei, for the sin of one man by name, Ajax
the son of Oileus, Hesiod. op. and dies.
and Polla^^ ka xumpas pli kako ndr paure, God punishes a whole City for one
man's sin, and sends upon it Dimn mo ka limon, famine and plague, for the
sin of some particular, it is not so: God never punishes one man for
another offenses: if thou object unto me, that the Israelites were plagued for
David's trespass, I answer, David's sin did occasion that punishment which
the Israelites did justly deserve for their own iniquities: for howsoever
David in respect of himself (who deserved more) called them sheep, yet indeed
they were Wolves in sheep skins: and verily in this particular, we have an
evident demonstration of his mercies: for first, of three several punishments,
he gives him leave to choose which of them he would: When David had chosen the
Pestilence for three days, indeed he sent his destroying Angel; but before
his sword was half drawn, he puts it up again, and repents him of the
evil, and abridgeth the time: Now we know that every substraction from his
judgments is a multiplication of his mercies, and how far he is from
punishing the righteous with the wicked, let Sodom witness, a sink of the
filthiest sins, a cage of the vncleanest birds, a den of the wickedest
thieves that ever the earth bredde: yet he will not rashly come upon her, but
first he will go down and see* Genesis 18.21.
whether they have done altogether according unto that cry which was come unto
him, and if there can but fifty righteous men be found in five Cities, which
was but for every City ten, nay, if but forty, nay, if but thirty, nay, if but
twenty, nay, if but ten can be found amongst them all, which was but for
every City two, he will not destroy the City for those men's sake: when none can
be found save just Lot, he will not subvert Sodom before he be brought out
of the City, nay, he will spare the whole City of Zoar for Lots sake: if good
Paul be in the ship, all that are with him, Act. 27.
even the barbarous Soldiers shall for his sake come safe to land. But of all
others (that I may end this point where I began it) Jerusalem in my Text is
most famous: whom the Lord does so tenderly compassionate, that if within her
spacious walls, amongst so many millions of souls, one righteous man could
have been found, either amongst the Nobles or Magistrates, or Priests, or
People, he would have spared Jerusalem for that man's sake.

And is this true? be not then the brinke of hell: is there such a
thunder-threatning cloud of Gods justice set before thine eyes, that thou
think it impossible that the Sun of his favor should pearce through it
into thine heart? deceive not thy self, where sin abounds, Romans 5.20.
there grace superaboundeth; thou art a fit Subject for God to work upon:
where should the Physician show his skill, but where the greatest maladies do
reign: and where can God better show his mercy, then where is the greatest
abundance of man's misery? the desperatest diseases that can befall the soul
of man, dead Apoplexies, unclean leprosies, dangerous Lethargies, remediless
Consumptions, whatsoever they be, God can as easily cure them, as the smallest
infection: and as he is able, so is he most willing to do it, because his
mercy (as I have already proved) is his chiefest attribute, and every attribute
of God, is the Essence of God, so that he can no more cease from his works of
mercy, then the eye being well disposed from seeing, or the fire from heating,
or the heaven from moving, or the Sun from shining: he that denies this is
a Traitor to the king of Heaven, because he gaine-sayeth that still wherein God
especially delights. There is no sin of it self so heinous, but God can
wipe it away: he will forgive wicked Manasses as well as righteous Abraham 10000
talents as one penny.

Suppose that all the sins that ever were committed, from the murder of
Caine to the treason of Judas, laid upon thy shoulders, there is no more
proportion between them and Gods mercy then between Stillam muriae and mare
Aegaeum betwixt a drop of brine and the Acgean, Cicero de sinibus.
nay the great Ocean, the snuff of the Candle and the light of the day, or a
mote in the Sun, and the Globe of the high heaven. Fly unto the throne of
grace, and though thy sins were bloody like Scarlet, he will make them as
Wool; and though thou be as Purple which is twice dyed, to wit in the Wool
and in the Cloth: Though thou be dyed in the Wool (the first lineaments of
nature) with original deprauation, and in the Cloth (after thy natural
perfection) with actual transgression, yet he will make thee as white as the
snow in Salmon: Isa. 1.
he will bind all thy sins in a bundell, and cast them into the bottom of
the Sea, he will nail them unto his Sons Cross, he will remove them as far
from thee as the East is from the West, or the North distant from the South. No
man ever begged an alms at Gods hand in faith, and returned empty. Heaven
gates are never shut when penitent sinners knock, there is a Master of
requests in that Court, which is more ready to prefer thy petition unto God,
then thou can be to request his help, and will he which for ten men's sake
would have spared Sodom, and for one man's sake have passed by the crimson
sins of Jerusalem, who was moved with compassion at the hypocritical
repentance of wicked Ahab, and revoked his sentence at the counterfeit
humiliation of proud Nineveh, stop his ears at the petition of any penitent
sinner? doubt not but he will hear thy petition and give his royal assent to
that thou desire, though thou can but with David roar and not speak, or
with the poor Publican utter a short and abrupt speech O Lord be merciful
unto me a sinner, etc. or with Hezekiah Chatter like a Crane, Isa. 38.14.
and mourn like a Dove. Oh then flee unto him as a Dove unto the windows,
Cant. 2.
hide thy self in the holes of the true rock, put thy finger in Christ's side
there thou shall find both Oil to soften and Wine to cure thy festered soul,
cry mightily to God with Niniuch, say with David, 2. Sam. 12.13.
I have sinned, morn with Hezekiah, weep bitterly with Peter, Matt. 26.
fall down at Jesus his feet with Mary Magdalen, John. 11.
say with blind Bartelmaeus in the Gospel, O son of David have mercy upon
me. Matthew. 9.27.
And doubt not but God will be merciful unto thy sins, and make his
favorable countenance shine upon thee.

Again is Gods mercy such that he will spare the wicked for the Beliall, may
learn this lesson to spare the righteous for the wickeds sake. I mean to
cherish and to make much of all those that fear the Lord, if for no other
reason yet even for this, because such men are often times a means to keep
away Gods judgments from the evil doers, the chafe shall not be burned as
long as it is mingled with the wheat. Plutarch says that in the sacking of
Cities such houses as were erected near unto a Temple, of any of the heathen
Gods, were untouched, when the rest were overthrown by the enemy: as long as a
sinner stands near unto a Temple of the living God, he needs not fear an
overthrow. God could do no hurt unto the Sodomites as long as just Lot was in
their company, Genesis 19.
as he blessed the house of Obed Edom, 2. Sam. 6.12.
and all that he had because of the Arc that was with him, so the blessings
that fall upon the wicked man's head, are because of the godly with whom he
dwells; it was the encouragement that Caesar gave unto the Boateman, Phil in
Caesare.
when his Boat was almost over whelmed by the violence of the waves, in the
River Anius, that he should not fear because Caesar was in his company. And
the best encouragement that can be given to the wicked, in the time of danger,
is that some good man is in their company, then they may say as Michah said
when he had hired a Leuite to be his Priest, now I know that the Lord will be
good unto me seeing a Leuite (a man that fears the Lord) is with me, Iud.
17.13.
and therefore at the least in this one point, let them resemble the just man,
which makes much of them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. because they are as it
were Bucklers to keep away the force of the blow, Psa. 106.23.
and with faithful Moses they stand in the gappe to turn away his wrathful
indignation, least it should destroy them. But if they seek (as the custom of
so many is) by all means possible to destroy them, to trample them in the dust
and (as much as in them lies) to root them out of the land of the living,
that they may have none to control them for their unlawful deeds then they do
their best to cut a sunder the thread that keeps up the sword of vengeance,
or Sampson like to pull down the pillars upon which their house stands and
so to bring all down upon their heads.

Again is God so slow to anger, Adam, thou gettest nothing there but shame,
unless thou can step a foot higher (as Luke does in the Genealogy of
Joseph) and say that Adam was the Son of God, Luke 3.38.
if thou would be counted the Son of God, tread in his steps, walk as
thou have him for an example. Be thou merciful, as thy Father which is in
Heaven is merciful. For so doing thou show thy self to be a sparkle
derived from that infinite flame, a drop taken from that bottomless Ocean,
it is remarkable (which one observes) that God has given unto Beasts both
weapons of defense and offense, the Lion has his Paws, the Ox Horns, the
Boar Tuskes, the Serpent his Sting, the Birds Claws, the Fishes Skales, the
very Hedg-hog is not without his Pricks: But man the excellency of his
dignity, and the excellency of his Power (as Jacob speaks of Ruben) he brings
into the world smooth and naked, Genesis 49.3.
in token that he should be like unto him, soft to anger slow to revenge.
Esau, that was borne red, Genesis 25:25.
and rough God disinherited as a Monster, and no true Child of his, but smooth
Jacob he acknowledged to be his Son. The child of wrath is no Son unto the
God of mercy. How often do thou sin against thy God? By thy blasphemous
oaths thou tearest him, by thy hypocritical holiness thou mockest him by thy
uncleanness thou polutest him, by thy arrogant pride thou disdainest him, and
spittest in his face. The least trespass that thou committest against him, is
no less then treason against his royal person, and does God for every offense
vn-sheath his sword against thee? Si quoties peccant homines sua fulmina mittat
Jupiter, etc. If God should in judgment punish every sin upon the offender,
where should wretchedman be? now when God writes thy sins in dust, will thou
write thy Brothers in Marble? When he forgiueth thee ten thousand tallents,
wilt not thou forgive thy Brother an hundredth pence? If thou will be indeed
his Son, be like unto him, be pitiful, tender-harted full of mercy and
compassion, if thou be angry beware that thou sin not, Ephesians. 4.26.
by speedy revenge, if thy wrath be conceived in the morning, and perchance
increase his heat with the Sun till midday, yet let it settle with the
Sun at afternoon, and set with it at night, 1. Kings. 3.
Let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath, if its conception be in the
night, use it as the harlot used her child, smother it in thy bed and make it
like the untimely fruit of a woman which perishes before it see the Sun, Psalm.
to this purpose remember that the Citizens of this Jerusalem are at unity
amongst themselus, the stones of this temple are fast coupled and linked
together, the members of this Body as they are united in one head with the
nerves of a justifying faith: So are they knit in one heart with the Arteries
of love: The branches of this Vine as they are united with the boale (from
whence they receive nutriment) so have they certain tendrels whereby they are
fastened, and linked one to another. Now if without compassion thou seek thy
brothers hurt, thou do as it were divide Christ, thou pullest a stone out of
this Temple, thou breakest a branch from this Vine, AEneid. 3.
nay (more then so) thou cuttest the Vine it self. Virgill tells us that when
Aeneas was pulling a bough from a myrtle tree to shadow his sacrifice, their
issued drops of blood from the boale trickling down unto the ground: at length
he heard a voice crying unto him thus Quid miserum AEnea laceras iam parce
sepulto parce pias scelerare manus, the Poet tells us that it was the blood of
Polydorus Priamus his son which cried for vengeance against Polymnestor the
Thracian King which had slain him, in like manner whensoever thou seek the
overthrow of thy Christian Brother, and have a desire to revenge thy self of
him (as he had to pull a bough from the Tree) think that it is not the
branches but the Vine thou seek to cut down. Think that Christ will
count this indignity done to his members as it were done to himself. Think
that thou hear him cry unto thee after this manner, iam parce sepulto parce
tuas scelerare manus, imbrue not thy hands in my blood, haud cruor hic de
stipite manat, it is not the branches thou fightest against, Jude. 9.5.
Nam Polydorus ego, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. Titus. 9.5.
I am now come near to a point, which I have pressed heretofore in the other
public place of this city, At the Spittle.
therefore I proceed no further, but turn aside to my second general point
observed in this verse, which was Ierusalems misery.

The Tree is very fruitful, and I am but a passenger, and therefore must be
contented to pull two or three clusters which I conceived to be the ripest, and
the readiest to part with the boughs, which when I have commended to your
several castes, I will commit you to God.

First the Paucity of true professors (if ye can find a man, or if there be
any.) Secondly, the place where. (In Jerusalem.) Thirdly, that God will bring
his judgments upon her because of her wickedness; not expressed but
necessarily understood.

From these three I collect three propositions; from the first, Gods flock
militant may consist of a small number: from the second, There is no particular
place so privileged, but that it may revolt and fall from God: from the third,
No place is so strong, nor City so fenced, but the sins of the people will
bring it to ruin. Of these three in order, Gods holy spirit directing me, and
first of the first.

God made all the world, Proposition.
and therefore it is great reason, that he should have it all to himself: yea,
and he challenges it as his own right: Hag. 2.8.
The Gold is his, and the silver is his, and all the beasts of the field are
his, and so are the cattle upon a thousand hills: and the heavens are his, for
they are his Throne, and the earth is his, for it is his footestoole, and the
reprobate are his, Psalm. Act. 749 Ierem. 25
for Nebuchadnezzer is his servant, and as Judah is his so is Moab likewise: but
in an other kind of service, in a word, The earth is the Lords and all that
therein is, Psalm. 24.
the compass of the world, and all that dwell therein, but not in that
property, which is now meant for that belongs only unto men, and yet not unto
all, but to a few, which are appointed to be h^yres of salvation. Heb. 1.14.


God made all men, so that they are all his sons by creation, but he
ordained not all to life, so that there is but a remnant which are his sons
by adoption: our first Father did eat such a sour grape as did set all his
childrens teeth on edge: by transgressing Gods commandment he lost his
birthright, and was shut out of Paradise, by committing treason against his
Lord and King, Genesis 3.
his blood was stained, and all his children were made incapable of their
fathers inheritance, but God (who is rightly termed the Father of all mercy,
2. Cor. 1.3.
and God of all consolation) as he purposed to show his justice in punishing
the greater part of such, as so grievously incurred his displeasure: so on the
contrary side, it was his good pleasure to show his mercy, in saving of some,
though they deserved as great a degree of punishment as the other, and
therefore it is a Parliament holden before all times, it was enacted, that the
natural son of God, the second person in the Trinity, should in the fulness
of time take upon him man's flesh, and suffer for our transgressions, and gather
a certain number out of that Mass of corruption, Austin.
wherein all mankind lay: these be they which shall follow the Lamb
whethersoeuer he goes; these be his people and the sheep of his pasture,
these be they which have this prerogative to be called the sons of God, Psalm.
100. Gal. 4.1. Romans 8.17.
and the heirs of God annexed with Christ: and these are they which I affirm
to be often contained in a very narrow room in respect of the wicked.

There is much chafe and little wheat, it is the wheat that God keeps for
his garner: there are many stones, but few pearls: it is the Pearl which
Christ has bought with his blood. 2. Cor. 4.
Many fowls but only the Eagles be good birds. Satan has a kingdom, and
Christ but a little flock, it is like to Bethleem in the land of Judah, Luke
12.32. Mich. 5.2. Genesis 8.3.
but a little one amongst the Princes of Judah, it is like to Noah's flood,
going and returning, like the sea flowing and ebbing, or like to the Moon
filling and waining, and sometimes so Eclipsed and darkened with the earth,
that thou can not perceive, that Christ the son of righteousness does
shine upon it.

The story of Times will make this plain, innumerous were the men of the old
world, yet Gods flock was only contained in the family of Sheth, they only
were called the Sons of God, Genesis 6.2.
afterward this flock was compassed in a very narrow fold, in Noah's family,
it was enclosed in one Arc, and yet there was one Wolf amongst these few
sheep. Not lupus inter oues. Ovid metam. lib: 1.
Thus it continued in a very narrow compass till Abraham's time, and so
downward till it began to multiply in the land of Egypt, and afterward in
the promised Canaan, as yet it was still tied to one place, there was but one
pasture for Gods sheep, the rest of the world playde the harlot with other
lovers, and went a whoring after their own inventions, and in this one pasture
there were more Goats then sheep, for though the number of the children of
Israel were as the sand upon the sea shore, Romans 4.27.
yet only a remnant was to be saved. When the fullness of time was come that
God had sent his son made of a woman, this Moon did suffer such an Eclipse,
as that the quickest eye could hardly perceive her: then she began to recover
her light, for God broke down the partition wall, and rent the veil of the
Temple, and made no difference betwixt the Jew and the Gentile, Tuos Niriusque
mihi nullo discrimene agetur.

Then Gods sheep brought forth thousands and ten thousands in the streets,
then the Vine stretches forth her boughs, unto the river, and her branches
unto the lands end, then God gave unto his Son the heathen for his
inheritance, and the utmost part of the earth for his possession. Yet then and
ever since, the gleanings of Satan have bin more then the vintage of Christ.
Yet take a survey of the world, as it is at this day; divide it into three
parts with Ptolome or into four with some later writers, nay into six or
seven with our last Geographers, Maginus.
and you shall not find much above one of these seven which profess Christ.
Amongst these separate the orthodoxe from the heterodox, and you shall find
that Christ is now almost banished out of the world, so that if the son of
man should now come, Luke 18.8.
he should scarce find faith in the earth, the true profession of the Gospel,
is confined in a little corner of the Northwest, and in this corner remove the
Athiests, and Heretics, and Worldlings, and Neuters, and Hypocrites, how little
will the remainder be after so many substractions? And no marvel, for many are
caled, but few are chosen, and broad is the way that leads to destruction.
Gods sheep have a little narrow path, but the Goats have a beaten Cartway.

Bellarmine meant to make amplitude, and multitude, to be a note of the true
Church; especially when he proposes to speak of such notes, by which it may
be most easily known, and distinguished from the false religion of the Jews,
and Heretics, and Pagans, and Infidels whatsoever: and therefore such as are
both Notae debent esse propriae non co^munes lib 4. cap. 2 et postea in eodem
cap. notae variae inseparabiles auera Ecclesia
proper and inseparable, in respect of the Church; and again such as though Non
quidem efficient euidenter veru^ ipsam esse veram Dei Ecclesiam, sed tame^
efficiu^t euidenter credibile De ecclesiae lib. 4. cap. 3.
they make it not evidently true, yet they make it evidently credible, not only
probable (for Lutheranorum notae non sunt vllo modo, sufficientes, nam non
declara^t quae sit vera Ecclesia, se cu^du^ haeretic. nisi probabiliter lib
eod. cap. 2
that is the imperfection of our notes, if you will believe him) nay, amongst
those which admit of the Scriptures, and Ecclesiastical Histories and writings
of the ancient fathers, faciunt etiam euidentiam veritatis. Lord how plausible
a Doctrine would this have been unto Ahab; how would it have fitted his turn
to plead for Baal? what meanest thou Eliah thus to trouble Israel? As though
we were all Idolaters and thou only a true worshipper of God? Consider the
matter aright, and thou shall find what a weak ground thou stand upon,
those are the true worshippers of God, who are the most in number, now thou art
but one and the Prophets of Baal, are four hundredth and fifty, how pleasantly
would it have sounded in the ears of the Jews, when Jeremiah thus prophesied?
Behold (might they say) all the inhabitants, of Judah, and Jerusalem are
against thee, and is the spirit of God departed from us all to possess thee?
Thus Constantius disputed with Libanus Bishop of Rome, against Athanasius Hoc
orbis terrarum comprobat: quota tu pars es orbis terrarum qui solus facis cum
homine scelerato pacem orbis d^ssoluis. Theod. lib. 2. cap. 16.
The whole world is of this Opinion, and what art thou that thou should take
part with a naughty fellow, and disolue the peace of the world. If this
objection had bin urged against Luther, when he first began to bait the Popes
Bull, he might easily have answered in Athanasius his words: Athan. Epist. ad
solitarian. vitam agentes.
What Church is there now that does openly adore Christ; if it be godly it is
Subject to danger, for if there be any that fear God (as indeed there are
many every where) they have hid themselves with Elias in Dens and Caves of the
earth. But the example of the Jews will not much move our adversary quia non
est eadem ratio populi Iudeorum et populi cristianorum, Bellar. li. 3. d^^
Eccle. milit. cap. 16.
and might the Church of Christians be still known, by the multitude of
professors, so that a man not yet resolved in the truth, might be guided by
this mark to find her out, as the wise men by the Star were directed unto
Christ! Surely no, Jdem. lib. 4 cap. 5.
for scimus initio fuisse multo p^uciores Christianos, quam essent Iudaii, what
better was she in the time of those ten bloody persecutions which endured for
the space of three hundred years? when a man could no sooner make profession
of his faith but he was either killed with the sword or burnt with fire, Alij
flammis exusti, alij ferro perempti, alij flagris verberati alij cru^iati
patibulo, etc.
or drowned in the Sea, or stoned to death, or slain quick, or famished with
hunger, or thrust through with bodkins, or thrown to wild Beasts, or pulled in
pieces with Trees or wild horses, or boiled in lead, or made away with more
exquisite, and more Tragical torments. (If that be possible) then the Perilli
of our time have invented to gratify the Romish Phalleris. Come a little lower
and compare the Church not with the number of the Gentiles, (which no Papist in
the world can for shame deny to have ever exceeded the number of Christians)
but with Heretics, I mean not al sorts joined togeher (for they will
subscribe to Haeraetici sunt per totam faciem terrae, alij hic alij ibi alia
secta in Africa, alia, haresis in orient August de past. Cap. 8.
Austin the Church is every where, and Heresy every where, but the Church is
the same every where, heresy is not the same but most different) but only the
Arians, which sometimes have so ouerspread the whole Christian world, as that
if any had said, Lo here is Christ or there is Christ, thou would have
believed him. The Church was like a Sparow that sits alone upon the house
top, or like a Pelican in the Wilderness, and an Owl in the desert: they
counted themselves the only Catholics, but the true Christians they termed
Scismatikes, Augustine
calling them Ioannites, and Ambrosians, and Athanatians, and Homousians: Even
as the Papists at this day challenge the name of Catholics, to themselves, and
call us Lutherans, and Zuinglians, and Caluinists.

They did not only possess the Church of Jerusalem, and Alexandria, and
Antiochia, and Constantinople, and the rest in the Eastern Empire, but passing
thence into the North, and from thence with the Goths, and Vandals into
Germany and France, and Spain, and Italy, (yea into Afric to) had infected
all the Churches in the West. Which makes Jeremy say that the whole world
groned and marueiled, Hierom. in dialog contr. Luciferianos.
to see her self become am Arrian, an Arrian sat in Peter's chair, the head
of the Church Durand. lib. 2.
that great Melchisedecke whose Priesthood is not to be compared to any other,
their Dominus deus noster Papa. Ex trau. Ioh. 22. vt citat Iuell.
God and their Lord, the Durand. lib. 2.
Pope himself, rather then he would die in the defense of the Gospel,
subscribed to Arianisme; surely the whole Body must needs go wrong, Liberius
test. Athan. Epist. ad. Solitariam. vitam agentes idem patet. ex preambulo.
Council. Nicen.
when the head did thus miscary.

This plague endured not for some small moment (like the Macedonian Empire
which was but a Flash and gone) but for the space of three hundred years and
upward. Where was now the true Church amongst the Arrians, Bodin.
which oppugned the Doctrine of the Nicene Synod in sundry councels, and
expelled the Orthodox Bishops and enjoyed their rooms, and instead of the true
Christ worshipped an Idol of their own inventions? or rather in a few
miserable and forlorn wretches, which remained in prisons and wildernesses,
and Mountains, and dens, and Caves of the Earth, as was the case of the
Church at that time, so was it in the time of Wicliffe and Husse, for then the
Devil had for a long time bin loosed, and Antechrist was in the height of his
pride, and the light of the Gospel was taked up in the Ashes of Popery, Po
^ote esin i tn penan mn neiszontei ka tn plotn. kompzonte i plthei tnen kklesan
rixonte, ka t brochu, dipped onte pomnion. Nazianz. in oratione contra Arrianos.
in so much that that which Nazianzen spoke in the oration against the Arrians,
might fitly have bin applied against the Papists. Where be those that object
poverty unto us, and boast of their prosperous Estate, this is another mark of
the Popish Church.

Where be those that define the Church to be a multitude, and set at naught a
little Flock: and yet if multitude should bear the bell away, the Papists
should not have any such cause of triumph, as they will bear the world in hand
that they have. There are at this day four Religions in the world (if the name
of Religion may be given to them all) Iudaisme, Paganism, Mahametanisme, and
Christianisme: of all these Iudaisme is the least, but Paganism exceeds all
the rest, Mahametanisme (which is a mixture craftily composed of the other
three) both in largeness of Countries, and multitude of people, goes beyond
all Christendom: for it has not only seated it self in the whole Turkish
Empire, and the large kingdoms of the great Sophi, but spreads abroad in
many places of the vast dominions of Tartarie, Cathaia, and China almost unto
the Eastern Ocean, and what it has of later years gained in the west, we
feel partly in the miserable distress of Hungary and Transiluania, and have
just occasion of greater fear, if the Lord out of compassion to his poor
Church, shall not overthrow the plots of that proud Senacherib, 2. Kin. 19.28
and put a hook in his nose, and a bridle in his lips, and carry him back
again the same way that he came. Now for Christianisme, amongst those that
profess the name of Christ, there are not above a third part that are Papists:
for the Russians together with the Relics of the Greek Church, the Armenians
and the Christians that are under the Emperor of the Abassens, do exceed the
number of all those, which hold the Principles of the Romish Church. The
Protestants come not much behind them: for howsoever within these hundred
years, the Moon did suffer such an universal Eclipse, that a man would have
judged she had lost her light, and the Lords flock was but like a few grapes
after the Vintage is ended, here a grape and there a grape on the outmost
boughs.

Breui occupauit doctrina Lutheri, non Soli multa regna in partibus
septemtrionalibus sed etia^ vsque ad Indos excur^re aufa est. Bell. lib. 3. de
pont. To. cap. 23.
Yet since it pleased God to stir up the heart of Martin Luther to stand at
open defiance with the Italian Goliath which reviled the Israel of God: she
has every day recovered her light, the Gospel that was then hid under a
bushel, is become like to David's Sun, which comes forth as a Bridegroom
out of his chamber, and rejoices as a Giant to run his course: the
professors of the Gospel have wonderfully increased so that now their sound is
gone through the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world. Psalm. 90.4,
There is no place in the Globe of the earth, where Christ is professed, which
has not some Protestants. Italy the very Center and sink of Popery, and the
seat of the great Whore, when Iezabel has done what she can, in murdering
the Lords Prophets, will afford seven thousand men which have never bowed the
knees of their hearts unto Baal. Vid. Bell. de Paul. Romans lib 3. cap. 21.
Nostris temporibus Romana seeds magna^ Germaniae partem amisit, Suetiam
Gothiam, Noruegiam, Damam, etc.
In France we have a far greater number, in Germany the mayor part, almost
all Polonie, all Denmark, Swethen, Norway, Britain, and all the Islands in
the Northern seas, which have taken the military Oath to fight under Christ's
standard. If these be not equal to them, yet consider on either side such as
know the Principles of Christian Religion, and can give an account of their
faith, and we have a far greater number, for the common people amongst them
are stupide and blind, and do no more understand the mysteries of their
salvation then Pagans and Infidels, or those in the Acts, who being demanded
of Paul, whether they had received the holy Ghost, made answer that they never
heard whether there was an holy Ghost or no. Act. 19.2.
And little marvel for many of their Priests do no more understand their
Masses, which they mumble daily in their Churches; then Balaams Ass understood
his own voice. It is enough for them to believe as the Church belieueth,
though they know no more what that is, then did Bellarmines Collier, who being
demanded what he believed, (quoth he) that which the Church believes, being
again demanded what that was, answered, the same which I believe: Herein we
will not think much that the Papists exceed us: Bellarmine may give good
measure if he draw the dregs and all: August: in Psalm. 39.
but Austen will teach him another lesson, Noli numerare turbas hominum
incedentes latas vias, implentes crastinum circum, ciuitatis natalem clamando
celebrantes, ciuitatem ipsam male viuendo turbantes, noli illas attendere,
multi sunt, and quis numerat, sed pauci per viam angustam incedunt. Christ:
hom: 40. ad populum Antiochium.
Chrysostom will teach him that not in numeri magnitudine, sed in virtutis
probitate consistit multitudo. It was a pretty stratageme of the Roman
Captain, when his Soldiers were few in number, to make every man draw a bough
in the dry dust, that so the ^amnites (with which he was to encounter)
beholding them a far off might believe that his Army was greater then indeed
it was: we are no such dastards as to be afraid of every withered branch that
can raise up dust into the air: Liuius decad 1. lib. 9.
if the Papists purpose to match us with multitude, let them bring such as have
some skill to handle their spiritual weapons.

I end, seeing the Church is like unto the Moon, sometimes in a glorious
splendor, sometimes clouded with Schism, and sometime so darkened with the
shadow of heresy and superstition, and persecution, that the eyes of Linceus
can scarce behold her.

Seeing that the Papists at this day, cannot compare neither with the number of
Christians (taking the name generally for all such as profess the name of
Jesus) nor with the Protestant Churches, if we take an account only of such as
understand the Principles of their Religion: Hic non tenetur nota marginalis
quae nunqua^ occurrit in li. Sent. P. Lamberti.
I see no reason why Bellarmine should make multitude a Note of the true
Church; or if it were, why the Papists should challenge it themselves: and
therefore he may be well censured with a hic magister non tenetur, Viues de
causis Co:rupt: Art.
or nota quod haec nota nihil notat, it was only to make up the number of
notes, that he may number one Art, nam cum non prosunt singula, multa iuuant;
though they be of little force being severally considered, yet if they be all
jointly taken, they will prove like Plut Apoth.
Seleucus his rods, or like a threefold cord which is not easily broken.
Indeed he had need to be stronger then Hercules, that could cut off all the
heads of Hydra at one blow: but a simple warrior taking one by one may make an
end of them before he be wearied; for they are like to the tail of Sertorius
his horse, Plutar. in vita sertorij.
which a valiant Soldier taking it all together, could not pull off, but a
poor Skull pulling one hair after an other had quickly made it bare.

Noah's Arc: so in the great flood of fire, which shall be at the end of the
world, all shall be swept away with a river of brimstone, which are not of this
flock: it is a common saying, he shall never have God for his father which
has not the Church for his mother, and he shall never be a member of the
Church triumphant, which is not first of the Church Militant: first, then thou
art to enquire whether thou be of the true visible Church; and this thou shall
know, by two marks; by the true preaching of the word, by the right use of the
Sacraments, for where these two are performed according to the prescript of
Gods word, there must needs be a true church; this is somewhat, but it is not
all: for what did it avail Judas to be numbered amongst the twelve? he was in
hell before any of the rest came at heaven: all that are in the church be not
of the church: there are both good and bad fish in this net; there is wheat and
tares in this field, Sheep and Goats in this fold, thou must therefore go
further and examine, whether thou be one of that Company, which God from
eternity elected unto life, and in time effectually calls by his holy Spirit,
and makes true members of his Son Jesus Christ, which is the head of this
body, whether thou be of that flock which Christ calls his garden, Cant
his sister, his spouse, his love, his dove, his undefiled, which is the pillar
and ground of truth, 1. Tim. 3.13. the body of Christ, Ephesians. 1.23. the temple of
the Lord, Ephesians. 2.21. which the gates of hell shall never prevail against,
Matthew. 16 18. Here thou must exercise thy wits, this must be thy care to find
thy self in this little number, but how may this be known? by the cause?
that is the will and good pleasure of God, which dwells in light that none
can approach unto. This is a bottomless depth, who can sound it? Never man
looked into this Arc and lived: busy thy brains about it, and when thou have
done all thou can, thou art but like a fly about a Candle, which plays so
long with the flame, Lipsius lib. 2. de Con.
that at length she burns her wings and falls down: and good reason it should
be so: for it is enough for wretched man to be of Gods Court, Plut. in These.
and it is too much to be of his Privy Council: thou must therefore do as
Theseus did with the Labyrinth, thou must catch hold of the threeds end that
hangs without the door, and so by winding steps come at length to the first
cause. Seeing thou can not know it a Priori by the cause; thou must know it a
posteriori, by the effect, an effect of Gods immutable decree, and an undoubted
mark (to let all others pass) of Gods child his Sanctification: for as on the
one side it is certainly true, that without holiness of life, no man shall
see God: Heb. 12.14. So it is as true on the other side, that he which walks
not after the Flesh, Romans 8.1.
but after the Spirit is ingrafted into Christ and shall never be condemned. So
the^ holiness of life is the true touchstone, to try whether thou be of this
number: but here deceive not thy self, for there is a verbal holiness, and a
Pharisiacall holiness, and a Herod's holiness, and a popish holiness, and an
Anabaptistical holiness. The verbal holiness is of such as draw near unto God
with their lips, John. 29.13.
but with their hearts are far from him as the Prophet speaks: the
Pharisaicall holiness, is of those which devour widows houses under color
of long prayers; and such as will not leave a mote on the outside of their
cappe, but never care how filthy it be within. The Herod's holiness is of them
which will quench the fire on the harth, and leave it burning in the top of
the chimney, will mende their least faults, and let their worst be marring.
The Popish holiness is in observing humane traditions, and treading under foot
the law of God. The Anabaptisticall holiness is of such, as are well persuaded
of themselves (though without all reason) but can never have a charitable
opinion of any others: they are troubled with a Noli me tangere, touch me not,
Isa. 65.5.
come not near me for I am holier then thou: but I say unto thee, except thy
righteousness exceed the righteousness of all these men, Matthew. 5.20.
thou shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: it is an other kind of
holiness which thou must have, if thou will assure thy soul that thou art one
of Christ's flock: it is indeed in the tongue, but it proceeds from an other
fountain (the heart) and makes a man say with David, thy words have I hid
within my heart, Psalm. 119.
that I might not sin against thee. It makes a man have a carc to approve by
outward actions unto men, but much more to approve the cogitations of his heart
unto God: it strives not to break of some branches of sin (such as may be
best forgone) reserving the rest, but it is most severe against those sins
which are the sweetest to man, because such sins as are most pleasant unto
many, are most unpleasant in the sight of God. It will not stick charitably to
censure others: but it makes a man most sharp in censuring and containing his
own sins, it rests not contented with any one degree of perfection, but
forgets that which is behind, and endeuoreth to obtain that which is
before, Phil. 3.13.
and follows hard toward the mark for the price of the hie calling of God in
Christ Jesus.

Beloved in our best beloved Jesus Christ, do ye all desire to be fully
assured that you are of that little number, whose names are written in the
book of life: I know you desire it, for (alas) what comfort can a man have in
this life, though he should be Monarch of the whole world, and to have kings to
lay their crowns before his footstool, if he doubt what shall become of his
own soul? that of the heathen Emperor, animula vagula blandula que nunc
abibis in loca, etc. Though it be allowed by popish Divinity, Verba morientis
Traiani.
will be but a cold comfort to a Christian on his death bed: he shall never
come in heaven that is not perfect of the way before he go hence. This is the
best mark whereby you may assure your selves, that ye are already in the high
way, even your sanctification. Oh then be not (as to many are) like painted
tombs, gilded without, rotten within; tippe not your tongues with godliness,
when your souls are full of gall and bitterness. Bear not Bibles in your
hands, and Mammon in your hearts. Let the remembrance of this, that holiness
of life is the cognizance of every true member of Christ's Church, be as it were
a knife to cut a sunder the cords of vanity, wherewith Satan strives to
strangle you, or to draw you headlong into hell and destruction. Let it be as a
spur to prick you forward in the course of idleness, assuredly howsoever my
words may now pass away as a wind, and not sink into the hearts of many that
shall hear them: yet Cum votat ille dies, etc. Ovid Meta. lib. 15.
When those muddie walls are ready to fall (and fall they must for all your
daubing) there cannot a greater terror befall your consciences (to make you
fear that you are but rotten members at the best of Christ's Church) then the
remembrance of an evil life: nor on the other side can there a greater comfort
betide you, Eccl. 12.8.
when your pitchers are ready to be broken at the cesterne, then to assure your
selves by your lives past (abounding with good works which are the fruits of a
justifying faith) that you are amongst those which God has accounted to be his
children. For then you may go with greater desires unto your graves then a
weary pilgrim unto to his bed, assuring your selves that your souls shall be
transported into Abraham's bosom, there to reign with the holy Angels in
eternal happiness, for evermore.

The second proposition follows, 2. Proposition.
No particular place is so privileged, but that it may revolt and fall from
God. If ever city that was seated under the cope of heaven, had a Pattent from
the God of heaven, for her perseverance in religion, it was Jerusalem: for as
of all the countries in the world, he choose Judea, so of all the cities of
Judea, he preferred Jerusalem. Sometimes his tabernacle was placed in Silo,
but this he disliked, Josh. 18.1.
and removed unto Jerusalem, as the only place which he had picked, and
culled out of all others to set his name there; according to that of the
Prophet. He refused the Tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of
Ephraim: but he chose the tribe of Judah, even the hill of Sion, which he
loved, and there he builded his sanctuary as an high palace, like the earth
which he stablished for ever. Psalm. 78.67.68.69. Thus he made a seat for
himself, an holy place, for the tabernacle of the most highest. Here was a
Temple for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob, those that
shall but slightly peruse the graunts and privileges which God has promised
this one city, will think that it had been as impossible for her to fall
away, as for the found to be darkened in the midst of heaven. The hill of Sion
is a fair place, even the joy of the whole earth upon the Northside lies in
the city of the great king, God is well known in her palaces, as a sure
refuge. Jerusalem have I chosen out of the tribes of Israel, to put my name in
it for ever. 2. King. 21.7.

The Lord has chosen Sion to be an habitation for himself, he has longed
for her, saying, this shall be my rest for ever, Psalm. 132.14.15.
here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein. Here was the seat of
judgment, even the seat of the house of David. To whom the Lord had sworn by
his holiness, that his seed should endure for ever, Psalm. 132.5.
and his seat should be as the Sun before him: that he should stand fast for
evermore, as the Moon, and the faithful witness in heaven. Psalm. 89. When
the Israelites were yet in the wilderness, God told them by his servant Moses,
that he had appointed them a place in the land of Canaan, where they should
all meet out of their several tribes, and towns to offer their first fruits,
and to sacrifice unto the Lord: You shall seek the place which the Lord your
God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his name there, and thither you
shall come, and shall bring your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your
tithes, and the offerings of your hands, and your vows, etc. And there ye
shall offer before the Lord. Deuteronomy. 12. This was Jerusalem, for thither the
tribes came up even the tribes of the Lord, to testify unto Israel, and to
give thanks unto the name of the Lord. Psalm. 122. Moreover here was there
sunedrion their chief Council, Sigon. de rep. haeb. lib. 6. Cap. 7.
or high Commission, (consisting of the king and princes of the people, to wit,
the chief of every tribe, and of seventy Elders, Gijon de resp: haeb. lib. 6.
cap. 7.
and of the high Priest, with the Doctors of Law) in which all matters of
greater moment were concluded, and unto which (as unto the Oracles of God) in
difficult points, which could not be decided by the Judges of particular
Towns and Cities, they were to have recourse for the full determination
thereof, according to that of the Prophet: If there rise a matter too hard for
thee to judge between blood and blood, between plea and plea, between plague
and plague, in the matters of controversy within thy gates, then shall thou
arise, and go up unto the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, and thou
shall come unto the Priests of the Levites, and unto the Judge that shall be
in those days and ask, and they shall show thee the sentence of judgment and
thou shall do according to that thing which they of that place (which the Lord
has chosen) shall show thee, and thou shall observe to do according to all
that they inform thee, Deuteronomy 17. Beside this, the law was there more diligently
then in other places expounded; the Prophets did reveal Gods secrets unto the
people, and by thundering out the Canons of the law did strive to weane them
from their evil ways, and by the promises of the Gospel to woo them unto
God: the Iebusites which before time God had permitted to dwell amongst them;
that they might be thorns in their eyes, and prickles in their sides, were now
extirpated, Sigonius de rep: Haeb. li. 1.
so that they could not choke the word of God, which was sown amongst them,
and make it unfruitful. Was there ever City upon the face of the earth, which
had such a Charter as this? it was the City where God had promised to be
resident, where was the Arc of the Covenant, and the glorious Temple which
Solomon had built at Gods appointment, where the Kings of Judah had their
abode, where the Law and the Prophets were diligently read and expounded unto
the people, where all points of difficulty were handled, where was the
Priests Palace, whether the whole land had recourse out of their several
Tribes, as unto the place where men ought to worship: John. 4.
it was a heaven upon earth, and a type of that glorious City which is above:
and is Jerusalem so fallen from God, can there not one righteous man be found
within her walls? is the holy City become so wicked? is the faithful Spouse
become a Harlot? are her Princes become Rebels, her Judges Murderers, her
Gold dross, her charity oppression, her ripeness rottenness, her
almesdeedes al-misdeedes? Has the leprosy of sin so infected every part of
her body, Isai. 1.
that from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there is nothing
whole therein, but wounds and swellings, and sores full of corruption? What
need we go further for proving our conclusion, for as he speaks in Tully,
Cicero. lib. 1. de orat.
Either this is enough, or I know not what will suffice: if you would have
Topicall Arguments after such a demonstration as this: I could lead you
through many places of invention, which would manifestly confirm my
assertion. I could show you the Churches of Gallatia and Philippi, and
Corinthus, which Paul had planted, Apollo and other Disciples had watered, and
God had wonderfully increased, I could instance in Smyrna, and Pergamus and
Laodicea, etc. In which the Evangelist John had so painefully labored in
Constantinople and Ephesus, and Nice, and Chalcedon, famous for the general
Councels, in Carthage, and Hippo, and other Churches of Affricke in Antiochia,
the first Godmother of Christians, and in a word, in all the Eastern and
Affrican Churches, in which so many Worthies have flourished. What is the cause
of these particulars at this day? behold they are fallen, as though they had
not been planted, as though the seed of the word had not been sown amongst
them, Isa. 40.
as though that stock had taken no root in the earth, the Lord has blown
upon them, and they are withered, and the whirlewind has taken them away like
stubble: the abomination of desolation (let him that hears it, consider it)
sits in their holy places, which are now nothing else but as it were an
habitation for Dragons and Courts for Ostriches, Phillip. Lonicerus de rebus
Turcicis.
instead of the sacred Bible, they have entertained the blasphemous Alchoran,
their Mophti Meizin, and Antippi, and such Idolatrous Mahometains have gotten
the rooms of the ancient Fathers.

then let her that thinks she stands take heed least she fall. I mean
that strumpet which aduanceth her self above the stars of God: which says,
I am, and none else, and sings with Niobe in the port, Sum Felix, I am in a
happy estate, and there shall no harm happen unto me; which with Laodicea
thinks that she is rich and increased with goods, and needs nothing, Reave.
3.
whereas indeed, (as anon you shall hear) she is wretched and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked. Niniue had such a conceit of her self, and did so
far presume upon her strength, that she thought it had been impossible for all
the powers of the world to bring her under the hatches. And therefore the Lord
bids her look upon the state of Alexandria, a stronger City then Niniue, and
yet she was destroyed. Art thou better (says he) then No, Nahum. 3.8
which was full of people? that lay in the rivers, and had the waters round
about it; whose ditch was the sea, and her wall was from the sea Ethiopia and
Egypt were her strength, and there was no end: Put and Lubin were her helpers,
yet was she carried away, and went into captivity. The same may be said of
Rome, (suppose that none of these Cities which I have last mentioned may
paralele with her) is she better then Jerusalem: which was seated upon such
strong bulwarks, as already has been mentioned: yet she fell from God and
moved the holy one of Israel to anger against her: grant unto her all that
she can claim (and she will be sure to lack nothing for want of challenging,
Thrasilaus apud Athen. Dipnos. li. 12.
for she is not unlike to him who could not epsy a ship floating upon the
seas, but presently said it was his) and more then all the Papists in the world
can prove to be her due, yet she has no more to brag of, then had
Jerusalem; is she the mother city of all other and the Metropolis of all
Christendom? So was Jerusalem, in respect of the inhabitants of Jury. Which
at that time were the only people which God had chosen. Are al others to
appeal unto her as unto their supreme judge in matters of difficulty; so were
Jews unto the high court of Jerusalem; did Peter the prince of the Apostles,
the porter of heaven gates, remove his chair from Antiochia and placed it at
Rome? so did the Lord his tabernacle from Shiloh to Jerusalem, has Rome the
head or chief Bishop of all Christendom? Jerusalem had the like, is she the
keeper and dispenser of the Lords treasury? So was Jerusalem: does she
challenge a freedom for perseuering in the truth? Jerusalem had better grounds
to do the like: and verily, as Rome does at this day flatter her self with a
false application of universal promises, Ioh. 8.33.39 Psalm.
So did Jerusalem. Abraham is our father, we are the children of Abraham, Genesis
49.10. Ier. 7.4.
this is my rest for ever: the scepter shall not depart from Judea, nor a
lawgiuer from under his feet: the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord,
this is the temple of the Lord. All her titles that she can any way lay claim
unto, will not make her better then Jerusalem, which became such an Apostatate,
that not one godly man could be found in her. So that she cannot challenge any
privilege to her self from falling to the like wickedness, that which
happens to the one, may be fall the other, Unless she can deal with the
truth, as the old Romans handled the goddess victoria: who after they had
won the field, used to clippe her wings that she might not fly away.

But what need we stand of the possibility, when the act proves it. A
certain man, walking on his way, while he looked not so well to his feet, as
he should have done, fell into a pit: when diverse of his acquaintance came by,
and saw his mischance, they began to enquire one after another, how he fell
thither: What a question is that said he, you see that I am fallen, think
rather of some means how to help me up again. We never need make question,
whither and how Rome could revolt and fall from Christ; certain it is, she is
fallen; and well it were for her, if she could be help up. When Philip told
Nathaniel, that he had found the Messiah, of whom it was written in the Law,
and in the Prophets, and told him who it was, viz. Jesus of Nazareth: Nathaniel
wondered at it, and said; Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? John 1.47.
If any shall wonder that there should be any defect in Rome, which so many
ages has been counted the mother and nurce of true religion: I answer him as
Philip answered Nathaniel, Come and see. When thou art an eyewitness of all
her abhominatio^s, thou will subscribe to his testimony, who at his coming
away, bad her thus adieu: Roma vale vidi, satis est vidisse reuertar, cum leno
meretrice scurra cinoedus ero.

I must confess, that when first I made choice of this portion of Scripture, I
did not intend to have played upon this string with my least finger. But now
that I have met Rome in my high way, I cannot choose, but (by your patience)
speak a word unto her before we part, especially, when I consider how ready
she is to disgrace all such as will not drink of her Cyrcean cups. How she
sends her panders amongst us to get her more customers, and his pedlers to sell
her deceitful wares. How busy she is in hanging up her spider-webs to catch
our English butterflies which have neither wit to avoid them, nor strength to
break them; and what pains she takes in decking her self, and in painting
her ugly wrinkled face, that she may allure. Men destitute of understanding,
to forsake their first love, and commit folly with her. There was a time when
Rome was a glorious Church, Prou. 7.7.
Paul gives her this testimony, that Romans 1.8.
her faith was published throughout the whole world. She was (as some say) the
chief, seat for one of the four Patriarks. Praefac. in Council. Nicenum 1
seeds, Romanoe. 2 Alexandriae. and Cant 6. Antiqua Consuetudo. etc.
or rather of equal dignity with the others, Her approbation was desired in
sundry Councels, as one more incorrupt then the rest, Quia vrbis Romae paril.
estres.
by reason that she was not so shaken with Scismes and Heresies, as were the
Eastern Churches, she was an Asylum for many which were persecuted for the
testimony of Jesus Christ: this she was, and this is all that she can boast
her self off at this day. Which when she has done, she is no better the^
those degenerous spirits of Nobility and Gentry, who when they have nothing
in themselves worthy the least commendation, will dig up the old root whence
they sprang. But Si vita labat, perit omnis in illa,
Gentis honos cuius, Ovid.
laus est in origin sola.
He leans upon a rotten staff, which has nothing to speak for him save
his dead Progenitors virtues. If any man think I do her wrong, may it please
him to compare her with the state of Jerusalem in the time when Jeremy
prophesied: the sins of Jerusalem were either in doctrine and matters of
Religion, or in conversation and manner of living: for the former, it is as
much (if not more) corrupted at this day in the Romish Church, then it was then
amongst the Jews. The Prophets there Ier 5.31.
Prophesied lies: Cap. 23.24
God sent them not, and yet they ran, he spoke not unto them, and yet they
prophesied Cap. 14.14.
even a false vision, and the dreams and devises of their own hearts: whether
the Romanists do this or no: those impious assertions which they maintain
against the reformed Churches (for oppugning whereof, Vid. Lind: li. 4. Cap.
100. et petrum a Soto contra Brentium.
many holy Martyrs have with their best blood dyed the skirts of the purple
hoare) may sufficiently witness. What shall I tell you of their prayers for
the Dead, their Sacrifice of the Mass, their communicating under one kind,
their vows, their forbidding of Marriages, their Indulgences, their Purgatory,
their works of Supererogation, and a number more, by which like Act. 14.25.
the Silver Smithes of Diana, they have gotten their goods? all which make a
goodly show of holiness, to such as are blinded with the mistes of ignorance,
by reason that the candle of the word is covered under a Bushel, and locked up
in the closet of an unknown tongue, but bring Psalm. 105.
David's Lanthorn to try them and you shall find that when they are viewed in
the light, they will prove like Gloe-wormes, and Toade-stooles, more like to any
thing then that which they were taken for: or like Solimus.
the Apples of Sodom, which make a goodly show a far off, but if they be
once touched, they will presently fall into dust; or like those D. D. in his
preface upon Euclid.
Mathematical Showers, which in the twilight seem to be gold or precious
stones, yet where the light comes, prove nothing but lime and sand: then their
prayers unto Saints will prove but much babbling: their Images teachers of lies,
their forbidding of marriages, doctrines of Devils: their Purgatory fire
borrowed from the superstitious Ethnicks, to keep their Kitchins hot, their
Masses, massacres of Souls, their Holy Water, Crucifixes, Relics and Rags
of Saints, etc. beggarly rudiments, base Merchandise not worth the cheapning:
this they themselves know full well, and therefore if ye ask these Luci^ugae
scripturarum, Tertul. de resurrectione Carnis. Persius. Eckius Pighius contro.
3. de scriptura. Ludov. Canonicus quat. in orat. hab. in Council. Trid. vide
Chem. in exam. Council. Trid, et Iuellum in defen. apol. Cap. 19. et. 20. Si
quis habe^t interpretationem Romanae Eccl. deal q^o l^co scripturae etiamsi nec
sciat nec intelligat an aut quomodo eum scripturis Conueniat. habet tamen
ipsissimum dei verbum, Hosius: de expresso dei verbo.
what warrant they have from the Oracles of God, Romulidae Satyri quid dia
Poemata narrant? They will tell you they have it by tradition, or the Church
has ordained it: or it is not needful to bring Scripture for a ground of
their Positions: which it pleases some of them to call a Lesbian rule, and a
nose of wax, and a black Gospel, and inkie Divinity, and a dumb Teacher,
and a dead and killing Letter. Indeed, if they can wrest any place of
Scripture though it be contrary to the meaning of the holy Ghost, yet it must
be taken for sound Divinity, because as a great Cardinal speaks: If any man
have the interpretation of the Romish Church, of any place of Scripture,
although he know not whether it agree with the word of God or no: yet it is
not to be doubted, but he has the very word of God. Thus must these
expositions go for sound Divinity, mark them and compare them with Jewish
glosses: Drink ye all of this, that is not all, but some, to wit, the
Clergy, Marriage is honorable amongst all men, not all, but some, the
Laietie: Cast not pear es before swine: that is, suffer not the people to read
the Scriptures in a known tongue: Psalm. 8.
Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet, that is, under the
Popes feet: The fishes of the Sea, that is the Souls in Purgatory, The beasts
of the land, that is the men of this world, Antoni: in Sum. part. 3. tit: 2 2.
c. 5.
The fowls of the heaven, that is the souls of the blessed which the Pope
has canonized, Here are two swords, that is, the Pope has the managing of
both swords, Civil and Ecclesiastical, an exposition not altogether so
harsh, as that which In his advertisement to Pope Paul the Fifth touching the
Venetians.
Baronius brought of late, to prove that the Pope had authority not only to
feed Christ's Sheep, but also to punish with death such as resist his Papal
dignity: because he which said, Ioh. 21.
Peter feed my sheep, said also, Act. 10.13
Arise Peter and kill: if he had pressed the text a little further, he might
by the same Argument have proved his holy Father to be an Anthropophagus or
Caniball, because it is not simply said, Arise Peter and kill, but Arise Peter
kill and eat, unless he had Bellarmines wit, Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 1.
cap. 12.
who proves the Popes Supremacy, not from the first word kill, but from the
second word Eat.

But the maine fault in Religion, which hastened Gods judgments upon
Jerusalem, was her idolatry: She changed her God: Ier. 2.13.
She forsook the fountain of living waters, and dug unto her self even
broken pits which would hold no water: she played the harlot upon every high
mountain, and under every green tree: Verse. 17.
She said unto a tree, thou art my Father, and to a stone, thou have begotten
me. Whether Rome go not beyond her in this particular, he that has but half
an eye may plainly see, Virgill. Aene. 1.
Cur natos toties crudelis tu quoque falsis,
Ludis imaginibus? --


We do not read of many Idols that were famous amongst the Jews, there was
Ashtereth the God of the Sidonians; and Milcome the abomination of the
Moabites, and Chemosh the abomination of the children of Ammon, and Baal, and
a few more: but the Idols which Papists have invented are so many, that Rome
can scarce find room for placing them: She is more like to the old Gentiles,
who did acknowledge one chief Jupiter, -- anax andronte theonte, Hominum rex
atque deorum.
And Jupiter omnipotens, qui res hominumque Deumque
aeternis regis imperiis:
But he had three hundred under him which they worshipped as gods: Varro.
though the Papists acknowledge one supreme power, yet are there three hundred
to whom they perform that worship which is due only unto God, and as they
had twelve which they counted greater gods, which Ennius contains in these
old verses, Juno, vesta, Minerua, Ceres, Diana, Venus, Mars.
Mercurius, Iouis, Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apollo. Extant apud Apulerum. et Natalem
Comitem. Sen. na. quaest. lib. 2. cap. 41.

Whom they hold to be of Gods Privy Council: but many lesser gods and
goddesses for particular purposes, as for their Waters, Lympha, Varro. lib. 1.
de re Rustica.
for her Gardens, Pomona for their grounds, Terminus, etc. So the Papists have
the twelve Apostles, which (with the Platonists) they use as Mediators between
them and the high God, unto which they have added the Virgin Marie, thinking
especially by her intercession to have their desires; as the Trojans in the
Poet used the mediation of Venus to obtain favor of Jupiter. Now for
particular matters, there is scarce any thing but they have a God or Goddess
for it: When they are in fear of the plague they pray to Sebastian, Lutherus
in Decalog.
against the falling sickness to Valentine, against sudden death to
Christopher, against the Ring-worm to Anthony. Now then as Pythagoras from the
print of Hercules his foot in the games of Olimpus, did collect the bigness of
his whole Body. So from these few things which have been spoken, you may
gather how far Rome has declined from her former purity, and how well she
may parallel with Jerusalem in my Text. I might take occasion to speak of that
pre-eminence, which the Pope chalengeth over all Christian Kings (Gods
immediate Deputies on earth) by reason of a supposed Authority given unto
Peter, whose successor he pretenteth himself to be, the very same argument
in substance, by which the Turk claims the Western Empire, because he
succeeds Constantine: or he that married Tullies wife, laid claim to his
learning, because he had married his executor: all Princes must hold their
scepters from him, all nations must crouch down before him, and all kingdoms
must do him service: Here Jerusalem dare not stand out in comparison with
Rome: her hie Priests were never come to that height of impudency, as to set
up their heads above the Lords anointed. When Tiberius observed the base
servitude which the Romans used toward him: he could not choose but cry out,
Tacitus Annal. lib. 3.
O homines natos ad seruitutem, he that considers how vilely and seruilely,
she which sometime was the Empress of the world, does obey him which is
styled a servant of servants, he may well use Tiberius his words: or those of
the Poet, Roma tibi quondam suberant domini dominoru^,
Seruorum serui nunc tibi sunt domini.
but this is only by the way. From her religion, let us come to her
conversation and manner of living. Jerusalem was as corrupt in life, as she was
in religion: Ier. 7.9.
She did steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely. Her
inhabitants, Cap. 6.13
from the least unto the greatest, were given to covetousness, and from the
Prophet unto the Priest, they all dealt falsely. Cap. 2.34.
In the wings was found the blood of the souls of poor innocents: How far
Rome goes beyond Jerusalem, even in this also we may have a little taste in
our holy English Catholics, the remainder of the Romish Church, and the only
true professors (if ye will believe them) of the ancient faith in this
kingdom: but try them by the works of regeneration (the principal body of
true Christianity) and you shall find, that in profanation of Gods Sabbath,
in swearing and blaspheming, in lying and cozening, in drunkenness and
whoredom, in oppression, and all unconscionable dealings, they are for the
most part, the very scumme and excrements of this land. And why should they
make conscience of these sins, Venalia Romae temlpa, sacerdotes altaria
sacra, coronae, ignes thura preces Coelum est venale deusque.
seeing their holy mother is as it were a fair or royal Exchange, where any
sin may be bought at a reasonable rate. Nothing more common then what do
you lack, or what will you buy, etc. A pardon for your sins past, or for any
sin you shall hereafter commit? a tolleration for common Stews, for, (but I
dare not name it) a dispensation for incestuous marriages, or any thing else,
you shall have it if you can agree for the price: shall I say all in a word,
She is a hell of impieties, Reu. 18.2.
a habitation of devils, and the hole of all foul spirits, and a cage of every
unclean and hateful bird. And therefore I less marvel why Friar Mantuan
should be so bitter against her corruptions in his time.

Sanctus ager scurris venerabilis ara cinaedis,
Seruit, honorandae diuum Ganimedibus aedes. Mantuane.

And he says further, Nulla hic arcana reuelo, It was no shriuing secrets the
Friar did disclose, but such things as all the world could witness to be true.
Bernard Bernardus. lib. 4. de Consideratone ad Eugenium.
is more sharp against the abuses of his time (though the rotten humors were
but the^ in gathering) when he complains that the covetous, Luxurious,
Ambitious, Incestuous, Sacreligious, and all such hellish Monsters did flock
to Rome, to get a warrant from the Apostolic Sea, for their proceedings. And
that they made no more conscience of Sinning, then thieves after they have
robbed a man by the highway, are afraid to divide the spoil. Curia tua
recipere bonos magis, quam facere consueuit, (he speaks unto the Pope) mali
enim illic non proficiunt sed boni deficiunt. I intend not now to lay open her
monsterous cruelties and bloody massacres, of such as truly profess the
Gospel of Christ, in which point she does very well resemble (Shall I say)
Jerusalem, which killed the Peophets and stoned them that were sent to her?
nay, rather old Rome under Nero as often as the Emperor gave commandment that
any should be slain or banished, Tacitus. lib. 14. Annal. quoties fugas and
caedes iussit princeps, toties, predijs actae: quaeque rerum secundarum olim
nunc publicae cladis insignia fuere.
so often (says Tacitus) did they give thanks unto God: and those things
which in former time had been notes of some prosperous success, were now the
ensigns of public slaughter. Is not this her custom at this day? are there
any bloody butcherings of Christ's flock, any cruel murdering of Christian
Princes, by Romish Iebusites, but it shall be received at Rome with Bonefires
and Hymns in most triumphant manner? all which things when I consider, I am
fully resolved that a learned Divine of later years, does not speak of any
malicious humor, when he says that there be three points of divinity,
Caluinus lib. 4. Iustit. ca. 7.
(he calls them Capita arcana Theologiae) which go current in Rome. The
first, that there is no God: the Second, that whatsoever is written of Christ is
lies and deceits. The third, that the Doctrine of the resurrection and of the
last judgment is merely fabulous, now then this being the case of that great
and glorious City, we may well collect, that her horrid desolation and
fearful downfall is at hand. For there is no state so strong, no City so
fenced, but the sins of the people will bring it unto destruction, which is
my third and last Proposition out of the second general branch of my text,
whereof I am now by your patience to entreat.

Proposit. 3
That Kingdoms and common wealths have their periods and downefalls, is a
conclusion which the premises of all former ages do demonstrate; learned
Athens, stately, Sparta rich Babylon, victorious Carthage, ancient Troy, proud
Niniue, and a thousand more have numbered their years: and at this day have no
stronger fence then Paper walls, to keep their names from oblivion, the great
enemy of antiquity. Now for the true cause of their subuersions, it is a
truth, which the greatest wisards of this world, after much study, and many
serious co^sultations which nature could never find out. The Epicures attribute
it to fortune the Stoicts to destiny, the Pythagorians to numbers. Which last
opinion Plato made such reckoning of, that he will have numbers to be the sole
cause of the transmutations of common wealths. Whose words be so
Aenigmaticall, Plato. lib. 8. de rep. Cicero. lib. 7. Epist ad Atticum.
that Tullie makes them a Proverb, and Marsilius Ticinus inuocateth not
Oedipus but Apollo to unfold them. Arist. 5. lib. pollit. cap. 12.
Aristotle (who of all others comes nearest unto the truth) makes the cause
to be a disharmonie in the body politic, as too much wealth of some few, the
great misery of many, injury, fear, etc. I little marvel that heathen
Philosophers should shoot so wide, when Christians have so grossly mistaken
their mark. Bodin how witty is he in pleading for numbers? Bodin Math. hist.
cap. 6.
what virtue does he attribute to 7. or 9. or 12. and the squares and cubiques.
How does he shift himself to prove his opinion sound, by instances of the most
comon-wealthes that have been hitherto in account, adding, or detracting years
at his pleasure, from the calculation of the best Chronologers, to make the
number square or cubique, or spherical, or at the least, some way consisting of
7. or 9. or of three roots or squares. Cardanus Cardanus.
hangs all upon the tail of the greater bear. The common sort of
Astrologians, refer it to the planets and stars, making such a scheme at
the first foundation of any City, which made Varro (as Plutarch witnesses) so
earnest with Taruncius Firmanus, to enquire the opposition, and aspect of the
planets, when Rome was first situated, thinking hereby to conjecture how long
that Empire should endure. Copernicus Copernicus.
will have the conversion and motion of the centure of his imaginary
excentricle circle (which circle according to him, is not caused by the heavens
motion (for the heavens in his opinion are immovable) but by the earth, which
he will have to be continually wheeled about, to be the cause of these
alterations of Commonwealths. Thus while they groped in the dark, they missed
their mark, Genesis 19.
as the Sodomites did Lots door, and while they professed themselves wise,
Romans 1.22.
they became fools. And little marvel, for the wisdom of this world is
foolishness with God: None of all these have happened on the true cause, 1.
Cor. 1.
it is the sins of the people which brings every commonwealth to ruin.
And how can it be otherwise? for if thou lay more weight on the roof, then the
pillars can support, the house must needs fall. Now sin is of such an
intolerable weight, that no house nor City, nor Commonwealth can stand under
it, but it will press it down, it is a burden to the whole earth, and makes
it reele to and fro, Isa. 24.20.
and stagger like a drunken man: it is a burden to all the creatures, Romans 8.22.
and makes them groan and travel in pain: it is a burden to God himself,
which makes him cry out in the Prophet against the Jews, Amos 2.13.
That they had pressed him with their iniquities, even as a cart is pressed
with sheaues: it lay so heavy upon Christ's shoulders, that it made him sweat
drops of blood, Luke 22.44.
This burden of it self so heavy, like a malefactor that is pressed to death,
cries for more weight, to press the sinner to the pit of hell: it calls to
heaven for the burden of the Lord, Iere. 23.
that is, for vengeance to be inflicted upon the impenite^t sinner, God in
regard of his patience, and long suffering, is said to have leade^ heels, he
comes slowly even against his will to punish, but in respect of his justice,
he is said to have iron hands. He strikes with a witness, when once he
begins to smite in his proceedings against the sins of men, he has a double
method sometimes, (and this method is most usual when he proceeds against
the sins of his children) he comes to them as he came to Elias. 1. King. 19.
First he sends a mighty strong wind, to blow down the tall Cedars, and cast
them to the ground, as Paul was, before he was converted. Then an Earthquake,
Acts 24.26.
to shake the flintie rocks, I mean the stony hearts of men, and to make
them tremble, as Felix did, when Paul disputed of the judgment to come, then a
fire to burn up the stubble, and consume the briars, and then (when these
forerunners, like John Baptist have prepared a way for the Lord) he comes
himself, in a soft voice, the gracious and sweet promises of the Gospel, to
seal a pardon to such, as by the former Judgments are dejected and humbled.
And this may be termed Gods Ordo compositiuus: Sometimes (and this is more
usual, especially when he proceeds against the wicked) he takes a
contrary course: First, he comes in a soft and still voice, to woo them to
himself: But when they harden their hearts, and will not be reclaimed from
their evil ways; then at length he will send a fire to devour them, and an
Earthquake and mighty strong wind, to scatter them away like chafe from the
face of the earth, Psalm. 1.
and to blow them down even in the bottom of hell; and this I may fitly call
Gods ordo resolutiuus; it is said of Alexander, Q. Curtius.
that when he besieged a certain City, he held out a Lamp, proclaiming a
pardon to as many as would yield themselus before the Lamp was burned: so the
Lord first holds out the Lamp of his word, whereby he calls them to
submit themselves, and gives them a time to deliberate; if in the mean time
they do not yield, nothing remains but death and destruction: it is storied
of Tamberlaine the Scythian, Stephani. Epi. in Herod.
that whenever he besieged a City, first he displayed a white flagge in
token of mercy, if they would yield themselves, the second day a red flagge
threatening blood because they did not in time submit themselves, if they
continued until the third day, then came out his black flacke menacing utter
ruin and desolations; this is Gods Method. First he sets out his white flagge
of peace; if this be not regarded, then comes his red flagge of correction,
though not of destruction: if this will take no place with them, then he sets
out his black flagge, Virgil lib. 6. Aeneid.
bella horrida bella, nothing but death and desolation. Down with it, down
with it* even to the ground, tribulation and anguish, fire and brimstone,
storm and tempest, this shall be their portion to drink. Its long before he
be moved to anger, but if the coals of his wrath be kindled; O Lord God how
terrible will this flame be! it will lick up the sea like dust, and melt the
mountains like wax, and burn to the very bottom of Hell, so that nothing in
the world will quench it, but the blood of the Lamb, and the streaming tears
of unfeigned repentance: cast your eyes to the time of old, for we are: Job.
8.9.
but men of yesterday, and our days on earth are like a shadow, as Bildad
speaks in Job, and you shall find my conclusion proved by the occurrents of
all ages. Sodom that fruitful and plentiful City, which was for beauty and
pleasure like the garden of God, or as the valley of Egypt, Gene. 19.
as thou go unto Zoar, Gene. 13.10
if the stink of her sins ascend into heaven, shall be converted into a
stinking Fen, for an everlasting remembrance of her iniquity. Deuteronomy. 3.3.
Jericho a goodly place, a City of Palm trees, a fenced City, whose walls
reached up to heaven: John 6.21.
if she be withal a sinful and an idolatrous City, she and all that is in
her, both man and woman, young and old, Ox and Ass, shall be utterly
destroyed. Babylon, which Aristotle Arist. Polit.
for the greatenesse calls rather a Region then a City, the Empress of the
earth, the Princess of Cities, the glory of Kingdoms, the beauty and pride of
the Chaldeans, which said, I sit as Queen, I am no widow, and shall see no
mourning: If she continued in her sins, shall be as the destruction of God
in Sodom and Gomorrah, Isa. 13.
it shall not be inhabited for ever, neither shall it be dwelled in from
generation to generation, but Zim shall dwell there, and their houses shall be
full of Ochim, Ostriches shall dwell there, and the Satyrs shall dance there,
and Iim shall cry in their Palaces, and Dragons in their pleasant places: so
that a man shall be more precious then gold, even a man above the wedge of the
gold of Ophyr: It is not her powerful state, nor rich Citizens, nor strong
walls, nor high Towers, nor magnificall buildings, that shall free her from
Gods punishing hand: nay, Jerusalem in my Text, the Vine that Gods right hand
had planted, the City of the Great King, the holy place of the Tabernacle of
the most high, the beauty of Israel, the glory of Nations, Lament. 1.
and Princesses of provinces, if she will not be awaked from her sins, shall
not be much better then the destruction of Sodom and the miserable desolation
of doleful Gomorrah, her walls shall be turned into heaps of dust, her houses
consumed, her Temple burned, her treasury empty, her in habitants killed: Quis
Cladem illius vrbis quis funera flaetu explicet. What heart is so flinty which
will molt into tears, when it shall think of the misery which did twice
befall this one City.

Now all 1. Cor. 10.11.
these punishments came upon that you should be armed and warned, that you
should see, and foresee, before the time be past, Cicero. Phil. 1.
vt quorum facta imitamini eorum exitum per horrescatis, that if you tread in
their footsteps you should remember their downfals, God is the same God still,
he is as strong as ever he was, he is as just to revenge as ever he was, his
arm is not shortened, his strength is not abated, his wrath is not turned away
from sin, but his hand is stretched out still. Sin may bud in the spring but
it withers before Harvest: it may flowrish for a time, but godliness
endures unto the end. When the wicked thinks himself the surest, when he
says unto his soul, Peace, Peace, and Soul, take thy rest. Even then there
is but one step between him and destruction: believe the kingly Prophet, he
speaks it of his own experience, I my self have seen the ungodly in great
prosperity, Psa. 37.36.37
and flowrishing like a green bay tree; what follows, I went by, and lo, he
was gone; I sought him, and his place could no more be found. Behold his
countenance, he is but as the grass upon the house top, which withers before
it be plucked up, Psalm 73.18.
or as the sound upon the water, or as a garment freted with mothes: O how
suddenly does he fade, perish, and come to a fearful end: even as a dream
vanishes when as one awaketh. Plut. in vitae Pyrrhi. idem in vita Aninib.
It is noted of Pyrrhus and Hanniball, that they could quickly conquer a City,
but they could never keep that which they had once subdued. I little marvel,
that the wicked have great facility in heaping up of riches, but I should
think it strange, if they could keep them till the third generation. Their
wealth is like a snowball, gathered in the fall, not without labor and cold
fingers: and anon after it is melted with the Sun, or washed away with the
reign. But alas, alas beloved, I may hear take up the Prophets complaint.
Isa. 53.1.
Who will believe our report? my words seem unto many, as Lots Sermon did to
his sons in-law, when he foretold the destruction of Sodom, who seemed as
though he had mocked, Genesis 19.14. Give me leave a little to speak plainly: I
came not to sing unto you a gloria patri without a sicut erat, to flatter you
with a smooth tale, as to lay pillowes under your elbowes, whereby you may
securely sleep in your sins, Multi sunt Placentini, and Landenses pauci
Veronenses, many come hither from Placentia, and Landa, but few from Veron. I
doubt not but ye will all with your tongues confess my Proposition to be
true, but the practice of the most denies it: it is the sins of the people
that brings every common wealth to ruin. Every one will say as much, but yet
in our practice we hold an other strange Axiom that goes for current amongst
us: it is the sins of the people that vpholdeth every Common wealth:
conscionable and true, and faithful dealing, which my Prophet as I suppose,
names, by executing of judgment and seeking of the Truth, is like an
Almanacke out of date, every man has found out a new way, both to maintain
and better his estate, this old way is to far about. The blood-sucking
Usurer, instead of lending and expecting nothing again, a lesson which our
Savior would have him to take out, if he look for the true treasure, does
eat and consume his needy Brother, even as Pharaos lean and il-fauored Kine
devoured the other. This is the way he takes to support his house, God loves
not such an Arethmatician as spends his whole study about Multiplication,
Regula falsitatis.
and the Rule of falsehood, and can never learn, the practice of Division. The
Lawyer who should employ his best knowledge in uniting the knots of the law,
and should be an Atropos to cut off the thread of controversies between man
and man: feeds his Client with golden hopes, and sugared words, and in the
mean time like Lachesis draws in length the thread of contention, using
unnecessary delays, and posting of the matters from Court to Court, Term to
Term, year to year, not unlike the cogging Surgeon, who in hope of greater
gain does poison the wound, that it may be longer in curing, or (if I may use
a homely comparison) like the waggish Boy in the streets, who when he sees
two dogs snarling and grinning one at another for a bone, is never at rest till
(for his own pleasure, but little for their profit) he has brought them a
rictu ad morsum, to try their right by their teeth, til at length the weaker
be enforced to resign up his right to the stronger: this is a principal plot
to maintain his estate.

The Citizen that lives on his trade, is like to the idolatrous Jews in the
Psalmist, which worship the Images of Canaan; Canaan signifies a Merchant, and
what is the Merchants Image (says Luther) but Denarius the Cross. This he
makes such reckning of, as that he cares not for making shipwreck, not of a
crased, wodden vessel, but of a good conscience, so that he may obtain it:
he sells days and months, and years at a higher rate then his best
stuffes; if his wares be too light, false balances must make up the weight,
if too bad, too dear, a false oath must make a mends for both. The country
Landlord (for though I speak in Jerusalem, yet I do not doubt but some of
every quarter of Judah does hear me, whom the Lord has endowed with ample
possessions that he should be as it were Pater Patriae, an vpholder of his
Country, a maintainer of justice, a scourge of vice, a protector of Religion, a
shelter for the distressed to defend them from the rage of oppressors, as the
Xenocrates apud Aelianum. var. hist. lib. 13. cap. 31.
Philosopher did the Sparrow that fled into his bosom from the talentes of the
Hawke. What does he? he rayseth his rentes, wringeth his Tenants like spunges,
shakes by some new devise the ancient custom; if this will not serve his
turn, he farmeth out his livings (especially in such a year as this, when he
should break his bread to the poor at his own doors) and takes a room in
this City, or some other, where he may live with much ease, little charges, and
small credit, this he counts an especial means to hold up his estate.

If I have been in the bosoms of many of you, blame your selves, for mine
own part I may truly say to every particular that thinks himself touched,
as our Savior said to the woman that was taken in Adultery; Ioh. 8.11.
Has no man condemned thee? neither do I. Marry, withal I add that of John,
1. Ioh. 3.20.
If thine own conscience condem not he, God is greater then thy conscience,
and knows all things; and therefore I dismiss thee with that speech of our
Savior spoken to the Criple, that was newly restored to his feet; Go thy way
and sin no more, Ioh. 5.14.
lest a worse thing come unto thee. What shall I say more? Run through each
particular Estate and calling, and you shall find by the practice, though not of
all, God forbid that I should think so, I know there are in every profession
which make a conscience of their ways, and in all their actions set God before
their eyes, yet of the most part, that fraudulent and deceitful dealing, or
some other unlawful means, is thought the most expedite and beaten way for
supporting them. Few will let this conceit sink into their heads, that sin
is the means that brings every Estate to ruin, the Preacher may tell them
as much, but they will believe him at their leisure; in the mean time, they
will still run on their old Bias; the husbandman may labor in weeding those
grounds, but still they bring forth briars to entangle and nettles to sting
others: the Gardner may busy himself in pruning those vines, but still they
bring forth sour grapes, such as will set the teeth of Gods children on edge.
Gods shepherds may watch continually about their flocks; Ier. 2.
yet like swift Dromidaries they run by their ways, and like the wild Ass
used to the wilderness, which snuffeth the wind by occasion at her pleasure,
as the Prophet speaks; they cannot be kept from going astray. Every one can
be angry if his worldly purpose be crossed never so little, but few or none
will say with David; it greeueth me when ^ see the transgressors, because they
keep not thy law: Many can weep and commend plenty of tears, when any
worldly calamity does befall them, but few or none can shed one tear, Misere
terendo oculos (as he speaks in the Comedy) for their sins, much less weep
bitterly as Peter did, Math. 26.
or have their eyes gush out with water, because other men keep not Gods
laws, Psalm. 119.
with David many will sing to the Viole, and invent to themselves instruments
of music like David as the Israelites did. Amos. 6.5.
But few will say with him, Psalm. 119.143.
All my delight is in thy commandments; Many will say, with those good
fellows, Come and bring wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink,
and to morrow shall be as this day, Isa. 56.12
and much more abundant But few or none will say with those good professors,
Come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the
God of Jacob, and he will teach us his laws, Isa. 2.3.
and we will walk in his paths.

I think I cannot truly say with Hosea, that the Lord has a controversy
with the inhabitants of this land, because there is no knowledge of God in the
land. For our heads are not so sick, as our hearts are heavy: Isa. 1.5.
I mean our heads are not so void of knowledge, as our hearts are of
obedience, but I dare boldly say, that which follows: By swearing and lying,
and killing, and stealing, and whoring, Hos. 4.2.
they break forth, and blood touches blood. Will you hear the judgments
annexed in the subsequent words: Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one
that dwells therein, shall be cut off. This is a terrible curse, and he that
dwells in heaven, still auert it from us, but yet it is a conclusion which
the Lord uses to infer upon such premises.

Give me leave to repeat a parable unto you, Isa. 5.1.2.3. etc.
My beloved had a vineyard in a very fruitful hill, and he hedged it, and
gathered the stones out of it, and he planted it with the best plants; and he
built a Tower in the midst, and made a winepresse therein. The Prophet in that
place applies it to the land of Judah, Surely the vineyard of the Lord of
hosts, is the land of Israel, and the men of Judah, are his pleasant plants: me
thinks I may not unfitly apply it unto this Island. Surely the vineyard of the
Lord of hosts is the land of Britain, and the men of this land are his
pleasant plants, Now therefore, O ye inhabitants of this and, judge I pray you,
between him and his vineyard, what could he have done unto it, that he has
not done? He has planted it with his own right hand, he has so hedged it
about with his heavenly providence, that the wild boar out of the woods cannot
root it up, nor they that go by, pull off his grapes. He has watered it
most abundantly with the dew of heaven: he has gathered the stones of Popery
and superstition out of it; he has set the winepresse of his word therein: he
has given it a Tower, even a king as a strong tower against his enemies, whose
reign the Lord continue over us, if it be his pleasure, as long as the moon
knows her course, and the sun his going down and let all that love the peace
of Britain, say Amen. Now he has long expected that it should bring forth
grapes, but behold it brings forth wild grapes. He looked for judgment, but
behold oppression, for righteousness, but lo a crying.

These were the sins of Jerusalem, and you know her judgments, he that was
Ierusalems God, is Britains God too, and therefore if she parallel Jerusalem
in her iniquities, let her take heed she taste not of her plagues; God though he
has not yet begun to punish her in his fury yet has he sundry times shaked
his rod of correction over her, if this will not work amendment, her judgment
must be the greater.

Fearful was the case of Samaria, who^ Gods punishments could not move to
repentance. I have given you cleanness of teeth in all your Cities, Amos. 4.
and scarceness of Bread in all your places, yet have ye not returned unto me
says the Lord God. I have with holden the rain from you when there was yet
three months to the harvest, and I caused it to ruin upon one City, and
brought a drought upon another, yet have ye not returned unto me says the
Lord. Pestilence have I sent amongst you after the manner of Egypt, and yet ye
have not returned unto me says the Lord. I have smitten you with, blasting and
mildew, etc. yet ye have not returned unto me says the Lord God. The Lord has
not hitherto dealt with us after our sins, nor plagued us according to the
multitude of our iniquities, yet he has made it manifest that he is displeased
with us: His mercy has pulled back his hand from drawing his sword of
vengeance against us, yet he has left us sundry tokens that he is angered
with our sins. It is not long since that the heavens were made as brass,
Deuteronomy. 28.23.
and the Earth as iron, nay, the very waters became as iron or as brass so
that neither the heavens from above, nor the earth, or water from below did
aford comforts for the service of man.

This extraordinary cold diste^perature of the air might by an Antiperistasis
have kindled some heat of zeal and devotion in our breasts; when it had not
the expected effect, Psalm. 105.16
then he Called for a dearth upon the land, and destroyed our provision of
bread: even such a famine, that if we were not relieved from foreign
countries, Ten women might bake their bread in one Oven, as the Lord speaks,
Leuit. 26.26.

But all this has not brought us upon our knees, nor humbled our souls before
our God, therefore once again, he has put life in his messenger of death, and
set him on foot, which heretofore of late years has raged in this city, like
a man of war, and like a giant refreshed with wine, and bestirred himself
(though not with the like violence) almost in every part of this kingdom:
Psalm. 91.6.
I mean the pestilence that walks in the darkness, and the sickness that
has killed many thousands at noone day: all these are infallible tokens that
he is offended with our sins: Howbeit he is so merciful that he will not
suffer his whole displeasure as yet to arise, -- Horum si singula duras
Flectere non possunt, poterint tame^ omnia, mentes.
If each of these by themselves cannot prevail with us, yet if they be all put
together, they may serve (as a threefold cord) to draw us unto repentance. If
these be not of force but still we continue to blow up the coals of his
anger, then let us know for a certainty, that they are the forewarners of a
greater evil, as the cracking of the house is a forewarning of his fall: these
be but the flashing lightnings, the thunderbolt will come after.

The cloud that is long in gathering, will make the greater storm: he is all
this while in fetting his stroke, that he may give the sorer blow, Eurum ad se
Zephirumque vocat; he is in bringing the winds out of his treasures, that he
may rain upon our heads a shower of vengeance which shall be the portion of all the ungodly to drink.

I began like a Barrabas, I will not end like Boanarges: my song had an
Exordium of mercy, I am loath to bring for an Epilogue a thunderclap of
judgment. Wherefore (my beloved Brethren) now that you see the true causes of
the ruins of every commonwealth and the judgment that hangs over your
heads (like Damocles his sword) for our iniquities; flatter your selves no
longer in your own sins, but turn unto him by speedy and unfeigned
repentance, that he may repent him of the evil, and turn away his plagues
from you: let the wanton leave his dallying, and the drunkard his carrowsing,
and the Usurer his biting, and the swearer his blaspheming, and the oppressor
his grinding, and every one amend one in time, before the Lords wrath be
further kindled: then will the Lord be merciful unto this land: he will
quickly turn the sour looks of an angry and sin revenging Judge, into the
smiling countenance of a mild and gentle Father. He will take the rod which
he has prepared for you, and burn it in the fire. These plagues which do
hang over you for your iniquities, he will blow away with the breath of his
nostrils, as he did the Egyptian Grasshoppers into the red sea: he will command
his destroying Angel to put up his sword into the sheath, he will open the
windows of heaven, and power down a blessing upon you without measure.

Then shall you be blessed in the City and blessed in the field, blessed at
your going out, and blessed at your coming in, and whatsoever you put your
hands unto shall be blessed; your sons shall Psa. 129.4.
grow up as Olive branches, and your daughters shall be as the Psalm. 144.
polished corners of the Temple. Your grounds shall so abound with grane that
the tillers shall laugh and sing; your garners shall be full and plenteous with
all manner of store Joel. 2.24.
your presses shall abound with Oil and wine, your sheep shall bring forth
thousands, and ten thousands in your fields; Every thing shall prosper,
nothing shall stop the current of Gods blessings, there shall be no decay,
nor leading into captivity, and no complaining in your streets; and which is
better then all ^hese, he will give you faithful and painful Pastors to
feed you, his spirit to comfort you, his word to instruct you, his wisdom
to direct you, his Angels to watch over you, his grace to assist you, and in a
word, He will be your God, and you shall be his people: Esther. 6.9
thus shall it be done unto all those whom the King of heaven shall honor: so
that all the world shall wonder at your felicity, and say, Blessed be the Lord
which takes pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, and happy are the
people that be in such a case, yea blessed are al they which have the Lord for
their God; thus will he be with you, and direct you in the desert of this world,
till he bring you into a fair and Goodly place, the promised land, a land that
flows with better things then abou^dance of Milk and Honey, the celestial
Paradise, the heavenly Canaan, the kingdom of glory prepared for you from the
beginning of the world, even that kingdom where the King is verity, the Laws
charity, the Angels your company, the Peace felicity, the life eternity. To
this kingdom, the God of al mercy bring us for his sake that bought us with his
own blood, to whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, three persons in
trinity, and one God in unity, be ascribed all honor and glory, power and
Majesty, both now and for evermore Amen.

FINIS.

