THe bearer hereof, Christopher Angel, a Greek borne in Peloponnesus, having
been persecuted by the Turks for his Religion, which by his Letters
testimonial appears, and for that cause was forced to leave his Country,
came to Cambridge about Whitsontide 1608. and finding some releife, has
continued unto the day of the date hereof. During which time, his manner of
life has been very honest and studious. Now, because he could not here have
his health, being desirous to travel abroad into the Country, he has
requested these our letters for a Testimony of his honest behavior, which we
have willingly granted unto him, and set to our hands, this tenth of May. 1610.

Ioha. Duport. Vicecan. Thomas Comber Trinitatis Coll. Samuel Brook Trin.
Coll. Geruase Nid. Nath. Tailor. Joshua Blaxton.


To the Clergy and others of the Dioces of Sarum.
WHereas the bearer hereof, Christopher Angelus a poor Grecian (whom we have
known in the University of Oxford well and honestly to behave himself toward
all men) being in great want, and having not wherewith to supply the same,
requested our Letters to stir up the hearts of those that shall be ready to
commiserate his case. These are therefore to commend him and his charitable
suite to your Christian benevolence, in sustayning of whom you shall do very
well: and so much the more, because he has bin persecuted for his Religion, as
by his Letters Testimonial plainly appears. Thus far you well.

From our Palace at Sarum. 15. Die Augusti. 1616. To. Sarum.

THe bearer hereof, Christopher Angel, a Greek, borne in Peloponnesus, having
been persecuted by the Turks for his religion, as by his Letters Testimonial
appears, and for that cause forced to leave his Country, came to Oxford about
Whitsontide 1610. and finding relief, has continued unto the day of the date
hereof, during which time, his manner of life has been quiet, honest, and
studious. And because he is weary, and desirous to visit his friends in
England, he has requested these our Letters Testimonial of his honest
behavior amongst us, which we have willingly granted unto him, and thereunto
set our hands this 20. of March, An. Dom. 1617.

Arthur Bath and Wells, Vicean. Oxon. R. Kilby. R. Kettell. William Goodwin.
Sebastian Benefield. William Langton. Richard Moket. John Prideaux. Tho. Anyan.
Theod. Price. Io. Wilkinson. Tho. James. Samuel Radeclif. Ant. Blincowe.
Griffith Powell. Fr. Greuile.



