Upon the life and death of the most worthy, and thrice renowned knight, Sir
PHILLIP SIDNEY: A Commemoration of his worthiness, Containing a brief
recapitulation, of his valiant usage and death taken, in her Majesty's services
of the wars in the Low Countries of Flaunders.



AT LONDON; PRINTED BY RObert Walde-graue, dwelling without Temple Bar.

To the Right honorable, Sir Frauncis Walsingham Knight, principal Secretary
to her Majesty, and of her highness most honorable prime Counsel.
Pleases your honor: The reverend account wherewith the curious regarders of
whatsoever excelencie, have entertaigned evermore the deserts and honored
examples, of such as in their times have approved most worthy has moved me
(the most unskillful of a great many, but not the least in wel-wishing) to
adorn the funerals of the most noble and worthy renowned knight, Sir Phillip
Sidney, with these slender meters. Whose young years continued with all manner
of expectation of such honor, as by due desert he long since acquired, has
made the remembrance of his death, so much the more famous, by how much the
more honorably he has put forward the same, in so laudable an action, as
wherein consists his love, service, and obedience, to God, his Prince, and
his Country. The argument hereof, in zeal of his great Nobility, valor, and
worthiness (which upon a sudden I have penned, more answerable to mine own good
intendment, then to the weight of his excellencies) I dedicate with all
humility unto your honor. Beseeching, that according to the wonted nobility
of your mind, it may please you to accept and account thereof, as proceeding
from the simple store of such a one, who in all humble duty and reverence,
gladly would bind himself to do your honor any service. And though the
simplicity of the same is such, as in no point may challenge unto it self such
honorable liking, yet may it please your honor to deem, that the affection
of him that writ it, stood in the highest degree of well-doing, and gladly (if
the continuance thereof, had been of more value) could have submitted the same
to your favorable censure. And that I may not seem over tedious in so brief
a discourse, I humbly surcease herewith to detein your honor, praying the
eternal director of all your actions, to have the same evermore in his
gracious protection.

Your H. most dutifully affected: A. D.
Upon the life and death of Sir PHILLIP SIDNEY Knight.
What means this calm: why hang your bended brows?
what sad conceit: whence sues this sudden maze
Where are the drops? the sweet distilling dewes,
Of Ida fresh, whereon the Nymphs do gaze:
Where woons. Thalia with her pleasant lays?
fine Erato in gladsome Ditties dressed,
And fair Caliop', statelier then the rest.
Where be the sisters of the destinyes?
where Fate her self? where fierce uncertain Chance?
Where are the bedlem brood of Casualties,
that erst (in loss) their standard did advance?
What is become of crooked dire Mischaunce?
All mazed alike confuzed do ye rome?
Griefs griping the one, and shame for to others dome.
What thing alas that causes all this grife?
whereon did dare, that Fury to presume:
Was it on goods? or loss of private life:
Or fined course that Nature did resume:
Wherein proud Fate durst vaunt her highest plume,
No no alas, the hazard were but small:
To pinche at such as are at common call.
What was it then: what was? ye heavens do know,
It was the choice of all the powers divine:
The influence self, where Virtues erst did flow,
The very work of all the Muses nine:
The care of earth and skies, in one self twine,
The rarest Tipe of courtly gentleness:
Adorned erst with stem of noblenes.
Muse you that hear this wailefull dittie song;
Muse you to see, distressed how men plain:
Muse you to think what hie despite and wrong,
Bellona deemes is tendered to her train:
In reauing thus her glories chiefest gain:
Her worthy Impe, her stately noble knight,
VVhereto it seemed, that Fate had yet no right.
Then turn your eyes, and view his covered hearse,
In mournful weeds, see how the Nymphs are clad;
Disheueled how the rocks, with cries they pearse,
how Virtues self, is for her Iuell sad.
Now Fortune bannes, and Impes for grief are mad,
And judge you then, how rightly men may say:
Their sum of Joys, the Fates have reft away.
A book by him penned, called the Countesses of Pe^brooks Archadia.
Archadia now, where is thy sovereign guide,
who stately Penbrooke erst did to thee knit,
Where be the notes, his skill did erst divide,
In sundry meeters, wound from finest wit,
Which he so well in covert shapes could fit.
where be the pipes, the deintiest shepherds sound:
That ever erst, within thy woods were found.
Sugared Sidney, Sidney sweet it was,
That to thy soil, did give the greatest fame.
Whose honny dewes, that from his quil did pass,
with honny sweetes, aduaunst thy glorious name
Who ere thee knew, that knew thy soil, to blame:
far was it from the skill if any one,
To wade in thee, so far as he has gone.
And will thou Phoebus therefore be so sad,
(For he is wrackt whom erst thou held'st so choice)
And from Pernasus shall no Nimphe be had,
That list in laud of him to strain her voice?
And you so queld as nere you may rejoice:
Then Sacred Fame, do somewhat for thy knight:
To win thy love that shed his blood in fight.
O see you not the Destinies self, with blame,
Of lofty skies, for such a rash pretense:
(To shred his life) already blush with shame,
And hide their heads for doing such offense.
As from the world to reaue such excellence,
And were it not (as erst ordeind before:
The heavens him hent) their heads should rue therefore.
But mighty Powers, that swaye on earthly change,
Have knowlegde him unfit for earthly moulde:
Whence thus bereft untimely hence to raunge,
By over hasty hand of Parcas bold,
They have (for this) permitted uncontrolled.
They shroude their faces, in show of all the train,
Of worthy wights that yet on earth remain:
Can Chance, or Hap, or Fate, or what you list,
Be then of him (thus said) to work their spite?
Can triumphs ought (to her that riu^d his twist)
Ensue hereof, to quench your sweet delight?
Or may be deemed to prejudice his right:
who matched with virtues many mo then one:
Cannot lie dead though life be fled and gone.
Injurious death, yet needs I must appeal,
Cruel to us, to him a cause of blis:
VVrong to our love, wrong to the hidden zeal,
That in each mind by virtue planted is.
Most heinous wrong performed death in this:
To reaue the world the love, the choice of men
Of such a rare and far surpassing gem.
Be pleased yet ye sacred sisters here,
On Sidneis Tomb your learned tunes to sing:
Of Laurel fresh a wreath, set on his beer,
And let his praise within your ditties ring.
Let Fame resound, and whence your woes did spring,
Cease not eu^n there, whilst vital air may stand,
To fill with laud of him the farthest land.
And for my self (the least of others all,
That favored most, that loved, that honored eke:
And did with zeal admire what did befall,
To him by gift, of very natures beke.
In whom the Virtues all were not to seek)
Have undertook some matters to recount:
Wherein this knight, did once in life surmount.
Be ayding to my skillesse fainting pen,
That hardly dare presume of such a one:
To speak on write, whose vain from other men,
So far did stretche, and who to you alone,
(For rare perfection in his skill that shone)
Was charye held, was known by knowledge far,
With sweetest sound each others tunes to bar.
And (so you list vouchsafe your good aspectes,)
I purpoz'd have, by favor of your train:
Some what in brief, both of the large effects,
That life him gave, and death in greatest pain:
Him made a Iem midst others to remain,
To utter forth, That all the world may know:
The precious soil, where deinties such did grow.
With what one Virtue shall I then begin.
Where so great haunt of mightiest forces wrought.
What shall I praise that was not like in him:
whom Natures self first for a pattern sought:
And him endued with all that might be thought.
That by perfection of so sweet a ground,
The some of all the rest might more abound.
What was it wit, or golden wisdoms lore,
Might deck his years, and make him glorions shine?
He did surpass. His like in few before
was ever known, so quick, so neat, and fine,
So full of weight, with humors so divine:
were all his words, his works, and actions fraught,
As seemed from skies a secret power had raught.
If honored seat it were that might him deck,
His birth was great, but virtues more ex celo.
His hie descent remaind at Fortunes check,
But honored mind a greater force could weld,
whereon he sought with stately reach to build.
That as he was by parents nobly borne,
His virtues might his outward shape adorn.
But if that valor may his deeds commend,
Thou mighty Manors know he was a Knight
And Knightly could himself in arms defend:
Midst prease of Foes yclad in Armor bright,
Whereof to think my sprites are daunted quite.
This one occasion it was that bred the scathe,
Which ( Pallas moved) with tears her Knight to bathe.
O would his prowess at that instant hour,
Had not him preast so forward in the throng:
And Hector like (of Chivalry the flower)
He had not done his dearest soil such wrong.
As to bereave it of a force so strong,
who for his Princes cause and common good,
In dreadful fight consumed his dearest blood.
Which with what heart and zeal he offered then,
with what undaunted recklesse force of ill:
His stoutest foes approved, and eke his men
whose ventured lives with him their blood did spill,
Have witnest erst, and yet can witness still.
So manly were his acts at all assaies,
And in his death so mighty was his praise.
At Zutphen (thus the place delivered was,)
In Gelderland encountering with his foe:
And of September ere the Month did pass,
Full rbii. days, so long it was ago:
With Horse and Lance, the number I not knoe.
A valiant charge he set upon the train,
By force whereof his Foes were pressed amain.
And whilst in prease of mightiest Troops he stood,
This worthy Knight Sir Phillip Sidney bold,
His Horse betrampled all in goarie blood:
At length was slain, and under him lost hold,
Whereby on foot reculing uncontrolled.
He Horst again renewed a second charge,
And with fresh fight the skarmouch did enlarge.
There long he fought whilst many a man was slain,
And making way, among thickest prease he goes:
And reckles here and there he kills a maine:
whilst deep entrenched lay his secret Foes,
From out whereof a Dulket shot arose.
And leuelling just against the worthy knight,
Up to the thigh the Bullet turned quight.
Yet fought he still, and ceast not all for this,
Till he with honor could himself retire:
This skarmouch done, his wound perceived is,
By search whereof it mortal did appear:
what vaileth drops to (...) the flaming fire.
The fretting poison (...)ward fore,
So pearst his heart, as die he must therefore.
This Noble Knight not careless of his state,
Ne yet unwitting of the brittle stay:
wherein we live, and how by certain fate,
Each thing bath fine, and once must needs decay.
And as we rise, so must we fall away,
Not unexpected gladly framed his breath,
To climb the skies and pay his due to death.
And first (as nere before in all the course,
And common passage of this bloody war:
He did forget to feed on sweet remorse,
which humble souls expect from God a far)
He sought to free his conscience clean from iarr,
And as his usage was in health before:
with seruent zeal his sins he did deplore.
And firing faith, firm hope, and special trust
In him, on whom our aid dependes alone:
He gladly minds his corpse to be but dust,
Contemnes the world, and sighing (...) the throne,
Of him whose mercy saues each faithful one.
In latest pang he could receive of death,
He called on God and so gave up his breath.
Not unremembered here I may let pass,
Now in his death in deepest panges he had:
He not forgot that in his life he was
A faithful friend of good, and to the bad
An earnest foe, by deep discretion lad,
By skillful sawes his brother there he told:
A perfect path his honor to uphold.
What sage advise, what C(...)lesome speech.
what councels such, as a(...) scarce welde:
W^^^ deep instincts of high and lofty reach,
He then bequeth'd to him, and in the field.
How he him taught to stay on honors sheeld,
To mind his cause, his country, charge of men,
And think on God that would him prosper then.
How to his Soldiers he in life was found,
A careful Chiefteine and a christian guide:
How often his bounty did to them abound,
To salve such wants as they might not provide.
From whose relief he never yet could slide,
But what distress or wrack so ever came:
His purse and aid was pressed to help the same.
Can they but mourn, that then such one do mis,
Can we but wail, so few like him that find.
Can Sidneis name whose soul does live in bliss,
Obscured lie. Whose bounty so did bind,
The hearts of all, to whom he was so kind.
Nay Fame gainsaies (who rightly guerdons all)
That ere his deeds from mind of man should fall.
FINIS.

