TOBACCO TORTVRED, OR, THE FILTHY FVME OF TOBACCO REFINED: Showing all sorts
of Subjects, that the inward taking of Tobacco fumes, is very pernicious unto
their bodies; too too profluuious for many of their purses; and most
pestiferous to the public State. Exemplified apparently by most fearful
effects:

More especially, from their treacherous proiects about the Gunpowder Treason;
From their rebellious attempts of late, about their preposterous disparking of
certain Enclosures: as also, from sundry other their prodigious practices.



Prove. 27.9. If sweet ointments and perfumes do undoubtedly rejoice the heart
of a man: then surely, all noisome savors, and poysonsome smells (such as is
the filthy fume of Tobacco) inwardly taken, must necessarily disquiet, and
drive the same into a dangerous condition.

Dignitatis (...) Deus. LONDON, Printed by RICHARD FIELD dwelling in Great
Woodstreete. 1616.

TO THE MOST POTENT, LEARNED, AND RELIGIOUS PRINCE, JAMES (by the grace of God)
King of great Britain, France and Ireland, etc. be multiplied the abundance
of spiritual sincerity, of earthly prosperity, and of eternal felicity in
Jesus Christ, Amen.
RENOWNED SOVEREIGN,
THe Almighty Jehovah (being in very deed) the God of 1 Cor. 14.31.
order, has created all things in so excellent and absolute an order,
respecting Wisd. 11.17.
number, weight, and measure, as no one man living on earth may justly
challenge any one of his works, for being (in any their several orders) the
one either Eccles. 3.11.
better, or worse then another: if we exactly consider the exquisite order
observed among any his different operations in heaven, or in earth. For if we
first consider what an absolute order he has observed in any the superior
creatures (more especially in the firmament it self, with other the Celestial
orbs) we may find the same (by Mathematical demonstrations) made apparently
manifest to us. Then next, if we observe (in like sort) the like most
admirable, and absolute order among all other the inferior creatures (more
especially in Man whom he has purposely made a (...), I mean, an abstract
epitome, or a lively represent of all the rest (as by Physical observations
and sundry Methodicall proportions may be made apparent unto us) I doubt not at
all but that the truth of this point will more plainly appear then the
Sunshine at midday: so as the simplest on earth may soundly conceive the same
in that one special creature, if (besides his admirable creation) they will
likewise consider how the universal societies of mankind here on earth, are
(by the Almighty his most absolute wisdom) very proportionably reduced into
a fourefold corporal condition. Namely, first into a mere natural body: ^
mean a corporal substance consisting jointly in an healthful estate of
sundry particular members sympathically combined in one. Then next, into an
Oeconomicall body, I mean a domestical, or well ordered household condition
proportionably plotted together. Then next, into a mere Polititicall body, I
mean the public estate of kingdoms, and countries collaterally compact in
one mutual consort. And then fourthly, into an Ecclesiastical body: I mean,
into that holy and blessed communion of Saints which religiously consists
upon the mutual and joint society of a National Church, disciplinated and
governed in a most solemn and sanctified order.

As this fourefold order of bodies does comprehend, and uphold to the full, the
several conditions of men here on earth: so surely, the second and the last of
these four several estates I do purposely pretermit for the present, as
having heretofore in In a Treatise of household government covertly conuayed
from me, and set ^orth in the name o^ R. C.
some part, and also intending hereafter (if God say amen) to bend my
cogitations more fully that way. hang down the head, but all the other states
else (by a common consent) they do collaterally become very crazie and weak,
concerning any the dutiful discharge of their peculiar designements.

As for example, the said stomach it self, namely, the poor husbandmen, they
are fearfully subjected to an intolerable feebleness concerning the timely
performance of any their appointed functions; to offensive yelkings, and
vomitings forth of sundry discontentments against the whole State; to an
immoderate thirsting after other men's places; to many most bitter
heart-burnings, gripings, and gnawings; to sudden, and unappeasable
inflammations of fury; to an utter loathing of their appointed ordinary
labors; to a dog-like appetite after other men's profits; to an insatiable
hunger concerning the speedy supply of their sundry insufferable wants; to a
very bad digestion touching their present oppressions; to many windy
sufflations, and proud puffings up; to angry belchings, to choleric
passions, to an unnatural flux of the purse, by means of too many their
immoderate and superfluous dispendings; to inward heart-gripings; with sundry
such other like fearful occurrents as do finally disable their persons from
the orderly collecting, and proportionable dispersing of public maintenance to
any one of the other estates in that self same Political body.

Yea, and not only the said stomach it self (I mean the poor husbandmen,)
but all other estates besides are likewise (by a common consent as it were)
collaterally subjected to sundry most dangerous distempers: whether we consider
the superior, or any the inferior parts of that Political body.

For first, (concerning the superior parts) who may not easily see and
perceive how the head it self will forthwith begin to be fearfully tainted
with capital pains about the disordered State; with want of due rest, by
reason of sundry occurring cares; with idle vertigoes, and many terrible
turne-about thoughts; with sundry implacable furies, with most secure and
fearful Lethargies, dreams, and drowsy securities; with crasinesse of
memory concerning their duties to God and man; yea, and (which more is) with
such sudden congealed Catalepsies, violent conuulsions, and spi^ituall
benummings, as if all conscionable sense and moving (in and about their
designed employments) were utterly lost, or quite forgot, at the least.

And then next, for the Shoulders and Arms (the Nobility, and Gentry I
mean) who may not likewise perceive, how that (when the poor husband-mans
state, which did usually aford their Political maintenance, begins to fag)
they do eftsoons begin to fall forthwith into fearful Apoplexies, I mean,
to an utter decay of all spiritual moving and sense; into quaking Palsies and
trembling of heart, upon every crossing occurrent; into dangerous Epilepsies,
and deadly downefallings to evil; into violent Conuulsions, with a sudden
shrinking up of the sinews of love; into fearful oppressing Ephialteis, and
intolerable burdens of sin, each hour surcharging their sorrowful souls;
into choking Squinancies, I mean, a merciless throatling of all their
Inferiors; into sundry most deadly Pleurisies, through the abundant spilling
of innocent blood; into many quarkening Peripneumonies, and suffocating
Ptisickes, I mean, into a difficult breathing forth of any gracious decrees
concerning the present good of the poor; yea and (which more is) into very
many such impostumating Empiemaes, and most fearful exulcerations of
conscience (with other outrageous enormities) as bring an utter consumption and
waste to the whole Political body.

And as the superior, so likewise the inferior members of that self same
Political body, feeling once a defect in the stomach (I mean in the poor
husbandmans state) they do eftsoons decline to an unnatural weakness and
distemperature of the Liver and Spleen (I mean, to a fearful decay of
Christian love, for the timely discharge of any their Christian duties; to
sundry inflammations, obstructions, coldness, and hardness of heart against
the whole State; to most filthy deforming Iaundeis, through an unnatural
dispersing of choleric pangs, and melancholicke passions over all the
Political body; to many most languishing Cachexies, I mean, to an inordinate
consuming and wasting of politic nutriment, by reason of some evil
disposition in their proper estates; to such dangerous Dropsies, and disordered
cariages, as do either procure a dissolute looseness throughout their peculiar
societies, or an unnatural swelling at least, against the peaceable, and
prosperous state of the whole Political body; to deadly Stranguries, and
dangerous difficulties about the timely dispatch of their public designements;
to deadly benumming Sciaticaes, and griefs in the huckle-bones, so often as they
are to undergo the obsequious dispatch of their several duties; yea and (which
more is) into many preposterous Podagraes, and intolerable pain in their
feet and joints, so often especially as they are made to support and bear up
the necessary burdens belonging to that Political body whereof they are made
the united members.

So as your most excellent Highness may here again be pleased to perceive
very plainly, that (by the only distempers of the stomach it self in either
of both these bodies) the whole bodies of both are most fearfully brought into
such a languishing condition and state, as neither those stomachs themselves,
nor the head, nor the shoulders, nor the arms, neither yet the legs, nor the
feet are sufficiently able to dispatch their proper designements: by ^eanes
whereof, even those self same bodies (with all their several parts) must
needs remain in a languishing state. And therefore, as the good estate of the
stomach it self must be carefully continued, especially, if we desire to
uphold the happy condition of the whole body it self: so surely I do verily
suppose there may no better means be devised about that good estate of the
stomach, then to become very careful first, for the ordinary supply of
whatsoever good means may be helpefull unto it: and then next, for the
powerful and speedy suppressing of whatsoever occurrent may be hurtful unto
it in any respect.

Now then, these four succeeding faculties are especially helpefull to the
good estate of the stomach it self, if they be rightly had, and jointly
continued: Namely, Appetite, Retention, Digestion, with an orderly Distribution.

For since it is the proper office of every particular stomach, very orderly to
concoct the whole sustenance received therein, that so, the said sustenance may
forthwith become good natural nutriment for the whole body it self: who
sees not therefore but that (in the stomach) there must first be procured an
able and absolute appetite toward that the former received sustenance?

And because it is to very small purpose though the forenamed Appetite be
singular good, unless the Retentiue faculty be also every way fitted for the
firm retaining, and orderly holding of whatsoever solid sustenance so soundly
affected before: who sees not now, but that secondly a sound Retention must
necessarily be wrought in that self same stomach?

And because the Appetite, and Retention both, will very little avail to the
good estate of the stomach, unless the said stomach be thoroughly able
withal, most soundly to digest whatsoever good sustenance so orderly affected,
and so firmly retained before: who sees not therefore, but that a very strong
and absolute Digestion must thirdly be kindled, and firmly continued in that
self same stomach?

And because both Appetite, Retention, and Digestion also, are to very small
purpose for the good estate of the stomach, unless the said sustenance so
affected, so retained, and so digested, be likewise as proportionably dispersed
throughout the whole body for natural nutriment to the several members
thereof: therefore, who sees not fourthly, but that the said stomach it self
must be aptly disposed toward the proportionable Distribution of that self
same concocted nutriment to each several part of the whole body it self? Now
then, all those the forenamed faculties so fitly and so proportionably
concurring together about the orderly accomplishment of that the received
nutriment, this stomach it self may not properly be said to feel any want at
all, for the timely dispatch of it own employments about any his designed
functions.

These fourefold faculties must (in like manner) all jointly concur about the
happy and prosperous estate of those our Political stomachs: if especially,
we would have them profitably employed in the orderly collecting, and frugall
disposing of public maintenance, for the convenient supportation of the whole
Political body, in all and singular the several parts thereof.

And therefore, a principal care concerning the poor husbandmens happy
condition, must first be made known to the world, by an orderly procuring of
good Appetites in every of them toward their several husbandries: that so,
they may chearefully, comfortably, and profitably both affect, and effect the
fruitful managing thereof in every respect. Whereby it is apparently evident,
that those their said Appetites must not be killed by unreasonable Fines, by
excessive Rents, by over heavy Impositions, or any such other importable
burdens.

And then next, there must likewise be cherished in every of them, a powerful
Retention, an enabled faculty (I mean) to retain, uphold, and continue their
several husbandries, for those the former public respects. So as therefore, a
like provident care must be further had, that by no means they may be
discouraged from their said husbandries by any merciless, uncharitable, or
cut-throate dealings: neither yet compelled (by any causlesse, and cruel
oppressions) to cassier themselves from their former callings, and so (in a
malcontentednesse) forthwith to cast their ploughs in the ditch.

And then thirdly, they must yet further be furthered this way, by a strong and
speedy Digestion, with such warm and cherishing comforts (I mean) as may
enable them all to the orderly maintaining, the husbandly managing, and the
wholesome digesting of those their said husbandries for public good.

And lastly, there must very carefully be wrought in every of them (by the
ministerial operation of the word and prayer) a sympathicall disposition, in
and about the timely Distribution of that their former collected maintenance,
for the public good of the Prince, the Pears, the Nobles, the Gentry, the
whole Communaltie, and every particular member of that self same Political
body. These things accordingly effected, who sees not now, but that the
natural and Political stomachs both, are sufficiently furnished with
whatsoever supplies may any way be helpefull to either of them both for public
good?

And not only things helpefull must so be supplied, but things hurtful
likewise must forthwith be suppressed, for fear of enfeebling or weakening the
forenamed faculties. But there may not any thing be possibly found more
hurtful to the happy estate of those the forenamed stomachs, then superfluous
excess, or pining wants. For, as by superfluous excess, the good ^state of
those the said stomachs is fearfully overwhelmed and tumbled headlong into
most dangerous surfeits and deadly distempers: so surely, by oppressing and
pining wants, they are fearfully enfeebled, and finally disabled from the
timely performance of their proper designements for public good.

First therefore (for the timely suppressing of whatsoever superfluous excess
annoying the healthful estate of both these stomachs) a provident care must
forthwith be had, that not only all carowsing and quaffing, all gulling and
gormandizing, all excessive and riotous banqueting: but also that all
superfluous buildings, all needless braueries, all extrauagant sports, and all
other profluuious dispendings be heedfully avoided in every state, more
especially in those the forenamed stomachs themselves.

For these only respects, I have here even purposely (although yet
synecdochically) censured all those the former most foul and shameful
disorders under the only name of Tobacco fumes; putting down a part for the
whole: and naming that one vice especially, as a most lively represent of those
other the smokelike vanishing vapors; and as the very principal annoyance to
both the stomachs: and so consequently to the flourishing estate of the
natural, and Political bodies themselves.

And not only all such superfluous excess, but (which more is by much) all
those oppressing and pining wants whatsoever, which may (in any sort) surprise
the good estate of those stomachs, must forthwith be warily suppressed. Namely,
the want of competent tillage for corn; the want of convenient pasturing for
beeues, for oxen, for milch-kine, for sheep, with such other convenient means
to manure, manage, enable, and strengthen their several tillages and pasture
grounds, for such a convenient increase as may fully suffice from time to time,
about the necessary supportation of their own, and the public good. The want
(in like manner) of politic, of peaceable, and public good orders, about the
orderly and quiet collecting of such singular blessings as the Lord (in much
mercy) bestows upon any their ordinary labors for public good, must be
heedfully respected and timely redressed by public authority.

So as your excellent Highness may herein again be pleased to see the great
conueniencie of all those good penal statutes (were they but carefully
executed) which do necessarily concern the orderly upholding of husbandry in
it own proper nature, or do purposely tend to the timely suppressing of
whatsoever riots, routs, and unlawful assemblies that might respectively
ouerlay the poor husbandmens labors, and peaceable proiects concerning any
their peculiar professions for public good.

In consideration whereof, I have here purposely, and largely laid open the
urgent necessity for the timely suppressing of that late disordered and
unlawful attempt of lawless persons, in and about the unorderly and
tumultuous disparking of pastures and several grounds, under an idle pretense
of the necessary (though needless) augmentation of tillage: demonstrating
most plainly, that their falsely supposed defect of tillage is no such an
oppressing want, as does presently hurt the poor husbandmans happy estate (all
other things else proportionably and euenly respected:) and that therefore
there needed no such disordered and headie attempts, for the timely supply of
that their falsely supposed want.

Having hitherto anatomized the whole purport of this my purposed project for
public good, I am now, not unwilling the same should be soundly peized with
those the approved weights of the Sanctuary which will not deceive. Especially,
if our learned Physicians be made the indifferent cyzers and censurers
concerning all Physical questions: as also, if those our experimented
Politicians and Politic Statesmen may become the provident weigh-masters of
what points soever appertaining to matters of policy.

More respectively (most dread Sovereign) I do here very freely, and
submissiuely put over the whole to your Majesty's approved consideration and
view, as unto the most competent Judge of public regard; very humbly
entreating your excellent Highness, that (from out of your long experimented
Physical skill) you would first of all be pleased, very soundly to censure
that former part of this present Discourse, which more especially concerns
those exceeding great hurts that do vnperceiueably surprise the bodies of men,
by means of their inward taking of Tobacco fumes. And then next (with no less
humble submission) I humbly entreat, that your unmatchable wisdom for
public good, would likewise be pleased (from out of your long settled
judgment, and experimented practice about the orderly suppressing of
whatsoever shameful disorders adjudged pestiferous to the public good of our
country) to privilege with the approved stamp of your authentical
approbation, that other part of this present Discourse, which more respectively
relates the purses profluuitie about the superfluous charges of filthy
Tobacco fumes, and the pestiferous poisoning of the long settled peace of our
public State: so far forth especially, as the truth it self, and present
occasions do instantly crave from time to time. Very submissiuely entreating
moreover, that the whole Treatise it self may find at your Majesty's hands,
that favorable entertainment which your gracious wisdom shall think good to
grace it withal: and thereupon also, may publicly and boldly march under the
martial ensign of your kingly care for public good, against all the fiery
encounters of whatsoever fuming Tobacconists.

So shall the almighty Jehovah his absolute wisdom be Math. 11.19.
freely justified of all her children; so shall your kingly reputation be
justly eternized among all posterities; so shall the public State of our
country be much more bettered, and more soundly conserved in a solid
condition; so shall the almighty Lawmakers be more largely magnified for his
manifold mercies bestowed among us; so shall the poor husbandmens hearts (as
it were with kingly cordials) be forthwith revived; so shall our disordered
Tobacconists be presently daunted, and for ever hereafter discouraged: yea and
so shall my poor self be more securely protected from whatsoever the fiery
Ier. 18.18.
strokes of venomous tongues, to my better emboldning, and further
encouragement in such other like future attempts for public good. And even so,
I most humbly surceasse my purposed suite for the present good of our public
State: beseeching the almighty Jehovah to bless your excellent Highness in
body and soul, and to enrich you in both with a principal spirit,
correspondent to your Princely place; to the public good of our country, and
your own everlasting comfort in Jesus Christ. Even so Lord Jesus, Amen.

(...).
Your Majesty's most humble, and most dutiful Subject, JOHN DEACON.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, grace in Christ, with an holy discerning spirit. So
be it.
GEntle Reader, if thou will more seriously bend thy best thoughts awhile
toward some serious consideration concerning thine accustomed inward taking of
filthy Tobacco fumes, it may be thy good hap (by the merciful goodness of our
gracious God) to have thereby thy fantastical mind enlightened about a foul
foggie error; thy crazie corpse disburdened of many pestiferous humors, and thy
prodigal purse more might^ly privileged from those sundry proflunious
expenses, wherewith (by tampering too boldly with filthy Tobacco fumes, as
also, by conuersing too commonly with carousing companions, and other like
chargeable courses attending hourly thereon) the same has eftsoons been
shrewdly surprised, and (in a manner) most clearly euacuated.

The true and timely apprehension of these three such precious and present
auailes, succeeding these Paganish and heathenish practices, may make thee in
time (by the great goodness of God) to veil thy bonnet for public good: and
herein withal, to become forthwith a Merchant Venturer, by aduenturing boldly
upon the seasonable venting forth of this late invention, for the public
advantage of whatsoever our trifling Tobacconists; unless happily, those their
vapouring euacuations (very chymically extracted from the fennish fumes of
their filthy Tobacco) have now too too fearfully overwhelmed their blindfold
brains with such foggie forestalling mists, as do dangerously suppress the
senses themselves, and too too sottishly surprise the sway of sound reason.

Although notwithstanding, I am in no doubt at all, but that thou thine own
self (having once in an approved experience, very sensibly apprehended the
exceeding great efficacy of this present Discourse for public good) wilt
forthwith hold for an infallible Axiom, that Bonum quo communius, e^ meliu^.
A public good, the more common it is, the better it is. And thereupon, as my
self have eftsoons been moved by others, and now resolved in my self, to
communicate these my private thoughts to each particular person for public
good: so thou thine own self, and all the rest of that reasonable sort
(participating all jointly together with the public profit thereof,) will all
jointly together extol the infallible wisdom of that only approved Physician
for body and soul, who has every way made us so sufficiently and so
Christianly wise concerning the undoubted safety of body and soul: and
therewithal, will jointly and heartily pray for the healthful preservation of
such, and so many as seek (by any their sacred skils) to cause every of us so
foundly to conceive (though somewhat too late) the unsoundness of al those the
unsound and sottish conceits which have hitherto haled men headlong an end, to
the untimely taking of filthy Tobacco fumes.

If thy mind be still in a mammering doubt* whether the venomous condition of
these poysonsome fumes be so pestiferous as this present Discourse does seem
to purport, then turn thy present thoughts (I pray thee) toward the untimely
deaths of sundry such excellent personages as (tampering too much therewith)
have (even now of late) not only been suddenly surprised by an unnatural
death, but (which more is) their dead bodies being opened, had all their
entrails as black as a coal, and the very fat in their bodies resembling (in
all outward appearance) the perfect color of rustie, or reesed bacon: whose
names notwithstanding, I do here purposely conceal, for the very reverence it
self which I formerly bare to their persons and places.

If notwithstanding all this, thou will not (as yet) be brought unto a present
dislike of those the said fumes themselves, then turn thy serious and timely
considerations to those fearful effects, which (not long since) afforded
their untimely and terrible attendance toward those our disordered and
turbulent Tobacconists of former times. Who (for very love of their Tobacco
traffic, and other disordered courses) neither spared their persons, nor
purses, but wilfully spoiled and consumed them both: to the manifest wronging
of many other besides, the public contempt of good positiues laws, the
wilful breach of his Majesty's peace, the rebellious resisting of his martial
power, with the fearful spilling of their own, and other men's blood.

Let no partial affections (good Christian Reader) so far forth miscarrie, nor
so violently inueagle thine unsettled and wavering mind, as that thou should
once dare to applaud the disordered courses, and intemperate actions of any
such barbarous Cannibals as do causelessly conspire, and preposterously pretend
to bring in a confused paritie throughout the whole State. With very base and
most beastly degenerate minds are those monstrous Minotaures bewitched, no
doubt, who may (by no means) be brought to endure, or to broke the renowned
estates of the Nobility, or Gentry in any their country coasts: neither yet
to like long of any his Majesty's favorites, whom the Almighty himself (for
the raritie of sundry their singular virtues) aduanceth to a timely honor.
Howbeit, very true is the saying it self, and the truth thereof made too too
apparent in such disordered persons: namely, that Res. rationis expers est ipsa
improbitas.
Dishonestie it self is a thing even utterly destitute of all sense and reason.

Well (whatsoever may be the success with some others) I doubt not at all, but
that these my poor labors for public good, will (from henceforth) make me as
deeply interessed in some other men's labors of like interchangeable
traffic: more especially, of those well minded persons who now begin to
perceive what present profit may eftsoons arise from this my lately erected
new Mart for public good. On the other side, if any idle, or odly conceited
companions (at the unexpected pitching up of these my approved boothstakes for
public good) do over pecuishly fall into sustian fumes, because these their
filthy Tobacco fumes are thus suddenly enforced to render a most filthy
redolent smell in the very nostrils of such and so many as are but competently
furnished with a sound and settled judgment: yet undoubtedly, the integrity and
uprightness of mine honest plain heart herein, will be sufficiently able (I
hope) to manage most stoutly mine authentical intent for public good,
against all the fiery thunder-cracks of those our fuming Tobacconists, whose
trifling courses do nothing else but breed the public bane of our peace and
prosperity. And howsoever some malcontented Tobacconists, (of a very malicious
spite) may covertly endeavor to kindle their fiery tongues (as it were with
Psalm. 120.4.
Juniper coals) against either my person, or published Treatise, I doubt not
yet, but as the integrity of mine honest intent for public good, may
sufficiently shelter my person for dealing herein: so am I strongly persuaded,
that, that self same public authority which so frankly affords free
passage (with privilege) to this my published Discourse for like public good,
at the very first sparkling forth of those our Tobacconists fire-flashes (how
fierce, and how flaming soever) will be authentically able, either to cause
their turbulent rage to recoyle forthwith upon their own pates; or to besmeare
their persons at least, with that odd satyricall Adage which terms those our
testie Tobacconists (...).
Thericleiou philos, that is in English, A fantastical favorite and follower
of cupcompanions. Howsoever, the better sort (I am sure) will readily
entertain my good meaning herein, with that honest affection and Christian
mind which is evermore accustomed to construe such a subject as this, in the
best and honestest sense: and therefore (leaving the success whatsoever to the
orderly disposing of the only wise God) I will now show thee forthwith my
whole purpose and order herein.

First, I have propounded (as thou see) the whole in Dialogue manner, for the
plainer demonstration of the matter it self, making Capnistus, and Hydrophorus
the only speakers therein. The first (that is Capnistus, signifying a fiery
perfumed fellow) resembles our smokie and fumish Tobacconists: the other (
Hydrophorus I mean, betokening a water-bearer) correspondently represents all
such sound hearted subjects as are very well able (by the sway of sound reason,
as it were with cold water) to quench the intemperate fiery flames of all our
fuming Tobacconists. Having thus acquainted thee with my whole purpose and
order herein, let us now forthwith proceed to the orderly prosecution thereof.
Beseeching the almighty Jehovah to bestow that blessing upon it, which may
tend to the everlasting glory of his most glorious name; the good of our Church
and the common wealth; and our own eternal comforts in Jesus Christ: So be
it, even so, Amen.

Dignitatis (...) Deus.
Thine in the Lord, and the Lord his unworthiest on earth, JOHN DEACON.

A Ware-lash for wood-braines.
THe sluggish sort, who snorting sleep, and live like lazy louts,
False frauds will frame to mate each man; yet firke them with their flouts.
The Serpent sly, the subtle Snake, will fawn upon each Fear;
And coldly crewle till they be crept into the bosom dear,
Of them that pity their complaints, and waylings well do way:
But (if in breast they once be borne) to sting they never stay.
The Caterpillars carping crew, with these I may bring in;
Who live o'th labors of good men: yet pass they not one pin,
What cold, what irksome weary nights, what tedious tasks, what toil;
Nor yet, how many meatlesse meals men have, nor what turmoile.
Yet, Deacon dear (not dreading darts of furious frantic fools)
Has wouen a web, and wrought a work most meet for stately Schools.
He fears no force of Vipers b^oode, nor Caterpillars crew;
But frankly of his own accord puts it to public view.
In it he touches no man's state, of high or low degree:
Surmounting sins he would suppress, as soothly men may see.
Each vice put down in open Book, I might in order name,
Had not the Author to our hands, so soundly showed the same.
And since the man gapes not for gain, nor praise from men pretends:
Afford him thanks for his great pain, and so you make amends.
This guerdon just if you grudge at, I should account you wurse
Then Judas he, (that treacherous wretch) who bare about the purse.
But, hope I have, you will accept thereof by due desert,
And it applaud: and so (dear friends) adieu with all my heart.
Laudum suarum praeco insufficiens, S. T.

Que sara, sara.
To the beneuolent and honestly affected Reader.
IF handi-crafts-men have great praise for working well,
(With toyling trade) the trifling wares which they for money sell:
Then why should Deacon doubt to purchase praise of men,
To whom he frankly gives the gift of this his learned pen?
If he his busied brow has beat for our avail,
And for our profit taken pains: why should his guerdon fail?
No greedy golden fee, no gem, no Jewel brave;
But of the Reader, good report this Writer longs to have.
No man of meanest wit, no beast of slender brain:
Who thinks that such a work as this, was penned with little pain.
The work it self portends what toil he undertook,
Or er'e his curious file could frame this passing pleasant Book.
If pleasure thou possess, or profit thereby take:
He has the depth of his desire, who penned it for thy sake.
But, though thou feel some want of that thou wish at furst:
Read once again with good advice, before thou judge the wurst.
Lay love and hate aside, affection put to flight:
So shall thou judge as Justice wills, so shall thy doom be right.
Remember, Midas ears were framed like an Ass:
Because he said that Pan in skill, Apollo far did pass.
So, if thou shall prefer some trifle more then truth,
Thou shall deserve (as Midas did) the Asses ears with ruth.
For, learned is the man that did this Treatise frame:
And, learned is the wight, to whom he dedicates the same.
And, learned is the work, and honest eke the fact:
And honest men will honestly allow each honest act.
But, those that needs will storm, and wot not well wherefore,
Must needs have part of that reward which Midas reap't before.
Which, if thou will avoid (as I would wish to shun)
Do deem with good advised drift, this deed by Deacon done.
So, I that made this verse, will think no worse of thee,
Then Deacons work does well deserve, accounted of to be.
But, if thou bark at Moon (like Bandog void of fears)
All men may deem thee for an Ass, by those thine Ass like ears.
Virescit vulnere virtus.
Thine, to pleasure, and to profit thee, B. G.

THE FVME OF TOBACCO TAKEN INWARD, IS VERY PERNICIOVS UNTO THE BODY.
Capnistus, the Speakers. Hydrophorus, the Speakers.
Capnistus. WHat Hydrophorus, mine ancient Antagonist? adieu: farewell for a
season. Come, haste my mates: away. Have over, have over.


Hydrophorus. Cauallero Capnistus, what haste I pray thee? Whither away man,
that thou call so earnestly for the Mariners to have thee over?


Capn. What haste (quoth you) Sir? Who ever expected such a frivolous demand
from so famous a Doctor? Have thou utterly forgotten the ordinary proverb,
which tells us plainly, that Time and Tide attends upon no man's beck? And I
have undertaken a dangerous adventure toward the uttermost parts of West India
with speed: from whence also I intend to traffic Tobacco into this our
English Island.


Hydr. A dangerous, say thou? yea rather, a most desperate adventure.
Especially, when the voyage must be undergone by a stripling so tender of
years: and for a traffic moreover, so untoothsome in taste.


Capn. I am sir (I assure you) of a contrary opinion. For (my self being now
in my most flourishing age) you should deem me so much more able to bear, and
abide by the bickering, how bitter soever. And as for Tobacco (how untoothsome
soever it seems in taste) being found most wholesome by plain experience,
and a traffic moreover in so great regard with one and other, I do not
presently perceive what one commodity may be shipped from thence, more fit for
public good, nor any way more meet for my private auailes. But, adieu for
the present. Come, have over, have over.


Hydr. What man? pause (I pray thee) a little. For as soft fire makes sweet
malt: so, the hasty man (we see) does seldom want woe. And (without
question) thine unexperienced age, as also this thy preposterous purpose
concerning that thine intended traffic, they do both of the^, argue more
haste then heed; more will then wit; more hurt then health; more poison then
profit; and (which more is) a great deal more woe then welfare: if the same be
not heedfully foreseen, and timely prevented.


Capn. Why so, I beseech you, Sir?


Hydr. Do thou ask me, why so? Come hither I pray thee, sit close by my
sides for a while: and I will tell thee why so.


Capn. Content. But, of all loves, then be as brief as you may: for fear of
foreslowing my purposed voyage. Go to now, tell me what one reason you have, to
be hardly conceited, concerning either my tender young years, or the long
tried traffic of this my intended adventure?


Hydr. With very good will. And this so much the rather, for that the
consideration of both jointly together, do even forcibly carry my thoughts to
that selfsame amazedness, which formerly affected Julius Caesar that mighty
Monarch and Conqueror of the whole world, concerning the tried effects of that
fearful conflict which he eftsoons had with the Almains and Sweuians in
Germany, the Swissers and Tournayans in France.


Capn. What strange amazedness might that be, I beseech you?


Hydr. Certainly, even such, and so exceedingly strange, as did (for the
present) most fearfully daunt the very vigor and force of his vital spirits.
For, finding in that sort of people (above other nations) a wonderful
courageous mind, with exceeding great strength of body to bear out the hottest
brunt of the battle; and having also at length obtained of them a very
laborious and tedious victory, with exceeding much toil, and very great
bloodshed: by the often consideration thereof, he was sundry times drawn into
this deep and serious cogitation: Namely, how it might possibly come to pass,
that he should so experiment in every of them, such a rare and courageous
spirit, and so resolute a will, with sufficient strength accordingly, to
undergo any imminent danger; whereas, in others he found nothing at all but an
effeminate life, with a mind of curiosity, in withdrawing themselves from all
dangerous and deadly occurrents.


Capn. And what? was he carried so far into this endless labyrinth, as he
wotted not well which way to wind himself out, but with leading himself
backward by the only conduct of a labyrinthian clew?


Hydr. Nothing less. For (having searched all the corners of his divine wit,
to find forth some reason in nature concerning this matter) at length (with
exceeding great judgment, and singular wisdom) he espied two special causes
hereof; Namely, their abstinence from wine: and, their want of traffic with
other nations.


Capn. What benefits could come unto them by either of both these courses?


Hydr. Surely, exceeding great benefits. For, by the first (namely, by their
abstinence from wine) they reaped this certain commodity; I mean, they
continued the state of their bodily humors in a sound and settled temperature:
and, by the other (that is, by their utter want of usual traffic with other
nations) they kept entire their ancient customs and manners, and held them
continually absolute, and uncorrupted with the venomous vices of foreign
countries. As also (by the ordinary means of both) they received this singular
benefit, that they preserved from time to time, the vigor, as well of their
minds as their bodies, substantially sound and lively, and every way pregnant
and ready, both for peace, and for wars.


Capn. How has this odd cogitation of his distracted your mind?


Hydr. In very deed, exceedingly much. For, having eftsoons somewhat seriously
pondered this his approved judgment, and comparing it even now, with the
present occasions of this our licencious age, as also, with their childish and
fond resolution concerning such foreign adventures: I do find too too many
important and weighty causes, very earnestly persuading me to be iumpe of
Julius Caesar's opinion concerning such a purposed project.


Capn. And why so?


Hydr. Do thou ask me why so? Do but euenly compare the one age with the
other, and thou shall plainly perceive the reasons thy self. For, what made
them (in those days) such able men of their bodies and minds, and so apt for
every difficult enterprise, but even that their ordinary abstinence from wine
and strong drinks? And what causes us now to become such cauallering Carpet
Knights, such fantastical effeminate fellows, and so utterly unfit for
martial affairs, but our continual carousing of cup after cup; our
insatiable tippling up of Tobacco fumes, and our contagious conuersing with the
vicious customs of foreign countries?


Capn. I can (as yet) conceive no one inconvenience from either of both.


Hydr. Let us then consider them severally: for, so shall we the sooner
perceive the pernicious occurrents proceeding from either. Observe therefore I
pray thee, what monstrous diseases are daily bred in men's bodies, as also, how
many and diverse corruptions are couched close in their minds, by reason of an
immoderate swilling up of wine, of ale, and of beer. For, from whence
proceeds superfluous moistures ouerspreading each solid part of the body?
From whence comes Catarres, Coughs, Rheumes, distillations of the brain,
Comaes, Apoplexies, Palsies, Dropsies, Peripneumonies, Impostumations of the
Lungs, Lethargies, Ephialties, Tremblings, Cataracts, Ophthalmies, Crudities,
Iliaca passions, Cachexies, Surfets, unnatural Vomitings, Joint sicknesses,
Goutes, and sundry such other; besides the manifold corruptions of the mind it
self: from whence (I say) do all and every of these take primarie being, but
from an immoderate quassing? Would to God, this preposterous age of ours did
not so pregnantly purport and witness the same, without any my record herein.


Capn. Indeed I must freely acknowledge, that such sundry and strange
diseases are grown too too rife and ripe in this our decrepite age, and those
also very fearfully affecting both young and old: but do all those diseases you
speak of, directly proceed from an immoderate gulling in of hot wines, and
other strong drinks?


Hydr. Undoubtedly, they do take their primarie sprout from those pernicious
fountains, either immediately, or, by a mutual consent in their sundry and
diverse gradations at least: as thou thine own self (by some sober conference
with grave and skillful Physicians) may more sensibly and more soundly be
made to perceive.


Capn. Well Sir, I understand (by the purport of your speech) what fearful
inconveniences may successively follow upon such an immoderate swilling: and
therefore I do herein accord with your self and Julius Caesar, that, a
moderate abstinence from wine and other strong drinks, is a singular good
means to support the sound estate of men's natural humors, and (thereby) the
better to enable their bodies and minds for every notable exploite. Howbeit, I
cannot (as yet) conceive, how this our intercourse of traffic with forreiners
should any way prejudice the persons of men; or procure annoyance to the
public good of our English Island. And therefore, tell me without farther
delay, whether you do absolutely deny us all traffic with strangers?


Hydr. Nothing less. For, so should I be sure, not only to cross the
singular good purpose of God, in the mutual conservation of people and nations
dispersed abroad: but also, even utterly overthrow an excellent good course for
the orderly increase of mutual concord betwixt kingdom and kingdom, while
the pining wants of the one, are plentifully supplied by the others abundance.
Concerning therefore the timely intercourse of traffic with strangers, though
I hold the same simply lawful, nor flatly to be forbidden by any; if
especially, a provident care and a due regard be first had of the traveler his
age and years, as also, of the religious and honest estate of those countries
themselves, whereunto the travelers bend their purposed designements for such
traffice intended: Although yet, notwithstanding (I know not well how) this I
am certainly sure of, that, whilst such an inconsiderate recourse to and fro
from sundry nations and kingdoms far remote, lies carelessly open for
whosoever will first give the onset upon it, we leave our ancient simplicity
eftsoons in a foreign air: and (in stead thereof) do too greedily suck up
from forreiners, not their virtues, but vices, and monstrous corruptions, as
well in religion and manners, as also, in framing the whole course of our life
(both for apparel, diet, and all other things) every way correspondent and
current to such a contagious, and most pernicious president.


Capni. By your leave Sir a little, before you proceed in your speech.


Hydr. With all my heart: propound what you please.


Capn. This then is the sum of my purpose. Seeing the holy Scriptures do
teach us directly, that Romans 7.25.
it is the law in our members which leads us captives to sin, and that Iam.
1.14.
every man is enticed and drawn unto evil by his own concupiscence: how dare
you ascribe the corruptions either of our minds or bodies, concerning religion
and manners, unto any our intercourse of traffike with foreign nations?


Hydr. Very true as thou say. It is the law of our members which leads us
captives to sin; and that every man is enticed and drawn unto evil by his
proper concupiscence. But yet, mark thus much withal, that the Scripture does
not there make the minds of men mere agents, but patients rather in the
perpetrating of any ungodly actions; because, those their minds, are said to be
enticed and led, which necessarily imports thus much at the least: Namely,
(since those their minds are said to be enticed, and led) necessarily there must
(in every such sinful action) be some other primarie agent (besides their said
minds themselves) which so inticeth, and leads men captives: as also, a
convenient means with some proportional object, whereby they may so be
enticed and led unto evil. Now then (to speak properly and pertinently) the
devil himself is that primarie agent: who, by sundry external occurrents
(as it were by most apt and convenient means thereunto) does accidentally
entangle men's minds: that so (their said minds being formerly captiuated by
their proper concupiscence) he might the more easily entice, and lead them
captives to all manner of evil. For so James speaks plainly in the forenamed
Scripture, thus: Let no man say (when he is tempted) I am tempted of God, for
God tempts no man: but every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his
proper concupiscence. Where ye Apostle(yousee)speaks purposely of three
concurring together in every temptation. Namely, the primary tempter, I mean
ye devil; the party tempted, that is, man's mind; and the outward object, as ^
convenient means whereby the temptation it self is thoroughly effected: namely
yt inbred concupiscence which covertly lurketh in every man's nature, as it
were a quick spark under ashes. Which said concupiscence (having apt matter
outwardly offered unto it) will quickly be kindled, especially, if ye devil
with his bellows but blow up the same. A most lively representation
presentation here of we may have in the first fall of mankind^ wherein Genesis
3.1. Wisd. 1.24. 2 Cor. 11.3.
the devil himself was the primarie tempter, Genesis 3.1. 1 Timothy 2.14.
our Grandmother Eve she was the party tempted; and her Genesis 3.6.
inherent concupiscence, the very means whereby the temptation it self was
effected. Which her concupiscence (howsoever the same was Genesis 1.27. Ephesians. 4.24.
absolutely upright and sound before,) yet then (having a proportional object
outwardly and conveniently applied unto it, (the Genesis 3.4.5.6.
apple I mean which was good for meat, and pleasant in sight) her said
concupiscence (being eftsoons blown up Genesis 3.1.4.5
by the bewitching bellows of Satan's enticing blast) was quickly inflamed and
kindled in evil. And therefore (the premises rightly respected) I both dare,
and may as boldly asscribe the pollutions of our minds and bodies (concerning
religion and manners) to such careless intercourse of trafficking with the
corruptions and customs of foreign countries; as I formerly avouched the
immoderate swilling in of hot wines, with other strong drinks, to be the very
procuring cause of many pernicious diseases in the bodies of men.


Capn. Which ways Sir, I beseech you?


Hydr. Do thou ask me which ways, or by what means such careless
intercourse of traffic with foreign nations, might be any occasion of
polluting both body and mind? If I should likewise demand of thee now, which
way, or by what means the wise King Solomon became such a wicked idolater:
would thou not tell me straight way, that it undoubtedly came so to pass,
by his conuersing and wedding with wicked idolatrous nations?


Capn. That would I presently do, and you may not deny it your self: because
the word of our God 1 King. 11.1.2.3 4.5.6.7.8.
avouches so much.


Hydr. And does not the same word of God tell thee in like sort, that Eccle.
13.1.
all such as handle pitch shall be defiled with pitch? And therefore the good
people of God are precisely charged Ier. 51.8.9. Reave. 14.8.9. and 18.3.4.
to go out forthwith from Babylons beastly society, for fear of partaking
with Babylons beastly sins. If good men's timely departure from Babylons
beastly society, be deemed a very good means to deliver their bodies and
souls from Babylons beastly sins: who sees not then, but that their
untimely and careless conuersing with Babylons society, must needs be some
urgent occasion of a contagious communicating with Babylons beastly
cor^uptions? Yea and this so much the rather, by how much the feeble nature of
sinful man, is more wilfully prone to perpetrate whatsoever noisome
pollutions, then warily pressed to participate with holy and wholesome
preseruations.


Capn. Illustrate this one point (I beseech you) with some apparent and plain
demonstrations of truth.


Hydr. With all my heart. But first, let me here ask thee, whether thou thy
self do not very plainly perceive (in thy proper experience) too too many of
our English men's minds most fearfully estranged from the Apostolic primitive
sincerity: and their bodies withal, very monstrously transformed from their
former ancient simplicity?


Capn. Yes undoubtedly. I have eftsoons experimented the truth hereof, in a
daily, and due observation of their present estates: and withal, I have
wondered greatly thereat, considering the sincere and plentiful preaching of
the gracious Gospel among us.


Hydr. No marvel hereof at all. For howsoever the sacred word of our God has
a glorious passage among us, that it might be 2. Cor. 2.16.
A savor of life unto life in such as believe, or a savor of death unto death
in so many as perish, and is also 2. Cor. 2.14.15.
in either of both a sweet savor to God: yet surely (such is the waywardness
of men's wicked nature) we commonly do take a much more delight in an apish
invention of men's wicked actions Esa. 3.16.
then in an holy meditation of wholesome admonitions. And therefore, like as
lewd words 1. Cor. 15.33 Iere. 44.16.17.
are a most mischievous means to corrupt good manners: so likewise, licentious
manners, they are very contagious occasions to Psalm. 106.34 35.
contaminate the minds of men with all manner of outrageous maladies. Whereupon
the Apostle precisely commands men 1. These. 5 22.
to abstain from all appearance of evil.


Capn. All this I freely confess: but what infer you hereof?


Hydr. This I infer: namely, the very maine reason it self, confuting that
their former most frivolous wondering at the contagious corruption of men's
minds and bodies: especially in this age of ours, wherein the glorious Gospel
is so sincerely and so freely preached among us. For (pretermitting herein the
unsearchable purpose of God, who uses eftsoons to punish one sin with
another) what other more pregnant reason may be rendered for this, then our
careless intercourse of trafficking with the contagious corruptions, and
customs of foreign nations? And (to explane my speech in more particular
manner) from whence comes it now to pass, that so many of our English-mens
minds are thus terriblie Turkished with Mohammedan trumperies; thus rufully
Romanized with superstitious relickes; thus treacherously Italianized with
sundry antichristian toys; thus spitefully Spanished with superfluous pride;
thus fearfully Frenchized with filthy prostitutions; thus fantastically
Flanderized with flaring net-works to catch English fools; thus huffingly
Hollandized with ruffian-like loome-workes, and other like Ladified fooleries;
thus greedily Germandized with a most gluttenous manner of gormandizing; thus
desperately Danished with a swine-like swilling and quaffing; thus sculkingly
Scotized with Machiauillian proiects; thus inconstantly Englished with every
new fantastical foolerie; thus industriously Indianized with the intoxicating
filthy fumes of Tobacco, and what not besides? From whence (I pray thee) do
all these, and sundry such other prodigious pollutions of mind and body
proceed, but from an inconsiderate conuersing with the contagious corruptions,
and customs of those the forenamed countries? According to the Italian
proverb which pourtrayeth forth an Englishman, thus: Englese Italienato, e v^
diabolo i^carnato: An English man Italienate, is a very devil incarnate.


Capn. And does their only conuersing with those the forenamed foreign
countries, procure such filthy pollutions of body and mind?


Hydr. It is not simply their conuersing with any those foreign countries
themselves: but their communicating rather with the inbred corruptions, and
contagious customs of those several countries, tha^ poysoneth both, with such
filthy pollutions.


Capn. You conclude then, that our country men may safely converse with those
countries themselves, all the while they be carefully circumspect of their own
proper carriage, and resolutely purposed not to participate (in any respect)
with the contagious corruptions of those selfsame countries.


Hydr. Very true. But how difficult a matter it is for man's nature (so
universally polluted) to escape the pollutions themselves, each one may
perceive in his proper experience, and find it most apparently demonstrated by
this ordinary experiment: Namely, let a sweet crystal stream but have it
accustomed course through the midst of a foul filthy channel, and then tell
me how long that stream it self will soundly retain his inherent sweetness
or clearenesse. Now then, man's corrupted nature (being neither inherently
sweet, nor essentially clear in it self) if it be carelessly permitted (hand
over head) to have an ordinary intercourse of trafficking with corrupt and
contagious countries, as it were in a foul filthy channel, the very mind it
self will be as unable to withstand the pernicious customs of those
contagious countries, as the very body of man (accustomably conuersing in
pestilentiall places) is unfit to resist the pestilentiall infections of those
selfsame places. For a further proof of this point, let other Christian
policy; or the King his prerogative royal; or the force of fear and bloody
massacres, but once proclaim a final restraint, or perpetually forestall the
accustomed course and recourse for traffic to any the forenamed Babels of
beastly confusions, and thou shall plainly perceive by the very sequel
thereof, how far forth the contagion it self has hitherto possessed those
passengers minds. For the Merchants of the earth (making erst their ordinary
traffic, in the bowels and belly of those beastly Babels) will eftsoons
begin very grievously to bemoane themselves, by reason of such a final
restraint from those their beloved Babels of beastly confusions; because no man
may now Revel* 18.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.
buy of their wares any more: Their glittring wares (I mean) of gold, of
silver, of precious stones, and pearls: their wares of fine linen, of purple,
of silk, of scarlet, and all manner of Thine wood; their wares of all vessels
of yuorie, and of all vessels of precious wood; their wares of brass, of iron,
and of marble; their wares of cinnamon of odours, of ointments, of frankensence,
of wine, of oil, of fine flower, and of wheat; their wares of beasts, of
sheep, of horses, of chariots, of servants* of the very souls of men: yea and
of the apples (I mean, the filthy Tobacco fumes) which their very souls and
minds so earnestly affected, and lusted after. All these are departed from
them; and all other things else which were fat and excellent are quite departed
from them, so as they can find them no more. The Merchants of these (I say)
which were made (by such traffic) exceedingly rich, will stand afar off and
cry: Alas, alas, that great Babel of beastly confusions, which was formerly
apparelled in fine linen and purple, and scarlet; and gilded with great and
glorious riches; as of gold, of precious stones* and of pearls; is now come to
a woeful and sudden desolation. And every ship-maister, and all the people
that occupy ships, and shipmen, and whosoever do usually travail upon the
Seas, shall stand afar off and cry out, saying: What City was ever like to
this our beloved great Babel for traffic? Yea, they will even cast dust on
their heads, and with weeping and wayling will cry out and say: Alas* alas for
this our beloved Babel, wherein were made rich all such as had ships on the
Sea, by means of her costly traffic: for (by that former final restraint)
she is now in one hour, made utterly desolate. Now then, all these (with
sundry such other their horrible outcries, arising upon that former final
restraint for trafficking any further with foreign countries) do very plainly
purport to the world, that both bodies and minds have heretofore been filthily
polluted with the contagious corruptions and customs of those foreign
countries.


Capn. They pretend (I confess) very probable presumptions. But what? is there
none other remedy else for the timely redress of this mischief, but the
only perpetual, and final restraint of trafficking with them any further?


Hydr. God forbid the case should consist of such a desperate condition.


Capn. What then (as you your self conceive of the matter) may be the safest
course to be taken herein?


Hydr. Attend with patience, and I will tell thee my proper thoughts.


Capn. I do Sir: and therefore, I pray you proceed.


Hydr. This then it is. When I had somewhat more seriously bethought me hereof
(though somewhat too late) and with great grief of heart observed these
matters, as well concerning our Church, as Commonwealth, even thereupon I met
with (as I verily imagined) a very fit means for the timely forestalling of
all those the forenamed mischiefs: the which also I will here propound to the
serious consideration of thy self, and all other besides. Not because I do
once imagine, that either thou or they may possibly be ignorant of it, being a
point so frequent and popular in public policy: but rather, that you all may
jointly record, and mutually recognize with me that selfsame thing which
cannot possibly become unpleasant to any; being (in very truth) approved of
all, and universally convenient for the good estate of our Church and Country.


Capn. Declare the same then, without any further delay.


Hydr. I will. Aristotle that divine Philosopher, a man in all his inventions
very excellent, especially, in framing a Commonweal, most admirable: he
deemeth young men utterly unmeet to be ouertimely instructed (much less
employed) in matters of civil policy. And moreover, for so much as (by reason
of their tender years) the humors of young men are too too turbulent and
headie, and their affections over easily carried away, he allows them no
conuersa^ion at all with servants, much les^e with strangers, of whom (for the
slenderness of their present judgments) they might rather learn that which
may fearfully corrupt both nature and manners, then what would any way better
their minds in either of both.


Capn. To what purpose propound you this opinion of Aristotle?


Hydr. To a very good purpose. For by this one precept of his, we may clearly
collect, what course (in this case) is most convenient to be taken with Youths,
more especially with such as are Students, as also with so many besides, as (by
reason of their worthes) should seriously give over themselves to the study of
learning for public good.


Capn. What course, I beseech you?


Hydr. Even this which here follows now: Namely, that no foreign recourse be
permitted to any (especially the younger sort) before they be fully come to
their ripe, and well stayed years.


Capn. And why so, I pray you?


Hydr. Because then (their humors being formerly settled) the stayednesse of
those their said humors will cause the perturbations of the mind to be calmed:
so as (from the orderly asswaging of both) there must necessarily proceed a
maturitie, and ripeness in judgment. Because then they can more easily
discern what is sound in opinion, as also what is honest and meet in manners:
being then also the better enabled (with a more constant resolution) to pursue,
and to follow especially that which is good.


Capn. If this caution were carefully observed in the ordinary education of
Youths, what public commodity would follow thereof?


Hydr. Very admirable and sundry commodities would grow from the same. For by
this means, it would undoubtedly come to pass, that neither our Church would
be dilacerated and disquieted with so many heretical opinions; our Weal
public deformed with so great and grievous corruptions, nor the profession of
Physic so amazed (as eftsoons it is) at the often beholding of such hideous
monsters (to use Auerroes his words) in many diseases.


Capn. What Sir? will you now play the Puritan, in presuming thus proudly to
propound new platformes concerning Ecclesiastical and Civil policy?


Hydr. That was and is the furthest end of my thought. For seeing as well
heresies in Religion, as corruptions in manners are authentically referred to
the several Magistrates of Church and Commonweal, by them to be plucked up by
the roots; and seeing moreover (so much as lies in them) they have hitherto
very well and warily weeded them out in either of both: it never was, nor is
now my meaning so polypragmatically to thrust forth my sickle into those their
sincerely designed haruests, nor to entermeddle at all with any their lawfully
propounded proiects. Only (as a well-willer to either of both) I do here
purpose (for the present) to put down and declare what dangerous
discommodities in Physic, as also, what pernicious occurrents to our
physical methods of curing diseases, are too too perniciously brought home and
procured from foreign travel: while we have ouercarelesly entertained a
strange kind of curing, together with many strange and vncooth medicines never
heard of before; yea and those not so sorcible to help the diseased, as to
infeeble and throw down the sound constitutions: and which also we do use so
greedily (I will not say want only) quite contrary to our countries climate,
the natural constitution of our country bodies, the inevitable rules of all
physical reason, and the long approved custom of all our wise Ancestors.


Capn. Pretermitting (for the present) your physical methods for curing, our
natural constitutions, our Countries climate, your physical rules, as also
our Ancestors long approved customs, as matters beyond mine element: do tell
me (I pray you) what one kind of hurtful traffic you are able to name,
that is so carelessly transported from foreign countries?


Hydr. What one, say thou? Alas man, what sundry sorts of poysonsome drugs
could I not soundly challenge that way, if time would permit, and such an
unwonted challenge might possibly prevail against the settled conceits of
headstrong people? Howbeit, among many things, which (without either profit,
or due regard) are needlessly (yet daily) brought home by certain vicious and
wild dispositions from the farthest India, surely nothing (in my conceit)
could be devised more apt, and more fit to overthrow quite the solid strength
of our bodies, nor more prompt and more ready to obscure and to darken the
faculties of our minds, then this filthy fume of Tobacco, whereof I purpose
here chiefly to spe^ke. In drinking also whereof, too too many do lead a
smokie life, breathing naught forth but smoking fumes: until (by untimely
deaths) they do fearfully forestall the timely establishment of an honorable
and ancient age.


Capn. (...). Haec Hel^na pro qua digladiabantur. vide Iliad. 3.
This then (I perceive) is the only fair Helena for whose sweet sake now, a
most bloody bickering must be bladed between us. But yet hear good Sir, I
beseech you. This underhand particularizing of men's proper persons, as also,
this so covert a singling forth of one particular commodity from all the rest,
they are plain demonstrations, that your preposterous spleen does more
dispitefully swell against my tender young years and purposed traffic, then
desirously seek to assuage any soundly supposed corruptions from foreign
countries.


Hydr. And why so, I pray thee Capnistus?


Capn. First, because you so boldly avouch some such vainly imagined venime, to
be ouercarelesly conuayed from out of the farthest India into this our English
Island, by vicious and wild dispositions. Secondly (for that among those your
manifold supposed corruptions) you touch only Tobacco by name, as that only
Trojan horse-bellie from whence all foreign filthiness (as your self very
soundly surmize) does too too infectiously ouerflow this Island of ours.


Hydr. I may safely swear for having a thought or purpose, either to point at
any man's person, or once to pursue his particular traffic: but only to
insist upon matters for public good. Howbeit, seeing this thy particular
application, enforces here some further explication, I will therefore deliver
my mind in plainer terms touching either of both.

For the first, who knows not of old, that this thy intended Tobacco, was
primarily posted over from West India to England, by a vicious, a vain, and a
wild disposition? that I say no more. And who sees not likewise, that the
same now (for the most part) is very vainly entertained in England, by as
vicious, as vain, and wilder dispositions, if wilder may be? For tell me (I
pray thee) what more vicious disposition then that, which so excessiuely takes
Tobacco, of very purpose to inflame his excessive and vicious affections? Or
what more vain disposition then that, which so insatiably swalloweth the
filthy fume of Tobacco, as an ordinary shooinghorne, to pull on more
insatiably, an abundance of wine, and strong drink? Briefly what more
vicious, more vain, or more wild dispositions may possibly be then those our
carousing companions, who so viciously, so vainly, and so wildly do use the
inward taking of filthy Tobacco fumes, as an intoxicating poison to make
themselves, and other their swaggering associates most dangerously wild and
mad with the venomous and deadly contagion thereof? Lo (Capnistus) these only
considerations (not thy particular person) did make me so peremptorily to term
those our careless Tobacco triflers, with that proportionable title of
vicious, vain, and wild dispositions. So as none but such as cannot
distinguish between the men and the matter it self, may justly be offended
therewith.

Neither did I precisely or purposely aim at any one particular traffic,
appertayning more properly unto thine own self: but (intending only to
propound and declare what dangerous discommodities in physic are forcibly
offered to our orderly method of Curing, through an unorderly transporting of
sundry pernicious drugs into this poor Island of ours from foreign countries)
I made (for further proof of this point) a special choice to entreat of
Tobacco alone in stead of the rest: of very purpose to bridle our unbridled and
bewitched Tobacconists from tampring any further therewith. Whose wilful
errors and vicious customs, though (as I could heartily wish) I cannot
thoroughly reclaim and correct; yet give me leave (at this present I pray thee)
to lay them wide open to the view of the world: that so our Tobacconists
themselves may perceive (if the blind obscurity of their brains, procured
from their filthy Tobacco fume will give them leave) how perniciously they
dispose of their own proper health, while they so insatiably suck in (by the
conduite of their tippling Tobacco pipe) a venomous matter enemy to man's
nature, and so inconsiderately entertain that filthy noisome fume into the
treasury of their temporal life.


Capn. If you intend to maintain this idle talk, for an absolute truth: you
may be sure to have more fists then your own about your pate.


Hydr. Yea Capnistus, I do look for many gain sayers herein, and some
peradventure of the learneder sort. Howbeit, I leave all men that way to their
own proper judgment, all the while they work no prejudice to this my
opinion; and so long as mine own self may with the same good leave dissent
from them, by the which leave they hold and maintain a contrary conceit from
me, I will not say from the truth it self.


Capn. But Sir, howsoever you seem to pretend many plausible pretenses in open
speech, men may yet suspect that you harbor some other shrewd purpose in your
secret heart.


Hydr. Men (if they please) may imagine many curious castles beyond the Moon,
without either matter or form at all. Howbeit I protest, not to speak
purposely to the prejudice of any man's person: but let every man enjoy his
proper opinion for me. Neither yet is this my speech herein undertaken for the
private respect of painful Physicians; (which wicked imagination, some
Christopher of all conceits may peradventure very viciously vent forth
against my good meaning:) but rather that I might more freely, and more
ingeniously express my whole mind in this matter, and show thee more plainly
how I am persuaded in conscience concerning the same.


Capn. Well then, this your pretended purpose being soundly performed, I doubt
not but each man may reap a singular profit thereby.


Hydr. It were (in very deed) to be wished so: although yet I can hardly be
persuaded it will be so. For Plato (in his book Plat. in Gorg
entitled Gorgias) does say there are two holes in men's minds, by means
whereof they cannot soundly contain the knowledge of good things; to wit,
forgetfulness, and misbeleefe.


Capn. How do those two holes hinder their apprehension of good things?


Hydr. After a very pestiferous manner; if thou observe it well. For by the
first (I mean by forgetfulness) the noble virtue experience (locked up long
since in our memory) is eftsoons lost: and by the other (namely by
misbeleefe) that steadfast persuasion whereby we should firmly resolve our
selves upon the authentical authority and faith of our teachers, is confusedly
scattered. Both of these hurtful holes, I would have surely shut up in thy
self, and so many besides as desire to reap any benefit by this my present
discourse.


Capn. Let other men deal as they list; I (for mine own part) will carefully
see them most soundly shut up in my self: and therefore proceed and spare not
to speak what you please, concerning the smoke of Tobacco.


Hydr. With very good will: wherein also I purpose to propound, and prosecute
this following order. First (being now to speak generally of the nature of
smoke) I will briefly and plainly show thee what smoke is: and how the same is
distinguished from vapor and exhalation. Secondly, how many kinds of smoke
there are: and from what kind of matter each one is drawn. And lastly, I will
show thee what inconvenience and hurt the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, does
dangerously effect in the bodies of men.


Hydr. A most excellent order, no doubt: proceed therefore (I beseech you)
first, in showing me generally what smoke is.


Hydr. Content. Wherein, mark this well, that almost all kinds of combustible
matter, do send forth either smoke, vapor, or exhalation extracted from
thence by the heat of the fire. The which three kinds of matters are also
distinguished one from another, in respect either of their efficient; or of
their matter; or of their effect at least. For the better understanding
whereof, I think it best (in this place) to define them all severally,
appointing to every of them his own particular limits and bounds.


Capn. Go to then, without any further delay.


Hydr. Aristotle (in the book of his Meteors) does Arist. in Meter. lib. 4.
^ap. 1.
distinguish them all in this sort. First, he defines smoke to be the general
and common extraction of dryness and moistures together, being wrought by the
heat of a more vehement fire: which notwithstanding, does neither moisten, nor
bedeaw, but rather infecteth with a black color such things as are smoked. In
which definition, smoke (thou may see) respecting the matter thereof, is said
to be a common extraction of drought and of moisture together. In respect of
the efficient, it is said to be drawn out by a more vehement fire. And in
regard of the effect, it is said to be died with a black color, but yet not
to moisten it at all.


Capn. Sir, by that which is hitherto spoken, I do plainly perceive what smoke
is; but how distinguish you the same from vapor and exhalation?


Hydr. Even by those three former respects; namely, by the efficient, the
matter, and the effect: as the comparison of smoke it self with those other
two, will make more manifest.


Capn. Why, what thing is vapor I pray you?


Hydr. Aristotle (in his Arist. in Meter. lib. 4. cap. 1.
forenamed book) defines vapor to be a separation extracted (by a vehement
heat) from water, and turned into air and spirit: which can make moist, but
give no color at all.


Capn. And what is exhalation?


Hydr. The said Aristotle defines exhalation or breath, to be a separation of
moisture alone, wrought by a small heat, which (in continuance of time) does
draw it forth: and which also is turned into air, and not into a spirit;
neither yet does it give any color or moisture.


Capn. Having succinctly showed me what smoke, vapor, and exhalation is: now
tell me (I pray you) wherein they accord, and how they do differ.


Hydr. I will. First therefore, smoke and vapor they jointly accord (thou
may see) in their proper efficient cause, for both of them are wrought by a
vehement heat, whereas exhalation is effected by a very small heat. Again
(in respect of their matter) smoke does differ from vapor, and exhalation
both: for so much as smoke is the extraction of moisture and drought together,
whereas vapor and exhalation they are only but the extraction of moisture.
Again (in regard of the effect) smoke altogether varieth from vapor, because
smoke is neither resolved into air, not yet into spirit, neither does it
moisten at all; both which are effected by vapor. Again, smoke and exhalation
(in their effect) do partly differ; for that smoke colors, which the other
does not: and partly they accord in this, that neither of them both does
moisten. Again, vapor (concerning the effect) seems both to differ from
exhalation, and to accord with the same. For, in that vapor turns unto a
spirit, and moisteneth also, therein it differs: but whereas it is sometimes
turned to air, therein it accords with exhalation. By all the premises then
thou may plainly perceive wherein smoke accords with vapor and exhalation:
and wherein also it differs from either of both.


Capn. Very true as you say, if men may confidently credit Philosophy.


Hydr. Why not credit the same? Especially, it being so consideratly
determined by that prince of Philosophers, who both had a principal
illumination this way from the heavenly Philosopher himself; and withal, the
joint approbation of all succeeding Philosophers: as may very plainly appear
by the approved consonancie which this his opinion h^ldeth with the original
words put down in the sacred Scripture.


Capn. Show me succinctly this your supposed consonancie.


Hydr. With very good will. Hebr. (...), id est, fumanit, infumauit, fumu^
emisit. Graec. (...). id est, fumus, ex furuo color sic dictus.
First therefore (concerning the first word, viz. smoke) the Hebrews they use
the word gnaschan, arising from the radical verb gnaschan: which signifies
to fume, to vapor, or send forth smoke. The Grecians, they have the word
capnos, that is, a fume, a vapor, or smoke. The Latins have famus, which we
commonly call smoke: that is to say, a black vapor extracted from fire,
taking it own name from a furnace color, and besmearing whatsoever it fumeth
upon.

And as this is the very true Etymon of the word smoke it self, so surely the
sacred Scriptures, they do accordingly observe the same. As for example: When
the Lord had assured Abraham of the Amorites country in the fourth generation
following: the holy Ghost there affirms, that, when the Sun went down
there was a fearful darkness. Gene. 15.17.
For (says the Hebrew) vehine thannur gnaschan; the Septuagint says, (...).
Et ecce fumantem furnum.
clibanos capnizomenos; the Latin says, and ecce fumantem furnum: that is
(says the English) and, behold a smoking furnace. This place (thou may see)
is directly plain for our matter propounded.

Again, when the Lord in mount Sinai, gave the Law to his people, it is there
said, that mount Sinai was all on a smoke, because the Lord came down upon it
in fire. Exodus 19.18. (...). Et ascendebat fumus eius.
And (says the Hebrew) Vaiagnal gneschano; says the Septuagint, Hosei capnos
caminou: says the Latin, and ascendebat fumus eius; that is (says our
English) and lo, the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a fiery furnace.
In this place likewise thou see an approved consonancie concerning this point
in question.

In like manner, when Ioshuah had set the City of Hai on fire, It is said,
that the men of Hai looked back and saw it: Josh. 8.20. (...). Et ascenderet
fumus ciuitatis.
Hebrew, Vehine gnalah gnaschan; ye Septuagint, et heoroun ton capnon; the
Latin has, and ascenderet fumus ciuitatis: that is (says our English) and
lo, the smoke of the City ascended up unto heaven. In all these, and Psalm.
74.1. and 75.5. and 104.5. and 144.5.
sundry such other places besides, the holy Ghost (thou may see) does not
only observe the very Etymon of the word (smoke) but (which more is) he
accords clearly with that which Aristotle has set down before concerning
the very true nature of smoke: namely, that it is an extraction of dryness and
moistness together from some fiery combustible matter, through the heat of a
vehement fire; that it is of a dark or sootie aspect; and that it besmeareth
with a black or duskish color, whatsoever is fumed therewith.

Hereunto also accords the joint approbation of all the succeeding
Philosophers, holding smoke to be hot and dry* and answerable in all things to
that which was formerly spoken concerning the same. For (says Ovid. Meta.
Ovid.) -- Calidoque inuoluitur vndique fumo. Also Virgil says thus, Virg.
Aeneid. 2.
Mistoque vndantem puluere fumum. In like manner says Cicero thus, Cic. in
Pisonem.
Paulisper stetimus in illo ganearum tuarum nidore, atque fumo: and so all the
rest. Seeing therefore we have thus, not only the joint approbation and mutual
consent of all succeeding Philosophers; but (which more is) the authentical
consonancie of sacred Scriptures concurring fully with that which Aristotle
puts down in his Meteors, concerning the efficient, the matter, and the
effect of smoke: Let this fully suffice for thy full satisfaction that way.


Capn. It gives me (Sir, I assure you) sufficient content, and therefore
proceed now to the word vapor, I pray you.


Hydr. With very good will. And therefore, herein observe (in like manner) that
(for that which we call vapor) the Hebrews they have (...) Cognationem habet
cum (...). i. aurae, vapor.
edh, that is, a vapor or very thin fume. It has a maru^llous affinity
with another word called udh: that is, a firebrand, an adustion, or burning, a
piece of wood made black by adustion. The Grecians they have Genesis 2.6. (...).
atmos, that is, a vapor or air. The Latins they have vapor: that is to say
in our English tongue, a waterie or earthy humor, extenuated or thinned: the
breath or vapor of the seas, or the earth. Or, It is a very thin humor
ascending up by adustion, and resolved into a waterie cloud, being (by nature)
moist and cold. According to that in Genesis saying, Genesis 2.6. (...).
Hebr. veidh; Septuagint; pege, Lat. vapor: that is in English, And a vapor
ascended up from the earth, and watered all the earth. Again, it is said in
Job, Job. 36.27. (...). ad vaporem cius.
that when God restrains the drops of water, the rain pours down. Hebr.
leidho, Graec. eis nepheleen, Lat. ad vaporem: that is in English, by the
vapor thereof. In these two places, the holy Ghost (thou see) does not only
observe the very true Etymon of the word vapor it self, but does likewise
very fitly accord to that definition thereof which was formerly put down by
Aristotle; namely, that vapor is a separation extracted (by a vehement heat)
from water, and so turned into air or spirit; which also can moisten, but give
no color at all, being (by nature) cold and moist. Neither is the said vapor
Johan. Velcurio. in Comment. lib. 3. cap. 5.
any inflammable impression as exhalation is: because (being but a moist and
waterie meteor) it cannot possibly be set on fire, nor carried beyond the middle
region of the air: although notwithstanding (being so elevated) it may be
thickened and made constringent.

And hereunto also, we have the joint approbation of all the succeeding
Philosophers. For says Ovid, Ovid. Metamor lib. 1.
Vapor humidus omnes, -- Res creat, and discors concordi^ foetibus apta est.
Howbeit this word, vapor, is sometime put down for heat, as witnesses
Columella saying, Colum. lib. 5. cap. 10.
Minusque vaporis aestate per angustum os penetret. And so likewise says
Virgil, Virg. Aeneid. lib. 5.
Lentusque carinas -- est vapor, and toto descendit co^pore pestis. And so
likewise the rest of that sort. Seeing therefore we have thus, not only the
joint approbation of all succeeding Philosophers, but (which more is by much)
the authentical consent of the sacred Scriptures, even mutually concurring
with that which Aristotle himself has formerly put down concerning the word,
vapor, let this therefore (for the present) suffice for that point.


Capn. It fully suffices, and therefore proceed now (in like manner) to the
word exhalation I pray you.


Hydr. With all my heart. Wherein observe (as before) that (for that which we
call exhalation) the Hebrews they have the (...) ex. (...)
word mappach, that is, a sufflation, an air, or a breath. It comes of the
radical verb, naphach, which properly signifies to blow, to breathe, to send
forth an air from out of the mouth. It has a marvelous affinity also with
poach, Cognationem habet cum (...)
that is, to breathe again, to breathe forth: and is properly spoken of the
air of the day. The Grecians, they call it (...).
apophora, that is, an exhalation, or an expiration. The Latins they have
exhalatio, that is, a breathing, or drawing forth of breath. By all which it is
apparently evident, that exhalation is a certain thin terrestrial spirit,
which (by reason of a vehement heat) is exhaled, and drawn from out of the
earth, and carried about in the air; being (by nature) hot and dry: and
therefore very apt to be kindled or set on fire; a thing quite contrary to
vapor, as I told thee even now.

Whereunto accords that in Job, who says, that the hope of the wicked shall
fail, their refuge shall perish: and their hope is (...)
mappach naphesh. Graec. (...).
apoleia, Latin, exhalatio, vel expiratio animae, that is, as the exhalation,
or the expiration of life: I mean, a very vain hope, or an exceeding sorrow
of mind. Thus then thou may here plainly perceive the current consent of
sacred Scriptures concerning the Etymon also of this word exhalation.

Neither is there wanting herein the joint approbation of all the succeeding
Philosophers: according to that which Pliny speaks of it thus, Plin. lib. 31.
cap. 3.
Certior multo nebulosa exhalatio est. Again Cicero accords thereunto Cicer.
1. Tuscul.
saying thus. Quod and humidum, and caliginosum est, propter exhalationes
terrae. And so likewise the rest. Seeing therefore we have herein, not only
the authentical consent of all succeeding Philosophers, but likewise the full
approbation of sacred Scriptures concerning the true Etymon, the nature, the
efficient, the matter, as also the several effects of these three different
words, I mean, of smoke, of vapor, and of exhalation: thou may now more
apparently perceive then ever before, wherein smoke accords with vapor and
exhalation, and wherein also it differs from either of both.


Capn. Very true as you say, but I pray you proceed.


Hydr. These things then being thus briefly determined, and set down (as thou
see) by their several names and differences: let us here now put vapor and
exhalation apart for the present, as nothing appertaining to our purpose
intended; and consider (in like sort) of the several kinds of smoke; that (by
the means thereof) we may have a ready access to the rest.


Capn. Why Sir, how many kinds of smoke are there?


Hydr. Aristotle (in that Arist. Mete. lib. 4. cap. 1.
his forenamed book and Chapter) deuideth smoke into three several kinds: and
distinguishes them moreover, in an especial respect of those several matters
from whence they are drawn. Namely, into fume, fuligo, and Nidor.


Capn. What says he first of fume?


Hydr. He defines fume, to be a terrestrial exhalation extenuated; (...).
which the Hebrews call nasi, the Grecians atmos: that is, a vapor or fume of
the earth. The Frenchmen they call it vapeur, exhalation, and fumee montant de
la terre en haut: that is, a vapor, exhalation, or fume arising from some
terrestrial or earthie substance. More especially (says Aristotle) from some
wooddie matter: whereunto also he refers bones, hairs, herbs, and such
like. All which said several matters, notwithstanding they have no one name
common to every of them, yet are they jointly ranked in one and the selfsame
kind, as witnesses Empedocles, saying thus. Empedocles.
Of same kind are both leaves, and hairs, and pens of fethered Foul; with
scales of fishes, wherewith their strong bodies are covered.


Capn. Empedocles (by your patience Sir) he had not chiefly a respect unto any
their supposed resemblance in matter, but unto that rather which consists in
the final cause of those the forenamed several things. Namely, that look
what end and use there is of hairs in creatures living upon the dry land: the
selfsame use there is also of leaves in plants, of feathers in fowls, and of
scales in fishes; because unto every of the forenamed creatures has nature
allotted those selfsame supplies, for their timely preservation and proper
defense.


Hydr. Very true as thou say. And yet (notwithstanding all this) it is not
to be doubted but that Empedocles withal, does even secretly seem (as it
were) to point also at the earthie constitution of every of these: which their
said constitution is an effectual and a special furtherer of such
conservation.


Capn. Well Sir, proceed to the other kinds of smoke, I beseech you.


Hydr. The second kind of smoke he calls fuligo, that is, a vapouring earthie
fume extracted by heat: and making black the very beams of men's houses.
Whereupon Quintilian (describing a Student rethorically) does tell us directly,
that Quintilian.
unto such a one, fuligo lucubrationum bibenda est, the very smoke of the
candle or lamp must be sucked up: meaning thereby, that a good Student must
abide by his book, and spend light after light for the timely attainment of
learning. In like manner, Aulus Gellius (alluding directly to the besmearing
nature of fuligo) very lively sets forth (by the same) the deceiptfull
speeches of a subtle man, saying thus, Aulus Gellius.
Verborum, and argutiarum fuliginem ob oculos audientium facit: that is, He
casts a mist of words before the eyes of his hearers.

And as the witness of these men is a pregnant proof for this point; so
surely, the Hebrews they have a word very consonant thereunto. For that which
we name fuligo, they call (...). fuligo.
kitor. The Septuagint they term it athrachia; the Latins, fuligo: that is, a
vapouring fume, or subfumigation extracted from Frankincense, Mirrhe, Aloes, or
some such other aromaticall spices, or herbs, being cast in the fire, as
Exodus 30.1.39. Numb. 4.16. ^sal. 66.15.
may plainly appear by sundry places of Scripture.

Wherein thou may plainly perceive, that Aristotle (in his former book) does
fully accord with the infallible truth of God, by telling us confidently, that
fuligo is some such vapouring exhalation as proceeds from matter of fatty
substance, especially from Frankincense, Pitch, and such other like subjects
that are of a more fattie and pitchie nature.


Capn. And what is the third kind of smoke?


Hydr. (...). odor.
The third kind of smoke (named Nidor) is that which the Hebrews call riach,
id est, odoratus est, olfecit; the Grecians call it osmein; the Latins odor,
as appears evidently by Cant. 2.13. and 4.10. Ier. 48.11.
sundry places of Scripture put down in the margent. All which do plainly
approve unto us, that Nidor is the fume or savor of any thing burned or
broyled: according to the French-mens opinion, who call it Ga^lica.
L'odeur and flair de quelque chose qui est au feu, ou brusle. The Italian he
terms it Italica.
odor di cosa arostica. The Germans they name it, Germanica.
ein geschmunerezeren. Again, ein gescmack eines gebratnem oder geroesteren
dings. And the Spaniard intitles it, Hispanica.
odor suave del maniar. Whereunto also accords Virgil, saying, Virg. 12.
Aeneid.
Illi ingens barba reluxit, Nidoremque arbusta dedit. Properly it signifies
some smell of oylie-meates either boiled or broyled: according to that of
Martial, saying, Mar. lib. 1.
Pasceris, and nigrae solo nidore culinae. By the premises then it is very
apparent, that Aristotle he was not deceived at all, in defining Nidor to be
such a vapouring fume as is usually sent forth from some unctuous and oily
matter.


Capn. But Sir, you seem herein (by your leave) to confound fuligo and nidor,
and so to make of them both but one kind of smoke: For, what difference (I pray
you) between a fattie and an oily matter?


Hydr. How a fattie and oily matter do differ one from another, the said
Aristotle (in the former place) very plainly declares, Arist. Mete. lib. 4.
cap. 1.
affirming fat to be more dry, and oil more moist. Yea, and Galen in his
book Galen. in libro Simplic.
of Simples, as also Aristotle in the forenamed Treatise, do jointly affirm
the fattie fume called fuligo, to be more dry then that oily exhalation which
is commonly called nidor: for that it consists of an earthie substance, and
retains withal some strength or force of the fire.


Capn. Well then, let it be so as you say: but what do you observe from this
your threefold difference of smoke it self?


Hydr. Surely a very fit introduction to this our intended business. For,
seeing fume is drawn (by the operation of heat) from those selfsame
material substances, which (being by nature more earthie) will not, nor cannot
be made to melt, but by reason of their dryness (which is the nature of flame
in an only loss of their coldness) are turned estsoones into fire: and seeing
flame it self is nothing else but air, or smoke set on fire and kindled, it
must necessarily follow (thou see) that therefore, fume, it has a far
greater force to heat and dry, then either fuligo, or nidor has.


Capn. The consequence I freely acknowledge, but what infer you hereof?


Hydr. A very pregnant gradation to this our purposed discourse concerning the
fiery pernicious fume of filthy Tobacco. For these things being thus orderly
set down and determined, according to the undoubted truth of that natural
Philosophy which holds so apt a consonancie with the sacred Scriptures
themselves, how can it possibly seem strange to any man living, that I should
thus confidently affirm the fume of Tobacco (inwardly taken) to be very
pernicious to the bodies of men? For, seeing all kind of smoke does not only
dry up the humors of the body, and inflame the inward parts, but also does
scorch and burn them up, yea and consume those radical humors which should
uphold and nourish the spirits, and even feeds (as it were) upon the heat
both natural, and external, or accidental: how should not the smoke of
Tobacco (being a more forcible fume then many of the rest) be much more able to
dry up the humors, to inflame the intrals, to scorch and consume the radical
humors, and so utterly to extinguish the natural heat it self? whereupon
must necessarily ensue, not only a most fearful extraction of that the said
natural heat, but also of those the vital spirits wherein are contained the
vigor and power of the whole life it self.


Capn. I perceive no such necessary consequent (Sir) as your self would here
seem to conclude from the fume of Tobacco. Besides that, howsoeuersome nimble
and exquisite wits (by such a voluntary discourse as this of yours is) are
sufficiently able to set a Vermilion die upon whatsoever subject or matter they
please: yet (being at any time drawn to a more deliberate and succinct
dispute) then a man may easily epsy the manifold imperfections which covertly
lurk in their extrauagant and rouing collations. And therefore proceed now
more syllogistically (I beseech you) in the orderly prosecution of this your
intended discourse, without any such soaring aloft in the air.


Hydr. With very good will. And therefore (to shut up this my wide open hand a
firm closed fist, and to reduce my succeeding discourse into the ordinary
limits of an artificial argument) I may thus propound my first reason
fyllogistically: which also (being absolutely grounded upon the premises, as
upon a firm foundation and infallible ground) may (by no cunning opposition or
craf^ie engine) be possibly overthrown.


Capn. Go to then, propound it (I pray you) whatsoever it be.


Hydr. Attend then unto it, for this it is. The first argument.


That which consumes the natural heat, is very pernicious to the bodies of
men.

But the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, consumes the natural heat.

Therefore the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, is very pernicious to the bodies
of men.


Capn. Your mayor proposition seems something obscure in my apprehension: and
therefore, show me more plainly, how that which consumes the natural heat,
is very pernicious to the bodies of men.


Hydr. That may easily be proved by this following argument.

That which causes putrefaction and corruption both, is very pernicious unto
the body.

But that which consumes the natural heat, causes putrefaction and
corruption both.

Therefore that which consumes the natural heat, is very pernicious unto the
body.


Capn. This argument (I must needs confess) is very probable, but what
authority have you (besides your self) for further confirmation thereof?


Hydr. Why man, both Propositions (as thou heardest even now) are firmly
protected by the authority of Aristotle, in that Arist. Me^^. lib. 4. cap. 1.
the forenamed book and chapter. Where he avouches confidently, that all kind
of smoke does dry up the humors, inflame the intrals; burn, scorch and
consume those radical humors which are the vpholders and nourishers of the
vital parts; and extinguisheth their heat, both natural, and external, or
accidental: and therefore pernicious unto the body.


Capn. But how are you able to maintain the Minor or second Proposition of
your former Argument: namely, that the smoke of Tobacco consumes the natural
heat?


Hydr. If any make question thereof, the same may thus be performed.

That which extinguisheth the natural and radical moisture, consumes the
natural heat.

But the smoke of Tobacco extinguisheth the natural and radical moisture, and
that in a very short time.

Therefore, the smoke of Tobacco consumes the natural heat.


Capn. How prove you the Proposition first: namely, that that which
extinguisheth the natural, and radical moisture, consumes the natural
heat?


Hydr. I prove it very substantially and soundly, thus.

That which consumes the subject, fountain, and maintainer of the natural
heat, the same does extinguish the natural heat.

But that which feeds upon the natural and radical moisture, consumes the
subject, fountain, and maintainer of the natural heat.

Therefore, that which feeds upon the natural and radical moisture,
extinguisheth the natural heat.


Capn. Sir, I cannot contradict you in this: the proof thereof is so pregnant.
Notwithstanding, I do flatly deny the Assumption put down in your former
argument: namely, that the smoke of Tobacco extinguisheth the natural and
radical moisture, and that also in a very short time.


Hydr. I confirm it more fully, by this syllogism or reason succeeding.

That which scorcheth and burns the natural or radical moisture, that
extinguisheth the natural or radical moisture.

But all kind of smoke drawn immediately from a matter hot and dry, scorcheth
and burns the natural or radical moisture.

Therefore, all such kind of smoke (and so consequently the smoke of Tobacco
drawn inwardly) extinguisheth the natural, and radical moisture.


Capn. I cannot as yet conceive the soundness of this your syllogism.


Hydr. Why man, the soundness of both propositions is apparently evident by
that which was spoken before from Aristotle. Namely, that Arist. in Meteor.
lib. 4. cap. 1.
all kind of smoke does dry up the humors, inflame the intrals, burn up,
scorch and consume the natural and radical humors; feeds upon those the
said humors which are the vpholders, maintainers, and nourishers of the vital
parts; yea and extinguisheth their hea^e both natural, and accidental. If all
kind of smoke (drawn inwardly from a matter hot and dry does work such
fearful effects: then surely, the smoke of Tobacco (it being drawn inwardly
from a matter more hot and d^ie then many of the rest) does much more
effectually, and more speedily procure such fearful effects. And so
consequently, the fume of Tobacco taken inward, is very pernicious to the
bodies of men: according to the inevitable force of this our first artificial
argument.


Capn. Stay Sir I beseech you: insult not so bravely before the final
success. For as one Swallow makes not a summer: so surely, this your first
conflict against the fume of Tobacco, it concludes no absolute conquest over
Tobacco. And howsoever this your primarie assault may happily be thought very
fierce and forcible, yet full feeble is the refuge of that resistance, which
(for one only received wound) forsakes the field.


Hydr. Why man, one only received wound (being both mortal and deadly) is no
less dangerous to the life it self, then ten hundred concurring together.
Howbeit, because the conquest it self will be so much more glorious, by how
much the adverse part is made to appear more ignominious: it shall not be
greatly amiss to undertake ef^soones, some deadly encounter herein. To the end
therefore, that this smokie contagious fume (receiving the deadly wound afresh)
may concludently, and clearly be chased from out of our coasts, I will now
muster forth some fresh supply from those other our sound hearted arguments,
which (for mannaging the forefront of this our set battle) do here so frankly
offer their service in the open field.


Capn. Discharge your uttermost force against the fume of Tobacco, and spare
not.


Hydr. Take this then that follows, for a second murdering Canon.

The second argument.
Whatsoever dissolueth the natural proportion of the Elements in bodies
compounded and mixed, that same is very pernicious unto the body.

But the smoke of Tobacco dissolueth the natural proportion of the Elements in
bodies compounded and mixed.

Therefore, the smoke of Tobacco, is very pernicious unto the body.


Capn. Sir, I am something suspicious of the first proposition: namely, that
that which dissolueth the natural proportion of the Elements in bodies
compounded and mixed, is very pernicious unto the body.


Hydr. The same may be made more apparently manifest, by this following proof.

Whatsoever does corrupt things naturally compounded, and so bring them to
destruction, that same is very pernicious unto the body.

But that which undoes the natural proportion of the Elements in bodies mixed,
does corrupt and destroy things naturally compounded.

Therefore, that which undoes the natural proportion of the Elements in
bodies mixed, is very pernicious unto the body.


Capn. Explane your proposition, I pray you.


Hydr. Why man? the proposition needs no explanation at all, it is of it
self so apparently manifest. For Ioh Velcurio in vniuersam Arist. Physic. lib.
2. cap. 14.
is not the essential being of a man, a body naturally compounded? And is not
corruption, the mutation, and amission either of the substantial form, the
quantity, or quality of such a compounded body? That thing then (whatsoever
it be) which so corrupts and destroys the substance, form, quantity, or
quality of any compounded body, must needs be very pernicious to that
selfsame body.


Capn. What mean you (Sir) by a body compounded?


Hydr. That selfsame substance whatsoever, which (being primarily connected,
or knit together of it own proper beginning, Elements, substantial, and
integrall parts, causes, and qualities) is essentially combined in it own
proper nature and substance, For Ioh. Velcurio in vniuersam Arist. Physic. lib.
2. cap. 14.
composition is nothing else but the connection of forms in a natural body:
by which connection, that selfsame natural body does essentially cohere and
consist in the proper proportion of parts and accidents. Now then, that thing
which corrupts and destroys the proportionable connection of such a
compounded body, must needs become very pernicious unto the body.


Capn. I begin now to perceive the pregnancie of your last proposition.
Howbeit, I do flatly deny your Assumption: namely, that that which undoes the
natural proportion of the Elements in bodies mixed, does undoubtedly corrupt
and destroy things naturally compounded.


Hydr. The same is approved by the joint authorities Hippocra. in libro
Aphoris. lib. 5. Aphoris. 62. Galen. in libro detemperam.
of Hippocrates and Galene; as also by Arist. Mete. lib. 4. cap. 1.
Aristotle himself, in that the forenamed Treatise. Wherein the excellent
Philosopher (defining procreation to be properly effected by the due proportion
of Elements) does manifestly notify unto us: that death and destruction is
nothing else but the dissolution of that selfsame proportion, or (at the
least) that this dissolution is the very cause or way to such destruction.


Capn. Well, be it so. But prove the Assumption put down in your former
propounded argument: namely, that the smoke of Tobacco dissolueth the natural
proportion of Elements, in bodies compounded and mixed.


Hydr. The same is apparently evident by this following argument.

Whatsoever augmenteth the just proportion and measure of heat and dryness
limited by nature, that dissolueth the natural proportion of the Elements in
bodies compounded and mixed.

But the fume of Tobacco taken inward, augmenteth the just proportion and
measure of heat and dryness limited by nature.

Therefore the fume of Tobacco taken inward dissolueth the proportion of the
Elements in bodies compounded or mixed.


Capn. Prove your Proposition, I pray you Sir.


Hydr. Why man, the proposition is manifest enough of it self: so as all men
(but natural sots) may sensibly conceive the same. For as well augmentation as
diminution undoes the due measure of heat and dryness limited by nature her
self: and so consequently, dissolueth the proportion of the Elements in bodies
compounded and mixed.


Capn. Go to then, make good your Assumption: namely, that the fume of Tobacco
taken inward, augmenteth the proportion and measure of heat and dryness
limited by nature.


Hydr. I will convince the same to be true, by this subsequent syllogism.

A more vehement heat and drought added to a less, augmenteth the proportion
and measure of the less.

But the smoke of Tobacco is more vehemently hot and dry, then the natural
heat and drought of man's body.

Therefore the smoke of Tobacco augmenteth the heat and dryness of man's body
above the natural proportion thereof.


Capn. Make plain your Proposition I pray you.


Hydr. The same is plain enough of it own proper nature: being moreover
confirmed by the joint authorities of Hippocrates, Galene, and Aristotle, as
also by common sense. For who can deny that a greater quantity added to a
less, increases the just proportion of the less?


Capn. You say very true. But yet for all that, I suspect the soundness of
your Assumption: namely, that the smoke of Tobacco is more vehemently hot and
dry then the natural heat and drought of man's body.


Hydr. Some man (peradventure) will not believe that to be true: but (being
more fully confirmed by this following argument) the truth thereof will appear
unto any how unlearned soever.

That which the Physicians (in respect of man's temperature) do call hot and
dry in the second degree, that (I mean) which exceeds the due temperature
of man's body by two degrees, and which (by adustion and b^rning) obtains a
more vehement force from both* that same is more vehemently hot and dry then
the natural proportion of man's body by much.

But the smoke of Tobacco exceeds in heat and dryness the due temperature
of man's body by two degrees, and (by adustion and burning) obtains a more
vehement force from both.

Therefore the smoke of Tobacco is more vehemently hot and dry, then the
natural proportion of man's body by much.


Capn. I deny your argument.


Hydr. Why man? the proposition thereof very reason it self does ratify; and
all sorts of learned Physicians do jointly subscribe to the same.


Capn. Go to then, make your Assumption: namely, that the smoke of Tobacco
exceeds in heat and ^rinesse, the due temperature of man's body, by two
degrees.


Hydr. That is sufficiently mainta^ned and vpholden by the authentical
authority of Theuittus a French Monk; of Monardus a Spaniard; of Gesne^us a
Germane; of Wicke^^s; Clusius; and other new writers; who do all jointly
affirm Tobacco to be hot and dry in the second degree.


Capn. Be it supposed, that those men do hit on the sooth, by telling us
jointly that Tobacco is hot and dry in the second degree. What then? does it
necessarily follow thereof, that therefore, the smoke of Tobacco taken inward,
exceeds the due temperature of heat and drought in our bodies by two degrees
at least?


Hydr. Yea, that (be thou sure) must necessarily follow. For since heat and
dryness Ioh. Velcurio in vniuersam Arist. Physic. Lib. 2. cap. 22.
be primarie sensible qualities, and that all primarie sensible qualities are
the primary virtues of Elements concurring jointly together in the due
composition of bodies naturally compounded; it cannot possibly be, but as that
which diminishes the due proportion of heat and drought in bodies compounded,
is colder by two degrees at the least, then if the natural heat and drought
of such compounded bodies: so surely, that which augmenteth the due proportion
of natural heat and drought in such compounded bodies, it must needs be
hotter and drier then the natural heat and drought of those selfsame bodies,
by two degrees at the least. But now, that the heat and drought of this thy
Tobacco smoke surmounteth the due temperature of heat and drought in the
bodies of men, let our tippling Tobacconists tell thee the truth hereof in their
proper experience; who (by reason of the excessive scorching and burning flames
of their inward taken Tobacco fumes) are enforced eftsoons to assuage the
vehemency and outrage of that excessive heat, by an excessive swilling in of
wines, of ale, or of beer at the least.

Seeing then this inward taking of Tobacco smoke dissolueth the due proportion
of Elements in a body compounded or mixed; seeing it corrupts things naturally
mixed in such a compounded body; seeing it augmenteth that due proportion of
heat and drought which nature her self has justly limited to such a
compounded body: it is more then apparently manifest, that the same
surmounteth the natural heat and drought of our bodies, by two degrees at the
least. And therefore, who sees not now by this our second assault, but that
the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, is very pernicious unto the body?


Capn. Good Sir; how confidently soever you seem to conclude your self: that
(be you well assured) which you have hitherto said will be deemed as good as
nothing, among those our gallant Tobacconists who make the very smoke of
Tobacco their smoking glory.


Hydr. It may be true as thou say; especially among such as do make Phil.
3.19.
their glory their shame, minding nothing at all but earthly things. Neither
do I much marvel at this their bewitched blindness. For how is it possible
that they whom this smokie fume has made so fantastical (I will not say so
senseless in judgment) should ever be able to determine substantially
concerning this matter? And therefore, since this their seducing Tobacco smoke
is such an intoxicating Circes, a monster of so many heads, and has taken
withal so deep root in those our besotted Tobacconists minds, as it will be
found but an Herculean labor to eradicate and root out the same from a soil
so suting unto it: I hold it every way a very good course, yet still to bend
more engines about it, and even to pull up (if possibly it may be) all the far
spread sprouts and riotous springs thereof.


Capn. Undertake what exploit you please to supplant the same: for neither
they, nor I do crave any favor herein.


Hydr. Go to then, let this which follows now, The third argument.
and which also (in such gallant bravery against those gallant Tobacconists
here marches on gallantly toward the very forefront of the battle it self,
be entertained afresh for a third encounter against the inward taking of
Tobacco fumes.

That which makes the clear, sweet, and wholesome spirits to become obscure,
stinking, and unwholesome, is very pernicious unto the body.

But the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, makes the clear, sweet, and wholesome
spirits to become obscure, stinking, and unwholesome.

Therefore, the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, is very pernicious unto the body.


Capn. Pardon me Sir, though I do absolutely deny this Argument.


Hydr. Oh nay Capnistus, beware of such an absurd and senseless denial. For as
the Argument it self is absolutely sound in mood and figure, so surely,
either of both propositions may thus be easily proved.

Whatsoever infecteth the instruments of both body and mind, that same does
most perniciously procure the destruction of the body.

But that which makes the clear, sweet and wholesome spirits to become
obscure, stinking, and unwholesome, infecteth the instruments of both body and
mind.

Therefore, that which makes the clear, sweet, and wholesome spirits, to
become obscure, stinking, and unwholesome, that same does most perniciously
procure the destruction of the body.


Capn. I do not as yet conceive the soundness of your first proposition:
namely, that that which infecteth the instruments of both body and mind, does
most perniciously procure the destruction of the body.


Hydr. The soundness thereof is hereby apparent: namely; for that no one
action of life can be exercised without the mind and body. But neither body nor
mind may possibly perform their duty that way without their proper
instruments. Howbeit, the instruments of both, they are the spirits: the
clearenesse, sweetness, and holsomnesie of which said spirits being made
obscure, stinking, and unwholesome: how should either body or mind be able to
exercise any one action of life in good order?


Capn. Uery true as you say. But how are you able to prove your second
Proposition: namely, that the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, does so infect,
and corrupt the spirits?


Hydr. The same may very plainly be proved by this following argument.

Whatsoever infecteth and defiles the whole body with a black, filthy, and
smokie color, that same does make the clear, sweet, and wholesome spirits to
become obscure, stinking and unwholesome.

But the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, infecteth, and defiles the whole body
with a black, filthy, and smokie color.

Therefore the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, does make the clear, sweet, and
wholesome spirits to become obscure, stinking and unwholesome.


Capn. Howsoever amazed herein, at all adventures I deny your argument.


Hydr. Thine amazedness (it seems) has made thee at all adventures to bewray
thy palpable ignorance in denying the argument. For the first Proposition
thereof is such, and so sound, as no man of sound judgment will once dare to
deny: it being (even in common sense) no less apparently evident then the
Sunshine at midday. For must not that which infecteth and defiles the whole
body with a black, filthy, and smokie color, even necessarily make the
clear, sweet, and wholesome spirits to become obscure, stinking, and
unwholesome? What one man (being well in his wits may not plainly perceive the
apparent necessity and truth of such a consequent?


Capn. But how prove you the second Proposition: namely, that the smoke of
Tobacco taken inward, infecteth and defiles the whole body with a black,
filthy, and smokie color?


Hydr. That is fully ratified by the authority of Aristotle in his former
Treatise; where (as I have eftsoons told thee before) he affirms Arist Mete.
lib. 4. cap. 9.
all sorts of smoke (and therefore the smoke of Tobacco) to infect with a
black color: the same also avouches Galene in sundry places. And (besides
their two approved testimonies) that which I have heard eftsoons very credibly
reported by many; as also, that whereof my self was once an eyewitness,
namely, an approved experience in the opening of sundry men's bodies, which
(being fearfully strangled up with this poysonsome smoke) very suddenly died)
does apparently prove the truth of this proposition: for so much as those dead
bodies (being so cut up) were every of them found strangely infected with a
certa^ne black and smokie color.

Seeing therefore the inward taking of Tobacco smoke does make the clear,
sweet and wholesome spirits obscure, stink^ng and unwholesome; since it infecteth
all the instruments of the body and mind; briefly* seeing it corrupts and
defiles the whole body with a black, filthy, and smokie color: who can
(without blushing) deny, but that the taking of Tobacco inwardly, is very
pernicious unto the body?


Capn. Howsoever my self be unable with sway of argument to deny the same:
yet be you well assured of this, that you shall find ten thousand Tobacconists
flat opposite to you.


Hydr. That may very well be, For so one only Michaiah 1 Kin. 22.23.^4.
did find four hundred opposite to that which he spoke from the mouth of the
Lord: and yet, their exceeding great multitude was no manner of prejudice to
the truth which he taught. Howbeit, that I may here (as much as possibly lies
in my power) take away whatsoever occasion of either gainsaying or doubting,
and that the truth of this matter might be made to appear as manifest as the
Sun in his strength: I have even purposely placed this following argument in
the rereward of the battle, as an armor of proof, to give a fresh encounter
against Tobacco fumes.


Capn. Discharge your uttermost force, and spare not.


Hydr. Well then, stand strongly upon thy guard: for this it is.

Whatsoever spreads and disperseth throughout the whole body a most venomous
matter, The fourth argument.
and a mortal enemy to the nature of man, that same does bring destruction
unto the body.

But the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, spreads and disperseth throughout the
whole body a most venomous matter, and a mortal enemy to the nature of man.

Therefore, the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, does bring destruction unto the
body.


Capn. I perceive not the truth of your first Proposition.


Hydr. How true that is, we may plainly perceive by the pestilence, and sundry
such other infectious diseases. All which (by the dispersing and spreading of a
venomous matter, and a mortal enemy to man's nature throughout the whole body)
do procure the present destruction of men by many great multitudes, as daily
experience approves.


Capn. Well, be it so as you say: but how appears the truth of your second
Proposition? Namely, that the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, does spread and
disperse throughout the whole body, a venomous matter, and a mortal enemy to
the nature of man?


Hydr. The truth thereof does sound forth it self throughout every coast, by
the sudden and lamentable end of many Tobacconists; more especially, by a
pitiful experience in Parson Digbie at Peterborough of late: who (having
excessiuely taken Tobacco in a tippling house) did instantly fall down stark
dead in the open streets. All which examples (being no less true then woeful)
as they may serve for a terror to all: so especially, these our insatiable
suckers in of Tobacco smoke, should conscionably apply to themselves, and be
warned thereby. Notwithstanding, this fantastical course (I know not how) is
now grown into such a foole-hardie custom among us, as other men's harms
cannot make us beware: neither yet are bare examples of sufficient force to
suppress and abolish this idle opinion from out of our idle brains.


Capn. What Sir, would you have men so precizely, so certainly, and so
confidently conclude conceits from every uncertain and sudden occurrent? So
should we be sure, eftsoons to conclude many strange, extrauagant, and
uncertain conclusions. Men must live (you know) by infallible rules: not by
fantastical, and fickle examples. Neither have you your self any one
authentical rule, to conclude so certainly, from such an uncertain example
as you urged even now. For what kind of sequel call you this? Namely, such a
man died instantly after his insatiable taking of Tobacco fumes: therefore, his
insatiable taking of Tobacco fumes was the undoubted cause of that his so
sudden a death.


Hydr. It follows as fitly as this: Such a man died instantly upon his
careless entertaining of one dangerously sick of the pestilentiall infection^
therefore, his careless entertaining of one so dangerously sick of the
pestilentiall infection, was the undoubted cause of that his so sudden a death.


Capn. Nay Sir, the pestilence, and Tobacco, as they are not of one and the
self same mortal condition: so they work not one and the self same mortal
infection. For the pestilence, and sundry such other infectious diseases, they
contain in them essentially some contagious and venomous matter, which
(dispersing it self presently throughout all the parts of the body) will
undoubtedly procure the present destruction of that self same body: whereas
you have not hitherto proved, that there is in Tobacco it self any such
infectious or venomous matter.


Hydr. Well then, thus much thou do grant by the way: that the peril by
conuersing with pestilentiall persons, must necessarily arise from some
infectious or venomous matter proceeding from those pestilentiall diseases, and
dispersing it self presently throughout the whole body.


Capn. Sir, if I should deny that to be true, experience it self would prove
me a fool.


Hydr. And do thou fondly imagine, that experience will prove thee a
wiseman, if thou deniest the truth of the other? For tell me (I pray thee)
must not the present destruction of so many Tobacconists, even as necessarily
also arise of some infectious or venomous matter proceeding from such inward
taking of Tobacco fumes, and presently dispersing it self throughout the whole
body?


Capn. Good Sir, this sequel is yet in dispute: and you take it as granted.


Hydr. I scorn such a grant at any man's hand: especially in this so evident,
and so clear a cause. And therefore, I will here undertake afresh to convince
(if possibly I may) by sound and substantial reasons, that which I cannot
persuade by sundry examples, how lamentable and pregnant soever. Thou having
therefore so freely granted, that the thing which thus suddenly surpriseth the
life of men's bodies, must necessarily have in it some infectious or venomous
matter, dispersing it self presently throughout the whole body: why should
not the Assumption it self (established especially upon so certain a ground)
be able to stand inuincibly against whatsoever assaults of fantastical and
idle companions?


Capn. Well, go to then, prove your Assumption: namely, that this insatiable
swallowing up of Tobacco smoke does spread and disperse throughout the whole
body a venomous matter, and a mortal enemy to the nature of man.


Hydr. That may soundly be proved by this subsequent syllogism.

Whatsoever suddenly overthrows both the faculties of mind, and strength of
body, that does undoubtedly spread and disperse throughout the whole body, a
venomous matter repugnant to nature.

But the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, suddenly ouerthoweth both the faculties
of mind, and strength of body.

Therefore, the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, does undoubtedly spread and
disperse throughout the whole body, a venomous matter repugnant to nature.


Capn. Sir, I do absolutely deny your Argument.


Hydr. In so doing ( Capnistus) thou declarest the self an absolute Ass. For
this know thou assuredly, that a common axiom among Physicians conuinceth the
Proposition to be certainly true: namely, that nothing can suddenly confound
and overthrow both faculties of mind, and strength of body, and so either
leave none at all, or a depraved motion in both, but the same has some
infectious and venomous quality wherewith it possesses the body. And
thereupon it is, that all Physicians (with one consent) do jointly affirm that
the falling sickness arises of a venomous air possessing the brain.


Capn. But how holds your Assumption current and good: namely, that the smoke
of Tobacco taken inward, does suddenly overthrow both faculties of mind, and
strength of body?


Hydr. Surely Capnistus, the daily experience of such as usually drink that
self same smoke, does easily confirm the truth of this matter. For what one
is he among our tippling Tobacconists, that does not (alas) even presently
perceive a certain whirling about of the brain, and find himself very
fearfully possessed with a certain kind of giddiness immediately after the
taking thereof? Or (if not so) that suffers not at the least, a marvelous
perturbation, and a dangerous disturbance of nature? Notwithstanding (besides
this their proper experience) I will yet further maintain, and defend this
point, by the approved authority and fortress of sundry late writers (as it
were with a wall, or rampire) against the violent assaults of all sorts of
gaine-sayers how gallant soever.


Capn. Go to then, muster forth now your surest men for the field: and make
them march forewards in battlearay.


Hydr. Content. Amongst whom I will make Dodonaeus and Metellus the first in
that rank: who do reckon Tobacco among the sundry sorts of Henbane.


Capn. What infer you hereof?


Hydr. The firm, and infallible proof of that which I affirmed before:
namely, that there is in the fume of Tobacco inwardly taken, some venomous
matter, which so dainly overthrows the faculties of mind, and strength of
body. For whereas Dodonaeus and Metellus do so skilfully sort Tobacco among the
sundry kinds of Henbane, it is apparently manifest (from out of Dioscorides
his approved judgment) that all kind of Henbane is venomous, as an enemy
disturbing nature, disordering reason, assailing the brain, which is the
Metropolitan over the whole body, and the very tower of the heart; yea and
procuring a certain madness withal for the present.


Capn. Dodonaeus, Metellus, and Dioscorides they only say so: as for the truth
of their speech, that we must take at their hands upon trust: for they only
say so, but show no one reason at all. Howbeit Sir, our Tobacconists (be you
sure) they hold not those men of Pythagoras authority: neither will they be
brought to conclude on this sort; Dodonaeus, Metellus, and Dioscorides do
jointly avouch, that all kind of Henbane is of a poysonsome and venomous
nature, and therefore it is certainly so indeed.


Hydr. Why Capnistus, have thou not a more reverend regard of that the
accustomed and ancient axiom, which tells plainly, That every Vnicuique in
sua art perito, credendum est.
expert and skillful Artist must be believed in his proper profession?
Notwithstanding (because thou make no more account of those their
authentical judgments) thou shall hear further, what Gesnerus Gesnerus, ad
Ioh. Functium Epist. vltima.
avouches from his proper experience: who (having experimented the true
operation of Tobacco in his own proper body) gives a judicious censure
concerning the nature thereof, in an Epistle to John Functius, that renowned,
and learned Physician.


Capn. What is his censure thereof (Sir) I pray you?


Hydr. I will put down the same in his own proper words: without either
adding, or taking therefrom. The leaf (says he) which was sent out of France
to Augusta, seemed most strange unto me, and a very plain novelty. Wherefore,
I was very desirous to taste thereof: but presently I perceived a marvelous
sharpness therein, and it did most strangely affect me. So as, me thought
verily I was stark drunk; and (as it were) sailing down a River in some
staggering ship: yea and trying the same again and again some three or four
times, I eftsoons found the selfsame effect. Wherefore, washing my mouth, and
drinking up a spoonefull of vinegar: I forthwith put away the giddiness of my
head. Moreover, I gave a piece of the leaf (bruised and wrapped in flesh) unto
a dog: which (presently after some few hours) did cause him to vomit
abundantly. Verily (whatsoever it is) I suppose, it cannot possibly be without
some secret venime. Thus much Gesnerus concerning the virtue and force of
Tobacco in his proper experience.


Capn. This (I confess) is something to our present purpose in hand: but Sir,
one Swallow (you know) makes no summer.


Hydr. Well then, let us add to Gesnerus experience, that which Theuittus in
his description of West India; as also that which Monardus, Clusius, and
Weckerus do jointly remember thereof. Namely, that the Priests and other the
common people of the Indians do use to suck up the fume of Tobacco through a
pipe or conduite, either when (as being asked) they give answers concerning the
success of business, or when they are desirous to see visions; and (as it
were) to be rapt from themselves in a trance: or being to enter into the
dangers of battle. Which said disturbance of mind and soul, by no means can
be so suddenly wrought in man's body; without the force and efficacy of some
venomous quality concurring therewith.


Capn. Not so Sir, for then should the force thereof be generally perceived in
all men alike. Howbeit, this swimming of the head is not generally in all: and
in them whom it so strangely possesses, the same may seem rather to proceed
of a certain thin humor suddenly turned into wind, and of a whirling about
of that air so suddenly changed, then of any other supposed quality in the
smoke it self, as being venomous, and a mortal enemy to the nature of man.


Hydr. This peradventure (in a simple swimming, and such as is eftsoons felt
at some other time else) might seem to carry some show of truth: but in this
sudden darkness and falling into trances upon the only taking of Tobacco,
and at none other time else; and wherein all the senses, and the whole brain
is so suddenly overwhelmed with an obscure and cloudie smoke, it cannot
possibly have any place at all, but by the operation of some venomous matter
concurring therewith. For such a swimming (for the most part) is the undoubted
forerunner of the falling evil: and impresseth such a sensible weakness in
the brain, as may not possibly be cured, nor ordinarily helped by any medicine
at all.


Capn. Why Sir, not all that drink of this smoke do feeele such a smming?


Hydr. That is nothing at all to the purpose. For the pestilence and such other
infectious venimes they do not forthwith destroy all whom they possess, nor
infect every one indifferently: which notwithstanding, have in them naturally a
power of killing and slaying. And therefore, whereas all men are not equally
affected with ye selfsame swimming, that ought rather to be attributed to the
benefit of nature, and sound constitution of the brain, then unto any
defective poysonsome quality in the smoke it self, which is evermore
venomous, and a mortal enemy to the nature of man.


Capn. But Sir, the use of Tobacco is very profitable for such as are affected
with shortness of breath, and with stopping of the lungs by reason of gross
humors ouergrowing the same.


Hydr. What use of Tobacco is profitable for those diseases? The scorching
smoke thereof drawn or sucked into the body by a Tobacco pipe? Nothing less,
be thou sure. For so the lungs themselves being made hard and stiff (as in old
age it commonly comes to pass) by reason of the extreme force of the fume in
drying, so as they cannot be fanned, nor lifted up any longer, the natural
heat is choked up quite for want of breathing. And there is much difference
betwixt the smoke of the earthie and stinking fume of a burnt herb, and the
airie juice of the said herb drawn forth by infusion, by steeping, by
boiling, or seething. Indeed, the broth of Tobacco, or a sirupe made of the
infusion thereof, does somewhat help the stopping of the lungs, but not the
smoke.


Capn. And yet for all this, the smoke of Tobacco disburdeneth the brain from
this sink of humors: and purges the blood from filthy and unwholesome
matter.


Hydr. Yea marry Sir, a very trim purgation (no doubt) that draws so forth
from the body and brain such a thin, subtle and waterish matter, as (it
may be) nature her self had proportionably appointed to both for the better
and more easy conueyance of the blood it self throughout the whole body: and
(in stead thereof) places gross humors in the brain and all the rest of the
members; and whereby a certain curdled matter is increased, and this same
smokie stinking fume settled in the room thereof.


Capn. But Sir, the fume of Tobacco freeth the spirits from those burdensome
humors, as it were from fetters: and so makes them more prompt and nimble by
much.


Hydr. And does it so indeed? When rather the spirits (whom nature has
ordained to be clear and bright, both for the discoursing of reason, as also
for the ministry of the senses themselves) by this filthy fume-drinking are
made obscure and dark, and the brain, and whole body infected with a smokie
black color? yea, and when in stead of that same dry clearenesse and light
which Heraclitus, and (with him) all, both Philosophers and Physicians of any
sound judgment do account the principal and purest soul, those fume-drinkers
do substitute and thrust in their appointed place, most palpably obscured and
darkened spirits? In which their so preposterous a purging of the brain it
self, they do both confound the orderly works of nature, and even quite
overthrow the infallible precepts and rules prescribed by Physicians: who are
the appointed ministers of nature her self for the orderly preservation of the
body in health. Who all jointly with one uniform assent do affirm; that a
cloudy and obscure air, or such as proceeds from hollow and fennie places,
is very unwholesome for the bodies of men. Which their canonical judgment those
our fume-deuourers do never observe, until (with an extreme hazard of life)
they do find (by their miserable and woeful experience) how pernicious a thing
it is. Neither, without an exceeding great cause were chimnies (by our
Ancestors formerly invented, that thereby, the smoke (drawn by a vehement
heat of the fire from matter apt to burning) might be dispersed abroad in the
air, for fear of hurting the bodies of men.


Capn. Why Sir? there are many sorts of fumes invented and taught by the
Physicians themselves, as well for the strengthening of diverse parts, as also
for the curing of hard diseases.


Hydr. There are so (I confess,) but what do thou conclude from the same?
That therefore the smoke of Tobacco sucked up by a pipe or conduite, is
exceeding wholesome for the bodies of men? Alas silly souls, who may not
plainly perceive a flat fallacion in this their consequence? For almost all
sorts of fumes are used by expert Physicians, to recreate and comfort the
spirits by their odoriferous smells, rather then to draw any thing out of the
body by such scorching fumes as do heat and dry. Yea and that sweet kind of
refreshing the spirits was instituted first by nature her self, who tells us
directly and truly that Pro. 29.9.
sweet ointments and perfumes rejoice the heart. And as this was dame natures
own institution, so was the primarie practice thereof set first afloate by
learned Hippocrates, the prime interpreter of natures purpose therein. Whereas
these filthy scorching Tobacco smokes, do nothing else but daunt and dry up
the spirits: a thing flat opposite to natures institution, and the witles
invention of vicious and wild dispositions.


Capn. Not so Sir, for some stinking fumes are also applied by Physicians
themselves in the suffocation of the matrixe, or rising of the mother: and this
also with laudable and happy success.


Hydr. Very true as thou say. Howbeit, those stinking fumes they are not so
applied by expert Physicians with any purpose or mind to cure the disease, but
for this end rather: Namely, that nature her self, and the natural heat so
suddenly surprised by reason of those stinking fumes which they naturally
abhor, might be the sooner provoked to gather their natural strength and
vigor afresh, and thereby disperse and expel that venomous air wherewith the
matrixe it self being stuffed, did so dainly arise and ascend upward.


Capn. But over and besides the suffocation of the matrixe (namely, in the
consumption of the lungs, as also in ye French pore) certain fumes of Cynoper,
red Arsnicke, quicksilver, Orpiment, and other venomous things are admitted
and used of sundry late writers in Physic, as Fallopius and others.


Hydr. They are so I confess. Howbeit, warily, sparingly, and in very small
quantity: yea and this also not without a considerate, and proportionable
mixture of some other things else to correct and alay the force of their
venomous qualities. And that moreover the operation thereof in drying only
(which agrees with nature) might be communicated to the body it self: and
yet (notwithstanding all this) the learned (for their parts) have evermore had
a very vehement suspicion of this kind of curing. And (in the consumption of
the lungs especially) I see that Galene mislikes those fumes: and approves
rather of a sweet bath, or hot-house. And certainly, Fallopius himself does
not altogether approve of those fumes. And for learned Fernellius, he utterly
misliketh of them: in so much as (in the cure of the Frenchpoxe) he will not
admit any ointment compounded of quicksilver. And verily, if Galene durst not
so much as taste of the herb Lycoporsium, because only it but smelt somewhat
strong: shall those our smoke-deuourers thus dare, not only to taste, but also
to entertain into the secret and most inward parts of their bodies, yea even
into the very treasury of nature it self, such an infectious, venomous, and
most deadly consuming poison?


Capn. But be it Sir, there were (as you say) in this Tobacco smoke some
certain contagious venime: our artificial Tobacconists they can very
skilfully correct, and allay that selfsame venomous quality with the powder
of a Nutmeg, and two or three drops of the Chymicall oil of Anise, compounded
and blended with the powder of Tobacco it self, or ever the same be inwardly
taken.


Hydr. Our artificial Tobacconists say thou? Nay rather, our Seraphicall
smokie Asies. Who (by this their skillful unskillful mingle-mangle) do show
themselves such soddenheadded sots as blend Sugar-candie with rats-bane. Of
very purpose forsooth, that (howsoever the rats-bane it self be mortally
dangerous) it might by the sweet taste, be made to pass more pleasantly down,
and thereby also more vnperceiueably convey the venomous poison it self into
the inward parts, and so more powerfully surprise the vital spirits. And (yet
for all this) these fantastical fellows, they must (by thy calculation) be
accounted forsooth our artificial Tobacconists. Well then, be it so for this
once; and now do tell me withal, whether thou thy self by the very purport of
thine own proper speech, do not covertly confess the inward taking of
Tobacco smoke to be very pernicious unto the body, except the same be
consideratly and skilfully corrected before. But what a strange and monstrous
kind of correction is this that thou speak of? What man? When the very smoke
of Tobacco it self is a mortal enemy to the nature of the body, may the
gross muddie smoke of those oily matters commixed with that former poysonsome
fume, be possibly made either good or wholesome? What is this else, but to add
fire unto fire? and (in stead of suppressing) to set that scorching flame yet
further afloate? That so (with an over hasty and untimely death) they may the
more speedily consume and scorch up their vital spirits and radical humors.


Capn. Well Sir. And yet for all that, if this smoke of Tobacco were taken but
once in a week, peradventure it might do much good in resolving the
excremental humors only; as also in expelling them out of the body, and yet
not consume the natural moisture thereof.


Hydr. Do thou place the preservation of men's health upon blind
peraduentures? Surely, a wise man should be without all peradventure, before he
adventure to take any thing inwardly into his body: or else he may peradventure
but play the part of a fool. And yet this I confess withal, yt the taking of
Tobacco but once in a week would do ye less hurt, though it would
(notwithstanding) do very much hurt, by working such an imbecillitie and
weakness in the brain it self, as would make it much more apt to entertain
sundry other excrementall humors afresh: and by procuring the said brain
withal (by reason of the excessive heat and drines thereof) to draw and suck
up from the lower parts, some such excrementall humors as were not to be
expelled that way. And verily, if our common proverb be true in any one thing,
it is infallible, and most certain in this so seldom a sucking up of Tobacco
smoke: namely, That a little can do no harm at all, if the same be not taken.


Capn. But Sir? what speedier course may possibly be invented for purging those
excrementall humors out of the body, then by drinking this smoke?


Hydr. What Capnistus? And must we (in very deed) be enforced to borrow from
the furthermost parts of India this stinking, infectious and venomous smoke, to
expel that mass or sink of humors from out of the body: when we have here
at home that selfsame method of curing (whether by pills, by medicines to be
chewed in the mouth, or put into the nose, or by sweating) which was formerly
derived from the ancient, and most famous Physical fountains of the world? Or
(if that do not like thee so well) thou may then (by the mere benefit of
nature it self) very easily dispatch thy self from all such corruptions, if
thou diligently and religiously observe that golden mean which Hippocrates
persuades, and prescribes in thy labor, thy meat, thy drink, thy sleep, and
thy lust. For as in domestical and household affairs, parsimonie or sparing
is worth a great stipend: so surely, from the very manner of thy conversation
and carriage, thou may receive a very rich benefit, as well for retaining
thy strength, as for preserving thy health. And herein I will give to thy
self, and all our Tobacconists this only precept: which if thou and they do
conscionably and carefully observe as you ought, you may easily and a long time
preserve your bodily healths healths in good estate. The precept for that
purpose is this: Do not lift up your hands so often to your mouths: for, an
insatiable swilling down of wine, ale, and beer, as also this inordinate
sucking up of filthy Tobacco smoke, do even band and bend themselves jointly
together, to breed, hatch, and nourish this filthy foul channel or sink of
corruptions.

Saint Bernard is reported to have sharply accused himself, for that (whiles
he went about with overmuch abstinence) to keep his body under, by corrupting
the vigor and temperature of that his said body, he did (after a sort)
defraud the functions of his mind, of their appointed organe or instrument. For
understanding at length, that he ought not to live privately to himself alone,
but also to the public benefit of others, by instructing, exhorting, and
comforting them: and perceiving withal that those public duties of piety
required the ministry of the body it self, he found by experience at length,
that a man ought so far forth to make much of his body, or otherwise to keep
the same under: as (in the mean time) the powers and operations of the mind be
neither choked with pleasures, nor dulled by too much austeritie. Now then, if
so grievous a prick of conscience did even sting that holy man Bernard,
because he but made his body too too lean and withered with godly exercises,
what punishment (think thou) are those men to expect and look hourly for
from the hands of our God, who (by unseasonable swilling and riotous fumes) do
most prodigally consume and so riotously weaken and waste the very treasury of
nature it self? I for my own part will put down no censure upon them: but
(with all my heart) I will beseech the Almighty to give them far better
minds. Lo, this is the very worst I wish unto them, and this is the best I can
do for them.


Capn. As your prayer is most charitable: even so are your earnest persuasions
with me so available, as I am utterly unable any further to gainesay your
speeches herein.


Hydr. Esdr. 4.41. A recapitulation of the whole.
Great is the truth I perceive, and will ever prevail. Well then, seeing
therefore the smoke of Tobacco consumes the natural heat; since it dries up
that radical moisture which is the very fountain of that selfsame heat;
since by corrupting the due proportion of the Elements, it dissolueth the
primarie composition of the whole body it self; since by the sharpness
thereof (which partly it has by nature, and partly does draw from the burning)
it even gnaweth and fretteth the members of the body; seeing it causes the
clear, sweet and wholesome spirits of the body to become obscure, stinking,
and unwholesome; seeing it disperseth throughout the whole body a venomous
air, and repugnant to nature, assayling the head, heart, and life; finally,
for so much as it brings all these incommodities to man's natural life,
without any one hope of profit at all to the same: let nature her self, and
the judgment of sound reason both say and affirm for me, that the smoke of
Tobacco taken inward, is very pernicious unto the body.


Capn. Alas poor Tobacco, my pretty Tobacco; thou that have been hitherto
accounted the Ale-knights arms, the Beer brewers badge, the Carousers crest,
the Drunkards darling, the Draffe-sackes delight, the Easterlings ensign, the
Fantasticals foretresse, the Gormandizers glory, the hungry Hostesses alepole,
the Mad-braines merriment, the New-fangles novelty, the Poope noddies
paramour, the Ruffians reflection, the Swil bols swine-troffe, the Linkers
trull, the Tospots protection, the Vintners vintage, and the unthrifts pasport:
thou must now (I fear me) be enforced forthwith to take thy farewell toward
the uttermost parts of India, from whence thou were first transported to
England by vicious and wild dispositions, and there must make thy final abode:
having now (I plainly perceive) the very head of man, the brains, the radical
humors, the vital spirits, the wit, the memory, the senses, all the natural
faculties, the whole body and soul, yea nature her self, and the sway of
sound reason so strongly combined in one, to prove thy inward taken smoke, a
very pernicious matter for the bodies of men.


Hydr. It is even certainly so as thou say. And therefore I pray thee
persuade her Capnistus, with all her fiery fumes, and fumish fauourets, to be
forthwith packing together apace, for fear of losing their tide: and so to be
left in the lurch.


Capn. I will (from henceforth) be ready to do mine uttermost endeavor
therein. Howbeit good Sir, you do confidently avouch even in the very forefront
of your Tractate it self, that the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, is not only
very pernicious to the bodies of men, but too too proflu^ious for many
Tobacconists purses; and most pestiferous likewise to the public state.


Hydr. I did so confess: and what thereof?


Capn. I desire in like manner to hear those points confirmed at large.


Hydr. With all my heart, if thy leisure will give thee leave to attend
thereupon: In the mean time, let us walk forth a while to take the fresh
air, and then return again to our purpose intended.


Capn. With all my heart.


The end of the first part.
Nulla valet tantum virtus patientia quantum. (...).
THE FVME OF TOBACCO TAKEN INWARD, IS too too profluuious for many of our
Tobacconists purses, and most pernicious to the public State.
Capnistus. SIR, having hitherto proved the smoke of Tobacco taken inward, to
be very pernicious unto the body: you remember (I am sure) that you also
affirmed the same too too profluuious for many of our Tobacconists purses, as
also most pestiferous to the public State.


Hydrophorus. I did so indeed: and what then?


Capn. Do you ask me, what then? why Sir, this is the reason of this my
demand. Having hitherto sufficiently showed the pernicious effects of Tobacco
fumes, respecting especially the bodies of men: I pray you, prove now (in like
manner) the profluuitie thereon concerning their purses, and our public State.
For so shall you be sure to let all our Tobacconists blood even in the basilica
vein it self: and to draw forth presently the very feces or dregs of any
their preposterous affections toward those infectious filthy fumes.


Hydr. In very deed, it is true as thou say. The purse-plague is much more
respected now, with some sorts of people, then is either the plague of body or
soul: they are so desperately drenched in their dangerous delights. And
therefore (to effect this our pretended purpose the better) we will herein
observe this following order. There shall first be propounded the purses
profluuitie it self: and then secondly, there shall be resounded the
consequent effects succeeding the same.


Capn. A most excellent order, proceed (Sir) unto it with speed, I beseech
you.


Hydr. With very good will. Wherein first shall be showed what this the purses
profluuitie is: and then next, how such an insatiable sucking in of filthy
Tobacco fumes, becomes too too profluuious for the purse it self, and our
present State.


Capn. What mean you first, by the purses profluuity?


Hydr. By the purses profluuitie, I do not mean any frugall or commodious
disbursing, but a prodigal or profluuious dispending of those worldly
prefermen^s and blessings which the Lord God (in his abundant mercies)
bestows on men for their necessary uses, not needless abuses: to the
preposterous impouerishing of them and theirs, the dangerous infecting of
others about them, and the pestiferous undermining of the public State.


Capn. Sir, I do now understand to the full, what you simply mean here, by the
purses profluuity: and therefore, show me next (I beseech you) how this our
insatiable swilling in of filthy Tobacco fumes, becomes too too profluuious
for our Tobacconists purses, and most pestiferous to the public State.


Hydr. Content. Wherein thou have first to observe, that Tobacco it self has
been evermore held at an exceeding high price; that those our tippling
Tobacconists cannot ordinarily compass the same without an excessive
reckoning; that such an excessive reckoning cannot possibly be performed
without very chargeable cost; that such chargeable cost cannot be freed from
superfluous and riotous wasting; that such superfluous wasting procures a
prodigal dispending of men's patrimonies with other worldly preferments; that
such a prodigal dispending of patrimonies with other worldly preferments, is
over profluuious for our Tobacconists purses: and that this their purses
profluuitie is most pestiferous to the public State.


Capn. This gradation (I must needs confess) does give to the Eagle-eied, and
sharped-sighted sort, some glimmering show concerning your purpose propounded:
howbeit, that 2 Pet. 1.19.
the day-dawne and the day star thereof may more clearly break forth to the
simplest man's view, I pray you discourse of these more at large.


Hydr. I am not unwilling therewith. First therefore for the exceeding high
rate that this Tobacco has ever been at since the very first arrival thereof
into England, thou thy self, and all our Tobacconists, are able to say this of
your own proper knowledge: namely, that the same has usually been sold by the
pound, for twenty nobles, five, four, or three pounds: yea and when it came
to the lowest price, it could not be had under four marks or forty
shillings, which amounts to three shillings four pence an ounce at the
least. Is not this (think thou) an exceeding high rate for filthy Tobacco?
And is not twenty nobles, five, four, or three pounds, yea forty shillings,
an excessive great price for a pernicious poysonsome smoke? And may such an
excessive great price be performed without a chargeable cost? And c^n such
chargeable cost be possibly freed from a superfluous or riotous waste? And will
not such a riotous waste procure (in the end) a prodigal dispending of
patrimonies with other like worldly preferments? And will not such prodigal
dispending of patrimonies, become too too profluuious for our Tobacconists
purses? And will not such a profluuitie of purses, in the end prove very
pestiferous to the public State? Speak man and spare not, what say thou to
this demonstration? Do not every of these (like the inseparable lincks of a
deadly devouring chain) very dangerously draw a public calamity upon our
country and kingdom?


Capn. Indeed Sir, I cannot but acknowledge the exceeding rate, the excessive
reckoning, as also the chargeable cost bestowed upon Tobacco it self: but I
see not as yet, how th^se our professed Tobacconists will account that thing a
superfluous or riotous cost, which (as they verily suppose themselves) does
work their so exceeding much good.


Hydr. It has been apparently proved, and thy self has freely confessed in
our former discourse, that the smoke of Tobacco is very pernicious unto the
body: and which way then does it work them so exceeding much good? I am
certain it works a wonderful strange consumption in every of their purses
at least. If therefore some odly conceited companion (whose brains are filthily
besotted with filthy Tobacco fumes) should over idly imagine, that that
thing which unnecessarily costeth both living and life, were no superfluous or
riotous waste: must that his idle supposall be forthwith privileged for a
current conceit among such as are soundly wise? God forbid that any such
peevish persuasion should ever possess the prudenter sort. For so should we
Eccles. 107
Set servants on horseb^cke, and make Princes to plod by their sides as Pages:
yea so should the crew of some idly conceited companions, bec^me the
canonized counselors to those that have far finer wits then themselves.
Concerning therefore that former superfluous and riotous waste, which those
Tobacconists do so wilfully make about their beastly Tobacco fumes, do tell me
in good sadness, whether it be not a superfluous waste, for any man of great
place, to paddle forth y^arely one hundred pounds at the least, for an hundred
gallons of filthy fumes? for a Gentleman of meaner condition, to be at forty
pound annual expenses, about bare forty pottels of stinking flames? for a
Yeoman, an Husbandman, an Artificer, a Tradesman, a Tinker, a Shoemaker, or a
Cobbler, to bestow weekly some three shillings fourepence at the least, for
but one only ounce of fantastical fooleries? What say thou Capnistus? Is
not this a very superfluous and riotous waste? Do answer directly, either yea
or no to the same.


Capn. In very deed Sir, I must needs acknowledge it a superfluous and riotous
waste: yea and no better in effect then the fantastical purchasing of vanity
it self.


Hydr. Go to then. Can such a superfluous and riotous waste be possibly
performed without a prodigal dispending of those our Tobacconists their
patrimonies and worldly preferments? or without a frivolous pursing up of their
annual revenues and rents Hag. 1.6.
in a bottomless bag? Who sees not then, but that their filthy Tobacco fumes
(being ordinarily at such an exceeding high rate, at such an excessive
reckoning, at such a chargeable cost, at such a superfluous-waste, and at such
a prodigal dispending of patrimonies, with other like worldly preferments)
must needs become too too profluuious for any our Tobacconists purses, and very
pestiferous to the public State?


Capn. It is even certainly so. And therefore Sir, (having hitherto succinctly
showed the undoubted profluuitie of the purse it self) I pray you now likewise
proceed to the orderly setting down of those fearful effects which
successively follow thereof.


Hydr. With a very good will. Wherein we have to observe, that those self same
effects, they are such as more especially concern the Tobacconists themselves:
or some other besides.


Capn. Very well. But what are those effects first which more properly concern
themselves.


Hydr. They are all those accidental occurrents which (proceeding collaterally
from those their Tobacco fumes) do more especially respect the parties
themselves, without any proper relation, or peculiar reference to any other man
else besides themselves: being such withal as more especially concern either
their own person, or their proper estate.


Capn. What are those effects first, which more especially concern their own
person?


Hydr. They are those dangerous diseases, and those desperate deaths, which (by
reason of such an insatiable sucking in of filthy Tobacco fumes) do even
ordinarily attend (like pursuiuants) upon their very bodies and souls. Namely,
a fearful consuming of the natural heat; an unquenchable scorching and
drying up of the radical moisture; an utter exhausting and sucking out of the
corporal humors; a most poysonsome corrupting of the due proportion of
Elements appointed by nature; a continual f^etting and gnawing of all the
bodily members; a pernicious dissoluing of the primarie composition of the
whole body it self; a preposterous procuring of the clear, sweet, and
wholesome spirits, to become obscure, stinking and unwholesome; a most dangerous
dispersing of a venomous air through out all parts of the body; a violent
assailing of the head, the brain, the heart, the whole body and life it self;
yea and eftsoons a most so daine and desperate death, as we have more la^gely
declared before. Lo Capnistus, even these, and sundry such other occurrents,
they are those proper effects which do undoubtedly attend upon the poor
Tobacconists body, and as ordinarily follow his insatiable swilling in of
filthy Tobacco fumes, as the shadow follows the body. And as his said body
is therewith very dangerously infected, so surely that his honest reputation
(which should be unto him Pro. 22.1. Eccles. 7.2.
as a precious ointment) is thereby most shamefully blemished. Being pointed at
by all sorts of people when he walks abroad in the open streets, and too too
reprochfully termed a tippling Tobacconist, a swaggering swil smoke, a sodden
headed Ass, a fantastical fool, a proper tale stripling to play at
Poope-noddie, a man of a wonderful wit (forsooth) concerning those our newly
devised chymicall extractions: being sufficiently able (in very short time) to
turn a shilling to nine-pence, one that has a meruellous dexterity in
augmenting his patrimony by a plain retrogradation, beginning directly where
his ancestors ended, and never giving over before he come where they first
began: to knit up all in a word, he is (say they) Thericleiouphil^s: (...).
that is (in plain English) a friend and follower of cup companions. What one
ingenious nature may possibly but hear these disdainefull reproaches, and his
very ears not burn on his head? Or who is the wight which (being thus
odiously branded in every place) would not grow grossly ashamed of that
shameful condition which thus makes him the shame of the world? Surely, the
timely consideration of these fearful effects concerning especially their
own proper persons, would even presently take up our Tobacconists minds with
far better employments: were they not too too beastly bewitched with those
venomous vapors which flow from their filthy fumes. For lo, these are the
fair fragrant flowers of their chargeable flames, the undoubted success of
those their sottish attempts, and the flourishing fruits of those their
fantastical fooleries. The very feeling of these and such other most fearful
effects should cause them continually to cry out and say thus, Nocet
emp^adolore, voluptas.
Oh how pestiferous is that transitory pleasure which we have dearly
purchased with such perpetual pain and shame? For lo now we do find and feel
(in our proper experience) that these our filthy Tobacco fumes, are not only
pernicious unto our bodies, but too too profluuious also for our purses, in
procuring such fearful effects to our own proper persons.


Capn. They should so, I confess. And I doubt not but (by that time they have
been better schooled a while with the mistress of fools) they will learn that
lesson by roate. But what are those other effects (I beseech you) which do
likewise concern their proper estates?


Hydr. They are those accidental occurrents which do ordinarily attend upon
such chargeable cost, such superfluous waste, such a prodigal and profluuious
dispending of ancient patrimonies with other like worldly preferments. For what
other things else may possibly follow thereof (besides a pernicious hurt to the
body, and untimely undermining of men's honest reputations) but an unrecoverable
subversion of that their ancient estate which they formerly received from their
forefathers frugalitie? a perpetual supplanting of that their primarie
approved condition? and a monstrous metamorphosing of their former well managed
Manors, with other their domestical maintenance? So as (by these means) they
make great noble Persons, but single-soaled Gentelmen; well bred Gentelmen, but
bare thredded Yeomen; bountiful Yeomen, but beggarly Husbandmen; hospitious
Husbandmen, but shifting Tradesmen, artificious Tradesmen; but conicatching
companions; conicatching companions, but vagabond rogues. Thus thou may
plainly perceive how these their intoxicating Tobacco fumes are able (in an
vnperceiueable and Circean manner) to transform nobility into gentry,
gentry into yeomanrie, yeomanrie into husbandry, husbandry into maunuarie,
manuarie into manubiarie, manubiarie into a vagrant and retchlesse roguerie,
and what not besides?


Capn. Do you then determine, that these their Tobacco fumes are the
unchangeable cause of such a changed condition?


Hydr. I do not make those their said fumes the efficient cause, although yet
an unchangeable occasion of such a change. For seeing Genesis 6.5. Iam. 4.5.
the spirit which dwells in them, does lust after evil continually: who
sees not then, but that this filthy Tobacco fume (so forcibly bewitching
their brains) is the undoubted occasion of inflaming their said luft to such a
profluuious waste for the timely purchase of that which makes them eftsoons to
Deuteronomy. 23.15.
wax wanton with the good blessings of God? And even as Israel Psalm. 78.18.
and 106.14. 1 Cor. 10.6.
affected flesh for their lust: so these our fantastical spirits (requiring
Tobacco fumes for their filthy desire) do most prodigally dispend their
patrimonies about the untimely procuring of those vanishing flames which they
so wastfully Iam. 4.3.
consume upon their inordinate lusts. Howbeit, this one thing withal I pray
thee obscrue: namely, that as the Lord God indirectly Psalm. 78.29.
gives them this way their hearts desire: so surely while the Tobacco fume is
yet in their mouths, Psalm. 78.30.
his inevitable wrath falls fearfully upon them. For not only he deli^ers
them up (in justice) Romans 1.24.
to their own hearts lust: but leaves them withal so sottish in judgment, as
themselves know not which way to manage their present possessions; making the^
insatiably mad in dispending their patrimonies about such smokie delights, and
in wasting their worldly preferments upon those their preposterous lusts. And
thus at length they begin to perceive in their proper experience, that as the
water which drives the mill, decaies the mill: so surely with whatsoever vain
man Wisd. 11.^3.
insatiably sins, with the same eftsoons he is foundly punished.


Capn. Why Sir? may not wise men maintain their Tobacco fumes, as well as
their meat, drink, and clothing, without either offending God, or the
pitiful subversion of their present estates?


Hydr. Do thou accomt those for wise men, which so wantonly and foolishly
waste their worldly maintenance upon those their forenamed fooleries? But that
thou may be able to understand these matters the better: thou must learn here
to distinguish between the necessary, and the needless supplies of nature.
For all those things which do necessarily tend to an orderly preservation of
natures well being, according to the provident purpose of God himself, namely,
meat, drink, and clothing: they may, and they must be maintained by a
moderate and frugall expense, correspondent to each man his present ability.
Yea and all the necessary expenses bestowed that way, they do undoubtedly
receive such a blessed increase from the goodness of God, as a man shall be
sure, therein Psalm. 128.2.
to eat the labor of his own proper hands, and it shall go well with him
every kind of way. Howbeit, all those things whatsoever which are but needless
supplies to natures well being, not only needless (I say) but noisome withal
(such as are our immoderate gormandizings, our superfluous quaffing up of wine
and strong drinks, our insatiable sucking in of filthy Tobacco fumes, with
sundry such other fantastical fooleries) as they are not the ordinary
appointed labors of those men's hands which Psalm. 128.1.
walk uprightly in the ways of the Lord, so has the Lord himself not only
allotted no one blessing unto them, but rather imposed a Mat. 3.9.
fearful curse of penury upon them. For as it is the Pro. 10.22.
blessing of the Almighty that makes men rich, so surely all those senseless
fools which so insatiably devour their own proper substance, they shall be
enforced eftsoons Job. 20.15.
to vomit it up again, for the Lord God will draw it out of their bellies, be
they never so great, or so mighty. Yea and not only the great ones shall be
sure to feel this fearful effect concerning their own present estates, but
even the Ecclus. 19.1.
laboring men likewise that are so resolutely given to these their drunken
delights, they shall never be rich: and all they that make not much of a
little, by little and little shall soon come to nothing; so uncertain are the
estates (be thou sure) of all those our insatiable suckers up of filthy
Tobacco fumes.


Capn. But why should the expenses bestowed upon meat, drink and clothing
receive such a blessing from God, and the excessive cost laid forth for
filthy Tobacco fumes, undergo so fearful a curse?


Hydr. The reason is this. Meat, drink, and clothing, they are necessary
supplies for natures well being, and the ordinary props appointed of God for
the timely support, and needful preservation of this present life: so as a
moderate expense bestowed that way, it is the Almighty his merciful
designement to such as Psalm. 128.1.2
uprightly walk in his ways. Whereas that superfluous waste which these men
do riotously lavish forth upon their filthy Tobacco fumes, it is not the
approved ordinary way which the Almighty appoints for man's preservation, but
rather such an inordinate desire of man's lusting heart as procures his present
destruction. To the one sort therefore the Lord has promised a Deuteronomy. 28.3.4.5.
blessing upon their basket and store: and tells them withal, that they
shall undoubtedly Psalm. 128.1.2.
eat the labor of their own proper hands, which do so industriously and so
painefully walk in his ways. To the other, he not only denounces a curse
upon Deuteronomy. 28.16.17.18. Malac. 3.9.
their fields their basket, their store, the fruit of their land, the increase
of their kine, and the flocks of their sheep, but also upon their revenues
and rents how exceeding soever; telling them withal, that they do but even
Pro. 23.21. Hag. 1.5.6.
purse up the same in a bottomless bag. So as the very curse of the Lord (thou
see) is in Pro. 3.33. 1 King 17.14.16.
the house of the wicked: but he blesses the habitation of the righteous. I
will make thee perceive my purpose herein, by some plain demonstration: and
(for better performance hereof) let us put this down here for the present
proportion. Be it supposed that some great man received yearly but five
hundred pounds annual rents to defray his domestical charges withal; which
said five hundred pounds (being handsomely husbanded, and frugally employed)
would accomplish that work in a very commendable and competent manner: but
being any way superfluously or wastefully spent upon excess of apparel,
meats, drinks, and other such riotous courses, would come very short in the
reckoning. Suppose now withal, that this man forsooth (to fulfill the
inordinate lust of his own licentious heart) would yearly dispend one hundred
pound at the least, upon the vanishing flames of filthy Tobacco fumes, not
abating at all his said excess in apparel, in meats, and in drinks: does it
not necessarily follow, that either this man's five hundred pounds rent must
otherways receive some extraordinary supply for the continual support of
such a superfluous waste, or that else his present estate (in continuance of
time) will be tumbled vpside down? What say thou Capnistus? do answer
directly either yea, or no.


Capn. The one, or the other (I freely confess) must necessarily follow
thereof: namely, either some present supply, or a present supplanting of that
man's present estate at the least.


Hydr. Thou iudgest aright. But tell me now where must such a present supply be
had? There is no hope to obtain the same from the blessing of God, because
such a riotous course is directly opposite to his holy appointed ordinance: but
rather the contrary. For as those men do prodigally even blow away their
wealth about filthy superfluous fumes, so surely the Almighty himself (even
in his fuming vengeance) does proportionably blow forth a fearful curse upon
all their labors: willing them to Hag. 1.5.
consider their own ways in theit hearts, and telling them withal that Deuteronomy.
28.38. Mich. 6.15. Hag. 1.6.9.
although they sow much they shall bring little home, and though they do eat,
they shall not be satisfied: and although they do drink, they shall not be
filled; though they cloth themselves, they shall not be chearished; yea
although they addle much wages, or receive large revenues, yet shall they but
purse up the same in a bottomless bag: because I have blown upon it, says
the Lord God. Yea, the just revenger of such fantastical courses, will appoint
Joel. 1.4.
the Palmer worm to spoil the rest of their store; and that which is left by
the Palmer worm, shall the Grasshopper eat, and the residue of the Grasshopper
shall the Canker-worme eat; and the remainder of the Canker-worme, shall the
Caterpiller consume and devour. By all which thou may very plainly
perceive, that rather a final consumption, then any formal supply, it is to be
fearfully expected from the hands of the Lord.


Capn. Very true it is. And therefore, I see now they must either surceasse
from that their former superfluous waste: or use some other device of their
own, to supply their wants.


Hydr. Thou say very well. But what one device of their own will be able to
counteruaile the determined vengeance of God against those their superfluous
vanities? No no, it is utterly in vain for those vaine-headded men, whose Job.
27.3. Psalm. 146.4. Isa. 2.22.
breath is in their nostrils, to encounter herein with that Psalm. 94.1.
God of vengeance whom they have Deuteronomy. 32.21.
moved with jealousy, and provoked to anger by those their superfluous
vanities: and who moreover (besides that inevitable curse upon their worldly
preferments) will yet further smite their own persons with such Deuteronomy. 28.28.
amazedness, such blindness, and astonishment of mind, as they shall be quite
destitute even of natural discretion and judgment which way to manage well
their proper estates: but shall ignorantly Deuteronomy. 28.29.
grope about the same at middle-time of the day, as blind men grope in the
darkness, and shall not be able to prosper in any their ways. And from hence
(I assure you) it is that thou beholdest hourly among them, such sudden
alienating of ancient inheritances; such a beastly bangling out of their
birthrights; such careless curtolling of ancient entailes; such injurious
transporting of former titles; such an horrible chopping and changing of long
continued Lordships; such a monstrous metamorphosing of their ancestors
Manors; such a graceless acknowledging of fines and recoueries, and such a
preposterous posting over of patrimonies with other like worldly preferments.
And howsoever these our Ammorites sins Genesis 15.16.
are not as yet mounted up to their excessive height, but that the men
themselves do still continue a time in some part of their ancient possessions:
yet be thou assured of this, that (so soon as the just measure of those their
monstrous enormities are heaped up once to the full) then even those their
reserved possessions will likewise vomit them forth; so as open bills of sale
shall be set over their doors, to purport to all passengers the sale of such
houses. Yea and this also, to the great admiration of those our Diogenists, who
will be ready to put down this their cynicall censure upon it, and say,
Diogenes.
Oh house, house; I thought thou would surfeit so long upon those thy Tobacco
fumes, that at the length thou would spew thy master quite out adoores. For
now we do plainly perceive, that the Lord 1 Samuel 25.22 1 King. 21.21.
has not left in thee, one man of thine own blood, to make water against the
wall. Lo, here the fearful effects concerning these our fume-suckers present
estate in the world.


Capn. Very fearful effects I assure you. But Sir, having succinctly showed
me those horrible effects which more especially concern the Tobacconists
themselves, in an only respect either of their person, or their proper
conditions: now show me in like manner (I pray you) those other effects which
more respectively concern some others besides themselves.


Hydr. With very good will. Wherein also thou have to confider, that those
self same effects they are of two sorts: Namely, such as more properly
concern their own wives and children: or such else, as do more generally
concern some others besides.


Capn. What are those effects first, which more properly concern their own
wives and children?


Hydr. They are all those accidental occurrents which do very fearfully
affect their sorrowful hearts. Namely, the riotous dispending of that their
allotted maintenance; the alienating of their designed inheritance, and their
utter impouerishing without all hope of redemption. From the woeful
consideration of which occurrents, they are severally enforced to put up their
pitiful complaints for the ease of their endless griefs.


Capn. What complaints (I pray you) are those?


Hydr. Surely, even such as are able to batter our Tobacconists hearts in an
hundred pieces, were they not an hundred times harder then the Adamant stone.
For imagine thou beheldest here such a fume-suckers wife most fearfully fuming
forth very fountains of blood, howling for anguish of heart, weeping, wailing,
and wringing her hands together, with grisly looks, with wide staring eyes,
with mind amazed, with thoughts perplexed, with body shiuering and quaking in
every joint: would thou not wonder greatly at this her so sudden a change?
I am sure thou could not but wonder much. But suppose withal thou should
presently hear the thundering echo of her horrible outcries ring in the
clouds, while she pitifully pleades with her husband thus:

The same or the like complaint may also be taken up against adul^erous
husbands.
Oh husband, my husband, mine only husband! Consider I beseech thee, thy dear,
thy loving, and thy kind-hearted wife. Am not (I alas) thine only wife; thy
best beloved wife; yea and Mal. 2.14.15.
the only wife of thy youth? Out, out (alas) why art thou then so careless of
this my present estate? Why do thou so vainly prefer a vanishing filthy
fume before my permanent virtues; before my amourous imbracings; yea before my
firm settled faith and constant love? Alas (my sweet husband) have I not bin
the Almighty his sanctified means to Genesis 30.3.
build thee up with an Mal. 2.15.
holy, a blessed, and a sanctified seed? Have not I here brought forth Genesis
30.11.
an army of children unto thee? Have I not enabled thee (husband) to Psalm.
127.5.
speak with thy stoutest enemies in the open gates? yea have I not made thee
(alas) an happy man, by Psalm. 127.5.
filling thy quiver full of fair, of faithful, and gracious young impes? What
might any one woman in the universal world have done more for thee (my dear
husband) then thy dear wife has done? Oh, out (alas) why art thou then become
now so graceles a father toward this thine own offspring; and so grievous an
husband to me their poor mother, in preferring a fantastical smoke before
these so substantial blessings? Oh husband, husband, oh hard hearted husband!
nay rather, a Exodus 4.25.
bloody husband thou art unto me. For that thou (neglecting 1 Timothy 5.8.
thy proper calling and care concerning an husband) have causelessly brought
Luke. 10.41.
abundance of cares upon me thy silly poor careful wife: A care how to live
my self, a care how to uphold our present estate, a care for these my poor
comfortless brats, a care for their present provision and food; hil-backe,
and fil-bellie is now mine hourly care, yea and a care for some corner (God
knows) wherein we may hide our beggarly heads. For thou (alas husband) having
hitherto vainly wasted their proper revenues upon a vanishing filthy fume, I
my poor self must be feign (now) to forgo my Feoffement also, I must
(perforce) be enforced to yield to the present sale thereof, to acknowledge
before some Judge my unwilling willing consent thereunto, full sore (God he
knows) against my own will. Howbeit, necessity (they say) has no law: I
must now do it (alas) or let thee lie fast by the heels. I must do it (God
wot,) otherwise my poor self and my sorrowful children must starve in the open
streets. Tell me Capnistus, if thou should but hear a poor sorrowful wife
thus pitifully complain upon her pitilesse fume-sucking husband, would thou
not forthwith imagine that her poor fainting heart had too effectually felt
the fearful effects of that his former fantastical fooleries?


Capn. Yes in very deed would I Sir, and (I suppose) not without a very urgent
occasion: but what are the poor childrens complaints, I pray you?


Hydr. They are those sighing sobs, and those sorrowful outcries which even
present necessity, and the fearful foresights of their future wants does
hourly urge them unto. For the better explanation whereof, imagine thou
should here likewise behold before thy face, a young tender brat, or little
pretty nest-cukkle (beginning to bite in the lip, to whimper a little) and then
(creeping pretily betweete the degenerate father his legs) should cry out and
say thus unto him in the name of all the rest of his brethren and sisters:

Dad, hark Dad in thine ear. Am not I thy best boy, am I not, Dad? And do
thou not love me thy best boy, Dad? Hark Dad, thou were wont (when thou wentst
to the Faires) to buy thy best boy, fine knacks, fine boxes, fine rattles, a
fine feather, a fine gilden dagger, and a fine golden hobbie-horse: were thou
not, Dad? And will thou now let me thy white-headed boy run barefoote and
barelegged without hose and shoes? Why hark Dad, has the fire of Tobacco
filched thy purse? Has filthy Tobacco flames enforced all thy golden angels
to creep covertly out of thy coffers into thy profluuious pouch, and from
thence to fly forth all about? Tell me good Dad, has the poysonsome stink of
those filthy Tobacco fumes made me thy own pretty boy, my brethren and
sisters to stink now so horribly in thy unnatural nostrils, as thou art
utterly unable (how willing soever) to buy my brother Humfrey an hat, or little
Francke a fustian coat, or my sister Kate a new coife, or poor pretty Tib a
tawdrie lace, or yet me thy best boy a new nothing to hang on my sleeue? I pray
thee hark Dad, and i will tell thee a thing in thine ear. My brother Robin he
wrings his hands thus, and cries mainly out: because thou art now no more able
to maintain him any longer to school, and yet he has half learned his
Puerilis (he says) without book. And my sister Meg, she sits mourning in
corners, because (being now ripe and ready for marriage) thou art not able to
prefer her that way, with one groates-worth of goods, she being otherways
capable enough of many good marriages. And Dad, little Kit, he cries out for a
prenticeship, but cannot prevail therein, for want of preferment. Yea and mine
eldest brother Will, he goes wailing up and down: because his birthright (he
says) is bangled out about nothing. Dad, hark in thine ear; Will, he prates
many bugs-words to my brothers and sisters behind thy back. He maruels (he
says) how thou can for very shame go daily (as thou do) to hear Sermons,
and profit no more by preaching. Nay, hark Dad, he tells them that Saint
Paul says plainly, 1 Timothy 5.8.
thou have denied the faith; art become an apostate, and worse them an infidel:
because thou show thy self so careless in providing for us, and the folk
of thy family. Yea and that the Lord God proceeds justly in judgment
against thee, by causing thy fantastical sucking in of filthy Tobacco flames,
to feed thee as fat as a fool. For lo (says he) our Father long since did
lie Mich. 2.1.
in his bed, devising that monstrous flame: never regarding at all, how the
Lord (in the mean time) was Mich. 2.4.
devising a plague against him and his family, from which neither he himself,
nor we his forlorned offspring, shall ever be able to pluck out our necks.
And therefore (with very great grief and anguish of heart) we may now take up
this reproachful parable against him* yea we may now lament with a doleful
lamentation, and say one to another. Alas, we be Mich. 2.4.5.
even utterly wasted? Behold here, how the righteous Judge (for our fathers
fantastical fooleries) has justly dispersed the long settled portions of us
his poor offspring for ever. For lo, our own father himself (being
fearfully given over to the insatiable lust of his own licencious heart) has
now made such an absolute sale of his lands, and so beastly bangled out our
birthrights in so many odd parcels, as there is utterly no hope at all of any
redemption; nor possibility that any one of our fathers poor of spring shall
ever be able to cast forth a coard by lot, in any our alienated inheritances.
In so much as wise men (wondering greatly thereat) may say one to another:
Behold, we Job. 5.3.4.5.
have seen the foolish man substantially rooted, and surely settled: but lo,
now the Lord curses his habitation, and tells him, his children shall be
destitute, and far from succor: yea that they shall be destroyed in the
gate, and none shall deliver them. The hungry shall eat up this foolish man's
harvest; yea they shall even take it away as it were from among the thorns;
and the thirsty shall drink up his substance. Neither may our said father
impute the blame hereof to the barrenness of the soil, but to the badnesse
rather of his own proper husbandry, and to the preposterous waste of his
profluuious purse. For Job. 5.6.
misery comes not forth of the dust, neither does poverty spring out of the
earth. Lo Dad, my brothers and sisters they prate thus in corners behind thy
back, so they do: and I said I would tell thee thereof, so I would; and will thou not whip them soundly for it? How say thou Capnistus? if thou should
but hear some poor distressed mother and her pitiful brats thus grievously
cry and complain, would thou not forthwith conclude that their poor
hearts had formerly felt the forenamed effects of such a fantastical sucking
in of filthy Tobacco fumes?


Capn. Yes that would I, no doubt: and not without very great cause. But good
Sir, forbear (I beseech you) all such your further patheticall Prosopopoeias.
For my very heart it bleedes in my body, to think that any poor harmless
infants should thus be enforced to pull a public reproach upon their own
fathers, for those their fantastical and palpable fooleries.


Hydr. I am very well willing (upon this thine entreaty) to surceasse
forthwith from those their supposed most pitiful plaints; not taking any
pleasure at all in such prosecutions, but desiring thereby to make those their
unchristian courses become odious, even in the ears of all sorts of people.
And surely, had those our blindfolded sots but one dram of Gods grace, or one
drop of good nature remaining within them, they would eftsoons imagine such
patheticall Prosopopoeias in their own sinful souls. Howbeit, this is
certainly a vengeance decreed with God, that as Pro. 1.32.
the prosperity of those our foolish Tobacconists is their proper destruction,
so surely the Almighty (in that self same decreed vengeance) will even
constrain them perforce to Pro. 1.31.
eat up the whole crop of their own foolish ways, and to be filled with the
fruits of their former devices. Yea he will enforce their Pro. 6.11.
appointed poverty to come speedily upon them as one that passes apace by the
way: and make their allotted beggerie very fiercely to assault them, like a
strong armed man.


Capn. Well Sir, let this fully suffice for those fearful effects which more
respectively concern their wives and ^hildren: an^ now lay open those other
effects (I pray you) which more generally concern some other besides.


Hydr. With a very good will. Wherein thou have here to observe, that those
self same effects, they are either such as more especially concern the poor
Tenants themselves: or such else as more generally appertain to the public
State.


Capn. What are those effects first, which more especially concern the poor
Tenants themselves?


Hydr. They are all those importable burdens which their intoxicated Landlords
do most grievously impose upon the poor men's backs, for the bloody supply of
their beastly wants. For, these our insatiable suckers of smoke, feeling once
(in a miserable experience) that their five hundred-pounds yearly revenues
will not render an allowance to that their prodigal dispending of one hundred
pounds yearly at least upon those their filthy Tobacco fumes, without a
final confusion of their forefathers patrimony; and perceiving moreover, that
no one supply of those their superfluous wants may possibly be expected from
any the good blessings of God, but the cursed supplanting rather of their
present possessions, they begin eftsoons to cast about with themselves, which
way they may assuredly support their fantastical fooleries, without the final
subversion of their proper estates. And this imagination of theirs, no sooner
possesses their swimming heads, but the devil himself does forthwith suggest
as pleasing a supply to their swilling hearts; persuading them seriously
(through the devilish device of Christian Craft, that Machiuilian monster
which hourly attends on their persons, and undertakes withal to manage their
domestical affairs) that they may very well raise yearly some two hundred
pounds more at the least from among their poor Tenants, toward the timely
defraying of those their superfluous and idle expenses, without any present
oppressing of those peasant-like fatbackes at all.


Capn. Oh monstrous imagination of theirs! All the devils in hell could never
have found forth a more mischievous device for the pitiful spoiling of those
their poor Tenants.


Hydr. Very true as thou say. For this devilish device is no sooner set on
foot by those monstrous Minotaures, but the same is as diuellishly entertained
of our Tyger-like Tobacconists, and as perniciously put in present practice by
them, and their bloody Bailifs together. So as, from this sandy foundation
does forthwith arise the monstrous improuing of Lordships, the merciless
enclosing of several grounds, the insatiable inhaunsing of incomes and fines,
the excessive racking and raising of rents, the beggarly borowing of some three
years pay before hand at the least; the rufull riding and running; the
chargeable carting and carrying, so uncharitably exacted upon the poor Tenants;
their bondslaue-like boonings at every beck; their extraordinary rent-corne,
rent-coales, rent-capons, and I wot not what; together with the unseasonable
haling home of their hungry Landlord his harvest, notwithstanding the
exceeding great loss of their own, lying all abroad in great danger of waste.
Yea from hence also arises the taking of so many new leases, in a needles
reuersion; the dishonest drowning up of some nine or ten years in the old lease
at least; the finding forth of some certain odd quirkes in either of both;
and the unequal making of forfeitures in either of both, so often as poor
Tenants refuse to crouch down like old beaten hounds at their masters beck,
or to supply the insatiable want of the Landlords insatiable lusts whenever
they call. By all which thou may plainly perceive, that these our insatiable
suckers of smoke, do nothing else in effect, but even Isay. 3.15.
batter their poor Tenants to powder, Isay. 3.15.
grind the poor men's faces away, Am. 8.4.
swallow up the hungry souls, Am. 8.4.
buy the needy for shoes, Am. 5.12.
oppress the just in the gate, Am. 8.4.
make the needy of the land to fail, yea and Hab. 2.8.
insatiably devour the innocent blood, to uphold their insatiable filthy
fooleries. So as, the Am. 8.8.
whole land must tremble for this: and every man mourn that dwells therein.


Capn. And very well worthy they are. But Sir, Do you absolutely ascribe these
fearful effects, to our insatiable taking of Tobacco fumes alone?


Hydr. Not so. For howsoever it be a most fearful sin before the Majesty
of the immortal God, for any man thus vainly to waste his wealth: yet surely
this our superfluous sucking in of filthy Tobacco fumes goes never alone by
it self, but has (like an amourous Lady) her lascivious hangbies attending
hourly upon her train, to aggrauate her needless excess the more in the
presence of God. For this burning and scorching flame being once inwardly taken
into the bowels; there must necessarily follow, an insatiable quaffing up of
wine, ale, or beer at the least, to allay and quench the excessive heat of
the stomach. And by the insatiable quaffing in of these strong drinks, Dame
Venus her self begins eftsoons so fiercely to be enflamed and set on fire,
as nothing in the world but some one of her Damsels, or Draf-sackes at least,
must forthwith be fetched, to calm the new kindled coals of their lusting
hearts. And those amourous Damsels so seruiceably attending their beck, and
so wantonly serving their turns that way, they must not only be most gallantly
adorned with whatsoever ornaments of bravery themselves, but be courted
eftsoons (by those their prodigal paramours) in sundry changeable and
chargeable suits. And this bravery of apparel, it must be proportionably graced
with proud and sumptuous buildings: and those sumptuous buildings, they
speedily procure a prodigal dispending of patrimonies with other like worldly
preferments. And this prodigal dispending of patrimonies, it cannot but
impair our fume-suckers ancient estates. And this needless impairing of
ancient estates, it must have forsooth some present supply from a pitiful
oppressing of the poor Tenants themselves. So as, albeit these sundry most
wastefull disorders do all jointly concur in the speedy subversion of our
fume-suckers ancient estates, and therefore we do synecdochically put down but
a part for the whole; yet the filthy Tobacco fume (thou may plainly
perceive) is now adays become the Trojan horse-bellie of those other hidden
mischiefs, and the only Metropolitan of all those monstrous misorders. By
the misguidance whereof, our insatiable fume-suckers (thou see) they do
nothing in effect: but even Isa. 59.5.
hatch the Cockatrice eggs, and weaue the poysonsome spiders web, Isa. 59.4.
conceiving mischief, and bringing iniquity forth: thus Isa. 5.18.
drawing wickedness to themselves with the cords of vanity, and sin, as t^
were with cart-ropes.


Capn. Let this suffice for those fearful effects which more especially
concern the poor Tenants themselves: and now show me (I pray you) those other
effects which more generally appertain to the public State.


Hydr. With very good will. And those effects also are such as do primarily
proceed from the mightier sort of our filthy fume-suckers: or from the more
abject crew of those our tippling Tobacconists.


Capn. Very well. But what (first) are those fearful effects, which do
primarily proceed from the mightier sort of our fume-suckers?


Hydr. They are such monstrous attempts and outrageous enormities, as honest
minded persons should even tremble to tell; as men of common humanity should
abhor to hear; and as holy religious wights should loath in their hearts.
For when those our insatiable suckers of filthy fumes are utterly sunk; when
their ancient estates (I mean) have suffered such an unrecoverable ship-wracke,
as they know not which way to wind themselves forth from the sands of sorrow,
and shelfs of shame, then they forthwith resolve upon desperate courses for the
daily supply of their present wants. For then (forsooth) they will either
become magnificent statesmen in Stand-gate hole; or too too humbled suitors at
Shooters-hil; or huffing hunts-men on new Market-plaine; or brauing Bow-bearers
at Black-moore heath; or hucking Habberdashers on Hog-magog hills; or the Kings
cauallering coyne-takers at Crabtree corner; yea or the most fliggering
Faulkeners at Flittesse hedge, to let fly at each passengers purse at the
least. For as these fellows can neither Luke 16.13^
dig, nor delue: so are they most egregiously ashamed to beg their relief at
honest men's houses.


Capn. These Sir (I confess) they are most horrible effects.


Hydr. They are so indeed. And yet (if no help might be found for the same) I
could even heartily wish that these were the worst. Because then it were more
safe to suffer some small inconvenience, then desperately admit of an horrible
mischief. Yea and of two dangerous occurents, rather to tolerate the least of
the twain, then fearfully undergo the hazard of all.


Capn. What might be your meaning herein Sir, I beseech you?


Hydr. My meaning herein is this. Namely, if there could none other help at
all be had, then were it much better to bear a time with such desperate
adventures as tend to the only hurt of some private persons, then over
carelessly to neglect the unnatural nourse-mother of some such dangerous
attempts as directly do aim at the public good of the State. I will
demonstrate this matter by an apparent example thus.

Those our late traitorous Recusants, they were all (for the most part) but
beggarly Bankrupts, and men of very base condition, as Authority it self (by
due inquisition, and provident inquiry) found plainly forth, and their own
favorites themselves very freely confess. Now those men (for the most part)
they were formerly held for professed Tobacconists: namely, for disordered and
riotous persons. Who falling first from Tobacco to tippling; from tippling to
whoring; from whoring, to a Court-like brauing; from a Court-like brauing, to
superfluous building; from a superfluous building, to a prodigal dispending of
their ancient patrimonies, and other their alloted preferments; from a
prodigal dispending, to an excessive want; from an excessive want, to a woeful
malcontented condition; and from their malcontended condition, to the proud
pioners most bloody profession in that the undermining practice of theirs:
wherein they purposely put down their pestiferous proiects and plots for their
present relief. For howsoever they made Religion it self unseemly couerture
to those their traitorous attempts, because among them, In nomine Domini
incipit omne malum.
In the name of God, all mischief begins: yet (without doubt) the preposterous
supply for those their profluuious purses, was the principal propounded period
to those their pestilent purposes, and the fully determined shot-anker of that
their subsequent shame. The sequel it self does sound forth at large the
truth of the premises now, how intricate soever before. For their intolerable
wants became so heavy a burden unto their vnbended backs, as (before they
would too long undergo the huge weight thereof) they rather most damnably
resolved among themselves to massacre our most Christian King, our gracious
Queen; our peerlesse young Prince, the whole royal offspring, the honorable
Council; the Nobles, the Gentry, the Clergy, the Communaltie, and the
happy estate of this our whole country: like a most viperous brood, devouring
the very belly it self wherein they were borne and bred.


Capn. Oh horrible attempt! What steely heart would not tremble and quake at
the very hearing thereof? But go to Sir, make haste I beseech you, to the
timely unfolding of those other effects which more respectively proceed from
the baser sort of those our tippling Tobacconists.


Hydr. Content. Wherein also I would have thee consider afresh, that albeit
this sort of tippling Tobacconists be accounted for men very abject and base,
in comparison of those lofty fume-suckers we spoke of before, yet prove they
too too pestiferous also to the publ^ke State; and their pretended proiects and
plots are much more pernicious that way, then may well be perceived at first.
And howsoever these, and the other may seem somewhat to differ in their
several circumferences, they do both of them jointly fall iumpe and pat upon
one and the selfsame period of public disorder. For (concerning any their
practical designements) they mutually march forwards in one and the self same
circular motion, I mean, in the pestiferous disturbing and preposterous
supplanting of our public State.


Capn. Good Sir, I cannot as yet conceive your purpose herein.


Hydr. I will thus more expressly demonstrate the same. Be it here supposed that
this baser sort of tippling Tobacconists (whether Husbandmen* Artificers,
Tradesmen, Sadlers, Shoo-makers, Taylers, Tinkers, or any other else of the
vulgar condition) having in all* but twenty nobles, twenty marks, twenty or
forty pounds maintenance to defray all manner of domestical charges withal)
should weekly dispend some three shillings fourepence upon filthy Tobacco
fumes: who sees not plainly, but that either their said maintenance must
forthwith be managed by some other bad means, or this their ancient estate
in very short time be shrewdly surprised, and (in a manner) quite subverted?


Capn. There is no necessary consequent in either of both. For behold Sir,
they may forthwith surceasse from such a superfluous waste, and eftsoons
betake themselves to a much more frugall course.


Hydr. Surceasse from their former superfluous waste (say thou) and fall to
frugalitie? When the sky falls so down to the ground, we may happily gather
great store of Larks. No, no, its more possible for a man to take an Hare with
a tabret and whistle, then turn those bewitched Tobacconists from that
tippling course wherein they were more accustomably bred and brought up. For
howsoever they be Ierem. 4.22.
wise enough to do wickedly: yet (without question) to do well, they have no
knowledge at all. Do thou but take an exact survey of any their disordered
courses, or desperate attempts in all their assemblies, and at every time and
tide: and then tell me withal, what any one hope may be had after such a
Moone-shine in the water? And whether worse Cankerwormes can be found in a
Christian Commonwealth, then those our Exodus 10.13.14.
Egyptian Caterpillars.


Capn. Help me good Sir (I beseech you) in such a survey.


Hydr. With all my heart. And (for the more orderly effecting of this our
intent) it shall be by a lively resemblance of them, and their ordinary
practices. Let us therefore accordingly imagine, that Prince Arthur our Aleman,
Babble-much the Barber, Barthelet the Butcher, Cocke-on hoope the Cobbler,
Ding-thrift the Dog-keeper, False-chaps the Fiddler, Grout-nolle the Girdeler,
Huf-cap the Hunts man, Iustle-king the Ioyner, Lithersbie the Lath-render,
Martin the Mariner, Mad-braine the Make-shift, Nichol the Net-mender, Oliver
the Oyster-man, Perkin the Peddler, Partiface the Piper, Proud-mind the Plummer,
Runagate the Royster, Simkin the Sithesmith, Small-braines the Shoo-maker,
Thin-gut the Thatcher, Talke-apace the Taylour, with Tom-trash the Tinker:
imagine here (I say) that all and every of these should mutually assemble
themselves at Saint Paltockes Inn, would thou not account them Crobyll
^ugum.
a quaint Crobylian yoke, a congruent cluster (I mean) of pretty carowsing
companions?


Capn. I might (at first sight) so account them, I freely confess. Howbeit
Sir, this your cynicall censure, it will (I fear me) be shrewdly distasted of
some: because the Trades themselves which you speak of here (being rightly
respected) are very commendable, yea and sundry men of those self same trades,
are worthily reputed for honest persons.


Hydr. Distasted of some (say thou?) A silie poor witless some they are
(be thou sure) who wot not how to distinguish between those trades themselves,
and the men in those trades. For I do not here censure those good trades
themselves, nor the honest men whatsoever, employed in any of those commendable
trades: only I tax the scum and ofscouring of honest men, and the palpable
abusers of those the good trades whatsoever. And therefore (to proceed
directly in that our former survey,) let us imagine that either all, or some
certain of these should purposely assemble themselves at Arthur ale-mans house
about eight or nine of the clock in the morning, with a joint and full
resolution there to hold out side till eleven or twelve in the night: what kind
of coile (think thou) would those our quaint companions keep there for all
the day long?


Capn. When the good ale were once got in the head, and wit gone out, I fear
me Sir, they would keep a very bad coile.


Hydr. Thou may be assured of that, if thou but observe their ordinary
courses. For (having jointly determined upon the match making) to make then
their sweet liquor of life the appointed period to all those their pot-like
proceedings, they suppose it not greatly amiss, to begin the match first, by
drinking in measure next their hearts; that is, each man (for his share) must
carouse a whole quart at a clap, for curing his eie-sight. After all this, they
mispend some quarter of an hour in questioning about the manner of their
Hostesses brewing, and in commending most highly that last brewed liquor of
life. But now (forsooth) perceiving some sudden cold qualme ouerwhelming their
queasie stomachs by reason that their lately receuied liquor lies cold in the
same, they do call forthwith for one ounce of Tobacco, for a Tobacco pipe, and
a greasy candle to kindle the same: sucking in (by course) that filthy
Tobacco fume, as eagerly (I assure thee) as the hungry horse-leach sucketh up
the putrified blood from a sore bruised leg. This is no sooner done, but they
begin eftsoons to feel the fiery scorching flame of that filthy Tobacco
fume, to fret and burn in their bellies: and thereupon, they do presently call
for a whole yard of ale, that is, for so many fresh cups of that their beloved
liquor, as may stand one by one within a yard compass every way. With these
they resolve to allay, and to quench the outrageous heat in their belching
breasts: wherein also they do make exceeding much haste, for fear of fiering
their rubie vermilion noses. This purpose performed, they perceive their former
fiery stomachs so suddenly cooled, and do then feel withal, such a chilling
cold dispersing it self throughout all the parts of their body, as they fear
to be forthwith surprised with a cold deadly palsy, or to fall eftsoons into
some new feauer-lurden at least: and thereupon they take Tobacco afresh: and
withal (for preventing the worst) they do call forth a whole Jury of fresh
cups, to conclude and determine the good estate of their bodies. The first
quart cup of those twelve (being called Tom Troth) they do make the foreman of
the Jury: swearing him forthwith, to give up a very true verdict concerning
this present point, and to kiss the book, that is, to cleave close to their
pale colored lips till all the liquor be out. After him, Brafield-font he is
next called, and so all the rest of their Jury in order: telling them one by
one, that the same oath which their foreman had taken, must every one of them
also (for their parts) take and fulfill, so help t^em Beelzebub, in the name of
bleare-eied Bacchus their ale-mighty soule-slayer, and to kiffe the said book
as before. The Jury now having thus devoutly taken their oaths, and very
deeply considered their late-giuen charge to the bottom, Breede-bate ye
Bailieffe he cries, A verdict, a verdict. Whereupon Prince Arthur the ale-man
(being then made the deputed Rhadamanthus over those his tippling Tobacconists)
he readily receives the verdict, as follows: Namely, that (howsoever all the
rest of their damned crew, are in pretty good case) Cocke-on hoope the Cobbler
is fallen into very great danger, having too too beastly surfeited in his
swine-like body, and being soule-sicke to death: so as there is none other way
with him for the present, but forthwith to dispose of his last Will and
Testament, and so to betake himself (hand over head) into the hands of Pluto
his magnificent Lord and master.


Capn. A very sharp verdict. But Sir, what was the success thereof?


Hydr. Upon the hearing of this late-giuen verdict, the whole company advise
Cocke-on hoope to devise of a Will: who willingly consented thereunto. And
thereupon Rincepot the Register, he is sent for in haste, to write and record
the same. Rince-pot (having formally put down the style of the Testament) does
ask him withal, what he would have him write. Cocke-on-hoope wills him to
write word for word from his mouth, as he vtters them forth: which (immediately
after the ordinary style) was thus in effect: namely, Drink, then more
drink, then a little more drink, then yet more drink, then a little modicum
of Bakers bread, then drink again, then more drink, then a little more
drink, then yet more drink, and so forth. Item, I appoint Arthur Ale-man mine
only Executor, making Huf-cap the Hunts-man, and Small-braines the Soomaker,
the joint Superuisers of this my last Testament: allowing them all three, a
full pipe of Tobacco, for their pains that way. Witness hereunto, the whole
raskallike-rabblement of this our damned crew. Go to now (says Cocke-on hoope)
let me hear my last Testament. Content (quoth Rince-pot) and thereupon (crying
Silence my masters) he read the same forth in this following order:

In the name of Beelzebub, amen. I Cocke-on hoope Cobbler, being now most
shrewdly surfeited in my beastly body by reason of the good ale suddes, and
damnablie soule-sicke in these my damned delights, but yet of a reeling and
rotten remembrance, blessed be Bacchus therefore, do ordain this my last Will
and Testament, in manner and form following. First, I bequeath my beastly body
to Bacchus mine only ale-mightie protector, and the same to be buried directly
under our gallows, at the East towns end: surrendering withal my swine-like
soul into Belzebubs hands, to be shrined up for ever in the neathermost
Stygian gulf. Then next, I bequeath to the whole society of these my
carousing companions, as follows: Namely, drink, more drink, a little more
drink, yet more drink, then a little modicum of Bakers bread: then drink
again, then more drink, then yet a little more drink, and so forth. Item, I
appoint Arthur ale-man, the sole and only Executor of this my last Testament,
making Huf-cap the Hunts-man, and Small-braines the Shoemaker, my joint
superuisers; allowing to every of them, a full pipe of Tobacco for his pains
taken that way. Witness hereunto, the whole Rascabilian rabblement of this our
damnable Crew. Lo this (quoth Rince-pot) is here set down as your last Will
and Testament: How like you thereof? I do like it (says Cocke-on hoope)
exceeding well, saving in one only point, namely, that little modicum of
Bakers bread marreth all: if that were some way amended, I do ^ot doubt to
recover forthwith. Can you not put out the modicum of Bakers bread clean, and
put down a good pipe of Tobacco in the place thereof? That may be done with a
trice (quoth Rince-pot) and so accordingly records the same. Cocke-on hoope,
at the hearing thereof (being something recovered of his surfeiting sickness)
he bids Groutnolle the Girdler to reach master Rince-pot the bottom of the
pot for his pains: and withal prays False-chaps the Fiddler, and
Partie-face the Piper to play him his resurrexit a mortuis. At which his idle
conceit, the whole company they fell forthwith into an exceeding loud
laughter: and thereupon (calling eftsoons for fair Allicocke their Hostess,
as also for her fine minion, mistress Winefride the wring-spigot) they held it
an ancient kind of carousing courtesy (in a merry memento) to kiss both of
them round for fear of some ranckling.


Capn. But, how did Arthur her Husband like of that matter?


Hydr. Exceedingly well: and no marvel at all. For it is the manner of such
cup-shotten companions, to account those wives the best wives (what baddes-bies
soever) which with one after-noones sport, are able to make their pottagepot
play the better for a whole week together. Howbeit, here began the new broyle.
Breede-hate, he breweth a marvelous brawle about his ordinary Fee for
summoning the Grand-Iurie before; and Runagate the Royster, he lends him a
sound cuffe on the ear for the same. Whereupon the whole crew of companions
fell a scuffling together, neither once knowing, nor yet caring whom they do
strike, so they may soundly light pat on any man's pate. In this their drunken
fought fray, there was given many a broken head, besides sundry dry blows
about their shoulders. At length they friendly parted themselves: and thereupon
Arthur (to save his recognizance) conueyes them one from another into several
corners, there to sleep out the good-ale suddes. After all this (having
somewhat recovered their senses) they call forthwith for a reckoning: which
came just to twenty shillings ten pence for ale, and seven shillings six for
Tobacco and candle. Such as had present money paid their shares: and such as
had none, either laid down their pawnes, or else ran on the score till a
further reckoning. And then (calling for a fresh pair of cards, and their
reckoning cups) they thought good to conclude their sport, with a game or too
at Poope-noddie.


Capn. At Poope noddie Sir? What game (I beseech you) is that?


Hydr. What Capnistus? art thou a professed Tobacconist: and know not
Poope-noddie? I had thought the very hearing of these former disorders, would
have made thee acquainted therewith. Well then, I will show thee the whole
sport, according to the credible information of such as learned the same
themselves in a sound and settled experience. Mark it well man; for this (I
assure thee) it is: Namely, all the kine out of the stall; all the sheep out
of the fold; all the corn out of the barn; all the coin out of the coffer;
all the webs out of the wardrobe; all the pennies out of the purse; all the
drink out of the pot; all the wit out of the head; all the shame out of the
face; all honesty out of the heart; body it self underneath the board; and
soul and all to the devil. Lo here the sway of Poope-noddie: and this for a
short survey concerning any their disordered courses.


Capn. Disordered courses indeed. But yet Sir, these courses (how disordered
soever) they hurt only themselves: neither do I perceive as yet, how the same
should be greatly pernicious to the good of our public State.


Hydr. Surely, Capnistus, thou art over shallow of conceit to deal in deeper
matters of policy, if thou perceiuest not this. For (besides the great hurt
which those our Tobacconists do causelessly procure to their own proper persons
and states) is it not exceedingly hurtful to the publik good of our country,
that any such able persons should be so carelessly permitted to cassier their
public callings; to lead an idle and loytring life; to lose their precious
times; to abandon their ancient trades; to neglect their charges; to consume
their patrimonies; to lavish forth their worldly preferments; to waste their
whole wealth; and so to procure such needless poverty upon themselves and all
theirs, as they must be enforced perforce, either to beg their bread, or to be
maintained upon public charge at the least: to the untimely imbeazilling of
their present provision, and the preposterous undermining of public good? Tell
me (I pray thee) whether these their disordered courses do not collaterally and
consequently become very pestiferous to our public State? Besides that, these
disordered persons, they are egregiously scandalous to sundry such others of
like disposition, in giving them all a very pernicious president to such
profluuious expenses as they are naturally prone unto, by procuring them to the
like disordered practices; by causing them very carelessly to foreslip their
present auailes; to lose their precious times; to neglect their commendable
callings; to cast off all Christian care concerning themselves, their wives,
their children, and all the folk of their family; yea and even prodigally to
dispend, and wastefully to consume their worldly wealths upon vanishing and
vain delights. Are not these squandring courses of theirs become very
pestiferous presidents, and most pernicious practices (think thou) to the
undoubted prejudice of our public State? For how should public States be
prouidently supported, and safely preserved in their public good: without the
honest cares, the careful endeavors, and industrious labors of men in their
sundry professions and callings? And who shall attend upon such industrious,
laborious, and painful endeavors, if all sorts of tradesmen should
confusedly become such carousing companions? And why should Cocke-on hoope the
Cobbler, or Ding-thrift the Dog-keeper, or False-chaps the Fiddler, or Lithersbie
the Lath-render, or Partiface the Piper, or Small-braines the Shoo-maker; or
Spend-all the Spurrier, or any other else of that retchlesse rascabilian route,
be more privileged to plod forth their precious times in any such pestiferous
practices, then either Bonny-boy the Barber; or Doubti-man the Draper; or
Honest-heart the Hatter; or Lustie-lad the Labourer; or Trusty-man the Mason;
or True-pennie the Taylour; or Labour-hard the Lock-smith, or any other man
else that make conscience of their calling, that do Psalm. 127.2.
eat the bread of carfulness, that (as the beloved of God) do repose their
whole rest in his gracious and most merciful providence?


Capn. It is certainly even so as you say.


Hydr. Very well. And will not then (think thou) these the disordered
courses of those our carousing companions become very pernicious occasions of
breeding and procuring a marvelous discontentednesse in the minds of these
other industrious persons, all the while they perceive them thus wastefully to
live of the spoil? The pretty Pismires providing Pro. 6.6.7.8. and 30.25.
their meat in summer, and gathering their winter food in the harvest before,
they can (by no means) abide and sloathfull Ants in their company. The
painful Bees they cannot possibly endure that any idle Drones in the hiue,
should Judge. 14.14. Ecclus. 11.3.
suck up the sweet of their diligent labors. And how (think thou) may
these our honest minded laboring men (at any hand) be made to manage the
ruinated estates of any such monstrous Minotaures as seek nothing else (in
effect) but even utterly to massacre and spoil their own, and other men's
public preferments? No, no, they will rather run desperately upon them at
once, like Isa. 7.18.
fierce Assyrian Bees; or cruelly Psalm. 118.12.
cluster about them as an angry swarm; or Deuteronomy. 1.44.
chase them away from their hiue at the least, like Amorite waspes; and so send
them Psalm. 109.10.
to beg their bread in desolate places.


Capn. And very well worthy they are.


Hydr. But yet this would I have thee observe herewithall: namely, that ye
honester minded sort, grow maruellously miscontented with those their monstrous
misorders. For, out upon those graceless Ding-thrifts say they: what an
excessive spoil do they make of all the good blessings of God? We must be
carking and caring, while they sit carousing and carding; we must be laboring,
while they lie loytring; we must be toyling at home, while they are tippling
and trifling abroad; we must be warily working in harvest, while they are
wantonly wasting at alehouses; yea we (alas) must be spending our spirits at
plough, while they lie spoiling our purses at play. What reason have we to
become bondslaues for bellie-gods; poor Saint Christophers, for proud
carousers, diligent drudgs, for such desperate drunkards; yea and most
provident sparers, for such prodigal spenders? Is it not strange that
authority should so curbingly bridle us in, and so carelessly cast the raines
in their necks to all licentious courses? That they should so grievously Math.
23.4. Luke 10.46. Act. 15.10.
bind burdens upon us while our backs are ready to burst; and so egregiously
to wink at their carousing of cup after cup, while their bellies are ready to
break? That they should so chargeably exact payment after payment upon every
of us for the necessary support of public affairs* and so uncharitably grant
payment to any of them for the pernicious supply of those their prodigal
dispendings? Or that a weekly contribution toward the poor, should be
imposed upon every of us: and a weekly distribution thereof be so
pestiferously allowed to every of them, to the irreligious robbing of poor men
indeed and the profluuious dispending of our proper wealths? Much better were
we to forsake our painful professions, and to follow eftsoons their
prodigal practices, with an hourly expectation of like public relief, then
(in this sort) to toil and turmoile our selves about a pestiferous
supportation of any their retchlesse relief. Lo here (Capnistus) how these
honest poor men grow malcontented against those monstrous Minotaures? how they
begin to distaste authority for their pestiferous permission? yea and how
bitterly they murmr at those superfluous impositions which they are enforced
eftsoons to undergo about the unnecessary releeuing of these our riotous
rungates? May not these beginnings of mischief become very pestiferous in the
end (think thou) to our public State?


Capn. Yes verily may they: and it were very convenient they should be
circumspectly prevented in time.


Hydr. Very true as thou say. Howbeit (in the mean time) these our tippling
Tobacconists they run headlong an end upon sundry other disordered courses, no
less pernicious to our public State then those other before. For when their
patrimonies are all dispended; when their worldly wealth is utterly wasted; yea
when those their profluuious purses have thus prodigally poured forth the best
blood in their bellies, then they bring their hungry Hostess some pretty
pawn or pledge for their beloved liquor. Then their household trash must trudge
forth; then their whole webs of cloth must walk; then their bras pots, their
bras-pans, their platters and the rest, must be purloyned away for the
unnecessary purchase of the black stone pot, and their pretty Tobacco pipe:
yea then the very couerlet and sheets from their bed must be carelessly
chaffered forth for their filthy Tobacco fumes, and causlesse carousing cups.
And now (having their faces frecked over with a crimson color, and their wits
well whitled with the good-ale suds, and perceiving withal, the pulse-veine of
those their profluuious purses to beat very weak for want of further supply)
they begin forthwith to cast about for their neighbors chickins, to houer up
and down for their hens; yea and eftsoons to prey upon their young sucking
pigs, for their own and their hungry Hostesses tooth, and what not besides?
Tell me (I pray thee Capnistus) are not these their disordered courses become
very pestiferous practices to our public State?


Capn. They are so, I must needs confess.


Hydr. Well then, let us here forbear to speak further of their disordered
courses; and now turn our talk toward some of their l^te most dangerous
attempts against the good of our State: to see whether these our tippling
Tobacconists be not that ways also become most pernicious and pestilent
companions toward ye wished welfare of our public State. For when they have
played the Poope-noddies too long in dispending their worldly preferments after
such a riotous sort, and are also enforced to feel the present want of their
filthy fume, and to perceive some lack of that their beloved liquor, not
knowing which ways in the world to supply their said wants: then they begin
eftsoons to pray for the pestilence, to wish for wars, to hope for a change,
to broach many dangerous babbles about some sudden invasion; to mutter forth
certain mutinous murmurings concerning some civil dissensions among men of
State; yea and to wish the whole land on an vproare at least: that so they
might come to make present spoil of Haukin-holdfast his house, or to preie
upon Godfrey-gather-goods purse. Tell me now Capnistus, are not these their
desperate attempts most dangerously pestiferous to the present good of our
public State?


Capn. I dare not deny them to be certainly so.


Hydr. And yet these (alas) they are but the beginnings of mischief, in
comparison of those their subsequent most desperate attempts. For (feeling once
a greater increase of their present wants, and perceiving all further supply
therein to decrease more and more) they do then forthwith become professed
malcontents against the well settled peace of our public State: wishing and
praying eftsoons for their long expected Iubilee: and hoping earnestly after a
presposterous deliverance from all dutiful subjection toward their holy
Superiors: telling their carousing companions, that it will never be merry
with boon-companions in England, before the inhabitants of England be up
together by the ears among themselves. For then (say they) would forthwith
begin the sport: then should we come to Catch that catch may; yea then should
we compel our country cormorants themselves, to catch at a broun-bread crust:
whereas those merciless peasants do now lead the whole world in a string, and
deal with good fellows as it pleases themselves. Then would we soon make
their full barnes to supply the long lack of this our beloved liquor, then
would we constrain their rustie red ruddockes to run at our beck, and to
attend upon the pleasure of us, and the rest of our carousing companions: yea
then would we cause their enclosures to crack. How says thou Capnistus to
these their desperate attempts, are they not (think thou) most dangerously
pestiferous to the present peace of our public State?


Capn. Surely Sir, their desperate prate it self is very pernicious: for it
puts disordered persons in present mind of some such desperate practices, as
cannot but greatly prejudice the long and well settled peace of this our public
State.


Hydr. Thou speak the truth. And therefore, their very prate it self would
forthwith be sharply suppressed, for fear of some subsequent mischief.
Howbeit, these our tippling Tobacconists (those riotous companions I mean)
they fear not to surpass the pestilent bounds of that their pestiferous
prate, by putting in present practice all those pernicious proiects and plots
which their pestilent tongues had so audaciously, and so undutifully prated of,
long before. For Mad-braine the Make-shift, Proud-mind the Plummer,
Smallbraines the Shoemaker, and Iustle king the Ioyner, they do no sooner hear
speech of causing Enclosures to crack, but forthwith they care not a point to
crack their desperate conscience on pieces, in an undutiful undertaking to
set such a perilous practice on foot: arming themselves, and animating their
desperate associates to the joint and speedier performance (forsooth) of such a
preposterous enterprise. Pretending withal (to such as demand a reason of
those their desperate adventures) that one Master Need did this way set them
on work; that they were resolved to deal no further therein, but according to
Master Mend-all his only direction, and with the authentical warrant besides
of an old penal Statute against such hurtful Enclosures: yea and that also
(for their protection and pay) they marched under the approved conduct of
Captain Pouch. This exploit was no sooner bruited abroad, but the very garbage
of graceless subjection; they offscouring of honesty; the scumme of
humanity; yea the whole rif-raffe of vicious persons came flocking thick and
threefold from every coast unto their accursed company: reporting abroad, they
had twelve pence aday for their pains, with wine, ale, and beer so much as
their bellies would hold. These flying reports drew multitudes unto them from
every place, and procured them many more fauourets wheresoever they came: who
would not stick on their alebench to say, God speed the plough, though yet
they durst not afford them their presence. How say thou Capnistus, are not
these the odd youths of our country? Are not these our old suresbies to serve
at a pinch, and to help our State at any dead lift? What say thou man, to
these desperate practices?


Capn. I should account them desperate practices indeed, had they not had the
Kings broade-seale for their warrant: which was commonly reported they had.


Hydr. The Kings broade-seale for their warrant? Fie, fie for shame man, that
any such the incredible reports of idlebrain'd fellows, should once make thee
imagine we had but a fool to our King.


Capn. God forbid that such a gross and undutiful imagination should ever be
found in any true hearted subject. For all the whole world does universally
both know, and acknowledge his Highness to have a most admirable,
superexcellent, and sanctified wisdom.


Hydr. They do so I confess, and this also not without a justly deserved
cause, I assure thee: beseeching the Almighty Jehovah that Romans 16.27.
only wise God, even ten Deuteronomy. 34.9.
times yet more to double his spirit of wisdom upon him. And yet without
doubt, his Highness should herein have showed a very slender use of his said
excellent wisdom; if (as that rebellious rout made public report) he should
(by his Prerogative royal) first privilege them to dispark and disclose all
such Enclosures: and then should forth with authentically arm a subordinate
power to suppress their person with Romans 13.4.
the sharp sword of vengeance, if none other peaceable means might make them
desist from those their desperate attempts. For how long (think thou) could
his Highness securely continue a supereminent King over England, if he should
so improuidently have set all his subjects in England together by the ears?


Capn. Not half so long (I fear me) as 1 King. 1.34, 39.
my hearty desire is he may by many hundred years: if it were so the good
pleasure of God. And surely, the whole world may now plainly perceive by the
sequel it self, that those foolish reports were purposely prolated abroad, to
make the foolish people applaud their irregular proceedings. But yet Sir, it
was commonly said, that the young Prince himself (by the peremptory command of
his merciful mother) was privately conversant with the^, to protect their
proceedings this way: and moreover, that the good King of Denmark himself was
personally, and newly entered England with forty thousand strong to manage
their matter in hand.


Hydr. Oh heavens! Oh hell! Oh horrible hideous helhounds! Was it likely
(think thou) that the enterprise it self should ever attain to an happy
end, which was formerly begun, and forthwith continued with such horrible and
such monstrous lies? Although yet this their devilish dissembling does
palpably discover their devilish dissent to all the world, and that their
impudent lying, most apparently unfolds their impudent Ioh. 8.44.
lying father the devil. For is it possible (think thou) that such a
pearelesse Prince should proudly attempt, or such a gracious Queen, should
preposterously command any one project or plot, so authentically, and so
peremptorily countermanded by his most excellent Highness before? Or is it
credible in nature, that a natural King, yea a King of such a sanctified
nature withal, should so unnaturally permit his own natural Prince (being
the Genesis 49.3.
primarie offspring of his fatherly strength) the secondarie supply of his
princely succession, and the happy eternity also of Englands princely hope on
earth: is it credible (I say) that such a prudent fatherly King should so
improuidently permit his own natural son (in such dangerous manner) to sort
himself among such degenerate and desperate monsters, as neither regarded God
nor the devil in those their desperate and dangerous attempts?

And now next (concerning the good King of Denmark himself) may it in any
humane reason (think thou) be possibly brought within the compass of
paganish humanity, that an humane King (being withal so good and so Christian
a King, a King over a nation so humane and Christian, an humane kingly brother
to so humane and Christian a King) should so inhumanely, and so unchristianly
invade so humane and Christian a kingdom; either to manage so inhumane, and
so unchristian an enterprise, or once to undertake so inhumane, and so
unchristian an exploite? God forbid that any humane, or Christian-minded man
should once dare (so inhumanely and so unchristianly to dream of any such
palpable fooleries: or that any sound-hearted subjects should seek to shelter
such desperate attempts, under any such plausible pretenses.


Capn. I wish so much with all my heart. Neither did I ever admit such an idle
imagination to enter my head: howsoever (by obiecting the same to your self) I
deemed it very convenient that those their palpable fooleries, and treacherous
pretenses should thus be desplayed to all y^ world. But yet Sir, many men
(notwithstanding) do confidently affirm that they had the warrant of an old
statute law, against such a lawless enclosing or arrable grounds converted to
pasture.


Hydr. I do not deny, but that (for the necessary upholding of husbandry, as
also against the apparent decaying of tillage) there have been sundry good
penal statutes provided from time to time. First in the Ann. 4. Henry 7.29.
Ann. 7 Henry 8. i. ann. Dom. 1515. An. 20. Henry 8.22. An. 27. Henry 8.22. Ann.
5. Elizabeth, 2. Ann. Dom. 1569. Ann. 27. Elizabeth, 1.10. Ann. 31 Elizabeth,
5. Ann. Iaco. 1.1.
reign of Henry the seauent* ye same also being further fortified by sundry
other like godly statutes, in the reign of Henry the eight; with a fresh
corroboration also thereof, at sundry other Parlaments since, in the flourishing
reign of our late sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth: yea and those also more
fully confirmed since by the Kings most excellent Highness, at his very first
entrance into this his kingdom. So as wise men may justly wonder that any one
of those our Isa. 3.15.
gripers and grinders of poor men's faces, should not be grossly ashamed to show
their shameless faces, in but once daring either to uphold their old, or to
adventure so boldly upon any other new enclosing of tillage, contrary to those
the former most forcible statues, considering especially the grievous penalties
imposed upon every such wilful transgression.

But what? does it follow thereof (think thou) that (because for the needful
upholding of tillage there are provided many good statutes,) therefore these
disordered persons (for the better preservation of tillage) might (at their
private pleasures) very boldly pull down whatsoever Enclosures against those
the said statutes? Nothing less. And therefore, it was to no purpose at all
for those persons to pretend so presumptuously the supposed timely supportation
of those their disordered attempts from any those penal statutes, unless they
could show in some one of those statutes, an apparent Prouiso at least; that
one master Need, master Mend-all, master Proud-mind the Plummer, master
Small-braines the Shoo-maker, master lustle-king the Ioyner, with the residue
of that rafcabilian rebellious rout (so riotously marching under the conduct of
Captain Pouch) had special privilege to disparke and disclose such lawless
Enclosures even in an open despite of the owners themselves, as also, in a
rebellious contempt of our gracious Sovereign.


Capn. Sir, I am certainly assured there is no such Prouiso at all, in any one
of those the forenamed statutes.


Hydr. Then am I also as certainly assured, that they did more then they might
do by much. And so (for that their lawless usurpation of the Princes sword
contrary to Christ his commandment, who charge all private persons to put up
the sword into his own place: because, whosoever in such sort usurps Math.
26.52.
the sword, shall be sure to perish with the sword) they were therefore most
justly suppressed by that the Prince his authentical sword, who Romans 13.4.
Revel. 13.10.
bears not the same for naught, but is the subordinate minister of that
immortal Prince who has power to take an inevitable vengeance on such as do
evil.


Capn. But Sir, seeing those kind of Enclosures, are so directly opposite to
the good laws of our land, as I perceive by the former statutes they are: it
seems strange to those disordered persons themselves, as also to their
favorites of every sort, that such an hard hand should be carried against them,
for but pulling down that which is so directly opposite to the law it self.


Hydr. Howsoever all those kinds of Enclosures which directly do tend to the
hinderance of husbandry, and decay of tillage be undoubtedly opposite to those
the established laws of our land, as I she wed thee before: yet had those
disordered persons no one law of the land (in such riotous and rebellious sort)
to pull down Enclosures; but rather ye sharp laws of our land against every
such disordered and unlawful attempt: as is apparently evident in See Pultons
Abridgment of penal statutes: against riots, routs, and unlawful assemblies.
sundry good penal statutes provided against riots, routes, and unlawful
assemblies. And therefore, no hard, but an heedfull hand for public good, was
so carried against them.


Capn. I must needs acknowledge so much as you say, if (indeed) there be any
such sharp laws provided against those disordered actions: and therefore I
beseech you set down some summarie abridgement of those self same laws, as
well for my further satisfaction herein, as also for a necessary caveat or
watchword to all others hereafter, to beware how they deal afresh in any such
disordered actions.


Hydr. With all my heart; and therefore, give ear to the words of those
statutes as follows thus: If See the statute, primo Mar. 12. And the statute
primo Elizabethae, 17.
any persons to the number of twelve or above, shall intend, go about,
practice, or put in ure with force of arms unlawfully, and of their own
authority, to overthrow, cut, break, cast down, or dig up the pales, hedges,
ditches, or other the Enclosure of any park, or other ground enclosed; or the
banks of a fish pond, or poole; or any Conduicts for water, Conduict-heads, or
Conduict-pipes having course of water; to the intent that any of the same from
thenceforth should remain open, not enclosed, or void; or unlawfully to have
common, or way in the said Park, or other ground enclosed, or in any of them;
or to destroy the Dear in any Park; or any warren of Conies, or any Dove
houses; or any Fish in any Fish Pond or Poole; or to pull, or cut down any
houses, barnes, mils, or baies, or to burn any stacks of corn; or to abate,
or diminish the rents, or yearly value of any lands, or tenements, or the
price of any victual, corn or grain, or any other things usual for the
sustenance of men; and being required or commanded by any Justice of Peace, or
by the Sheriff of the County, or by the Mayor, Bailieffe or Bailieffes, or
other head-officers of any City, or towne-corporate where such assemblies
shall be had, by Proclamation to be made in the Kings name, to return in
peaceable manner to their places and houses from whence they came: and they or
any of them (notwithstanding such Proclamation) shall remain and make their
continuance together, by the space of one whole hour after such commandment
or request made by Proclamation; or after that, shall (in forcible manner) do,
or put in ure any of the things before mentioned: then as well every such
continuing together, as every such Act, that (after such commandment, or
request by Proclamation made) shall be done, practiced, or put in ure by any
persons being above the number of t^elue, shall be adjudged felony; and the
offenders therein, shall be adjudged felons, and shall suffer only the
execution of death, as in cases of felony. Lo here Capnistus, whether there be
not a plain sta^ute directly against such disordered and unlawful attempts:
what say thou unto it?


Capn. In deed Sir, I do now perceive that the case is very clear against all
such riots, routs, and unlawful assemblies for any the forenamed intents, by
what persons soever attempted: and therefore, I dare not (in any sort) approve
of the late unlawful enterprise of those disordered persons. And yet (had not
some bad practices by sundry of lewd disposition) incensed and raised up the
people of every Town thereabouts, for very shame to yield their present
assistance to that unlawful enterprice; neither had the assembly it self
been so mighty as it was, by many hundred folds; nor the primarie attempters
thereof (being but few in number before) never would, nor could have continued
the disorder so long as they did: and therefore, the^ selves and their
favorites think there should have bin had a more respective pity upon the
first actors thereof.


Hydr. Nay, not one whit. For as it was their own disorder first, which
subjected their persons to such a sharp and bitter suppression: so surely, all
those the incensers and raysers of others whosoever they be, they are (by the
just sentence of law) made liable likewise to the self same punishment, as
appears in those the forenamed statutes, telling them thus. If See the
statute primo Mar. 12. And the statute primo Elizabethae 17.
any person or persons unlawfully and without authority, by ringing of any
bells, sounding of any trumpet, drum, horn, or other instrument, or by
fiering of any Beacon, or by malicious speaking, or uttering of any words, or
making any outcry, or by setting up, or casting of any bill or writing abroad,
or by any other act, shall raise, or cause to be raised, or assembled, any
persons to the number of twelve or above; to the intent that they should do or
put in ure any of the things above mentioned; and that the persons (to the
number of twelve, or above) so raised and assembled after request, or
commandment had, or given in form aforesaid, shall continue together as is
aforesaid, or unlawfully, and in forcible manner shall commit, or put in ure
any of the things aforesaid: then all and singular persons, by whose speaking,
act, or any other means above specified, any persons to the number of twelve
or above, shall be raised or assembled for the doing, or putting in ure any
thing, or things above mentioned, shall be adjudged for his so speaking or
doing, a felon, and shall suffer execution of death, as in case of felony.
What say thou Capnistus, to these raisers of unlawful assemblies? does such
action of theirs either help themselves, or any way quallifie the disordered
enterprise of those other disordered persons?


Capn. Neither of both, if I my self understand the matter aright. But Sir,
howsoever the concourse of people (in those their unlawful assemblies) was
grown to a wonderful greatness: yet surely, had they not been exceedingly
animated, encouraged, and hardened forwards in those their disordered
enterprises by such as assisted them with meat, drink, money, and other like
needful supplies, they neither would, nor could possibly have held out so long
as they did: and therefore, so much the more to be pitied, as them selves and
sundry others suppose.


Hydr. Not fo. And surely, even this which they say here, does rather
aggrauate, then extenuate the act. For it plainly purporteth to all the world,
that neither their love to God and the King; nor the conscionable obedience to
his Majesty's laws, neither yet the terror of threatened death, but the only
exceeding great want of some needful supply for the present, could possibly
suppress the outrage of those their unruly attempts. And as for those their
inconsiderate and rash releeuers, it had been much better for every of them, to
have left such unlawful assemblies succourlesse at six and seven, without
yielding them succor at all, then (by the preposterous supply of those their
preposterous wants) to procure their own present woes, in making them selves
guilty likewise of those their justly deserved punishments: as by the former
statutes is very apparent, telling them thus: If See the statute, primo Mar.
12. And the statute primo Elizabethae, 17.
any wife, or servant of any of the same persons assembled, or any other person
else whatsoever, shall willingly, and without compulsion bring, send, deliver,
or convey any money, harness, artillery, weapon, meat, bread, drink, or
other victual, to any person or persons so assembled as is aforesaid, during
such time as her or they shall so be together: then every wife, servant, or
other person so bringing, sending, delivering, or conueying any of the foresaid
things to the same persons so assembled, or to any of them, and not departing
to their dwelling places upon request or commandment made unto them as is
aforesaid, shall be adjudged a Fellon, and shall suffer only the execution of
death as in cases of fellonie. These things exactly considered, what think
thou now of that former hard hand, so unjustly surmized, against them selves,
their abettors, procurers, and counselors; as also, their assistants, aiders,
and comforters: were they not very well worthy of whatsoever hard measure
befell them?


Capn. I must needs acknowledge the same from my heart. Although yet, they them
selves, and their fantastical favorites so covertly seem to impose some
imputation of blame upon those his Majesty's Justices who were next to the
places where they so assembled them selves: because they no sooner suppressed
the outrage, or ever it came to such a strong head; as also, for that they then
carried so hard an hand in suppressing the same as they did.


Hydr. Oh horrible ingratitude of base minded monsters! that would so
outragiously procure their own hurt, and then thus unhonestly go about to
impose the blame thereof upon those his Majesty's Justices, whom rather they
ought to reverence and love all the days of their life, in an only regard of
that their exceeding great lenity, and Christian care to restrain their said
excessive outrage, with none or as little spilling of blood as possibly might
be. For, did not those his Majesty's Justices from time to time (by all gentle
and loving allurements) very earnestly labor their peaceable and quiet
departures in every place? Did they not rather adventure the hazard of See
Pulton in the title of Riots etc. sect. 5.
an hundred pounds apeece in regard of their kind and godly forbearance a
while, then that they would set too fiercely upon them at first? And (having
solemnly published his Majesty's late Proclamation in every open market) did
they not even then also intimate eftsoons his Majesty's further pleasure
concerning their speedy suppressing by force and arms, if none other means
else would serve the turn? Yea and (which more is by much) did they not (with
often entreaties, again and again) persuade them to a peaceable departure, or
ever they published the appointed Proclamation against their outrageous
disorders, or did once endeavor to put the severity of his Majesty's power in
practice upon them?


Capn. What Proclamation I pray you was that?


Hydr. The same which is authentically put down among those forenamed statutes
in this following order: First his Majesty's Justices caused to be openly made
an Oyes: and then afterward was deliberately pronounced these following words,
or the like in effect: The form of the Proclamation. See Pulton.
The King our sovereign Lord charge and commands all persons assembled,
immediately to disperse them selves, and peaceably to depart to their
habitations, or to their lawful business, upon the pain contained in the Act
lately made against unlawful and riotous assemblies. And God save the King.


Capn. And was this Proclamation then published accordingly?


Hydr. That was it, I assure thee, and a full respite given them withal, for
their peaceable departures, with like vehement persuasions thereunto as before.
And (which more is) did not his Majesty's said Justices, upon the very day of
the skirmish it self (for the former part of the day) both train and march
their soldiers very near the place of that their unlawful assembly, of very
purpose, to strike an impression of fear in their hearts, to further their
present departures? Did they not moreover send sundry messengers of purpose
unto them to persuade that matter by all possible means? Did not some of his
Majesty's Justices solicit them sundry times on their knees with tears? Yea
did not the right worshipful Sir Anthony Mild-may (with hat in hand) very
earnestly entreat the same, or that (at the least) they would desist from
their purpose for five, or six days, till they might know his Majesty's
further pleasure? yea and (which is most to be wondered at) did not the said
Justices before the skirmish began (in an exceeding great care of sparing their
blood) give secret direction to the whole company of shot, for discharging the
first volley of shot but idly upon them, in hope that the sudden fear of
the said shot, would make them the sooner depart the field?


Capn. But Sir, what effect did all this take among them, I pray you?


Hydr. All the premises were so far off from working their timely departure,
as they were rather more desperately imboldned in that their rebellious
attempt. For not only they cast up their caps with a wonderful shoute,
crying, Again, again, come better, come better: but they endeavored also with
stones, and other bad means, to drive the said Justices, with his Majesty's
power from out of the fields. Which their said in satiable outrage did then
enforce a sharper fresh charge and onset upon them; whereof (I suppose) they
were very well worthy. Tell me now Capnistus: was this an hard hand against
them, or no?


Capn. Surely Sir, if all this be certainly true, I must needs confess they
were very well worthy of whatsoever hard measure befell them either then, or at
any time since, Although yet their favorites, and such as applaud the
enterprise, they say their intent was only for public good: yea and they
work also it self (namely, the casting down of such unlawful Enclosure) was
simply and in it own nature, a very good work.


Hydr. First, for the truth of the matter, let those parties themselves
undertake to contradict the same in any one point, if they possibly can. Next,
for their good intent: who can certainly say what good intent they had in them
selves, save only that God who is (...). Psalm. 17.9.
card^ognostes, the searcher (I mean) of the heart and the reins? But be it,
their intention therein was fully so good as themselves and their senseless
favorites do seem to surmise: can the goodness of any man's intention, make
good an unlawful action? I suppose no: because it is not enough for a man to
do what which in it self is simply good and just, unless the same also be
justly effected. And whereas they account such casting down of Enclosures a
very good work, they do therein declare them selves, either such as cannot
Jonah. 4.11.
euenly discern between the right hand and the left, and therefore utterly
unable to distinguish soundly between good and evil: or such impudent
wretches at least, as are not ashamed of sin, nor yet care for honesty in
any respect. But (being grown to a desperate impiety) do Pro. 17.15. and
24.24. Isa. 5.20.23.
speak good of evil, and evil of good; putting darkness for light, and
light for darkness, holding bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter: and
therefore a fearful woe with a vengeance, is denounced against them. For may
that be a good work (think thou) which was so wilfully wrought with the
Wisd. 6.3. Romans 13.2.3. Tit. 3.1. 2 Pet. 2.13.
wronging of others; with open contempt of public authority, and with an
obstinate rebellion against God, and his Majesty's highness?


Capn. Sir, those men (commending the goodness of that work) do mean (as I
verily imagine) the only matter it self, that is, the only disparking of
such lawles Enclosures: and not any such a disordered manner of casting
Enclosures down.


Hydr. Then surely, howsoever the matter (the disparking of Enclosures I mean)
be simply good in it self, their manner of casting Enclosures down (by their
own confession) was simply evil; and so the very work it self, which was
thus outragiously, and without authority performed by them, deserves not the
name of any good work. But be it here supposed, their action was simply
lawful: and now tell me withal what makes them to think that the casting
down of Enclosures should (in it own self) be simply good?


Capn. Because then (say they) such converting of pasture to arrable ground,
must necessarily tend to the mightier augmentation of tillage: and so
consequently to the public good of our country.


Hydr. As though the owners of such pasture grounds were more necessarily
constrained to plough up their said grounds being so disparked, then at any
time before when they were hedged in. But suppose those said grounds were all
converted to tillage; how are they able to prove, that the augmentation of
tillage does undoubtedly tend to the public good of our country?


Capn. Because (say they) the augmentation of tillage would procure more
plenty of corn by much; the great plenty of corn would presently pull down
the excessive prices of corn: and the excessive prices of corn being brought
once to a very low rate, then the Artificer, the Tradesman, and poor laboring
people might more merrily live by much. For was it not a merry world (say
they) when a man might buy barley and pease for four pence the bushel, malt
for five, rye for six, and wheat for seven or eight at the most?


Hydr. In deed, those our beastly bellie-gods who live only to eat, but not
eat to live, they reason even so for all the world, saying thus: Oh sir! was
it not Ier. 44.17.
a merry world (I pray you) when a poor man might buy twenty four eggs for
a penny? Or as those our tippling Tobacconists do now say one to another: Ah
sirrah, how say thou (my heart) was it not a merry world (think thou)
when good fellows might have four gallons of good-ale for an halfe-pennie?
And thus, these our poor malt worms they measure the public good of our
country by their own proper bellies, and so determine the matter and means
of maintenance (thou may see) as if the welfare of countries and kingdoms
consisted wholly in gormandizing and gulling in of meats and drinks, and in
an only fragging and pampering of poor men's bellies, though it were with the
filching and pining of all other besides them selves. Yea surely, these our
tippling Tobacconists they measure the welfare of men in the world, as the
common drunkard uses to size the fatietie of such as sit with him at table, by
the only placing of all ye good-ale pots plumme under his own proper nose,
saying thus to the rest: Sirs, set up your pots hither I pray you, that every
man may the more easily reach them. As though he him self were every man, or
as if (because the said pots be now within the reach of his own proper nose)
it may be Videre licet, gustare non licet.
enough for the rest to see them, or to live by their only smell, without any
tasting at all. Even such is our tippling Tobacconists care (thou may see)
for public good. Although yet, I will not deny, but that this which they thus
babble abroad, might have in it some better resemblance of truth, if in (very
deed) the welfare of kingdoms co^sisted alone in the exceeding great plenty
of corn, and in an only superfluous support of the poorer sort. And therefore
(for a further manifestation of this one matter now in question) let us here
first consider upon what kind of people the welfare of countries and kingdoms
does chiefly consist: and then next, whether the low prices of corn would be
the only best means for the better upholding of that kind of people.


Capn. Upon what kind of people, I pray you, does the welfare of countries and
kingdoms chiefly consist?


Hydr. Upon that selfsame kind (I verily suppose) which best maintaine^h the
whole, or greatest multitude of men in the kingdom. For since the Pro. 14.28.
honor of a King is immoueably settled upon the multitude of Subjects, and that
(for want of such Subjects) the Prince himself must necessarily come (in
success of time) to an inevitable desolation and spoil: who sees not now,
but that the happy estate of kings, of kingdoms, and countries must
consequently arise from that sort especially, whereby the greatest multitude of
true hearted Subjects is most surely maintained? But that sort (all men know by
daily experience) is the Yeomanrie or Husbandry of countries and kingdoms:
because by it are Kings supported; by it, are Princes and Nobles sustained; by
it, all artificers, tradesmen, and poor laboring people are preserved from
famine. For tell me, I pray thee Capnistus, from whom especially do Kings
receive their subsidies, their fifteenes, their taxes, and yearly provisions
for any their domestical or public affairs, but principally, or collaterally
from poor husbandman? From whom do the poor, the Nobles, and Gentry of
countries or kingdoms possess their annual rents, their ancient revenues,
their incomes and fines, their boonings and ordinary carriages, but primarily
from out of poor husbandmens purses? From whose only endeauours and labors
do all Artificers. Tradesmen, and poor laboring people enjoy their
bread-corne, and mault-corne, but only, and altogether from the poor
husbandmans plough?


Capn. That is certainly so: and thereupon they boldly conclude without all
contradiction, that the augmentation of tillage would yield a further
complement to all those the former supplies.


Hydr. Very well. Now then we are consequently come to consider more especially
of that our second propounded point. Namely (for that the surest supportation
of all estates in a country or kingdom does primarily consist in the
ordinary upholding of husbandmen) whether therefore the augmentation of
tillage (all other things continuing still in their ordinary course) would
become the only best ordinary means to maintain that one only state it
self in such solid condition, as that thereby also all other estates besides
are the more surely supported from time to time? My meaning is this, whether
(all other things else continuing still their ordinary accustomed rate) the
only augmentation of tillage must be adjudged the best means of all to
maintain and uphold the husbandmans happy estate?


Capn. Surely Sir, they do all jointly imagine it would be so.


Hydr. Their uncertain imaginations, they are no certain conclusions. And
therefore, do speak directly to the question propounded: by giving some
certain demonstration of that their uncertain imagination.


Capn. They take in hand to demonstrate the matter thus. By the augmentation of
tillage (say they) there might be maintained in England, as many more husbandmen
as there are at this present. And so the greater multitude of husbandmen, the
greater abundance of corn; and the greater abundance of corn, the better
cheap it would be by much.


Hydr. They show themselves to be men of shallow conceits: because such an
augmentation of husbandry, would directly become an augmentation of beggerie.
For if a poor husbandma^ may now very hardly uphold his present husbandry,
when corn is presently worth some two shillings sixe-pence at least: how
should he be able to uphold the same in any good sort, when the price of corn
is but sixe-pence the bushel at most?


Capn. That might be very well done, say they: because for every bushel he
has at this present, he should then be sure to have full four at the least.


Hydr. They have no certain assurance of such a proportion: because the
increase of their labors consists not 1 Cor. 3 6.7.
in any their own proper planting, but in the only good blessing of God. But
be it supposed, the increase it were ce^tainly such as they say; and yet even
then also a man may plainly perceive, that (according to this their propounded
proportion) the poor husbandmans state should even now become worse then it
was before, by sixepence at least in every bushel. For if he might usually
sell his one bushel before for two shillings sixe-pence at least, and now
(that corn is so cheap) can sell those his four bushels but for bare two
shillings at most, is not the poor husband-mans state impouerished, rather
then bettered, by this their augmentation of tillage, notwithstanding any the
exceeding great plenty of corn? Now then, if the abundance of corn (arising
from that their former augmentation of tillage) be brought once to such a low
price, as (albeit the poor husbandman had now four bushels at least for every
one bushel before: how shall he be able (in such an impouerished estate) to
discharge his annual rents, to perform his servants wages, to provide plough
and plough-geares, cart and cart-geares, at such an excessive reckoning, to
defray his domestical charges, and uphold his husbandry also, without the
utter impouerishing of his present estate?


Capn. Very true. But then the rents of Farms would be brought to some low
reckoning they say: and so should the husbandman be somewhat eased thereby.


Hydr. How should the rents of Farms be brought to a lower reckoning, when the
greatest number of Farms are leassed forth for some ten, twenty, yea forty
years yet to come, with a strict covenant for such an excessive rent, during
the whole remainder of years? Those our husbandmen therefore being thus
shrewdly impouerished through the small prices of corn, and no way eased of
those their excessive rents, neither yet any thing bettered by the abundance of
corn: who sees not, but that such an augmentation of tillage, would become
the undoubted diminution of the poor husbandmans estate?


Capn. The Kings Majesty might be moved (they hope) to mitigate those their
excessive rents in such reasonable sort, as the poor husbandman may be able to
live well of his Farm.


Hydr. Yea, but since the leasing forth of lands is allowed by positive laws,
and for that many of our Noble-mens and Gentlemen's lands are already so leased
forth: the Kings Majesty (governing the whole kingdom by those his positive
laws) he will not so far forth intermeddle with those Noblemen, and
Gentlemen's private possessions, unless such an extraordinary course did
necessarily tend to a more public good, then these our preposterous
platformers are yet able to demonstrate unto him, by any one probable reason.
Besides that, as the head must (by no means) go about to strengthen the legs
and the feet, by infeebling the shoulders and arms; for that would bring hurt
to the whole body it self: no more may his excellent Highness (for the only
support of inferior subjects) so weaken the good estate of his Nobles and
Gentlemen, (who are the very shoulders and arms of his kingdom) as they shall
not be able to yield him their public assistance in time of need. For must
not our Nobles and Gentlemen, of necessity be maintained by their yearly
revenues and rents? But this could not now be possibly done, if those their
annual rents and revenues were brought to such an abatement as these our
baseminded platformers propound to them selves. And therefore (all other things
else continuing still in such sort as they presently do) I cannot perceive (I
assure thee) how the poor husbandmans state should not rather be hindered, t^^n
helped by this their preposterous augmentation of tillage.


Capn. But, if husbandmen (say they) were wise, upon the clause of reentrie
contained in their lease, they would (by one uniform consent) make presently a
forfaiture of all their old leases, for the none-payment of those their
excessive rents: and so suffer their landlords to reenter upon their farms.


Hydr. A very proper device to impouerish them selves, and to procure a present
great hurt to our public good: because (by this means) that their supposed
great multitude of Farmers should rather be decreased, then any thing increased
at all. Moreover, what would then become of that their augmentation of tillage
which they so eagerly pursue, if all Farmers should so foolishly forfait their
leases? But (to show them their folly more plain) be it supposed a great
number of Farms were so fallen, and left for a while in the landlords hands,
what issue (think thou) might follow thereof for public good?


Capn. This good (say they) would follow thereof: Namely, by that time those
insatiable landlords had held such forfaited Farms in their own occupation
but seven years together, they would be right glad to let them afresh at a
far easier reckoning.


Hydr. As though (if the Farmer did good on such a Farm, notwithstanding his
former excessive rent) the landlord sitting rentfree, and thoroughly occupying
that selfsame Farm, might not do much more good thereof then did the Farmer
before him: yea and so perhaps (beginning a little to feel the sweetness of
gain) will not hereafter lease forth the faid Farm any more, but still hold
the same in his own occupation. How then? Where are now become the great
multitude of Farmers which these our foolish platformers do idly dream of by
this their augmentation of tillage? But be it supposed those landlords so
holding those forfaited Farms in their own hands for seven years together,
would quickly wax weary, and so be right glad to lease them afresh at a more
reasonable reckoning: how then? what (in the mean time) think thou are
husbandmen bettered? or how is husbandry it self any better held up by this
their idle augmentation of tillage, when (by reason of the low prices of corn,
and such excessive great rents) the poor husbandman himself is enforced to
forsake his Farm for seven years together, in hope of an easier rent: and in
all the mean while both he and all his fit pilling of strawes by the fire
side? When in the mean while all tillage decays; the old store of corn is
quite consumed; the Nobles and Gentlemen are mightily impouerished for want of
their usual rents; and poor men are famished for lack of food? Is this the
public good we are to expect from that their former augmentation of tillage?
But, be it supposed again, that the poor husbandmen might now have those
their said Farms at twenty nobles rent by the year, for which they paid
yearly some twenty pounds at the least before: would those husbandmens state
become any thing better now by this abatement of rent, then it formerly was
when they paid twenty pounds yearly at least?


Capn. What one wise man (say they) would make any question thereof?


Hydr. That would I mine own self, I assure thee, not without great
probability of reason also: and therefore, do heartily desire thine own
self, as also those our disordered Tobacconists, that you would herein permit
me to 2. Cor. 11.19.
play the fool for a while; because you your selves are so wonderful wise in
your proper conceits. And (for a further demonstration hereof) let it here be
supposed again, that the poor husbandman (when he sat upon twenty pounds
rent before) by his good husbandry grew yearly some threescore quarters of
corn; and that now (paying but twenty nobles a year) he does one year with
another reap some twelve score quarters of corn at the least; which (thou
may not deny) were a wonderful odds: yet surely (so long as all other
things else do hold their accustomed rate) thou may plainly perceive (even
by that self same proportion which them selves have made) that the poor
husbandmans state (notwithstanding the former abatement of rents, and great
abundance of corn) is far worse now then it was before when he paid a far
greater rent, and grew not so much corn by four times double at least. For
first, if we rate his threescore quarters of corn but at threescore pounds,
after two shillings sixepence the bushel, who sees not plainly but that
(deducting twenty pounds from the same for his twenty pounds rent) he has
still remaining forty pounds to himself, for the timely discharge of his
other domestical expenses, as also the orderly upholding of that his said
husbandry? Perceiuest thou this Capnistus?


Capn. He were worthy to be crowned a coxecombe, that cannot perceive the
same?


Hydr. Go to then, let us now likewise observe that their former proportion
also in their abundance of corn, and abatement of rents, by rating their
tweluescore quarters of corn, at their own wished price, namely, at five
pence the bushel, that is, three shillings foure-pence the quarter; and so,
our total sum for the tweluescore quarters amounts but to forty pounds.
From this now deduct his twenty nobles rent (which is their desired abatement)
and so has he left to himself but forty marks at the most, to defray his
domestical charges and uphold his said husbandry. Is not herein his estate
made worse then it was before by twenty marks yearly at least,
notwithstanding his former twenty pounds rent, and the small quantity of
corn, in comparison of his tweluescore quarters now? So then, this his
impouerished state being soundly considered, as also, the excessive charges of
all other things being still considered; how shall this poor husbandman be
able (think thou) to uphold his said husbandry, to maintain his own
house, to pay servants their wages, to bring up his children, to perform to
the Kings Majesty his ordinary subsidies, fifteenes, taxes, provision, and
such other extraordinary payments, without the utter subversion of himself,
and his happy estate?


Capn. Good Sir, your observations herein they are, I assure you, very
probable, neither do I perceive how the poor husbandmans state should possibly
(in such an abatement of the prices of corn) be bettered one penny by the
augmentation of tillage: unless all other things else that belong to his
husbandry, were likewise abated in price.


Hydr. Thou conceiuest the matter aright. For whereas in former times (when
corn was sold for five pence a bushel) the poor husbandman paid for a good
new cart but one noble at most: now he pays four nobles at least for the
like. Then he might buy him a plough ready made for fourteen pence; now it
will stand him in fourteen groates at the least. Then he might provide him his
yron-workes for three farthings the pound: now he must pay three pence
halfe-penny for every pound at the least. Then he might have a whit-leather
hide for one shilling at most: now he pays five shillings four pence at
least. Then he might have had an acre of grass both mowne and made to his
hands for two groates, or ten-pence at most: now he must give two shillings
six pence at least, and not have it so well done by the half. Then might he
hire a very good man-seruant for twenty groates wages: now can he not have any
so good for twice forty shillings at least. Then might he purchase a very good
yard of full brode-cloath for three shillings four pence at most: now he must
pay some fourteen shillings four pence at least, for the like, Then he might
have had a good pair of Shoes for six pence: now can he not have the like
for two shillings six pence at least, and so for the rest. These things
therefore being soundly considered, how should the poor husbandmands state be
bettered one pin, by abating the prices of corn through that their
preposterous augmentation of tillage, so long as all other things, else do
contiue still in that their former excessive reckoning?


Capn. Sir, I am full of your mind concerning this. But so long as corn say
they, is at such an excessive reckoning, all other things else must needs be
dear; whereas the small prices of corn will bring all other commodities to
their former low rate.


Hydr. Alas good Capnistus, it should seem that these our disordered reformers
do either dotingly dream of some dry harvest after Michelmas moon when corn
is clean gathered into poor husbandmens barnes: or that else their wild wits
do rouingly run a wool-gathering, after the sheepe-maisters flocks are all
shorn. For, tell me (I pray thee) which ways a Wheele-wright should any way
possibly afford an exceeding good cart for twenty groates now, as in former
ages, and pay for the very timber thereof some sixteen shillings him self? Or
how a Tanner may well forgo a good bend of soaling leather for eightpence now,
as in former days: and pay four marks a load for his bark at the least? or
how the Shoo-maker should sell a good pair of shoes for six pence now, as in
former seasons: and himself pay twenty pence full, for the leather thereof at
the least? Or how the Ioyner should yield a very good cup-boord for four
shillings now, as in former times: when the very timber thereof does stand him
in twenty shillings at least? Or how a good man-seruant should be able to
serve for twenty groates wages now, as before: and pay ten-groates thereof,
for one pair of high-buckled shoes? and so forth for all the rest. These
things therefore being soundly considered, let all those our tippling
Tobacconists which so eagerly affect the former low prices of corn, first
devise which ways to reduce the ordinary traffic of all other commodities
else to their pristinate state: and then urge (as they now very idly do) the
pristinate prices of corn. Or (if that will be thought a matter impossible)
let them (at the least) begin this their preposterous reformation first in them
selves: and then see how thick and thre^fold all other sorts of people will
follow their foote-steps. My meaning is this. Let Iustle-king the Ioyner afford
so good a cup-boord for four shillings now, as other men sell for four nobles
before his face; let Proud-mind the Plummer forgo so good a brewing-lead for
four shillings now, as other men sell for sixteen shillings at least: let
Small-braines the Shoo-maker not take above six pence now for so good a pair
of shoes as others do sell for two shillings sixpence: briefly, let Lithersbie
the Loyterer not take now above ten pence for mowing and making an acre of
grass, howsoever all other poor painful laborers do take two shillings six
pence for doing the like: and then see how the abatement of rents, and low
prices of corn will follow thereof.


Capn. What Sir? they will never be brought to such an abatement in any their
trades (they say) do the Prince what he please. For, (besides that such a fond
course would work nothing at all toward the public good) they should thereby
be sure to impouerish themselves.


Hydr. And why then should the Prince (at any their preposterous beck) be
pleased to procure the Peers of his kingdom, the Nobility, Gentry, Yeomanrie
and poor Husbandmen to be brought unto such an excessive abatement of rents,
and prices of corn: since (besides that the same would become no furtherance at
all toward public good, all other things else considered) they should thereby
but impair their proper estates? Thus then, thou may plainly perceive by the
premises, what manner of reformation it is, that these our disordered fellows
do 2 King. 9.20.
so furiously drive at, as if they were mad; namely, at the preposterous
prancking up of their private estates, without giving regard to the public
good of our country and kingdom: not caring one whit (so themselves may
stretch out their infatiable guts with bread, ale, and beer) though the whole
Peers of our kingdom, the Nobility, the Gentry, the Yeomanrie, the
Husbandry, yea and (by consequent) our good King himself, come all to present
confusion: such a public good (thou see) must necessarily ensue of this
their preposterous augmentation of tillage.


Capn. Me think Sir, you speak probably herein, and to very great purpose.
But yet, those our monstrous malcontents they have still a mighty imagination
among themselves, that such augmentation of tillage would undoubtedly tend to a
public good.


Hydr. So might it do, I confess, if the poor husbandmans state were not
hindered, but helped also thereby: otherways not. But tell me (I pray thee)
what the abundance of corn would be better for him, all the while such an
abatement in the prices of corn did drink up his gain? As also, which way
would the abundance of corn make the Artificers and Tradesmen become the
wealthier one groate then they were at the first, if corn (notwithstanding the
abundance thereof) continue still at the accustomed price? It is not therefore
the abundance of corn, but an excessive abatement in the prices of corn, that
these men do make the only shot-anker of all their hope. And very certain I
am, that (so themselves might buy bread-corne and mault-corne fox six pence a
bushel) they would never thus disorderly prate, and practice for the
augmentation of tillage: though there were less corn in the land then (God be
blessed) there is, by ten hundred thousand quarters at least. By all this it is
apparently evident, that then the augmentation of tillage does undoubtedly tend
to a public good, when not only some one or two sorts of people are thereby
helped, and the poor husbandman especially is not therewith hundred at all.
Otherwise the partial supportation of some few alone, with ye fearful
suppression of sundry besides, were very preposterous. For even as in our
natural bodies, when the sustenance thereof is soundly concocted, and
proportionably dispersed throughout for convenient nutriment to each several
part, then the whole body it self is universally vpheld and continued in a
very good state; whereas, if that the said nutriment should be wholly exhaust
by some three or four members, with an utter deprivation of nutriment from the
rest of the members besides, then surely, that self same body would not only
grow out of order in it self, having some three or four members thereof
puffed up until they be ready to burst, and all the rest made as lean as a
rake; but besides, there would follow (in continuance of time) a final
confusion of all the whole body: So surely, in the body of our Commonwealth,
when the whole commodities thereof are aptly employed, and proportionably
disposed for the more convenient welfare, and public good to each several
member thereof, then the whole body of Commonwealth is universally vpheld, and
continued in an happy estate. Whereas, if the commodities of our country were
wholly sucked up by some three or four sorts of subjects, to the pitiful
impouerishing of all ^he rest: then without question, the whole body of our
Commonwealth could not long continue in good estate. Because some would be
ready to burst with abundance, while many other besides, do even woorne away
with their wants, to the final confusion of the whole State it self in a very
short time, without some timely redress. And therefore, howsoever such
abundance of corn, might undoubtedly become exceeding commodious to some three
or four Monopolian Merchants, who (by transporting the same (at such a slender
reckoning) into all foreign parts with an excessive great gain, would grow
(in a very short time) so abundantly rich as if they were ready to burst. Or
howsoever such an excessive abatement in the ordinary prices of corn, might
be singular good for Artificers and Tradesmen, and poor laboring persons,
who (buying corn now for nothing, and selling their commodities and ordinary
labors as excessiuely dear as ever before) might (in very short space)
attain to a wonderful wealth: yet without doubt, the poor husbandmans state
(by whose only industrious labors all other estates are hourly vpholden) it
being greatly impouerished by the small prices of corn, and mightly oppressed
through the excessive rating of all other commodities else; I cannot possibly
perceive how this their augmentation of ^illage should in any sort be helpful,
but every way hurtful to him.


Capn. Oh yes Sir. For if there were once a far greater augmentation of
tillage obtained, then every husbandman (say they) should hold (in his proper
occupation) twice so much land as he held before.


Hydr. And what then, I pray thee? Would not the small prices of corn (in such
an hourly excess of all other things else) become a very shrewd cooling card
to that his great store of tillage, he having thereby, as much more toil
imposed upon him, with a far less commodity then he usually reaped before?
For tell me, I pray thee, whether it be the great store of tillage, or the well
manuring of tillage that breeds abundance of corn? Has not some excellent
husband as much corn of one acre, as some have of two or three? Be it
therefore supposed that a poor husbandman, having in his occupation before,
but bare forty acres of arrable land, did yearly grow thereof some forty
quarters of corn at the least: whereas now (when he has some forty acres
more annexed to his Farm) he hardly grows forty quarters of corn at the
most. How much (think thou) is this poor husbandmans state advanced by this
their augmentation of tillage? May he not boldly put up the whole gain of his
getings in his eye, and yet see never the worse? Is he not properly promoted by
tillage, being thereby surcharged now with a two fold toil, for a bare single
increase of corn? Is not his great abundance of arrable ground (through some
lack of good order) grown now so far out of order and heart, as it will
either yield him but little, or no burden at all? His charge of housekeeping,
of household servants, of horses, of carts, of ploughs, with other odd
implements, is mightily increased: and the great gain of those his daily
endeauours, and industrious labors, as deeply decreased. How then is this
poor husbandmans estate made any thing the better, by that their augmentation
of tillage?


Capn. Sir, he must procure him abundance of sheep (they say) to amend his
barren land by the often foulding thereof: and withal, he must get him a great
company of beasts to breed him good store of compose, and thereby better his
barren grounds by manuring of the same to the full.


Hydr. This, (indeed) is something they say. But yet now (when the small prices
of corn have so mightily impouerished the poor man's purse, as he is hardly
able to buy him clothes to his back) where is ye means (think thou) that
should compass those cattle? Corn he has none to sell: and many quarters of
grain would not buy him half a quarter of a flock to fould his said barren
ground. Or, be it supposed the man had money good store to buy those beasts:
where is the most convenient place for their walk? or wherewithal shall he
pasture those cattle, when all his Enclosures and other laie-grounds are quite
converted to tillage? Before this augmentation of tillage, a poor man might
very well raise his whole rent from out his Fallow-fields, those fields
affording him great store of grasing to pasture his sheep: but when all his
gras-grounds are turned to tillage, that hope of gain is grown out of use;
and he may happily reap from his Fallow-fields now, some three or four loades
of thistles to recompense his pains in ploughing the same. For, consider
Capnistus and mark it well, are there not (at this present) in every Champion
field, some ten, twelve, yea twenty hundred acres of laie-grounds at least,
which being (as it appears) in former times made arrable land, were all of
them left lay by poor husbandmen, some two hundred years past or more. What
was the maine cause (think thou) that our forefathers (in former times) did
make such a mighty decay of tillage?


Capn. Surely Sir, either it was so because those poor husbandmen then could
make no benefit at all by upholding of tillage, corn being brought at that
time to such a low price, and all other things else at an excessive reckoning:
or for that those husbandmen wanted both grass and hay for their cattle, and
were therefore enforced for very great need, to convert their tillage again
into pasturing grounds.


Hydr. Thou speak aright: and therewithal do fully conclude even this our
disordered persons proper dispute in a circular motion: not unlike to the
circular paces of a maultmil horse. For, mark here I pray thee, the manner of
this their preposterous prate. We must have (forsooth) an augmentation of
tillage, by converting all ancient Enclosures and pasture-grounds into arrable
land, for the speedy abating of these excessive prices of corn: and then
(when corn is once come to so low a reckoning as the poor husbandman is not
able to live of his plough) we must forthwith turn the greatest part of our
tillage again into pasturing grounds, for the necessary increase of grass and
hay for our cattle. Tell me Capnistus, whether these their changeable courses,
be not (in very deed) to make and mar, to do and undo, because the day is our
own till night. Yea tell me, I pray thee: whether this be not a proper roauing
dispute of these our round-about Robins, as if they were hunting the wild-goose
chase? A man (without question) might quickly purse up whole poake-fuls of wit,
if he would but follow a while all these their extrauagant courses, and
wandering vagaries: and (in the end) be enforced to bring them backewards again
by the nose, to let them then see (if they would not be wilfully blind) that
the poor husbandman (so long as all other things else do still continue their
excessive reckonings) is rather hindered, then helped by this their augmentation
of tillage.


Capn. But Sir, do you hold in good earnest, that such an augmentation of
tillage would bring some hinderance now to our Commonwealth?


Hydr. Perceiving not hitherto, any reason at all to the contrary, I
undoubtedly do, and may very confidently hold this one special point: Namely,
that such a preposterous augmentation of tillage as these our polypragmat^call
spirits do now so fiercely pursue, would rather be hurtful, then helpefull to
the poor husbandmans present estate: so long especially as all other things
else do thus continue (as we see) at such an excessive reckoning as I showed
thee, and thou thy self has confessed before. Besides that, these our beastly
P^il. 9.19.
bellie-gods who babble so inconsiderately (I might say so baldly) about the
abundance of corn, without due consideration or further regard of any other as
needful commodities for public good, they grossly imagine (as it seems by
their courses) that each Commonwealth is sufficiently vpheld in an happy
estate, all the while they have plenty of bread and beer. But tell me (I pray
thee Capnistus) are not good dearies as convenient every way for every
housekeeper, as is plenty of corn? May butter and cheese, may milk and
milke-meates by missed wholly in husbandmens houses? What one family at all
throughout the whole country, may well be maintained without butter and cheese?
What pretty young brats may possibly be bred, or brought up without milk? What
flesh-meates may fitly be roasted? what light stuff may soundly b^ baked? what
minced meats, what carrots, what parsneps, what other ^ates else may be
buttered, where poor housekeepers can have no butter at all?


Capn. Good Sir, this is even certainly so as you say.


Hydr. Very well. Hereupon then let these our tippling Tobacconists tell thee
with the best wits they have in their head, how those poor housekeepers may
possibly compass such store of milk, butter, and cheese without keeping
milch-kine; how milch-kine may be maintained and kept without convenient
pasturing; and where such convenient pasturing may possibly be had, when all
Enclosures and pasture grounds are so preposterously converted to tillage?


Capn. In deed Sir, as I (for my own part) do hold it impossible for
husbandmen to have good dearies but by keeping milch-kine: so is it hard for
them to keep milch-kine at all, where Enclosures and pasture grounds are so
preposterously converted to tillage. But yet (say they) this their augmentation
of tillage would bring abundance of corn: and so poor husbandmen (having
abundance of corn) might keep (if need were) their milch-kine with corn.


Hydr. I told thee even now (and thou could not deny) that it is not the
abundance of tillage, but the well manuring of tillage which breeds abundance
of corn. But be it here granted, that the abundance of tillage would
undoubtedly bring them abundance of corn; what then? How would the excessive
prices of corn be any whit abated thereby, all the while that self same
abundance is quite consumed with keeping of cattle? And this their abundance
of corn being that way consumed quite, how then shall the Artificers, the
Tradesmen, and poor laboring peoples estates be any way bettered at all by
such abundance of corn, if corn (being so consumed) did still continue their
excessive great prices? By all which thou may plainly perceive, that even
this their preposterous augmentation of tillage, it would either procure a
present diminution of dearies, and so that way become very dangerous to the
public good of our country: or (if such an augmentation should maintain good
dearies by keeping milch-kine with corn) that then the said Artificers,
Tradesmen, and poor laboring people their estates could not be bettered at
all, by any their supposed abatement of the excessive prices of corn.


Capn. Surely, the one or the other would follow thereof. And therefore Sir,
these men's preposterous augmentation of tillage it does but endanger their own
proper persons, without bettering their own, or the poor husbandmans state at
all.


Hydr. Very true. But (for further demonstration hereof) be it again supposed
that such an augmentation of tillage would both breed an abundance of corn,
and bring down also the prices of corn; what then? When these our insatiable
suckers of filthy fume have even fragged their bellies with bread and beer to
the full, would they then be content (think thou) with their present
estates? It is a common speech (I confess) among those our ordinary
Ale-knights, that such nippitatie new liquor will serve very well for meat,
drink, and cloth, if it be soundly taken in a cold frostie morning next a
man's heart. But (howsoever their tongues run round when they are met on their
ale-bench) can they and their families live without flesh-meate, or the offals
thereof at the least? Do thou ask them (I pray thee) whether there may be an
excessive abatement of beeues and muttons in England without the present
impairing of our public good? May the ordinary provision of flesh in any our
markets, be much less then it is any market day, without wonderful hurt to
the country in sundry respects? Are not beasts hides, sheepe-skins, with such
other pelts else (notwithstanding our daily, and our ordinary slaughter of
beeues and muttons) even little enough in every country? Does not the great
scarcity of hides and skins make leather and shoes, with liquor for leather,
and tallow for candle, excessiuely dear? Now then, those our Artificers' and
Tradesmen, who keep such a combersome coil for corn (having once corn to
their own content) let them then tell me in sadness, whether themselves* and
the fulke of their families, are able to live long without any meat; to run,
or ride without boots; to go or walk without shoes, to work day and night
without any candle, or to dispatch (in any good so^t) the most of their
ordinary trades without much tallow, and great store of kitchen stuff
compound^d therewith? But how should they have flesh-meate to eat, store of
leather for boots and shoes, tallow for candle, or kitchin-stuffe at all for
any their needful affairs, without an exceeding great breed of beefes and
muttons? And how should such an exceeding great breed of beefes and muttons be
possibly bred and maintained, without very great store of Enclosures and
pasturing grounds? And where must such store of pasturing grounds be got
(think thou) if all Enclosures were preposterously turned to tillage?


Capn. The certainty of your speech is such, as I am not able to contradict.


Hydr. Besides all this, when these our disordered persons have (by much
augmentation of tillage) even crammed their bellies with bread and beer till
they be ready to burst: must they not likewise have clothes for their own,
and their families backs? But can they possibly make webs of cloth without
any wool? Or can they have wool to web, but by breeding abundance of sheep?
Or can such abundance of sheep be bred without many Enclosures, and much
pasturing grounds? But where may many Enclosures, and pasturing grounds be got,
when all our Enclosures are preposterously turned to tillage?


Capn. Surely Sir, these your apparent demonstrations of policy they are held
in as high admiration with me, as were (in times past) the sundry Oracles from
Apollo Pythius at Delphos. Howbeit, many others do hold, and my self have
heard some Preachers avouch in public place, that this only great breed and
pasturing of sheep, is the most grievous bane and spoil of our land. The
silie poor sheep (say they) which are (by nature) the meekest creatures on
earth, are now made the most merciless Minotaures in the world: for every
where now they do eat up whole Towns, and devour the Inhabitants young and
old.


Hydr. I hate from my very heart ye destroying of Towns and depopulation of
countries, as a most barbarous cruelty beseeming rather the savage Cannibals,
then any sound hearted Christians. Assuring my self withal, that all those
our ugly black raue^s which seek to Isa. 5.8.
dwell alone upon the face of the earth by that their unspeakable cruelty,
shall one day be sure to feel a woe with a witness, and to have Isa. 33.1.
Mich. 2.1.2.3.4.
the law of like repayed double and treble upon their own pates. Yea and that
they, and all theirs (without a speedy repentance) must undoubtedly receive
their allotted reward 1 Kin. 21.21.
with wicked king Ahab. Although yet I doubt not at all but that those our
great breeders of sheep, which so make the best of their pasturing grounds
without Isa. 3.15.
grinding the faces of their silie poor Tenants, they are the blessed
instruments of our bountiful God, for public good. And therefore (concerning
that point which thy self has heard some Preachers avouch in public place,
about the great breeding of sheep) howsoever I make no doubt but that those
self same Preachers they delivered then the private opinion and thought of
their own proper hearts: yet when they shall hereafter somewhat more
considerately examine the matter it self without any such wry-respect, and
according to the proportionable bounds of Christian policy for public good, I
make no question at all, but that they themselves will eftsoons affirm, that
(in those their blind baiard-like bold speeches against such necessary
breeding of sheep) they were rather misguided with the sway of inordinate
affection, than soundly directed with any authentical rule of settled reason.
For, howsoever those our great pasture men do gather up to them selves an
exceeding great gain by the breeding of sheep, as there is no reason at all,
but that they which win it, should wear it: yet surely (if I conceive not the
matter amiss) there is no one commodity throughout the whole land more
tending to the public good of rich and poor, than the great abundance and
mighty increase of sheep, as that which was Genesis 13.2.5.6. and 24.35. and
26.14. and 29.6. and 30.31.32 1 Samuel 17.15. Psalm. 78.70.71.
the ordinary practice of all the Patriarchs, and which also received from
time to time Genesis 24..35. Ps. 144*13.14.
an extraordinary approbation from the unchangeable providence of the eternal
God. And (to let pass the much bettering of arrable ground by the foulding of
sheep) this (I do verily suppose) may here be avouched for an infallible
truth: that almost the third part of people in this our English Island, are
vpheld and maintained by the breeding of sheep. Whereupon this consequent does
clearly demonstrate it self to all the world, that those men which prate
purposely against the great breeding of sheep, they do either discover (at
unawares) their wayward and envious hearts against the breeders themselves
without any respect of public good; or lay open at least, their own
inconsiderate thoughts, and shallow conceits concerning such matters of
public regard.


Capn. The one or the other must necessarily follow thereof. But Sir, if you be
able (indeed) so demonstrate soundly unto us, that almost the third part of
people in this our English Island are vpheld, and maintained by the ordinary
breeding of sheep, you shall satisfy many concerning this point.


Hydr. I doubt not to demonstrate the same to the full. For first, let an exact
survey be had of those our great sheepe-maisters themselves, as also of that
their ordinary retinue which they hourly employ about the breeding and
hearding of sheep; then next, of all those our professed clothiers in Wales,
in Cornwall, in Devonshire, in Kent, in Essex, in Suffolk, in Northfolke, in
Yorkshire, Lancashire, Cheshire, Hallifax, Kendall, with other like places
where cloath-making is purposely professed and practiced together, with all
their whole families depending upon them; then next, let the self same survey
be likewise taken of all the poor laboring people which are this way set
hourly on work by those our cloth-makers, about the seuering, sorting,
towsing, carding, spinning, knitting, weauing, fulling, shearing, dressing and
dying of wool and of clothes; then next, of all those provident husbandmen
who yearly defray their rents, and apparel themselves by the breeding of
sheep; and then lastly, of all those Artificers, Tradesmen, and poor
laboring people which yearly do cloathe themselves, their wives and families,
with those webs of cloth which they usually make of the gathering loakes that
are scattered in pastures and fields by the breeding of sheep: let (I say now)
some sound and exact survey be forthwith taken of all and every of these, and I
doubt not (when the account is cast up in a total sum)but that the whole will
amount to the third part of people in our land at the least.


Capn. The third part (say you Sir) nay, the better half I am sure.


Hydr. Go to then, tell me what one reason those Preachers have to bark so
bitterly against ye breeding of sheep? or any man else to mislike of that one
commodity whereby the one half of our kingdom is so well set on work, and
which tends to the public good of our country?


Capn. But Sir, howsoever there be great store of cloath-making amongst us in
England, yet clothes (they say) are never the cheaper in England: and
therefore they see not how poor men are bettered any thing at all, by the
making of cloth.


Hydr. Though clothes (in very deed) were never the cheaper by the great
store of cloath-making among us in England, which is utterly untrue: yet would
clothes become more excessiuely dear among us in England by much, were it not
for the great store of cloath-making throughout the whole land. And therefore
howsoever these gaine-saying companions, do grossly imagine that the poorer sort
of people are nothing bettered by the making of cloth, yet surely if that one
trade alone were discontinued among us but for few years together; not only
the better sort of men they would quickly begin to feel some very shrewd want,
but many poor souls besides (set on work by that means) should shortly have
hungry bellies. Yea even those our Tobacconists themselves would plod up and
down with threadbare backs, and tattered tails. But now tell me Capnistus (I
heartily pray thee) how any great store of clothes may possibly be made
without abundance of wool; which way, men may have abundance of wool, without
a continual breeding of sheep; how such a continual breeding of sheep may
well be maintained without abundance of pasture; and how such abundance of
pasture may possibly be had, where all our Enclosures are thus preposterously
converted to tillage?


Capn. Surely Sir, I wot not which way to supply such a want: and therefore I
do fully refer the further answer hereof to those our disordered
Tobacconist's who labor so eagerly after such a preposterous augmentation of
tillage, without giving regard at all to sundry other as needful commodities
as corn it self, for the orderly supportation of every several estate in the
land. Wherein moreover they declare (at unawares) that as the water which
drives the mill, decays the mill: so surely, those their disordered
affections which so preposterously enforces them forwards in such an idle
conceit of public good, would turn (in very short time) to the fearful
subversion of our public good.


Hydr. That is undoubtedly true, as may be plainly demonstrated unto them by a
pregnant comparison, put down by Adrian the fourth, upon a very like occasion
of coffeehouse.


Capn. Declare the comparison I pray you at large.


Hydr. With a very good will: this therefore it is. It came to pass on a time
( Policrat. de nugis Curialium. lib. 6. cap. 24.
says he) that all the members of a man's body conspired jointly against the
poor stomach, as against him (forsooth) who (by his insatiable rauine) did
continually exhaust and devour the ordinary labors of all the other members
besides. For, whereas the eye it self was never satisfied with seeing, nor the
ear with hearing; whereas the hands were bent each minute of an hour upon
their ordinary labors, the feet became fearfully sorebated with trotting to
and fro; the tongue was even worn to the stumpes about the moderating of
speech and silence; yea all the whole members were mutually devoted toward the
public good of the whole body it self: only (in this their general
carfulness and excessive toil) the stomach it self (as they falsely
surmised) he lived at ease, and whatsoever the rest of the members had
carefully prepared before by any their mutual labors, he alone devoured up
the same by a prodigal waste. What need many words? The rest of the members
considering this, they do all jointly conclude to desist forthwith from all
those their peculiar designements for public good: and therewithal
(withholding whatsoever convenient sustenance from the said stomach it self)
they fully resolved to torture that their insatiable and slothful adversary
with the continual want of nutriment. Upon this their ouerhastie and headie
resolution, one day was passed quite in a pining penury. The second day
followed more tedious and irksome than the other before. But the third was so
extremely biting and pinching to the stomach it self, and all the said
members besides, as they jointly began to faint and to fagge. Oppressed thus by
urgent necessity, the members they assemble themselves afresh, very seriously
consulting about their own, and that their supposed adversary his present
estate. In which their public assembly, the head it hung drooping down; the
shoulders (being shrewdly benumbed) they shakingly shrunk together; the arms
became weak; the hands unable to hold themselves up; the feet were infeebled
so sore, as they could not possibly support their appointed burden; the whole
body it consumed away; yea the tongue which until then was pregnant enough to
plead for the public good of the whole body it self, it eftsoons began to
faulter, and cleave so fast to the roof of the mouth, as it had now no power
in it self to propound and expound the public occasion of that their present
calamity. The case standing fearfully thus, the whole members (by a joint
consent) they make their mutual recourse to their sovereign Lady the Heart,
for present advice in this their public distress: who (examining the matter
with a more advised and mature deliberation,) by the very sway of sound and
substantial reason did make it apparently evident to all the members, that
this so exceeding a misery befell them all, only because of their former hard
measure toward the said stomach their falsely supposed adversary. For, by
withdrawing a competent sustenance from him (he being the deputed public
dispenser thereof to the rest of the members,) they did thereby also deprive
themselves of convenient natural nutriment. And (since none ought 1 Cor. 9.7.
to go a warfarre at his own proper cost) it cannot otherways be, but that
(by withholding the public maintenance from the said stomach it self) they
themselves were proportionably disabled every of them from the dutiful
discharge of their proper designements for public good. Neither may any blame
thereof be justly imputed unto the poor stomach: because he could not
possibly distribute that public sustenance to the rest of the members, which
he received not first for himself. And therefore (says reason) I conclude it
a safer course, and much more consonant to natures sacred direction, that a
convenient nutriment be primarily bestowed on him who must propor^ionably
distribute the same unto others, then (by thus peeuishly depriving the said
stomach thereof) to procure an inevitable penury upon it self, and all the
rest of the members. Hereupon it came forthwith to pass (by reasons pithie
persuasion) that the said stomach being presently repleate with corporal
sustenance, all the rest of the members (by her operation) were proportionably,
and mutually refreshed together. Lady Experience (the Schoolemistrisse of
fools) making the rest of the members now to perceive their former exceeding
great folly, the stomach he was universally freed from all imputation of
blame concerning this their needless calamity. Because, howsoever he be (in
very deed) an insatiable deuourer of whatsoever their public labors, yet
does he not so insatiably feed thereupon for himself alone, but likewise, for
all the rest of the members: and therefore, he being pined with a needless
penury, they cannot but be miserably pinched with a biting hunger. Surely
Capnistus, if thou examine the matter aright, thou shall find it even so in the
politic body of every particular country. Wherein, albeit the stomach (the
poor husbandman I mean) does heap up together exceeding much maintenance:
yet does he not heap up the same so much for his own proper use, as for the
public good of all the particular members in that self same political body.
And therefore so much the more heedfull regard must hourly be had about the
orderly supportation of that one estate above all the rest: by how much the
prosperous, or the pining condition of all other estates does proportionably
depend upon that one estate above all the rest. For be thou thoroughly assured
of this, that there is proportionably even one and the self same office of the
stomach in a natural body, and of the poor husbandmans estate in every
political body. Because if the stomach it self be hourly kept in good
quarter, all the rest of the members they are mutually refreshed thereby.
Whereas, if it be made empty of corporal sustenance, how should it then be
able, either properly to support it own self, or collaterally to sustain the
rest of the members? And even so, if the poor husbandmans estate be vpheld in
an happy condition, the rest of the members throughout the whole political
body, are substantially and soundly supported from utter confusion. Whereas, if
the poor husbandmans happy estate be fearfully impouerished, how should any
estate else in that self same political body be possibly enriched, or safely
preserved? And therefore let these our disordered Tobacconists take heed in
time, lest (by this their preposterous augmentation of tillage under an idle
and fained pretense of public good) they do not hurt themselves and the rest
of the members in this our political body, to the utter subversion of our
public good. For if corn it self (by this their augmentation of tillage)
should inconsiderately and causelessly be brought to such a small price, as the
poor husbandman (all other things else continuing at an excessive great
reckoning) be not able to sustain himself and his family: how should he
possibly be able to afford any public maintenance to all other states else in
the political body?


Capn. Surely Sir, this comparison does set forth the matter so plain, as none
now but senseless and peevish idiots may possibly be ignorant thereof.
Although yet (for all this) there be many rich Parsons and Vicars in sundry
parishes, who likewise do keep a combersome coil about this their
preposterous augmentation of tillage, as an undoubted present good means for
public good: commending each enterprice that ways attempted, and wishing an
happy success to the same.


Hydr. Why Capnistus; never wonder at this. For so Act. 19.14.15.
Demetrius the siluer-smith he kept a combersome coile, concerning the
prosperous and happy estate of his siluer-shrines. In so much as he called
together the workmen of that self same trade, and told them saying: Sirs, you
all do very well know, that (by this our craft) we have gotten our goods.
Declaring (by this his pernicious prattle) that it was neither the love of
Religion, nor the honest care of public good that set him so greedily a gog in
that his tu^bulent course, but the only inordinate desire of his own, and of
those his copartners private respects. If these prattling priests thou speak
of now, were carried with wrie respects, and such other like private motions
about any their undutiful managings of these late disordered and devilish
attempts, they may rather more truly be termed the pestilent Parsons of
poysonsome parishioners, than the provident Pastors of a peaceable people; yea
and the Demetrian Vicars of most detestable villainies, rather than the honest
deputed Vicegerents of Jesus Christ concerning the Christian subjection of
dutiful subjects. Declaring themselves to be such Isa. 56.10.11
insatiable dogs as never have enough: and therefore, they do all of them look
to their own proper ways, every of them seek his peculiar advantage, and
after his own private gain, without giving a due regard to the public good.


Capn. But Sir, what might it be that makes those our rural Parsons and Vicars
so rustically mad upon that so mischievous a matter in hand, if the
augmentation of tillage does tend so little to the public good?


Hydr. I cannot certainly set down the reason of that their unreasonable
applaud to such a pestiferous purpose, unless I did certainly know the very
thought and intent of their secret hearts. Howbeit, if the secrets of the heart
it self may shrewdly be gessed upon, by the Math. 15.18.19.
very outgoings they have to any external action, then surely this their
preposterous approbation of any such a pernicious practice, it could not
possibly proceed from any good motion; the best that may be conceived thereof
is this: namely, that as those kind of persons are commonly Isa. 56.11.
destitute of all understanding, so (it may be) they but drousily dreamed that
this preposterous augmentation of tillage would undoubtedly bring forth an
augmentation of tithes; and that such an augmentation of tithes, would more
abundantly increase their augmentation of worldly trash. And that therefore
(upon this their fantastical fliggring confidence) when the whole country was
Act. 19 29.
full of confusion, it may be they thought it not gr^atly amiss, to keep such
a combersome consort with that rascabilian rout who so disorderedly made the
late uproar, and even mainely to cry out among them and say, Act. 19.28.
Oh great is Diana of the Ephesians; or rather more plainly thus: Great Genesis
34.13.
gain without doubt, will grow yearly to us, by this their preposterous
augmentation of tillage. Howbeit, if these pedling Parsons and Vicars were but
once enforced to find and feel in their proper experience, that such a
preposterous augmentation of tillage did afford them no further augmentation of
tithes then they reaped before, yea and that those selfsame tithes which thus
befall to their portion, are far worse in quantity and quality both, then
were those their former tithes which they possessed before, when there was
less store of tillage by much; and (which more is) that (notwithstanding the
badnesse thereof) they are eftsoons enforced to bestow a twofold labor in
gathering the same: surely when their proper experience has made them perceive
the plain truth of the premises, they will then cry out to their servants
and say, Sirs, we have now adays a very long harvest for a little corn. For
fie upon this preposterous augmentation of tillage: it was never well with the
Commonwealth, since the same was first so fantastically set on foot. For
every husbandman now has so much arrable land in his proper possession, and so
little manure withal to make it more burdensome, as he loses one acre while
he is sore toyling about another. The land (for want of good order) is now so
clean out of order and heart, as it yields more weeds then corn: yea and
the corn which it commonly bears is so lean and so light, as it affords
no flower at all. What say thou now Capnistus, to these our counrrey Parsons
and Vicars cars who so highly applaud these public disorders?


Capn. Surely Sir, if the sequel should thus fall forth, I might boldly
affirm, that the judgment of God were justly upon them.


Hydr. Very true as thou say. For, as it is a most filthy shame for them,
to yield their underhand approbation toward any such public disorders: so
surely, had they but one dram of Gods grace in their hearts, one scruple of a
subject like subjection in their heads, yea one jot of an honest humanity in
any of their minds; they would hold it much more beseeming their persons and
places, to teach their parishioners al holy subjection toward their
superiors; to beat down very bitterly whatsoever disorders shall but put out
their head against our positive laws, and the public peace of our sovereign
Lord the King; yea and even rather to hazard their proper persons and states
about the timely suppressing of every such desperate attempt from private
persons, than either by deed, by word, or by countenance, to give any
encouragement at all to such a preposterous project. Howbeit as Mat. 11.19.
wisdom is evermore justified of her own proper children: so surely, there
was never yet any one faction so filthy in nature, so foul in apprehension,
neither yet so furious in practice, but the same had evermore either the
primary sproute, the preposterous proceeding, the pernicious progress, the
pestiferous perfection, or the pestilent approbation at least of some of those
simple Sir John's; who rather should soundly convince, then seditiously confirm
the same. Howbeit, as ever there has been, so still there will be Hos. 4.9.
like people, like priest. That so (the base people practicing, and the bad
priest approving such pestilent practice) they might all jointly become liable
to one and the self same determined judgment of God against such disordered
attempts: according to the testimony of the Prophet who says, Hos. 4.8.9.
The priests they eat up the sins of my people, and lift up their minds in
these their palpable iniquities. Therefore there shall be like people, like
priests: for I will visit their ways upon themselves, and reward their wicked
deeds upon their own pates. By all the premises then thou may plainly
perceive, that (nothwithstanding whatsoever those our disordered Tobacconists
pretend, or these our men-pleasing priests do prate) about their preposterous
defense) the poor husbandman his estate (so long as all other things else do
continue at such an excessive reckoning) is rather hindered then helped by this
their preposterous augmentation of tillage.


Capn. Good Sir, the whole matter it self (in my poor apprehension) is so
apparently evident, as I am able Genesis 24.50.
to say nothing thereunto either good, or evil.


Hydr. I hope, by this time thou may plainly perceive the falsely supposed
goodness of that preposterous work which was so perniciously applauded among
the very garbage of humane societies: namely, those the desperate attempts of
these our disordered Tobacconists against the long settled peace of this our
public state, in a matter especially of such slender importance and so
needless moreover, if all other things else be soundly resolved.


Capn. But Sir, do you hold (in good earnest) the augmentation of tillage a
matter most needless, especially in this our age?


Hydr. I tell thee this in good earnest: it must either be needful, or
needless. But howsoever the augmentation of tillage may very truly be said to
be simply good init self, because it was Genesis 3.23.
the primarie ordinance appointed by God for man's preservation and practice:
yet do I not hold it so needfully good for ye present, if all sorts of people
in our public state be proportionably respected, according to the several
qualities of their persons and places. For how may this their preposterous
augmentation of tillage be held now so needfully good, it being every way so
hurtful as thou heardest even now, the present condition of our public state
being duly considered? Then next, a matter but needless it may seem to be for
the present: because corn is not now so excessiuely dear, but that each man
(of what sort soever) may as sufficiently be able to maintain his proper
estate, by paying two shillings six pence the bushel, as were the people of
those former times, when they paid but sixepence the bushel.


Capn. I pray you Sir, demonstrate this point more plainly for the better
satisfaction of my self, and all others besides.


Hydr. This thing is so plain of it self, as it needs no plainer
demonstration at all, then the former, and now present experience. For who does
not see, but that the whole Peers of our kingdom, ye Nobles, the Gentry, and
Yeomanrie also, might much better maintain their estates in former ages with
some five hundred, three hundred, or one hundred pounds rent at the most, when
all other things else appertaining to their household provision, their ordinary
attire, and the moderate pomp of their persons and places did generally run at
so low a rate, then they may now (in this present age) with a thousand, six
hundred, or three hundred pounds rent at the least, when all those the former
supplies cannot possibly be gotten without an excessive reckoning?


Capn. I am just of your mind for that. But Sir, these our great personages
(say they) do prodigally and wastefully consume so much wealth upon superfluous
buildings, and sumptuous apparel, as they cannot possibly uphold their
estates, without an excessive polling and pilling of all their poor Tenants:
and there is the welspring it self of all their wants.


Hydr. I intend not now to plead for, much less to put down any patrocinium
at all to men's superfluous expenses, how many, or how mighty soever: having so
sufficiently censured the same a little before. Although yet (respecting these
great men's persons Deuteronomy. 28.13. Psalm. 45.7. Ecclus. 38.25. etc.
and places, the Math. 6.29.
royalties of Salomons house, the clothing of the Kings daughter Psalm.
45.9.13.14.
in beaten gold with raiment of needle work; the acustomable Math. 11.8.
wearing of silks, and soft apparel, in Princes courts; yea and that Ioh.
19.23.
seame-lesse coat of our Savior Christ being wrought upon throughout) I dare
not deny a different dignity in apparel, in diet, in sumptuousness in
buildings and every way else, from the base and vulgar sort; which made me even
purposely put down the moderate pomp of their persons and places in my former
speech, as a pomp respectively permitted unto them by the Almighty himself.
Howbeit, Capnistus seeing thou thy self art just of my mind (as thou saidest
even now) concerning our purpose propounded, I will therefore (without further
delay) proceed in the rest.


Capn. Do so Sir, I pray you: and first, how they husbandmans state is every
way now as good as in former times.


Hydr. Why man, who makes any question at all, but that the poor husbandman
may as competently, as comme^dably, and as contentedly continue the good estate
of himself, and his husbandry, now when he sits upon twenty pounds rent, and
grows but threescore quarters of corn at the most, as he might have done in
our forefathers days, when he paid but twenty nobles rent by the year, and
reaped tweluescore quarters of corn at the least, all other things else being
proportionably and euenly respected according to their different rates and
reckonings? For when as one bushel of barley (being then sold for fourepence
in former times) was able to buy him but one pound of candle: one bushel of
barley now (being sold for two shillings sixpence) will purchase this poor
husbandman, a pound of candle, a pound of hops, a quarter of lamb, three
pennie-worth of bakers bread, and a gallon of good ale at the least; and so
forth proportionably for the rest of any his other needful affairs.


Capn. The case is apparently evident concerning the husbandmans happy estate:
but how for the inferior sorts of subjects?


Hydr. The self same proportion (respecting their several persons and places)
will fitly serve for every of them. For who sees not but that the Artificers,
Trades men, and poor laboring people (being painful in their callings,
frugall in their gettings, and provident in all their dispendings) may as
competently, and as conveniently maintain themselves, and the folk of their
family now, with bestowing two shillings sixpence upon every bushel of corn,
as their forefathers might have done in former seasons when they paid but
sixpence for every bushel. For even as the prices of corn are now increased,
so surely the different prices of their several traffickes, their sundry
commodities, and ordinary labors, they are likewise proportionably augmented
and raised accordingly, so as the different times have brought no disparagement
at all to their different states. I will make it more apparently manifest by
this demonstration: When a Shoo-maker (in former seasons) might readily buy him
a bushel of corn for sixpence, in those self same times he hardly could sell
a good pair of shoes for sixpence. And whereas a Shoo-maker now pays two
shillings sixpence for every bushel of corn, he may now also sell the like
pair of shoes for two shillings sixpence. So as one pair of shoes (in
former times) would buy but a bushel of corn: and one pair of shoes (in our
present days) will likewise procure him a bushel of corn. These things being
certainly so, the Shoo-makers state is much better now, then was the
Shoo-makers state in former seasons. For, this Shoo-makers having once procured
him a bushel of corn with one pair of shoes, which also his forefathers
were forced to give for a bushel in former ages, he has fully as many shoes
remaining for his further uses, as had his forefathers before him, yea and
each pair of his will be fully as much worth as five pair of the like in his
forefathers days. And as in this one, so likewise in all other trades else,
according to the selfsame proportion of persons, of times, of trades, and of
traffic.


Capn. It is even certainly so as you say. And therefore I wonder what should
make our Artificers, our Tradesmen, and poor laboring people so malcontent as
they are, with their present estates.


Hydr. It is not any unavoidable want (I assure thee) but a fantastical
wantonness rather, which (shaping their shoes now a great deal higher in the
instep, then did their forefathers in former times) does make them so
malcontended. My meaning is this. Our men (having now more ambitious, more
aspiring and haughtier hearts than had their forefathers before them) they
cannot Phil. 2.11.12. 1 Timothy 6.8.9.
content themselves with meat, drink, and clothing, with that competencie (I
mean) wherewith their forefathers were fully contented before them: or (at
least) they will not be pleased before such time as they have abundance of
blessings, to Iam. 4.3.
consume the same upon their inordinate and licentious affections. For let our
Artificers, our Tradesmen, and our poor laboring people be as industrious
now in their different degrees, as diligent in their several callings, as
painful in their ordinary labors, as provident in getting, as careful in
keeping, as frugall in disposing, and as heedfull in their domestical
dispendings as were their forefathers before them: and I see not (as yet) to
the contrary, but that (the premises themselves being proportionably and
rightly respected) they might every way live in as happy a state as did their
forefathers before them. But when those men were industrious, and our men are
riotous; when they were diligent, and ours too too lazy; when they were
painful, and ours over playfull; when they were provident in gathering, and
ours profluuious in scattering; when they were careful in keeping, and ours
careless in saving; when they were frugall in disposing, and ours prodigal in
bestowing; when they were heedfull in dispending, and ours altogether heedlesse
in dispersing: how should they possibly accord in their proper conditions, when
there is so great discord in their diverse professions? How should they consent
in their equal properties, when they dissent so much in their several
practices? or how should they iump pat in their congruent states, when they so
grievously jar in their different stirs? The Tradesmen (in former times)
would not willingly spend so much in seven years together about the necessary
decking up of themselves, their wives, and seven small children, as our
Tradesmen now do wilfully waste about the needless trimming up of proud
Tag-tailes their wives in less then one quarter of a year, or two at the
most. The ancient Artificers then would not usually provide so many delicate
dishes for themselves and their families in a whole twelue-moneth together, as
our new vpstart Artificers do now commonly procure for each Sundaies dinner at
least. Milk, cheese, and butter, was a rich and bountiful banquet with them:
Pig, porke, and lamb is nothing with ours, unless also they have a whole
quart of sack to kindle their queasie stomachs withal. It was very much with
poor labors then, to play one poor halfe-pennie at cards throughout a whole
Christmas together to cobble their shoes: it is nothing with our loyterers
now, to lavish forth twelue-pence a week at one vnthristie, or poope-noddie at
least, for whole gallons of ale to comber their cockscombes withal. It was
fully sufficient for the common sort then, their wives and poor children, to
be reputed good, honest, plain country people: whereas our vulgar sort are
never satisfied now, unless themselves be reckoned the odd burgo-masters of
every parish; unless their proud wives be gentilized with, May it please your
good worship at every word; unless my young princkcockes their sons be
maistered with long lousy huge locks on their head, and a guilt-dagger
forsooth, behind at their backs; yea and unless my pretty pigs-nie their
daughters be ladified with a tucke on their tails, and a pair of new pumpes
on their heels for hurting their kibes. So as howsoever our ancestors lived
honestly, and contentedly with their former conditions, it is no marvel at all
if these our late vp-startes be monstrously malcontent for their proper
estates; without any one occasion at all from the scarcity of corn for want
of more tillage.


Capn. Surely Sir, if you had been lodged these seven years together in the
very closet of our common peoples hearts, you could never have laid forth more
soundly, the foolish humors of those their fantastical heads. Yea and all men
may now plainly perceive, that it is not any want of corn, but the wantonness
rather of their lewd dispositions that makes them discontented with the times,
with their states, and with whatsoever else is opposite to their humorous
affections.


Hydr. Very true as thou say. For the times themselves are as tolerable
now, as ever before; their ordinary estates as competent now, as ever before;
the great plenty of corn as exceeding much now as ever before; yea and the
prices also of corn as proportionably convenient as ever before, if all things
else be rightly respected: only our mutable minds are now grown quite out of
order, and that is the only maine cause which makes us so malcontent in our
selves, and so mischievous also against the public good of our present state.
But be it supposed there were now some present want of corn in our country,
as these our disordered persons may seem to suggest, might not this want
(think thou) be much better supplied, than by these their disordered
attempts about the untimely disparking of all Enclosures, for that their
needless augmentation of tillage?


Capn. Good Sir, I see not (as yet) how these our unruly Tobacconists may be
brought to conceive the reason hereof.


Hydr. When proud horses (being handsomely had forth to the crystal streams)
may not possibly be made to drink, can ^hou conceive any other reason of
this their wilful refusal, but the only pride of their stomachs which makes
them so causelessly to distaste the good and wholesome water before them?


Capn. No surely Sir, that is the only cause, I verily suppose.


Hydr. And even so in like manner, it is the only height of our proud
Tobacconists minds that will neither suffer themselves to see the depth of
their desperate folly herein, nor yet let them be handsomely led forth to a
better dexterity, from ye approved judgment of others. For let the earth but
yield yearly the like abundance of grain that it now ordinarily grows from
time to time: and I doubt not at all but the prices of corn may still be
continued in the self same reasonable reckoning which they hold at this
present, yea and (perhaps) be brought to a lower rate (as need shall require)
if the observations I could give them herein, were rightly respected.


Capn. Put down those observations, I beseech you Sir.


Hydr. Nay, soft here a while. For as I am not (I assure thee) a professed
Politician, so dare I by no means presume to put down political orders for
the public State, in a kingdom especially so prudently governed.


Capn. Let no such needless conceit (I beseech you) withhold your Christian
care from ye public good of your country. For as it was no presumption in 2
King. 5.3.
Naamans little girl to propound, nor any prejudice to the reputation of
Naaman to practice her prudent advice for the timely restoration of his
diseased body to it pristinate estate: so is it no arrogancy in your own
self, nor derogancie at all from the justly deserved dignity of any our
politic statesmen, to refer your good thoughts (for the public good of your
country) to a public consideration. And therefore, fear not to put your
observations upon terms at ye least, whatsoever dislike ensue thereof.


Hydr. I do willingly consent to this thy reasonable and honest persuasion.
First therefore, if it might but please his excellent Majesty, to command from
time to time, a strict execution of all those penal statutes which were
formerly See Pultons Abridgment in the statute of corn ^^d grain See the
statute of 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. Also the statute of 5. Elizab. 5.27.
provided against the needless transportation of corn and victuals into
foreign parts, beyond ye ordinary prices of corn put down in those statutes;
with a severe exaction of the penalties appointed, at the hands of such
husbandmen first, as convey, or cause to be conveyed their corn to any haven
or port to be so transported; at the hands also of such insatiable Merchants or
others as do so transport our said corn; and then lastly, at the ship-maisters
and mariners hands for so transporting the same: and I doubt not but that
there would be plenty enough of corn in our country, and the same continued
from time to time at a reasonable rate.

Again, if his said Majesty might eftsoons be pleased to See Pultons
Abridgment ibid. 3.4. Item ibidem, in the title of corn and grain. 3.4.
become very provident in granting so many needless licenses to any of those
our monopolian Merchants especially, who do nothing else in effect, but ship
over our corn, with other the like substantial commodities of their native
country into all foreign parts, and bring home from thence their trifling
toys; I mean boxes, hobbie-horses, and rattles for little young babes,
loombe-works and laces for young ladified lasses; proud pomanders, perriwigs,
and squirrels tails for prickmadaintie fools, with other like trumpry trash:
and I doubt not but that there would be plenty enough of corn in our
country, and the same continued from time to time at a reasonable rate.

Again, if his said excellent Majesty might likewise be pleased to command
from time to time, the like severe execution of penal laws, provided See
Pulton, in the statute against forestallers, etc. See the statute of 5. Edw.
6.14. See 5. Eliz. 5. Item: 27. Eliz. 11.
against all Fore-stallers, Regrators, and Ingrossers of corn and victuals,
with a full exaction of the penalties appointed against every offender therein:
and I doubt not but that there would be corn enough in our country, and the
prices continued from time to time, at a reasonable rate.

Again, if his said Majesty might be pleased to give it in special charge,
that the Justices of every country should from time to time See Pultons
Abridgment in the title of Farmers. 2. Item, ibid. in the title of corn, 10.
take a diligent survey and view whether any of our country cormorants do
accustomably keep up in their hands, some two, three, four, five, yea six
years corn together, first for the feeding of rats, mice, weasels, and then
(being good for no purpose else) to be tumbled forth by whole quarters at once
for hogs and swine; with a very severe and sharp punishment for such as so
filthily consume the good blessings of God: and I doubt not, but that there
will be plenty enough of corn in our country, and the prices continued from
time to time, at a reasonable rate.

Again, let his Majesty be likewise pleased to give strictly in charge from
time to time, that See the Canons against resorting to Alehouses.
no roysters, ruffians, riotous persons, nor tippling Tobacconists do continue
day by day, and night by night, at tippling Alehouses in a needless
gormandizing, carousing, quaffing, and swilling in of wine, ale, and beer, as
they usually do; but See Pulton in the title of laborers, sect. 2.3.13. Also
in the title of poor people. sect 22.
be industriously held and kept to their several callings and labors: and I
doubt not but that there will be plenty enough of corn in our country, and
the prices thereof continued from time to time at a reasonable reckoning.

Again, let his excellent Majesty be likewise pleased to command very
strictly See Pulton in the title of vagabonds, 1.2. etc.
the due execution of laws from time to time upon rogues, vagabounds, and
sturdie-beggers, who like greedy Caterpillars, devour the good blessings of
God, and as idle drones, do but suck up the sweet of other men's labors; as
also Ibedem 11.
upon any their maintainers and releeuers; together with such and so many as
Ibidem 10.
neglect their timely apprehension: and I doubt not but that there will be
corn enough in our country, and the prices thereof continued still at a
reasonable rate.

Briefly, let his said excellent Majesty be likewise pleased to command his
said Justices in every country, from time to time See Pulton, in the title,
Alehouses. sect. 2.
to execute very sharply the breach of his laws upon all disordered Alehouses,
as also to put presently in practice Ibidem sect. 1.
the speedy suppressing of superfluous Alehouses to the sixth part at the least
in our land: and I doubt not to have plenty enough of corn in our country,
and the same at a reasonable rate from time to time. For I make no question at
all, but that ten hundred thousand quarters of malt at the least (besides the
abundance of wheat and other the good blessings of God) are very riotously,
wastefully, and needlessly bestowed from year to year in our land, by reason
of such superfluous tippling houses: which said malt, wheat, and the rest of
Gods good blessings (being otherwise most frugally dispended only for the
present necessity of his Majesty's subjects) would make more plenty of corn
in our land by much, and continue the same from time to time at a reasonable
rate, without any such needless augmentation of tillage.


Capn. Surely Sir, if these things were prouidently observed, and carefully
executed from time to time (as in equity they ought) according to the true
intent and meaning of law, we should have from year to year such abundance of
corn, and at so reasonable a rate withal, as the augmentation of tillage
would rather be hurtful then helpefull to all estates: and therefore that the
disordered enterprice of those our tippling Tobacconists (for any thing I do
perceive) was idle, and utterly needless.


Hydr. Very true as thou say, and the needlesnesse also thereof may yet be
made more apparent by much, if thou considerest rightly the very true cause it
self of these our Tobacconists wants. Which their said wants arise not (I
assure) from any defect of corn in our country, or through the excessive
prices of corn for the present, but rather from their own inordinate riotous,
licentious, and loytring carriage. For, what is the cause that all other
Artificers, Tradesmen and poor laboring people do now (notwithstanding this
falsely supposed want of corn, and the excessive prices of grain) so
competently and so commendably maintain their several charges, with money
from time to time in their purse for any their needful affairs: and these our
disordered Tobacconists are each hou^e so oppressed with penury and want, as
they are eftsoons enforced to adventure upon such vndurifull and desperate
attempts, to preserve them and all theirs from famine and hunger?


Capn. Howsoever I my self might shrewdly guess thereat, yet can I not
certainly set down the certain reason thereof: and therefore do heartily
entreat your assistance therein.


Hydr. With very good will. Wherein this also observe by the way, that if it
were the present want of corn, or that the excessive prices of corn might
justly be adjudged the cause thereof, then all other poor men besides, having
fat greater charges than they, and (setting their painful labors apart) as
little to take to as any of them, should have as great cause to complain of
their wants as themselves. Neither is it their want of a competent skill, or
sufficient strength of body to maintain their labors that constraines them
thus to complain: for therein they far exceed, and go beyond those other
poor men by many degrees. But it is their only want of grace, their want of a
Christian conscience, their want of an honest heart, and the want of a ready
will to walk industriously in their several callings, that causes this
stir. It is their lazy, their loytring and idle life, being hardly brought
to labor soundly one day in a week. It is their prodigal dispending of
whatsoever they get, about their filthy Tobacco fumes, and superfluous
carousing cups. It is their fine dainty tooth, their excess in apparel, and
their riotous behavior in every place. Yea it is their profluuious lashing
forth of whatsoever they get, at cards, ^ice, and other v^lawfull, nay rather
unthrifty pastimes. And now when all is thus spent, yea more than all, and
themselves grown impatient in that their penurious estate, then forthwith they
make most dangerous outcries about their private wants, and most desperately
undertake a causlesse supply thereof, by their disordered disparking of all
Enclosures forsooth, under a false pretense of the needless augmentat^^n of
tillage. By all which thou may plainly perceive, how pestiferous those their
bad practices are to the long settled peace of our Sovereign Lord the King: and
consequently, how pernicious withal to the present good of our public State.


Capn. Sir, the case is apparently evident, like the Sun in his strength, so
as even all (but such as are wilfully blind) may very easily epsy the evident
truth thereof.


Hydr. Very true as thou say, And therefore, that these our poor-blind
platformers in public affairs, as also, every of their polypragmaticall
applauders may the more readily be made to recover a clear understanding
concerning these matters, let us now next, endeavor to draw those Act. 9.18.
filthy scales of corruption from out of their eyes, by demonstrating yet more
plainly to every of them what further pestiferous perils to the present good of
our public State did still proceed, and poysonsomely break forth from those
their desperate attempts. For here I would have thee to observe afresh, that
the late disordered enterprise of those our intemperate Tobacconists, it was
not only flat opposite to the well established peace of our sovereign Lord
the King as thou heardest even now, but very rebellious likewise to his kingly
sovereignty it self. Not only, because they so desperately attempted the
wilful breach of his peace, but for that they so proudly resisted his kingly
power, and did thereby most impudently declare themselves very obstinate, and
open rebels against his sacred Majesty.


Capn. Oh Sir, I would to God you had been somewhat more spare in your speech,
and not so satyrically have termed them Rebels; for that term (I fear me)
will hardly be brooked.


Hydr. Howsoever thy self would have me be spare, I love to be plain in my
spe^ch, and to call a spade, a spade, how hardly soever digested. And why
should they themselves, or any man else (I pray thee) dislike of that name
which they in the very secret of their hearts so earnestly desired, and (by
their outrageous carriage) so justly deserved? That they in their own hearts
desired this name, it is more then apparently evident: because neither
peaceable entreaty, nor any plausible means might possibly persuade their
dutiful departure, nor once make them desist but a while from those their
desperate attempts. And that their outrageous carriage di^ duly deserve such an
odious name, they may not deny it themselves: not only for that they would
not (upon his Majesty's Proclamation) depart from the field, but rebelliously
persisted and proceeded afresh, in that their undutiful practice. Howbeit (to
the end thou may more exactly understand my meaning herein) it shall not be
greatly amiss, to examine first, the ordinary use of the word rebellare,
according to the just propriety of several languages: and then next, to set
succinctly down a true definition of the very matter it self, as is properly
intended by those the said several languages.


Capn. A very excellent order, and therefore I pray you proceed in your
purpose.


Hydr. With very good will. Wherein, I would have thee observe with deliberate
consideration, that the Hebrews they use The Hebrews have (...), as in Genesis
14.14. Ios. 22.16.29. Ezech. 2.3. Dan. 9.5.
the word maradh, which signifies to offend by rebelling against, to revolt or
forsake, to fall finally from one, to rebel, to deal perfidiously: as thou
may plainly perceive by those several Scriptures which are purposely put
down in the margin to make it more manifest. This word maradh, it has a
marvelous affinity with another word Cognatione^ habet cum (...) and cum.
(...)
called marah, that is, to make bitter or sour; as also with iaradh, that is,
to descend or fall from: because the man that rebelleth, does seem (as it
were) to revolt or fall from his superior so, as he does utterly vex and
grieve his heart. According to that which Abner uttered to Ioab, in an only
regard of the exceeding great slaughter between them, saying thus: 2 Samuel 2.26.
Shall the sword devour for ever? Know thou not that it will be bitterness
in the latter end?

The Grecians they usually have for this matter, the The Grecians have (...)
word aphistamai, which properly signifies to resist, to withstand, or to
depart from one: because the man that rebelleth does seem (as it were) to
depart, or to withdraw himself from that other whom he so unjustly resists.

The Frenchmen they commonly have The French have rebeller, se reuanger.
Rebeller, se reuanger, that is to say, to rebel, or to revenge himself:
because the man that so unjustly resists his lawful Superior, does seem to
rest (as it were) upon his own proper revenge without all authority.

The Italians they do usually put down for this point, the word The Italians
have rebellare, resorgere.
rebellare, resorgere, that is, to resist, or rise up against one: because the
party rebelling does rebelliously rise up in arms against his Superior whom
he so proudly resists.

The Latins they do eftsoons observe the word The Latins have repugnare.
repugnare, that is, to fight purposely against, or to raise up an opposite
war: because the party so rebelling, does undutifully bear armor against
him, whom he so unjustly resists. So as all these several languages, they do
(by this word to rebel) even purposely speak of all such as abide not very
firmly in that loyalty or faith wherein they are authentically obliged, and
dutifully bound to their sovereign King, and natural country. Or they
understand it of such as (being victoriously subdued before and (upon their
humble submission received to mercy) do nothwithstanding endeavor eftsoons
to stir up rebellious strifes against some such as they are orderly subjected
unto, and from whom they formerly received much mercy. Now then, as a warrior
is properly called of the Hebrews, Hebrew, (...) Grec. (...) Gal. Guerroyeur,
homme de guerre. Ital. Combattitore, guerrieur. Lat. Bellator.
Ish-milehamah, that is to say, a man of war; also of the Grecians, Hebr.
(...) Grec. (...) Gal. Caeluy qui rebelle. Ital. Rubello. Hisp. E^que rebela.
Lat. Rebellator.
polemisteis, that is, a man at arms, or one rightly enabled for warlike
affairs; also of the French men, Guerroyeur, homme de guerre, that is, a
warrior, or a man of war; also of the Italians, Combattitore, gueerieur,
that is, a combatter, or warrior; and of the Latins, bellator, that is to
say, a warrior, or bearer of arms: So surely a rebel he Hebr. (...) Grec.
(...) Gal. Caeluy qui rebelle. Ital. Rubello. Hisp. E^que rebela. Lat.
Rebellator.
is usually called of the Hebrews, posheang, that is to say, a transgressour,
a perfidious, or mischievous person; also of the Grecians aphistamenos, that is
to say, a reuolter from an open resiter, or a wilful withstander of public
authority; also of the Frenchmen, Celuy qui rebelle, that is, one that
obstinately, or stubbornely rebelleth against his Superior. Also of the
Italians, he is called rubello that is to say, a very pestiferous, or most
persidious rebel; also of the Spaniard he is termed, rebela, that is, one
which rebelleth, or takes up armor against his Prince: and of the Latins,
rebellator, that is to say, a rebeller, an obstinate resister, or a wilful
withstander of the Princes power. By all this then it is very apparent what the
word (rebellare) does signify, according to the natural propriety of each
several language.


Capn. Good Sir, you ^aue sufficiently set forth the sense and meaning of the
word rebellare, and therefore, now I pray you proceed to put down a perfect
definition of the matter it self, which is purposely intended by the natural
propriety of those several languages.


Hydr. Content. And (for this respect) thou have here to observe afresh from
the premises, that a rebel is he who (having been lawfully conquered before,
and upon his humble submission received to mercy) does estsoones
(notwithstanding) seditiously raise up and unlawful war against his liege
Lord, and lawful Superior. Or else, a rebel is he, who abides not firmly in
that honest loyalty and faithful obedience wherein he is strictly obliged to
his authentical King, and dutifully bound to his natural country: but too
too rebelliously reuolteth from both, and resistingly takes up armor against
his said authentical Sovereign and natural country. By this then it is
apparently evident, that rebellion is nothing else but a wilful resisting or
rising up against a lawful authority. And that therefore, if the word bellare
be properly and purposely put down to import and authentical and lawful
war, then the word rebellare it does not improperly, but even purposely
betoken an unlawful rebelling, or an undutiful raising of war against a
lawful authority. As also, if the word bellator, be truly translated an
authentical warrior, then the word rebellator, is not unaptly termed a
treacherous rebellour. I will yet more plainly demonstrate this matter thus.
When two fight together in a cause contradictorie, or in a matter of mere
repugnancie, that quarrel (in the one of them) is undoubtedly just: but yet
(in the other) it is utterly unjust, so as (in this case) the imputation of
rebellion it cannot be truly imputed to both. For he that has the just
quarrel, is properly said bellare, that is, to fight lawfully in the necessary
defense of his own proper right: but he that vpholdeth the unjust quarrel, he
is not improperly said rebellare, that is, unlawfully to rebel or rise up in
an unnecessary opposition to him that stands in the lawful defense of his own
proper right. Not the other then, but this man that makes the unjust
opposition, is properly termed the party rebelling. To apply this to our
present purpose. The Kings Majesty's power, and these our disordered persons
did skirmish together in a cause contradictorie, or in a matter of mere
repugnancie. Because the Kings power it stood for the timely supportation of
public peace, and the necessary defense of his Majesty's positive laws
against that their unlawful assembling together for the lawless and needless
disparking of pastures enclosed: those disordered person so unlawfully
assembled they rose up in their own proper persons against that his
authentical power, to manage the unlawfulness of that their desperate
attempt against those his Majesty's laws. Not both, but the one of these may
truly be said to rebel. If they had dared to say then, or at this present do
but think that his Majesty's power rebelled against them, and not they against
his Majesty's power, it were more then high time they were all cut off quite,
for so proudly Judge. 9.14.15.
aduanc^ng the base bramble-bush of Shechem against the tall Cedar of Libanon.
For Cicero. Bellare cum Dij, id est, naturae repugnare? Na^ vbi maioritas, ibi
mandan^^ authoritas, vbi minoritas, ibi obediendi necessitas.
were not this (in very deed) to war with the gods, I mean, to resist, and
rise up against Nature her self? Because in whomsoever there is a maioritie,
in them there is placed a commanding authority, and in whomsoever there is a
minority, upon them is imposed an obeying necessity. And therefore, if his
Majesty's power may not justly be said to rebel in that action, because it
authentically stood up for the only supportation of public peace, and the
timely defense of his Majesty's positive laws: it must then necessarily
follow, that they themselves (so unlawfully arising against his said Majesty's
authentical power) did make the rebellion. And even so, those our disordered
persons (in that their unlawful resistance) they are very aptly and properly
called obstinate rebels, how unsavory soever the word rebel does seem to
that their unsavory taste. And that therefore the one part of them (for that
their unlawful rebellion) were justly put to the sword, and all the rest of
them since, not unjustly deserved the gallows as Felons, had not his excellent
Highness (even by the mere motion of his Kingly clemency without any their
merit) then mingled Psalm. 85.10.
Mercy with Justice, according to the approved testimony of the blessed
Apostle, who tells them thus: Rom 13.1.2.3.4.5.
Let every soul be subject to the authority of the higher powers. For there
is no power but of God, the powers that be, are ordained of God: whosoever
therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation. For Princes are not to be feared
for good works, but for evil. Will thou then be without fear of the power?
Do well, so shall thou be praised for the same, for he is the Minister of God
for thy wealth. But if thou do evil, then fear; for he bears not the sword
for naught, for he is the Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that does
evil. Wherefore you must be subject, not because of wrath only, but also for
conscience sake. What say thou Capnistus, to the word rebellion, now? as
also to the testimony of the Apostle concerning the same? Were they not rebels
in that their resistance? And was not that their rebellion a very pestiferous
enterprise against the present good of our public State?


Capn. The case (I confess) is much more apparently evident, than that any
sound hearted subject may once dare to oppose himself to the same. Although
notwithstanding, they themselves, and their underhand favorites do seek to
suppress the imputation of rebellion thus: Indeed (say they) if those silie
poor souls had taken up armor against his Majesty's power, they might justly
be called rebels: but (alas) they were silie poor snakes, utterly unarmed, and
therefore no rebels.


Hydr. Why man, that their disordered intention (it being wilfully persisted
in, with a resolute mind not to depart from the place) is by those (the
forenamed statutes) made a plain rebellion against his Majesty, though
neither armor nor weapon were used at all. Yea and the word which the Apostle
puts down in the forenamed Scripture, imports so much. For the word there
(...). Romans 13.2.
is antitassomenos, that is, one opposing himself unto; one that resists, or
withstandeth the power. Signifying thereby unto us, that not to obey, or not to
submit to the power, is a plain resistance, or a standing against the power of
God, albeit neither armor nor weapon were used at all. Otherwise Saint Steven
could not justly have challenged the stifnecked Jews for Act. 7.51.
resisters and rebels against the holy Ghost, because (in that their wilful
resistance) they used no material armor at all, but only Romans 6.13.
the weapons of unrighteousness to sin. But tell me Capnistus, do those
captious confederates then only account it rebellion when as weapons are used
with war against war? Or is it only the bearing of armor against his
Majesty's power that makes the rebel? How then may themselves be (that way)
set free from the just imputation of an obstinate rebellion? For (besides that
their undutiful withstanding of his Majesty's Proclamation so authentically
made in their own proper hearing) had they not armor? had they not weapons?
Had they not hatchets, axes, mattocks, shouels, spades, forks, staves, bows
and arrows, bills, partisans, guns, with other like implements? were these no
weapons think thou? And would they be commanded (in a peaceable manner) to
deliver up these? Nay did they not with violent force, and to their vitermost
power, make a rebellious resistance with every of these, against his Majesty's
power? Yea and (which more is by much) did they not (like proud railing
Shimeis) very villanously 2 Samuel 15.4.5.
cast pibbles and stones against our most virtuous David his authentical
power, even then, when all the men of war were 2 Samuel 16.6.
on their right hands, and on their left hands, I mean, had environed them
round about on every side? If therefore, it be the only bearing of armor
against his Majesty's power that makes the rebellion, why, yet then surely even
they also themselves (so using these weapons against his Majesty's power) they
are here very clearly concluded for Rebels, and therefore very pestiferous
persons against the present good of our public State. Howbeit (besides those
their former disordered courses, and desperate attempts against good laws of
our land, against his Majesty's peace, as also against his said Majesty's
sovereign power) their disordered enterprise was yet more hurtful to the
present good of our State, by procuring ^o causelessly their own, and other
men's blood to be so fearfully spilt about that their rebellious enterprise.
The timely consideration whereof, should even forcibly constrain the
principal procurers of such a bloody massacre to tremble and quake all the
days of their life, for fear, lest that shed blood (at one time or other) be
justly Genesis 4.10.
revenged with bloodshed upon their own pates.


Capn. Oh nay Sir, such a consideration is so far off from working their
fear, as it rather procures their comfort. For Genesis 9.6.
the lively image of God being (by that massacre) so fearfully defaced in
those silly poor souls whose blood was so cruelly spilt, they doubt not
(they say) but that the just revenger of blood (whose image was so fearfully
defaced in every of them) will one day require an account for their blood,
according to his own infallible promise, saying thus: Genesis 9.5.
I will surely require your blood wherein your lives are, at the hands of every
beast will I require the same. At the hand of man, even at the hand of a man's
brother, will I require the life of man. For Genesis 9.6. Matthew. 26.52. Revel.
13.10.
whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: because Genesis
1.27. and 9.6. Ephesians. 4.24.
in the image of God has he made man. Now Sir, (this being certainly so) they
doubt not (they say) but that even those war-horses, as also the warriors them
selves shall one day yield an heavy account for so cruelly spilling their
blood.


Hydr. Why man, thou did freely confess but even now, that their rebellious
disorder (in this their rebellious attempt) was very well worthy of death.


Capn. I did so indeed: and am still of that mind.


Hydr. Yea, but tell me this one thing I pray thee. Who is the man that either
may, or will dare to execute such a deserved death upon any one of them all, if
(as themselves do blindly imagine) their blood must be required at the hands of
such as shall put them to death? Thou must necessarily acknowledge thus much at
the least, that some kind of men (in such an orderly execution of death upon
malefactors) are clearly acquitted of those malefactors death, and so freed
from yielding an account unto God for their blood: or else (if that which these
our fantastickes do fondly conclude from the forenamed Scripture be soundly
concluded) that then no malefactors blood may (at any hand) be split, without
the dreadful displeasure of God.


Capn. That must needs be certainly so: and therefore, I pray you explane that
portion of Scripture, for the better satisfaction of them, and of me.


Hydr. With all my heart. Wherein thou have here to consider afresh, that
(immediately after the first creation) the almighty Jehovah designed to Adam
himself Genesis 1.26.28
the primarie and sovereign dominion over all other his creatures in general,
by Psalm. 8.6.7.8
putting them under his feet: and then next (in a more special manner) over
Euah her self, by Genesis 3.16. etc. 1.22. 1 Cor. 14.34.
subiecting her desire to Adam her husband, appointing him withal, to have the
maiestical^ sovereignty over her person. After this, the Lord ratified afresh,
that selfsame maiesticall sovereignty in Caine; by constituting him Genesis 4.7.
a princely ruler over Abel his brother; by subiecting Abel his ordinary
desires unto Caine; and by authorizing the said Caine to rule over the person
of Abel. By this means, insinuating to all the succeeding ages, that as he is
1 Cor. 14.33*
the God of order, so would he have 1 Cor. 14.^0.
order observed among his creatures. And thereupon (by this his primarie
president of such a princely sovereignty in the said person of Caine) dis
plainly demonstrate to all the world throughout their generations from age to
age, how he had decreed for ever, that (in all humane societies to the end of
the world) there should be some to bear rule, and some to obey. Now then, to
the end the offspring succeeding might not too too grossly imagine, that this
selfsame princely pre-eminence of some special person over the people, after
the first age of the world was come to the full period or uttermost date, the
Lord therefore immediately after the flood (when the Genesis 8.2.13.
windows of heaven were closed up, and the waters quite fled from the upper
face of the earth) he Genesis 9.1.
powerfully renewed the world afresh, by that selfsame primarie blessing
wherewith Genesis 1.28.
the propagation of man was blessed at first: and Genesis 9.2.
reestablished also in man his primarie dominion over birds, beasts, and
fishes. Yea and even then also (recalling eftsoons to remembrance Genesis 10.8.9.
the bloody massacres of Nimrod and others, as also intending a marvelous
increase of the world afresh, by those eight suruiuers after the flood) he
purposely divised a very provident restraint concerning all such outrageous
murders as might any ways hinder his forenamed purpose for propagation:
telling Noah and the rest, that he would undoubtedly Genesis 9.5.
require the blood of man, at the hands of every man outragiously spilling the
same. And because there should no scruple of conscience remain in any those
just reuengers of blood, the Lord God therefore does authentically establish
afresh, a perpetual supereminent power over man and beast, for the orderly
execution of that his unchangeable ordinance concerning the lawful revenge of
any such wilful murders, telling them thus: Genesis 9.6.
Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, in man, or by man shall his blood be shed, or
let his blood be shed. Lo this I assure thee, is the true sense and meaning of
that portion of Scripture.


Capn. Surely Sir, this sen^e which you give, it seems very congruent with
the proportion of faith, and scope of the text. Although yet, I have heard say
of some who do verily think that Ioh. Calvin in Genesis 9.6.
the Lord (in that text) has not exactly and purposely put down any politic
or positive law concerning the authentical punishment of outrageous murders.


Hydr. There are some (I confess) who affirm as thou say, and those also
of reverend regard with the Churches of God. But whosoever more considerately
examineth the apt coherence of this one, with all the precedent verses, he will
(I verily suppose) be soon of a contrary mind. For since the Lord God (by the
very tenure of that text) does directly determine a timely revenge of every
such wilful murders by the subordinate ministry of some one man or other:
what man is he that may unblameably undertake the timely execution of that
self same determined revenge, but only some such a one as the Lord himself
has publicly and powerfully enabled thereunto? Besides that, if we consider
somewhat more strictly, the very maine reason it self which the Lord God has
purposely rendered for the undoubted approbation of such a ministerial
revenge: we shall find (in my judgment) the matter more evident than that it
may probably be impugned of any. For whereas Noah, and his sons (conceiving
some doubt concerning the matter propounded) might have made this exception,
saying: Lord thou have told us even now, that the outrageous spiller of any
man's blood shall undoubtedly be sure to have his own blood spilt again by
man: but here show us (we pray thee) what one man in the world may reuengingly
shed such a murderers blood, and not be made guilty of bloodshed himself?
That may the magistrate to (says the Lord) into whose authentical hands alone,
I have (for such a determined revenge) even purposely put Romans 13.4.
my revenging sword. Lo, here is the proper coherence, and the purposed scope
of this present text.


Capn. Very well. But why may such a man do it more than another, and not be
made guilty of murder himself?


Hydr. For answer herein, let me first ask thee this question: namely, Whether
thou beleeuest that the Lord God himself may take an immediate revenge of
innocent blood upon the murdering person?


Capn. That I do verily believe; both because he has justly decreed such just
revenge: and for that also he (being only the supereminent God) may 1 Samuel
3.18.
Do whatsoever seems good in his own eyes, without the check or
controlement of any.


Hydr. Well, and that which he may immediately so work by himself alone, may
he not likewise mediately accomplish the same, by the ordinary means of
another?


Capn. Yes Sir, he may work either by himself, or by another, what pleases
himself. But since he has unchangeably determined such a revenge upon any the
causeless spiller of blood, how may this his mediate revenger of blood
perform such an action more then another, and not be guilty of bloodshed
himself?


Hydr. Such a man may unblameably do it (says God) because I my self (for
that self same purpose) have undoubtedly substituted him thereunto, according
to Genesis 9.6.
the very image of that mine own maiesticall sovereignty. That is, I have (in
a more especial manner) advanced him to such an excellent service, by
inuesting his person more properly with a most lively resemblance of mine own
revenging power: and by making him especially, the authentical representation
or the express image of that mine own immaculate justice against malefactors.
Thus then, these words of the Lord, namely ( for Genesis 9.6.
in the image of God has he made man) they are even purposely annexed to that
the precedent decree of the Lord, as the very maine reason why such a
substituted magistrate may powerfully and unblameably require like of a
murderer as a decreed revenge of the murder committed: namely, because (for
that self same business) he is the authentical image of the Almighty his
absolu^e authority.


Capn. Surely Sir, those words (as you say) they seem to have in them a very
probable reason of that the presedent decree concerning the just revenger of
blood: and are therefore even purposely annexed thereto, for a further
confirmation thereof. Howbeit, some others (by your leave) they do imagine that
these words ( Genesis 9 6.
for in the image of God has he made man) they were Johan. Cal^inus, in Genesis
9.6.
not put down there for any such supposed confirmation of the magistrate his
subordinate power, as your self do seem to affirm; but as an amplification
rather, to aggrauate the sin of such murder committed: telling the murderer
thus, that not only he has been most injurious to the man whom he murdered,
but that also the Lord his supereminent Majesty is mightily wronged thereby,
Genesis 1.26.
because his own image in man (by such an outrageous murder) is most
monstrously mangled, marred, and (in a manner) defaced.


Hydr. Although this which those men affirm, be (in it own self) such a
sanctified truth as proportionably consorteth with the analogy of faith: yet
is it not truly collected (I verily think) from that portion of Scripture, if
we more strictly consider the same according to the maine purpose of the
Almighty himself. Because these words (the image of God) they have not any
such reference there to the murdered man, but rather to the magistrate
himself, so severely revenging the murder committed. The Lord very plainly
declaring thereby, that Tremelius in Genesis 9.6. Petrus Martyrus in Genesis 9.6.
not only a just revenge must severely be executed upon the outrageous
murderers, but that also, the said revenge must only be orderly undertaken by
a man authentically endued with the authority of God. Yea and this sense of
the place may yet more evidently break forth to every man's apprehension, if we
advisedly consider, first the several significations of the image of God: and
then next, if we examine more strictly the word (...)
gnasa it self, put down in the forenamed text.


Capn. Show me first (I beseech you) the several significations of the image
of God.


Hydr. Touching the several significations of that selfsame image, so
frequent and ordinary in sacred Scriptures, we have here to observe, that a man
is said to be made according to the image of God, in a threefold respect:
namely first, respecting the nature of his soul: the same being a spiritual
essence, immortal, eternal, invisible, and very significantly resembling the
immortality, eternity, and inuisibilitie of his Lord and Creator. And in an
especial regard hereof, each man (so created) is fitly called Genesis 2.7. 1 Cor.
15.45.
a living soul Secondly, a man is not unaptly said to be created also
according to the image of God, in an only respect of the essential qualities
of that his said soul, namely, righteousness, and holiness: because man also
was therein accordingly created after Genesis 1.26. Ephesians. 4.24 Col. 3.10.
the image of God. And thirdly, a man may very well be said to be created also
in the image of God, in a more special respect of the holy attributes thereof
bestowed upon him, namely, dominion, dignity, and glory: because man also
himself (even by a more special dispensation from God) obtained from God Gen
1.26. and 9 2. Psalm. 8.5.6.7.
a most princely sovereignty over all the inferior creatures, as also more
specially Genesis 3.16. and 4.7. Wisd. 4.7. and 9 6. 1 Cor. 11.7.
concerning mankind.


Capn. This Sir (I confess) is marvelous strange, and more then ever I heard.
But what do you infer from this threefold signification of the image of God?


Hydr. Even that which notably tends to the timely confirmation of our
purpose concerning the true ^ence of this text. For we may not (in any wise)
understand this portion of Scripture according to that primarie signification
of the image of God, namely, according to the spiritual essence, immortality,
eternity, and inuisibilitie of man's soul: because therein the soul of man
was made immortal; and the Lord speaks here precisely of that image of God
in man, wherein man's blood may be spilt, which cannot properly be said
concerning man's soul. Neither may we understand this portion of Scripture
according to that secondarie signification of the said image of God, namely,
according to the essential qualities of that selfsame soul, I mean, true
righteousness, and holiness: because those the essential qualities
appertaining to the soul of man, as they were utterly lost in our forefather
Adam, so surely (being now eternally restored to a man in Christ) they are no
way subjected to any such outrageous spilling of blood. And therefore we must
necessarily understand this making of man in the image of God, according to the
third signification of the image of God, namely, according to that 1 Cor. 11.7
See Calvin. ^hera.
divine dominion, power, or soueraignetie which (by ye special dispensation of
God) is more especially designed to some such special persons as are (by his
absolute authority) to take a just revenge upon all malefactors.


Capn. Surely Sir, this threefold signification of the image of God, does show
forth the true sense of that text by sundry degrees 2 Pet. 1.19.
like the day-dawne in the morning. But how may this sense be yet further
confirmed from a more strict examination of the word gnasa, put down in that
text?


Hydr. Exceedingly well. Because the word gnasa, (which is there translated
(made) it may not properly be referred to that special work of creation
wherein Adam Genesis 2.7. 1 Cor. 15.45.
was primarily Genesis 1.26. and 5.1. Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10.
or secondarily made according to the said image of God, concerning either the
essential being, or the essential qualities of that his said soul, which are
no way subjected to any such outrageous spilling of blood: and therefore it
cannot be rightly referred to either of them.


Capn. Oh yes Sir, marvelous fitly, especially if the word gnasa, be used
indifferently for that threefold signification of the image of God.


Hydr. It were certainly true as thou say, if the word gnasa indeed, were
used indifferently for every of those several significations of the said image
of God. And therefore, we have here now to consider afresh, that as the holy
Ghost has purposely distinguished those several significations of the image
of God the one from the other: so has he precisely observed three several
words in the original tongue, to set forth the different degrees of those the
said actions of God, according to their different conditions.


Capn. What are those three several words, I beseech you?


Hydr. The first word is (...)
bara, that is, to create, or to make: and more properly it betokens Genesis 1.1.
the bringing out of something, without any matter at all preexisting in
nature. And even so accordingly this word bara, it is used sometimes Genesis 1.1.
and 5.1.
for creation; sometimes again Genesis 1.11. and 2.18.
for procreation; or the bringing of one thing from out of another, and
sometimes also for Psalm. 51.12.
recreation, or making again: because every of these three several actions
there appears a wonderful inherent power in God, who Psalm. 135.6.
works whatsoever pleases himself in heaven and earth: and Romans 4.17.
calls those things which are not, as though they were.

Secondly, the Lord sometimes uses the word (...)
sarath, which properly and naturally signifies to Iere. 6.29.
burn up, to boil, to melt metal, to try forth by fire, and so
metaphorically, to Psalm. 26.2. and 66.10. Isa. 48.10.
try out the children of men, to search through their hearts and their ways:
also sometimes if signifies to Isa. 43.7.
to form, or to fashion a thing, and to bring it unto that exact and absolute
condition which 1 Cor. 15.22.
does proportionably consent with the primarie pattern thereof.

And thirdly, the Lord sometime also he uses the word (...)
gnasa put down in this portion of Scripture, as also Genesis 4 9. and 5.1. Isa.
41.4.
in sundry other places where occasion requires. The which word (in like
manner) is diversely observed in the sacred Scriptures, according to the diverse
and sundry occasions offered. For sometimes it signifies Genesis 1.11.
the timely producing, and the orderly bringing forth of the fruits of the
earth according to Natures primary appointment; sometimes it signifies Genesis
14.5. Ezech. 28.4.
the procuring, the getting, and the gathering, together of things, as men
usually do, when they gather up goods and treasures; sometimes it signifies
Genesis 18.7.
to provide, to prepare, or to make ready a thing, as men commonly do, when
they prepare and make ready their meat for the hungry traveling persons;
sometimes it signifies Psalm. 115.3.
to do, to make, to fashion, to form, or to finish a thing, as the Lord did
his works in the first creation; sometimes it signifies Exodus 10.25. Leuit.
16.9.
to present with sacrifice, or to offer up sacrifice as men usually do in the
service of God; yea sometimes again it signifies Deuteronomy. 32.6. 1 Samuel 12.6.
to advance, to extol, to grace, or to magnify, as men commonly do unto some
such special persons as they advance unto dignity, and even so is the word
gnasa Genesis 9.6.
used in this our present text.


Capn. I perceive the variety of significations concerning those the forenamed
three words, but what do you observe from the same?


Hydr. Surely, even that which sufficiently tends to the true opening of this
portion of Scripture according to that only sense which I set down before.
For seeing the holy Ghost has not here put down the word bara, which properly
betokens the creating of something from out of nothing preexisting in nature;
neither yet has used the word tsarath, which properly signifies to form or
fashion a thing (as it were) by melting the same in a mould: therefore, this
portion of Scripture (being not purposely declared by any of those two words)
it cannot properly be understood of that primarie image of God which more
particularly respects the first creation of man; and so consequently the
special reason comprehended therein, it can have no such peculiar reference to
that murdered man in whom the created image of God is so defaced. Moreover,
since the holy Ghost does precizely put down in this portion of Scripture,
neither bara, nor tsarath, but the only word gnasa, which properly betokens
to advance, to extol, or to magnify with honor, as I told thee before:
therefore the text cannot significantly be resolved thus; For in the primarie
image of God, has the Lord created or formed that murdered man: but rather
more proportionably thus; For in the secondary image of God, has the Lord
advanced, and magnified that his subordinate revenger of innocent blood. And so
the maine reason rendered there in that text, it has (thou may see) a much
more peculiar reference to such a revenger of innocent blood as is peculiarly
authorized thereunto according to that divine image of soueraignetie, wherein
such a revenger (by a peculiar dispensation from God) is authentically
advanced, extolled, and most honorably magnified. Now then, the Almighty
Jehovah (protesting to Noah and the rest, that the Genesis 9.5.
outrageous spiller of any man's blood* should by man have his own blood spilt
again in a just revenge) does presenly put down the maine reason, why such a
subordinate revenger of blood may boldly, and unblameably accomplish that
business: namely, because such a man (such a ministerial revenger of blood I
mean) is authentically formed or made in the image of God; or (to speak more
significantly and properly according to the original text) because such a
subordinate revenger, is authentically advanced, dignified, extolled, or
magnified with the authentical image, or lively resemblance Genesis 9.6. Romans
13.4.
of that the Almighty his maiesticall soueraignetie, wherewith he may boldly
and unblameably execute vengeance upon all such malefactors as are formerly
condemned to death for any their enormious or capital crimes. Lo Capnistus,
this (I assure thee) is the very true sense and meaning of that portion of
Scripture.


Capn. Surely Sir, this sense which you give (in my proper conceit) it is
without all contradiction. More especially, if those the former three words be
not mere Synonima, words (I mean) of one and the selfsame signification, but
are used rather (as you say) for such different terms as are purposely put
down by Ioh. 14.16.17.
the spirit of truth, to distinguish those the forenamed three actions of God,
according to their different, and diverse conditions.


Hydr. There is (I assure thee) no question thereof. Yea and therefore the Rom
16.27.
only wise God (to take quite away all colorable shows of any such idle
conceit) has of very purpose compacted and coupled even those the former
three words (I mean, bara, tsarath and gnasa) all jointly together in one and
the self same verse, yea and (which more is by much) for those the three
former different respects which we precizely spoke of before, saying thus:
Every one shall be called by my name, for Isa. 43.7. (...)
berathiu, ietsarethiu, aph-gnasithiu that is, I have created him, I have
formed him, yea I have exalted him.

We may not therefore too too grossly imagine that these three several words
were here put down by the Prophet, only for bate Synonima, as words (I mean)
of one and the same signification; for so should he have made but an idle
tautologie, that is, but a superfluous and a needless repetition of one and
the self same matter, propounded thus: I have created him, I have created him,
I have created him. But those three several words they are used there rather
See Tremelius in Isa 43.7.
as different terms, or as an elegant gradation, to set forth more succinctly,
the excellent and most admirable order of the Lord his exceeding great
kindness toward the elect. For first of all the Prophet he tells the
people, that (from the very first hour of their creation) the Lord Pro. 16.4.
has ordained them to his own everlasting glory Ephesians. 1.5.
according to the eternal purpose of his own will. Then next, that he forms
or fashioneth them afresh, being fearfully fallen from their former
integrity: that is, Romans 8.30.
he calls, justifies and preserves them to himself, by this holy Spirit of
regeneration, And lastly, that he aduanceth, extolleth, or magnifieth them with
a sovereign dominion, dignity and honor 1 Samuel 12.6.
both in this, and the life to come.


Capn. The matter (as you make it) both seem very probable. But yet do tell
me (I pray you) wherefore you your self have purposely translated the word
gnasa put down in that place (advanced or magnified) rather then (made or
formed that man in the image of God) as it is usually turned in many of our
Latin and English Bibles?


Hydr. I have purposely translated the word gnasa so, for three principal
reasons. First, because (among the manifold significations of that word set
down before) it is no improper, but a most proper signification of the word it
self. Secondly, for that the very coherence and purpose of that present text
does even proportionably require that self same translation. And thirdly,
because (in sundry other places Deuteronomy. 32.6.15. 1 Samuel 12.6.
of Scripture besides) the same word gnasa (upon the like urgent occasion, by
many most excellent and learned See R. D. Kimbi, in 1. Sam. 12.6. See Tremelius
in Deuteronomy. 32.6.15. and 1. Sam. 12.6. Isa. 43.7. Isa. 46.4.
Linguists) is ordinarily and usually translated, to advance, to extol, and to
magnify with a sovereign dignity, dominion, pre-eminence, or princely power.
As in Deuteronomie thus, Is not the Lord God thy Father, that has redeemed
thee, that has magnified thee, that has proportioned thee? And a little
after, thus: He forsook God that magnified him, and regarded not the strong
God of his salvation. Also in Samuel, thus: It is the Lord that magnified Moses
and Aaron, and brought your fathers out of the land of Egypt. Also in* Isaiah
thus: Every one shall be called by my name (says the Lord) for I created him,
I formed him, I magnified him. And again in another place thus: I the same,
even I will bear you until the hoare hairs, I have magnified you; I will
also bear you, I will carry you, and I will deliver you. Where also he uses
the like elegant gradation, (though in different terms) to that which he spoke
of before. Now then, since such excellent Linguists (notwithstanding the
forenamed opposition in some of our Latin, and English Bibles) have thus (upon
urgent occasion from those the former propounded Deuteronomy. 30.6.15. 1 Samuel 12.6.
Isa. 43.7. and 46.4.
Scriptures) of very purpose translated the word gnasa (not made, but magnified
rather) according to the natural signification thereof: why may not I
Capnistus (upon a like urgent occasion from the text it self) translate the
word gnasa, put down Genesis 9.6.
in Genesis (not made, but magnified man in the image of God) notwithstanding
any thy pretended opposition in the forenamed Bibles?


Capn. Surely Sir, I see no reason at all why the like lawful liberty herein,
may not (upon equal occasion) be used by you, which was formerly used of
others, yea and so much the rather, by how much the sense which your self have
given concerning this portion of Scripture, is thereby made so apparently
evident to each man's apprehension, as that I (for mine own part) am presently
constrained to Esdr. 4.41.
cry out and say thus, Oh great is the truth, and must needs prevail.


Hydr. If any besides they self do yet seem scrupulous concerning this sense
of the place, I do here purposely refer him (for further satisfaction herein)
to that the authentical interpretation thereof which our Savior himself, and
the holy spirit of God (upon just occasion) have authentically put down:
saying thus unto Peter (and all other whatsoever being only but persons of
private regard) Put up thy sword into his place, Math. 26.51. Revel. 13.10.
for all that take the sword, shall perish with the sword, Wherein our Savior
Christ does See Calvin in Mat. 26.10.
make no restraint of the Magistrate his lawful authority in the use of the
sword: but only inhibites an ^surped authority, or a lawless abuse thereof.
And therefore, these words in Matthew (...) accipientes.
hoilabontes, that is, all that take the sword, would rather be translated
(says Beza) thus See Theod. Beza in Mat. 26.52.
omnes vsurpantes, that is, every one usurping the sword shall perish with the
sword. Yea and so the Hebrew word (...).
nasa (says he) whereunto answers the Greek word, to lambanein, is
eftsoons observed in Exodus 20.7. Deuteronomy. 5.11. Psalm. 50.16.
the sacred Scriptures. And in very deed, those men, they may justly be said
to take, that is, to usurp the sword, to whom the same is not purposely given
by the Lord himself, or who do abuse the said sword beyond the appointed
limits and bounds of their proper calling. As did Peter there, and as all
others before the law written should undoubtedly have done: had not the
Almighty lawgiver (in that Genesis 9.6.
ninth of Genesis) authentically enabled their persons to take just revenge
upon any the outrageous spiller of innocent blood. Thus then I hope the
Magistrates authority (concerning such a sanctified use of the sword) was
sufficiently established among the old Patriarchs, even by that selfsame
legal decree which the Almighty concluded there with Noah, and the rest
immediately after the flood. Wherein also I have labored the matter so much the
more, by how much I would not willingly (without very apparent reason) be said
to dissent from so worthy and reverend a man, concerning the true and natural
sense of that portion of Scripture: as also to let thy self and the rest
perceive, that his Majesty's power (so authentically suppressing those our
rebellious Tobacconists) was no ways made guilty of shedding their blood.


Capn. The truth thereof is so apparently evident, as (I think) all men but
such as are purposely blind, will freely acknowledge the same. But yet Sir,
they and their underhand favorites do exceedingly wonder, that so many poor
souls should be put to the sword, being al English men borne, and bred in our
country.


Hydrophorus. How many (think thou) were put to the sword?


Capn. I do not certainly know the number my self, but ye report goes
currantly in many men's mouths, that there were fourteen score slain and
hurt at the least.


Hydr. What marvel is it, though such a false report ran currantly among that
disordered company, since their words seemed Psalm. 55.21.
softer then butter, when (not withstanding) there was war in their hearts: and
seeing their speech appeared more smooth ^hen oil, when as yet they imagined
nothing but mischief, being not unlike to Psalm. 52.2.
a very sharp razour which cutteth so deceitefully, as hardly a man may
perceive the same. But oh impudent mouths, which are no whit ashamed (under a
falsely pretended couerture of fourteen score persons) to shilter fourteen
score lies and four at the least: for there were not slain above sixteen
persons at most. Notwithstanding, behold here the bad disposition of those our
monstrous Minotaures? For as they had desperately Psalm. 55.20.
laid their bloud^e hands before upon such as were soundly at peace with every
of them, and broken the holy covenant of their dutiful subjection to his
Majesty's power: so surely (to hide the horror of that their horrible
enterprice) they are not now ashamed to make known to the world, that they
Psalm. 52.3.
do rather love evil, then that which is good, and do take a far greater
delight to broach abroad lies, then to utter the truth of the matter.


Capn. But yet Sir (notwithstanding all this) they do boldly affirm, that a
most barbarous cruelty was shelved upon silly poor women and children; one
woman being sauagely killed with two young babes in her womb, another run
bloudily through with a spear, the one end thereof sticking fast in the
ground, and the other end being pitifully shattered on pieces in her harmless
sides: also upon old men, women and children, being but weeding their corn in
the fields: and lastly, upon poor passengers likewise, that did but travel by
the way.


Hydr. It seems rather (by the purport of thy speech) that a most barbarous
villainy is used against his Majesty's soldiers, by these most barbarous and
savage reports. Howbeit, it now plainly appears, that these barbarous
Cannibals can do nothing else but Psalm. 140.3. Romans 3.13.
use their bad tongues to deceit* that they Psalm. 140.3.
have sharpened their said tongues like a serpent; that Romans 3.13.
the poison of Aspes is under their lips; and that they Psalm. 64.3.
delight in nothing at all, but to shoot out their arrows (I mean) most
bitter and venomous words. For I assure thee this on my credit, that there was
killed neither woman nor child; neither yet any one creature weeding their
corn, was so much as once challenged at all. It may be (I confess, which yet
I believe can never be proved) that some one passenger (carelessly crowding
himself in the midst of the throng as they fled) received some little hurt at
unawares, but wittingly and willingly not touched at all: and therefore those
his Majesty's soldiers are most barbarously belied by these their beastly
reports. Howbeit, the best remedy they have against Ier. 18.18.
those deadly strokes of the tongue, is (with good David) to cry out to the
Lord and say, Psalm. 140.1.2.
Deliver us oh Lord from the evil men, preserve us fro! such pestilent
persons, and protect our harmless souls from all those lying lips which
Psalm. 120.2.
imagine but evil things in their rebellious hearts, and stir up a deadly
strife all the day long; which do Psalm. 52.2.
mischieuously furmize all manner of words that may do hurt, oh false
deceitful tongues. But thou oh Lord wilt Psalm. 21.12.
shoot an arrow suddenly at every of them, yea their deadly strokes they shall
be at once. They shall cause their own tongs to fall pat on their pates, in so
much as whosoever sees them shall flee from them, and say thus unto every of
them: Psalm. 120.3.
What good have those your deceiptfull tongues procured unto you? or what do
those your venomous mouths avail you at all? Has not the Almighty Jehovah
destroyed you for ever? has he not plucked you out from your tabernacles, and
made you a present terror to those that pass by the way: when they daily
behold what monuments of mischief you are justly become to all disobedient and
rebellious raskals? Even so Judge. 5.31.
let all thine enemies perish oh Lord, that shall any ways raise up themselves
against thine anointed, but let all those that love thee and thy saving
health, be even as the Sun, when he arises in his strength. So be it Lord
Jesus. Thus then thou see now Capnistus,that (notwithstanding any their
barbarous babblings abroad) his Majesty's power is every way freed from blame:
and those Genesis 4.10.11
cursed Cains themselves are every way guilty of spilling their own and their
confederates blood, either then in the skirmish, or at any time since, in the
orderly execution of justice upon them.


Capn. Good Sir, I do not as yet perceive, how they themselves should be made
guilty of any man's blood but their own, unless happily they did most
outragiously lay their violent hands upon any their associates slain.


Hydr. They they themselves became guilty of their own, and their
confed^rates blood, it is more then apparently evident. Because howsoever it be
necessary that offenses should come, yet Math. 18.7.
woe be to that man whatsoever, by whom the offense first comes on foot. Yea
and the civil law tells us confidently, yt Qui occasionem damni dat: damnum
dedisse videtur.
whosoever administreth an occasion of hurt, that man is accounted ye doer of
the hurt it self. Moreover, if their laying of violent hands upon any of those
their associats (though otherwise, never so worthy of death) had undoubtedly
made them guilty of that their blood: what a dangerous condition then, are
those wretches in (think thou) before the Majesty of the immortal God, who
so desperately combined themselves in one, and with such bloody and murdering
resolutions made haste to murder his Majesty's authentical power? Yea and
(which more is by much) what a fearful case are those blind Cannibals in
before God in their conscience, who so caus^lesly, so cruelly, so cursedly, and
with most rebellious minds to the King his excellent Majesty, did so
villanously execute such a villainous, merciles, and monstrous massacre upon Sir
Henry Fowkes Knight.
that excellent Captain, who was the deputed conducter of his Majesty's power
for the present? whose experimented valor for service of weighty importance,
and whose admirable worth for the timely atchieuing of any notable exploit, is
famous throughout the whole world; yea and whose woeful want for future
employments of trust, is ten thousand times more then would be the want of an
hundred thousand of such silly fresh water soldiers as rebelliously bare
armor then against his said Majesty's authentical power. Well, since i^ is now
as it is, let them praise God with all their hearts, for his Majesty's
exceeding great clemency in so pardoning, and sparing their lives for the
present; and let them (in Gods holy name) endeavor now to spend the remainder
of their woeful days, in an earnest and hearty desire to be freed forthwith
from Psalm. 51.14.
that one bloud-guiltinesse above all the rest, before the presence of God;
lest good Abel his innocent blood Genesis 4.14. Heb. 12.24.
do continually cry out for vengeance against them: and themselves (being
justly cast forth from the face of the earth) begin with horror of conscience
Genesis 4.14. Pro. 17.11. Isa. 19.4. Ier. 50.41.42.
to run hither and thither like runagate-vagabonds, being hourly afraid to be
cruelly killed of every one that shall but happen to meet them. Lo Capnistus,
this is the worst I wish to them all, and this is the best I can do for them.

In the mean time, thou may now very plainly perceive by that which is
spoken, what a pestilent crew of pernicious persons all those our disordered
Tobacconists were (for the present) to the public good of our State; as also,
what further mischiefs might forthwith have followed upon those their
mischiuous attempts, had not our merciful God (by the provident care of those
his Majesty's most prudent magistrates) very mercifully met with the mischiefs
in time: Namely, many mutinous broiles among our own selves; civil
dissentions in every coast, the spending of our selves against our own selves,
much spilling of English blood, a present spoil of all the good blessings of
God, the opening of a fearful gap to foreign invasions, most cruel
massacres on every side, with an extreme hazard of King, of Queen, of kingly
offspring, of our happy estate, yea and of this our flourishing kingdom also,
without the more mercy of our merciful God.


Capn. It is undoubtedly true as you say. And therefore the Lord of his
infinite mercies forgive all men their sins in deserving, and those men their
sins in attempting such horrible beginnings of mischief.


Hydr. The Lord God say amen to the same, for the merits of Jesus Christ. Now
then, (to knit up the second part of this our present discourse in a summarie
speech) since those the disordered courses of our graceless Tobacconists are
every way so exceedingly hurtful to their own proper persons, first by
poisoning their bodies and souls, and then next, by procuring a prodigal
dispending of their ancient patrimonies and other preserments; since they are so
unnaturally injurious to their own wives and children, by causing their
needless poverty, and woeful complaints; since they are so barbarously cruel
toward their poor Tenants, for the chargeable supply of their unnecessary
wants; since they are so outragiously resolute upon the present spoil of other
men's substance; since they are so fearfully opposite to the well settled peace
of our country; since they are so starely repugnant to the good established
laws of our land; since they are so dangerously occurring to the public peace
of our sovereign Lord the King; since they are so proudly rebellious to his
Majesty's sovereign power; since they are such inevitable prouocations to the
untimely spilling of their own and other men's blood; briefly, since they are
the horrible beginnings of many mutinous broiles, of civil dissentions, of
spending our selves, of spilling much blood, of spoiling the present good
blessings of God, of opening a fearful gap to foreign inuations, of cruel
massacres, of an extreme hazard to our gracious King, our Queen, the royal
Progeny, to our happy Estate, and most flourishing kingdom: Let their own
proper bodies, their patrimonies, their wives, their children, their poor
oppressed Tenants, their honest good neighbors, the quiet of our country, the
laws of our land, the public peace of our sovereign Lord the King, his
Majesty's sovereign power, their own and other men's bloods, the foreign
powers about us, our King, our Queen, the whole Progeny, our present good,
the flourishing state of our kingdom, yea and Capnistus also himself, in the
name of those our disordered Tobacconists; let all these (I say) both jointly,
and severally conclude with me, and for me, whether those their filthy Tobacco
fumes are, not only pernicious to their own proper bodies, but over
profluuious also for those our ^isordered Tobacconists purses, and too too
pestiferous to the present good of our public State.


Capn. Surely Sir, I (for mine own part) do not only conclude it an
infallible truth from my very heart root, but will (herewithall) very readily
afford you a general applaud from the rest, and my self: praising the
Almighty with heart and mouth, that it was his gracious providence to bring me
so right in your company, before that I entered upon my purposed voyage:
protesting withal from an unfeigned heart, to have from henceforth those filthe
Tobacco fumes in no less detestation then the devil of hell.


Hydr. Not so Capnistus. For howsoever I am heartily glad to hear thee brought
now into such a deadly deflation with those their former Tobacco fumes, yet let
not my present speech, bring any such prejudice to that thy purposed voyage.
Thou art a proper young man, of exceeding great hope in our country, even now
in thy best flourishing state; and young men (thou know) by traveling
foreign countries, may happily attain to a notable experience; besides that,
this thy purposed adventure, may become very gainful unto thee.


Capn. I am a young man (Sir) I confess; and therefore do stand in more need
of a sound and settled experience. Howbeit, I have now gathered (I thank my
good God) such an experimented and sanctified wisdom from this your present
discourse, as does very plainly demonstrate unto me, the palpable foolerie of
all my former West India voyages. Although this I acknowledge withal, that (if
my purposed journey had this way been prosperous) I could (by the only
traffic of Tobacco it self) have clearly gained three hundred pounds by my
voyage at least; so vainly are our vain Englishmen affected after a vain,
and vanishing filthy fume. But Sir, (Gods holy name be blessed) I begin now to
abhor the gain that is enterprised with such imminent perils, and
accomplished also with such endless pains. For what will it Marc. 8.36. Luke.
9.25.
profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his own soul? And (Sir) you
told me but even now, that Qui occasionem damni dat, damnum dedisse videtur.
Whosoever but administreth an occasion of mischief, he is the principal
master of that mischief himself.


Hydr. That is certainly so. But God grant Capnistus, that this so forward a
protestation prove not a fire-flash, resembling those sudden flames of thy
filthy Tobacco fumes, which (being suddenly kindled with the flame of a candle)
are as suddenly quenched with good ale fumes. Yea I beseech the Almighty with
all my heart, that this thy sudden illumination prove not (in the end) and
odd Interiection, I mean, some sudden passion of a passionate mind prolated
under an imperfect voice, and thereupon as suddenly vanish away like a flash or
a fume.


Capn. Nay Sir, my protestation proceeds from a firm and settled judgment: and
(that you may the rather credit my speech) I will tell you what seal shall be
set to the same for a further confirmation thereof.

I have (at this present) two hundred pounds worth of this beastly Tobacco at
home in my house; all which (notwithstanding the great value thereof) shall
either presently pack to the fire as a burnt oblation for this my advised vow,
or else be sent swimming down the Thames at the least, directly toward West
India from whence it first came, in an utter detestation of the most detestable
fooleries of those our disordered Tobacconists.


Hydr. Not so Capnistus. For howsoever the filthy fume of Tobacco taken inward
be most pernicious to the bodies of men, yet may there a very good use be made
of the herb it self for sundry diseases befalling the bodies of men, as I
told thee before.


Capn. Good Sir, I am altogether hopeless for ever beholding any good use of
that which (being first abusiuely brought to our country by bad and wild
dispositions for the only abuse thereof) has ever since been beastly abused
by like dispositions, and never yet converted to any good use at all. And
therefore (for mine own part) I will never regard whatsoever supposed good use
may hereafter be made of Tobacco it self, all the while I perceive the
present abuse of filthy Tobacco fumes in such earnest request among our
disordered Tobacconists: more especially among those our insatiable deuourers
of all the good blessings of God; and therefore I will (for ever
hereafter)beware of giving the least occasion to any such fearful abuse.


Hydr. Gods holy name be blessed for these his good beginnings of grace, and
the Lord multiply his sweet mercies upon thee an hundred fold. But yet thus
much I would have thee remember withal, that as it is the undoubted true
nature of all those to whom the Lord restores Psalm. 51.12.13.
the joy of his saving health, and more fully establishes with the spirit of
freedom, to show forth his merciful ways to the wicked: so is it a special
duty imposed upon every Christian Convert (being soundly converted himself)
even then also most seriously to labor Luc. 22.32. Ioh. 1.40.41.45. 1 Timothy
1.15.16
the sound conversion of all others besides. And therefore (good Capnistus) I
pray thee heartily, do thou now make known thy Christian conversion, by that
thy Christian care in converting thy brethren. Show thy self Pro. 11.30.
wise(for ever hereafter) in winning of souls: and so shall thou certainly
know, that Iam. 5.20.
he which has converted a sinner from going astray from the ways of the Lord,
shall save a soul from death, and cover a multitude of sins.


Hydr. Good Sir, my good will that way (by the grace of God) shall never be
wanting when, or wheresoever I meet with any of them: how furiously soever
their filthy Tobacco fumes do make them to fret, to frown, or to to fume at
the same.


Hydr. Indeed Capnistus, whenever thou do soundly undergo such a Christian
course, thou must look forthwith for the Ier. 18.18.
strokes of the tongue. For thou shall no sooner begin Ier. 20 8.
to proclaim desolation against those their shameful disorders, but the sweet
word of the Lord will be made a reproach to thy person, and thy self shall be
had in derision for it. Then shall thou be forced Ier. 20.10.
to hear the raylings of many, and be assaulted with fear on every side: yea
then be thou sure Psalm. 41.9. Ier. 20.10.
that even those thy former familiars will narrowly watch for thy halting, and
daily endeavor to execute all their outrageous villainies upon thee. But 1 Pet.
3.14.
be thou nothing dismayed with any their terrors, fear not their fiery
threatenings, neither be thou troubled at all with, the rufull remembrance
thereof; nay rather, be thou every hour ready Isa. 50.6.
to offer thy back to those smiters, and thy cheeks to those nippers, and
never hide thy face from their shame and spitting. But endure thou with
meekness 2. King. 18.22
the outrageous raylings of those raging Rabshakeians, and undergo with
patience, the 2 Samuel 16.11.12.
causeles curses of any those shameless Shimeis, because the Lord himself
has bidden them curse: it may be, the Almighty will much more mercifully
behold thy affliction, and do thee much good for their cursing that day.


Capn. Good Sir, (being thus resolutely bent as I am 1 Samuel 25.28. 1 Cor. 10.4.
to fight the Lords battles, never make you any doubt (I beseech you) but
that I have long since Luc. 14.31.
set down, and seriously cast with my self, whether I be able with bare ten
thousand, to meet him y^ comes against me with twenty thousand, or not. Do as
you may be certain of this, that (if I had either felt a fainting heart, or
found too feeble a force, I would rather Luc. 14.32.
send an Ambassador, and desire conditions of peace, then desperately
adventure my self upon any so bloody a bickering. And therefore, I pray you
cease weeping Act. 21.13.
and breaking my heart: because (by the help of my God) I will rather endure
ten thousand tortures and torments, then suffer his glorious name to be so
deeply dishonored by any their disordered dealings, or permit his gracious
blessings to be so prodigally and so profluuiously Iam. 4.3.
dispended upon the inordinate lusts of those our insatiable and lascivious
suckers in of filthy Tobacco fumes, if any my private admonitions, or open
reproves may hinder the same.


Hydr. If thy resolution be thus, why then, Act. 21.14.
the will of the Lord be done; but in any wise observe (I pray thee) a
Christian course in those thy rebukes.


Capn. My Worshipful Fathers, and fellows for foreign adventures: We that
Psalm. 107.23.24.25.26.27.28.29.30.31.
go down to the Sea in ships, and occupy our business in huge great waters,
we have eftsoons seen the great works of the Lord, and his wonders done in
the deep. How he commands the stormy winds to arise, and lifts up those
the mighty waves of the Sea, which make our tottring ships mount up to the
heavens, and down again to the deep. So as our souls they melt for trouble,
to see our selves tossed to and fro, to stagger like drunken men, and to be
hourly brought to our wits end for fear. We remember (I hope) that when we
cried heartily out to the Lord in the midst of those our dangerous troubles, he
brought us forth from our present distress, by turning those great tempests
into a quiet calm, and by causing the waves of the Sea to be still. Lo, then
began we to be heartily glad, because we were safely brought to the haven
where we longed to be. These things (my dear brethren) we all know to be true
in our own proper experience. Oh let us therefore most highly exalt the Lord
in the congregation of his people, and praise his great name in the assembly
of the Elders. Let not our goodness herein, be Hosh. 6.4.
as a morning cloud, or like to the morning deaw that goes away. Let us not
within a while Psalm. 106.21
forget God our Savior: who has dealt so wonderfully with every of us, above
many the sons of mortal men. But let us eftsoons be persuaded, that those
terrible storms of wind they did only pronosticate the inevitable storms of
God his exceeding great anger against our excessive sins: yea and let us
acknowledge withal, that there can be no greater wickedness concerning our
ordinary callings, then wittingly to traffic home that from foreign parts,
which does both willingly and wickedly procure a general wastfull consuming of
all the good blessings of God. More especially, when those self same blessings
are prodigally dispended upon that which not only does our country people no
one good at all, but also which hurts their health, consumes their wealth,
and hazardeth eftsoons their happy estates.

Perhaps your good worships do wonder much what this hurtful traffic might
be? I will here tell you the same without further delay. It is that our filthy
Tobacco fumes which we so dangerously adventure to get; which our own
countrie-men so greedily devour, and which has so egregiously endangered our
public State. I know there is an exceeding great gain to be gotten thereby:
yea I fear me (alas) that too too many of our miserable Merchants (by the very
sale thereof) have gotten the devil and all. But accursed be that gain
whatsoever Mat. 16.28. Marc. 8.36. Luc. 9.25.
which is so dangerously obtained with the exceeding great grief, and hazard
of body and soul in hell. The pernicious, the profluuious, and pestiferous
effects of these our filthy Tobacco fumes, do universally appear throughout
this whole country of ours, and Mat. 18.7.
woe be to them that are found the primary causers thereof.

Let not us (my worshipful Fathers, and fellows in foreign adventures) for a
private gain to our proper purses, procure the cause of a public bane to our
own country people. Let not our inordinate care of superfluous wines, be made
an ordindary Psalm. 62.2. Isa. 7.20.
razour to our countrie-mens throats. Let not our preposterous profession, be
any occasion at all to our countries perdition. Let us no longer cozen our
poor country neighbors, by bringing them home a filthy pestiferous fumes,
for their rich and substantial fruits. Let us not still show our selves to be
those insatiable hungry Merchants, who (hearing once what wonderful gain may
be got from the intoxicated minds of Mooneheaded Minotaures) do most shamefully
1 Macab. 3.41.
take over with them an abundance of gold and silver, to sell the sons of
Israel for slaves, Amos. 8.6 Revel. 18.13.
and to make open sale of the souls of men for old shoes: lest the Almighty
revenger of innocent blood 1 Kin. 22 49. 2 Chronicles 20.37
do break our whole Navy in pieces, and disable them finally for all foreign
adventures. Let us not hereafter any more undergo such dangerous voyages for
vain and vanishing smoke, but endeavor to traffic home rather 2 Chro. 2.8.
and 8.18.
the cedar trees, and fur trees, the Algummin wood, the gold of Ophir, and
precious stones: so shall we be worthily esteemed those honest and frugall
adventurers who seek rather the public good of our country, then the private
gain of our purses. But if (notwithstanding any thing hitherto said) we
neither care what bad traffic we buy, nor pass not what excessive prices our
poor countrymen pay for our paysonsome pelse, all the while we our selves
may live by their loss, then surely we shall most filthily shame our selves,
and pluck a justly deserved reproach upon our worthy profession.

For mine own part (my reverend brethren) I had rather undergo (I assure you)
ten hundred thousand tortures of death, then but once more to undertake the
enriching of mine own self by the sale of that, which not only does no
manner of good, and which is many ways so pernicious to the bodies of men, so
profluuious to poor men's purses, and so pestiferous to the public good of my
native country. For surely (knowing so much as now by the sweet mercies of my
God I do sincerely know, and feeling what comfort by the work of his spirit I
presently feel) if I should still continue that my former most covetous, nay
rather most cutthroate-like course, all the whole world might justly conclude,
that (if time would serve to vent them forth by open sale) I would desperately
Revel. 18.13.
adventure (with the Babilonish Merchants) to traffic also from Rome, even
Agnus Deies, crucifixes, popish pardons, with other like paultrey pelf, by the
fearful Tale of any poor countrymens souls. Yea and (which more is by much)
that I would (with the most vicious Venetian Panders) very desirously pack
over whole ships-full of sorry Venetian Courteghianes, and most shamefully
lease them forth in feefarme for a filthy lucre.

Alas (my dear brethren) alas, what a proportionable equity is that (think
you) which chaffereth but chafe unto men for their precious wheat; which
gives them goosequils for their glittring gold; and which only affords them
a foul thinking fume, for their seuenfold refined silver? Is not this to
accomplish that ancient hyperbolicall proverb, which so accustomably
accompleth each vile contemptible traffic, no better in effect, then
Sopho^les in Antigone. (...) Fumi vmbra.
the very shadow of smoke? that is, but a vanishing show, without any substance
at all. Is not this, to make men believe that we provided them very dainty
fine cates, howsoever most dearly bought; when yet (as is usually spoken) we
set only before them, Lucianus. (...) Sacrum sine fumo.
an holy sacrifice (forsooth) without any sweet smoke? that is, a poor
beggarly banquet, without either beef or browesse at all. Would we our own
selves (my reverend masters) be willingly feasted so at other men's tables.
Could we (at any hand) endure to pay so excessiuely dear for our suppers
before hand, and (when all comes to all) be then so conie catchingly fobbed
forth with such a vain show of fantastical fooleries: Can we be contented (I
pray you) that any one living person (upon any such our former most chargeable
payments) should promise us the gainefull purchase of golden mountains, and
then (for our substantial silver) procure only unto us but Martialis, Vend^e
fumos.
the deceiptfull sale of a most filthy vanishing fume? that is, should make us
many great and glorious promises, which notwithstanding are finally destitute
of their wished effects. Might we not (my worshipful brethren) for these our
insatiable Psalm. 59.14.15. Isa. 56.11.
and dog-like inordinate desires of greedy gain, be justly termed (not the
worshipful Merchant venturers) but rather those worrie-sheep mucke-scrape
Vespasian vipers, who (for filling their extraordinary gaping after greedy
gain) do make an ordinary sale (being spoken with reverence) of their most
filthy stinking stale? Yea and (which more vile is) when at any time their
godly minded Matrons, or their sanctified sons (with great anguish of heart,
and grief of mind) do but once seem to distaste or dislike of such kind of
sale, even then (most contemptuously)to proffer the most poysonsome stink of
that stinking gain to their sanctified noses, bidding them boldly to smell
thereof, and then tell him withal, whether that same silver (so gathered
together) does not yield as redolent a savor as any of the sweetest gold
couched up long since intheir Cabbinets made of spruce. By this means making
good upon their own paultrie pates the pestiferous Vespasian proverb; which
tells them plainly, that Vespasianus, Lucribonus est odor ex re qualibet.
the savor of insatiable gain (from what filthy matter soever the same
arises) does afford as fragrant a smell to those their insatiable and
hunger-sterued nostrils, as any the finest ciuet or musk. Thereby also
canonizing that heathenish Poet for a Preacher of truth; who Ennius, Vnde
habeat curat nemo, sed oportet habere.
tells them plainly thus: From whence it comes we never care:
So it may fall unto our share.


Perhaps your good worhips would willingly know the maine reason it self, why
those filthy mucke merchants should become such hungersterued Heluoes,
concerning Auri sacra fames.
the holy hunger of gold, such greedy gormandizers of filthy gain, yea and
such insatiable Philargyrians, in gathering treasures together: the reason
hereof (says Zenodor) is only this, namely, because Zenodorus, (...).
Mendicantium sacculi, semper inanes.
the needy beggars satchell can never be satisfied.

Now then, if we also our selves (my worshipful masters) should (in these our
seafaring courses) declare our selves to be such: were we not very well
worthy (even for this only respect) to be no less odiously esteemed of, and
therein also as deservedly (in all points) to be dealt withal, as was that
notable conie chatcher Thurinus, in the days of Alexander Seuerus? Who (being
sharply accused, and presently produced before the said Alexander, for that he
(remaining otherwise in no favor at all with his Majesty) did
notwithstanding, continually bear the silly poor subjects in hand that he
was all in all, and in excellent account with his Highness. By this base and
paltrie practice (under an only pretense of speaking for them to his Majesty)
he did very peeuishly pilfer much money from out of the poor men's purses.
Howbeit (so soon as that his said knauerie brake forth to the open view of the
world, and the same accordingly made known to the King) he was forthwith
adjudged to be surely made fast to a stake, and (having great store of green
wood then kindled about him) to be so smothered to death by the violent smoke
of that fire: The Executioner also then crying out to the bystanders and
saying thus; He Martialis dignus vt fumo pereat, qui fumos vendidit
is worthily adjudged to perish with smoke, who has so deceiptfully sold forth
his smoke unto others. And herein moreover that conie catching companion did
personally accomplish the old ancient Proverb which speaks thus: Lucianus
(...) F^mum fugiens, in fla^mam incidi.
By flying from smoke, I fell forthwith into the flame it self.

These the precedent matters being now more naturally, and more exactly
considered, with their several circumstances concurring also therewith, let us
in Gods name (my worshipful fathers and fellows) at no time hereafter after
give any further offense this way: but very conscionably and carefully (from
henceforth) carry our selves toward all sorts of people, 1 Cor. 10.32.
whether they be Jews, Gentiles, or the Churches of Christ. Let us heedfully 1 Thessalonians. 5.2^
abstain from all appearance of evil. So shall the Lord God Psalm. 128.1.2.
etc.
abundantly bless us: so shall the Kings Majesty Romans 13.4.
most powerfully protect us; so shall our dear countriemen 1 Timothy 2.1.2.
pray heartily for us; so shall not the land at any time hereafter Genesis 15.16.
vomit us forth for filthy Amorites; yea so shall we be sure to have Romans 12
18. Heb. 12.14.
peace in our conscience with God and men. Lo (Sir) this I assure you (if the
Lord God say amen to my purpose intended) shall be the whole and the only
course that I will take with these kind of men.


Hydr. Surely Capnistus, I do freely approve of this thy purposed course: yea
and I doubt not at all, but that so many of them also as have but one half
dram of Gods holy fear in their secret hearts, as have but one scruple of
true honesty in their open foreheads, yea as have but one only grain of
common humanity in their ordinary courses, will every of them very
conscionably, and most carefully account of the same. As for those insatiable
companions, of whom thou did speak even now, there is no hope at all to
prevail with any of them. For Ier. 13.23.
can the black More change his skin? or is it possible the Leopard should
after his spots? Then also may those men learn to do good, who have been
accustomed so long to do evil. Otherwise, howsoever Iere. 4.22.
they may be wise enough to do evil, yet to do well they have no wisdom
within them at all. But now show me what course thou will take with the rest.


Capn. The course I intend to take with them, shall be this. Having first made
thoroughly known to every of the^, this your present discourse, I will then
wish them withal, for very shame to remember themselves in time, to give over
all those their former carousing courses with speed; to forbear now any
longer to make such beastly swine of themselves, by swillings in so
superfluously the manifold blessings of God; to abandon all their former
unnatural dealings toward their own wives and children, toward their true
hearted Tenants, toward their honest poor neighbors, and natural country.
To take heed moreover, lest (in pursuing such a superfluous supply to their
insatiable gulling throats) they do not procure Amos. 4.6.
a cleanness of teeth throughout the whole kingdom; lest (in going about such
an unorderly augmentation of tillage) they Isa. 24.5.
do not cause the whole earth to deceive the dressers thereof; lest (by this
their inordinate swallowing down of their filthy Tobacco fumes) they do Isa.
24.9.
make their sweetest drinks to be mingled with Myrrh, and to have a most
bitter farewell to all the drinks thereof; lest (by procuring such a
needless havoc of wine, ale, and beer) they themselves Lam. 5.4.
be constrained to drink their own water for money; lest (instead of Isa.
5.12.
the harp, the violl, the timbrell, the pipe, and the wine at their
extraordinary wanton feasts) they be driven Ezech. 12.18
to eat their own bread with a trembling fear, and to drink their water
with trouble and carfulness; lest (for their former most filthy abuse of the
manifold blessings of God) the Lord himself Ezech. 5.16.
do shoot forth the arrows of famine among them, and break the staff of
their bread in pieces; lest (for this their abundance of victuals now) they
Ezech. 4.9.10.11.12.
be compelled to take wheat, barley, beans, lentils, millet, fitches, with
whatsoever else they can get in one vessel together, to make them their bread
thereof, according to the number of days wherein they must be feign to sleep
on their sides; yea and to bake their said bread in the dung of men, to eat it
by weight, and to drink their water by measure. Briefly, lest they be enforced
to hear a most horrible cry before, and behind them, saying thus: Joel. 1.5.
Awake you drunkards, weep and houle you quaffers of wine, because of the new
wine, for it shall finally be plucked away from your throats.

Whereas (on the other side) if they once soundly forsake their former most
filthy ways, and be heartily converted to God, he will then so exceedingly
Deuteronomy. 28.5^
bless their basket and store, as they shall not need thus disorderly to run
upon any such desperate and dangerous attempts for the augmentation of tillage.
Because, whenever they do conscionably sow that self same portion of tillage
which they have (at this present) in their own proper use, the Lord God of
hoasts will even then give such a bountiful blessing unto it, as they shall be
sure Genesis 26.12.
to find in one year an hundred fold more by due estimation. For the Lord he
will Joel. 2.23.
give them the early, and the latter rain, and Joel. 2.25.
render them the years that the grasshopper had eaten before. Yea their Joel.
3.24.
very barnes shall be filled with wheat, and their winepresses abound with
wine and with oil. And herein no marvel at all, because the Lord (in the day
of this their holy conversion) will hear Hosh. 2.21.22.
yea the Lord God of hosts will hear the heavens; and the heavens they will
hear the earth; and the earth, it will hear the corn, wine and oil; and the
corn, wine, and oil will hear the people; and the people shall Psalm. 65.13.
see the valleys stand so thick with corn, that they shall laugh and sing,
and say one to another, Behold how Psalm. 67.6.
the earth does yield her increase; and God, even our own God has given us
his blessing. Lo (Sir) this is all the whole course I will take with that sort
of men.


Hydr. This course (I confess) is very convenient, were they men capable of
it. But alas (Capnistus) the wisdom of the word is a matter over lofty for
such fantastical fools as do so insatiably affect their own inordinate
lusts: they may (by no possible means) attain to the height thereof. Not
because the words of wisdom are idly bestowed among any the sons of
mortal men, (for Pro. 1.7.
the fear of the Lord is the very beginning of wisdom) but for that all such
unregenerate fools do most disdainfully despite true wisdom it self, and all
holy instruction. Neither yet has the authentical sound of such sacred
knowledge been hitherto held back from any of them. For behold Pro. 1.22.23.
Ier. 7.23.
Wisdom her self has cried without, she has uttered her voice in the open
streets, she has called to them all in the public assemblies, yea even in the
very preasse of the people themselves, as also in the midst of the City has
she solemnly uttered her words, saying thus: Oh you foolish, how long will
you affect your own foolishness, and you scornful take such pleasure in
scorning? Oh turn you at my correction, for lo, I will now even power out my
mind unto you at large, and make you understand my words to the full. What (I
pray thee) might Wisdom do Isa. 5.4. Mich. 6.34.
more to the sons of men, then she has hitherto done unto every of them?
But what? behold Pr^. 1.27.
how obstinately they do despise all her counsels, and most scornfully set her
corrections at naught. Lo then, here is the only cause of their foolishness.


Capn. And why should not all these be as capable of heavenly wisdom, as
those other we spoke of a little before?


Hydr. Because they will Ierem. 7.24.
not obey nor incline their ear unto wisdom, but run headlong after the
counsels and stubburnnesse of their own wicked hearts, Ephesians. 2.2.
walking moreover according to the course of this sinful world, and after the
Prince that rules in the air, that wicked spirit (I mean) which even now
works effectually in all those children of disobedience: who Ephesians. 4.18.19
having their own cogitations even utterly darkened, and being mere strangers
from the gracious life of God (by reason of that inbred ignorance which is
naturally ingraffed in every of them) and being become without feeling, have
given themselves over to work all manner of uncleanness, even with an
insatiable kind of greediness. And therefore, as they have no regard at all
Romans 1.28.
to know God, so surely, the Lord (injustice) delivers them up unto reprobate
minds, to do such things as are not convenient: sending them withal 2 Thessalonians.
2.10.11.12.
very strong delusions to make them believe all manner of lies, because they
received not the truth: that thereupon, they all might justly be damned which
believe not the truth, but take an exceeding great pleasure in those their
unrighteous courses. Which their just recompense also even then shall justly
fall upon every of them. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.8.9.10.
when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels in
flaming fire, rendering due vengeance to so many of them as know not God, and
which obey not the Gospel: who shall be then punished with everlasting
perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his maiesticall
power. When notwithstanding he shall be eternally glorified in all his Saints,
and be made marvelous in every of them that believe: because our testimony
toward them, was so soundly believed in the day of their hoped salvation.


Capn. Well Sir, whatsoever be the success, I will earnestly endeavor to
speak plainly unto every of them, and (it may be) that many of them will
willingly hear me.


Hydr. It may be they will not: and more likey it is so, by a thousand fold.


Capn. Oh, I beseech you Sir, never say so, but hope the best: 1 Cor. 13.7.
for charity (you know) must not be suspicious.


Hydr. I know it very well Capnistus, and this I dare tell thee withal, that
charity (in like manner) it must not be foolish in grounding so firm a
persuasion of hope 1 Cor. 10.12.
upon so hopeless a ground as stands only on may bees.


Hydr. Why Sir, the word was purposely given, you know, for Act. 17.30.
the hoped, and happy conversion of sinful souls.


Hydr. Very true (as thou say,) although yet for the only conversion of
those poor sinful souls, whose effectual calling to grace was purposely and
eternally Romans 8.29.30 Ephesians. 1.9.13.
decreed of God, by the ordinary means of that self same word. For they
being Ephesians. 1.4. 2 Timothy 1.9.
before all beginnings the elected of God in Jesus Christ, were sure (in their
appointed time) to have their effectual calling to the true knowledge of God,
by the powerful n preaching of his holy Gospel. And therefore, even as all
they which are eternally elected, are sure (in time) to be effectually called:
so surely all such as have finally no calling at all, or but only a temporary
calling to grace, they cannot certainly conclude to themselves, any one
certain or grounded hope of their eternal election in Christ. Seeing
therefore the true saving faith is primarily 1 Pet. 1.20.
begot in the hearts of the heaters by the word of God preached, and must
secondarily 1 Pet. 2.1.2.
grow up and increase by that self same means it was first begotten, how is
it possible (think thou) that those men should ever be effectually called by
the ordinary preaching of Gods holy word Psalm. 58.45.
who cannot possibly be brought to the ordinary hearing thereof? since men must
necessarily Isa. 1.19.
give their willing consent to ye word, before they can be drawn to the
obedience thereof. Or when at any time (for fashions sake) they come to the
ordinary preaching of that self same word, if they then hear it only Ezech.
33.30.^1.32.
as a minstrels song, with their mouths make mockes at those preachers which
bring it, their profane hearts still pursuing their former inordinate
affections: what other thing else will befall them (think thou) but that
which the Prophet proclaims saying, Habak. 1.5. Act. 13.41.
Behold you despisers, and wonder, and vanish away, for I work a work in your
days, a work, which you will not believe, though a man should declare it unto
you?


Capn. Whether they hear, or not hear, fleare and floute, jeare or jibe, make
moes with their mouths or not, if God give me power, I will never forbear
them.


Hydr. Oh say not so Capnistus, for Christ tells thee Mat. 15.26.
it is not always good to tumble the childrens bread unto whelps: forbidding
thee moreover Math. 7.6.
to cast those thy precious pearls before beastly swine, and to hurl thy holy
things unto filthy dogs; because the swine they will tread those pearls in
the mire, and Ier. 20.7.8. Math. 7.6.
the dogs, they will turn again and tear thee in pieces. And howsoever those
scorners may show themselves holy a time, yet be thou assured of this, that the
dogs (first or last) will Pro. 26.11. 2 Pet. 2.22.
return to their vomire afresh, and the swine which seemed before to be washed
clean, to their wallowing again in the mire. And therefore, if (at any time)
they show themselves such, or if they will Revel. 22.11.
needs become filthy, let them be filthy still: assuring themselves that all
the while they be such they shall never have Revel. 22.14.15.
entrance through the gates into the celestial City, but be shut out among
dogs, enchanters, whoremongers, murderers, idolaters, and such as take a
delight in their lying. Although yet I doubt not at all, but that the ordinary
preaching of the glorious Gospel, shall Isa. 55.10.
accomplish that thing whereunto it was purposely sent of God: namely, it shall
either be a blessing or a Isa. 13.1.
burden; a word of Romans 1.16.
conversion, or a word of confusion; a 2 Cor. 2.15.16.
savor of life unto life, or a savor of death unto death: yea and in either
of both, the same shall be a sweet savor to God.


Capn. Why then (God willing) I will not cease crying unto them, that (whether
they hear or not) they may yet know Ezech. 2.5. and 33.33.
there has been a Prophet among them.


Hydr. Surely Capnistus, as thy resolution herein in exceeding honest, thy
purpose godly, and thy intended course correspondent to both: so I doubt not at
all but that (if thy practical proceeding be suitable in every respect)
exceeding much good may be wrought by the same. More especially, if thou (for
thine own part) do Christianly consider, that such as are but lately wained
from the milk, and newly drawn from the breast, must have Isa. 28.9.10.11.
precept upon precept, precept upon precept; line unto line, line unto line;
there a little, and there a little: yea and must also be spoken unto with a
stuttring tongue, and a stammering language. And then next, if they also (for
their parts) laying apart Iam. 1.20.21
all filthiness, and superfluity of maliciousness, do reverently,
chearefully, and in the spirit of meekness receive the word at thy mouth:
acknowledging withal, that those thy Psalm. 141.5.
friendly strokes are beneficial for them, and that thy precious balmes will
not break their heads. For the timely accomplishment whereof, both thy self,
and every of them shall be sure (from time to time) to have the hourly
assistance Ephesians. 1.16.17.
of my heartiest prayers to almighty God Ioh. 15.7.16.
in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ. In the mean time, the hour
appointed for mine ordinary studies, begins now to approach, and very loath I
am to let slip the same, unless upon very important and urgent occasions.


Capn. And in very deed (Sir) the time also, and the tide it self for my
former purposed voyage, does draw very near: so as I my self (for the
present) must even necessarily make have to the Psalm. 107.30.
haven, either to unlade, or forthwith to dispose of some other designement
concerning that ve^sell of mine, which already is full fraught for some
foreign adventure; and therefore must even now crave leave for my present
departure.


Hydr. With all my heart: beseeching the eternal God Est. 2.15. Judith. 10.8.
to give thee favor with foreign nations, and to make thy journey exceeding
prosperous to thee.


Capn. I Romans 1.8.
thank my God in Jesus Christ, for this your godly care for the good so my
soul: and I humbly beseech the Father of mercies to assist you from time to
time, with his holy Spirit of wisdom, for the public good of our Church and
country. And even so I most heartily take my leave for the present.


(...). Psalm. 119.168.

If in this my present Discourse, I do happily fail of any such delectable
speech or eloquence as might give good contentment to the Ciceronian and
delicate ears, I pray you pardon mine imperfections that way. For how should I
possibly deliver any dainty discourse of so noisome, so stinking and so
offensive a Subject, as is the poysonsome savor of filthy Tobacco fumes? In
the mean time, season your tastes, I beseech you, with this succeeding Sonet.

TOBACCO TORTVRED.
WHat does the foul contagious fume and smoke
Of this Tobacco (filthy stinking weed)
But senses all, and spirits lively choke,
And through ye members strange infection breed?
The moisture natural it does consume,
Wherein the treasure of the life is laid:
Which being lost, and wasted by this fume,
Thou then (of something) art just nothing made.
Thou then (of something) art just nothing made,
Thy wasted body straight is turned to dust:
And (dire contagion through thy limbs conuai'd)
Thy life to wrack and ruin, run needs must.
If thou desire to know, and cause demand
Why such strange monstrous maladies are rife?
The cause is plain, and reason is at hand;
Men like and love this smokie kind of life.
Men like and love this smokie kind of life,
Whereby does vanish into air most thin,
The vigor of the mind, and bodies chief
Strength; force and power also of life and limme.
This is the wel-spring of diseases all,
The tree which direful death does yield for fruit:
Whereby their loathsome limbs do quickly fall,
And run to ruin, clad in woeful suite.
This is the mortal foe which does assail
The members vigor, and the bodies power:
A Tyrant which most cruelly does hale
The vital breath (hearts handmaid) from her bower.
This is a Traitor, and does treason warke;
Brain clear and bright, with smokie mists polluting:
And with his color black, obscure and dark,
Throughout the body every part imbruing.
And (that it might more easily effect
The dire perdition of the heart and head,
The body with contagious rotte infect,
And through the members deadly poison spread:)
A Conduite pipe devised is by Art,
Whereby the smokie air might have a way.
Through the whole body, and through every part,
The dire destroying venime to convey.
And when the direful venime is conua'id
Through all the body, and through every part,
Then fainting life withal, does quickly fade,
Strength quite consumed, and vigor of the heart.
Let him therefore eschew pernicious draught
Of filthy, loathsome, vile infectious fume,
That does desire strength fresh, or has a thought
To keep his body sound and limbs in tune.
(...).
If neither m^ former Prose may persuade, nor my present meeter make glad your
mal-contented minds, I pray you then make your selves some sport about the
reading of my subsequent riddle, until my next arrival.

Read me a riddle, What is that,

That is Times greatest daunter, cause of idleness, Tobacco.
That is Old Alehouse haunter, friend to drunkenness, Tobacco.
That is Vile bewitching weed, healths huge consumer, Tobacco.
That is Wits most woeful speed, breaths foul perfumer, Tobacco.
That is Intrails foul blackness, bodies brave dier, Tobacco.
That is Dame Natures slacknesse, quenching her fire, Tobacco.
That is Wives, child's dysaster, Tenants contrition, Tobacco.
That is Wealths woeful waster, countries perdition, Tobacco.
That is Offense to many, bringing good to none, Tobacco.
That is Not loved of any, until it be gone. Tobacco.
Ioca, seriaque. (...).
Certain faults escaped in the printing, which are to be corrected as
follows.
Page 11. l. 32. read either. p. 38. l. 1. read, make good. p. 55. l. 25. put
out one of the words healths. p. 61. l. 4. read sharpsighted. p. 66. l. 10.
read manuary. p. 74. l. 7. read lip. p. 87. l. 5. read, shoemaker. p. 92.
lin. 31. read drudges. p. 116 l. 23. read respected. p. 137 l. 26. read Fie,
fie p. 149. l. 16. read I assure thee. p. ^62 l. 25. read life. p. 184. l.
14. read shipfuls. p. 186. l. 33. read maturely. p. 187. l. 36. read
swilling. p. 192. read and with.

Typographi Encomium.
Fieldus opus pressit; menda vacat iste Libellus:
Non nisi correctas imprimit ille notas.

