MICROCOSMOS. THE DISCOVERY OF THE LITTLE World, with the government thereof.

Manilius. An mirum est habitare Deum sub pectore nostro?
Exemplumque Dei quisque est sub imagine parua.
By JOHN DAVIES.

At Oxford, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold in Fleetestreete at
the sign of the Turks head by John Barnes. 1603.

TO MY MOST DEAR AND dread Sovereign JAMES by the grace of God King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, be all heavenly and earthly happiness.
THoughts, fight no more, but now (with Wits accord)
Yield al obedience to Arts rightest rule;
Then, like a constant treble-twisted cord,
Bind up the sweet'st affections of my Soul,
And, in a Poesy give them to, O no,
They are too base for such high Excellence!
Yet (prostrate) give them to him, and say so;
So, I may shun dislike, you, insolence:
Great (o too narrow is this name for thee)
King, (yet too strait a style for thy great worth)
And Monarch, (this with it does best agree)
Deigne to accept a Base, base Wit brought forth:
And base it is (great Highness) in each line,
Because indeed it is too rightly mine.
His Majesty's less then least, and most unworthy Subject: JOHN DAVIES.
To the sacred Queen of Englands most excellent Majesty.
IF those VVombs blessed be, from whom proceeds
A world of blessings to the World accursed;
Or if that gracious be, that Graces breeds,
To make Men gracious, being at the worst;
O then how blessed and gracious is thy Womb,
Dear Daughter, Sister, Wife unto a King!
Wherein Heaven wrought (as in a sacred room)
Strong Props of peace, which blessed Time forth did bring.
Unto a Mother-maide we all are bound,
For bringing forth our Souls preservatiue;
Who, for the same, is Queen in Heaven Crowned:
And, since thou bring'st our Corpse conservatiue,
We must crown thee in Earth, or else, we should
Do otherwise then Saints and Angels would.
Your Highness most humbly devoted Vassal. JOHN DAVIES.

The whole I Will of great Britain was of yore divided into 13. Kingdoms, as
by Monuments of antiquity, and History (the vvitnesses of time) appears. viz.

England into 8. namely, Kent, South Saxons, East Saxons, 8
West Saxons, Bernnicia, (alias Northumberland) Deira, (or Southumberland)
Est-Angles, Mercia.

Scotland into 2. viz. Scotts, and Picts; The Scotts 2
on the VVestside, the Picts on the East, called Pictla^d, as the other,
Scotland.

Wales into 3. viz. North Wales, Southwales, and 3
Povvys-land. Upon which Plaine-songe thus I descant.

AN Articke I Will there is (most famous) found
In the great Lavor of this lesser Round,
Which Neptunes hand (as most esteemd) infolds
And in his vnsweet-sweating bozome holds,
On whom at once, Heavens providence begat
Thirteen Kinges', which did her participate;
She fedd them sweetly, made them fat to grow;
For, from her Breast did Milk and Honey flow:
Who being pampred, so, ambitious made,
Against Nature began each other to invade:
She greatly griv'd, they quited so her love;
And ay to make them one, she often did prove:
But (froward) at the least, they would be Two,
So lived long (in strife) with much adoo:
Yet like a tender Mother (vexed to see
That her dear children could no better gree)
She labored night and day with Time, to do
That which she tried, but could not bring them to:
Who (both together joined) did them atone,
So, Time and she, (at last) have made them One.
Then if in One, Thirteen united be,
How great, how glorious, and how good is he?
JOHN DAVIES.
AENIGMA.
A Treble pair, does our late wrack repair,
And sextiplies our mirth, for one mishappe;
These six, as hopes, to keep us from despair,
(When clappes we feared) were sent us at a clappe:
That we might clapp our hands in his high praise,
That made us, by our Heads loss, much more fair,
And us beheaded, so, our Head to raise:
One headless, made all look as black as Hel^
All headless makes the Head and all look well.
SPHINX.
IF this a Riddle be, then so be it,
Yet Truth approues what therein hid does lie,
And Truth's most lovely in the Eye of Wit
When she is robbed with richest mystery:
In few, by loss we have got benefitt,
That Is, six for one, by lawful usury:
Then, if we gain by loss, our loss is gain;
So says France, Fla^ders, Scotland, Ireland, Spain.
To the judicious Reader.
THou see this great World ( Reader) and percha^ce
Thine Eye is cloid with often seeing it;
Then see the Less with noe less circumstance,
And with VVittes Eye, that Monarchy of VVitte. Microcosmos.

The Heavens and Earth, do make the greater World;
And Soul and Body, make the Less (we prove:)
The Heavens do move the Earth, and they are whirld
By Him, that makes the Soul, the Body move. Primus Moto.

Who conquers it (at least) are Monarchs great,
Greater then those that conquered the greater;
For, from their goodness Men their greatness get,
And they are best, that do subdue the better: Prover. 16 32.

The great World's good, but better is the least: Things living though never
so small, are better then liveles things, though never so great.

Then view it, to subdue it, thou were best.
JOHN DAVIS.
A Request to the City of Hereford.
Dear Mother, in whose Womb my vital flame
Was kindled first by the Almighties breath,
Lend me thy name, to add unto my name,
That one, with other, may keep both from death:
Unto thy conscience I (poor I) appeal,
Whether or no, I have deserved it;
My conscience tells me I have sought thy weal
With all my skill, my will, my worth, my wit.
Judge God, judge good men, judge my truth herein,
Impartial Judges you shall judge for me;
If so, my soul is seared, or I have bin
(Dear Mother) what I now would seem, to thee:
Ephesians. 6.1,2,3,4.
And do confess, though unkind Parents prove,
Yet are their children bound to seek their love.
John Davies of Hereford.
In Microcosmon IOH. DAVIS II Herefordiensis.
Quadrua vis animat Prud. in Psycho^

(...). Pyth.


EN tibi Pythagorae sacram diamque (...),
Almae Naturae scatebram fontemque perennem:
Cuius quis pandet mysteria? quisve profundos
Audebit timidogressu tentare recessus?
Meram. 2.
Audet Davisius nec magnis excidit ausis.
Non is Daedalea per coelum remigat ala,
Nec Phaetontaeo raptatus in aethera curru
Stellarum inspector stupet, aut Iovis atria lustrat:
Horat. lib. 2. Sat. 2.
In se conversus, Divinae particulam aurae
Non lippo aut lusco solers rimatur ocello.
(...) Epict.
Hunc lege quisquis aves Animani, tam nobile germen
Noscere, decerptum delibatumque supremi
Quod de mente Dei quisque hoc in corpore gestat.
Non te AEgyptiacus teneat tardetve character;
Clau. epig. 21.
Nulla Syracusij Senis art inventa morentur,
Suspensus coeli fornix and vitreus orbis:
(...) etc. Ho. (...). Iuv. Saty. 11.
AEdibus in proprijs quae recta aut prava gerantur
Inspicias, haustamque polo vigil excute mentem:
Coelitus emissum descendit (...).
IO. SANFORDVS.
Charissimo Iohanni Davisio Salutem.
OXoniae vates cum sis, Herefordia quare
Davisi, in titulo pristina scripta tuo?
Creed mihi, doctam non vrbem tale pigebit
Ingenium in numero nomen habere suo.
Charus and illius mihi nomine, charus and huius
Vrbis es: hinc arts ducimus, indegenus,
Charior at proprio mihi nomine: fas mihi suave
Ingenium, mores fas sit amare probos.
Ingenium moresque tuos redamem: illud and istos,
Plura mihi, cunctis hic lib^r ipse probat.
Robertus Burhillus Coll. C.C. Soc.
Liber Lectores alloquitur.
HEm! tu qui (leve paginas pererrans
Nostras pollice, and inquiete ocello)
Piscaris rabidum tibi venenum
Ex hoc fonticulo, scaturienti
Nisi Castaliae liquore, nullo;
Abito procul hinc: facessat is it hic
Ocelli male prurientis ardor.
Non nostris olidae natant papyris
Algae; nec levibus tume sco nugis
Molestanta, scelus Patre expiandum
Lemnio! hinc profugus Cupido: lirae,
Sordes, qui squiliae exulant, and omnis
Putredo, iuveni nocens legenti.
Quin tu, sobrie, docte, perspicacis
Cui luces Aquilae, altiusque acumen,
Cultor Virginis integer Patrimae;
Et tu, Montis amans biforme culmen
Chara progenies novem Dearum,
Adsis; and genium, meumque carmen
Expendas (rogo) strictiore lance
Tui iudicij sagacioris.
Non supercilium, striasve frontis
Declino tetric as minacioris:
Thaletem accipio; venito Brute,
Censorem volo te; severioris
Nec durum fugio Catonis vnguem.
Hoc est quod fugio; labor tanto,
Commentum peperisse mollicellum,
Veltricas, apinasve; queis, inepto
Ridendi moveatur a^sa vulgo.
N. Debillus.
In Libri Auctorem.
PHilosophi lauds, lauds meruere poetae;
Davisius vatem, philosophumque refert.
Ergo Parnassi lauro, lauroque Lycaei,
Philosopho, and vati cinge Britanne caput.
Nam quorum Pylios vnum dare postulat annos,
Haec effecta duo sedulus ille dedit.
MIrum in modum, Men did wonder-maze,
Which wonderment, this later work of thine
(Not by detracting from it) does deface.
How so? by giving out a greater shine:
The souls Horizon that made light whil-ere,
But this inlightens her whole Hemispheare.
Blessed be thou Sun from whence this light does spring
And blessed be this little World of light
By which who walks, perforce must be a King,
King of a little World, in Fortunes spite;
For force, and virtue, in the soul do sit,
And they do reign that ruled are by it.
The^ reign thou in Men's thoughts, thou thoughtful Soul,
Whilst thy rare Work among their Works shall reign;
For, it in passion, passion does control,
Then mighty is thy grace, thine Art, thy pain:
As thou for writing fair art most renownd,
So, writing thus, thou must be Laurel cround.
JOHN JAMES
Mihi charissimo Iohanni Dauisio Herefordiensi.
QVid petis nostrae leviora Musae
Fila, Davisi? fateor, Sorores
Tardus ignoro Ardalides. quid isthoc!
Me-ne lacessas?
Eia! nec factum been! mellilinguis
Te canat Maia genitus; Camoenae
Te canant diuae; ingeminentque cantus
Agmina vatum:
Cui bono? Maia genitus, Camoenae,
Agmina and vatum procul ite: mirum
In modum dio cecinit seipsum
Carmine vates.
Dij boni, talis titulus Poesi
Optimae quam conveniens! and isthic
Microcosmos- sed tamen acquiesco;
Ipse loquatur.
Desinas and tu steriles arare
(Me citando) arvos: niveum Libelli
Est scelus frontispicium lituris
Tinguere nostris.
T. R.
To the Author.
Man's soul (the Idea of our Makers mould)
Whiles it does harbor in this house of clay,
Is so ore-whelm'd with passions manifold,
Is so ore-throwne with Adams old decay:
That much like bastard Eagle, dim of sight,
It dares not take a view of Reasons light.
O then, redoubled thanks deserves thy Work,
Whose Verse Prometheus-like strives to inflame
That sacred Spark, which in our Souls does lurk,
Giving blind Reason eyes to see the same:
Davies, thine Art beyond our Art does reach,
For thou each Soul, soule-humbling Art do teach:
Thus Oxford Artists are obliged to thee,
Who, Stork-like building here a while thy Nest,
For Earthly Lodge do leave an heavenly fee,
Giving a Sword to kill that foe of Rest,
Fair learnings blott, which Scollers know to well,
I mean, Self-loue, which thy Self-Arte does quell.
DOVGLAS CASTILION.
Upon Master John Davies, Beginning his Discovery of the little World with a
Preface unto the most high and mighty Prince James the first King of England
etc.
SO, ere he dare adventure on the Maine,
The prudent Sailoure prostrate on the shore
Makes first his vows unto the Castor and Pollux.
swan-bred Twain,
And their aspect religiously implores:
So, ere unto the Ocean he sets-forth,
Who is this less Worlds great Discouerer,
He turns his eyes unto the hopeful North,
And viewes the Cynosure that shines there.
Auspicious Star, at whose divine arise
Earth did put of her saddest mask of Night,
Shine mildely on him, who beholdes thine Eyes,
As sole directors of his course aright.
So that the great world may the less world see
By that fair Light he borrowed first of thee.
Upon the Discovery of the little World By Master John Davies.
Go Drake of England, Christoph. Columb.
Dove of Italy,
Unfold what ever Neptunes arms infolde,
Travel the Earth (as Phoebus does the sky)
Till you begette new Worlds upon this old.
Would any wonders see, yet live at rest,
Nor hazard life upon a dangerous shelfe?
Behold, thou bear a World within thy breast,
Take ship at-home, and sail about thy self.
The ship wherein Sir Fr. Dra. compassed the World.
This Paper-Bark may be thy Golden-Hinde,
Davies the Drake and true discou'rer is,
The end, that thou-thy-selfe thy-selfe may find;
The prize and pleasure thine, the travel his:
See here displayed, as plain as knowledge can,
This little World, this wondrous I Will of Man.
Charles Fitz-Ieffry.
To the Reader.
BEyond the reach of vulgar intellect,
Inbred by Nature, but refined by Art,
Does wisdoms Heir this monument erect,
Grace't with what ere the Graces can impart.
Here, Wits not soild with looser blandishment.
The Subject pure, abstruse, and worthy pain,
Annatomizing civil government,
And, of the Soul what Reason can attain.
The many sweetes herein contained be,
Epitomized, would ask too large Narration
To be comprised within this narrow station.
Read then the Work: when, if thou can not see
Th'infolded flame; be rapt with admiration,
But censure not: for, Owls have bleared eyes,
Dazzled with every Star that does arise.
To the Book as it is dedicated unto his most excellent Majesty.
Thrice happy Issue, brain-begotten Birth,
Wits pure Extraction, life of Poesy,
Together borne with Englands endless mirth;
How have the Heavens grace't thy nativity!
Wast from disdain to power th'ambrosian dew
(Dropping like Nectar from a sacred quill)
Into the common Lavour, vulgar view;
That Heaven deferd thy birth these hours until?
O blessed Book, reserved to kiss that hand,
From which, desert nere parted discontent!
Go, pay thy vows; await his dread command
To whom in prostrate duty thou art sent.
Shall He say, live? fly Time; swell Lethe lake;
Burst fell Detraction; thou live: and when
A thousand Ages dust shall over-rake,
Thy living Lines shall please both God, and men:
For, grace't by him, whom swift intelligence
Has made Arch-Master of each excellence,
It needs must follow, that succeeding days
Cannot detract from what he dain'd to praise.
Nicholas Deeble.
Ad Lectorem de libro.
Benign lector, parvuli orbis incola,
Qui coeca falsi transfretans mundi vada,
Dirigere recto tramite exoptas ratem,
Istum libellum vt Nauticum Indicem sequens;
Fugies Ceraunia saxa, Syrenas leves,
Fugies trucem Carybdin, and Syrtes vagas.
Vide Teipsum, and in spice omnes angulos;
Quisquis seipsum non videt, cernit Nihil.
Noscito Teipsum, cordis explorans sinus;
Quisquis seipsum nescit, hic novit Nihil.
Cura teipsum, vt proprij medicus mali;
Quisquis seipsum negligit, curat Nihil.
Vides teipsum modo Animam inspicias tuam.
Curas teipsum modo Animam sanes tuam.
Nathanael Tomkins.
TO praise thee, being what I am to thee,
Were (in effect) to dispraise thee, and me:
For, who does praise himself, deserves dispraise;
Thou art my self, then thee I may not praise:
But this, in Nature, may I say by Art,
Thine Art, by Nature, makes thee what thou art.
Your loving Brother and worst part of your self Richard Dauies
A Preface in honor and devotion unto our most puissant, and no less
roially-accomplished Sovereign, James by the grace of God King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc.
THou blessed I Will, Albio^.
white Mark for Envies aim,
(If Envy aims at most felicity)
Triumph, since now thou may by justice claim
Precedence in the UNIVERSITY,
Wherein best Isles do strive for mastery:
Now, shall thou be great MODERATOR made
In each Dispute, that tendes to EMPERY,
So that AMBITION shall no deeper wade,
Then thy DECREES in judgment shall persuade.
Now Grand-dame ALBION, in thy grandeur think,
Think seriously upon each circumstance
(Since late thou were at Pit of Perils Brincke)
That may make thee (though old] as young to dance,
Moved by sweet strains of more sweet Concordance:
But stay (dear Mother) o I do thee wrong
To putt thee in thy Muses; now advance
Thy voice, in Praise to whom it does belong,
GOD, and thy KING, that made thee, fainting, strong.
My son love the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are seditious
Prover. 24.21.
Thy God, and King, King given thee of GOD
To make thee love thy Go^, and like thy King;
And so gave thee a Royal, for a Rod,
To punish thee with what does comfort bring,
And make thee richer by his chastening.
He came by no Killing this, or that Cousin; that, or this Competitor.
Meanders of Man's blood
Unto our Land; but with a sure slow winge
He ^lew far from it, and did leave that Flud
On the left hand, for those that Right with-stoode.
Though homebred hearts may harbor strange desires,
Nere-pleas'd Perverseness, yet, must needs confess
He to this Crown, by double right, aspires,
Blood, and Bequest; say, Male-contentednesse,
(If thou do live, but I hope nothing less)
Is It true, or no? I see Shame holds thy tongue
From such denial; then, for shame, express
Thy love to right, and do thy Liege no wrong,
But say, long may our Crown to him and his belong.
His precious Veins do flow with our deer'st blood;
2. Sam. 5.1.
Bone of our bones, Flesh of our Flesh, is he:
If he by us, then, should have been withstoode,
We had withstoode our selves; and cursed be
The hand that with the head does disagree.
Beyond his birth, he was a King, in right,
And borne to bear rule, in the highest degree,
Whose hand and head endowed are with might
Scepters and Crowns to weld, and wear aright.
And give we her, her due, that now is gone,
Who had in her a World of Princely Parts:
Yet she has left her World, and Worth to one
That's Master of himself, and of the Arts
Which Art, and Nature, but to Kings impartes:
And as this Queen was often from death preserved
When in his laws he had got all her partes^
So was this King from like distress conserved,
And both (no doubt) for Englands life reserved.
And right well worthy of the Crown is he,
Were it more dear then Caesar's Diadem
(When envious World did him her Monarch see)
That never did molest our Queen, and Reame,
That might with blood, for blood, have made it streame^
That God that tenders all that tender blood
Bless him and his for it, and make his Stem
Yield many Branches, that may ever bud,
And bring sweet fruit, for Scottish-Englands good.
Much Blood, though drawn from Heavens unholy fo^s,
Seems irksome (if not loathsome) to their sight:
For, when just David thought their Arc t'inclose
Within a Temple, with all glory dight,
(Which he (in zeal) meant to erect outright)
He was forbad by Heavens most holy One
For making B^oud to flow (though in their right)
And that Task put on peaceful Solomon: ^. Sam. 7.2.13.

Then peaceful be thy Reign (dear Lord) alone ^. Sam. 7.2.13.

To build the Temple of true Union. ^. Sam. 7.2.13.

But, though our Blood were thus dear in thine Eyes
(More dear then Gold, although a double Crown)
Yet did our fear thy E: A:
Love with care surprise
And bee'ng our own, we used it as our own;
For, safe we kept it, as to thee its known:
We loved thee so, as still we feared thy power,
For, if a wren from us to thee had flowne,
We (as supposing that he meant to tower)
Would keep him safe, for love and fear, in Tower.
Dear King, drade Sov'raigne, sacred Majesty,
And what style else, a mortal state may bear,
We, truly English, do but live to die
For thee, for that thou (stirred) did not steer
Thy power against our peace; but did indeere
Us to thee, by thy peerless patience shown,
True token of thy loue-begotten care
Of us and ours; as if that love alone
Had held our loss of blood (as it is) thine own.
Had not our bloods been precious in thine Eye,
Thou might (perhaps) have made us buy it dear
Or made thee heir apparent publicly,
As Justice would; but cro^t by private fear:
Stories swarm with Examples, far, and near,
That many further off, and of less force
To catch at Crowns, would heirs thereto appear,
Or pull of Crowns and heads of them perforce,
That, wearing Crowns, crossed their unblessed course.
But thou (to thy true glory be it said)
Though having hands of power to reach a Crown
Thou did thy self contain, and praid, and staid,
Till now in peace thou haste it for thine own;
And still may thee and thine by it be known:
That Scots, and English, no more may be two,
But made, by true-loues artlesse Art, all one,
As Nature has made us, and Contry too,
Both which to unity us both do woo.
So neighbor Nations seeing our concent
Shall stand in awe of our united powr's;
And (of our friendship glad) shall us present
With precious gifts, and all that love alures;
So all, as friends, while friends we are, is ours:
And may he be a terror made to all,
That twixt us the least discontent procures;
And as a Monster most unnatural,
Let odious be his damned memorial.
If we, when we were but half, what we are,
And had a woman to our sovereign,
Were able all foes at their doors to dare,
What may we do, when over us does reign
A kingly King, and one Realm made of twain?
If ever therefore twixt our Fathers were
(That now are rakt in dust) cause to complain,
Let it be rakt with them, for we are clear
From wronging each, and each to other dear.
Both subject to one Sovereign, then draw we
Together kindly in subiections Yoke;
God, and our King will joy, if we agree,
But greive, if we each other shall provoke,
And make us feel their wrathes resistlesse stroke:
Then dwell in our hearts, for joys cordial
(Which nothing but your sorrows can revoke)
Have made them large enough to hold you all,
Prove. 27.19.
And lend us yours, to do the like withal.
Call for them when ye will, they shall be yours,
Together with the Tena^nts harbred there:
But take our hearts, for now they are not ours,
But yours for ever, let us then end ere
Us to you ever, who are to us dear:
My voice, though base, to highest Concord tends,
Then it is in tune (I trust) to every Ear:
If it be harsh, my heart shall make amends,
For it does relish Love which nere offends.
Then weigh our Prince (our Peace) with Uprightness,
And press him to no more then that will way.
For, (if not too perverse) we must confess
Our best requests sometimes may have a nay We may not ask God why he
(sometimes) denies our requests; but because he is as good, as wise, suppose it
is for the best: no more ought we a wise and good King, etc.

For better ends; which he may not bewray:
It is no ease for one two friends to please
When both, perhapps, do but for one thing pray:
Then die, o die ere once him so displease,
As to urge that, that may his heart disease.
O that I had a Soule-enchanting Tongue,
That with an Eare-bewitching violence
I might persuade to all that does belong
To perfect Love, and true obedience;
Since our felicity must flow from thence:
If so it be, then naught the Will can move
To love, if objects of such excellence
cannot allure the Mind and Will to love,
As the felicity which now we prove.
Our King comes not to our late barren Crown
Himself alone, but brings a fruitful Queen,
And ( Englands comfortes) children of their own,
By which the state ay stablisht may be seen;
Then blessed are we, if ere we blessed have been:
O let us then bless him whose blessedness
Has (when our sins expected sorrows keen)
Preserved us both from wars, and wretchedness.
And let us love, in Soul, and singleness.
Give us your Daughters, and take ours in marage,
That, Bloods so mixte, may make one flesh, and blood;
We will not yours, then do not ours disparage,
But balance all by worth, and Liuely-hood,
By Virtue, Beauty, and what ere is good:
Each bend his wits, and all his industry,
To make all one in body, mind, and mood:
Then God will bless all, bent to unity,
And plunge us all, in all felicity.
If Concord makes of weak, most mighty things,
And Discord of most mighty, things most frail;
If subjects peace, and glory be the Kings,
And their Disgrace, and strife his dis^vaile;
Then o let my weak words strongly prevail
To strongest peace, (that makes weak'st weakness strong)
Then, naught shall dare our daring peace t'assaile,
^ccl. 4.9.
But we shall right the oppressed Neighbors wrong,
And make them hold their own, as we do, long.
As when a humane-flesh-fedd Caniball
Has singled out some weakling, for a Pray,
And by the power of some Knight (armed all),
Is sker'd (at point to feed) with skath away:
So from the oppressed, we shall oppressors fray;
And be as Gods Liuetenants, here belo,
To see his highest justice done each way,
Prove. 24.11.
That Heaven by us may make the Earth to kno
We are Heaven- help, to help all wronged so.
Whiles Mine, and Thine, did disvnite our Crowns
(Two things for which, the Sire and son will jar)
There was some cause, sometimes, of secret frowns,
That ended too too often with open war;
But now both We, and They united are;
And, surely to sustain that double Crown,
Five Proppes we have, ( Ambition so to bar)
Made of each others substance, so, our own,
Then what remains but still to love, as One.
The Lion to the Dragon's reconciled,
That whilome did upon each other feed;
Jerusalem has David (erst exild)
Free denized, and King proclaimed with speed;
Whose Members dance for joy of that just deed^: ^. Sam. 6.14.

Her King is now, according to his Heart
Which, with, save goodness, nothing is agreed^
He is a King in all, and in earth part,
By blood (without blood) Nature, Mind, and Art.
Fortune that crossed the will, and work of Nature
For many years, has now made her amends
By making us, (as we are) one, in nature,
And of unfaithful foes, most faithful friends:
That Hand on whose direction all depends
(Disposing Crowns and Kingdoms as it lists)
Has made us one, I hope, for endless ends:
Then cursed be he that Heaven herein resists;
And blessed be him that it therein assists.
And, though I be no Seer, yet let me
(Out of my dark foresight in things future)
Speak like a Seer, that can snch things see
That may be seen without the seeing power,
And their like, seen of blind men every howr:
If sin cross not the course of Heaven herein,
Our Land (that flows with Honey, Milk, and Flower)
Shall be an Earthly Paradise, wherein
Plenty, and Peace shall woo from, and to sin.
But Plenty, like an Eaue-enticing Snake,
Shall tempt us with the Eye-delighting fruit
Of all voluptuousnes, which if we take,
There is a power that can our fortunes suit
With Adams, when he Ead^^ was cast out;
And, with stil-sweating sorrow-furrowed Brows,
To live, or beg, or starve if we be mute:
For naught has root so fast, or gaily grows,
But Hea^^n^ least puff extirpes, and overthrowes.
O it is perfection next to that of Gods,
When Men are compast with all sensual sweetes,
Then, then, to make the Will to know the odds
Betwixt that sweet that lasts, and this that fleetes,
And so restrain hearts joy when pleasure greetes:
An abject Slave will glutt his greedy Maw
A noble and good heart will have consideration of his meat and diet. Eccl.
30.25.
With what so ere his Sense with sweet regreetes,
If he can snatch it, but great Minds withdraw
Their Wills from such base bliss, by Glories law.
A Bear will break her Belly, if she may,
So hoony be the mean to do the deed:
And so will Men-beares do, as well as they,
If they catch hoonied sweetes, themselves to feed;
Who make it their Minds labor only meede:
Basse humane Beasts, how senseless is your ^ense
That will against sense and Reason so exceed!
Base is your mind, worse your intelligence,
Odious to God, and unto Men offense.
Eccl. 10.17.
If Lands are said to flourish, and rejoice
Under new Kings, though often worse then the old,
How may this Land, as if she had made choice
Of her Liege Lord, (that now the same does hold)
For virtue only, joy him to infold!
If Souls extreme joy makes the Body dance,
(VVittnesse sweet Psalmist) then, dear Liege, behold
Thy subjects iesture at thine entrance,
And be assured they besse this blessed chance.
And see how Virtue pulls to, and putts fro,
Note Simil.
Like to the Lodestone whose North-point attracts
And South-point putts off, what the North pulls to:
So thou ( North-point) by right and virtuous Acts
Do draw our Crown, and us to thee contracts:
And those, South from thee (that in show might draw)
By Virtue moved (as loathing bloody facts)
Put off the Crown, (before their head it saw,)
To thee, whose virtue breeds their love and awe.
See, see how Mother Natures total Body
Does (as inspired with a second Soul)
Exult to see thee wear the Crown unbloody!
See how the Orbs of Heaven do slowly roll
To slack Times course, which they for thee control!
The host of stars, with Sol their sovereign,
Fight, all aspects malicious to ore-rule:
The Elements renew their force again,
To bless with plenty, thy thrice-blessed reign.
Our Fields, are clad in three-pil'd Green in Grain,
(Three pil'd for thickness that none sees the Ground:
In Corn.
Grain which no Land can (for goodness) stain;
Like joyful Summer- Queens, they thus are gound
To see their King (by whom they flourish) cround:
Who will for thee such larges throw about
(With open hand) that Beggars shall abound
With fill of Bread; yea all the land throughout
Shall glut her Children with Milk, Flower, and Fruit.
Behold our Herds crowning our gorgeous Downs Psalm. 144. 13

With Diadems of rich and rarest Wool!
See how the virgin Lambs, in milke-white Gowns, Pro. 27. 26.

Do skip for joy (whereof their hearts are full!)
No Beast, nay not the Ass (though nere so dull)
But in his voice (though vnarticulate)
Salutes these times, and up their spirits pull:
So, Airie, and Watrie Flocks congratulate
Thy fortune blessed, to stay this sincking state.
No Beast is backward in this common joy,
But the slow Ox; and he with open Throat
Complains, for that Men will him now employ
More then before; yet tunes a doubtful Note
That none may him directly grieved note:
For, he (though nere so blunt of wit and sprite)
Cannot but know (except he can but dote)
That his whole Tribe might have been bucherd quight
To feed huge Hosts, if thou had not thy right.
Our Hounds and Hawks, with Spaniels them among,
Together drue their Heads, so to decree
(With Triumph such as to them does belong)
How the one should run, and cry, the other flea
To sport their King, for their Sportes libertee.
They feared their game had been expired quight,
And that their own decay they soon should see;
For no flesh comes amiss t'a hungry wight
The person that is full despises an hony-combe but unto the hungry Souls (as
hunger-bitte^ Soldiers) every bitter thing is sweet. Prove. 27.7.
That hunts for Flesh for need, not for delight.
The Rivers, dallying with their beauteous Banckes
With voice of comfort, whisper in their Ears
That Swans shall deck them now, not Soldiers Rancks^
Swans, whose sweet Songs, shall banish cares and fears,
And both ioy-drown'd do interchange sweet Tears:
Each silver Prill gliding on golden Sand
Transmuted so, by these new golden years,
Oreflowne with joy, does laugh upon the Land;
Which as with bliss entraunct, amazed does stand.
The senseless Trees, with sense of joy past Joy,
Send, through their Buff-skyn Barks, their juice in Tears;
Which ere they fall, blithe Nature does employ
In Buds, and Blossoms, so that each appears
Smiling on all, and Roabes of Triumph wears:
So, all do weep and laugh, and laughing weep
That earth (the Jade of Elementals) bears;
And as an holy day, this year does keep,
Drowned in a Sea of hoonied pleasures deep.
The Seasons of the year in council sat,
Which of the fow'r thee first should entertain;
Who all decreed the Spring (as chief in state)
Should welcome in thy coming hereto reign,
And deck our Triumphs for our Sovereign.
Among the Months, March was thereto assigned
Yet he refused, till he his puffes restrained,
And having spent his spite, to wit, his wind,
I^ fine, he welcomes thee in mildest kind.
The Day, and Night, straue then for greatest might
When thou should come this Isl^ of Isles to sway;
So greed, there should be as much Day, as Night,
The Day to triumph in, the Night to play
With Heavenly Visions, which sweet sleeps bewray.
Neptune now hugs his Darlinge in his Arms,
(This Queen of Isles) lest that his Tridents sway
Should be made subject to her Sceptred Arms,
So, flat^'ring, seeks to shun his feared harms.
Her Eyes, (witness mine Eyes) lights of the Land
Oxford, and Cambridge, distilled joyful Tears,
With cries among, for lo, the Doctors stand
(Pressed with the Press) filling the Worlds wide Ears
With showts of joy, that fainted late with fears;
Up go their Caps; so Gravity for joy
Does light become, and Age like Youth appears,
Which doubled mirth to see Eld play the Boy
And with Cap tossed, till lost, to sport and toy.
Look in the studies of the young, and old,
Their wonted studies we shall changed see,
For now the Muse their heads (dear hearts) does hold,
The while their hands are making lines agree
To meat their joy, that cannot measured be:
Happy is he that can light on one line
That may express (and kiss it for a fee)
The thousandth part of what his heart does line,
Namely that joy, that no name can define.
Some bend their brows, and wroth with their conceit
Do scratch their Cogitations The fore part of the Scull.
hardest Hold
For having no Worths in their rude Receipt
VVorth the bestowing, though the worst be gold;
WVhich is but Dross, compared with what they would:
Some other write and blot, and blotting write,
So thoughts in Blots infolded, thoughts unfold;
Bewraying so the Worlds of their delight,
Is more then Worlds of thoughts can well recite^
And he that best discharges his Souls charge,
Does it displeasingly, with much a do,
As when rare Preachers whith a blessing large,
Discharge their hearers, thronging out they go
That at the Gate they stick, and stumble too:
(When some by maine force from their fellows break)
So, thoughts in them, so one another woo
To be out first, and so the same do seek,
That in the Portall of the mind they steeke.
And those that break out, come but stumbling ou^
Nay, cannot stand, without some others stay:
So, one each other stay in stumbling doubt,
And yet no one can well his doubts bewray,
For doubt he does, say what his friend can say:
He doubts his Lines may be (for Love or hate)
Led to his Liege, that can all faults display;
He doubts their worth, and (careful) doubts their fat^,
So Doubts distress his thoughts, oppress his Pat^.
Learning and Virtue, that did hang the Head,
As if they had received their doom of death,
or had bin in a Dream, or rather dead
With their kind Nurse dear Queen Elizabeth
(Who did the^, with her Crown, to thee bequeath)
Lo, on the sudden how they look aloft,
Being revived (at point to render breath)
And with the Muses tread the Measures often,
Meating their joy with feet high-falling soft.
The Brain bredd Godesses, poor forlorn Crew
That still she feeds, which some^ call broken- Brains,
Some Poets, and some fellows fangled new,
Some Rimers base (that all the World disdaines)
And other some, Men's plagues, (but they are swains)
These being well^neere out of heart before,
Each to his fellow joy unfeigned faines,
Because they likely were to Be no more
For being but (poor Souls) the Worlds Ey-sore.
But when they heard with cheerful Trumpetts clange
Thy peaceful name proclaimed, as Englands king,
They skipt and daunc't, and Heavenly Hymns they sange,
That Angels did admire their Carrolling,
Which made both Heaven and Earth with joy to ring:
Each now retakes his late abandoned Pen,
And Night, and Day they plie it, pestering
Thy Name with Fame, thy fame with more then Me^
May bear, if they be not remade again.
And who has held their Pens from blott of blam^
And ever kept their Muse immaculate,
Their conscience now takes comfort in the same^
As if some God were come, (that Vice does hate)
With Grace their virtue to remunerate:
As when the King of Kings shall come at last
To give all Men their meede, in righteous rate,
The good alone rejoice in their lives past:
So perfect Po^ts now must comfort taste.
Now, their clear Souls (free from distemp'ratur^
That constantly ensues unconstant Vice)
Do ( Angell-holpe) draw Lines divinely pure,
T'expres^e their Souls prais-worthy avarice
To draw their King to read their Subject twice:
They melt in Nectar of Phrase most refin'de,
That may the Palate of the Soul entice
To taste and retast (in a greedy kind)
The Sweetes there mixed to recreate the Mind.
Healths, now go round among the rude, and Civil,
The Earths best blood, (that bettereth our blood)
Is sucked each where, and he esteemed a divill
That will not drink (to show his merry mood)
A little more (perhapps) then does him good:
If Wine were made to gladd the heart of Man Psalm. 104. 1^. Eccl. 31.28.

(Although our gladness needs no wyny floudd)
Then now, or never, troule about the Cann,
Till sober mood cries hoe, and no more can.
When the righteous are in auctority the people rejoice: but when the wicked
bear rule, the people sigh. Prover. 29 2.
A time there is for all things under Sunn^,
A time for mirth, as well as to be sadd,
The time for mirth is now, even now begun,
Now wisest men with mirth do seem stark madd,
And cannot choose their hearts are all so gladd.
Then let us be merry in our God, and King
That made us merry, being ill bestadd;
South^hampton up thy cappe to Heaven fling
And on the Psalm. 144. 9.
Violl there sweet praises sing,
For he is come that grace to all does bring.
If thou did faul^, (judge Heaven, for I will spare thee,
Because my faults are more then can be cast)
It did to greater glory but prepare thee,
Since greater virtue now thereby thou have.
Ps. 119.67.71.
Before our troubles we seem goodness past.
But cold Afflictions water cooles the heat
Which Youth, and Greatness often too much does wast;
And Queens are coy, and cannot brook the sweat
That such heat causes for it seems unsweet.
But yet thy worth does wrest from what soere
thereto opposd, by unseen violence
Acknowledgment of what in thee is dear
That is, the glory of much excellence
God and King.
Fit for the use of highest pre-eminence:
The World is in the wane, and worthy Me^
Have not therein in each place residence:
Such as are worthy should be cherisht then,
And being overthrown raisd up again.
Pembrooke to Court (to which thou were made strange)
Go, do thine homage to thy Sovereign,
Weep, and rejoice, for this sadd-ioyfull Change;
Then weep for joy, thou needst not tears to feign,
Since late rhine Eyes did naught else entertain:
If I mistake thee not, and thy best part,
Thy virtues will thy Lieges favor gain:
For, Virtue, virtue loves, as Art does Art;
Then will he love thee ( Lord) for thy desart^
Thy Sire and Grand-sire, were two mighty Peers
That were strong trusty Pillars of this State:
Thou have what they had, thy want is but years;
Yet Art in thee does Time anticipat,
And maks thee being young, in old estate:
For lo, thy Judgments, iointes are strongly knitt
And in Arts Limbecke, thy all-learned Pate,
VVisdome extracts the Quintessence of VVit^
To make the same for hie employment fit.
Hold up your hartlesse Heads, and headless Hearts
All ye whom Time and Fortune did suppress;
He Is come, he is come, that Life half dead reverts,
Dear little Lord, great in too great distress,
(With smoothed front) go kiss thy happiness.
Ladies, and Lords, purse-pinched, and Soule-pain'd,
Poor, Rich and all (rich in all blessedness)
Bles^e him by whom ye have till now remained
To taste these Times which yield sweet joys unfeigned.
High humbled Lady, high though humbled,
High by thy virtue, humbled by thy Cross
By Fortune lift up, and down tumbled,
Two (o speak World) had ere one such a loss
As she had of two Pheares, who did engrosse
The richest VVares that Art and Nature sold,
Yet Fortune in their fines was over-crosse,
For both untimely she returned to Mould
Yet, Lady, new be cast in Comforts Mold.
Ye seemly Senators that God do fear
Virtues true Lovers, Bloud-detesting Sages,
Peace and Rights friends, (as now does well appear)
Load-starrs to this, Lights to the after Ages
Rejoice you may, for, your well-erned Wages
(Earned of your late Mistress) he will pay
That Is now your Master; The^ with harmeles rages
Of zeal infam'd exult, and with us say
Blessed be King James, our King, our Joy, our Stay.
Mo^^t-ioy, let joy now mount as high as Heaven,
For now thy (long-left) land is Heaven become:
Come; come away, the Foe to slight is driven,
Hasten thy coming, hie, o hie thee home
That joy (though naught else ca^) may thee overcome:
Muses dear love, Mecaenas to their loves,
Thy King unto this kingdom now is come,
And like the sun in our new Heaven moves
To comfort thee and all that glory loves.
If we that still live here do Heaven it hold,
What will thou think it with that Hell co^par'd
Where yet thou liv'st, among deaths manifold,
(Which for our safety thou have long endured?)
Thou sure wilt think no Angel now does ward
The Esterne Eden, placed now in the North,
But, Scots and English men, the same do guard
And therein live; then come Heroicke Worth,
Attend thy Liege till he resends thee forth.
Meeke-harted Worcester friend of Humanity^
Hono^'d for honesty, so rightly honored;
Gods white-guif^ Whiteguif^^ glory of Prelacy;
Buckhurst our Treaso^er, roially treasured
With richest Rules of Rule: Egerton famouzed
For love to equity: chief Iust^ce of the land
Bold Popham resolute, for thy friend, for thy Head;
Strive, strive, o strive to make fast Peaces Band,
That you (obeying) may in peace command;
So you by it, and it by you may stand.
Great hearted Heroes, great Northumberland
Furnished withal that may make great a Peer;
And Tethys true- love ventrous Cumberland;
Together with the rest to England dear
Dear Peers let now your peereles^e joy appeere^
Go Lords, go meet your sans-Peere Sovereign;
And tell him ye are his while he is here,
And when he leaves the Earth for heavenly reign
You and yours will be his, whiles they remain.
Thou lively Image of our Worlds perfection,
Ou^ little Worlds great Paragon of fame, Sir Phil. Sid^.

Both taking being (by the Heavens direction)
In one selfe^ womb, that both should be the same
In Spirit, in virtue, nature, and in name;
This World begins to cotton now for thee,
For whom the World, sometimes, was much to blame:
Virtue, dear Sidney, Sir R. Sidney.
now advaunc'd shall be
Since Virtue knows no partialitee.
Thou virgin Knight that do thy self obscure
From Worlds unequal eyes, and feign would die
Er' thy name should be known to Worlds impure, Sir Ed. Die.

Now show thy self, thou can not hidden lie
From our new^ Worlds desert^out-searching Eye.
Great Sidneies love (true proof of thy great worth)
Live now, for now thou may not living die;
Virtue must use thee, then ( Dyer Knight) come forth
To hail thy virtues Loadstarre from the North.
And Albions Scaeva, whose crosse-wounded Corse
Like to an imbalmed dead-Corpse in aspect
Twenty times dead, yet still have vital force,
And so do cousin death, through deaths defect,
Yet scornst, nay hat'st thy life, in Fames respect: Sir Ed. Wingfield.

Up with thy Coat of Steel, its time for thee,
No foe is now in field, and in effect
Thy Veins are dry, thine eyes do dimmely see,
Then joy in peace, with life at last agree.
Great Majesty, last let the least, of all
Thy Subjects least, send from his heart a sign
Of that it holds and whiles it is, it shall; The light of the kings
cou^tena^ce is life: and his favor is as a cloud of the later rain, Prover.
16.15.

That is, that love thou only mai'st define
By that unbounded love (to us) of thine!
I hail thee happy Sov'raigne from a far,
Unworthy to approach thy view of Eine,
Saying blessed be him that blessed thee from war,
To be our peace, in whom we blessed are.
And be thine own, though others praise come short
O sacred Sovereign Soul of Englandes joy,
Let matchless virtues, Virtues praise report,
Which thou alone do questionless enjoy:
The Vulgars lauds thine Ears do naught but cloy,
The Concaue of a Crown may cause that wind,
Which froward Fates have power to destroy:
But that pure praise that is due to thy pure Mind,
From Fates is freed being of immortal kind.
Well wott'st thou Princes lives have much more force
Then purest Laws, their Subjects to refine;
For, Subjects follow still their Sov'raignes course,
As, Sunne-like Marigolds do Sol divine,
Who lose their grace when he does cease to shine:
This makes thee shun, what may eclipse thy light,
Because thou lead'st all by that light of thine,
And striv'st to glitter in all virtue bright,
That all might have thereby direction right.
Though at thy beck be all sons-pleasing sweetes,
Yet art thou pleased with what thy sense contains,
In Straightes where Abstinence with Reason meets,
Which headstrong Appetite ( Synne-spurred) reigns,
And binds thy Passions in Soule-staying chains.
Thus Reason strictly rules thee, we see,
Which over thee (as thou raign'st ore us) reigns:
If Reason thou obai'st, much more should we,
That are borne to obey Reason, and thee.
How came I with thee to be so acquainted
That so I should discribe each part of thee?
Thy Book wherein so lively thou art painted
(Dear Liege) I once (ioy-ravished) did see,
For which I shall, till death the better be:
Then saw I thee, and then I heard thy Words
Which with Gods, and thy glory, did agree,
And Charity belief to them affords,
Since ^hee knows nothing that with them discords.
And if the Books compiled by us, do bear
The Image of our Minds, (as thou do say)
Then in that Book that Image does appear
Bright as the Sun (in Virtues best array)
To light all Kings to keep their 1. Tim. 6.15. Romans 19.16.
Kings high Way:
No Sentence, Line, Clause, Word, or Syllable
Therein contained, but does pure thoughts bewraie:
Then, since thy Mind is to it semblable,
No Earthly King is to thee suitable.
Never was Piety with Policy
So well componnded in the Head of State:
The Serpents wisdom many Snakes apply
To Sores of Kings Simplicity, but hate
The Doue-like innocence, as out of date.
If Piety, and Policy do jar
(As some suppose) then can we be s'ingrate
As not to crown him that did end the war?
Nor be composed by such a Temperer?
For, if from Hearts abundance Mouths disperse
Virtue or Vices Mammon all abroad,
What may we deem thee the^, that did rehearse.
Such precepts, as beseem'd a Semi-God,
How best the Son should bear an Empires Lode
(Which weakness often, back-broken, undergoes)
We needs must ween that Virtue makes abode
(As in her home) in thy Heart, since it floes
With goodness like Gods, to thy Friends, and Foes.
How like a Lord of thy self do thou strive
To conquer Passion ( Princes great'st disease)
In him that likely is thee to survive?
And, as an old^tride Seaman tells at Seas
What Rocks and ^latts a young one may displease
Ere first he setts out, that he them may shun:
So, from thy proof (for thy Succeeders ease
Thou tell him (ere to rule he has begune)
What Compass he should keep, safe Course to run.
For Empire is a Sea most fair to see,
But perilous to prove, as they best kno
That all their life-long to it bounden be,
Subject each Tide to be orewhelm'd with woe,
If not to wrack and final overthro:
Wherein thou do thy course so wisely guide
That like a skilful Pilot thou do sho
(By demonstration) how this Sea to abide
And safely sail, or else at Ancor ride.
Then, o how blessed is this blisful I Will
Whose God is Love, whose King is Virtues Host,
Whose Grace and VVisdome (with an holy guile)
Does catch the Least and binds them to him most,
As to their Pillar, and upholding Post!
Who makes his Subjects great, as good, as great
By his example, without Check, or cost,
And to vnequalls equal Law does meat
With Loves right hand, which still does hate defeat!
The Fire, as being the noblest Element,
Is placed, by Natures hand, above the rest;
That, by it is active virtue prevalent,
It might repurifie the worst, and best,
That be inferior, or in less request:
So thou art justly placed (in Natures right)
Above the great'st, that with thy virtue least
Can purge them from their greatest vices quight,
And make them shine, through thy high virtues light.
Such Kings should be obaid, and glory-cround,
Because their Virtues al men's else exceed:
For, they that are in all abundance drowned,
Yet, set no more in, then may Nature feed,
And spare the rest for those that have more need,
O! these are rightly Fames Superlatiues,
( Gods upon Earth, that is Kings like Gods in deed)
From whom the subject virtue high derives,
Whose lives are Lights to lead obscurer lives.
And, Virtue in a King is more of price,
Then in a poor man, though most virtuous,
For Kings have more means to be drawn to Vice,
And may, without control, be vicious;
But poore-men, not, for Want, and Summumius:
If Sol would Venus use, what Star comes not
At beck, wel-neere, too near to him, to use?
But if a naked poor Snake be so hott
He may be coold; but so be coold, cannot.
What glory gettes constrained Sobriety
(If glory gotten be by Virtue right)
Constrained b'imperious Necessity,
Other, then to be chaste for want of might
In Purse, or Parts, or all the Body quight?
Where Is no Foe to oppunge what conquest i^t?
But where be many great Ones, there to fight,
And with a Kingly courage them resist,
O such an one is a true Martialist!
How easy this is sedd, who does not see?
How Art may picture Virtue, all perceive;
But to inspire her with vitalitee,
This none but only Gods have power to give,
From whom alone she does her life receive.
O, dear Liege, that I could, as feign I would,
Make Virtue lively; then by thy good leave,
Thou should not leave me (wretch) since then I could
Leave all the World to serve thee, as I should.
Then would I with a never vvearied Eye
Help thee to watch from wolves thy Flock to keep:
Thy Flock is great, and Wolves may lurcki^g lie
In each dark Corner to devour thy Sheep:
But blessed were he that would, and could dive deep
Into the Abiss^ of every dark device,
(While thou gav'st Nature necessary sleep)
To feel their Psa. 64.45.6.
Snares to catch, and Lures t'intice,
So, make them known that would thee prejudice.
Diue, diue, to Hell black Hels inhabitants
(Children of darkness that envy our light)
Albion's no place for such black Miscreants,
For God, and Man, there, with (not for) you fight:
Then, do your selves ensconse in endless night;
There stand upon your guard, guarded with ^iends^
That guard and grieve you, both at once, with spite;
There shall ye feel smart of Gods fingers ends,
Since divine Justice deeper nere descends.
Dear Love, sweet Lord goodnes-surmounting God,
How stands this Land obliged unto thy love!
This little-great Land, or great-little Clod
Thou more regard'st (it seems) the^ heaven above;
2. Pet. 2.4.
For there thou plaguedst sin, as Angels prove:
B^t, though this Isle does flote on seas of sin,
Thou, moved with love, from it do plagues remove,
As if against the stream thou would it win
To perfect goodness, and to rest therein.
O bow our Hearts of steel, make them well bent,
That they may through thy heart shoot sh^f^s of love,
And wound the same with love most violent:
But what need that, since now the same we prove?
But yet, since thou such shooting do approve,
And, by thy laws, alone its lawful game,
Let a^l the shafts of our indevors roue
At thy hearts whitest love, since in the same
Consists our game, grace, glory, joy, and fame;
Gain, for all is gained in thy all-giving love;
Grace, for Gods love is man's extremest grace;
Glory, for thou do glorify thy love;
Joy, since they needs must joy, whom In G^d are all, since without him are no
Joys.
ioies embrace;
And ^ame, for Fame ensues the love of Grace;
All these win we, if we thy love do win:
Then should we draw our Souls out of sins Case,
And, being well bent, shoot loue-shafts at the Pi^
Of thy dear love, which lies thine heart within.
Overcome us ( Lord) in kindness, let thy grace
Ever triumph ore our vngrac'ousnesse:
So, we will triumph in that gracious disgrace,
Giving all glory to thy graciousnesse,
And, love, and fear thy dread almightynesse.
Let not these Blessings greater make thy Curse
Against our inbred base ungratefulness:
O let not thy grace make us worse, and worse,
But to be gracious let it us enforce!
These super-supererogating Works
Proceeding from thy sup'rinducing love
Might make us (though far worse then Jews or Turks) Math. 11.2^.

To entertain them as thou do approve,
And give thy love no cause ours to reprove.
Since borne I was, I saw but sin abound,
And thy grace ore abounding, which might move
A senseless stone to sincke in Tears profound,
Flowing from highest love, in Tears ydrownd.
Thou deal'st not thus with the adjacent Lands
(Although perhaps they have provokt thee less)
Captivity has often bound them in Bands,
And the Destroiers Sword has had egresse
Through all the Members of them, more, and less,
Which did not cut, but eat flesh (greedy sword) Deuteronomy. 32.42.

Nor shed, but was made drunk with bloods excess
But to out land, alone, thou do afford
Peace, Plenty, Freedom, Health, Wealth, and thy Word.
Yet from him sitting on the kingly Throne
Unto the Slave that at the Hand-mill grindes^
Others, by civil Sword have been orethrone,
And Masacres of Bodies, and of Minds,
Have been performed in all hell^sh kinds:
Upon their Walls were Woes and Wellawaies
Breathed out with groans, like hollow-voiced winds;
Their streets, with shrikes through soddaine stabs dismai^s,
By Nights did echo, and did ring by Days,
While storms of rage did bloody billows raise.
The venerable Lore that Time and Art^
Ramu^.
Exchequer'd had, in one Head (rarely wrought)
Was let-out by a Dagger, or a Dart,
As good for nothing, but to bring to naught:
Virtue was held a Rebel, and still sought
But to be slain, and so, by Death, embraced:
Vice was secured by that which Vice had wrought
By Virtues help, by Vice now quite defac'd^
So all, but Vice, then did, or were disgraced.
And heerewith keene-cheek'd Famine made away
Paris, Rochel.
Through their best Cities bowels, so to bring
Their Bellies and their Backs to kiss, and play,
So to beguile the smart of famishing,
Which in the hollowes of the Heart did sting:
Dogs, C^ts, Mice, Rats, stale Carrion, and Horse-dung
(Wherewith perchance they humane-flesh did minge)
These did they eat, they were so hunger-stunge,
Nay, did for want of these, through famine long.
Think what it is to Sow, and not to Reap,
Or what to have, what others have in hold
That have no hold; yet all away does sweep
And so by spoil of all, live uncontrolled:
What it is to have a Wife, yet have thy wife
To have no power to do, as thy wife should,
But, to avoid the Ravishers rude knife,
Cannot avoid the loss of more then life.
O could a Man behold, at one aspect,
The many Hels attending Civill-warre,
He would suppose (no doubt) by the effect,
Hell had broke loose, and taken Earth prisoner,
And vsd it worser then worst Hell by far:
For, if the God of Heaven a Realm would damme
Above the Earth, he need but let it jar
Within it self; and then, no Hellish flame
Can so torment with anguish, as the same.
Diffring in nothing but in Time, and Place
Save that the Suns light makes the grief the more;
For it gives light to see the hidious case
Of all, when all are almost drowned in Gore,
That, like a Deluge, oreflowes Sea, and Shore;
Which, if it might be felt, and not be seen,
S^nse would suppose the same to be less sore;
For Sight (the Senses Sovereign) would ween
That, that is still unfelt, that is unseen.
And but that Woes are priviledg'd from jest,
I well might say (and yet but jest in sho)
That this damnation Devils more detest
Then the perdition in the Hell belo;
For there their utmost miseries they kno:
And well they wot, if they (as these) should jar,
Their kingdom (like these) should to ruin go:
So they, much more then Hell, fear civill-warre^
Because a kingdom it does more then mar.
The Night that Nature has ordained for rest
Then ye^lds no rest, yet endless rest it gives;
No rest it yields, but kills both Man, and Beast,
Yet rest it gives, by reaving of their lives;
So, knives bereave their rest, that rest by knives! They disease thereby
killing, and ease them being killed.

Men go to bed (as to their grave) with breath,
Where Death, unawares, of breath the^ often depriues;
So, while they sleep in life, they sleep in death,
True Image of the life in Hell beneath.
For if in that Hell be degrees of Woes,
As Truth it self affirms (with voice divine)
Then may these seem to be the worst of those
That lowest Hell does in it self confine;
For, weeping and Teeth-gnashing, that Hels Sign
Is seen each where, where civil Swords do rage,
Which do the best-backt states in sunder chine,
And with Hell-like confusion do engage
The brightest Empires to dark Vassallage.
As when the might Baiazeth is come
Into the claws of some rude Tamburlaine,
He Is vsd more basely then the basest Groom,
Till he be forced to beat out his own Brain
Against the cage of his hard Hearts disdain:
So, when the civil Swords vncivilliz'd
In mightist Empires, there it runs amain
Through all, till all be with Contempt surpised,
Or, all do end, ere so will be dispisde.
2. Kin. 11.1,2,3 2. Kin. 16. 3. and 2 Chro. 28.16.
Thus whiles Athalia has her own blood sucked;
And Achaz in the fire his Flesh did fry;
Yea whiles Samaria on her Walls has plucked,
Her 2. Kin 6.26. 27,28,29.
childrens Limbs in sunder savagely,
Devouring them with hunger greedily,
Our Milk and hoony-flowing Palestine
Has overflowne withal felicity;
Whiles Envy sought, but could not (save repine)
To hale us from this Sea, with Hook and Line.
So we alone (orewhelm'd in Earthly Bliss)
Still diue in Pleasures Streams to find new Ioies,
Not knowing once what Sword, or Famine is,
Nor the least thing that Nature ought annoyes,
2. Sam 7.18.
Save when we list to make them sporting Toies.
What are we ( Lord) or what our Fathers house,
That it by thee such vvelfare still enioies,
As it does seem thy whole care's cast on us,
And to us only were most gracious!
What endless Peales of Praise are due to thee
From those to whom (as to unworthy us)
Thou leavest not an headless Anarchee,
As to the Caniballs prodigious,
A Government more then most monsterous!
Gen 10.6.8.10
Nor as to the Tartarian Herdes of Cham,
Isai. 66.19.
Nor Swarms of Tubal-gog (most ravenous)
But with thy power divine, them up did dam
Far off from Albion in the Land of Ham!
Our present happiness shall more appear
(And long may it be present and to come)
Compared with the state wherein we were
At our grand Ancestors first calling home
To civil life (that long did rudely rome)
Their commonweal (if so it may be called)
Was (like to Romes when Sylla raged in Rome)
With Rage, and Wrong, and lawless might enthralled,
And by each savage Fury ever galld.
The great devoured the mean, the mean the less;
Who could gripe hardest held all as he would;
Who crossed his will, the law did then transgress,
For which he did, or dying live he should;
So strongest Thieves themselves did Princes hold:
All was worse then it seemed, yet seemed all woe,
For it was a Nation (which this Land did hold).
That lived by one another overthro,
Yet, for they lived together, seemed not so.
I could, although my Muse were near so dull,
Be endless in this infinite discourse:
But now, Decorum hy the ear does pull
My forward Muse, and stays her in her course,
Lest that a Book her Preface wax perforce:
It is enough my Book does ore abound
With tedious lines, if not with lines far worse.
Yet in well-borne Prolixitie is found
That which abortiue Breefenesse cannot bound.
And for a taste (God grant it may prove tastie)
Of what the Muse can do now thou art come,
That which ensues (though she were over-hastie)
Is her first speech since Musing made her dombe:
This Brat, conceaved in her barraine Womb,
Was made to move by the all-movers aid,
And if both move thee to like all, or some,
I shall account my Muse the blessedst Maid
That ever for an Husband so long staide.
Yet she that next to God and thee has right
My service to command, commands me
To be her Mouth (to utter what she might)
unto her great'st Protector, next to thee,
Ere that my short winged Muse do further flee:
My dearest Country Wales commands this,
That in the depth of all humilitee
I let her Prince to know how ill she is,
For want of him, her Love, her Life, her bliss.
What shall I say (dear Liege) I Am at a stand
That have so much (with little skill) to say;
Heaven, Earth, Men, Beasts, Fish, Foul, yea, Sea and Land
Exults with us, insults on those that may
And will not; cursed be those I (cursing) pray:
To curse Gods foes, and youres, is but to bless
Those that be his, and yours, and both obey;
David did so, and Davies does no less,
Amen say all, that love true blessedness.
John Davies.
CAMBRIA To the high and mighty, Hen^y by the grace of God Prince of Wales.
GReat Grandame Wales, from whom these Ancestors
Descended, from whom I, (poor I) descend,
I owe so much to my Pregeni^ors,
And to thee, for them, that until mine end
Thy name, and fame, I Will honor, and defend:
Since Joy does pas^age to thy speech deny
(For that thy Prince ^hine honor does commend)
Lest that thy silence might be taken awrie,
Mine Artlesse P^n shall thy Tongues want supply.
Did Curtius more for Rome, then I for thee,
That willingly (to save thee from annoy
Of dire dislike, for ingratuitee)
Do take upon me to express thy joy,
And so my Muse in boundless Seas destroy?
Yet, lo, dear Grandame, how mine active Love,
My little All does (more then all) employ
For thee, that thou by me thy Prince may move
To louethee for the joy he makes thee prove.
O then most gracious Son unto that Sire,
Whose grace does glorify both Sire, and Sonn^;
Of thy great grace I (prostrate) thee desire
To cast thine Eye on mine intention,
Rather, then on my Muses action.
The Burden's weighty which she undergoes,
And she is VVeake, and Dull in motion;
Then let thy lively Soul her Soul enclose,
And give her youth and Spright, that aged groes.
As when a yongling lies by the side
Of some old Sire, his age does virtue draw
From his dear youth, that makes Age longer bide:
So mine invention old, cold, rude, and raw,
(Not able to digest ought in her maw)
May by the quick hereditary heat
Of thy young Muse (that y^iest thoughts can thaw)
In Wales, my Countries name, perform this fear,
And welcome thee to thy long empty Seat^.
But o! I feel, but with the thought of thee,
My frozen thoughts to melt, as with a Sun,
Whose comfort Brutes Remain does long to see:
And through my Nerves I feel the warm blood run
From heart, to brains, to heat invention.
Mount Muse upon the wings of high desire;
Runn Numbers, now my swistest thoughts outru^ne,
That prostrate on my face (while you aspire)
I may salute thie Prince ( Wales) and his Sire.
VVelcome ten-thouzand times ye sacred Pair,
Great Atlas, and Alcides of this Land,
Upon whose shoulders (safe from all impair)
The Commonwealth thereof does fixed stand,
Which dext'rously your Virtue does command.
Dear Prince, the weal of Wales, the Britains bliss,
By me (thine own) Wales lets thee understand,
That she desires thy princely feet to kiss,
And prays, as for her Heaven on Earth, for this.
Then come sweet Prince, thy Principality
Does long to bear thee on her blisful Breast:
There shall thou see the Heart of Loyal^y
(Loue-sicke) for want of thee in great unrest;
Then come ( Dear sweet) and to thine own give rest.
For, as an hungry Stomach bites the more
The nearer meat is to the same addressed:
So is thy Peoples longing made more sore
To hold thee now they have thee, then before.
There shall thou find Brutes venerable Stock
To love thee, as the Cream of their best blood;
For, all about thee will they thronging flock
To tender thee their Eyes, to do thee good,
Such is the nature of their loving mood.
As when a Father, fallen in decay,
Does see his Son, that gives him Cloth and foode^
Crowned as a King, Joy makes his heart her Pray;
So will they joy to see their Joy to sway.
From Owen Thewdor, who from Camber came,
(From Camber Son of Brute who came from Troy)
Art thou descended; and thy Bellsires name
Was Thewdor: let us ( Britains) then enjoy
Our own in thee, in thee, our only Joy.
We have bin long afflicted, and oppressed
By those that sought our whole Race to destroy;
Then since we are in thee so highly blessed,
Lett's have our own, thy self, to give us rest.
O come, and comfort us, our Joy, our Peace,
Let us have thee, then have we all, in thee,
All that, that tends to Peace, and joys increase;
And in thy presence we shall blessed be;
For thou art blessed, then in thee, blessed are we;
Since blessed thou art with all that Heaven does cast
Upon the Heaven of Earthes felicitee:
Our blood in thee craves part of it, at last^
In recompense of all our sorrows past.
What shall oppunge this, our blood does co^vince;
Nature has made thee ours, and we are thine;
We are thy people, and thou art our Prince;
Betwixt us Love will have nor Thine, nor Mine,
But the Word Ours she does to us Assign:
Our Land, our Prince, our People, and our Laws,
Our State, our Commonweal, our Hand, Seal, Sign,
All ours, and naught but ours, (dear Prince) because
Both Prince and People closed are in this clause.
Then come All ours, bless all ours with our Eyes
Placed in the Head, begotten by our Head;
Which was begotten by our blood likewise:
Come, rule thou us in that Heads place, and steed,
Till thou that Head, in his place, shall succeed.
Here shall thou see, cased in poor Coats of freeze,
Rich Spirits of Trojans, which on glory feed,
Who, for they are, and rightly came of these,
Each with the nature of the Stock agrees.
Our greatest braverie lies all within
(Where greatest Hearts do love the same to have)
We say, to brave an abject sprite, is sin;
But, to be brave in Sp'rite is passing brave:
We scorn a double-gilt base-mettled Slave,
For we are harted-vvhole, true Iovialists,
Making our glory go beyond our Grave,
So to dissolve Oblivions foggy mists,
And blind the Eyes of squint-Ei'd Satyrists.
For, be it that we know no Complement,
Other then such as our dear Ancients knew,
That Is plain, and simple, like our hearts intent;
Yet, if we pleased, we could be fash'ond new;
Loved we not more our Fathers to ensue:
We want nor wit, nor sp'rit, nor wealth (perchance)
Swift-flying Fash'on swiftly to pursue,
In guize, in gate, and courtly dalliance,
At Tilt, each way, with Love, or Marses lance.
Witness our Owen Thewdor, who could give
True demonstration how to court a Queen:
Who from the seed of Jove did grace receive
To bear him self in her Eye best-beseene,
And made her thoughts a demi- God him ween:
He so could draw the motion of her eye
By motions seemly, which, in him were seen,
That he alone best pleased her fantazie,
As being full of best-grac'd Majesty.
Now, from the Court, descend we to the Camp:
And from those elder times, to these of ours:
There find we (no less current for the stamp)
Sir. Roger Williams.
WILLIAMS (worlds wonder for his native powers)
Out-daring Death in many sanguine showers:
The singing Bullets made his soul rejoice,
As Music that the hearing most alures;
And, if the Canons bas'd it with their voice,
He seemed as ravished with an Heavenly noise.
And when the Fo men's Muskets spite did spitt
Then would he spitt, in sport, at them the while:
The Blows his courage gave, were placed by wit^,
For Wit and Courage dwelt still in his Style;
While Cowardice, and Folly made them vile
Whose glory lay all in their Ladies Lap,
And when he came to Court, at them would smile
Yea, smoothly jest at their soft silken Hap,
Yet could, like Mars, take there sometimes a Napp.
Run over all the Stories Times afford,
Or pry upon them with the sharpest sight,
We shall not find one did more with his Sword
Then this brave Britain, and true Troian-Knight,
Who putt P. Parm^.
Achilles in his Tent to flight
By such an over-dareing Enterprise,
As all that that hear it, not believe it might,
But that these Times have seen it with their Eyes,
And that the fame thereof to Heaven flies.
Quite through and through Deaths grizely Jaws he ran^
And made a way through Horrors vgli'st Hell,
Yea, danted Death, more like some God, then Man,
Until the Prince, and Death he did compel
To fly for life, which his sword sought to quell:
O Skinck how blessed were thou in his love
That drue thee on, through Death to Glories well,
From whence the life of Fame does flowing move
To all, that for her sake such Dangers prove!
Should I recount the petty Miracles
By him performed, in his martial course,
My words would scarce be held for Oracles:
Suffizeth me, the World (that knew his force)
Well knew his Heart was Wit, and Valors Source.
And they that most envy our British fame
Must needs thus much of him confess (perforce)
That whatsoever from this Britain came
Was Wit, and Spright, or savor'd of the same:
But, should I instance in particular,
What Truth does warrant for the Britains glory;
I could (perhaps) run up their Race, as far
As love, and find them famoused in story:
But, for in me it may be thought vain glory,
Since being one, my self I seem to praise,
I will desist, although my soul be sorry
I should desist from that which many ways,
Might Camber crown with everlasting Baies.
The^ come, sweet Prince, take thou us to thy charge,
And we, the while will take the charge of thee:
Thou shall thine office easily discharge,
For we will more then most obedient be,
Which, to his comfort, thy dread Sire shall see:
For, when obedience flows from ardent love,
It is performed with all alacritee;
Which thou in us (we hope) shall shortly prove,
For with thy beck thou shall us stay, or move.
If thou will come to us, thou well shall see
We Will spare no pain, that may effect thy pleasure;
For each one will be busy, as a Be,
To yield thee honied joy, by weight and measure,
And shun (as Hell) the cause of thy displeasure.
We Will plant our Mountains with the rarest Trees,
That may be culled from Pomonas Treasure,
And all our hedge-ro^s shall be ranckt with these,
To please thine eye with what with taste agrees.
We Will root up all our roughes, our heath's, our furs,
And, in their place, make grass, and cowslips gro:
We will remove what thy dislike incurs,
And with the Mountains fill the Vales below,
If by Man's power, and pain they may be so:
Naught shall offend thee, be it what it will,
(Be it but mortal) if we it may know;
For, we will bring down the prowdest He, or Hill,
That thou shall doom to be scarce good, or ill.
Then live with us (dear Prince) and we will make
Our wildest Wastes Iett-coulored Garden-Plots;
So, Flora will her flowred Meades forsake,
To set flowers there, in many curious knots,
To please thee and (our other selves) the Scots:
We Will turn our Villages to Cities fair,
And share them twixt the Scots, and us, by lots,
VVhereto both one, and other may repair,
To interchange Commodities, or Air.
We Will cleeue the Mountains Neptune to let in,
That Ships may floate, where now our Sheep do feede^
And, whatso-ere industrious hands may win
Shall not be lost, that may thy pleasure breed,
Or richer make our intermixed Seed:
And whereas now two Towns do scarce appear
Within the largest Prospect; then, with speed,
They shall be built, as if one Town they were,
That we may be to each as near, as dear.
Those pleasant Plots where erst the Romans built
Fair Cities for their Legions to live in,
Whose gorgeous Architecture was oreguilt,
That by the civil Sword have ruined bin,
("Which Ruins are the Monuments of sin)
These will we now repair, fair as before,
That Scots, and Britains may mixed live therein:
Caerleon, where king Arthure lived of yore,
Shall be rebuilt, and double gilt once more.
And all along her gaudy gallant Streets
We Will go in Triumph, singing once a day
God, and our Princes praises ( sweet of sweetes)
Upon our Harpes, like Angels, all the way,
For that our Prince is pleased with us to stay:
What is it that loiall thankful Hearts can do,
But we will do, nay, do much more then they?
Thus do we Britains our Prince kindly woo
To rule us, ere misrule does vs^ undo.
If proud we be (as Pride perhaps will say)
How can we choose, now we have such a Prince?
Yet shall we prowder be him to obey,
Then proud of our dominion, long since,
When with our Swords we did the Land convince.
We were a People free, and freely fought
For glory, freedom, and pre-eminence,
But now our total glory shall be sought
In this, that we will serve thee as we ought.
Believe not Envy ( Prince) that us pursues
(Because she knows our Race is half divine)
That will (perhaps) say we our selves misuse,
And to contention overmuch incline;
This may be put on any mortal line
By Envies malice; but thou shall perceive
Our vice is Wit, and Courage-masculine,
With constant kindness mixed; which Brute did leave
To Camber, from whom, we did it receive.
Nor may it be harmonious to thine Ears
To hear our stock deprau'd by Injury;
For, thy deer'st blood (as to the World appears)
Is soild thereby with odious obloquie;
Then stop their mouths that breath such blasphemy:
Let not our plainness be their commonplace
To make them sport, in bitter foolery;
For we hold planenesse to be no disgrace,
How ere, false-harted Fiends may deem it base.
I do confess we open-harted are,
Scorning Italian-hollow-hartednesse:
Where we dislike, there show the same we dare;
And where we love, we love for nothing less
Then that which tastes of base unworthiness.
Troy had no Sinen, though the Greeks had store,
Nor can her Offspring their cro^fe fortunes bless
With creeping to a Devil, or adore
A senseless Block, though double-gilt or more.
We like Civilitie when it is did,
In coulor which will take no hue but one,
That Is Black, which still will like it self abide,
As Well in raging storms, as shining Sun,
Till it does change by dissolution:
We hate, as Hell, the foul bi-formed face,
Because it alters its creation,
And think, that glory has her greatest grace
In uniformity, and keeping place.
We are whole- chested, and our Breasts do hold
A single Heart, that is as good, as great;
And that does make us in our actions bold:
For Innocence with fear does never sweat,
How ill so ere the World does her entreat:
Our Kith, Kin, and Aliance, with our friends
We by the measure of kind nature meat,
If so, we needs must love thee, for these ends,
And, for our happiness on thee depends.
O could I tune my Tongue unto thine Eare^
That so my Words, might music seem to it,
That so thou might alone the Burden bear
Which it requires, as it is requisite!
Then, should my Note be noted to be fit:
I speak for those, whose Tongues are strange to thee,
In thine own Tongue; if my words be unfit,
That blame be mine; but if Wales better be
By my disgra^e; I hold that grace to me.
And better shall it be if my weak lines
Shall draw thee but one furlong thetherward:
For as, when in the Morn, Sol farre-off shines;
Yet cheeres us with approaching hetherward
(But makes us heavy going from-vs-ward)
So Wales will much rejoice, when thy svveete face
Does (though far off) with favor her regard:
Thine only countenance shall give her grace,
And make her deem her se^fe in blessed case;
But ten times blessed if she might thee embrace!
None otherwise then as a widow poor
Vexed with oppressions, and adversity,
If some great Prince do match with her, therefore,
To shield her so from woes, and injuries,
She Will kiss his feet in loves humility:
So she (that like a widow long has lived
Without a Prince) our Principality,
Will kiss thy feet, and be (half dead) revived,
If such an honyed Husband she had wiv'd
She, good old Lady, then (with youth renewed)
Would foot it finely in blithe Round^laies;
No Bellamoure should then be better hu'd,
For her Hearts mirth in her face blood would raise,
That would deserve thy Love, thy grace, thy praise;
And, as inspired with a courtly Spright,
Upon the soddaine, would spend, Nights, and days,
(As Dido entertained the Trojan Knight)
In all that should or thee, or thine delight.
Thou shall perceave, though she be far from Courts,
Closed in a Cantone of this blessed Land,
Yet she has in her Train some of all sorts
Of either Sex; whereof some understand
The Dialect of Court, and Courts command;
To whom she gives most royal Maintenance:
For, petty Ki^gdoms some Squires have in hand,
Who will the glory of thy Court advance,
Since they themselves keep Demi- Courts percha^ce.
Then come sweet Prince, Wales woeth thee by me
(By me her sorry Tongs-man) to be pleased
To live with her, that so, she may by thee
Be ruled in love, and ruled so, be eased
Of what in former times has her displeased.
The Sheep their Owners keeping most approve;
For, he will cure them, when they are diseased,
Ioh. 10.12.18.
With Loves right hand; But Hirelings ( Truth does prove)
Do keep the Flock for Lucre, more then Love.
Wales her most unworthy Solicitor JOHN DAVI^^.
MICROCOSMOS. THE DISCOVERY OF THE LITTLE WORLD, WITH the government thereof.
Since that thou have so soundly slept my Muse,
Dreaming on that which thou before had do^e
Being awake again, thy Spirits rowze,
To make an end of what thou have begun:
Being rest-refresht therefore, now forwards run
With bright Christ the true God of Wisdom, and the only Sun in^lightning
our Intelligence.
Apollo; (pray him be thy guide)
Until thou touch the Tropicke of Reason
Where VVisdome puts Plus vltra, there abide,
For past that point to pass, is passing pride.
For our VVill's Baiard blind, yet bold, and free,
And, had she way made in her maine Carreere,
sh'would run into that Light that none can see
Save light of Lights, to feel the secrets there,
Which Angels wonder at, yet not come near:
But Reas'ns conduct is nothing safe The secrets of the highest Heaven are
far above the reach of humane Reason^
herein,
Therefore the Will has too just cause of fear
Lest she should run into presumptuous sin,
For which divinest Angels damned have bin.
For since our Proto-parents lowest fall,
Our wisdoms highest pitch (God wot) is low:
But had they stood He had infused in all
His Word, (self- VVisdome) which alone to know
Is to know all that Wisdoms self can show:
But since, the state of things is so vnstay'd
That humane wisdom stands it wotts not how;
Unsure in all; for, Iudgment's often betrayed
In that which proof before had well Every knowledge has its beginning of the
senses, which are often deceived. Therefore all sciences which are derived and
fast rooted in the senses are uncertain, and deceiptfull.
assai'd.
But having touched the Brain, the Soul, the Will,
(All which (save of the soul) can brook no touch)
It rests that Reasons heasts we do fulfill,
To prosecute much more, or more then much,
That Wit for Will will willingly avouch:
Th'al-giving Giver gives all that live
(His Creatures) such desires, and Natures such;
As for their good with good will still should strive,
And shun what ere should them of it deprive.
Beasts more the^ Men (the more Beasts me^ the while)
Pursue that good that does their natures fit.
To them for that (though they be nere so vile)
Is highest knowledge given, and they use it,
Thereby condemning both man's Will, and Wit:
And yet has Man a (synn-peruerted) will
To seek that good he knows most ^requizit,
Who knows and loves the good, yet takes the ill
Often for the good, but for the evil still.
Yet as he was ordained to greater good,
So greater knowledge was in him infused;
With no less will, (were it not sin withstood)
To seek that Good; yet the will witt-abus'd
When it has found it, is often wit The understanding abused by the misreport
of the inferior senses diverts the will from embracing good objected to her.
refused:
Unhallowed sense, drowned in that damned juice,
( Sins Syder) from Eaues fatal Apple bruiz'd,
(Be'ing deadly drunck) makes still the worser choice,
Wherein (like Sow in mire) it does reioyce^
Among the host of Natures creatures, be
Three kinds of Appetites, (there ay consorts)
3. Kinds of Appetites in all creatures.
Natural, sensitive, and Voluntary.
The first divided is into two sorts;
One found in all that to the World resortes:
That Is inclination void of Sense or Soul,
To do what the own nature most importes: The natural apetite two-folde.

As light things mount, and heavy downwards roll,
Which nature, Natures self cannot control.
The other with this virtue action have,
Which nerthelesse proceeds not from sense;
To Vegetative Souls this, Nature gave, Souls Vegetative.

Which in Trees, Plants, and Grass has residence;
Who do desire to suck that influence
That feeds them, and avoides the contrary;
A plant will thirst for moistures confluence;
And draw to it all kind humidity,
Retayning that it lives and pro^pers by.
The like in our own members we observe,
Who wanting nutriment do suck the veins;
The veins do suck the blood themselves to serve;
Thus each attracteth food when need constraines,
And all things living seek the same with pains:
Hence we devide this natural desire The natural desire how divided.

Into two kinds, the one, each plant retains,
The other, things which life does sense-inspire;
As Man, and Beast, and what does else respire.
The Seat of this desire stands on two feet,
Which fixed are in two places; That Is to say
The liver, and the Stomach; there do meet
The forces of this Appetite to slay
With famine, or with food frail life to stay:
The sensitive desire is twofold too, The sensitive apetite twofold.

From sense the first, the last comes not that way,
The first, to joy and grief is fixed so,
That no force can it from the same undo.
For in the sinews ( Feelings instruments)
This power is placed, or in the Synewy skin;
And that the Synewes joys, or discontents,
That well, or ill, affects them within:
By heat, or cold, they pain, or pleasure wyn,
As they to them are well, or ill applied.
For sense and motion synewes made have bin
That by them pain or pleasure, should be tried,
And make our Bodies move on every side.
Nor do these Appetites wait on the will,
Ne from the Phantazie do they proceed,
For will we, nil we, we shall hunger still,
When food's withdrawn, that should our Bodies feed;
And we shall feel what sense affects with speed,
How ere the will or Phantazy impung;
We may abstain from nurrishment in deed,
But then thereby much more for it we long,
And Flesh will pine with pain, if hunger-stung.
But the other Appetites bredd without touch,
Are forged by the thoughts or Phantazie;
These, discreet Nature in the heart does couch,
Which be Affectes that lurk in secrecy,
Being motions of the hearts Heart properly:
These wait on wit, and choose or else reject
What it holds dearest, or does most defy;
So VVitt's the cause, and they are the effect,
That love, or loath, as wit does them direct.
This wit, and will, the Beasts do not possess,
For their most knowledge is most sensual;
Guided by Nature in their Brutishness,
Only by inclination natural,
Which moves their sense vn-intellectual,
Or this, or that way, without Reasons Though Beast^ have much more perfect
outwa^d senses then Men, yet can they not employ them reasonably as Men do.
sway;
Then wit and will their sense we cannot call,
Though sensual will and wit we call it may:
For man alone has both to guide his way.
The Voluntary Appetite we find
Is got by Reason, and produced by will,
By it we are to good or ill inclined,
As Reason doomes of them by Judgments skill:
Two actions has the will in reason still,
By which we good embrace, and ill refuse,
Reason revealing what is good or ill,
Who rules her not as though will could not choose,
But as one teaching Hir^ her power to use.
As in the Understanding and the Mind
Of Men, and Angels, God has fixed his form,
So to Man's will Free Will is not avoided by grace but established: because
grace heals the Will, that is, gives us a will to righteousness. Aug. de
spiritu and littera. Cap. 30.
his love was no less kind,
That to Gods will he might his will conform:
Ah woe! that sin should since the same deforme
Without constraint! for He Her freedom gave,
And did with understanding her inform,
That voluntary That we do^ will well^ God works of himself without us, and
when we will so well that we do accordingly, God works together with us.
August. De gratia and libero arbitrio. Cap. 17
service he might have;
As that, his nature most does love and crave.
For, as himself does nothing by constraint,
So he constraines God draws unto him, but he draws none but the willing.
not those that him obey;
Lest that their vvil might have cause of complaint,
For want of liberty it self to sway:
Those prayers please him not, Constraint does say,
But true obedience flowing from the God gives regenerate Men free will to do
well but the reprobate have free will only to do evil. Musculus common
places.
will;
Then will should force her self (for so she may)
His gracious good will freely to fulfiil,
Since good he made her love, and loath the Ill.
Then Justice would that God man's will should do
When Man does Gods will, Godliness has the promises of this life and that
to come. When Man pleases God God will please Man. All is to be given to God
who prepares the good will of Man to be helped, and helps i being p^epared.
Aug Enchir. ad Laurent. Cap. 22.
this exchang is just;
And Gods free will must needs subscribe thereto,
Since it is free to do that needs itmust,
Which cannot do the thing that is unjust;
For that were bondage free, or freedom bound;
Since to do evil but to have a lust
Were Vassallage to Satan that Hel-hound,
Which fredome to do good would quite confound.
But yet the will has many motions else,
Diverse degrees therein do plain appear;
Some have such open hearts and wilful wills
As that they love and hate through passion mere:
So, Reason their Minds Stern in vain does steer,
For sense they serve, and have no patience
The seemeing nearest pleasure to These are Beasts in humane shape, whereof the
World's too full.
forbear
For further good; but forthwith please their sense,
As sensual appetite does them incense.
But will in others, so her self commands,
And those Powers to her power subordinate,
That (being free) she binds both in bands
And unto Reason all does captivate:
As, many Dropsy-drie forbear to drink,
Because they know their ill it would aggravate;
So, will herein from her own self does shrink,
And cleaves to that, that Reason best does think.
The Heavens, and Earth, and all the Elements,
(And what besides Man, is of them composed)
Do GOD obey in his commandments,
For, as He wills, so are they al disposed;
Yet never he himself to them disclosed:
Then not from knowledge their obedience springes,
But from the nature in their kinds enclosed;
Yet Men he made to know and do the things
That be of him, which grace and Knowledge bringes.
And that he should with more heed do the same,
A Will he gives him joined wirh grief and Grief and Joy are always
Consociates of our will
Joy;
Which will might joy when she does passion tame,
And in the contrary might feel annoy,
All as she does her native powers employ.
Here hence we know the odds twixt Joy and Grief,
For in extremes they comfort or destroy
Such as lead here a good, or evil life,
Both flowing from the will, their fountain chief.
This power has highest virtue of Desire,
And Caesarizeth ore each Appetite;
She rules (being taught) with liberty entire,
Whose actions are to will and nill aright;
Whose Obiect's real good or so in sight:
In nature she hates ill in deed, or show,
And in the true, or false good, does delight;
If ill for good she choose, hence it does gro
Because ill seeming good, she takes it so.
She naught can love but has some show of good;
Nor ought can The will naturally cannot desite that which in nature is evil.
loath but has like show of ill;
Desire of good by her may be with-stoode,
But it she cannot loath, or leave it still:
So may she choose to execute her will,
When ill is tendered her indeed, or sho,
Bnt cannot l^aue it, or her will fulfill,
Because to ill she is a mortal foe,
And lothes it as sole worker of her woe.
Then must she needs be ever vnconstrain'd,
Since her Creators Will would have it so;
She could not be her self, were she restrained,
And though she waits on Reason to, and fro,
Will makes Reason to attend her.
Yet she makes Reason wait her will to kno:
For, touching her, her Lord confines his power,
Which cannot take that he did once besto,
Namely, arbiterment, (her richest dowre)
Except Not-beeing, should her quite devour.
The Will may object, or not object what she will to the Mind.
For she has power, to object to the Mind
What pleases her, or not the same object;
And while the Thoughts the same do turn and wind,
She may oreturne those Thoughts or them neglect,
And turn the Mind to what she shall direct:
Yea when as Judgments final doom is given,
She may, or may refuse the same to effect;
For Men are not as Beasts by Nature driven,
Unless of Reason they are quite bereav'n.
The understanding straineth out of the secret and hid^ causes of things that
which to wisdo^e is incident. Will exacting the sa^e.
About she goes when Judgments doom is past,
And re-examines what it has decreed;
Which done, perhaps the same she will distaste,
(Although the sentence be direct indeed)
And runs another course, less right, with speed:
Which second The Will refuses Good being found, not for being good, but not
being so good as it willingly would hau^. I^l spirits may provoke our fa^tasies
and will
search yet aims at greater right,
Though she mistakes the same for want of heed,
Which want proceeds from Sins extreme dispight,
That blindes our Minds eyes in extremest light.
Wherefore it us behoues Grace to invoke,
Whereby wit uprightly may weld the will;
For as ill Sprites our fantazies provoke,
So on our wills they may the like fulfill,
And make her scorn to rule by Reasons skill:
For, she is ambitious and delights to reign
Without control, how ever well, or ill;
And being free she runs on amain,
To joy if well, if otherwise, to pain.
This liberty of Monarchizing thus
She deemeth good, what ill so ere ensues; It is a kind of bondage to have
power, will, and liberty to do ill.

Which liberty, is bondage base to us,
And free we were, if our will could not choose
But use His will, that gave us wills to use:
Whose only service, only freedom is,
And only they are Slaves that it refuse;
Since they are Satan's servants (if not his)
Which please him most, when they do most amiss.
For in this great commerce of terrene things,
The bad whereof exceeding so the good,
And that so fast the one to other clings
That twixt them both there is great likelihood,
Hardly by will can they be understood:
And since Men Bodies have as well as Souls,
Things bodily best like the bodies mood,
Which often so the Mind and Will controules,
That as it lusts it rules and overrules.
Herehence it is, some mortal life do prize Whosoever seeks felicity where
it is not shall find infelicity where it is.

Above eternal, and their guts above
The highest God, that does their guts suffize;
And though the will herein may rigor prove,
Yea, may be forced to leave what it does love,
Yet naught can her resistlesse power constrain,
For nothing can desire from her remove,
Although she cannot do what she would feign:
So maugre force, she freedom does retain.
Reason and man's desires should be in continual league.
Since Reason then the Wills desires should sway,
And bring the Affections to obedience,
Its requisite they should accord always
To mainetaine wars against rebelling Sense;
Which is the rule of Reasons consequence:
Wherefore we may well judge of Reasons rule,
By the Affections and Wills continence;
As a good Prince or Master of a School,
Make them they govern, hate, and shun misrule.
The Heart and Mind being at Unity procure the tranquillity of the Affections.
And, for the Affections from the heart proceed
(Which is the Seat of love to God and Men)
If then the heart and Mind be well agreed,
The heart with flames of lasting love will bren,
And fire out froward Passions from their den:
Then will the Tongue from hearts abundance speak
Gods highest lauds till they report again;
Then love twixt Tongue and Heart shall marriage make,
To bring forth naked Truth, which love does seek.
Wherefore the Providence divine did place
The lunges (the voices Organs) next the Heart;
(As the Minds instruments the Brains embrace)
That they may near at hand, soon use their Art;
As Orators of Princes play their part
Near to their Sov'raignes; And were not for sin,
The Brains and Heart are the Seats of Reason and the Affections. Sin is
nothing because it was made without him, without who^ nothing was made that was
made.
The Will, from Reasons rule should never start,
And twixt the Heart, and Brain there should have bin
A lasting league, as being near of kin.
Sin, noughty Nothing that make all things naught,
(Except the Thing of Things that made the^ good)
Thou wast unmade thy self, yet ill haste wrought;
Whereby thou haste so perverst Flesh, and Blood,
That now by it all goodness is with-stood:
Damned Nothing that have such a something stride,
How wast begot? by whom? and in what mood?
Through lust; By Eaue and Adam; In their pride:
Now Sin.
Error speaks what The scriptur
Truth has iustifide.
For wit, will, Anger, and Concupiscence,
Are four powers of the soul, wherein should lie
Four virtues, taking thus their residence:
Wisdom in wit, in will Integrity:
Valor in Ire, and in lust Temprancie:
But wit with ignorance, and will, with wrong,
Anger with Fear, and lust, with liberty
Are so pervers'd, that they themselves impunge,
Except preventing grace be mixed among.
The total frame of man's divinest part,
By light divine we see is out of frame;
Th'antipathie betwixt the That is, between Reason and the Affections.
Mind and Heart,
Gives but too good assurance of the same:
And though the mind in all her limbs be lame,
Yet in our little world she reigns as Queen,
And seeks wild passions of the Heart to tame,
That in her self there might be ever seen,
Soule-pleasing joy and peace to flourish green.
For she is the mancion of Felicity,
Contrived so, that there its safe confined;
To which there is no way nor entery,
But through the Affections, servants of the Mind:
Yet they too often disloial prove by kind,
Who liers, and sinne-soothing claw-backes are,
Whereby our judgments eyes they (Traitors) blind,
That it erres mortallie ere it beware,
If reason of their treason have not care.
Reason, Concupiscence, and Ire, 3. special powers of the Soul.
For three Powers special in the Soul reside,
Reason, Concupiscence, and ardent Ire,
The first, to Truths obscure abiding guides;
The second, good-things gladly does desire;
The third, does from the contrary retire:
In bowels of the first the Wits are bred;
The Affectes are forged in both the others fire;
In number four, Joy, Hope, Sorrow, and Dread,
Which from the last powers spring, as from their head.
First, from the first Power, Joy and Hope proceeds,
(For what we covet, we joy in with hope)
And Ire, the last power, Dread and sorrow breeds;
For, hate to dread and sorrow lies wide open;
Grief in hates hell the way to dread does grope.
From these Affects (as from their fountain) floes
All vice and virtue which in Man does cope,
For vice and virtue ay are mortal foes,
And as Reas'n rules, so either overthroes.
Anima.
The soul's called Anima our flesh contains,
While she the same with vital fire fills;
Men's.
Men's, while she minds, or she Mind retains,
Animus.
And Animus, while she has Will or wills;
Ratio.
She Is Ratio, whilst she judgment just fulfilleth:
Spiritus.
Then, spiritus she hight, when she respires.
From all which, science to the soul distilleth,
Scientia.
So, called scientia; thus her names do change,
As she her qualities does interchange.
The outward senses outward parts possess,
As the inward to the soul are knit by kind:
And, for the soul her power does most express
In that whereto her soul is most inclinde,
Here-hence it is, men mortified in mind
Whose spirits powers on things divine are bent The soul uses not the
ministry of the outward senses when she is swallowed up with divine
meditations.

Fare, as they were sometimes, deaf, dombe, and blind,
Their contemplations are so violent:
But, Vulgars outward sense is excellent.
But while the soul can take a strict survay
Of all the instruments which she does use,
So long the owner of that soul may say
He has a judgment sound, and perfect Muse:
But if those instruments that Man misuse,
Or ruin them, the soul straight seeing it,
Her ruined Iaile she strives then to refuse:
Which strife the senses frame does so unknit
That it confounds it, or distracts the Wit.
And in this mood (though we esteem it madd)
Men prophecy, and truly things foretell, The soul being divine works
divinely, if she be not hindered by her Clog, the body.

Speak diverse Tongues, which erst they never had,
And in Arts which they knew not, they excel.
Thus whilst the soul does hold her house an Hell,
Striving to be enlarged, becomes more free,
Then works she like her self (exceeding well)
That wonder it is, the same to hear and see:
O sacred soul (but God) who is like to thee!
NOw, for the Heart frail life first intertaines,
And is the last part that from it departes,
(Without which, dull were reason, dead the brains)
It Is taken for the part which power impartes
To Wit and Will, whereby they play their parts;
So as it is held the Mirror of the mind: The Heart the Mirror of the Mind.

For, when the Mind unto herself converts,
The Heart is interposd, where she does find
Her feature foul, or fair, cleere-eied, or blind.
Then, for the Heart is such a powreful thing,
My heart desires to touch it feelingly:
And, for the Heart does pain or pleasure bring,
A clean Heart and a clean soul are convertible.
The pain is pleasure, when Head properly
Makes hand discribe the Hearts heart handsomely.
Erst Man's internal parts we did devide
Into three VVombes, the Brains, the Breast, and Belly:
About the Brains (before) our skill we tried,
And now by it, the Breast must be discride.
Which is the Shop of all the Instruments
Wherewith the vital Virtue operates;
The Heart, the Lunges, with all Life's incidents
In region of the Breast, do hold their States,
Whose Bulk them Bulwarks from what ruynates:
The Midriff parts them from parts that feed
(Which the third Womb, (the Belly) circulates)
It being a Muscle made for Natures need,
Assisting in the Breathing Act and Deed.
And next, there is a Tunicle, or Skin,
That over-spreads the Concaue of the Breast,
Much like a Spiders web, subtle, and thin;
Wherout two others grow to part the rest,
Because two places should be breath-possest:
So that, if one (being hurt) could not respire
The other might one half retain (at least)
To keep Natures providence for Manns good, should lift up his mind to the
consideration of the love of a greater Good.
Life's breath (at point to part) entire,
And blow the sparks that kindle vital fire.
These Felmes (like to a Nett with fruit repleat)
Together hold what ere the Breast does bound,
They line the Ribs, that when the Lunges do beat
They might perform their office whole and sound,
Without being bone-bruiz'd, which might the^ confound;
So likewise in a Caul the Hart's enclosed,
Called Pericardion, being Ovall round,
Or like a Flame for form, and so disposed;
To show that vital fire is there reposed.
There, in the Hart's the fountain whence does flow The Heart is the fountain
of natural heat.

Natural heat, and by the Artires sends
It al abroad to make the Members grow,
And keep them grown, in plight to do their ends.
And though each Instrument of breath attends
And serves the Voice, yet were they chiefly made
For the Hearts use, (that Lifes-fire comprehends)
That by their service that fire might not vade,
Which unkind coldness else might overlade.
Wherefore the Lunges ( breaths-forge) is preordain'd
First to receive the Air that cooles the Heart,
Who do prepare it (being intertain'd)
And so prepared, do the same impart
( As Nature wills) to that Life-giving part^
The Lunges therefore, are Spu^gy, soft, and light,
That Air might enter, and from the^ depart,
Which guard the Heart (on left side and the right)
From bordring Bones, that else annoy it might.
Which has a double motion; One, when it
It self dilates, the other, it restraines. The Hearts motion is double.

When it goes out, in goes Air requisite:
And when it shrinketh in, then out it strains
All smoky Excrements procuring pains.
This motion's kind, proceeding from its kind
(Not as the Muscles moved by the Brains)
For which it has fixed filaments assigned,
VVherby it self, it self may turn and wynd.
This double motion has two double uses,
(A two fold use whereof we mentioned have)
The next to draw in blood; and then, by Sluices
To send it to the Lunges, for food they crave
At the Hearts hands, since they the Heart do save.
Thus gratefully they kindness interchange,
To teach us how we should our selves A motive to brotherly love taken from the
disposition of the Members.
behave;
For when we disagree, it is as strange
As Heart and Lu^ges should cease to make this change.
Thus, this subordinate Lord of Man's life
(The Heart) resides in his wel-fenced fort;
And, though with it al vital force be rife,
And members keeps from being al-amort,
Yet should it die, if their helps were cut short.
Hence Kings may learn, that though they Monarchize
Yet do they, whom they rule, maintain their port,
Which should induce them, not to tyranize,
But, like good Hearts, lifes-pow'r to exercize.
The flesh of the Heart is the firmest flesh of any part of the Body.
The flesh whereof is firmer, then the flesh
Of all the parts the Body has besides:
So, Kings should be most firm, for, being nesh,
Their Subjects might be wounded through their sids.
Such be the People still as be their Guides.
The Heart with Passion, passion may each part,
Which Joy or Sorrow with the Heart abides:
So, Kings their praise and People may subvert,
If Passion overruled their ruling Art.
And in the Bulk it is so situate
As that its Base is Center of the Breast;
The end whereof (where greatness does abate)
Leanes to the left-side more then all the rest;
(So Kings, where they from Iniust^ce makes great Kings less, then Fame can
take notice of.
Right decline, are least.)
Yet leanes the Heart so, for two causes great;
One, that the Brest-bone should it not infest,
The other, that it should the left-side heat,
Since on the right, the Liver does that feate.
And though the Hearts left part more heavy be,
Because its hard and greater then the right,
Yet Nature has so balanced it, that she
Makes it to hang (by admirable slight)
As if the both sides were of equal weight:
For in the left part (heaviest) she putts
The vital spirit, of its nature light;
And in the right part (lightest) lo, she shutts
The weighty Blood, wherewith that part she glutts.
Lo, thus the Highest holy upright hand
By even counterpoise has hanged the Heart
In the Breasts Center, (like as the Earth does stand The Heart is hanged in the
Breast by even counterpoise.

In Center of the Heavens) by matchless Art:
Hence we may learn the duty of this part,
Which should be upright in Affects, and will,
And never from the rules of Virtue start
To right hand, or to left, for good or Ill,
But come life or come death, be upright still:
This part likewise has two Concavities,
On left side one, the other on the right:
And for this use, are these capacities;
The right receaves the blood (being boild aright)
That from the Liver runs, to give it might
To feed the Lunges, and vital spirits breed,
Bred of pur'st blood in the left Concaue dight,
Like sweat that from the right one does proceed,
Which sweat with vital Spirits it does feed.
That is the furnace, wherein still does flame
The vital Sp'rit, resplendent, quick, and clear,
Like the celestial Nature, for the same
Both heat, and life to all the whole does bear;
This Primum mobile that All does steer:
These concaues thus are made commodiously;
Many good com^lexions are ill in conditions.
But now (alas) most hearts all hollow are,
That Blood and Spirits therein confused lie,
So as no Art can one from other spy.
In this left concaue where the Heart does try
His chiefest skill, the vital spirits to make,
There is the root of that great Artery
From whom the Artires their beginning take:
Which near the Heart does so it self forsake,
That part ascends, and part thereof descends
To carry vital fire to parts that lack;
These are the pipes whereby the kind Heart sends
His cordial comfortes to the extremest ends.
And, for the Veins and Artires need each other,
And that their succors should be near at hand,
They meet, and (for the most part) go together,
Thereby to vigorize the vital Band
Which the Hearts virtue wholly does command:
For, the Artires being lincked with the Veins,
Lend Air and Spirit, least their blood should stand;
And from the Veins some blood each artire draines,
Which to disperse, the vital spirit constraines.
Mutual love is to be learned from the mutual assistance of the parts of the
body.
Between the Heart and Lunges the like is seen
(As erst was said) to learn us mutual love;
For, certain Pipes do pass these parts between,
By which, each others kindness they do prove:
The heart from his right side does blood remove
Unto the Lunges by the Arteriall Vein,
The Lunges through veyny- artire, air does shoue
Unto the heart, it to refresh again,
Whose side sinister does it entertain.
The heart (besides) has many members more,
Which are distinguished by Anatomists:
The right, and left side has a little door,
And many a pipe so small therein subsists,
That scarce man's eye can see how each exists;
Yet all have use; for, when the heart does seek
Such blood as without which no heart consists,
The means wherewith it draws it, should not break,
But that the strong therein might help the weak.
And, that the Air might enter in thereby
More mildly, and for Nature, more concinne,
Therefore, the heart does not immediately
Draw from the Mouth the air it draws in,
But through those passages it first does rin,
Lest being too cold it would cool the heart too much;
For all extremes, save extreme good, are sin,
And Nature Virtue in the Mean does couch, Virtues Throne is erected just
between extremes.

Showing, that our desires should still be such.
That God, whose power no power can resist,
Resists all powers that are too violent,
And ever does the moderate assist;
From whose hand (only) comes the Thunder-dent,
To plague the proud, and wound the incontinent:
For, should his Creatures power b'immoderate,
Then should not his own be so eminent:
So, if they it affect, he them does hate,
And with a thundering vengeance ends their date.
Thus having slightly touched this tender part,
(Touching his substance, proper place, and frame)
It now remains that we do prove our Art
Touching another motion of the same,
Belonging to our souls affections lame,
Lamed by our Flesh too lusty, yet too frail,
Too lu^tie in desire of its own shame,
But frail in that wherein it should prevail,
Yet when its weak'st, the Soul does most assail.
It not suffiz'd that nere-suffized Love
That al things made, to make Man only Be,
But to Be well, as well some men do prove,
Who though of Being, they desirous be,
Yet not being well, they Murder themselu^s.
end ill, since they see
Their being Well, and Being disagree:
Then The Soul Vege^atiu^ d^si^es to Be, The Sensitive to be well, The
reasonable to be best, and therefore it never rests till it be joined to the
best.
Being, was not Manns creations end,
But to be happy in a high degree:
And therefore al men al their forces bend,
T'inioy that Good, that Being does commend.
Which good desire of Good, in Man is knitt
To a detesting of the contrary;
But, for that sin hood-wincks Man's Eye of Wit
He gropes for Good, but feels the Evi^l cleaves to each worldly Good, as
Canker does to Silver.
Evil by:
From this desire of Good, the affections fly;
Which with their motion swift^ draw that desire
Here, there, and where soere they please to hy,
In pursu^e of that Good which they require,
To which (though base they be) they would aspire.
Yet they were good, and kindly loved their like;
But they are ill, and love Ill seeming good;
Yet they by Natures instinct Ill dislike;
And yet by nature evil is their mood,
Basely obaying the sinne-soiled Blood:
At first they were Truths other self, for friends;
Yet now by them she is too too much with-stoode,
Adhering to her foe, while she pretends
To bless the Sense, though to accursed ends.
The motives of the Soul these motions are,
Whose other names are called the Affects^
By foll'wing good, and flying ill, they ARE;
Consisting so of these two good Effects;
Though Syn their sense with error often infects:
Some usher Judgment, some on her attend,
The later, take or leave as she directs;
The Former, naturally cannot offend,
For they desire but Nature to defend.
As when the Body ( Nature to suffize)
Desires to eat, or drink, (as need requires)
Or when good hap or ill does it surprise,
Then Joy and sorrow (as Plato affirms) are the Ropes wherewith we are drawn
to the embracing or avoiding of every action.
Joy or sorrow moves our desire:
These still fore-run our Judgment, and conspire
With Nature, to usurp her highest Throne;
For nature runs on, or does retire,
As she is moved by judgment of her own,
And so do these that Nature wait upon.
But those Affects that follow Judgments Train
Wait hard, as long as Heart is well disposed;
Then lasts the League between the Heart and Brain,
For, al their iarres by Reason are composed:
But when the Heart against the Brain's opposed,
(Which often proceeds of too much pampering)
Out fly the Affections that were erst reposed,
And from their necks the Raines of Reason ^ling,
Impatient of slow Judgments tarrying.
Yet true it is that Heart cannot be moved,
Ere Judgment doomes what is good or badd for it;
Then Hearts desires by her must be approved,
Or else the Heart cannot desire a whit:
For what Judgment foregoes the Affections.
she holds unmeet, it thinks unfit.
But for the motions of the Mind are free,
And need not stay, as it is requisite,
So before Judgment do they seem to Be,
Although they follow her as bond, and free.
But though the Affections cannot move at all
If Judgment wing them not and make them flee,
Yet sound advice (which here we Judgment call)
The Affections may work without sound advisement.
May be at rest when they too busy be,
Moved by the judgment of the Fantazee:
This Iudgment's blind, yet is it most men's Guide,
And no less rash, yet rules each degree;
This makes the Affects from Rights straight Paths to slide,
For Fantazy does fancy ways too wide.
This skipp-braine Fancy, moves these easy Movers
To love what ere has but a glimpse of good;
Then straight she makes the^ (like unconstant lovers)
To change their Loves, as she does change her mood,
Which swimmeth with the current of the Blood:
For as the body's well or ill composed,
(Which follows often the nature of its food)
So Fancy and these Fondlings are disposed,
Though in the Soul, and Mind they be enclosed.
And yet the body's but the Instrument
Whereon the The Soul works by motion, and the Body by Action.
soul does play what she does please;
But if the stringes thereof do not concent,
The harmony does but the soul displease;
Then tune the body Soul, or playing cease:
And when a String is out, straight put it in
With Phisickes Physic can extenuate the Humors that make the Body unapt to
execute the works of Virtue.
help, which Passion may appease,
By humbling that which has too loud a din,
And put the Parts on a Soule-pleasing Pyn.
These Parts though many, yet of three consist,
That Is, Humors, Elements, and Qualities;
Which three, do of fow'r parts, a part subsist,
For from Earth, Water, Air, and Fire does rise
All that the Heavenly Cope does circulize:
These are the Elements from whom proceed
The Humors be the children of the Elements.
Humors with their foresaid qualities;
For, Blood, Phlegm, Choler, Melancholy breed
Hott, Cold, Moist, Dry, a fowr-fold vital Seed.
An Element is the most simple part An Element, what.

Whereof a thing is made, and in its wrack
Is last resolved; And in Phisicks Art
There are but two, which two of those do lack
That all the Elemental bodies make:
These two, are termed Simples, and Co^pounds, 2. Elements in Phisick-Arte.

The first, is borne on Speculations back;
The last, is bredd by Practice, which co^fou^ds
Two or more Simples in each others bounds.
The Elements of Natures famelies
Produce the Elementals temprament,
Which is a mixture of the Qualities
Or composition of each Element:
(As these do bend, so are their bodies bent)
Which we Complexion call; whereof are two, Complexion what.

Well, and ill tempred; And the Aliment
That feeds the Body, herein much can do,
For that can make and mar Complexion too.
Well tempred Complexion, what.
VVell-tempred, is an equal counterpoise
Of the Elements forementioned qualities;
Whereof there is but one thing of Natures choice
Wherein she made the mixture thus precise:
(As Galens tract of Tempers testifies:)
Which, of each hand, is the interior skin:
And hence we may thus fitly moralize;
That Nature to the Hand so good has bin,
That it might temper what the Mouth takes in.
Il Complexion, what.
Ill tempred's that where some one Element
Has more dominion then it ought to have;
For they rule ill that have more regiment
Then nature, wisdom, right, or reason gave:
So does this Element it self behave:
Yet each ill temper does not so exceed,
As that it spils what better tempers save;
For some surpass the temperate in deed,
In some small ods, whereof no harms succeed.
The Bodies temper is five ways discerned.
Five ways the Bodies temperature is known,
By Constitution, Operation, Clime,
Coulor, and Age, by these the same is shown,
As Dials by an Index show the time.
The Body fat is cold, for fat does clime
By cold degrees; and that, full-flesht is hot,
For heat proceeds from blood, as does my rhyme
From brains; where no heat were, if blood were not,
And bee'ing too cold they would my sense besot.
By Operation too, the temper's found,
For when a creature, ( Man, Beast, Herb, or Plant)
Does that which they by right of kind are bound,
Then no good temprature those bodies want:
The Clyme in showing this is nothing skant;
For Southward, Men are cruel, moody, madd,
Hot, black, lean, leapers, lustful, vsd to vant,
Yet wise in action, sober, fearful, sad,
If good, most good, if bad exceeding bad.
The Northen Nations are more moist, and cold,
Less wicked and deceiptfull, faithful, just,
More ample, strong, courageous, martial, bold,
And, for their blood is colder, less they lust:
Then cold blood being thick, it follow must
They are less witty, and more barberous;
And for they inwardly are more adust, A natural reason for the gurma^dizing,
and qua^fing of the Flemmings.

They meat and drink devour as ravenous,
The panch and pot esteeming precious.
Yet are they most laborious, loving Arts;
Whose souls are in their fingers (as its sed;)
For, all our best hand-workes come from those parts,
As from the hotter Climes, works of the head:
And those that twixt the South, and North are bred
(As France and Italy, Spain, and the like)
Of hot and cold, are ev'nly tempered;
Therefore they are not made so apt to strike;
But war with VVisdome, rather then the Pike.
The coulor likewise shows the temprament; The Coulor shows the bodies temper.

For Sanguin's red: and yellow's Choleric:
The M^lancholy is to blackness bent:
The white or whitish, is the Phlegmatic:
The white, and black, are cold and rhewmaticke:
The Red, and yellow, hot by course of kind:
To this consents each skillful Empericke,
Who by experience of their practice find
That coulor shows the temper, notes the mind.
The Sanguin's frolic, free, ingenious,
Courageous, kind, to women over-kinde;
True Iovialists, by nature generous;
And hot and humid they are by their kind:
The Chollericke is hasty, and inclinde
To Envy, pride, and prodigality;
The reason why men choleric of complexion are ^oone angry.
As Herc'les-hardy, though with anger blind;
And in its temper it is hot and dry,
Which is the cause it is so angery.
The Phlegmatic are idle, sleepie, dull,
Whose temper's cold and moist, which drownes the wit:
The Melancholy's mestiue; and too full
Of fearful thoughts, and cares vnrequisit;
Who love (as loathing men) alone to sit:
In temper cold and dry too like the dust,
(Dust of the earth, ere God life-breathed it,
Where hence we came, and whereunto we must)
Which flies (as fearful) from a little Gust.
These are the humors, whereof Man consists,
A humor, what.
Which is a substance thin, to which our food
The Stomachs heat by nature first disgests,
And has dominion chiefly in our blood:
These like the Elements move in their mood:
For blood is hot, and humid, like the air:
Flegm's cold, and moist, in Waters likelihood:
Then Melancholy's like Earth, cold and dry'r:
And hot, and dry is Choler, like the Fire.
How the meats are changed to Humors.
And, that the meats to humors should be changed
They must be thrice concocted thoroughly:
First, in the Stomach they are interchang'd
And made that Chyle wherein potentially
The Humors ( Chaos-like) at first do lie:
Next, in the Liver the Mass Sanguiner
Of Chyle composed is, successively:
The third, and last's through all the body, where
Humors are made, that Meat and Chyle first were.
These reign by turns, until their terms be done:
Blood, in the spring, from three till nine each Morn: How the Humors reign
in man's body

Choler, from thence, till three in th'after noone
In sommer-season: Then Phlegm in his turn
From thence till nine at night does rule the stern
In Autumn: then sad Melancholy thence
Till three next Morn, when VVinter does return:
Thus in their turns they have pre-eminence,
Till Time turn us, and them with us from hence.
And as these humors have their turns in time, How, and when the Planets rule
in man's body.

So rule the Planets in like consequence:
For, by the Moon is governed our Prime
That Is hot and moist, but the pre-eminence
The moisture has; So our Adolescence
Is swaid by VVit-infusing Mercury
Being hot and moist, yet does more heat dispense,
Which tunes the voices Organes erst too hy,
Making them speak with more profundity.
The^, youth (our third age) Loves Queen, Venus swaies
Bee'ng hot and dry, but yet more hot, then dry;
In this we Wantons play, in Venus plays
And offer Incense to a rolling eye:
Bright Sol (the gloriou'st Planet in the sky)
Does rule our Manhood which is temperate:
He Author is of race and gravity;
Of hapless life this is the happi'st state,
Which they hold long'st that are most moderate.
And lastly old age being cold, and dry,
By al-wise Jupiter is governed,
Author of Council, Craft, and Policy:
Which Age again in two's distinguished,
The first young old age may be Christened:
The last Decrepit is, and so is called;
Which Saturn rules with Scepter of dull lead:
This Age to Life like Death, is still enthralled,
Thus in our life the Planetts are enstall'd.
Precise dates assigned to several changes of man's age in his life.
And to these Ages, dates precize we give;
As Childhood from our Birth till thirteen years:
Adolesce^ce, from thence to twenty five:
And youth from thence til five, and thirty wears;
From whence, til fifty Mannes-estate apperes:
And to the rest old age we do assign;
But one his years the^ other better bears,
As time their temprature does enterteigne,
Therefore the temprature should age design.
For all men cold and dry are old, though young,
Psalm. 31.11.
Some young at sixty, some at forty old;
In growing old the youthful Sanguin's long,
For it does store of heat, and moisture hold:
The Melancholy, being dry and cold,
Is aged soon: So women more then men
Soon meet with age, which makes some be so bold
(As under Paint the face.
Coulor that they are wo-men)
To keep off Age till they be Bis puer.
young again.
The Air we breath may haste^ our age.
The Air we breath does bear an Ore herein,
And being subtle moves the simple Mind;
For, never yet was fool a Florentine,
(As by the wise has well observed been)
So subtle is the Air he draws in:
The influences of malignant Stars, Causes of the Aiers putrification and
consequently of gross wit.

Vales, Caves, Stanckes, Moors, and Lakes that never ryn
Carrion, and filth, all such the Aier marres,
Which killes the Corpse, and vvitts Carreer bars.
From Regions, Winds, and standing of the place
Where we abide, come the Aires qualities;
Under the Poles (the Sun nere showing face
But as a stranger) the Air so does freeze
That whosoever breathes it, starving dies:
And in the Torrid Zone it is so hott
That flesh and Blood (like flaming fire) it fries,
And with a Cole-blacke beauty it does blott,
Curling the Hairs upon a vvyry knott.
The winds, though Air, yet Air do turn and wind; The passions of the Aier
do affect our Minds.

Which Passions of the Air, our spirits affect;
These by the Nose and Mouth a way do find
To Brains, and Heart, and there their kinds effect,
And as they are, make them, in some respect:
For, where the VVindes be cold and violent,
(As where rough Boreas does his Throne erect)
There are the People strong, and turbulent,
Rending the Stern of civil government.
The situation of the place likewise The situation of the Place makes the Aier
good or badde.

The Air therein does well or ill dispose;
If to the Sea, or Southern wind it lies,
It Is humid, putrifactiue, and too close:
So fares it in fatt grounds ( Slouthes chief repose)
The Sandy grounds do make it hott and dry;
As cold, and moist it is, that Fennes enclose,
But clear and piercing on the Mountains hy;
Thus Place with Air does cha^g our quality.
Food good or badd, helps or hinders Wit.
Of no less virtue are our Alements,
Which VVinde, and Air, unto our spirits prepare,
Who are conformed to those Condimentes;
Then fine they be, if most fine be our fare:
The Goodness, Quality, and Time of year,
Use, Order, Appetite, and Quantity,
The Hour and Age, these nine require our care
If we desire to live here healthfully,
And make the Soul above her soul to fly.
The soone-concocted Cates good juice affoording
And but few excrements, are those alone
That make the mind to board, when Bodi's boording,
If temp'ratly the stomach take each one:
These in the Brains base wits do often enthrone:
For, these the Mouth prepares for the Maw,
Where being concocted, to the Liver run;
From whence, a sanguine tincture they do draw,
Then to the Souls Courts hie by Natures law.
The Hart's the lower house, the The Heart and Brain.
head the hie;
(The Rooms whereof we did discribe whil-ere)
Where once appearing they are winged to fly,
And in their flight the Soul and Body steer
With motion such as both Celestial were:
What mervell is it then, though Geese some be
For want of Capons, that would Cocks appear
( Cocks of the Game) and chaunt melodiouslee,
If with their kind, their Commons did agree.
How subtle does a simple cupp of Wine
Make the Souls faculties, and their effects?
It makes their divine natures more divine,
And with a world of Joy the Heart affects
Which, Sorrow though in panges of Death reiects:
Hence comes it that some Captains do ca^rowse
When they must Wine moderatly taken chee^es ^he Ha^t and spi^it^.
Combat with contrary Sects,
To heat the cold blood and the spirits rowse,
And so make Courage, most courageous.
But here (as erst was said) some over drink,
While they desire in fight to over-doe;
On naught but wounds, and blood, they speak, and think,
While Healthes go round, and brains go rou^der too;
VVyne-making Blood to Wine and Blood them woo.
But Nequid nimis, is the List wherein
Courage should combat, and the Bar whereto
Valor should venture, what is more is sin,
Which by the wise and Valiant damned has bin.
Drink has three; offices, The first assists 3. Offices of Drink.

Concoction, for in it is boiled the meat:
The next, to mix the food the first disgests:
The Last, to bring it to the Livers heat,
There to be made redd-hott, and apt to ^leete:
Now when the Current is too violent,
It bears away (untimely) small, and great,
So crossing Nature in her kind intent,
She back Vomitt^.
retires not knowing what she me^t.
Then meat must soak, not in the Stomach swim,
If Nature duly we desire to please;
For, when the Stomack's Gluttony and Drunken^s^e are he horrible sepulture^ of
man's reason and judgment.
full above the brimme,
Tide tarries none, how ere it may disease
And Nature drown in those unruly Seas:
Breath most corrupt, behavior more then most,
And Mind much more then most, is made by these;
Then how corrupt are they that of it boast?
So much corrupt, they may infect an Host.
Its said of one,, that did help to behead
The mounting Monastries that decked this land,
That he (at last) lost his all-wittie Head
For words he spoke, to which he could not stand,
Nor stand to speak, Wine having vpperhand:
Who vsd (as Fame reports) his wits t'refine,
To let them often rest at VVines command;
But wit abused, by abuse of Wine
Abusd One that forced Law to force his fine.
Now as a moderation in these things
With Judgments choice in their varieties,
To Soul, and Body, health, and glory brings;
Temperate exercise available to mind and body.
So both are bound to temperate exercise
For helping them to use their faculties:
For without health the same were hindered,
And health from hence as from an help does rise;
For wholesome labor breaks those humors head
By which the enemies of health are led.
Natural heat
It helps the heat that helps all the parts;
The Spirits it quickens, and puts open the pores;
Whereby each loathsome excrement departs
As at so many straight wide-open doors:
Our limbs it strengthens and our breath restores:
The morning walks to the intestines send
The first digestions filth (which kind abhorres)
And make the seconds to the bladder wend,
So labor lets our sickness, so, our end.
All travel tendes to rest, and rest to ease;
Then must the body travel to this end:
The Sons of Adam, borne to labor.
The Spirits travel has respect to these;
For idle Spirits that active Sp'rit offend
That for such ease a world of woe does send:
Yet naught was made that was not made to rest;
But naught was made to rest until the end:
For Heaven, Faith, Man, Beast, Fish, Foul, and the rest
Do travel, in fine to be rest-possest.
Yet Nature has ordained a repose
Which we call rest for Man, which rest is sleep;
The cause whereof from the Brains chiefly floes,
When mounting vapors in their moisture steep
Do humors wax, and in the Nerves do creep;
And so their conducts close, which shuts the eyes;
Then rests the corpse in death-like darkness deep,
And Spirits animal Rest does surprise:
So, are they said to rest until they rise.
This makes the head so heavy after meat,
The fumes ascending make the head descend;
For they like hammers on the brains do beat,
Til they have hammerd humors in the end,
The weight whereof does cause the head to bend:
Yet sober sleeps, in place, and season fit
Do comfort Nature, and her hurts amend;
The Spirits it quickens, and awakes the wit,
For heart must sleep, when the head wants it.
Dead sleep, Deaths other name and Image true,
Does quiet Passion, calm Grief, Time deceive;
Who pay'ng the debt that is to Nature due
(Like death) in quittance thereof does receive
Supply of powers, that her of power bereave:
So sleep her foes wants friendly does supply,
And in her womb does wakefull thoughts conceive,
Making the Mind beyond it self to spy,
For, doubtless Dreams have some divinity. Divinity often in dreams

For, as the influence of Heavens leames
Frames diverse forms in matter corporal:
A natural reason, for the divinity of Dreams.
So of like influence visions and Dreams
Are printed in the power fantastical;
The which power being instrumental,
By Heaven disposd to bring forth some effect,
Has greatest vigor in our sleeps extremes;
For when our minds do corporal cares neglect
That influence does freely them affect,
And so our Dreams often future haps project.
Watching oremuch, oremuch does Nature wrong,
It blunts the brains, and sense debilitates;
Dulleth the Spirits, breeds crudities among;
Makes the head heavy, Body it abates,
And kindly heat it cooles, or dissipates:
Over much watching debilitates our wits.
Yet thorny cares, or stings of ceaseless Smart,
May keep out sleep without the senses Gates,
(By pricking them as it were, to the heart)
Till vital Spirits from senses quite depart.
Those Chieftaines, on whose cares depend the crowns
(The weighty crowns, on their as weighty cares)
Of mighty Monarchs, and their own renownes,
Two burdens which in one who ever bears,
This waking care breaks the sleep, as a great sickness breaks the
sleep. Eccle 31 2.
Must night, and day, use hands, legs, eyes, and ears:
These watch, yea sleeping wake for in their sleeps
The point on which their hearts are fixed, appears,
And through their closed eyes their minds eye peeps,
To look to that which them from slumber keeps.
Their sleeps are short, but were they short, and sweet,
^^re enemy ^o sle^pe and ^^^epe co^^or^^^ of Care.
Nature would longer sweetly life support:
^ut in their sleeps with wakfull thoughts they meet;
That make their sleeps unsweet, and yet as short;
Which must perforce make Nature all amort: Care a Ca^ker to Min^e and Body.

Yet as they were all Mind, and Body none,
That had noe feeling of the Bodies hurt,
That Mind (all mind) though Corpse the while does groan,
Makes flesh all hardness brook, as it were Stone.
Such force has worldly glory (though but vain)
To make men, for her love, themselue^ to hate,
Who for desire of her, their strength do strain
Far, far above the pitch of mortal state,
And pain in sense, to sense do captivate:
Though pains wake sense, yet sense does waking sleep,
Dreaming on Glory in the lapp of Fate;
So pain from sense, does pain with pleasure keep,
While sense is mou^ting Honors Mountain steep.
Where Glory sitts enthroned (Celestial Dame)
Surrounded with a Ring of Diadems,
With face (whose beaming-beautie seems to fla^e)
Darting in simling wise those blissful beams
On those that for her The labor of like Bodies be not a like painful. For
glory in a Prince makes the labor lighter then that of a Pesant, because he
wot^s it will be notable.
love brook all extremes:
What Sense has sense being so beheavened,
And carried from it self on pleasures Streams?
But as entranced with joy, it must seem dead,
And feel no pain in Mind or Body bredd.
If then Vaine-glories love shall so subdue
The sense to sense that feeling all annoy,
Its armed to brook the same by glories view,
And the more grief is felt, the greater joy;
(Yea though the grife the sense does quight destroy)
What shall the love of Glory infinite
Make sense endure, if sense her powers imploie
To apprehend it, as its requisite?
Such love should hold the pains of Hell too light.
When vnconceaved Joy dilates the Heart
To the utmost reach of his capacity,
When sense no leisure has to think on smart,
Being so busied with felicity
That soul, and sense are ravished thereby;
What marvel then though fire does comfort such,
(Although with que^chlesse flames their flesh it fry)
Since that much Inward joy annihilates outward pain.
pain their joy makes more the^ much
And pain, that sense can feel, no sense can touch.
This made a wooden Esaias the Prophet so marti^ed.
Saw sweet to the flesh
wherewith it sundred was in savage wise:
This makes the burning S. Lawrence.
Grediorne flesh refresh
That on the same in hellish manner fries,
This makes pain pleasure, and Hell Paradise.
Then give me, o good giver of all good,
An Heart that may ore pain thus signiorize,
For thy dear love; then with my dearest blood
I Will wash the Earth, and make more Saints to budd.
When Stones (as thick as hail) from hellish hands
Battr'd that blessed S. Stephen. Act 7.56,58.
Proto-Martyres brain,
The sight he saw his senses so commands,
That, as the Stones did fall the sense to pain,
It deemed that Grace on it did pleasure rain:
And that dear blood, like-worthlesse water shedd,
Did make the springing Church to sprout amain;
One Martyr begets many.
For that no sooner was this Martyr dead
But many (as from him) came in his steed.
And that the Elements do loose their force
(that by such loss their Lord might lovers win)
It well appears; for, did he not divorce
The heat from fire, which his dear Saints were in?
Some too well knew that this performed has bin:
For out it flew and brent their enemies,
And where it first began, it did begin
The power thereof with power to exercise, Dan. 3.22,23.

To show his power, that loathed their sacrifice.
NOw, to retire from whence our Rimes do range,
And touch the soul, and minds mind at the soul;
We see the bodies state the mind may change;
So may the mind the bodies state control;
Thus they the state of one another rule:
The souls soul is the mind, and the minds mind
Is that, where Reason does her laws enrowle:
Yet fuming Passions both of them may blind,
When body, with them both are ill inclined.
Phillipides, that comedies compiled
Orecoming one that with him did contend
In that light Art, (when hope was quite exiled) Sorrow does occu^ie the the
place of extreme joy. Petrarch.

A sudden joy wrought his as sudden end.
Like fate did one Diagoras attend,
Who, see'ng his three sons at Olimpus crowned
For deeds there done (which All did much commend) Extreme joy (being
sudden) is enemy to nature.

He them embracing, strait fell dead to ground,
Because his joy was more then heart could bound.
As extreme sudden joy does kill the heart,
Leaving it bloudlesse which is ioies effect Simil.

(For joy sends blood amain to every part)
So, extreme grief the heart may so affect
(Or sudden fear) that life may it reject;
For both revoke the sp'rites, blood, and kind heat,
And to hearts Center do the same direct,
Which place bee'ng little, and their throng so great,
Expels the Vital spirits from their seat.
Marc Lepidus, divorced from his wife
Whom he entirely loved, with extreme grief
(For it conceav'd) he quickly lost his life;
So love reft life, that erst was life's relief,
For love of that his woe was fountain chief.
So, with a sudden fear have many died
Which name I need not, since I would be brief:
By it the hairs have suddenly bin died,
As by grave writers is exemplifide.
Of no less force (though less the reason be)
Is shamefastness, in some of mighty mind:
Shame may bring life to confusion in generous spirits.
One Diodorus died because that he
Could not assoile a Question him assigned:
The like of Homer we recorded find;
Who died with shame for being so unsound
Not to be able (like one double blind)
Quod capio perdo, quod non capio mihi seruo.
To answer that, base Fishers did propound;
So sense of shame did sense and life confound.
These Passions are the sufferings of the soul,
Body and Soul
That make the Inn to suffer with the Ghest:
For, Perturbations both together roll
Here, there, and every where, as they think best;
Heat natural
Kinde-heate they fire, or quench with their unrest:
For, some (as all observe) have died with joy;
And some with griese, have bin life-dispossest:
For in extremes, they Nature so annoy,
As (being sudden) her they quite destroy.
Yet Mirth in measure, kindly warmes the blood,
And spreads the Spirits, b'inlarging of the heart:
This mirth in measure is the only mood
That cuts the throat of Physic, and her Art,
And makes her Captains from her coulors start; Phisition^.

It makes our years as many as our hairs: Mirth makes man's yeare^ as many as
hi^ hairs.

Then, on earths stage who play a meery part,
Shall much more more the^ much offend their heirs
By overlong p^olonging their desires.
Then, should I live by Nature overlong,
For I to mirth by nature am too prone;
But Accident in me does nature wrong,
By whom untimely she will be overthrone:
For Melancholy in my Soul inthrones
Herself against Nature, through cross Accident,
Where she usurps, that is not her own;
And Nature makes to pine with discontent
That she should so be reft her regiment.
Thus as the Corpse the qualities compound,
So are the Affections moist, dry, hot, and cold, The Affections follow the
qualities of the Humors.

The last are humor'd as the first abound:
Joy (hot and moist) the Sanguine most does hold,
As sorrow (cold and dry) possess the Old.
Mean ioie's a mean to make men moist, and hot,
In which two qualities Health has her Hold:
But grief the heat consumes, and blood does rot,
Which health impaires, and cuts life's Gordian knot.
And as mean mirth man's age maks most extreme;
So does it cloth the bones with frolic flesh:
For, to the parts it makes the blood to stream,
Which makes them grow, and does the^ ioy-refresh;
This mirth the heart must have when head is fresh,
For wyny mirth proceeds from excess; Sickness i^ (as Seneca says) the
chastisement of intempera^ce.

And all excess does but make nature nesh,
Unable to endure times long process,
How ere it may spend time in drunkenness.
This correspondence then twixt flesh, and sp'rite,
Should make our Mouth the House of Temperance;
For the Corpse qualities will answer right
Her rule of Diet; Then intemperance,
The Head and Heart does odiously entrance:
The Har^s affects begett the Minds
The Hearts affects, produce the Heads effects,
Which make the Soul and Bodies concordance:
Then since the Body breeds the Souls affects,
The Soul should feed the same with right respects.
Respect of Health, respect of name, and fame,
Depending on our moderation,
Should be of force to make us use the same;
But, when the Bodies depravation
Touches the soul, and bothes damnation,
All these respects should (being things so dear)
Inflame Desires immoderation
Coldly to use hott wines and belly cheer,
For belly- gods are but the Devils Dear are fatted but to be killed; So
Epicures etc.
Dear.
Since sickness then in body, and in soul,
From tempers ill, and ill affections flo,
Wit ought Wills appetites to overruled
When they (to follow sense) from Reason go;
And bring them to the bent of wisdoms Bo:
For, since our souls by Knowledge things discern,
From whence the will has power of willing too,
The power of The will is derived from Knowledge.
If Knowledge then be to them both a Stern,
They should do naught but what of her they learn.
And so they do, but their Guide being blind
Of the right Eye, no mervel though they run
Too much on the left hand from place assigned,
Directed by Delight, the senses sun:
But Clouds of sin our Knowledge over-runne,
Which make her run awrie in rightest ways,
Whereby our silly souls are often vndunne,
When as she weenes to win immortal praise,
And crown her Craft with everlasting Baies.
Who learnes a trade, must have a time to learn;
For without time an Habit is not gained:
So diverse skills the soul cannot discern,
Until they be by exercize obtained, Pr^ctise the Moth^r of Habit.

For by it only Habittes are attained:
Which Habitts stretch not only to our Deeds,
But to our sufferings, being wronged, or pained,
For Customs force another Nature breeds,
And pyning soul with patience it feeds.
Unto a soul impatient (seldom crossed)
Each Day a year, each year an Age does seem; The Soul is possessed in
patience, if she possess patience.

But a meek soul with troubles often tossed,
The time, though long, does ordinary deem;
For Time and Troubles she does light esteem:
This well appears in sickness, (though most ill)
At first we still do worst of it misdeeme,
But staying long with us, we make our will
Familiar with it, so endure it still.
Afflictions water cooles the heat of sin,
And brings soule-health; But at the first like frost
It soul benummes, as it were starved therein,
And sense, and Life and sp'rit thereby were lost:
The Cross does quell to Hell the seldom crossed:
Hence is it, Christ does with his Cross acquaint
Those that be his, whereof they glory'ng boast,
For that the Cross well borne creates the Saint, Frst the cross and then the
Crown.

As it to Fiendes transformeth them that faint.
Affliction, Lady of the happy life,
(And Queen of mine, though my life happlesse be)
Give my Soul endless peace, in endless strife,
For thou have power to give them both to me,
Because they both have residence in thee:
Let me behold my best part in thine Eyes,
That so I may mine imperfections see;
And seeing them I may my self despise,
For that self-love, does from selfe-liking rise.
Enfold me in thine Arms, and with a kiss
Of coldest comfort, comfort thou my heart;
Breath to my Soul, that mortified is,
Immortal pleasure in most mortal Smart:
Be ieloues of me, play a Lovers part:
Keep Pleasure from my sense, with sense of pain,
And mix the same with pleasure by thine Art;
That so I may with joy the grief sustain,
Which joy in grief by thy dear love I gain.
When from our selves we are estranged quite,
(Though it be strange, we so estranged should be)
Thou make us Affliction being familier with us, does make us most familier
with our selves.
know our selves at the first sight
And bring'st us to our selves, our selves to see;
So that we thoroughly know our selves by As a man cannot know him self, if he
know not God so he cannot know God well if he know not him self. So
inseparable are these knowledges
thee:
But bright Voluptu'snesse does blind our Eyes
That we can nothing see, (and less foresee)
But what within her gaudy Bozome lies,
Being a Map of glorious miseries.
Pleasure, thou VVitch to this bewitching World,
Eare-charming Siren, sold to sweetest Sin,
Wherewith our Hearts (as with Cords) is ensnarl'd,
That break the Cords we cannot being in,
How blessed had we bin, had thou never bin?
For had not thou bin, Grief had nere had being,
Since at thine end, all sorrow does The end of worldly pleasure is the
beginning of Pain.
begin,
And it with thee has too good-ill agreeing:
That Is leagued in ill, and in good disagreeing.
Observaunce, look about with thy right Eye,
View this Worlds Stage, and they that play thereon,
And see if thou can any one epsy,
That plays the wanton being wo-begon;
Or in Wealth wall'wing, plays not the VVanton: Wealth makes men wanton.

See how deep sighs pull in each panting side
Of the first sort, in all their Action,
And how the second sort no where abide,
As standing on no ground through wanton pride.
The first, with downe-cast looks still eye the Mould,
As waying whence they came, and where they must:
The second, with high looks the Clouds behold,
To see how they for place and grace do thrust,
Like these ungracious proud Oppressors just:
Quiett and sadd the first do still appear,
The otherm Ample fortunes, have as ample passions.
mad with mirth, for Prove. 13.10.
quarells lust;
Affliction thus to God does Souls indeere,
When welfare makes them to the Devil dear.
Revile me world, say I am Sincke of shame,
Nay worse then Ill it self, (if worse might be)
Thou do not wrong me World, for so I am,
Although I am the worse (damned World) for thee:
Spitt out thy fame-confounding spite at me,
Make me so vile that I my self may Our ^nemies will tell us wherein we are
faulty which friends will forbeare^ so may we profit by our foes^
hate,
That so I may to my Reformer flee;
And being reformed, I may still meditate
On that pure Mind, that mended my Minds state.
Then though Affliction be no welcome Ghest
Unto the world (that loves naught but her weal)
Of me, therefore she shall be loved best,
Because to me she does the World reveal,
Which worldly welfare would from me conceal:
Affliction is the best Tutres^^ to make us know the World.
It is a gaineful skill the World to know,
As they can tell that with the World do deal,
It cost them much ere proof the same does show,
Which knowledge from Affliction straight does flow.
And though the entrance into Virtues way
Be strait, so strait that few do enter in,
Yet being entered, walk with ease we may,
For labor ends when we do but begin:
,, Sweat before Virtue lacky-like does rin
To open the gate of Glory sempiterne,
That her triumphant coach might enter in;
So outward temp'ral toil 'gets bliss eterne
Upon the corpse of Virtue most interne.
Custom is another nature. Custom is overcome by ^ustome.
Since Custom then is of such lively force
As it has power it self to overcome,
How blessed are they that do themselves divorce
From Custom ill, by force of good custom:
And ten times blessed they that from the Womb
Accustomed are to Virtues straightest Way,
For, such by Custom virtuous become,
Though powreful Nature do her self say nay;
For Nature, Customs power is forced t'obay.
When, the affections are called virtues or Vices.
When the Affections Acts are habits grown,
Then Virtues or else Vices are they named;
A vicious Habit's hardly overthrown,
For our Affection is therewith enflamed,
As with the fire infernal are the damned:
Who though they would, and though they anguish have,
Yet cannot that outrageous mood be ram'd,
But still they raging sin, and cannot save
Themselves from that, that makes their grief their grave.
A vicious Habit is Hels surest Gin,
Wherewith a Man is sold to sin, and shame,
Running from sin to sin, and naught but sin,
As Rivers run the same, and not the same.
Til the minds Iointes, sins force does so vnframe
That it becomes most loose and dissolute;
Neither regarding heaven, hell, shame, nor fame,
But to live loathsomly its resolute;
Thus Habits ill, make evil absolute.
But few there are in whom all vice concurres;
And fewer are they, that all faults do want;
Unto the worst, offenses cling like Burres;
And to the best as to the Adamant
The Iron cleaues; for the Church militant
By nature is accompanied with sin;
Yet the least force of faith parts them (I grant) Sin inhabites, but is not
habitual in the godly.

Because it cleaues but slightly to the skin,
But to the wickeds flesh its fastened in.
For as a burre the longer it abides Simil.

Upon a garment being cott'nd hy,
The more the Wool winds in his hooked sides:
So sin the longer it in Flesh does ly,
The faster to the same its fixed thereby.
If Nature then sin soon does entertain,
Use violence to Nature by and by,
That it perforce may from the same refrain;
For what skill cannot, force may yet constrain.
Simil.
And as the Burre to Wool so being fixed,
With skill, or force cannot be parted thence,
But that some part will with the Wool be mixed:
So, sin where it has had long residence,
Will leave remains there, maugre violence:
Simil.
But Iron from the loadstone clean will fall
With but a touch: and so will sins offense
From those in whom its not habitual
With but a touch of Faith, though nere so small.
That I may touch the Subject of my Rimes
More home, (though homely I the same do touch)
And for, my traveled Muse might breath sometimes,
And, that the Reader too might do as much,
(Lest that prolixitie might make him grutch)
Here shall she make a stand, and look a-backe,
Simil.
As Riders rank on Steepes have customs such
To breath their bony- Nags, when wind they lack,
And courage them again like toil to take.
In knowing our souls, we know ^he wel-head of al our Actions.
THe knowledge of the Soul, and of her Powers,
Is the wellhead of morrall-VVisedomes flood:
Hence know we al (worth knowing) that is ours,
In body, or in Soul, that is ill or good:
And if these Powers be rightly understood,
We know the founts from whence our Actions slow,
And from what cause proceeds every mood,
Or good, or ill, and where that cause does grow;
All this and more, this knowledge makes us know.
For in the Soul does shine (though sinne-obscur'd)
By Natures light, great light of such science;
Whereby the Soul is made the more assured
In all her Actions, and Intelligence;
Though often deceav'd by seeming goods pretense:
And for the Soul is to the body bound,
Affections therein have their residence,
That, as with wings, the soul with the^ might bound,
Above her self from being blood y drowned.
Wherefore she has Affections of two kinds, The Mind turns and winds the
body by the Affections of the Heart.

The one eggs on, the other do restrain,
By which the Mind the body turns and winds,
As they the mind, and mind the Corpse constrain:
Yet when these Curbs our headstrong nature pain,
It winceth with the Heel of willfull-will;
Orethrowing those Affects that do it reign,
And in extremities it runs still,
Which is the Race of Ruin, Rest of Ill.
This comes to pass when as we overpasse
The bounds of Nature, by our Natures vice;
And in some one excess we do surpass,
Desiring more then Nature may suffice,
To which our corrupt natures us entice:
For let the least Necessity appear
A ken from us, (though near so small of price) Little suffiseth Nature, but
nothing Opinion.

As a little Colloquintida does mar a whole pot of pottage: so covetousness
does make all other virtues abominable. The best use of worldly things is^ to
contemn worldly^ It things^ Plato.



We hold what else we hold, (though nere so dear)
VVorthlesse, and for that want with woe we steer.
Hence is it that with never-ceasing toil,
And no less care, we traverse all this All;
Nay, all that All we restleslie turmoile,
And bandy (as it were) this Earthie Ball
Past reasons reach, to win worlds wealth withal:
Desire of having thus still moiles the mind,
Though Nature be suffis'd with pittance small;
Which makes us loose our selves when we it find,
Since see our selves we cannot, being blind.
It blinds our Eyes that seldom'st are deceav'd,
Eyes of our Soul, that make our Bodies see;
Then Soul and Body cannot be perceav'd,
By their own virtue when they blinded be;
And mine and thine, does sever me, and thee:
Naught can content us. Therefore the Affects
Are in the soul like winds (that nere agree)
Upon the Sea, and work the like effects,
Some great, some small, yet like in most respects.
Beside the chief winds and Collateral,
(Which are the VVindes indeed of chief regard)
Seamen observe more, thirty two in all,
Al which are pointed out upon their Card:
But our Minds Mapp, (though many may be spared)
Contains many more Affects then these,
All which though set our Minds Content to guard,
Yet sturr they up (as VVindes do on the Seas)
Unquiet Passions which the Mind disease.
A simil.
When Zephire breathes on Thetis, she does smile,
She entertaines that gale with such content;
But, if proud Boreas do puff the while,
She Is madd with rage, and threats the Continent;
For those proud puffes her soul do discontent:
So, some Affections our souls brows unbend,
And other some do sextiply each dent;
Some meanly please, some meanly do offend,
And some do make the Soul her Soul to rend.
Those that do meanly move, Affections hight;
The other Huff-snuffes Affections move the Soul moderately, but Perturbations
move her most violently.
Perturbations be;
These later rudely against their Guides do fight,
And so enfume them that they cannot see,
Or make them from their Charge away to flee:
So that the soul being left without a Guide,
And tossed with Passions that still disagree,
Does like a Sternelesse Ship at randon ride A Simil.

On mightiest Seas, wrack-threatn'd on each side.
For, if our Reasons judgment blinded be,
The Affections needs must ever run When Judgment is betrayed, the Affections
are misguided.
awrie,
And draw with the^ each sense tumultuoslee
To offer violence to low and hye;
That God, and Nature, taste their tyranny:
Let but the Heart be loue-sicke, and the same
Will carry Judgment where his Love does ly;
And there confine it, setting all on flame
That offers but resistance once to name.
The lower Judgment in our blood is sunck
The lower is her reach in Reas'ns discourse;
For Judgment with our blood may be so dru^ck,
That doom she cannot better from the worse,
But (reeling too and fro) is reft of force.
The higher therefore, she her self does rear Therefore moderate fasting feeds
the Soul.

Above base Flesh and Blood's declining course,
The more Affections baseness will forbear,
And nearer draw to that that first they were.
For, Passions passing ore that break-neck Hill
Of Rashness, ledd by Ignorance their guide,
By false-Opinions Hold of Good and Ill
Taking their course, at last with us abide,
While from our selves they make our selves to slide,
So that we seek not that sole sov'raigne Good,
But many Goods we seek; which being tried
Do but torment the Mind with irefull Ills taken for good, grieve the mind
upon trial.
mood,
Because they were by her mis-vnderstoode.
Had we the prudence of the brutish kind,
We would preve^t these Passions Storms with ease;
For, ere a Storm appears they shelter find;
Like providence have Seamen on the Seas,
Who see them far off, and provide for these:
So ought we, when we see a Passion Passion is easiest extinguished when it
begins to kindle.
rise
That may the Soul, and Body much disease,
With Moderations power the same surprise,
Before it gather head to tyrannize.
But, so far off are we from curbing Passion,
That wilfully we mount it, and so ride
On it a gallopp (spurred with Indignation)
To all Extremes, where Vices all abide;
The Devil being extreme Passions guide:
For once when Reason^s driven from the Helm,
And we twixt Scylla and Charibdis glide,
There is no hope but one should overwhelme,
And send us straight to the infernal Realm.
But with a prudent Man it fares not so,
He keeps himself without the Affections A wise man rules, and is not ruled by
his Affections.
sway;
He seeks no good, but he it well does kno,
And knowing it, seeks it the rightest way:
We say, and miss, because we mis-asay:
Wisdom chalks out the way her self to find,
So that Men cannot err if it they way,
Except they be (as many) wilful blind,
For it is straight, though strict in easy kind.
Wisdom (the Well of every perfect good)
Is that, which wise men only (seeking) find;
Which Constancy holds the Heart that holds wisdo^e.
constant good they seek in constant mood,
And being found, most constant makes the Mind:
For to the same, it self, it self does bind:
Heerehence it is, the clouds of Ignorance
That erst the same did naturally blind
Away are chased, without tarriance;
For VVisedomes Son, himself does there advance.
Thus good, and ill (as erst we said) procure
The Minds Affects, or Moodes, (so called by some)
Which good, or evil, pure, or most impure,
Is either past, or present, or to come,
To be attained, or not be overcome:
And, as we deem the absence of good, ill:
So, absent Ill, Ill is the privation of good.
we deem does good become;
Either of which affects so our Will,
That by their means it is in motion still.
When any good's propounded to the soul,
She notes, she likes, and lastly it does loue^
But in her Mouth she often it does roll,
That so her Palate may thereof approve,
Before it can her Souls affection move:
This motion of possessed good is Joy;
But good to come (which we do long to prove)
Is called Desire, Good is the object of love and Desire.
which love does still employ
To seek that good which it would feign enioie.
If Ill proposed be, its called Offense,
Because the soul offended is thereby;
If it abides, Hate does her soul incense;
For she a lasting ill hates mortally,
As that which most her soul does damnifie:
And, as from present Ill, Grief does aspire:
So, Fear proceeds from Ill far off or ny:
The mood against present Ill is sinnelesse Ire, To be angry with evil, is
good.

And Faith, and Hope, against future Ill conspire.
All which Affects have others under them;
For Reverence, Pity, and Benevolence,
Spring out of Love, (as Branches from the Stem)
From Joy, Delight; Dislike, from sorrows sense;
And in Desire, Hope has her residence:
Pride is a mo^ster compounded of many Affections.
But Prid's a Monster, for she is composed
Of Self-conceit, Desire, Joy, Impudence;
These, and such like in Pride are often disclosed,
For in her womb they restless are reposed.
And, as Affections one another breed,
By one another so are they restrained:
Joy wounds Grief, and Grief makes Joy to bleed;
And so the rest are by the rest refrained,
As by the Strong the weaker are constrained:
A Simil.
As when cursed Thetis chiding knitts the Brow,
Her Billows proud, that eithers pride disdain,
Thrusts out each other: So, when Passions flow,
The greater do the lesser overthrow.
A Simil.
And often it fares in our Minds Commonweal,
As in a Civill-warre the case does stand;
Where no mann's careful of his Countries heal,
Or who of right should all the rest command,
But follow him that has the strongest hand:
So, in Affections fight there is no respect
To the Minds good, or how it should be scand,
But (inconsiderate) they both reject,
And do as strongest Passion does Where Passion reigns Reason obayeth.
direct.
The Heart, the Hold where these Pow'res are enclosed,
Hereby is vexed; for, if it do incline
To those Affections that are worst disposed,
Its inly griv'd, else Joy the same does line,
And with the same does face the Face in fine;
But, if sadd sorrow do the Heart surprise,
It does deface the face and make it pyne;
Looking like Languishment through both the Eyes,
For through the The Eye is the Index of the Mind.
Eyes, our Eye the Heart espies.
This direct Index of the Mind, the Eyes
Does often bewraie what Reason does conceal;
For will ye, nil ye, we shall see thereby
What Is well, or ill, in the Minds commonweal: Eccl. 13.26.

Our Looks, our Falshoode truly do reveal,
Whereby often lives and liberties are lost;
Examined Thieves Confounded looks bewray men's lewdnes.
confess that they did steal
By their confused looks, with horror tossed:
Thus Count'naunce often putts us to double cost,
It Lyvings costs, to hold it being hy,
It costs our lives, when we it cannot hold;
We cannot hold it when through it we dye;
And two Proppes hold it high, Silver and Gold,
For which our lives, and livinges often are sold:
For too low State too false does make the hands,
Which in the Countenance we often behold,
Through which we die; and State that highly stands
Lands must uphold; So, it costs life and lands.
Thus Joy and Sorrow send with equal pace
True tokens of their presence in the Heart,
(By Natures force conducted) to the Face;
Where they the powr's convince of Reasons Art,
And in the The countenance shows how the Heart is aff^cted^
Front with force they play their part:
If in the Heart, Grief be predominant,
The brows will bend as if they felt the smart;
If Joy, the face will seem therefore to vant,
Then how Heart fares, Fools are not ignorant.
That Man is truly wise as Man may be,
That can bear weal, and woe, with like aspect;
There may be such, but, such I nere could see;
Yet good men's countenance I much respect,
But of their goodness nere saw that effect:
Let Stoics give for praecepts what they list,
This virtue may (perhapps) be their defect;
For though Affections force they can resist,
Yet they will prevail when Natures powers assist.
And weakling that I am, how apt am I
To martial al my Passions in my face;
Not to dissemble, is not to live.
I often have tried, and yet I do but try,
To keep them in, in their conceaving place,
Dissembling so Discretions foul disgrace:
But as I cannot color my defects,
So, can I well dissemble in no case;
Which is the cause of many badd effects,
For none (though nere so vain) this vain affects.
Tears are the Tokens of a Passion'd Soul,
That Heart for Love sometimes sends to the Eyes,
And often they witness there Joy, Pain, or Dole,
But how so ere, from Passion strong they rise;
Which Passion in Compassion often lies:
Mine Eyes are kyn (too near of kyn) to these,
Which, though my Spirit does it much despise,
Yet do they turn mine Eyes too often to Tears quench the ^^^e of immod^^ate
Passion.
Seas,
To drown Hearts Passion and to give it ease.
But blessed were I if mine Eyes could flow
With Tears of Pity seeing the distressed;
But much more blessed, had I then to bestow
And franckly give, then were I treble blessed;
In Tears, in wealth, and in both so addressed:
My Secret to my self, I bless Him ay
For being no worse, though badd I be at best;
The less I speak of what I feel that way,
The more I feel his grace my thoughts to sway.
He, Fount of goodness (holy be his name)
Was often seen (when he as man was seen)
To weep, and seemed delighted with the same,
Seeing the World (through his Tears) still oreseene,
That might by his example blessed have been:
Who never was observed to laugh, or jest,
Either in Manhood, or when years were green,
At merry-meetings, or at vveddings feast;
Showing thereby what mood fitts Virtue best.
If Joy at any time had touched his Soul,
(As when his words had made a Proselite)
He (only wise) would wisely it control,
For that this mood with Mirth is too light for the gravity of Majesty.
Majesty does fight,
Which in his Person was enthroned by right:
This we admire as that we cannot do,
For, we in pleasures vain so much delight,
That Joy may make us madd, and kill us too:
For Joy, or Grief can our hart-stringes undo.
Thus when our Tears do testify our ruth,
We need not rue, or of them be ashamed;
For, Virtue therein her own self ensuth,
When with self-love her Soul is most inflamed,
Which self-love burns the Soul yet nere is Virtues self-loue alone is
Virtuous.
blamed:
Wherefore such Tears, and Tears effus'd for sin,
Is wine of Angels, so by Angels named;
Then blessed are those Founts that never lyn
To send forth streams, that Angels glory in.
When sighs for sin ascend^ Mercy descends,
And in the rise, their flight anticipates;
Grace centreth sighs that Mercy comprehends,
But sighs from sin ascending Mercy hates;
Sighs for, and from sin, are unequal mates:
From sin, none but sighs sinful can arise;
But sighs for sin high grace consociates,
The kingdom of heaven suffers violence; and the violent take it by force Mat.
11. 12.
And did not Mercy stay them in the rise,
They would with violence the Heavens surprise.
The Heart co^ceaues two kinds of Joy or Grief.
Two kinds of Joy or Grief the Heart conceaues,
For Good, or Ill, possessed, or future;
The name of Hope, the later Joy receaues,
Which of some good to come does us assure;
The latter Grief does Fear in us procure
Of Ill to come, which we with Grief expect:
So, Joy, and Hope, or Grief, and Fear in power
Are much alike, their ods Time does effect,
And take their names as they do Time respect.
Hope time to come respects, bred by Desire,
Desire of good, wherein we Joy by Hope;
Likelihood is the life of hope touching mundane matters.
Hope has no help of science but entire
Rests on conjecture, which to doubt lies open,
And likelihood gives her her utmost scope:
Yet Hope that is fixed on that all-working Word
That gave Earth being, and the Heavenly Cope,
Excludes Conjecture, and is so assured,
As if that hopt for, Time did strait afford.
Then no true Joy can hope accompany,
That has but likelihood for her best stay;
For such hope, Posse evermore does eye,
Which ere it comes to Esse, slides away:
For in each Possibility we may
Behold a possibility of fail;
Which must of force our hope sometimes dismay;
Then Fear a shaking hope must needs assail,
And hope must shake, that cross events may quail.
Such is the VVickeds most assured hope, The hope of the impious is full of
fear.

Who Ancor it on transitory Toys;
They fear the cracking of that cable Rope
That holds them to their hopes expected ioies;
Contingencie their constan'st hope annoies;
Which ay is constant in inconstancy:
And often them with their groundless hope destroies;
Which fills their hopes with dire perplexity,
And lines their ioies with lasting misery.
But hope that has for object certain things
(As those which Truths nere-failing word assures)
In great'st distress great consolation brings,
And like good sauce an appetite procures,
Grief to digest, as long as life endures:
This hope makes hearts to hold that else would break;
And hearts almost quite broken she recures,
And when our foes by force our ruin seek, Innocence dreades no danger.

She gives us strength to ween their force too weak.
She holds the powers of hell in high contempt,
And makes a jest of temp'ral power or pain;
From all annoy of both she is exempt,
For in Griefs bowels she does joy retain;
As Jonas did in the Whales intertaine:
The air she strikes with so strong a winge Hopes wings are pennipotent.

That air, or fire, the force cannot restrain,
But up she will through both, and every thing
That lets her from the place of her biding.
Nay, she with such resistlesse wings does fly,
That she her self her self does often surmount;
The Patriarck Abraham.
The Faithfuls Father made her so to stie,
And diverse other Saints of less account;
Being on her VVings she, maugre force, will mount,
Who, through the ten-fold heavens (though thick and hard)
Ca^ glide with ease, as Fish do through a fou^t,
Nor by the highest himself can she be bard,
Genesis 32.26.28
But will prevail, as it with Jacob fared.
Thus Joy, and Hope go jointly hand in hand,
Like Twins got by Desire, by Fancy borne;
And as Hopes joy, on future Good does stand,
So, Fear's a grief conceav'd for Ill unborn
(Which we expect) wherewith the Soul is torn:
Then look what ods there is twixt Hope and Joy,
The like's twixt Fear, and grief (in minds forlone)
A like they comfort, or the Mind annoy,
As they best know, that best or worst enjoy.
Fear does the Heart contract, (that Hope dilates)
And shut so close that vital Spirits it pines;
Then Nature to prevent death (which she hates)
Draws blood and Spirits from all the parts confines,
And to the Heart in haste the same assigns:
Then are the outward parts, as pale, as cold,
And quake as fearing their approaching fines;
Then pants the heart that labors life to hold,
Which ties the Tongue, womb loosing ere it should.
And as this sense-confounding Passion, Fear,
The heart with horror thus excruciates;
So, in the soul it such a swaie does bear,
That it the Powers thereof quite dissipates;
And makes most abiects, of most mighty States:
How like an Idol stands Fears servile Slave?
Whose total senses Fear so captivates, The Senses would die, that fea^e might
^ot ^iue

That no one sense has force it self to save,
But Death desires to kill the fear they have.
If this base Fear (hearts hateful hell) possess
The heart, the heart does then possess the heel;
But most of all, when heart does most transgress,
And divine vengeance it (with fear) does feel;
Then Strength may seek to stay it, but, t'wil reele
In spite of morrall strength, that it should sway;
And, as stark drunk with fear, turn like the wheel
That wheels the nether heavens without stay,
Let courage say the while, what courage may.
No harness (though by Vulcan forged) can make Fear is utterly ha^tl^sse.

Fear to be hardy, or not hartlesse quite;
If Armors could from Art such tempers take,
The Artist should be king'd in Fortunes spite;
For many kings would crown him for this slight:
But he it is, whom heaven, and hell does fear,
Can take fear from, and arm us with his might;
For he alone the faint- heart up does rear,
Or make the stowtest heart most faint appear.
We must then armed be from Fear, by fear; Gods fear expels fear.

Gods fear, that strong Vulcanian Armor, must
Guard such good Souls as do regard it here;
Because such fear is ever full of trust, Eccle. 1.12.

That fears no threate of any mortal thrust;
For, Hope in him, does make the dareing heart,
Which hope no heart can have that is unjust;
For Conscience pricks will make the same to start
When the least Leaf does wagge, by wind, or Art:
The Belly becomes loose though force of Fear
When therefore divine Justice sin will scurge,
He does dishart their hearts, in whom it reigns,
In sort, that they themselves with horror Job. 41.16.
purge,
When he on them his heavy vengeance raynes;
So that their fear exaggerates their pains:
The haughti'st Heart (erst swollen with Valors pride)
Fear striks stone-dead, when he but vengeance faines;
And greatest strength by weakness is defide,
When as his power in weakness does abide.
Courage comes from Hope.
Then, Courage comes from Hope, and Hope from Heaven,
The Donor is the highest Diety;
The praise is His, that is to prowess given,
For he alone the Mind does magnify:
Then praise him Low, if courage make you Hie;
And laud him High, if fear make ye not low;
Yea high and low praise Him alone, whereby
You gain the praise that men on you bestow,
From Whom (as from the Fount) al praise does flow.
How is it then, that Divills in Men's form
swaggring Six-penny Champions.
Man-quellers are so desperate?
Who with strong hand Gods Images deforme
Fearing no man, but give the check or mate
To good and badd of what soever state^
This is not courage, but an hellish fire
That boiles their blood, called Ire, inflamed by Hate,
And often of Saints they ( Fiendes) have their desire;
Job. 2.7.
No otherwise then Job felt Satan's ire.
Genesis 4.8.
So, cursed Caine slew Abell in that mood,
Abell, that Innocent the Highests beloved;
Yet Caine had heart and hand to broach his blood:
The like, Men Angell-like have often approved
By those whom God in this life nere reproved.
This secret is obscure, but light to those
That take it light, and it abide vnmov'd;
Them Faith assures, He does of all dispose;
In whom, come life or death, they hope repose.
If divine God.
LOVE desires my Bodies death,
By soddaine death my Soul so straight to have,
What matters it, though he bereave my breath
By Div'll, or Angel, so my Soul he save;
The God is the Fountain of all Power.
power they both possess, to them he gave,
Both are his Ministers to do his will;
If Satan then, my Corpse bring to the Grave,
To me it is so far from being ill,
That Satan does me good, against his will.
Me good said I? well may I call it good,
Since it is good of goods, good all in all;
The fount, whereof all goodness is the flood,
That never yet was gagged nor never shall
By Men, most wise, or spirits Angelical:
It is the Abyss of true Felicity,
Which some men, more then most fantastical,
Suppose they have, had they high dignity;
With pleasure faced, and lyn'd with Misery.
Thus Joy, and Hope, were by the all Giver given
As sweet Conductors to his sweetest Sweet;
And Fear, and Grief, from his wrath are deryv'n
To awe the Mind, (which first therewith does meet)
And that which that Mind has fore-done unmeet,
should be thereto as Sorrow remains after sin for sin, to make the Soul
detest sinne^
Scourge and Scouger just,
Which do remain, when sins sour- Sweetes do fleet
To make the Mind abhor her former lust;
For Grief, and Fear, are just to Minds unjust.
Now the true pleasure which our Nature craves
The whiles the Soul remains the Bodies Ghest,
Is the true rest some Good the Soul vouchsaves,
Which the Heart holds, and esteems best;
As Contemplation is Reasons rest:
Yet can there be no pleasure in that good
If it be greater then Heart can digest;
For, if the Continent bound not the flood,
Confusion must ensue in likelihood.
If Light (joy of the Eye) be, as the Sun,
Too great for the Eyes small capacity,
They may be dymmed so, if not vndunne:
Or if it be too small, they cannot see;
As they are strong or weak, so Too great Light is as offensive to the Eye, as
too little.
Light must be:
The like of other senses may be sedd
Outward or inward, bound to form, or free,
Who must with moderation still be fedd,
For excess the^ annoies, nay strikes the^ dead.
As therefore God is most most infinite,
So he is with joy received of that part
That Is likst himself, which is the Soul or sp'rit;
But for that he cannot himself impart
(being Immense) to them by power or art,
(they being not so) he is to them applied
By God is by Intelligence apprehended of us.
Understanding, yet but so in part;
If otherwise he should with them abide,
They would through glory be quite nullified.
Now, as a man takes pleasure by these parts,
So in that part he takes the most delight
That to his Flesh, or sp'rite, most joy imparts;
And with those pleasures is he swallowed quight,
That do affect that part with maine and might:
Therefore the brutish Vulgar, most are pleased
In things substantial which appear to sight,
And things divine, which cannot so be seas'd,
They hold as vain, and are therewith displeased.
Among the pleasures which are sensual,
The vilst is that we feel, by that we touch;
Because it is the Earthli'st sense of all:
The Tast's of better temper, though not much: Note which of the outward senses
is the most supreme.

Smelling is light, and lightly more will grutch
At unsweet Savors, then in sweet will joy;
The Hearing is more worthy far then such,
Since its more Air^y and does less annoy,
Whereby we gain the Faith which we enjoy.
But Seeing, ( Sov'raigne of each outward sense)
Holds most of Fire, which is in nature near
To the Seeing is the Sovereign of the outward Se^ses and why.
Celestial Natures radience;
Therefore this sense to Nature is most dear,
As that which has (by Natures right) no Peer.
Thus much for pleasures which these senses give,
Whereof the best must needs most base appear
Compared to the worst our Souls receave,
Whose powers have much more power to take and give.
These are the Lures of lust, that never lyn
To draw the world to be a pray to vvoe;
These make frail flesh and Blood the founts of The outward senses are the
Doors wh^re thr^ugh Sin enters into our Souls.
sin,
From whence all mortal miseries do sloe,
Which flesh and blood do groaning undergo;
In these are Baits for Beggars, as for Kings:
Which pleasures streams do (swelling) overfloe,
That they are caught unawares; so that these things
The World to Hell, and Hell to horror b^inges.
These are the windows through which Satan spies
The disposition of our better part:
Through these he has a glimps of all that lies
Within the secret'st corners of our Heart,
The Devil knows not the thoughts of Man.
Which well to know belongs to heavenly Art:
For love of these, the Flesh the Sprite does loath,
Who for their pleasure makes the same to smart,
And for their comfort soul and body both
With Care confusedly themselves do cloth.
A Simil.
As when grim Night puts on a Sable weed,
Faced with infernal Apparitions,
That so the next days comfort might exceed:
So, are the Mind and Bodies motions
Care-cloth'd for senses consolations.
Frail senses (Seede-plots of impiety
Made for our Reasons recreations)
Die and be damned, or live to magnify
Your makers Mercy, Might, and Majesty.
And as in Pleasures false are true degrees,
Agreeing with these Organs of the sense,
Some base, some mean, some high, (for so are these)
The inferiorst interior sense co^ceiues more pleasure then all the outward
senses can.
(Yet all but base to pleasures excellence,
Whereof the souls low'st power has highest sense)
So are there like gradations in the ioies
Those Powers conceive, as is their pre'minence;
The feeding Power, in feeding power imploies,
Which pleases Nature, but the soul annoies.
The pleasures of the mind do far excel those of the body.
Those Ioies conceaved by the Intelligence
As most supreme, do most rejoice the sp'rite;
For they belong to the supreamest sense,
Wherein the Mind conceaveth most delight
(Though Nature pine the while) by Natures right.
Thus then, if judgment these degrees would way,
She would reject joy s^nsuall, as too light,
And not permit the same her to betray,
Which makes frail sense the strongest Reason sway.
The Gluttons Gorge ( Charibdis of Excess)
Should (being disgorg'd) from surfeiting forbear:
The Insatiate Leacher would that fire suppress,
That Conscience and his secrets often does sear:
None would be Beasts that humane creatures were.
Then, sense of Touch or Taste, as vil'st they be,
So do they bring the ioies that soonest wear;
For those that come by that we hear or see,
Do longer last, and with us more agree.
And the more base and brutish pleasures be, The more brutish the pleasures
be, the more pain is taken in their execution.

The more's the pain in their accomplishment;
And the more used they are excessiuely,
The more's the soul and bodies dammagement;
Witness the Leachers loathsome languishment,
The Drunkards dropsy, and the Gluttons Grease,
Each clogged with either, or worse punishment,
That health decreaseth with their corpse increase,
And shame increases with their fames decrease.
Ask sensual- pleasure, in her greatest ru^fe,
How little grief will overthrow her quite
And give her soul a deadly counter-buffe,
She will (as forced) confess, she has no might
When Grief, scarce sensible, but comes in sight.
We can brook pleasures want with greater ease, Griefs do more annoy us
then Pleasures delight us.

Then not feel griefs though they in pleasure bite;
For, absent good does not so much displease,
As present ill our Souls soul does disease.
For corporal pleasure being sensual
Consists in some excess, which still does tend
To the extreme subversion of our All;
The fear whereof must pleasure needs suspend,
And make her suffer penance to the end.
No Conscience Gods co^ma^dements mentioned in the Decalogue.
seared with Lusts Soul-scortching fire,
But seeles the Laws sharpe-burning Iron to send
An hell of pain, where she is most entire;
For it does death it self with life inspire.
Now as the pleasures of the eye surpass
The rest that on the outward senses rest:
So Fancies pleasures all those pleasures pass,
Because Opinion esteems them best;
Hence is it, wealth with pleasure is possessed
For no inherent virtue, but because
Opinion holds the possessor blessed;
This makes men (maugre God and Natures laws)
To bite, and scrat for wealth, with Teeth and Pawse.
Wealth, state, and glory, if they worldly be,
False wealth, frail state, vain- glory then they are;
Only held good by doting Fantasy,
Which will no part thereof to Reason share,
Least she should find them false, and bid beware:
But Reasons pleasures are perpetual,
They are all comfort, quitted from all Care,
They thrall the Mind to freedom spiritual,
That makes self Bondage, sweet self Freedoms thral.
Bodily pleasures are but pains compared to those of the mind.
No marvel then, though Men possessing these
Do hold al other pleasures hels of pain;
That some their wealth have thrown into the Seas,
That so they might this weal with ease retain;
These made that Eccles. 2.
King to hold all pleasures vain
(Save these alone) that proved all under Sun,
These have made Princes quitt their princely Train,
Trained by these pleasures (which are never dunne)
Quite from their Scepters and themselves to run.
These make the Mind and Sp'rite so Nectar-dru^ck
That they sleep soundly in divine delight:
These make the Soul forsake the Bodies Trunck,
Leaving it Ioy-tranc'd whilst she takes her flight
Through Natures works to have her Makers sight:
These, these, and none but these are Heavens on Earth,
Because on Earth they see by Natures light
The highest Heavens Majesty and Mirth,
And by his Sons light God the Father, father^le^^^.
without Sire, their birth.
Among which pleasures, those which do consist
In Contemplation, are the most divine;
By which this life and that to come are blist,
Which made Philosophers to it assign
The Chief Beatitude, the Spirittes wine.
If Minds that never knew the Sov'raigne Good
Mount up so high to make this Good their fine,
What shame for those baptized in Christ his blood,
If they (like Swine) do place the same in mudd?
And as the Soul retains more or less
Of pristine purity, so will the same
In all her Actions, less or more transgress,
And to the best, or worst, her motions frame:
Therefore some place their pleasure in their fame
For knowledge, and seek knowledge to be known;
Some in rare handy-works, and some in Game,
Some how a State may stand, or be orethrowne
When it is little, or else overgrowne.
And of al skils that merely are humane,
Civil Policy.
This skill is it that most commends the soul:
This can instruct the sword to make a lane
To Crowns, and teach the same Crowns to co^troule,
And slaves in Catalogue of kings enroule.
For Policies long Arm can compass power,
Which ioin'd, at will, the Earths huge Bowl ca^roule
In Natures spite, if from th'aetheriall Tower,
A sudden vengeance stay not humane power.
If the swords edge be set on Policy,
It will slip through the Ioints of Monarchies;
And shave the Crown of Royal Majesty,
So be it stand in way of Tyranies,
That clime to Crowns by blood and villainies.
The hand of Policy welding the sword,
Directs each Blow that wounds still multiplies,
Crowns are purchased often unjustly by bloody co^quests.
That slaves to Crowns through streams of blood may ford;
For Crowns de Or, those sanguine streams afford.
HEre Muse crave license for a maine digress,
Of those that shall thine Ambages survay;
Since Policy compels thee to transgress
The Rules of Order, her power to display;
She (most importunate) will have no nay,
But thou must from thy project long desist
To blazon her high virtue by the way,
That sense may see wherein she does consist,
Wherein (being much) thou must the more insist.
But what I shall in this behalf insert
Through my no skill and less experiment,
Comes from a Muse that can but speak of part,
Much less has skill to teach al government;
Or if she had, she were too insolent
So to presume; since Reason has bin strained
To highest reach for Rules of Regiment;
Suffices me to touch it as constrain'd^
By that I handle; else, would have refrained.
Nor will I justify all rules for right,
That Policy approves for direct;
God, and Man's wisdom are repugnant quite;
Man's wisdom holds for good a good effect
Caused by ill, which Gods does still reject:
And to do all that Policy does will
Must needs the soul with mortal Sores infect;
Hear, what she wills, then judge, if well or ill;
And use or else refuse it, as ye will.
Whose power if it with puissance be conioin'd Policy (under God) is the
overruler of all under heaven.

Controules al powers, save hellish or divine;
It glues together states, that VVarres vnioin'd,
And severs those that Concord did combine:
It makes or marres disposing Mine and Thine:
On Sov'raignes heads it makes Crowns close to sit,
That sooner shall their heads then Crowns decline;
It makes Will law, when Wit thinks Law unfit,
Yet wills that Law should lincke with Will and wit.
It tells the Statesman sitting at the Stern, To Princes, we must give our
reasons by weight, and our wo^ds by measure.

(Embozom'd by his sov'raigne) he must be
Careful the humor of his Lige to learn,
And so apply himself thereto, that he
May neither cross nor with it still agree:
Like Sol that with nor against the Heaven goes, Similie.

But runs ascue, by whose obliquitie, All Policy ought ^o tend to public
profite^

Each thing on Earth's conserved, and gayly groes;
So Counselors their councels should dispose.
Simil.
And as the Moon reflects her borrowed light
Unto the Sun, that but lent her the same:
So statesmen should reflect (how ere unright)
Their wel-deservings, and their brightest fame
Where the word of the king is, there is power, and who shall say to him, what
do thou?

Eccles 8 4.


Unto their Liege, as though from him it came.
For Princes may put shame of their oresights
Upon their servants, who must bear the blame,
Applying praises of those men's foresights
Unto themselves, as if they were their rights.
A Caveat for great subjects.
Great Subjects must beware of subjects love,
And Sov'raignes hate the first often breeds the last;
Kings will their Brethren hate, if not reprove
For being too well beloved, who often taste
The evil speed that grows from that loves have;
Men should not be devils to shun te^porall death, or to be Gods on earth.

That which in private persons is called Choler, in public is called Fury and
cruelly. Sal.

Rigor often buyeth her pleasure with peril of life.

Mercy and truth preserve the King: for his throne sha^be established with
Mercy.


Which makes great subjects (in great policy)
That would of King and subject be embraced)
To mix their virtues deeds with villainy,
T'avoide the plague of Popularitie.
With submisse voice it tells the Sovereign,
Severity makes weak Authority,
If that too often the Subjects it sustain;
And small faults punished with great cruelty
Makes Fear and Hate desperate rebell'ouslie.
For, death of Patients Emprickes less defame,
Then Executions often do Sov'raignty,
And all that have delighted in the same
Have hate incurred, and often death with shame.
For Policy can hardly well prevent
Prover. 20.28 He that is careless of his own li^e, is Lord of another. Sen^
The purpose of true Hate made obstinate
With ceaseless plagues, and extreme punishment:
For, when the weakest hand is desperate
It may confound a Which mischief (though with extreme difficulty prevented if
at al avoided yet all the means to escape it are these, 4. Enquiry, Punishment,
Innoce^cie, Destenie.
Caesar, so a state.
Who death desires, is Lord of others life:
He fears not hell that would be reprobate:
A calm Authority represseth strife,
When much severitie makes Rebels rife^
It Is better By reprehe^sion which S. Basil calls the healing of the soul:
Salomo^ an orname^t of fine gold Pro. 25. and David a precious Balm, Psa. 41.
Tacitus says, every notorious execution of justice has some taste of
injustice therein, yet since it wrings but some in particular it is amply
recompe^ced in the common good.
cure, then cut of members ill,
If it may be; and, if that will not serve,
Yet cut them off as it were against thy will:
For, Men hate not their members which they kerue
Or clean cut off, the rest so to preserve:
For Cruelty sometimes is Clemency;
Its mercy in the Prince (peace to conserve)
To cut off Rebels with severity,
Lest they prevailing make an Anarchie.
And, if in case a mighty Multitude
Of mighty Men for Treason were to die,
Policy would not have the sword imbrude
In blood of them as it were successively;
But all at once, let them al headless ly:
For often Iteration of reve^g for one fault, is faulty. Punishmente is the
companion of injustice. Plato.
revenge with blood to iterate,
The malice may suppress of few too hy;
But stirs the hearts of all to mortal hate,
Which may impeach the most secured state.
And therefore that which must be cut away
Away with it at once, quoth Policy:
And to the sores these Salus f^r the so^es growing from overmuch severity
plasters ply straight way,
Do some great good that argues Charity,
And pardon some to show thy Clemency:
To shed the blood of corrupt Maiestrates,
Does not a little the pain qualify:
The sacrifice of such hate expiates;
Thus blood must heal what blood exulcerates.
Intemp'rate Patients make Physicians cruel,
And wayward Subjects make the Prince Austere and just Maiestrats are like the
Ligatures of Chirurgions, which hurt them that be wounded; for though those
Bands be imployd to cure loose members, yet they putt the Patient to much pain.
seveare:
Ceaselesse abuses of Ire is the fuel:
Can Sov'raignes bear, when Subjects naught By the resistance of those that
should obey, the lenity of those that command is diminished. Tacitus.
forbear?
Such must be taught to love through cause of fear:
For, often a ijrke from a kind Masters hand
Among much cockring, makes our love more dear,
When as we know, it with our weal does stand:
So short correction tends to long command.
Judges corrupt and all Extortioners
Like Spunges must be used, squiz'd being full,
And so must Justice handle Usurers;
They pull from Usury is a sweet poison compounded upon the ruins of good
men.
Subjects, Kings from the^ must pull,
And when their fleece is grown, sheare off the wool.
These are the Canker-wormes of Commonweals,
They mortify and make the Members dull,
Then when the Head thereof these Cankers feels,
He needs must cleanse them, ere the Body heales.
For whosoever fears hate over much,
Knows not as yet what Rules to Rule belong;
Let Subjects grutch without just A temperate dread suppresseth high and stout
stomakes, fear in extremity stirs men to presumption or desperate
resolution, and provoks them to try conclusio^s dangerous.
cause of grutch,
They will, when they perceave the Prince they wrong,
To right the same, continue Subjects long:
By Punishment, and by Reward a State
May be ore-aged being over young;
In Mould of Love to melt the Commons hate,
Is to correct without respect of state.
From Piety and cleere-Eyde Providence
Authority derives resistlesse force;
Piety makes Authority most potent.
For Piety constraines Obedience,
Since all believes the Heavens do bless her coorse:
And The mother of a wary person knows not what belongs to Tears.

Paul. Emil.


Providence subjection does enforce,
For, it foresees where Riott may run out,
And with strong Bars (which Barristers r'enforce)
Makes fast the Parke-pale there and round about,
That to go through, no one will go about.
It teaches Princes wisely to beware
How they exhaust their store for war in peace
To maintain Superfluity in Ba^quets and Aparrell are tokens of a diseased
Co^mon-weale, or which is rather in danger of death.

Seneca.


Reuellings, and nothing spare
That tends to Sensualities increase,
Although therefore their Flocks they often fleece:
It ill beseemes (quoth Providence) the Prince,
His own and public A kingdoms superabu^da^ce if it be managed by a
lascivious and voluptuous Prince, is the cause of the subversio^ thereof.
Treasures to decrease
For private satisfaction of the sense,
Which sincks the State with weight of vain expe^ce.
If there be factions for Sions cause,
So be it they break not bounds of Charity,
Instruction sooner then F^are and terror are slender bonds to bind love.

Tacitus.

Simil.


Correction draws
Such Discords to a perfect Unity,
That yields a sweet Soule-pleasing harmony:
For, when a Violls strings do not concent,
We do not rend them straight, but leisurely
With A gentle entreaty is of more force then an imperious co^ma^d.

Claudian.


patience put in tune the Instrument;
So must it be in case of Government.
Its the least freedom Subjects can demand
To have but liberty to hold their peace;
Who keep their errors close from being scand
Do hurt none but themselves, in war or peace:
If Freedom true Obedience release
It will It is an easy matter to govern good men. Salust.
contain it self in liberty;
And Lenity Subjection does increase
Where strife desires public tranquillity,
And still agrees to obey Authority.
Policy prompts the Prince, with voice scarce heard,
If any Subjects be grown over great,
By O impious people, and accursed times, that do constrain Princes to do
this for the safety of their States, and bodies, that is so perrillous touching
the State of their Soule^.
death their grandeur must of force be barred;
But if by Law they cannot do that feate,
Without the shaking of their State and Seat,
It must be done without Law by some Chance
That Ere the Subject be in Arms. A Subject placed in high dignity has more
adoo to hold it, then others to get it. Brutus.
soddainly must fall (ere blood do heat)
So shall their Throne be stablisht, (witness France)
And subject only to divine vengeance.
For it is sel'd, or rather never seen
That peace and powrfull men do dwell Tacit Hist^ Abraham and Lot must part
when their wealth is over grown.
together;
And ten times blessed is that King or Queen
Who make their Nobles live and love each other;
Lyve like themselves, and like themselves love either:
This were the Quintenssens of Policy,
And All Wisdom assisted both by nature and Art, is little enough to effect
so great an Act by reason of the perverseness of ma^s nature.
wit, that is seld derive from the Mother,
Which rather can be wished then taught, for why?
No power from will can take wills liberti^.
A King may from his high erected Throne
With Eagles Eyes (for Kings such Eyes should have)
Behold the Members of the State alone,
And what the humors are which them deprave;
So may he purge the parts the Whole to save:
But to atone the wills perverst by power,
As easy were the Ocian dry to lave;
Power may co^straine, but Will may choose to endure,
And they that will be sick, no skill can cure.
Great Minds like Horses that will easly rear,
Are easli'st ruled with a gentle Bitt;
And reverence Princes should not gain with They ought to fear many whom many
fear.
fear,
Nor Love with Familia^itie in Princes breeds contempt in Subjects.
Lowliness, for State unfit,
For none of both with policy does fit:
This skill is very difficult, because
Virtues of different kinds must kindly knitt
Their powers in one, which Wit together draws,
And guards the Prince, no less the^ Guards or Laws.
The Empires Majesty in a Prince is no less commendable then behooful.
Majesty her state sustaines;
The Prince thereby security enioyes,
Free from Rebellions reach (that State disdaines)
And from contempt of Rule, that State annoies
Ingendring all misrule that state destroies:
The Scepter and the nuptial Bed detests
To be A Crown divided will serve no kings head.
divided, or to share their joys;
Yet Sou'rainty in extreme peril rests
Of partnershippe, when it Contempt disgests^
Empires are Fortunes Objects and Times Subjects,
Envy and The Creator of all coupled Envy and a Kingdom together. Seneca.
Empire be inseparate,
Fortune does often Monarchs make of Abiects
And Envy Monarchy does quite abate,
If it assisted be with vulgar The Multitudes love is light and their hatred
heavy.
hate:
For Monarchs find no mean betwixt the Ground
And the extremest topp of their To attain to Empire is a work humane but to
retain it being attained is a grace divine.
estate;
But if they fall, the fall does them confound:
Therefore let them be sure of footing sound.
Three things (says Policy) do stablish Rule,
That it be Constant, Severe, and Restraind;
Constant: for innovation breeds misrule; Innovation most dangerous to a state.

Severe: for often by Lenity unfeigned
Naught but Contempt (orethrow of Rule) is gained:
Impunity breeds lawless Over much pity bringes ove^much peril to
Sovereigns.
Liberty;
For hope of escape (when Justice is but feigned)
Draws on bold Vice to do al villainy
Under the Nose of mild Auctority.
For who is awed by him, whose Sword does lie
Fast sheathed with rust, that it will not come out?
Who by remissness, not by clemency
Makes th'edge of his power (dulled) to turn about:
An ynch of liberty more then ought, maks the Commons much more loose then they
should.
This King the Commons will command and flout,
Who are contained with fear and not with shame,
And nere abstain from Riot or from Rout
For badnesse of them, but for fear of blame,
And punishment inflicted for the same.
Thirdly, Authority should be restrained,
(As erst was said) and is as much to say,
When the Rod is in the magistrates hand, he may correct, but if it be out he
may be corrected.
That the chief strength from Kings should still be drained,
And stay with them, to be to them a stay;
Lest Treason should their trust and them betray:
They may dissolve the force of Emperie,
When they make Kings of those that should obey;
For Slaves endu'd with Kings authority
Make Kings but slaves, through Kings infirmity.
Yet Policy does not forbid the Prince
To honor Subjects high, of high desert
With highest honor of Obedience,
And though obeying, rule an ample part:
It is a sure guarde of thy principality, if thou do not suffer great
commandment to endure long. Livie. 4.
So be it the honor which they thus imparte
Be short and sweet, chiefly Lieuetenancie;
For it, if long, with pride affectes the Heart,
Which makes the same affect sole Monarchy;
So put the King and state in ieobardie.
Hardly ca^ me^ keep a mean in dignities surmounttng mediocritye.
For Men are Men how ever Angell-like;
The highest Angels were ambitious:
Its death to ample fortunes, Sail to strike;
Nay Death to them is far less dolorous:
"For use of Rule makes minds imperious. We read but of one Scilla that
having g^t^e^ absolute empiry, gave it over voluntarily.

Great Persons have great Passions; state is stiff,
Unapt to bow, how ever curtuous:
And when great Spirits have tasted but a whiffe
Of praise for rule, they (drunk) would rule in chief.
For as the Man overcome with powrefull wine
(Although a Beggar clothed like a king) Simil.

When some in mock'ry made him half divine
With Lauds, and Legs, still rising and bowing,
Persuaded was, he was no other thing:
So Sp'rites that are made druncke with vulgar praise Not to be overcome with
praises and acclamations of people is incident to God only.

For their dexterity in governing,
Do ween all true that vulgar vapor says,
And think themselves alone the rest should raise.
When too great subjects do too well agree,
Suspicious Policy them out does set:
For like as stones, which in firm Arches be Simil.

Would fall, but that they one another let,
By means whereof the Arch more strength does get: We ought to endevor even by
laws to hinder strife and partakings among nobles. Ari. 5. Pol. c. 8.

So fares it with a state or Monarchy,
Whose peril might (perhaps) be overgreat
By ore-much concord of the over-hie;
Then ods twixt them still mainetaines unity.
But among other rules of policy
That are unruly (if by that Scripture.
rule squared
That al should rule) ^t sov'raignes learnes to ly,
Dissemble, and deceive; if it regard
The common good of the^ they ought to guard:
But to do ill, that good thereof may come,
By better Divinity.
Rules and more assured, is bard;
Then how it should a sou'raigns state become
To ly at all, to this I answer mum.
Kings should be so framed as they may be altogether good or half good, and
not altogether wicked, but half wicked.

Ari. ^. Pol c II


But this I say from those that well did try
What it is to rule, and ruling long to reign:
If Kings make conscience of a little lie,
When it may good the state and Sovereign,
Ill may ensue, that good so to refrain:
Yet when we know all hearts are in his hands,
That hearts and all does rule and sole sustain,
We muse at Policies so cross commands
When as we know, all by the The divine Precepts.
other stands.
We have two eyes, two ears, and but one Tongue
Which with the teeth and lips is eake enclosed,
And is the senses Organs placed among
Eyes, Ears, and Nose, by Nature so disposed
That nothing by the Tongue should be disclosed,
Before it has taken council of each sense,
That are to falshoode evermore opposed,
The Soul is the true lover of Truth.
Lest they should misinforme the Intelligence,
Which haynously procures the Souls offense.
Proverb. 17.
Excellent talk becomes not a fool,
Nor lying lips the King; so says that Prince
That ruled in peace, and did his enemies cool
With truth and equity; but that is long since,
These are the last, and therefore the worst days.
And twixt the times there may be difference:
Yet if we may not for Gods gloryly,
Much less for matters of less consequence:
Kings should be Patterns of all piety,
Which does consist in truth and equity.
But pious Augustine (canonized
For piety) says there are certain lies
Whereof no great offense is borne or bred,
Aug. in Psalm. 5.
Yet are not faultlesse; in which leasings lies
That lie, which Kings for common good devise:
Hence may we see, how much depraved we are,
When Kings sometimes must feign and temporise A Kingdom is a school of
deceit. Sen. Thyest.

For their estate and commonwealths welfare,
Which would fare ill, if they should it forbear.
Who note withal, It breeds small regard
To be too lavish of their presence, when
Among the commons it might well be spared;
For Maiestis like Deity in Men,
When we it see, as far as we can ken: We bear m^st reverence to Majesty a
far off.

Yet policy (the proppe of weighty States)
Would have them present with all now and then,
As well to comfort, as to cease debates,
Both which their hearts to true love captivates.
It tells them other Documents among,
That who so bridles their felicity It is a great felicity not to be overcome
of great felicity.

Shall better govern it, and hold it long;
For Temp'raunce joined with Authority,
Makes it resemble sacred Deity:
It bids them love the learned with effect,
Who can with lines their lives historifie
That ay shall last, and their renownes erect Poets and Historiographers have
power to give immortality.

The Golden Worlds returned from exi^e.



As high as Heaven, maugre humane defect.
And here I cannot wonder (though I would)
Sufficiently at these guilt times of ours,
Wherein great Men are so to money sold,
That Jupiter himself in golden Showers
Will basely stand, to gather while it powers.
Mars scorns Minerva, gibes at Mercur^,
He better likes Venerian Paramoures: Yet learning and Arms should be in
league by the law of nature.

Greatn^sse regards not Prose, or Poesy,
But weenes an Angel has more Majesty.
Arts perish wanting praise and due support;
And when want swaies the Senses Commonweal,
VVitts vital faculties wax al Yet if some men's wits were measured by their
wealth, they would be accounted Salomons that are nothing else but money-baggs,
in who^ there is nothing but money.
amort:
The Mind, constrained the Bodies want to feel,
Makes Salves of Earth the Bodies hurt to heal,
Which do the Mind bemire with thoughts unfit;
Hence come those dull Conceits sharp wits reveal,
Which nice Ears deem to come from want of wit,
When want of w^alth (indeed) is cause of it.
As poor as a Poet.
How many Poets, like Anatomies,
(As lean as Death for lack of sustenance)
Complain (poor Staruelings) in sadd Elegies
Of those whom Learning only did advaunce,
That of their wants have no considerance.
What Gift to Greatness can less welcome be
Then Poems, though by Homer pend perchance?
It looks on them as if it could not see,
Or from them, as from Snakes, away will flee.
What Is this to me (thinks he) I did not this?
How then to me should praise thereof pertain?
Thou hitt'st the Mark (dear Sir) and yet do miss;
For, though no praise for penning it thou gain,
Yet praise thou gett'st, if thou that Pen It is good to do well, so it is
also to support well doing.
sustain,
That can But Poets lie open to a mischief; for ^as Alchimists are suspected
for coining: so are Poets for libelling.
eternize thee in Deaths despite,
And through it self thy grossest humors strain,
So make them pure (at least most pure in sight)
Which to Posterity may be a light.
In common policy, great Lords should give,
That so, they may (though great) much more receive:
The more like God, the more they do relive;
And, the more VVriters they aloft do heave,
The more renown they to their Race do leave:
For, with a drop of ynke their Penns have power
Good and ill renown are immortal and prevail even over the remembrance of
Time, which Poets have power to give.

When Poets commend men's names to monument they need no Tombs.


Life to restore (being lost) or life bereave,
Who can devour Time that does all devour,
And go beyond Time, in less then an how'r.
Where had Achilles fame bin long ere this,
Had not blind Homer made it see the way
(In Parchas) ^pight) to all eternities?
It had with him (long since) bin closed in Clay.
Where had AEneas name found place of stay,
Had Virgills verse of it no mention made?
It had ere this bin drowned in deep decay:
For, without memory, Names needs must vade;
And memory is ay the Muses Trade.
But how can these Daughters of Memory
Remember those of whom they are dispis'd?
They are not Stocks that feel no injury,
But sprightly, quick, and wondrous well adviz'd;
Who, though with Lascivious, obscene, etc.
loose Lines they are often disguised
Yet when they list, they make immortal lines,
And, who soere by those lines are surpised,
Are made eternal, they, and their Assigns,
Or well, or ill, as Poesy defines.
Leave we to urge poor Poets just As good no compleyning as complaining for no
good.
complaint
(Since they are deaf that should redress the same)
That Policy we may yet better paint,
And consecrate more lines unto her name,
That learnes our Pen her lauds by lines to frame.
She would that Government should never die,
Which is the Rodd of Circes, which does tame
Both Man, and Beast, (if ledd by Policy)
And tends to perfect Man's Society.
The put^ing up of one injury be, ettes another.
She teaches Kings to give and take no vvrong,
One gettes Revenge, Contempt the other gains:
All gainful Leagues she would have lengthn'd long,
And not to war until just cause constraines;
For, Justice prospers VVarres and Thrones sustaines:
No Secrets, nor no public governments
To They that possess all things want nothing but a man that will speak the
truth. Seneca.
Clawbacks, or to those that scrach for gains,
She would have shared; for badd are all their bents,
And evermore do ruin governments.
In such is neither truth to God, or King:
Therefore she would have such aloof to stand,
As far (at least) as a Prove. 25.23. The further Flatterers and Avaritious
persons stand from the Sovereign the surer he stands.

Take away the wicked from the King and his Throne shall be established in
righteousness.

Prove. 25.5.


bent brow can fling
Them from the Sov'raigne, or a straight command:
These bitter baneful weeds do spil the Land.
But to the tried trusty, she would have
The Sov'raignes favor constantly to stand;
For, with their loss they seek the whole to save,
To whom, like Fathers, they themselves behave.
She tells the King that Treason gathers strength
Extremely in his The Frogs (in AEsop) insulted upon the Logg and held it in
scorn.
weakness; and requires
That it be cut short ere it gathers length,
And level that, that out of course aspires:
She charge Kings to quench their vain desires
Of vain expense, without the Commons charge,
Lest it inflame Rebellions quenchlesse fires,
Which often, such large expense does much enlarge;
Who, often the same upon the King discharge.
She wills that wholesome Laws should be ordained,
Bereaving Kings of Not to be able to do evil is great power. It is an
excellent necessity not to be suffered to do evil.
power t'infringe the same:
For, if their Crowns are by the Laws sustained,
They should not break the God governs that common weal that is governed by a
written law. Aristot.
Props, lest all the Frame
Should fall, to their confusion and shame:
Statute of Reteyners.

It is an Aphorism among the Laws of the 12. Tables Let the protection of
the People be the chiefest Law.


That, of Reteyners she would have observed,
Else most Ignobles, in a Nobles name,
Will let Laws course, which should be safe reserved,
And wrack the Poor which law would have co^serv'd.
And as the Law should govern Maiestrates;
So should the Maiestrates the People sway.
The Governors are living Laws in States:
And a dumb Maiestrate the Law is ay.
As Bodies, Reason and the Soul obey;
So States should Law and Maiestrates by right;
For, Law is Reason, keeping all in Ray,
By which the wise themselves do guide aright;
And Vulgares have it from Lawgivers light.
She Civil Policy
bidds the Sovereign take heed how he hears,
Much less embrace the advice of self Ouer-weening a pestilent disease of the
Mind, most familiar with Fools.
Conceit:
For, such Conceit has neither Eyes, nor Ears,
To hear, or see another, but does wait
Upon her self, admiring her own height.
In cases doubtful it is dangerous
T'admitte light Take counsel of thine own heart for there is no man more
faithful to thee then it Eccles. 37. 13.
Counsels; for, for want of weight
T'wil make the case to be more ponderous,
The whilst such He is more discreet with whom provident councels (that carry
reason with them) do prevail, the^ prosperous deliberations which happen by
chance.

Tacit 2. An.

Treasons prevail on the sudden, good Counsels gather sorce by leisure.

Tacitus Hist.


Counsels prove Aereous.
For its often seen that Public Policy
Occurrs with matters of such consequence,
Wherein there is such depth of Mystery
That it will blunt the sharpest Senses sense
Of the acut'st, and swift'st Intelligence;
Ne shall Deliberation be assured
Of their effect, until their evidence
Time does produce, or trial has procured,
Wherein rash Judgment must not be endured.
The heav'nlyest Hav'ns, m'haue Hellish entries:
Therefore, wise Pilots keep them in the Maine,
And rather brook rough Tempests miseries,
Then by unknown perrils rest to gain:
They shun the flats by their experience plain;
For, in all perils such experience
Must guide the course, else perilous is pain;
Nay, death may follow double The faster me^ run being out of the way the
further they are out of the way.
diligence
Not set on work by single Sapience.
Experience is the eye of humane wisdom.
Experience is the guide of Policy,
Whose nere-deceaved eye sees all in all;
She can make light the darkest mystery,
Then, her at all assaies to council call,
Especially in matters mystical:
Realms have a world of crannies, where do lurk
Ten thousand mysteries from view of eye,
Which nerethelesse incessantly do work,
And often give the state a deadly Iurke
She would have Kings to have such Counselors
A Prince ought to bestow more in getting a wise cou^celler, the^ in achiueing
a conquest Quintus Curtius.

Where no counsel is the people fall: but where many cou^cellors are there is
heal^h. Prove^. 11.14 Simil.


That might be learned in state-Philosophies;
For Kingdoms governed by Philosophers
No Constellations fear, nor Destinies:
They know what should the Sovereign suffice
And what the Subject; bending al their might
T'accomplish both their long felicities
By seeing that each one may have his right,
Preventing foreign, and domesticke spite.
As when a Ship, that lives upon the Downs
Of Neptune (^ightie Monarch of those Plains)
Is near at point to perish (if he frowns,)
Without a stern and one that it sustaines:
(For maine is peril else upon those Maines:)
So fares that state that has nor Lords nor Laws,
Wherewith the Liege the State from ruin raines
In storms of troubles, and Contentions flawes,
Wherein wise Councels calm effects do cause.
They are the VVatch-men that stand Sentinel A good councellor is an Argust o
the Co^mo^-weale.

T'examine all that may impeach the state;
They make the Commonwealth a Parallel
To that of Rome when she was fortunate,
And Caesar make of a mean Magistrate:
Who Baracado up with Laws strong Bars
All that lies open for Vice to ruinate,
And stop the Passages of Civil VVarres
With martial law, which Malcontents deterres.
Nor need the Statesman gage Philosophy
Deeper, then well to know how well to live
In Peace, and Wealth, (this worlds felicity)
And Rules of Life, to that effect to give;
They diue too deep, if they do deeper diue:
What is the knowledge of the Transcendents
To him that learnes men only how to thrive?
Though he nere red such wild They will distracte his thoughts, and government
requires the whole man.
Arts Rudiments,
He Is fitter far for civil governments.
The Mathematickes, and the Metaphysickes,
Have no necessity in government;
But Ethickes, Politickes, and Oeconomicks,
These to good Governors are incident,
Where morrall virtue sits President:
To be well red in all good History To be well seen in history necessar^e
in a Magistrate.

(Which makes the sp'rite much more intelligent)
Does stand with state and perfect policy,
And makes dexterous Authority.
Salomo^ knew all in all. 1 King. 3.12.
The bounds of knowledge are the highest spheres,
For, all is known in their circumference;
And what soere this Nurse of Earthlings bears?
Eccles. 1.16.
Is subject to humane intelligence:
Then knowledge is unknown by consequence:
In which respect Men do their wits apply
To this or that Art with all diligence,
Unable to know al Philosophy,
Because it stands not with mortality.
In all things (as its sedd) are three degrees,
To weet, Great, Small, and the Indifferent;
And that which does participate of these
Is in perfection held most excellent,
The Councellor should be virtuous, for he supplieth virtues place, which is
in the midst.
Which is the Councellor in government:
For, he twixt Prince and People being placed,
Best sees what is for both convenient;
And for his virtue, is of both embraced;
For virtue from the midst is nere displaced.
If any one supply that virtuous place
And is not virtuous, he a Monster is;
For, in the midst can nothing sit that is base,
Since Virtue there (as in her Heaven of bliss)
Her self enthrones to all eternities.
Physicians labor, aims at naught but health;
Sailors, good passage; Captains, victories;
So Counselors should for the Commonwealth,
Which justly to her limbs her dowry dealth.
Those whom the king will know shall be to well known, but those he looks
strange upon, no man will know the^.
He had need be more then honest, yea much more
Then virtuous (that is, virtuous past compare)
Who when his King's withdrawn, may open the door
And in a Closet diue into his ear,
To put into his Head how all things are:
This if ill Spirits perceive, and he will be
Corrupted with pure gold, or what soere,
Some Fiend will say, all this will I give thee
(Showing him Worlds) if thou will honor me.
Then how behouefull it is for King and state,
To make such Minnions (if he must have such)
That in their Souls corruption deadly hate,
And having much, desire not overmuch;
But to find such an one, were more then much: A man may light a candle at
noone and seek amongst a multitude, yet miss to sinde, such an one.

For to be near, and dear unto a King,
Fills heart with pride, and pride does empt the pouch;
The^ for supply (sour Minions are for the most part so.
sweet) a sweete-sowre thing
(Which may the Sovereign wrest, the subject wring)
Called Lieges-loue abused, the same must bring.
But where shall Princes then, bestow their love
(Since love they must, and ought, where it is due?)
On any one that still his grace will move
For Common-good, and private does ensue
But for that good; This Minion in a Mew It is dangerous ventering abroad the
Air is so infectious.

Had need be kept; for, if he fly abroad
Divels-incarnate will him still pursue
Till they have made a Devil of a God,
Or if he escape, it is with temptations lode.
An Heart that is truly humbled and is dead
(For love of Heaven) to all the earth holds dear,
Yet serpents wisdom has, in his doves head,
And from all spots of pride is purged clear,
And still would fast to make the rest good-cheere:
This were a Minion for a God, or King,
Worthy to weld the World; and who draws near
In nature to this Man, or divine Thing,
A Prince should use, with all dear cherishing.
For, Maximilian the Emperor answered one that desired hi^ letters pattents to
ennoble him, I am able (quoth he) to make thee rich, but Virtue only m^st
make thee noble.
Virtue only makes good Counselors,
Who in great wisdom hold the State upright;
No Halles orehang'd with Arms of Ancestors
Have in their right creation any might;
But if they have them too, they are most right:
Yet Virtue found not Tully It is better to bring honor to a man's house then
to diffame it being there already.
nobly borne,
But made him Noble by his wisdoms weight;
" Virtue respects not fortune, nor does scorn
" To dwell with those whose fortunes are forlorn.
Kings come from slaves, and slaves from Kings desce^d:
Bloud's but the water wat'ring Fleshes dust;
Which by its nature ever does descend,
And makes frail Flesh to fall to things unjust:
For, it is but Act. 17.26. The higher the Sun is, the less shadow he maks,
and the greater a man's virtue is, the less glory he seeks.
Blood in the unjust and just:
And al alike it is in high and low;
Not half so full of life, as full of lust,
Making us rather abject, then to grow
To high accoumpt, for ought that from it flows.
Yet some times evil men make Rulers good,
As good Musitions, often in life are badd;
These last make discords join in pleasant mood;
The first the like in Commonweals have made:
So either may be virtuous in his Trade,
How ever vicious in their lives they are:
But Policy the Prince does still dissuade
From making such too great, for they will pare
The Prince, and polle the Commons They will make sale of the Princes favor to
the prejudice of his people
without care.
For Slaves (though Kings) in disposition
Are most unmeet to manage Kingdoms states;
And so are Men of base condition
Unfit to make inferior Eccl. 38.33.
Maiestrates:
The Flowers of Crowns fit not Mechanic They are, as the feet, n^cessary
members, nor could a commonwealth stand without them, howbeit they are as the
feet furthest removed from the head being Reasons Seat.
Pates,
No more then costly plumes do Asses heads;
They are called Crafts-men, quasi crafty mates,
Let these rule Crafts-men.
such (if they must govern needs)
For they at best are naught but wholesome vveedes.
But some as void of honesty as Art,
Advance themselves by Had men no other fault yet are they therefore unfit for
government, because so desirous to govern. Authority should be denied to such
as seek it, and given to those that (like wise me^) refuse it.
wealth (the Nurse of Vice)
And with good gifts supply want of desert;
Good-giftes, that Givers of Commands entice
To part with them though they be nere so nice:
These (seeing wealth has given them Virtues meede)
Do make port-sale of Virtue, and Justice
To Enrich themselves to clymbe thereby with speed;
From whence the wracks of Co^mon-weales proceed.
Did they but good themselves by some men's harm,
It might be borne, although it heavy were:
But Example of rich men does much good or hurt in the co^mon-weale.
they hereby make all themselves to arm
With gold, that seek authority to bear,
Because they see its gotten by such gear:
When Virtue's thus neglected and dispis'd,
Then Vice perforce does in her place appear;
And where damned Vice has Virtues place surprised,
A Common-woe, with Commonwealth's disguised.
That must be dearly sold that is dearly Alexander Severus caus^d such to be
deposed, and severely pun^shed, that b^ught their Offices, saying they sold
deerer in retaile then they bought in the grosse^
bought;
And whereas Judgments thus are bought and sold,
There, by just Judgment al goes still to naught:
Yet justice and just Judgments States uphold,
Whose want wrappes them in mis'ries manifold.
The Judgments of that Just orewhelme that Land
That arms Oppression (against the Laws) with Gold;
For where its so, there Will for Law must stand,
And Law goes with Confusion hand in hand.
Intelligence (supreme power of the Soul)
Wherein alone we are like the The Philosopher says, God is an infinite actual
Understanding
Deity,
Is that alone which makes us meet to rule;
For Natures laws, and Reas'ns authority
Requires that such should have highest dignity,
That by their virtue, and their high estate,
They might conserve men in prosperity:
For right it is they should be raised to State,
That make the state of all most fortunate.
For Honor is high Virtues sole Honor is the Prize for which Virtue endures
what not?
Reward,
For which all virtuous Men all pain endure:
If then such men from Honor should be barred,
All to be vicious it would soon procure;
For Vice does reign where Virtue has no power:
Where Honors are bestowed without respect
On good and badd, as clouds bestow their shower,
There must of force ensue but badd effect
For who will be good, if Grace the good neglect.
Honors given to virtue in former times.
In ancient Commonweals they wonted were
Statues of metal, Arches triumphal,
With Public Sepulture, and praises clear,
These, and such like, they did bestow on all
That to their Commonweals were as a Wall:
For they that watch whilst others sound do sleep
To stay the State, that else perhapps might fall,
And labor still the Lambs from Wolves to keep;
Such Shepherds should be honored of the Sheep.
Simil.
For to give Rule to none but Midasses,
Is even as if a Ship were rendered
In greatest Tempests and VVindes outrages,
To richest Merchants to be governed,
Not to the skillful'st to be mastered:
Whereof ensues the wrack of ship and freigh^,
From which in Storms it is delivered
By skilful Pilotts which have got the slight
by their experience to direct her right.
Themistocles is justly famoused,
For that by Valor and great Policy
He did reduce the Athenians beastly bredd
To live by Laws in great From wh^m the lib^rty of disorder is taken awa^ he
i^ overruled for his own benefit.
civility;
But Solon's praised more meritoriously,
Who finding Athens at the point to fall
With shocke of Civil war, he readily
Did stay the same, and reestablish't all
The Laws and Maiestrats, driven to the wall.
Nor did Camillus that repulst the Galls
And Rome preserved from their furies flame
Deserve less, (if not more) memorialls,
The^ the two Romulus and Remus.
Brethren that first built the same:
Nor yet can Caesar's or great Pompeies fame
(Though they Romes Empire stretched from East to West)
Be so renowned, as his glorious name
That found it near by Haniball Scipio Affricanus.
possessed,
Yet rescued it, and gave it room and rest.
Then Rule should not be given to the rich,
If with their wealth they were but fools unjust:
The Commonwealth would The oath of xpia^n Kings is. I will minister Law,
justice and protection a^ight to every one. It beh^ues the^ the^ to see that
their vnder-Mai^strates make a conscience of th^er own oaths and the Kinges^
private be to such,
For they would rule by Laws squared by their lust;
And for their gain still buy and sell the Just:
Wisdom and Justice, with wealth competent
Should be in Rulers: such ^he Prince might trust
With greatest charge (next them) in government;
For each will rule as Virtues President.
For how is it possible men should persuade
Others to virtue and to keep the Laws,
If they themselves themselves there from To make laws for others and
tra^sgresse the^ our selus, is to teach others ^o tra^sgres the^
dissuade,
And by their lewdness, others lewdness cause?
"A Rulers Vice to vice the People draws:
Sylla might well be laughed to scorn, when he
Persuaded Temperance to all; because
He lived himself (none more) licenciouslee,
For none less loved mediocritee.
Lisander was no less to blame, for he
Allowed those Vices in the Multitude,
From which himself refrained They that favor sin are a^ worthy of death as
they that commit the sin Rom 1.31. The way by precepts is obscure and long, but
by example^ sho^te and plain. Senec.
religiouslee:
For, if by Princes, vices be alowd,
It is al one, as if they vice ensude.
But just Licurgus nere did ought forbid,
But by himself the same should be eschude
Whose subjects did no more the^ himself did,
Such Legislators should be deifide.
Such Prince or Priest, such people, Princes and Priests ought to be the
Exchequers of Gods inestimable Graces.
says the Saw;
Examples more then Laws make men live well:
Do Priests live so? their lives like Loadstones Good works ar much more
perswasiue to good life the^ good words.
draw
The people to the same: And do compel
Sans-force to obedience such as would rebel:
Then weigh what good or ill your Good life is the effect and glory of the
church milita^t and of the good Pastors thereof. Blessed is the Prince and
Priest whose lives serve for vnwri^en law.
lives do cause
Ye Prophets Sons, that should in grace excel;
Is your life il? its double ill, because
It hurts your selves, and to vice others draws.
And where Vice reigns, Rebellion often does rule
That diss-vnites the best united state:
Which grows from Governors vice or M^s-gove^nment ^or the most part i^ cause
of rebellion; an a^gument of the goodness of ours.
mis-rule
That makes the Commons (with no common hate)
Watch al advantage, to abridge their date.
The foreign Foe, then finds domesticke aid,
Aid that assists all that will innovate;
So by their Subjects Sov'raignes are betraide,
When their mis-rule makes them be disobaide.
ANd here my Muse leads me as by the hand
Out of the way (as it were) by the way,
To view the lives of Princes of this Land,
Since first the Norman did the Scepter sway William Duke of Normandy.

And scanne their undertakings as I may:
For by the event of Actions past, we shall
The present, and future, the better sway; Others harm teach us to shu^ what
caused them.

Which is the use of story, for they fall
Seldom or nere, that have light to see All.
William the Norman, surnamed Conqueror,
By his succesful sword having subdude
This compound Nation (weak through civil war) Brittan^ Saxon, Dane.

The Conquest he so thoroughly pursude
As that an admirable peace ensude:
This fierce Invader with resistlesse force It is a glorious matter to co^quer,
but a much more glorious to use the Conquest well.

Dissolved the state and made the Multitude
To live by Laws, which Lawyers yet enforce,
Which, of all former laws did cross the course.
He pulled up all that might pull down his state,
Supplanting, or transplanting every plant The way to establish a state
purchased with the sword

That might prove poison to his frolic fate;
And planting in their place (ere Plants did want)
Such as were wholesome, or less discrepant:
So that no Britain, Saxon, Dane, or all, A consequent of removing great ones
in a newe-conquered kingdom.

Could to this day his Offspring here supplant,
But they have, do, and still continue shall,
Until this Kingdom from her self does fall.
It was no little work, nor wisdom less,
From so small wealth, and power which he possessed,
Not only such a people to suppress,
But erst at ods, to make them live in rest
20 And odd descentes of Kings and Queens since the conquest.
For ten descents twice told and more at least;
Not as a Nation mixed, but most entire,
And with new Lords, new Laws the land invest,
Which straight extinguish might seditions fire,
And keep Ambition down that would aspire.
For who so reaches with his sword a Crown,
If head, and hand, use not As this of this Conqueror.
like government,
The reeling Crown may soon be overthrown,
Though it (perhaps) be propt by Parliment:
France.
Witness our Conquests in the Continent:
That were more glorious, then commodious,
Because we made the sword the instrument
Only to make our selves victorious,
Our glory and shame.
But not to keep what made us glorious.
From William, unto Edward, Longshancks named,
Turmoiles, and Brals, to that state incident,
That is not thoroughly staide, the Land inflamed;
For no peace is so sure or permanent,
Ava^ice and Pride the perverters of Peace.
But Avarice or Pride makes turbulent.
Richard the first, transported by desire
To help to conquer Jury, thither went;
It is mere madness to trust the Crown in their hands that long to put it on
their own heads.
And made his brother John, Regent entire;
Who did usurp the Crown ere his retire.
In which return, he was taken Prisoner
In Austria, from whence b'ing ransomed,
Rich 1. taken prisoner in Austria.
He repossest his Crown; but in the war
He made (when he his Crown recovered)
Upon his foes, he life surrendered. The sincerest minds may be tempted above
their strength by the glitering gloss of a crown lying within reach.

The end of Kings thus causing their own grief
To leave their crowns so near another Head;
A pleasant pray enticeth many a Thief,
And who will be second, when he may be chief.
Neither did John escape the heavy hand
Of just Revenge, to all Usurpers due;
In whose dire Reign, two curses crossed the Land, The Pope interdicted the land.

Gods, and the churches, which made all to rue,
For ceaseless Troubles did thereon ensue:
And in conclusion his life he lost; By poison as some say.

For vengeance to the end did him pursue;
So, al his life he being turned and tossed,
Before his time gave up his tired Ghost.
But to descend to Longshanckes, in whose time Edward. 1.

The commonwealth (fast rooted) began to sprout,
And by this Pillar to high state did clime,
For he was prudent, painful, valiant^ stout,
And dexterously his business brought about:
He wisely waide how incommodiously All kings that thought so thriv^d the
better.

The Conquests stood atchiv'd the Land without,
Therefore he bent his power, and industry,
It to reduce into a Wa^ Scotland.
Monarchy.
On Wales, and Scotland he that power imploide, That which is got^e^ with the
Sword must so be mainetained, which little instrument can remove Obstac^es
be they never so great, or keep them down that would rise without permission.

Reducing both to his obedience;
And long might one the other have enjoyed
Without hart-burning inb^ed difference:
If he had used King Williams diligence:
Prosperous he was abroad, and just at home,
A no less virtuous, then a valiant Prince,
Leaving his Son (that next supplide his rome)
A demonstration what does kings become.
Edward his Son, succeeded him in Rule,
But not in To rule is as much as to amend that which is amiss or awry.
Rules, by which he ruled aright,
Who being seduced by Masters of Misrule,
Referred the government to their oresight,
Who, all oresaw, but what advance them might:
Until their rapine, and ambition,
The love of all from their A Prince once in obloquie, do he well, or ill, al
is ill taken of his subjects
Liege parted quight;
So that the Sire assailed was by the Son,
And being subdued, ^ in Prison.
Tacitus Hist. Simil.
A direful end to Kings misguided, due;
Who like to figg-Trees growing on the side
Of some steep Rock, do feed none but a crew
Of Crows and Claw-backs, and Sinn-soothers.
Kites, which on their Tops do ride,
And plume on them (base Birds) on every side:
A States abundance, if it managed be
By a lascivious King, which Slaves misguide,
Subverts the The more wealth, the more woo, if evil employed.
State which Kings cannot foresee,
When they are compast with ill Companee.
Edward. 3.
Edward the third, was most victorious,
In all attempts and Actions fortunate,
No less judicious then valorous,
Yet were his Conquests hurtful to his State,
For they the same did but debilitate:
So that when through his ages feeble plight,
And this ore-racked Realms most poor estate,
The Synnewes of the war were cracked quight,
His wonted fortunes then plaide least in sight.
His Fathers blood with never-ceasing cries
Filling The Almighty's just al-hearing Ears,
Importunes Vengeance, which with Argus Eyes
Watches his shaking house for many The divine Vengeance sleeps not though
it wincks.
years,
And to his Sons Son fearfully appears:
Disastrous Richard of Burdeux.
Richard second of that name,
Pestred with plagues, and ceaselesse cause of fears,
(Through his misrule) can well aver the same,
Who did the form of this State quite vnframe.
He, like his Grandsire great, great troubles raised
Through his more great oppressions, and excess:
He loved and praised none that virtue praised;
Lived like his Grandsire great, with like One evil corrupts another and
evil put to evil is cause of mutual destruction.
success,
Who, blessed a few, that few or none did bless:
Edward, and Richard, second of their names,
(The last, the first did second in distress)
Both overruled were by base past-shames,
So Both alike, lost Kingdom, Life, and fames.
And if there be wrench in this Parallel,
It is in that one had a sorry Son,
The other a like Cousin to compel
Him yield his Crown, before his Days were done,
Which were abridg'd (as Edwards) in Prison:
But, if this King had not so childish bin
When Mowbray peacht the Usurper of Treason,
He might have bin secure from al his Kin:
But blinded Judgment is the hire of Sin.
Thus fa^es it with weak Kings, and Cousins strong;
Richard, lies naked clothed with his God executes his own justice by the
injustice of others.
gore,
Exposed to the view of old and young,
A woeful Spectacle, if not much more
For Kings that live, as he had lived before:
But though Exampl^s (freshly bleeding yet)
Do Cave cry, (or rather loud do rore,)
Yet Kings thus clawde, where they do ytche, forgett
The future paine^ on present Present pleasures take away the thought of future
pain.
pleasure set.
Henry 4.
Henry the fourth, which thus usurped the Crown,
Of all Usurpers had the best success.
For, he was provident to hold his own,
And for the Commonwealth he was no less:
In Field, and Town, he would direct the Press;
Chief Captain, and chief Councellor was A King should be able to council
as chief councellor and direct as chief Captain.
he
Who ruled in height of Wisdom, and Prowess;
Into obscurest Treasons he could see,
And if they Were, soon cause them not to Be.
This held him King as long as life he held,
Which was as long as Nature gave him leave;
And courage gave the Scepter well to weld
Unto his Son to whom he both did leave,
Who, did accordingly the same receave:
Henry 5.
He ruled as did his Sire, in VVisedomes strength,
And height of Valor, which he eke did give;
Who caught fast hold on fleeting France at length,
,,But weak Arms loose, what ere the strong Arm geint'h.
And now as rowsed from a tedious Sleep,
(After this King with glory was interred)
The Divine Vengeance began again to Vengeance attends the 3. and 4 generation
of merciless ma^quellers.
peep
Upon his Son, that long had bin deferred;
The Cries of Richards blood now well are heard:
And silly Henry (though a Saint he be)
Henry 6.
Must bear the plagues his Grandsires guilt incurred,
When he imbrude his hands, or did agree
To have his Sov'raignes blood shedd savaglee.
His Uncles (more like Fathers) first he loses,
Then by a woman most improvident
He is ore ru^'d, for she of all disposes,
Till Hate and Factions ore-grew government.
Then Richard Duke of York in Parliment Rich. Duke of York claimed the crown
in Parliament.

Claimed the Scepter, (being so ill swai'd)
Where was examined his claim, and descent,
And then gave way to it, when all was wai'd;
So, silly Henry was by law betrayed.
The title of Duke Richard thus admitted,
But an Usurper needs must make the King;
Yet it was decreed that he should be permitted
For life to hold the Crown which death does bring
When as the Crown is held as no such No king, i^ but half on^^
thing:
Making the Duke by Act of Parliament
His Heir apparent, without altering,
Which for them both was most malevolent,
For hardly can one Crown, two Kings content.
This was a fond conspiring Parliment The fruits springing from the pow^e of
Parliame^ts to make Kings in England.

Against their Liege directly, and the Laws;
No less disloiall, then improvident,
And of effects most bloody was the cause;
For, now the King his Friends together draws,
Who, for his safety straight began to lay,
Which could not be without the fearful Pawse
Of York (that Lion) clean were Germanicus, because one or two in the Army
had only a purpose to salute him by the name of Emperor, was never well brooked
til by his own death he had paid the price of other men's rashness. Tac Hist.
cut away,
Down must his Den, his House must have no stay.
Who like him self (being truly Leonine)
Stood on his strength, so to defeat his foes;
And having wisdom truly serpentine
Still compassing about the crown he goes,
Whom Henry tripping in his course No wisdom prevails against Gods decree.
orethroes:
But his Son Edward kept the claim a foot
Until that civil blood the Land oreflowes;
Who, in conclusion, pulled up by the root
All Lets, and got th'imbrued crown with mickle boot. Edward 4.

Whilst this was doing, the Realm was vndunne,
The Commonwealth, became a Common-woe;
Justice, and government by Rogues ore run,
The Ministers whereof tossed too and fro
Like foote-balls over which al men may The effects of civil war: for look
how much Peace is better then war, so much is ^orraine invasion better then
civil dissension.
go:
All was quite out of square, by squaring thus;
The Ground did groan enforced to undergo,
Continued Armies (most contentious)
That made the State poor, as prodigious.
This Claim was well examined, and admitted,
Here was Succession well established,
What villainy was not thereby committed?
What virtue was not quite abolished?
And who so high that were not drowned in dread?
Young, old, rich, poor, and Babes unborn, Civil war ten^es to the
prejudice of the yet unborn.
or borne,
Beasts, and things senseless had cause Tears to shedd,
For all hereby away perforce were worn,
And fared at least, as Creatures most forlorn.
Woe worth such vip'rous Kings houses yield many such Vermin.
Cousins that will rend
Their Mothers^wombe (the Commonwealth) to reign;
From such apparant-Heires God us defend,
That care not who do lose so they may gain:
And long may He in peace the Crown sustain,
That for our peace, and his, such Heirs has brought;
We all of late for such did still complain;
Then now since we have such, and cost us naught,
Lett's thankful be and know them as we ought.
As Power does want, so Claims, and Factions For a poor and hungry Army
cannot observe military discipline. Casiodorus.
cease;
Might Right orecomes, chiefly in Kingdoms claims;
Power Titles stirrs, and Conquest makes their peace:
The Sword the Law (how firm soever) maymes,
Which at a Conquest (though unlawful) aims:
Though Prince, and Peers, provide for future rule,
Ambition hardly her estate disclaimes,
Though for a time the Laws her overruled,
Yet when time serves, the Law she will Ambition upon the least opportunity
setts upon what so ere hinders her rising
misrule.
Our State stands not on Arms as others do;
Our force lies most dispersed at the Plow,
Unready, rude, and often rebellious More commonweals are ruined for want of
good obayers, the^ good commanders.
too,
Whose Sunburned Necks often rather break the^ bow,
Not caring whom, ne what they do allow:
These and such like enduced our late Prince
Such motions utterly to disalowe,
For this, and many an inconvenience,
Whereof all Times afford experience.
This made this careful Queen as knowing well,
(By forty five years proof, and her sharp sight
Into events, whereof al Stories tell)
How safe to rule, and keep the State upright,
For her rights sake, right close to keep this Iealousy is glued to love and
to a Crown.
right:
Better (she thought) such Heirs two days old
Then two years, and as strong in Law, and Fight:
So, loved her States life, and her own to hold,
And made her Heart that Heirs securest Hold.
But since she did conclude this great affair,
Both Law, and Conscience, do conclude the State;
And who resists (by birth) that lawful Heir,
Resists the lawful Sov'raigne Maiestrate,
Made both by birth and Law from just estate:
Monarchicall-inheritance resides
In him from her, Birth, Bequest, Laws of God, Nature, Nations, and Reason,
together with all kingly worthiness makes good our now kings possession.
then, who does violate
Obedience to him wounds the tender sides
Of Law and Conscience, and al good besides.
Edward the fourth thus having caught the Crown,
The weak Lancastrians drove to the wall,
And spared none, till all were overthrown
That might lie in his way to make him fall:
His Neerenesse of blood does often put hearts furthest a sunder, in K^ngdomes
cases.
Brother Clarence (o Crime Capital!)
He did rebaptize in a Butt of Wine,
Being ielous of him (how soere Loiall)
A Turkish providence most indivine;
Yet Crowns will rest on such, ere thei'le decline.
Besides, a sliding and newfangled Nation
Full of Rebellion and Disloyalty,
May cause a Prince for his securer station
To stand upon the like extremity
Where Virtue has no place of certenty.
What Prince (if provide^t) will stick to strain
Both Law and Conscience in secresy
To cut one Member The Law it self will rather admit a mischief the^ an
inconvenience.
off, that letts his reign,
Which the states Body does in health maintain?
The more perfection and Heroic worth
Such Heirs, great Cousines, or great Subjects have,
The more the Multitude will set them He always shall be suspected and hated of
the Prince in possession who^ men do account worthy or like to be Prince in
succession. Tacitus Hist. The Valor and fierce courage of the great Cousin,
displeases the jealous Sovereign. Tacit.
forth
And more and more their rule they seek and crave;
Then must we lose a part the whole to save:
These have Achitophells to egg them on
And make them much more restless then a wave,
Until their Sovereigns they set upon
To make them yield up their Dominion.
Many a busy- Head by Words and Deeds
Put in their Heads how they may compass All crafty and Achitophell-like
councels, are in show pleasant, in execution hard, and in event deadly
dangerous.
Crowns,
That Crowns at last may compass so their Heads
And sit victoriously on steedfast Thrones:
All these like humming Bees ensue those Drones;
To gather Honey if they chance to rest,
And store themselves with sweet A Ba^kerours peace is in civil discord, and
his discord is in peace.
provisions,
Whilst the Crown-greedy Cousine in unrest
Lives but for them with fears and cares oppressed.
Now though King Edward (like a wary Prince)
To remove Obstacles bent all his might;
Yet could no skill or humane providence
Protect his Sons from their Protectors spite:
Who as he served King Henry, served them right.
The blood of Innocents on Innocents
With heavy vengeance mixte, amain does light^
Thus, Innocents are plagued for the Nocents
Such are the High'sts inscrutable Gods Judgments are inscrutable but none
unjust.
Judgments.
And as He murdered Henry for his Crown;
So for their Crown were his Sons Justice equal in quality, and quantity for
Henry 6. and his Son were murdered. etc.
murdered,
By hardest Hearts in softest Bed of Down
They were (dear Hearts) at once quite smothered,
Which some ignoble Nobles Man ought not to use man prodigally. Seneca.
Richard 3.
furthered:
And, rather then they should not die by force,
Or want a VVant-grace to perform the Deed,
Their Uncle and Protector must perforce
Their Crown from Head, and Head from Life divorce.
Now up is Richard, ( Monster, not a Man)
Upon the Royal Throne that reeling stood;
Now Rule does Under this King, to do ill was^ not always safe^ and always
unsafe to do well, as Tacitus reports of Neros reign, Princes that
tyrannously govern their people have greater cause to fear good men then the^
that be evil.
end, when he to rule began,
Who being perfect ill, destroi'd the Good,
And like an Horseleech lived by sucking blood.
Now as desire of Rule more bloody was
In York then Lancaster, so did the flud
Of Divine Vengeance more in York surpass:
For to maine Seas of blood, Blood-Brookes repasse^
They which co^te^n: peace and covet honor, do lose both peace and honor.
Bloud-sucking Richard (swol^e with sucking Blood)
When Horsleech-like he had his bloody pray,
Away falls he in blood bemir'd with Mud,
Making his Nephews usher him the way.
For from his crown the crown was cut away.
A good cause in public war (like the Cape Bone spei) co^ducts to the la^d of
triumph
Henry the sevenths keene-edg'd victorious Sword
Slipped twixt both Crowns unto his Crowns decay,
And got the Crown that was much more assured
Which he to his, and his to theirs afford.
God amongst Men, no King but demi- God
Hen. 7.
Henry the seventh the Sc^pter takes in hand,
Who with it (as with Moises powrefull Rod)
Turned streams of civil blood that soakt this land
A good prince mak^ war that he may have peace, and endures labor in hope of
rest. Salust.
To silver streams, that ran on Golden sand:
He turned Swords to Mattockes, Spears to Spades,
And bound up all unbound, in peaces Band,
Who dra^e the erst long idle to their Trades,
And changed injurious Swords, to Iustice-Blades.
No more Plantagenet, but Thewdor now
Sits in the Kingdoms late unstable Seat:
Eccles. 5 8^
Plow-men praise God, and God does Where God is praised men's endevors are
blessed.
speed the Plow,
For such a King that makes their Crops complete,
And multiplies their heardes of sheep and Neat:
Upon Ambitions Neck he sets his foot
Keeping her under; Two things do establish the Throns of kings prudence and
piety, the one a^earing in their Actions, the other in their manners.
And amongst the Wheat
He pulls up Darnell duly by the root,
And naught neglects that may his Kingdom boot.
This Solomon looked into High and Low,
And knew all from the Cedar to the shrub;
He bare the sword that gave a bitter blow
1. King. 3.12.
As Well to Cedars, as the lowest stub
That in the course of Justice proved a Rub: Homer faineth all the Gods to
sleep except Jupiter implying there by the care of a good King for his subiect^

Wisdom and Prowess did exalt his Throne,
Justice and Mercy propt it, which did curb
Those that would shake it, so that he alone
Did rule the Roast that all did live upon.
He, (virtuous King) still feared the King of Kings
With loving fear, that made him Lion-bold.
He ordered things as pleased the Thing of Things, Princes ought to measure
their Actions by the standerd of their Laws; as this did.

Like David, that of him his Crown did hold,
That on his Throne his Offspring does uphold:
Laden with happiness, and blessed days,
His Realm repleat with blessings manifold;
This prosperous Prince (to his immortal praise)
Left Life, Realm, Children, all at happy stays.
Then no less feared, then famous Henry, Hen. 8.

(That had a sacred Caesar in his pay) His sword was so successful as made
his neighbors glad of his friendship, and fearful of his indignation.

With somewhat more then mortal Majesty,
Sits on the Throne (that hands divine did stay)
As Heir apparent, and the state does sway:
He weilds the sword with his victorious hands
That the whole Continent does sore affray,
Wherewith he makes to crouch the Neighbor lands
Which in a manner lie at his commands.
He was as circumspect, as provident, Mercy may have her excess in huma^
things.

And by his Fathers observation
Did right well know, what kind of government
Was fitt'st for this unkind revolting Nation: Clemency is most dangerous
where and when soft quiet dealing draws on more evil then severity^

Well knew he how to part a Combination
That stood not with the state, or his avail;
And if he were severe for reformation,
It Was Emperik-like, that knew what it did aile,
So, kill the cause lest all the Whole should fail.
His for^aine VVarres, and famous Victories
More glorious were^ then for our Contrie good:
For, such Wars have these inconveniences,
They make us spend our Treasures with our blood,
Where both are cast Foreign Co^questes were costly in achiving costly in
holding, and often no less costly then dishono^rable in forgoing
away in likelihood,
When wars abroad drink up our wealth at home,
The fire must out, when spent is all the wood;
And if naught from without come in the womb
The Body needs must die by Natures dombe.
The wealth he pressed from Monastries suppressed
With the Revennues which to them pertain'd,
In liberal larges to his friends and servants.
The Crown possessed, but he it dispossessed
With open Hand; which, had they, still remained
T'had bin aloft; for less has Crowns sustained.
Lone, Relief, Subsedie, and such as these
Might (for the subjects ease) have bin refrained:
The crowns Revennues such might well release,
And have maintained the state in war and peace.
If these had still bin adjuncts of the crown,
And all that hold them hold as of the same;
Our Kings might have had a double intrest in their subjects.
Our Kings might war with Tenants of their own,
Who would vnprest have yet bin pressed for shame
To follow their Liege-land-lords by that name.
The Crown then, like a Condite never dry,
Still might have streamed (to the owners endless fame)
Rivers of Riches unto Low and hy
That well deserved of King or Contery.
Those hearts, whose life their Liege should thus maintain
(No less then bodies to their souls are bound)
Should have bin tied unto their Sovereign
To go with him at every needful Sound,
And in their service bin most faithful found.
But that, that shall be, shall be. That high hand
That all disposes, thus did it The hearts of Kings are in his hands that
disposes all things to effect his inevitable decrees.
confound
For purposes which hardly can be scand,
But for the Crown ill, how ere for the Land.
He, Caesar-like in's fortunes confident,
Ere first he crossed the Seas to war with France,
The Marquess of Exceter made Regent
And Heir apparent; but no ill by chance
Ensued till he did him quite Beheaded him
disadvance:
He had forgot the direful Tragedy
Of the sixth Henry, and like heirs appearance:
But more advised, he held it policy He knew it was not the speech of a wise
man to say, who would have thought it?

To spare that heir till more necessity.
When he had cleared the coast, and clensd the way,
Of all that lay in either to molest,
And having put the state in perfect stay,
He with his Fathers laid him down to rest,
And left a Son in whom the Land was blessed: Edw. 6.

Who being young, could not yet stir the stern,
But ruled by those his sire esteemed best;
And while the virtuous King to rule did learn,
His Realm (misrul'd) in vp-rore did discern.
Here reigned Ambition, like Obedience clad,
There ruled Sedition, in Concordes coat;
And here and there Rebellion raged as mad, Simil.

And every where the Commonwealth did floate
Like to an halfe-suncke tempest-beaten Boat:
Each for him self, no one for King or Sat,
Upon the Wedge of Gold the best did doat,
All stood as falling still in each estate,
Knights giving Earls, Earls giving Dukes the Mate.
Many a Demas then forsook poor Paul;
In Sum, the Sum of all was out of square,
And yet (strange Paradox) at square was all,
None Compass kept, yet For private good.
compassing they are,
And Circumvention held discretions care:
Thus whilst the Sov'raign's in minority,
Each would be sov'raigne that about him were;
The small in grace strave for maiority,
And Youth with Age for Seniority.
Disorder thus dividing the whole Disorder mother of Confusion.
State,
And subdividing those divisions;
The Lord of Love, to show his urged Hate,
Took the wronged King from his Dominions,
And left the Land fired with Sedition the plague of perver^nesse.
seditions:
By Angels hands this King Angelical,
(A^ one of high Iehovahs Minions)
Was borne from this Nation unnatural,
That vengeance on it, so, might freely fall.
No sooner had the Heavens seized his Soul,
But a left hand began to seize the Crown;
Which seizure a right hand did soon control,
And VVrong that would aspire, Right straight putts Fortune often reserveth t^
the hardest chance^ them who^ she adva^ceth to the greatest dignity.

The fortunate cannot do ill i^ they would.


down;
Which fatally in fine was overthrone:
Yet was that Wrong made Right by their consents
That were to see that each one had his own;
But Heaven disposes Earth and her intents,
And Earth against Heaven opposed, too late He is made wise too late that is
made wis^ by his own h^rme and irrecov^rable l^s^e.
repents.
Who trusts in Men in whom was never D^p^^t from th^^e enemies and bew^re of
thy f^iendes Eccle. 6.13.
trust
(Except they were at war with Wealth and State)
Few Statesmen such) shall see how much distrust
Does Men advantage, and prolongs their date;
Treason's in Trust; Repentance comes to late:
When Powr's derived from those that are but weak
( VVeake every way) it stands in desprate state:
Frailty sticks not fidelity to Frailty is full of falsehood.
break
When it does favor, and advantage seek.
In case of Crowns (when it our Crowns may cost,
If we miss holding when at them we catch)
It Is deadly dangerous at al to trust,
Much more to trust There is nothing more profitable to mortal men then
distrust. Euripides.
all that advantage watch
By thy loss, from loss themselves to dispatch:
Religion cannot dwell in double They that stand with all worlds will stand
with no world if the world stand not with the^. Queen Mary.
hearts;
Such Hearts have All that with all states do match:
Then where Religion slideth, promise starts,
And fear of peril, worldly frendshippe parts.
Queen Mary (for, she was that which she was,
Namely our Queen, and near to our late Queen)
Her faults in silence we will Love covers the multitude o^ sins in our
neighbor what should it do the^ in our Sovereigns that have more means and
induceme^ts to sin the^ private persons.
overpasse;
Let them be buried with her, since I ween
Sh'hath bin well taxt whose memory is green:
She now is Crowned, and Crowned to others cost;
With Spain she matches, being overseene,
Her King forsakes her, Calis quite is lost,
All goes awry, which makes her yield the Ghost.
Now sacred Queen Elizabeth.
Cynthia girt with silver Orb
From out Cimerian Clouds of Prisonment,
(Fair Queen of Chastity) appeared to curb
Contention, which oreranne this Continent;
And joined the same with peaceful government,
Which we do yet enjoy, and long may we
The cause of it All that understand the worth of blessed Peace will say Amen
to a prayer for Peace.
possess in all Content;
Amen say I, and all that peaceful be
In him that says Amen when all agree.
God will rather hear the Orisons of the^ that pray for Peace, the^ the
Tru^pets that proclaim wars
Pray for thy King (ble'st I Will) lest that a Change
A five-fold change, to Desolation tend;
Or thou made subject to a Subject strange,
Which may thy publike-weale in pieces rend,
And make it private only to the friend:
Gods Mill grindes slowly, but small meal it So often we play with Gods
judgments because we feel not the force ther^of, that at length (like the Fly
in the flame) we are consumed of them.
makes.
Then praise him for thy peace and less offend;
Be not as one that still occasion takes
To sin the more, the more he peace pertakes.
Far be it from Religion, to pretend
Obedience whilst it aims at Princes spoil;
Its not Religion Sovereignty to end,
That Servitude thereby may keep Civil war is fa^re worse then Tyranny or
unjust judgment Plutarch. in Bruto.
a coile,
And for her freedom covett Freedoms foil.
If Kings Commands do cross the Divine will,
In their discharge Religion must recoile,
But not confound the Charger, for its ill;
And ill can never good Gods commandments. A Recapitulation of what has bin
discoursed touching the Kings of England and their governments.
Commands fulfill.
Now, brifly t'recollect what we have sedd
Touching the Actions of these Pote^tates:
William Conqueror.
In William Conquerer's considered
How soon are conquered divided Stat^s;
,,For force disioyned^ small force Vis vnita fortior.
ruinates.
He, being desirous to reteyne the Pray
His Sword had purchased, it quite dissipates;
And like a Chaos at his feet it lay,
To form it as he listed every way.
New Lords, new Laws.
With the new King, he gave new Lords and Laws,
Which curbed the Head-stro^g, and did yoke the VVild,
Till Disobedience with obedience draws,
And all as one to one and all did yield,
That with and for that One did win the field:
Who, finding his possession to be sure
Did ease the thralldome wherein they were held,
And that which erst he wounded, he did To hurt and heal for more health is
wholesome.
cure;
And every way their loves did then alure.
Now are the King and the Nobility
True friends, and fathers to the Commonweal;
The Commons now obey Blessed is the affliction that procures greater
perfection.
unfeignedly:
The Victors and the Vanquished do feel
How much these Corsiues deadly hatred heal:
Now all, being whole and sound, are made entire,
And all about, their Liege does Larges deal,
By means whereof he has his hearts desire,
Whilst with his love, he thus setts Hearts on ^ire.
If he to mercy had the Peers received,
Or trusted to their Oaths (true Fallacies)
And so departed when he had perceav'd
The State well settled leaving Deputies,
He Had lost the value of his Soon ripe, soon rotten.
Victories:
Ne had the Land bin free from wars and woes,
That do consort divided Monarchies;
Ireland a woeful witness is of those,
That for a Conquests want, wracks Friends and Foes.
Omitting other Princes, to descend Edward 1. Longshancks.

To the first Edward, that did first refine
This Commonweal, and made the same ascend
When through mis-swaying it seemed to decline:
In whom we see the Providence divine
Work by his Wisdom, Valor, Industry,
Glorious effects, which in the State do shine;
For He it made an entire Monarchy,
Which now remains so to Posterity.
Edw. 2. Rich. 2 Hen. 6. Edw. 5.
Edward and Richard, second of their names,
With the sixth Henry, and the Infant King,
By these (be it spoken not without their blames)
Is seen the dire and diverse altering
Of kingly state, through evil managing.
These being childish, frail, improvident,
Lay open to Ambition gathers resistles strength in a Kings weakness.
Ambitions canvasing;
Who (sp^ing time) usurped their government
Making them Mirrors for Kings negligent.
The faults forementioned in these hapless Kings,
The unjust rule of those that ruled them,
Majesty without magnanimity is unassured. Livie. 2.^
The subjects strength which Sov'raignes weakness brings,
A fatal Potion made for King and Realm,
Whereof they drank a deadly draught extreme:
Kings must be Kings indeed and not in show,
Like as the Sun is Active with his Beam;
For if they suffer Subjects, Kings to grow,
Kings must be slaves, and to their Subjects I have seen servants on horses,
and Princes walking like ^ servants on the ground. Eccl. 10.7.
bow.
Edw. 3 Hen 4.
Edward the third and Henry Bullenbrooke,
Hen. 5. Edw. 4.
Henry the fifth, and the fourth Edward,
These Princes were of Fortune nere forsook,
Because they governed with due regard;
And whilst they watched, they made the rest to ward:
By others errors they did rule aright,
Loving fear a sure guarde to Sovereigns
Who made their subjects loving fear their guarde:
Ambition durst be damned ere come in sight,
Or but once move her head to look upright.
No kingd^me free from Ambition.

Kingdoms the objects of fortune and Envy.


Kings cannot safely reign without mistrust,
Because no state without Ambition is,
Which ever has her Train^ (for so she must)
To help to guide her, when she guids amiss;
For she is blind, and often the way does miss,
Impatient of delay in her desire,
Now running that way and straight trying this;
Like to a restless ventlesse Flame of fire, Simil.

That feign would find the way straight to aspire.
There Is Perfection humane
no perfection without some defect,
Yet may't be cured, or tolerable made;
Only Ambition does all cure reject,
Wealth does augment it, want makes it not fade; Ambition a sore of the mind
incurable.

And into deepes unknown in both it will wade:
In doing well it is most insolent,
And no less impudent in doing bad,
Too wil'd to tame, and violently bent
With Tooth and Nail to catch at government.
The Conquests which these Kings in France obtained
(As those in Scotland) were by others lost:
"(For Vice will lose what is by virtue gained.)
Their keeping put the state to ceaseless An inevitable inco^venience
cost,
Which ^ost the Commons (raged) being racked most;
And with their loss, the King lost many friends,
Which were as Fortes to guard his Kingdoms coast;
"But ill beginnings have unlucky ends,
And worse proceeding, worse in fine offends.
In the last Richard may be lively seen Richard. 3.

Ambition really annatomiz'd;
Which orelookes all, and yet is overseene,
Advising all, yet none more vnadvis'd,
Destroying all till she be sacrifiz'd:
She, Ambition would destroy al to be above all.
Faith, Sex, Age, Blood, State, and Contery,
Divine and humane laws (immortalized)
Respects not, in respect of Empery,
All which appeer'd in this King copiouslie.
Hen..7
In his Successor (Englands Solomon)
Are diverse things well worth the imitation
In our states policy: for he alone
Bent all his powers to benefit this Nation:
He saw our foreign Conquests ill probation,
And that for Islanders it was unmeet
To spend their wealth for foreign domination,
Which was no sooner fixed, but did fleet,
And did this state with ill Salutes regreete.
He thought it loss to purchase Unjust peace is to be prefer red before just
war Livie. Yet open war is more secure the^ suspicious peace. Tac. 4. Hist.
war and hate,
Where love and Traficke might be held with gain;
He well remembered, how each Runnagate
And wandering Nation, here ran in amain,
Making their profit of this Nations pain:
He saw the safety, and Great heaps are made of many little things in peace,
and brought to nothing in war.
weal of this state
Rested in wealth and peace, and quiet reign,
And not in foreign Conquests, and debate;
Which have as short, as most uncertain date.
Through Peace and perfect government this Land
May in her rich Peace and good government the Parents of Prosperity.
Commodities abound,
Which may confirm the Neighbor-friendships band,
And intertrafficke with them, tun for pound,
So make the Lands adjacent, to her bound:
Thus God is pleased, and King and Country eased,
The Tradsmen God sells us riches for the price of labor.
thrive, that dearth and wars confound,
The People are (as with great profit) pleased,
And none, but those that live by spoil, displeased.
This prudent Prince perceav'd this Commonweal
To be by Traffic strong made in the We are said to be well backed when we
are no worse frended
back;
So, as an head that Members wants does feel,
He leagued him, where might be supplied their lack,
Or be as walls to keep the Realm from wrack:
He seeing that (which he did often try)
The Gold makes al thin^s pregnable.
Money-Sacke, best kept the Land from Money is the very sin^wes of a State.
Mucian.
sack;
Therefore the Angels which from him did fly
Had but short wings, and lighted but hard by.
Among the things which he did least regard,
His Belly and his Back were more then least;
He fared well, when so his The good of the Subjects is the object of the good
^rince.
Commons fared,
(Although his commons were not of the best)
Yet fared like a King without a feast;
He rather chose to have Exchequers Money (says Thucidides) makes weapons
forcible and profitable.
rich
Then wealthy VVardropps; yet would well be dressed
When it his Majesty and State did touch;
Yet held, save Commonwealth, all wealth too Cyrus^ was wont to say, he heaped
great treasures when he enriched his friends and Subjects.
much.
Where Kings be not in ceasselesse guard of Arms
(Like these of ours) the State lying open so
TO invasion and Rebellions soddaine harms,
Let not the King look Friends should ^oile the Foe
At their own charge, for fear of overthro:
And in tumultuous times to break their backs
Will make them from their Necks the yoke to through,
And to be freed from such tormenting Racks
Will ruin all, though them with all, it wracks.
Such great improvidence Let Kings that desire to live in peace, provide in
time things necessary for war.
and want of heed
unseasonable Taxing ( Tempting rather)
Has made the Sovereign with the Subject bleed;
Witness the two last Richards among other,
That knew how greevous then it was to gather.
Store is no Sore (they say) except of Tiberius of Constantinople accounted
that for counterfeit coin, that was levied with Tears and cryings of the
people.
Sores,
Yet it is sore The bitings of enraged necessity are most dangerous^ Portiu^
latro.
store with hate to heap together;
Hate havocks in each hole in all vprores,
As Water havocks life through all the Pores.
This spectacle of Kingly providence
Nere cloi'd the subject with too great estate,
Nor would he of a Pesaunt make a Prince;
His best beloved he held in sober state,
That he might live with them without debate.
Hen. 7. a true Pa^terne of a wise and virtuous Prince.
Of all the Kings that ere this Land possessed,
For government discreet and temperate,
This King deservedly is deemed best,
And to be imitated worthiest.
In his Triumphant most victorious Son
Hen. 8.
Henry the last in name, and first in fame,
Is to be seen great wisdom, vsd to shun
Cross Accidents and courage in the same:
Yet some suppose, that he incurred blame
For being too open-handed in expense
Bounty does cover many faults, and Avarice obscureth many virtues.
And gifts excessive; but it is a shame
For Kings not roially to recompense
The rich desert of any Excellence.
Ingratitude in all is most monsterous,
But most of all in royal Majesty,
Wherein its more then most prodigious:
Munificence makes great, Authority;
Guiftes do superinduce the heart to love.
And stands with Greatness in great policy:
The force of Gifts does offer violence
Even to savage Inhumanity,
Forcing therefrom such loves obedience,
As singlie works with double diligence.
He more respected honor then profit.
His foreign Conquests much more famous were
Then any way commodious to this state,
Yet them his active sp'rite could not forbear;
For Caesar-like he would predominate
Where he had least just coulor of estate:
In raising lowest shrubs to Cedars hie
He from his sage Sire did degenerate;
Yet virtue though it nere so low does lie,
Is worthy of high praise and dignity.
In the last Edwards and Queen Mary's reign Edward 6. Q^ Marie.

Is seen, what to those states is incident
Where subjects do not fear their Sovereign,
But strive to live beside their Regiment,
Contemning so their too-weake government: Contempt in subjects is the
con^usion of government.

This made the Rebel rise in strength and pride,
From Sov'raignes weakness taking couragement,
T'assault their Gates, led by a feeble Guide,
Shaking their Thrones a while from side to side.
In our Queens no less long then peaceful reign Q^ Elizabeth.

Blessed (as appeer'd) by that blessed Prince of Peace,
Was seen much more then wisdom feminine,
If we respest how soon she made to cease
The old Religion for the oldes increase:
That sudden change that did the soul acquit
Of old devotion (which none will release
Upon the sudden) still to stand in might,
May make a Newter deem sh'was in the right. Act. 5.35,36, 37,38,39.

And now descend ye spirits Angelical,
That, chargde, do guard the Anointed of your Lord;
Crown my Liege Lord with crown imperial,
And put into his hand the awful Sword
Of Justice; so, the good shall be assured,
And so may ye be freed from your charge,
Whereby the good are evermore secured;
For, he that office will for you discharge,
Since Justice goodmens surance does enlarge.
Bless him o ever-blessed Union,
Making a no less blessed Trinity;
Bless him as thou have never blessed one
That ever did possess this Monarchy:
Shower down thy blessings on his family:
The blessings of the womb give to his Queen,
And let them as the Sea-sand multiply;
That from their royal loins may still be seen
Heirs, as the stars of heaven, for store, and sheene.
Thus have I breathed my Muse in Policy,
Or rather run her out of breath therein;
That so she may with more facility
Run ore the rest less difficult, wherein
She has much more then much delighted bin.
But Policy is but abused by me,
I do but mangle her, and make her sin:
But were she wholly seen as she should be,
Sh'would seem no daughter of Mortalitee!
Return my Muse from whence thou have digrest,
(To toil thy self in states deep mysteries)
And now directly prosecute the rest
Touching the souls yet untouched faculties:
We varied, where we touched varieties
Of dispositions of the soul and sp'rite;
In touching which, we touched these Policies
Wherein the worldly wise so much delight,
Because they tend to rule the World aright.
The Minds pleasurs much more pleasant the^ corporal delights.
The pleasures of the Mind (as erst was said)
As far surmount all pleasures corporal,
As the Mind does the Body, which is swai'd
But by the Mind, with svvaie Monarchical;
Yet some base bodies keep the Mind in thrall:
Who do s'extremely doat on fleshly ioies,
That they do wish they had no mind at all,
That so they might not feel the Minds annoies,
For those delights which Flesh and Sprite destroies.
These Men-beastes are as if they never were, Sensual persons are vselesse
burdens to the earth.

They burden but the Earth, yet are too light,
Who live to lust, yet straight away they wear,
(Like Dew against the sun in highest height)
With flesh-consuming fleshly frail delight.
These senseless spunges of Improbity
Are full of pleasure, but it is unright;
For Gods hand squizeth out their iollitie,
And fil^ their Minds with real misery.
The Mind, her pleasures needs not intermit The senses soon weery of their
pleasures.

And then retake them, as the senses must:
But changes them as she thinks requisite,
(Sometimes the just, for pleasures most unjust,
So changing Love too often to loathsome Lust)
Except the power, from whence the motion springs
Be hindered by (and so betrayed in trust)
Some let in the Organs, vsd in her workings, Wine and sickness 2. Obstacles
that lets the m^ndes actions.

Which VVines excess, and sickness often brings.
But those impediments bee'ng taken away,
She, like a River, keeps her wonted course Simil.

In motion still, ti^l she be at a stay
By some strong Damme; yet does her self enforce
(Still gathering strength, and courage from her Sourse)
To break away through all Impediments, We ought to propose nothing to the
mind unworthy of her.

That so she may employ her wonted force
Upon the pleasures, which her most contents,
Be they vain Ioies, or divine ravishments.
It then behooves us to be well advised
What matter we propose unto our mind;
Or good, or ill, or ill with good disguised:
For if she should therein a liking find,
She will thereto be evermore inclin'de:
Simil.
Like some pure virgins, that nere knew the sport
That men do yield them, in the kindest kind,
Having once tasted it, are all amort
But when (though damned) they a^e at that disport.
If then we would cheer this ay-moving mind,
We must have care, that that be perfect good
Which she does chew (how different e're in kind)
For, corrupt Aliments breed corrupt blood;
And blood corrupted is Confusions flood:
But sensual pleasures cannot please the Sense
Without being cloied, though they change their mood;
Sense must awhile forbear plea^ures to make them more pleasant.
For Sense sometimes must hold the^ in suspe^ce,
To set an edge the while on her dulled sense.
Likewise, the pleasures which we do receave
From The pleasurs which sense receives from natural things are more pleasant
the^ those from Artificial.
Natures works have much more force, then those
That we from Artificial things conceive:
For let all Arts unto our view expose
What Art it self in each kind can disclose,
They bring satiety soon with the sight;
But who is cloi'd to see a flowred Close,
Hills, Dales, Brooks, Meads, VVoods, Groves, all dainty dight,
Sun, Moon, and Stars, and al in perfect plight?
For we, being natural, do best agree
With things in nature no less natural;
Yet, to confess a wel-know'n veritee,
Our often seeing these fair Creatures all
Does make the pleasure much less Nothing under the Su^ne long co^tents:
therefore we should seek contentment above the Sun.
Cordial,
Herehence it is, that we do less admire
The power of that Hand supernatural,
Which did this al with all these Faires attire;
And so not praise him, as his works require.
Yet if a Child, confin'de t'a Dungeon deep
Until he had attained Manhoods years,
Should on a So^mers-day from some high steep
Upon a sudden see these glorious Fayres,
His Eyes would ravished be, how ere his Ears;
For Ears should solac'd be, as well as Eyes,
With the melodious Birds.
nimble-winged Quiers;
Nay I suppose such joy would him surprise,
As he were plunged in joys of Paradize.
But while he is Dungeon'd, let the expert'st Tongue young,
(That able were to create Living words)
Paint out the Earth with quick- words, great with
And though that Fry again like Spawne affords,
And every one had power to pierce like Swords
Into the nature of these Rarities,
To make him comprehe^d the highest Lords
Inferior'st works, he could not well co^prize
The thousa^dth part of grace which in the^ lies.
As when a Man (though with an Angels tongue) Simil.

Whilst we are Dungeon'd in this World of vvo,
Tells us of Heaven, and all that does belong
Unto the state of those that thither^ go,
With words that from a well of VVisdome flo,
Yet tells he not the hundred thousandth part
Of that rare bliss which none on Earth can kno;
As good Souls well perceave, when hence they None know it but they that feel
it.
part;
Which far surmou^ts the highest thoughts of Heart.
But herein's faulty this Comparison:
To Mundane things is fixed satiety,
But those blessed Things that are above the Sun
Are priviledg'd from such deficiency;
For they are full of all The property of true felicity is always to co^cent
the desire and exclude fear.
felicity:
The more they are beheld the more they may,
For they content Desires best-sighted Eye,
And please the more, because that still they stay;
"For true joys are complete by their delay.
Ask that same third- Heau'n-rapt St. Paul.
Saint, what he saw
Or what he heard, when he was ravished so;
He Will tell you (though most learned in sacred Law
And no less learned each way) he does not kno,
The joy thereof his Sense did so oreflo.
If then so great a Clark, so pure a Saint,
Being but in the Heaven, two lofts belo,
Wants words the joy there of aright to paint,
Who can the highest Heavens bliss depaint?
Thus the Affects of joy and Grief, are given
By him, that gives all only to one end,
To weet, his Glory, and desire of Heaven;
Joy to alure, and Grief the Affects to bend
From that which does to Grief and Horror tend.
Now then, to run through other strong Affects,
And to descend to Love, (that does Love does descend not ascend.
descend)
Which is a Passion powrefull in effects
And chiefly the chief good by kind respects.
When Judgment has alow'd a thing for good,
She foorth-with tenders it unto the Will,
Which does embrace the same in joyful mood,
Because it does her Souls desire fulfill:
And when that joy (conceav'd) does tarry still
Its called Love, How love is bredd.
which does the will incline
To simple good, or good scarce touched with ill:
Thus Love is bredd or humane or divine,
Which in the soul like a fair Flame does shine.
But Love, that has respect to any thing
Besides the goodness of the thing beloved,
Is rather doting, which does loathing bring Doting b^ings loathing.

When things thereby desired are well approved:
If God himself be for his bounty loved
And only therefore, who does love him so
Does love him for his goodness, by him proved,
Yea for that goodness which to him does flo,
Not for that good which he cannot forego.
Who loves us for his own goodness sake,
And for no good in us, (for we have none)
We should love him, not for he did us God should simply be loved for his own
goodness.
make,
But for his goodness only and alone,
And love al goodness, for, and in that One:
A father loves his son, not in regard
Of any gain, but for he is his own;
Nor should a Son, his Sire love for reward,
But for he is his Sire in Nature dear'd.
For, if we love ought for the good we have
From it, we love our selves more then the same,
Or love it for our selves, our selves to save
From want of that which from it to us came:
So such love is self-love, which Love does blame: It is self-love to love
God for his bounty toward us only.

But we must love the Lord of Love for love;
Nay, though he hate us, we must love his name,
Since to make man Love made us to love.
Love only did him move
But to love him again for Man's behove.
If then we weigh, by what degrees we mount
To him from whom our souls did first descend,
We find that as through love (which does surmou^t)
They came from him, so to him they ascend
God is man's beginning and his end.
The selfsame way, as to their proper end.
For coming from him, they must know him needs;
And knowing him, they needs must to him tend,
But so they cannot, but by loves good- deeds;
For what is not of love, from sin proceeds.
The order of loves progres
The order then, of the degrees to love
Is, first we at things corporal begin;
For, our birth to that Step us straight does move;
Unto our outward senses then we rinne,
To Fancy next, and so we never linne
Till through Reas'n, Judgment, Contemplation,
We come to love, and so we rest therein:
But to descend by the self same gradation,
And there to rest, descends to damnation.
For, to dismount from true loves lofty pitch
(Love of the Highest,) so low as to self-love,
Is, Sow-like, to lie mired in the ditch
Of lowest Hell, where we all Sorrows prove,
And cannot for our souls from thence remove
Without kind heavenly loves all-helping hand;
He works in us both the will and the deed.
Which only and alone has power to move
Our Minds from Earth unto the Livings Land,
And break the linckes of selfe-loues mortal Band.
Love makes an Union of Diversity;
If then we love God, he and we are One,
One (although diverse) through true amity;
We love him and our selves for him alone:
So may we love our selves, as we love none. Self-love is justifiable when we
love our selves for god only.

Likeness breeds love, which makes him love us so
Who made us to his Image; and his Son
Assumed our shape, which makes his love the mo:
Then, by like reason, we should love him to.
The more his Image is renewed in us,
The more he loves us, and we love the more;
Then to deforme the same's most odious,
And he detesteth us alone therefore,
Which makes us likewise loath him and his love:
All which proceeds from dissimilitude,
For, God and Beliall are foes evermore;
Then since we are with his fair Form indu'd,
Let it by us be evermore renewed.
For, Beauty is an urgent cause of Love; Beauty is a special cause of love.

If so, we should embrace the fairest Fair
With love that should be far all love above,
Yea, die for love, that Love might life repair,
And glorify the same as Beauties Heir:
See we an hue that mortal beauty stains
(As does the Sun the Moon by his repair)
This sov'raigne Beauty all the glory gains, God the Fou^t of all Beauty.

Since but a spark thereof the same sustaines.
Then Beauty blush to glory in thy Blaze,
And much more blush to blaze thy glory vain
With coulors fresh, to make frail eyes to gaze, Painting the face.

And such as cannot judge of coulors, feign;
No coulor have thou so thy self to stain:
The best is too too bad, and bad's the Best,
That without Without coulor of Reason.
coulor do their face ingraine:
In earnest such (I think) do love to Jest,
As Chaucer, but my, Muse will owe the rest.
But outward beauty love procures, because
Outward argues inward beauty.
It argues the inward beauty of the Mind;
For goodness is the effect, Beauty the Cause,
And both together commonly we find;
For Nature both together still does bind.
A good Complexions disposition
Is, for the most part, virtuously inclinde;
But VVeomens beauty by permission
Being often tempted breeds suspicion.
Sin is conceived in the womb of concupiscence.
For hardly is that kept, that many craves,
And chastity with beautie's still at strife;
For, much more beautiful are Frailties slaves
The^ (for the most part) they of virtuous life:
And, ask a man, that has a beauteous wife,
How much he fears the foul fall of his fair,
Because that nothing in the world's more rife
Then at fair beauties byding men's repair;
And where they hau^t, they do not still They rather ruin then repair the
^ender honors of women.
repair.
But this by accident is rather thus,
Then any way to beauty natural;
For it, by Nature, is most virtuous,
A well te^pred body makes a like tempered mind ordinarily.
Since Tempers good, to Ill are seldom thrall:
For, bodies merely are Organicall,
Whereon the mind does play al parts in one,
If then they be in tune, most cordial
Their motions must be needs, since there is none
That moves the^ but the mind or God alone.
But for that beauty still alures the eye,
An unchaste eye loves to look upon ^ light eye.
The ^ie the heart, the heart the soul and Sp'rite
Of those, that on the same do chance to pry,
Because it does beheau'n them with delight:
This makes them instantly the same incite
To yield to love, or lust, and their desire;
Then being subject thus to restless fight.
It often enflames, and is ens^am'd with fire,
That Flesh and Sprite makes but one flame entire.
How many may we see distracted quight,
Or pyning live, or rather die with pain?
Yea some to spill themselves (with all despite)
For others beauty which they cannot gain?
If beauty then so ore frail sense does reign, Beauty ^igniorizeth the sense.

The beauty of a Woman cheereth the face, and a man loves nothing better. Eccl.
36.22.



Sense, being subject to her sov'raigntie
Does sue and serve, her favor to obtain,
With most impetuous importunity,
Till she as subject, to her Subject lie.
And never times (except the times of old
For whose corruption all the world was drowned)
But these cursed times of ours, durst be so bold,
To make it common with estates renowned
To count bright beauty Married.
matched, as it were unbound:
Call ye it Courtshippe? call it what ye please
(Though it be in request) it was not found
In chaster times; ^or often it does disease
The head with swellings which naught can appease.
Me thinks I see, (as I have often seen)
A well-made Male, as malcontent to stand
(In silk or silver clad right well-beseene)
Wringing a matched fair Female by the hand, Adultery Luxury, wantonness,
sloth, Pride, etc. are sins in Specie, the Genus to all these is Caro.

Whilst, in her ear, he lets her understand
How much she ought to love him ^or his love;
Mean while hard by stands Patience the Husband,
And lets Temptation his weak vessel prove,
Which in his sight her unseen Spright does move.
Its pretty pastime so to pass the time,
It savoures of good breeding, and good Wit:
The Hours are made more pleasant by this Chime,
Who would not still to here the same still sit,
Although a man transformed were by it?
O it is a jolly matter to give ear,
Nay to give leave to Music in her fit:
He is a Beast that will not then forbear
Though he thereby be made a Beast to bear.
4. Kinds of divine fury.
Four kinds of divine fury are observed,
first (and first by right) Prophetical,
Which by Apollo is ruled, and conserved;
next by Bacchus, called Mystical;
third by Muses, hight Poetical;
fourth and last, by Venus governed,
Is called the Fury Amatoriall;
Which do infer, that Love is borne and bredd
Without the breach of Natures Maidenhedd.
What force it has, is better felt then shown,
Loves force is vnvt^erable.
For Words cannot express the force of love;
Call we it Love or Lust, it is well known
It has the force of both, the Heart to move;
Which these can testify that it did prove:
Semiramis (whose Virtue past compare)
This furious Passion her did so remove
From that she was; that lusting to reshare
Her Son, her Son her Thread of Life did share.
The Macedonian Philipps peerless Alexander Mag.
Son,
That over-ranne the World with Sword and Fire,
This flaming fury yet did so ore run,
That for his Thais (that kindled his desire)
He burnt Plutar. in Alexand.
Persepolis, sans cause of ire:
Yea, did not only that foul fact command,
But with his Hands he lab'red (as for hire)
To burn the buildings which as yet did stand,
Till he had laid al level with the Land.
A VVonder worthy of all wonderment,
That he that foiled what ere his force withstood,
Should be thus foiled, and made a President
Of Lusts fell force, which so enflamed his Blood
That made his Flesh Wild- Fire in likelihood:
A Man by woman, a King by a Queen
To be so overcome through Lustful mood,
(Being so effeminate and most obscene)
Argues, in Love and Lust there is no mean. Love is lawl^^

Strange are the effects of Lust. For, Men with Men
Nay, Man with Beast: A Sin not to be touched
So much as with the Tongue, much less with Pen,
And least of all with that too often bewitched,
With love of that which is by Nature grutcht:
Lust is so blind that it cannot discern
A Man from Beast, (how ever beastly coucht)
But does a Man-beast move (though Nature yerne)
The tricks of Beasts, with loathsome Beasts to learn.
Grave Xenephon loved Clinias in this kind;
So as he craved of Jove when Clinias di'de,
That (if he might see him, and still be blind,
Or not see him, and still be perfect Eyde)
He rather might the want of sight abide
To see him once, then still to have his sight
And not see him; See see how blind a Guide
Is loathsome Lust, that leads men so unright, Lust is blind.

As for her pleasure so themselves to spite.
Semiramis an Horse (o brutish Lust!)
Did lust to have (o monstrous Mare humane!)
Pasiphae longed for a Bull to thrust
Her from a woman to a Cow unclean:
And Cyparissus made an Hynde the mean
To cool his courage; Aristom^chus
A silly Be would have to be his Queen.
Lust whither wilt? wilt be so monstrous
To long for Bees that be but moates to us?
Publius Pilatus fell in lusting love
With Hellens Image; and Pigmalion
Such lovers are as sensles as the stones which they love.
For his own Picture did like passion prove.
Damned Lust what pleasure provd'st thou in a stone
That Is cold by kind, as Snow on Libanon?
To tell the Mischiefs, Spoils, and Masacres,
By hate effected, though through love begun,
Were but to tell the number of the Stars;
For Lust and Mischeife are joint- passengers.
Troy might (perhaps) have stood unto this Age,
Had Lust not laid it level with the plains;
And seas of Blood spent in that ten years Siege
Might still have kept the Chanells of the Veins:
Lust is most wilful.
But lewd Lust is so loose that she restraines
Her will in naught, though it bringes all to naught:
She pleasure takes in pleasure causing pains;
For by her painful pleasures such are wrought,
Yet on such pleasures she does fix her thought.
She will not let the Thoughts so much as pry
A minutes space, on ought, but what she loves;
She (Tirant) captivates the Fantasy,
So that it cannot stir till she it moves:
Or if it do she forthwith it removes.
My Fancies Mistress, says some slave to Lust,
Is my Thoughts Heaven: So swallowed with his Loves
Are all his Thoughts; and though as dry as Dust
He lusts to please his love with love unjust.
For this, all that pertaines, must be in print,
Weeds, Words, Looks, Loks, in print, not one awry,
Whose Motions must be current for the Mynt;
His glances must keep just time with her Eye, O toil intolerable!

And seem to die, se'ng her rich beauties dye:
Yet with a careful carelessenesse, he must
Avoid the hate which too much love does buy,
And love no more then may provoke to lust;
These are their love- tricks, tricks of love unjust.
One makes an Idol of his Mistress Glove,
And offers (thrice a day at least) a Kiss
Unto each finger, so to show his love;
Another her Haire-Bracelett makes his bliss,
And Night and Day to adore it will not miss.
These Fancies, fancy do with kindness cloy,
Wit nere, in love, taught Pupil so of his,
(As says the Book) but does his powers employ
With kindness coy, to win his witty Toy.
Whist Muse, be mute; will thou like Naso prove, Quoth Speculation.

And interlace thy Lines with levity?
Will thou add Precepts to the Art of Love,
And show thy virtue in such vanity?
So to polute thy purer Poesy!
No more, no more, enough, (if not too much)
Is sedd already of this Mystery;
My Conscience at the same does (grieving) grutch,
But let it go this once, with but this Touch.
Be^uty promis^th more honesty then deformity.
And how-soere Beauty may be abused,
It promises more good then shapelesnesse:
If it prove otherwise, its thus excused;
The Highest to show that good-guifts (more or less)
Proceed from him, and not from Natures largess,
Lets beauty fall, and soil it self with sin,
Which is more damned if beauty it does bless,
As Virtue is most fair, that blessed has bin
With beauty being resident therein.
But love, that Beauty breeds, is threefold,
According to three objects of that love,
All fair, some good, which thus we may unfold;
3. Causes of love viz Pleasant, p^ofitable, and honest.
The Pleasant, and the Profitable move
As does the Honest, true love, which we prove:
The first concerns things that please the Sense,
beauty, and at what the sense does roue;
second has to welfare reference;
third and last to Justice and Prudence.
The first and second kinds of lust or love,
Among the Perturbations may be put,
Since they so many ill affections move
That make man's life to be in Sorrow shut,
Which like a Razor off the same does cut:
But love of honest things is virtuous,
And from man's praises takes away the But;
It shows the Mind is right magnanimous;
'For that is most great, that is most gracious.
Perfect love.
This love is kindled by that heavenly Flame
That like fine Gold, does purify the Sp'rite;
And like it self (transmuted) maks the same
Good, gracious, holy, wise, just, clear, and bright,
Glory'ng in him that makes her glory right: God, the Exchequer of Beauty.

This is the love of beauty most extreme
Wherein celestial souls do most delight;
Of love that feeds the Sp'rite it is the cream
Infused by Justice Sons inlightning Beam.
This love resembles that of Seraphins,
Who burn in love of the extremest Good;
And makes Men like the sacred Cherubins
Still priviledg'd from outward charge; whose mood
Is still to attend on LOVES Trin-vnion-hood.
This love, this beauty, (Love of virtuous things
Whose beauty flows from divine beauties Flud)
Does make Men Gods among the mighti'st Kings,
And Kings with highest God, in highest dwellings.
Goodness is Beauties Mother, and true Loves; Goodness is mother to love and
beau^y

Beauty and love are both bred in one Womb:
Then love and beauty still it much behoues
To tend to Goodness, as unto the Tomb
That must at last for ever them enwombe.
But there are diverse loves, and beauties mo,
According to the creatures all or some
Proceeding from that LOVE and BEAVTY, who
Sheds both on things above, and things belo.
Four special beauties, Goodness has created; Goodness has made 4 especial
beautie^.

The first is that, whereby the Mind and sp'rite
Has Wit and Understanding in them seated:
The second, them adornes with Knowledge bright
That mounts the Mind to Contemplations height;
The third, in seed preserving mortal things;
The last in corp'rall things that sense delight:
Science the Soul to Contemplation brings,
But her to things material Fancy flings.
Yet, did the soul but weigh how she is bound
To her Creator, for his matchless love;
She would from thence (by Reason) soon rebound,
The little consideration we have of Gods goodness toward us, is the cause of
our coldness in love to him
And wholly still contemplate things above:
For this, his love requitlesse does approve;
He gave her being, merely of free grace
Before she Was, or could his mercy move;
Then if she love him, her love is but base
Compared with his that made her what she wa^.
Who gives a Gift much more affection shoes
Then the Receaver for it can bewray;
The giver gives, being free to give or choose,
But the Receaver's bound to love always:
Yet, if the giver gives to the end to pray,
Its not of Love, but Lucre, (loathed of Love;)
GOD cannot give so, in whom all does stay:
But Men give thanks for Blessings which they prove,
And God thereby to give them more do move.
The love that is bought is ^^ark naught.
Such love in giver and receiver both
Is merely merc'nary corrupt, and base,
Which hateful love the Lord of love does loath,
And from such lovers turns his loving face,
As from false Hypocrites, abusing grace:
But true loves scope, is (in a gracious mood)
To love all those that Mercy should embrace,
Respecting naught, but to stream forth the flud
Of goodness, which it has for others good.
For love is free, and freely would be loved;
Its active, like a Flame in operation;
Save that, like fire it is not vpwardes moved,
But does descend by Reasons computation,
For such descent on Reason has foundation^
The Sire does love the Son, more then the Son
Does love the Sire, because by generation
Part of the Sire into the Son does run, A natural reason why love
descends.

But no part of the Son in Sire does won.
Since love in nature still does thus descend,
God loves man more then Man his God can love;
For Man proceeds from God who is his end;
But God from Man likewise cannot remove, In him we live move, and have our
being.

For Man is finite, and in God does move:
This made him love Men when they were his foes,
And for their loves a world of woe did prove:
Therefore he is Fount of Love whence all love floes
Which loves for hate, and hate does loue-dispose.
Now, how to love this Well of love the more
Love does direct, by kindling the Desire
Truly to know and mind it evermore; To know god^ love is the way to make Man
love.

Both which so sets the souls frame all on fire,
That it is made one flame of love entire:
The more we know it, it the more we mind;
The more we mind it, it we more require;
The more we seek, the more we it do find,
And being found, it quite does lose the Mind.
For then the Minds no more that which it was,
For to this love it is transubstantiate,
To weete^ as near as love can bring to pass
Its even the selfsame thing immaculate,
And like this LOVE, this love does contemplate;
Rejecting all that would inveagle it
To love ought else, and still does meditate
To love naught else, and bends all powers of wit
To make it self for this Love only fit.
Thus Sinners may turn Seraphins by All true love is either Amor Coe^i or amor
Secul^, this of our neighbou^e, that, of God.

As ^here is no l^ue without faith, so there is no faith without love.


Love,
wounding with Loue-shafts Gods heart (pure alone;)
So, as the ones heart so the others move
As twixt them a^ there were no Heart but one:
This is to lie next the chief Cornerstone
In the Church-militant, ( Triumphant rather,)
For God and man this Love does ^o atone
As does, nay more then love does Son and Father;
For love makes both entire still altogether.
Love, of all humane Affections is, the most pui^ant and passionate.
For Love does grave (though in an Heart of Brass)
The form of the Beloved in the Heart,
So that a Lovers Heart is like a Glass
Where the Beloved is seen in ev'r^ part;
So, in Gods Heart we are graven by Loves Art,
And in our hearts Love does his form ingrave;
Thus interchang'd we eithers form impart
To others liking by the Love is the Bond that unites God and man.
Love we have,
And make the Heart the Lodge it to receave:
The end or scope of love is to unite;
The faster therefore it conglutinates
Two hearts, or of them makes an union right,
So much the more her virtue she elates,
And perfectly her kind effectuates:
Then, Love in God (in whom Love perfect is)
His virtue so to man participates,
That they become Brothers by redemption ought to be more near and dear to
each other, the^ Brothers by creation.
one through that love of his;
For Man partakes his Image and his Bliss.
But man (mere Chaos of extreme Defect)
Does love, but loves only in desire:
He longs (perhapps) to love with all effect,
That God and he thereby might be entire,
Whereto his leaden love would feign aspire;
From which desire proceeds a pleasant pain,
Pleasant, in that it setts the soul on fire
With love so good; And pain it breeds again, In good desires there is
pleasure and pain.

For that it has not, what it would have fain.
But what is lacking in Man's love, the same
God does supply out of his boundless love;
And makes Ma^s love thereby a working flame,
Which to press through al Pressures still does prove,
And toward God (her Sphere) does ever move:
This Flame does melt the marrow of the Sp'rite
Making it liquid sooner to remove
In It Mercies Mould, where its reformed aright,
And made entire with God.
LOVE, true loves delight.
For when the lover loves himself no more,
But the Beloved in whom he abides,
Or, if he love himself, it is therefore
To weet, for that he in his love resides;
Then Love is pure, and at highest pitch besides. When love is in the height of
perfection.

But such high Raptures are too rarely found,
In frail humanity, that on Earth bides;
Though love the Soul therefore perhaps may wound
Yet still t'wil be to the own Body bound.
How shall I end with everlasting Love,
To ease my Reader tired with heavy lines?
Unto this Labarinth of Love (I prove)
The Author ( LOVE) no coming out assigns;
Yet rest I may, though it my Muse confines:
As Zeuxis drue a veil (with curious skill)
Ore that, he wanted skill to express by Lines;
So I the like in Love must now fulfill,
And leave the Reader to think what he will.
NOw may we range next to the Rank of love
Other Affections, and to do it right
We must place Favor there, by which w'approve
Of some thing wherein we conceave delight,
For that it is good in deed or so in sight:
Herein Loves obligation does commence;
Yet favor may have force where love lacks might,
But without Favor, Love is a non ENS;
For, Favor waits upon Loves excellence.
^owe favor i^ bredd.
Then Reverence with Favor we may Rank,
Bredd by comparing some high Dignity
With some inferior State (that Fortune sanck)
Which then is in it is right especially,
When extreme fear and Hatred come not ny:
For though in Reverence, Fear and Shamefastness,
With moderation do obscurely lie;
Yet Fear (by some Ill caused) Good does suppress,
Still seen in that which breeds our humbleness.
True reverence therefore bear we unto God
Who is all^good, as he almighty is;
For, feared we naught but his revenging Rodd,
Our Reverence, would be turned to hate by this:
Reverence springs from power and goodness.
Then Reverence grows from power and grace of his;
And, whosoere with them he most endowes,
Of Reverence from less Reverend cannot miss:
For Reverence Power and Goodness still ensues,
And the less worthy to the better bows.
For when we eye the virtue, power, and grace,
Of the most Noble, (truly called so)
And look upon our selves, and weigh how base
We are compared with them, then bend we lo
As unto them that us in Good out-go.
For, as selfe-liking does enlarge the Heart, Simil.

Or puff it up (like Bladders which we blo)
So it contracts it self in every part,
When we see others pass us in desert.
Then as we reverence God for goodness more, We reverence God more for his
goodness then for his power.

Then for his might, and awful Majesty;
So, if we would be rev'renc't of the Lower,
We must surmount them in that ex'lency
That makes us most resemble Deity:
For whereas Goodness does associate Might,
There the most Insolent, most rev'rently
(Though otherwise repleat with all Dispight)
Will do their Homage freely with delight.
For homage, fealty, and honor, are
To sacred Virtue due by Natures Law:
Honor we owe to Virtue (though but bare)
And Virtue matched with might does Reverence draw.
Then Honor, Reverence, and loving awe To whom honor and reverence are due upon
Earth

Are due to Majesty; and that is due
To Magistrates that Men from Vice withdraw,
And make them Virtue eagerly ensue,
Themselves therein being Leaders of the Crew.
The last Affects to Love subordinate
Are Mercy and Compassion; Mercy and compassion, Affectes flowing from love
These are they
Which make us (like God) to commiserate
The miseries of those that still decay,
Or are at point to perish without stay.
These, these, bewraie that we are Members quick
Of that same Body, whose Head does bewray
That they are Members mortifide, or sick
Which feel no pains, that fellow- members prick.
These make us make the hand of the distressed
Our Mucke and Earthly Mammons continent,
Yea make us make the Orphans home our Breast,
And our right Arm the VVeedowes Sustinent;
Love has nothing in private.
And all that want, our All them to content.
O that these were more frequent then they are
With those that do our Churches so frequent!
For damn'ds Devotion that will nothing spare,
But for selfe-comfort altogether care.
These, Colleges and Hospitals erect,
And both endow with copious maintenance;
These are so prevalent in their effect,
That they unto the Heavens do Man made of earth.
Earth advance,
Wherein there is no want or sufferance:
These do forgive, as gladly as they give,
Unto their foes miscarried by Mischance;
These good and bad (like God) in lack relieve,
"For Mercies Bowels melt when any grieve.
These Bridges build ore Rivers (semi-Seas)
And turn deep Ways (though endless in extent)
To Cawseis firm, for Man and Beasts more ease,
Compassion extends her virtue to man and beast.
And every way provide for bothes content,
Through fellow-feeling of their dryriment:
These make their VVaredrops and the Needies, one,
And their own Limbs, limbs of the impotent;
Joy with the ioiefull, moan with them that moan
And sigh in soul, when they in Body groan.
O that my soul could (as it gladly would)
It self infuse into each word or line
That tendes to Mercies glory, then it should
(So as it ought) at least like Phoebus shine,
If not at most, be more then most divine:
For, Mercy and Justice are Gods mighty Arms, Mercy and Justice are god^
almighty Arms.

But he most might to Mercy does assign
As bee'ng the right Arm, holding all from harms
Though All do fall through Frailties least Alarmes.
Mercie's the true Idea of Gods Soul,
Wherein his matchless glory glitters most;
Which is of force his Justice to control:
For when in Justice all that are, were lost,
Then Mercy them redeemed, to Justice cost;
The Lord of Justice was unjustly slain,
That Mercy might triumph, and justly boast: Gods Mercy triumphs over his
Justice toward Man.

As Love first made, so Mercy made again
Mankind, that sin had marred with monstrous stain.
Since Mercy then is of so high account,
She should be most familier with the Hy: Princes and Maiestrates.

For, God in mercy does himself surmount,
That is, it does himself most glorify:
So they that eye the Poor with Pitties eye,
And have most mercy seated in their soul,
Draw neer'st the nature of his Deity;
Whose names engrossed are in his Check-role.
And next him ought the UNIVERSE to rule.
THus having touched the Affections most humane
That humane nature do consociate;
Now follow those that are most inhumane, Inhumane affections how bred.

Bred by Opinion of Ill, which we hate
Which make us savage or in worse estate:
The unrest of our souls, the while they rest
Within our Bodies, and predominate,
Proceeds from four chief causes of unrest,
Which thus by Natures searchers are expressed.
4. Perturbations from who^ do flow al immoderate passions of the soul.
Desire, Fear, Grief, Joy, all immoderate
(Which perturbations be) from these proceed
Al Passions which the soul excruciate,
Which the Minds ignorance does (fatting) feed;
As knowing not what is good or Ill indeed.
Desire and Joy those goods accompany
Which be not good, further then Natures need,
And that a little (God wot) does supply
For, overmuch does her soon mortify.
Ask peace and plenty what fell fights they have
With these three Monsters, Pride, Strife, and Excess,
Hardly themselves, if they at all, do save,
From their fell force, they easily will confess.
Wherefore God does bless man with abundance.
Yet, God with Peace and Plenty, Man does bless,
That Man might bless God both in word and deed,
Not take occasion from thence to transgress:
But from these Fountains pure do often proceed
(By their abuse) Abuses which exceed.
There is no greater temptation the^ never to be tempted, and no sorer
punishment then of God never to be punished.
For, sin in peace and plenty, is so armed
With all that may allure the simple sense,
That sense by those allurements is so charmed,
That soon it yeeldes to sin obedience,
As it were forced by some Omnipotence:
When sin so sweetly does entreat and pray,
And promise Flesh, Heaven in Incontinence,
(To which prosperity does Flesh betray)
How can frail Flesh and Blood say sweet sin nay?
If Taste would taste, what might her Palate please,
Sin offers the senses their several satisfactions.
Sin offers Manna, Nectar, and what not?
Would touching feel? sin opens pleasures Seas
To plunge the sense therein, it to besot.
The smell she ioies with sents as sweet, as hot.
The ear she tickles with such words and Notes,
That Hearing (ravished) has her self forgot.
With eye bewitching Faires the eye she dotes:
And thus each sense in pleasures seas she flotes.
These senses thus bewitched, Fancy allures
To share the sweetness which they say they find:
Fancy consents; and Judgment soon procures
T'approue their pleasure, which betraies the Mind,
(Betrayed and quite misled by Judgment blind)
Thus in prosperity sin domineers, Virtue without adversity withers and
loses her force.

Who with strong cords of Vanity does bi^de
The soul and body, as it well appeeres
By those whom welfare to the world endeeres.
O Flesh! did thou but know how suger-svveete
The pleasures were proceeding from the Cross; There is no other passage to
heaven the^ through the fire of Afflictions.

Th'wouldst run amain, the coming cross to meet
And count al gain, save that alone, but loss:
All sensual Ioies do thee but turn and toss
With restless proofs of false felicity,
Which Ioies retaile, but utter griefs in gross,
For, corp'rall pleasure in extremity
The center is, of endless misery.
Now Grief and Fear, Grief and fear accompany transitory riches.
though they accompany
These evil goods ( goods evil by abuse)
Yet they respect all kind of misery
Which we conceive, when we have not their use:
Through want whereof, as through an open sluice
Flow all vexations, and annoies of mind,
Into the empty sou^e, which they reduce
To their obedience in rebellious kind;
For Reason they in rage do rudely bind.
The Body hereby (puling) pines away
Simil.
(Like to a Bladder whose wind is out strained)
By such degrees, as it does by the way
A whyning make as if the same were pained:
So, fares the Body, by the Mind constrained,
Till she be breathles, she breathes out but moan,
For want of Goods but feigned, her griefs unfeigned
Do dry up quite the Marrow of the Bone,
As if she were in wretched plight alone.
Good Affects proceed from the opinion of good, and evil, from evil.
For as al good Affections do proceed
From the opinion which we have of Good;
So does the opinion of evil breed
All ill Affections and each evil mood;
For ill Conceit, conceaues this cursed Brood.
Offense, what.
Now the first touch of ill, is called Offense,
From whence (if it contynewe) forth do budd
Grief, Envy, Hate, and fell Impatience,
As Love proceeds from true Goods residence.
And since there is naught that does to Earth belong
In which both Good and Ill in deed, or sho
Are not (like Phisick-Potions) mixte among;
All mundane things are as they are taken.
Therefore from thence may be drawn Weal or VVoe
As they are taken, since both from thence do flo:
For that which likes some, some does most displease;
According to the humors which they owe,
Some take repose, in that which most disease,
As some delight in War, but most in Peace.
And the more inly that offenses touch,
So much the more they do thereby offend:
The inward'st is the better part by much;
Then that which thereto does annoyance send,
To the tormenting of the Whole does tend: Offenses against the outward Senses
are much less os^ensiue then those against the inward.

Offenses done to the external Sense
Are not so grievous, as those which do wend
To the internal; No^ is VVitts offense
So sore, as that which does the Will incense.
Nay, if our Will be not offended, we
Can suffer, what not? without al offense;
In which respect we willingly agree,
That Friends reproofs should prove our patience,
When with our Foes we would not so dispense:
Likewise o^r selves of our selves so may speak,
That others speaking so would us incense,
And make us mortally revenge to seek:
Thus Will bee'ng pleased, naught can our Nothing moves our patience that
moves not our will.
patience break.
Then since Offense most grieves the tender'st Sense,
Therefore are they offended soon'st of all,
Whose Minds and Bodies have most excellence,
And are most delicate and special,
Be it by accident, or natural:
And mong the Host of Natures Creatures, Man
Is hard'st to please, and most to Anger thrall; Man of all creatures hardest
to please.

For he with naught will bear, nor suffer can,
Yet al have cause this wayward VVaspe to ban.
If therefore One it be so hard to please,
How much more hard to please an Host of Men?
What can be said or done so well, but these
Will Who so pleases all does more then he that made all.
all, or some of all, speak there again?
They care not against whom, nor where, nor when.
Ask Generals if this be true or no,
Who though they make their Purs-strings crack again
To please the Press, yet they shall not do so,
But some will murmur, and speak broadly to.
Some, to be thought more judicious are most censorious.
For, some are so invred fault to find,
That they offended are without offense,
Nothing they hear or see, but irkes their mind,
So all offendes them without difference:
And, to be thought of tall intelligence
Their Tongues dispraise, what their Thoughts highly praise;
Because they ween great praise proceeds from thence:
For he (think they) that sees what to dispraise,
Sees and knows how t'amend it many ways.
Critics of these times.
How many may we hear and see of these,
Who with bent- brow, scue- look, and mouth awry
Slightly survaie the works that wise- men please
Protesting them to be but poor; And why?
Because they prove their VVitts base poverty:
They feign would feign to have unfeigned skill
In every thing wherein they faults epsy,
A Fool may make the wise ridiculous to Fools.
And by depraving Wit to have wit at will,
When all is but feigned, and strained and passing ill.
When Men adore their own sufficiency,
And ween their excellence does check the Skies,
What marvel is it, if al beneath the Sky
They check; and through their selfe-conceite despise?
(Who, but to see their own worth, have no Eyes)
These be men of parts that would have al wholly.
These Men are inly moved with much offense,
When they another see by Virtue rise,
Because high State (they ween) should recompense
No others, but their only excellence.
Be they most poor, yet be they much more proud,
Exclaiming on the times wherein they live:
The complaint of base malcontents.
For Men of worth (say they) with parts endowed
The times do not respect, nor will relive,
But wholly Without good parts.
unto partlesse Spirits give:
Thus do they melt away in Envies fire;
And whilst hart-burnings the^ of rest deprive,
They them bestirre to part that is entire,
And Commo^-wealthes orethrow, so to aspire.
These unwise witty Mal-contents are they Devils incarnate tempt me^
desperate.

That egg on Men unwise, and violent,
T'attempt the over-sway of Princes Sway,
Or rather to confound their government,
That so they might be made preheminent:
For, sly Ulysses must point out the place
Against which the force of Ajax must be bent,
And Men made desperate hold it no disgrace
To be directed in a desperate case.
These waspish overweening idle Drones,
Are mortal The Pestilence which infects all that comes near it.
plagues to every Publike-weale:
Right anti-Kesars undermining Thrones;
Yet Princes hardly shall their motions feel
Until their States and Seats begin to reele:
And then too late (perhapps) seek fast to sit
When they must rest upon the pointed Steel;
These are the effects of mal-contented Wit,
Which not looked to, will have a madding fit.
All which proceeds merely of Offense,
Co^ceav'd by hateful natures hard to please;
Which, mischief and great inconvenience
Bring to a State, and neither Land nor Seas
Can possibly be priviledg'd from They walk like Devils invisible.
these.
Who still do fear, their mis-imploied time
Will bring upon the^ that which will displease;
Which to prevent they seek aloft to clime,
Which to effect, make conscience of no crime.
For, fear of evil (though of ill to come)
Does grieve the mind, as if it present were;
Cold fear and grief then Reason so benumme,
That it feels nothing but cold grief and fear.
A natural reason of rebels civil fury.
This cold made hot by Ire, which it does steer
Becomes hell fire, which like a quenchlesse flame
Consumes all it touches or comes near,
And leaves naught else behind but lasting blame,
So, Fear turned Fury, Man does all vnframe.
Simil.
For, as in nature, things that are most cold
Made hot, are most extreme hot, like the Fire:
So Fear, most cold by kind, yet if it should
Be chafed incessantly with Hate and Ire,
It Would be more hot, then all fires made entire.
For, Man is more out-ragious, wild, and wood
In Passions heat, then Passion can desire;
A man in fury more furious then a beast.
No Beast is half so fell, in maddest mood,
As Man, when Fury sets on fire his blood.
A description of an angry Man.
From which fire fly out Sparkles through his eyes,
Who stare, as if they would their holds enlarge,
The Cheeks with boiling Choler burning rise,
The mouth does thundering ( Canon-like) discharge
The fire which does the Stomach overcharge:
The teeth do (grating) one another grind;
The fists are fast, in motion to give charge,
The Limbs do tremble, feet no footing find
But stamp, or stand unconstant as the VVinde.
All anger springs from offense but al offense grows not to Anger.
Which hellish Passion from Offense proceeds,
But all offense proceeds not to the same;
Offense the Mother is that Anger breeds,
But not it self in nature nor in name,
Ne can they be confounded without blame:
For things offend us often which have no sense,
With which we cannot angry be for shame;
For, that must have (like us) Intelligence
Which can to Ire provoke our patience.
For, Ire's a vehment motion of the Heart, What a^ger is

Stirred up by trespass, scorn, or such like ill
Offered unto us, w^olie or in part,
Which in the highest degree offends our will,
For which, we would revenge in have fulfill:
For, each one rates himself by the Assise
Of selfe-conceipt, by him conceaved still,
From that great good which, he weenes, in him lies
Which none (as he supposes) should despise.
The more therefore a Man himselfes esteems, The better a man thinks of
himself the sooner he is moved to anger.

The more and sooner he to Ire is moved;
Because that so great worth's despised he deemes,
For which he rages, as from wit removed;
Then, Rage to Rancor easily is should;
Which is an Anger most inveterate, What Rancor is.

By Charity and Reason most reprou'd,
And God and good-men mortallie do hate;
Therefore to be eschu'd as reprobate.
For, Rancor is so fell and violent,
That joint by joint, the Soul it rudely rends,
Forgetting Justice, and the Innocent
God, man, sex, age, good, bad, or foes, or friends, Rancor is indifferent to
good and bad.

For, this all these indiff'rently offends:
Then who consults with such a Councellor,
That Arguments with tooth and nail defends,
Shall be of all (but Fiendes) an iniurer;
For sure the Div'l's in such a Coniurer.
Some call it honorable to revenge with the sword all injuries done against a
ma^s honor. But how can that be honorable which God abhors and condemns to
eternal death.
Whose fury is inflamed so with desire
To wreake it self on that which it enflames,
That on it self it brings confusion dire,
And often with sudden death her subject shames;
Heaven, Earth, and Hell, and all therein she blames,
Nay railes against, if they wreake not her wrong,
And for her self an Hell, on Earth she frames,
To wreake it on herself, if she be long
Barred from Revenge, for which her Soul does long.
The quality of Rancor.
Which is a motion of the Heart, then which
None can be more immane, or violent;
Which turns from that which does it roughly tuch
And seeks to quell the same incontinent;
Or on the cause to inflict punishment:
A reason why angry men for the most part are pale.
Here-hence it is some ire^ull men are pale,
Because the blood returns from whence it went,
Whose hearts haught-courage so does ore exhale,
That they dare do what not? come Bliss or Bale.
But commonly the blood does not return
As to the Heart it does in Grief and Fear,
But in the face in fury it does burn,
And all the Spirits it enflameth there,
As if no more within the Body were:
The blood and spirits inflamed, the brain ascend,
Which they (confusedly distracted) stere,
For how so ere heat may the Heart offend,
To the brains
The Mind does rest, if heat it not transcend.
Simil.
No otherwise then as a man that drincks
More then a man, yet if it not ascendes
Unto the brain, no man him drunken thinks,
Nor is he drunk though drink his belly rends:
So, though the heart, an hell of- beat offendes,
Yet being still within the heart confined,
The soul within the brain her work attendes
Without disturbing of the Wit or Mind,
Who wonted freedom in the brain do find.
But give Men wit at will, nay wisdom too,
(If possibly men furious Solomon denies it. Eccl. Chap 7.11.
might be wise)
And put exceeding Anger thereunto,
All Is to no purpose, for all in it lies
As fat in fire, which to nothing fries;
Move but their choler once, and all is on ^lame
That should them coldly any way advise:
For, when the soul by heat is out of frame,
Her Judgment must be blind, and Actions lame.
So that in true effect the furious Man
Is good for naught, (for naught is all as good)
But to blaspheme, and rave, and railing ban,
And make good men amazed at his mood; I know no man worse the^ my self, God
help me the while.

God shield I should be any of this brood:
Yet must I (to my shame) for shame confess,
Because its seen what humor haunts my blood,
That Anger to my heart has often access
Against my will, which feign would it suppress.
He is mine arch foe against whom still I fight,
And though I be to weak, and he to strong;
Yet fight I will, and aie in his dispight
I will refrain my hands, much more my Tongue,
Both which in wrath are apt to Instruments of revenge. The heat of the heart
mak^ the fingers nimble.
offer wrong:
Heaven help me to subdue this hellish Ire,
And all that does or shall to it belong,
So with the drops of grace quench out this fire,
That to my heart it never more aspire.
Yet let me coldly speak in praise of Heat,
Which being temperate, yeeldes most sweet effects;
The praise of Choler.
For, Choler makes the Wit and Courage great,
Yea, makes the Heart abound with kind Affects,
And abject Anger is better the^ laughter for by a sadd look the heart is made
better. Eccl. Cap. 7.5.
humors utterly reiects:
In the best Natures commonly its placed
By Natures finger, for these kind respects,
And if with fury it be not disgraced,
It should by all means, by all be embraced.
How like to liuelesse Logges some Dastards are,
Whose wit and Courage are quite drowned in Fleame;
Who, though wrongs prick their Hearts, yet still they fare
As they were either dead, or in a dream;
Nothing shall move them, be it nere s'extreame:
A Coward cannot be truly honest.
Hear they their friends deprau'd (though nere so dear)
Nay hear they Fiends the Highests name blasphe^e;
They dare not speak a word for them for fear;
What use of such that such base-mindes do bear?
Simil.
For as a little fire when we are cold
Does us but little good, and being too great
Does warm us otherwise then fire should;
But being moderate, it so does heat
As neither letts us cool, nor makes us sweat:
So, Choler if too little, little steeds,
And if too much, too much does make us fret;
But being mean, it many Virtues breeds,
And with an active warmth, the blood it feeds.
For to be angery and not to sin,
Is an obligatorie Eph^s. 4. 26.
Heast divine;
For whiles we are that holy anger in
(Not wholly angery) it is a sign
We flame with that which does our souls refine:
For, in our Souls the iry-pow'r it is Virtue ca^no^ perform her functio^s
without anger.

That makes us at unhallowed thoughts repine,
And sober souls are zealous made by this,
Then zealous souls can hardly Anger misse^
Thus Ire I plead for thee, but thou hurt'st me;
O be propitious therefore, hurt me not:
Then Volumes large, ^le write concerning thee
Which without blott of blame, I al will blott
With black that shall thy Glory laud.
bright, make bright as hott:
So, leave I thee, and would thou me would leave,
Yet leave me not, as one thou have forgott,
But mind me still, when I should thee conceive
Against ill that would my soul of good bereave.
For so thou did possess Gods patient Soul,
When he as God and Man the Temple cleared
(With VVhipps) of Money Changers, who did proule Luke 19.25.

For filthy Pelf in place to him endeared,
Where most of al he should be served and feared:
So, be with me, dear Ire, till thou and I
Must part,, or ^ by thee no further steered,
Then may agree with perfect piety
And well may stand with true felicity.
NOw from vnloving Ire does Hatred spring, Hatred is a child of Ire.

Which is more Hellish; for, its lasting Ire
As some suppo^e; which is a damned thing,
Like to the Devil her prodigious Sire,
Who Loves to hate, as Love hates that desire:
Since God and Nature has made Man in love,
To love God and his like with love entire,
What Vice can Virtue in man more reprove,
Then that which Man to miss his End does move?
Yet Ire from Hatred must distinguished be,
I^e and hatred distinguished.
For Ire proceeds from some wrong done to us,
But Hatred, is conceav'd as soon as we
Suppose a Creature to be odious;
Though to us it were nere injurious:
And Time can Ire aswage, but hardly Hate,
Ire would but vex, but Hatred's murderous,
Revenge cooles Ire, but cannot Hate abate,
Ires heart can melte, but Hates is obdurate.
Love linckes men together, Hatred putts them a sunder
Love is the Linck that lincks man kind (by kind
Loving and kind) in perfect Union;
This Statute (sans defesance) men does bind
To succor one another woe-begon,
As if they were not diverse but al one:
But Hatred is the Hatchet, which does cleeve
Mankind to pieces in confusion;
Relief refusing, and ^ake to releeve,
Yet gives more damage the^ it would receave.
None harbreth Hatred, but men like the Devil,
The proud and envious are like the Devil.
(The Proud, and Envious, which are full of hate)
These hateful Hell Hounds love this loathsome Evil,
Because it seeks mankind to ruinate:
What can the Devil worse excogitate?
It is the Toade that swells with Venom such
That no force can resist, much less abate;
The Moath of Ma^-kind, worse the^ naught by much,
Yet most indiff'rent to the Poor and Rich.
A good use of Hate.
But hate inhabits Man to good effect,
When he loves naught, that is not perfect good;
For he through Hate does Evil still reject,
Which would corrupt his Nature, Mind, and Mood,
And make it (like it self) a Nihilhood:
Such hate is happy, holy, and divine,
By which the force of Ill is still withstood;
This Hate we ought to love, which does repine Hate, worthy of Love.

At al which does not Love aright refine.
Then sacred Hate let my Love thee embrace,
And, to an Habit grow'n, inhabit me,
Since thou flow'st from the Fountes of Love, and Grace,
O let my love be ever backed by thee;
Then Ill from Love (so backed) will ever flee. Sinful Hate i^ hateful ^ut
gracious hate is behoo^ull.

It is a fever of the Mind to hate,
That Is hate to Love, but when they both agree
They do preserve the Soul in perfect state,
Whilst Ill of Ills they quite annihilate.
The^ hate (my Soul) that thou may ever love
That which this Hate does love, with love entire,
That is, al good below, much more above,
Whereto this hate through love would feign aspire;
For perfect Love inflames just Hates desire.
No otherwise then Water hott or cold, Simil.

Though in some sort it does oppung the fire,
Yet makes the flames thereof more manifold,
When it is cast thereon, so as it should.
Thus Ire and Hatred may be good or ill Envy is a branch of injustice.

According to their objects; And Envy
(Their aie- familier) does follow still
Hatred and Ire, to make a Trinity; Ire and Hatred the Parent^ of Envy.

Which may be used well, ill, or neut'rally:
It is well used for Gods foes good success,
But ill, when it another good does eye,
And neut'rally when it does not transgress
The bounds of Love, for loving more or less.
Envy is oppo^^t to Mercy.
She is to Mercy always opposite
In her true kind; for Mercy still does grieve
At others harms; but envi's glad of it,
And pines with pain, when others well do thriue^
Yea lives in death, when others live to live.
gains, that hinder theirs;
weal, when they cannot arrive

To that they sought, but faild of their desires.
good,
Without respect of their own benefit,
Only because they think their fate's withstoode
When others on the least good fortune hit,
Or do the least good, getting praise for it:
The envy of the devil what
This is the envy, than which none is worse,
Even that of Satan, for Men most unfit,
This is the envy that incurres his curse,
That from Heaven for the like did Angels force.
It is safer to be conversant with a Tyra^t, then with the envious person for
the one takes away but life but the other honor and good name.
For envies eyes pry most of al on praise,
The noblest goods, goods of the noblest Mind
They most envy; and still themselves they raise
To highest virtue, where they (fixed) it find;
Heereat the teeth of envy most do grind:
For look how much the Mind the Corpse excels,
And the Minds riches are of rarer kind;
So much the more the heart of envy swells,
At those that have these goods, then any else.
She is Prides second self, or other name,
Monsters distinct, yet vndiuiduall;
In heaven and earth has well appeer'd the same,
For both made heavenly Lucifer to fall;
So do they Lucifers terrestrial:
Pride's more apparent, for it needs must swel; Envy is more obscure, then
Pride.

But envy ever lines Prides Pectorall:
Pride's as the highest, envy the lowest hell;
Worse Hags the^ either, can in neither dwell.
Pride, before all desires to be preferred;
If any therefore be preferred before,
She instantly is with fell envy stirred;
And the more rise, her envy is the more.
Though Meeknes mount, prids heart does ache therefore:
For she thinks, only she does al excel,
Then others excellence her heart must gore:
As others heaven on earth, is Envies hell;
So others rising makes Pride still to swell.
For, where there is no sun, no shadow is;
And, where is no weal, or glory, envi's not: Envy is as the shadow of virtue.

She feeds on her own heart, and others bliss,
She skornes to look so low as to their lot
That are of Fortune, or the world forgot:
Therefore she lurkes about the Courts of Kings, Envies natural home is in
Kings Courts.

(Whose Crowns are ever subject to her shot)
There like a Snake, that hisses not, she stings,
And often ere she is seen Confusion bringes.
For, not without just cause do Poets feign
That she (as one of the infernal brood)
Does poison suck, to vomit it again,
And makes of Snakes her flesh-consuming food; Ovid. Met. l. 2. Simul^

Which makes her like a blind-worme, without blood:
Who often creeps like this abject Worm,
Not wotting which way, each way but the good:
And in Preferments way she does enorme
All feet she meets with, which none can reform.
Envy therefore the heart does macerate,
The envious are ashamed to bewray their envy.
Because the Tongue dares not the grief disclose,
That makes that grief still on the heart to grate,
Which the lean look alone in silence shoes;
Yet eyes shrink in (as loath to tell the woes)
Such looks has the envious.
And look ascue, as if in looking straight
They might directly so discover those,
All which makes woe to have the greater weight
The soul and body so to over-fraight.
Bion.
One said, beholding one with envy pined,
I know not by thy looks (which all do loath)
If they fare well or thou ill; for thy Mind
Is vexed alike, alike thou look for both:
Which subtle speech included simple troth;
Envy is as much grieved for others good as her own hurt.
For, envi's grieved no less for others good
Then for her proper ill; and is as wroth
For others praise, as if hers were with-stood,
And for both, sucks alike her Subjects blood.
She envies all to all, except envy,
And that she envies to, if it exceed;
Like Argus, she nere sleeps but when her eye
Is charmed by Mercuries sweet sounding Reed;
Envy flattered sleeps for a while.
"For envy flattered is well agreed:
When all respect is had of her and hers,
And all neglected else, her All to feed,
No more, till she neglected be, she stirs;
Then as before her self she straight bestirres.
The sun at highest she resembles right
(Though base she be and dark as nether Hell)
Simil.
For as the sun obscureth things most bright,
And makes the light of things obscure, excel:
So envy seeks men famous most to quell, Before how many the more the envious
person slandereth a man, the more high in glory has he placed the crown of the
slandered if he take it patiently.

And praises most, men least deserving praise,
Such as their dearest fame to shame do sell;
All such (if any at all) she most does raise,
And all men else, does most of all dispraise.
The more Men want of what they feign would be,
The more their want with envy is supplide,
The less, if proud, they are in their degree
The less they can their betters far, abide;
"And horse proud Beggars, they like Kings will ride. Each Vice caries with it
its own torment.

Now as each Vice does in it bear about
An inbred plague: so in this does reside
The plague of plagues; to wear it self quite out
With fretting against the rich or royal Rowt.
The envious, privy to their own defects,
Do witness to themselves their small esteem,
For which the World, they see, them still reiects,
Through which they inly burst with grief extreme, The envious condemn
themselves for most unworthy men. No affection is less disclosed then envy

But dare not let the world them envious deem.
For, no Affect is less disclosed then this,
Because it makes men less then worthless seem,
Therefore the much more dolorous it is;
"For griefs do break the heart if vent they miss.
What Commonweals, and mighty Monarchies,
What glorious Kings, and famous Generals,
Yea (which is strange) what heavenly Hirarchies
Whose wretched state and miserable falls
(By envy wrought) remain in Capitals!
Whence all may see, how active and how fell
This Fury is, who rests in Funerals:
Or when on earth Men rest i^ such an Hell, Envies rest in funerals.

That to the infernal may be Parallel.
Envy is the parent of Jealousy.
FRom Envy springs ay-watchful Jealousy,
(Ore-plus of Love, as jealous Lovers would)
Which (worse then Hell) hates al Rivalitie,
And cannot brook that any other should
Possess that we or ours would, or do hold:
Yet some restrain it only unto Love;
For being (as they say) more manifold,
It Obtrectation is Jealousy in the largest Sense.
Obtrectation hight, which who does prove
Shall find the Mind unlike it self to move.
For, she can think of naught but that alone
That makes her jealous, and when she is restrained
Of former freedom, she is not her own;
But like a Body bound t'a Rack, is pained,
And thinks of naught but pain being so constrained:
This is the Linx in Love that never sleeps,
Jealousy a Linx in love.
And often (too often) by Lust is entertained,
Who through nine walls of Mudd, or Mettle peeps,
And so (like Argus) Loves beloved keeps.
Now; as the things beloved are good or badd,
Iealousy good or bad according to her object.

How Jealousy is good.


So jealousy is good or badd thereby.
If Men be jealous of their thoughts that gadd
From the chief- Good, good is that jealousy;
And in a Prince it is no impiety,
When he suspects Ambition in his State;
Nor in the mari'd is it an Heresy,
If loving- jealousy without debate
Do keep each others Love from cause of hate.
Like may be sedd of Parents, Kin, and Friends,
So long as it aims but at like respect,
An harmless jealousy, from harm defends
Those whom they govern, and by kind affect:
Such ieal'usie does in God our good effect; Gods iealousy touching us does
procure our good.

Which makes him watch us, where we wake or sleep,
Who in his love thereby does us protect,
From al those unseen ills that on us creep,
And by the same his honor safe does keep.
But jealousy conceau'd through cause unjust, Evil Iealou^^^

Be it in VVeddlocke, Freindshippe, or where not,
Makes Love a Languishment; for false mistrust
Is not by God, but by his Foe begott,
Which Love with Lust does evermore besott:
Hence come the Quarrels twixt the mari'd Paires,
When they through jealousy are overshott,
This makes Affraies too often of great Affairs, Quarrels raised through
Suspision causlesse.

Iealousy, what.



And ruynes that which loyal Love repaires.
The fell disturber of Loves sweet repose,
Copesmate of Care, tormenter of the Mind,
The Canker of fair Venus sweetest Rose,
The Rack that over-racks the over-kinde,
The over-watchful Eye of Love still blind:
The Heart of Caution wherein ay are bredd
The vital Sp'rites of Art to State assigned;
Soul of Regard, alive when it seems dead,
All this is Jealousy that holds the Head.
The Caucasus whereto Loves Heart is bound, Prove. 6.34.

The Vulture which the thoughts thereof devoures,
The Primum mobile which turns round
The Brain, which to the rest unrest procures,
A Sore which naught, that is good for ought, recures,
That Is Mummy made of the mere Heart of Love,
A temp'rall Hell, whose torment still eudures,
The Pennaunce of Mistrust, which Lovers prove,
All this is Jealousy which I reprove.
And now to end (where we should have begun
When we began to touch corrupt Affects)
With Pride, because from her al Vice does run
Ecles. 10.14.19.
(As from the Fountain) which the Soul infects;
Which may be thus described by her effects:
A swelling of the Heart which does proceed
Pride what.
From Selfe-conceite, that against the Soul reflects,
And shows more glorious then it is indeed,
Which makes us think our gifts al men's exceed.
The proud person hates pride in all but in himself.
THis Prodigy, this more then mounstrous Pride,
This Souls envenomn'd Botch, This Sourse of Sin,
Can nothing less the^ her own self abide,
When she does see her self another in:
If she her self does hate, what can she win
But hate of all, that see her as she is?
Still loathed may she be, for had she not been,
We still had lived in earthly Heavens bliss,
And Lucifer held heavenly Paradis.
Since Man was made a creature sociable,
And that his liues-ioy should therein consist,
What vice in man is more detestable,
Then that which does this joy of life resist?
For Pride, as if she were with nature blist
Pride holds all in scorn but her self.
That far surmounted more then half-divine,
Scorns al Humanity; if so, what is it
On Earth that she thinks (being so superfine)
Worthy to suite her, but alone to reign?
She (swelling Toade) looks with disdainful Eyes
If Humility be the mother of true piety, what is Pride, her contrary?
On highest things that are sublunarie,
And (Lunatic) above the Moon does rise
In mind, though she minds naught but villainy,
So to aspire to highest Dignity:
Therefore the most proud are most ignorant
Of wisdoms hid in blessed Theology,
Because they merely mind things miscreant,
As earthly pomp, and port extravagant.
If not impossible, yet hard it is,
For the most learned and lowly well to know
Themselves in every part, and not to miss;
Then since the Proud do never look so low,
That skill nere comes but with their overthrow: The proud are taught to know
themselves by their proper overthrow.

For they by nature are most prone to pride
That know all but themselves; and yet do show
They know themselves too well, for, naught beside
They love; which love, that knowledge does misguid.
For who so looks with vvell-descerning eyes
(If he be mortal, be he what he will)
Into him self, he will him self despise;
For in him self he finds naught but ill, He that know^ himself best
esteems himself least.

Corrupting Soul and Body, Mind, and Will:
The best shall find but matter too too bad
To humble them, and so to keep them still;
The worst shall see enough to make them mad,
Seeing themselves through Ill, so ill-bestad.
Al under Heaven man's pride has made so vile,
So frail, so full of sorrow and vexation, All under the Sun is vanity and
vexation of Spirit. Eccles. 1.

That should a Man possess al, yet the while
He should possess but temporal damnation;
And with it likely divine indignation.
Can Men be proud then, of an earthly hell,
Affording naught but grief and molestation?
Or can their hearts with Pride and Sorrow swell
When one puffes up, the other down does quel?
Proud men are senseless in the strictest sense.
If so they can, it is for want of sense
To feel the griefs that are most sensible;
And senseless Souls have no pre-eminence
Of humane Nature; nor extensible
To brutish, which is not insensible:
Then what are proud Souls by this just accounte
But either dead, or comprehensible
In that of Plants; which from Earth cannot mount,
But that a worthless VVren may them surmount.
The Eyes that Sunne-bright Robes, or smoke of praise
Do dim, are feeble-sighted, and such Eyes
Cannot themselves as high as Heaven raise,
Nor pierce to Hell which in their Owner The proud have Hell with the Prince
thereof abiding in their hearts.
lies:
For if they would or could in any wise,
Pride could not possibly surprise their Heart,
For Heaven they would admire, and Hell despise,
And from that Hell they would their Eyes convert^
To highest Heaven, and from it nere divert.
Simil.
But as the Toade to venom turns her food
(How pure so ere it be) she feeds on:
So Pride turns Virtue to her venomed mood,
Then which no prid's more near Damnation;
Spiritual pride God does most detest.
For sp'ritual pride God hates as he does none:
Which pride is Luciferian, and the fall
Of those, whose Souls are with it over gone,
Shall be like Lucifers, for no one shall
Overweening, an odious Vice.
Be saved that weenes his virtue passes all.
Pride is a wind that makes the Soul to swell,
And without Issue it the same will rend:
Therefore the proud their own perfections tell;
Yea, only tell of what them most commend,
And with whom not, for praise they still contend; Prov^ 13.10.

Which if they miss, or others praised more,
Out goth that wind, (which they with thu^drings se^d)
Against al those that are preferred before,
And as distracted, rail, and rave, and rore.
Does Pride a Tenent hold, it must be so,
Although it cut the Throat of Reason quite; The proud obstinate in their
opinion.

All her opinions can abide no No:
And though them to defend she has no might,
Yet to defend them she will rage and fight:
No time, no truth, nor no authority,
Shall putt Pride, if she wrong be, in the right;
For she desires to have the masterie
In all, that al may give her dignity.
Nothing so much she dreades, as to be deemed
Any's inferior in any thing;
This makes her loath to learn, since she has seemed
To know much more then al, by her learning:
She Reproofs do enrage the proud, though for their good bestowed.
scorns reproves that information bring;
Her Vices she will have for Virtues taken,
Or like a Serpent she will hiss and sting,
Blaspheme and what not, for she is most profane,
And if she can, be her impugners bane.
The frendshippe is as dangerous as unsure,
Where The proud man, the dru^ckard and the Coward are naught to make f^ends
of; the proud will scorn thee if he out start thee in fortunes, the dru^kard
will in wine bewray thy secrts, for what is in the ha^t of the sober, is in the
tongue of a drunkard, and the Coward dares not speak one word in defense of
thy reputation though he hear it slanderously depraved.
Pride has any place in any friend,
Pride will the downfall of a friend procure
If by such fall the proud friend may ascend,
For all his frenshippe to himself does tend;
Comes good from him, to him must go the praise,
As if good in him did begin and end;
So robbes God of his glory many ways,
And feign above his God himself would raise.
If he with fained modesty does veil
His height of Pride, and does himself dispraise,
It Is but the higher to advance the Sail
Of swelling Pride, which he to Clouds does raise,
Nay thu^der-cracks the Clouds, that clouds his praise:
The highest Heavens (he weenes,) must give it way
Unto the Throne where perfect glory stays,
Since the Earth cannot hold her, Hell must and can.
And there sit cheek by Iowle with Glory ay;
This, Pride desires, and those that her obey.
If she associate Learning, she will lead
That Heavenly Lady into Hellish ways;
Then she misledd, each Soul must needs misleade
That on her seeming-wel-stai'd Judgment stays;
Pride the Fountain of all Heresies.
Hence spring al Heresies; which Pride does raise:
For let a Scholar famous for his skill
Maintain damned Error, he for peevish praise
Will ransacke Books and Brains to do it still,
Though he thereby his Soul with Millions spill.
For should we harrow all the Souls of those,
The Souls of all the Heads of Heresies,
We shall find Pride did thereto them dispose,
That they might live to al If a man live Soul and Body in Hell to all
eternities that his name may live in the mouths of men to all posterities, he
has but an hellish purchase.
Posterities
In Mouths of Men, though but for Blasphemies:
Knowledge puffes up, and if the dewes of Grace
Swage not the swelling, it so high will rise,
That Earth nor Heaven shall hold it in that case,
Till Hell does take it down and it embrace.
The knowledge of the Best consists in Each man seems to know more then he
does.
show,
This Man is wise compared with one more fond;
Yet this great wise man nothing less does know
Then he would seem to know, and understand:
Suffizeth him he bears the World in hand
That he is wise and learned; Nothing less:
But wise in this, that can Men's thoughts command
To think him wise, when should he truth confess,
His wisdom were but wel-cloakt foolishness.
Latin and Greek are but Tongues natural,
Which help, but not su^fise to make men wise;
For the effect of speech is al in all,
Eccl. 39.1.^.3
Sound Sentence, which from wise Collections rise
Of diverse Doctrines, which Wit well applies:
Then he that has but Tongues (though all that are) Not the tongs but the
matter contained in the^ make men learned.

And not the wisdoms which those Tongues co^prise,
May amongst fools be held a Doctor rare,
But with the wise al Tongue, and nothing spare.
Give me the Man that knows more then a Man,
Yet thinks he knows no more then a Beast:
Give me him (quoth I) where is We may light a Torch at none day and seek
such a one among a multitude and yet misle to find him.
he? and who can
Give me that Gift, since such are al diceast,
Or if they be, not to be found at least?
Sage Socrates is dead, and with him gone
His Pupills that knew more then all the rest,
Yet thought they knew far less then every one,
But now al seem to know, yet know does none.
O! had a man al learning in his brain,
And were to hear or see the wondrous Writ
Of some deep Doctors, he should track them plain
From place to place where they have borrowed it,
And naught their own (perhaps) but what is unfit:
Yet as if all were As if wisdom and learning were buried in them.

For they have the name of wisdom, but there be but few that have the
knowledge of her Ec. 6.22.


theirs, they are admired,
As if their Sculls ensconst al skill and Wit,
Or with some sacred fury were inspired,
When as (God wott) their Wit is al-bemir'd.
We shall be modest if we take not that upon us which we have not, and brag
not of that which we have.
Yet all take on, as if all were their own,
So it is, all think, or few know otherwise,
Which few perhaps as well as they have stolen,
(Borrowed I would say) but yet they are wise
Not to detect each others pilferies:
The greatest skill these present times afford
Is others If any where I have followed our new learning and Time in their
fashion, Time and Learning ought the more to favor me, considering how little I
am beholding to them both
sayings cleanely to comprise
In ours: so that it be not word for word,
Which wit with modern wisdom does accord.
But say a Man knew al, that Man can know,
Yet does the The Devils knowledge far exceedes man's.
Devil know more then that Man;
What cause of pride then can it be to show
Less knowledge and more pride then damned Satan,
Who has observed all since the World began;
Nor do the Elements repugnance mar
His wits; for he of Air consists, and can
Command the same: But in The war of the Elements in man mars his wit.
Man so they war
That he is taken Follies Prisoner.
Who knows naught in the Cause but in the effect;
The Devils knowledge to the cause extends,
Who enters Natures Breast, and does select
All secrets of the same, to secret ends:
For he the Abyss of Causes dark descendes,
The Devil can look into all the hidden causes of nature.
And with his Owles-eies (that see best in dark)
Those Causes to the Causer comprehendes,
And how they are together linckt, does mark;
Yet is less proud of this, then some mean Clarke.
Yet he can wonders work amusing all,
For having viewed the forces of all things,
How the Devil works wonders.
Whether celestial or terrestrial,
And with most curious search their true workings,
Their forces he with slight together brings,
And active to their passive powers does bind,
Yea one another so together minges,
That it brings forth (by sympathy of kind)
Wonders surmounting all conceit of mind.
No one excels him (but that Three in One)
In wondrous works, which may amaze the wise;
But that same onely-wise Trin-vnion
Works Miracles, wherein all wonder lies;
For Miracles above all Wonders rise, The Devils wonders are Mira, non
Miracula.

Since they are truly supernatural;
But Wonders he to Natures Secrets ties:
Then wonders simply are but natural,
But Miracles mere Metaphysicall.
But be it that some Elixer-makers, a golden yet beggarly corporation^ for they
are as poor as a Poet.
Beggar can extract
By distillation or some other mean
The Quintessence of any thing; That Act
Suffiseth him to be as proud as mean:
And though the starueling be as lewd as lean,
Yet thinks he Kings should feed and make him fat,
Nay, do him homage: O base Thing unclean!
Can thou for this, think thou deservest that?
Or can a The skill i^ Earthly and earth is the basest of Elements.
skill so base, thee so inflate?
What Breast could bound thy Heart then, if thou could
Make the Elixer, which so many mar?
It Is past most probable^, that then thou would
Seek to be Deifide, or else turn star,
That Dull-heades might adore thee from afar:
It is a Because it te^ds to the attainment of riches, which in this world are
of most estimation.
skill indeed of rich esteem,
And worthy of the rar'st Philosopher,
But could one do the same, as many seem,
Yet no great wise one he himself should deem.
For all his wits to this should be restrained
(Since to work wonders the whole- man requires)
And though at length (perhaps) he it attained,
Yet should he be to seek that Wit desires,
In other matters, then these feats by fires.
Sage Solomon, whose wisdom wonder wan,
Knew al in all, which all in one admires,
Eccles. 1.
Yet knew that all was vain, and he a man
Vainer then Vanity, that nothing can.
Our knowledge is so slender, and so frail,
That the least pride cannot depend thereon;
Pride breaks our Co^nings neck, which often does fail
To hold aright the nature of one Stone,
Much less to know the kinds of every one.
Compare the All we know, with the least part
Of that we know not, we shall see, alone
God only and alone is wise.
That God is wise: And men are void of Art,
And blind in wit and will, in Mind, and Heart.
Be he a Pleader, and a wordie Man
(Whose VVinde the true Elixer is; for it
The Air to So^e lawyers sell both their silence and speech.

Immoderate desire of having, and honor be enemies, and can hold no co^gruency
in one man together.

If it be an in^allible token of health, when the Physicians be poor, the^ is
it a true sign of contention (a states disease) when Lawyers be rich.


Aurum transmute lightly can)
If once he gets a name for law-ful wit,
He thinks high pride for him alone is fit:
Convoies of Angels, then must help the most
Unto his speech; for he makes benefit
Of every word; for not one shall be lost,
Or if it be, the next shall quit that cost.
Up go his Babell-Towres of Pomp and Pride,
That to the Highest he may next neighbor be;
No neighbor neeres him, his grounds are so wide,
Then not a Nod without a treble fee,
An Angel (though most bright) he cannot see: Very many laws are notes of a
corrupt Common weal Tacit.

And yet to know the Law, is but to know
How Men should live, and without Law agree:
Which, Reason to the simplest Soul does show;
Then pride is far too high, for skill so low.
But though the Lawyer lives by others loss,
And has no place in Platoes Commonweal,
Yet if he will not Cato in R^me forbad al to be called to the Bar that were
found eloque^t in a bad cause
cross Law, for the cross
That no Man hates, but all do love to feel;
He Is worthy of the Money. The duty of Laws and Lawyers.
Cross sweet Comforts Seal:
For Lawyers ought (like Laws) to make Men good,
And who are in the wrong, or Right, reveal:
Then are they worthy of al liuelyhood,
That make men live in perfect Brotherhood.
But, that a Petti-fogging prating patch,
That gropes the Petty-foggers the grand disturbers of good men's quiet.
Law for nothing but for Galls,
Should be so proud as if he had no match,
For tossing Laws as they were Tennis- Bals,
This vexes God and Good-men at the Galls:
Yet such there are, (too many such there are,)
Who are the Seedes-men of Litigious Bralls:
And are so proud that by the Laws they dare
Contend with Crassus, though they naught ca^spare.
I grant the Law to be an holy thing,
Worthy of reverence and all regard;
But the abuse of If he ought to be punished which offers to corrupt a Judge
with guiftes, how much more ought he which goes about to blind his judgment
wi^h lies, or eloquence: because a virtuous Judge will not be corrupted with the
first, but he may be deceived by the last.
Law (and so of King)
By such as will abuse both for reward,
Is damned; hard term! yet that course is more hard:
Can such find patrones, such course to protect?
They can and do, but would they might be barred
From Bars, or that ore Bars they might be peckt,
El^ at Bars with as hard a doom be checked.
Hinc ille Lachrymae! o grief of griefs!
My Muse be mute, defile not thine own Nest:
O let the longest Largs be shortest Briefes
In this discordant Note, and turn the Wrest;
So that this Pride in who^ so ere is notable. for she will be seen, being
still overseene.
Note by thee be nere expressed:
Can thou my Muse? can thou my cruel Muse
Make Men, the Muses Minions detest?
Forbear, forbear thy Souls love to abuse,
Or touch that tenderly which thou do use.
Is It possible a Poet should be proud,
That for the most part is past passing poor?
That can paint Vice with and without a Cloud,
And being most ugly, make her ugly more,
Can he be proud? and only Proud of a conning invectiue against pride.
proud therefore!
It cannot be in sense, and Poets are
Sense-masters subtilized by their Lore;
Yet it is too true that scarce one Poet rare
Is free from Pride, though Back be lean as bare.
Poetry no skill humane.
I cannot but confess the Skill's divine;
For, holy Raptures must the Head entrance,
Before the Hand can draw one lasting Line,
That can the glory of the Muse advance;
And sacred Furies with the thoughts must dance,
To lead them Measures of a stately kind,
Or iocond Gigges: Then, if Pride with them prance
She will be foremost, then shame comes behind,
Both which disgrace the motions of the mind.
Will thou be lofty Muse? then scale the Mount
Where Jove's high- Alter On the topp of Olimpus at the foot whereof runs
Helicon.
stands; and on the same
Offer thou lowly, that which does surmount
The reach of Vulgars, in no vulgar Flame:
There sacrifize to Jove thy fairest fame
In lowest depth of highest humility; Humility is the surest foundation for
the highest glory.

Humility that can advance thy name
To highest height of immortality,
Embosom'd by diuinest Deity.
Art great with young with numbers infinite
The least of which has power to pierce the Sky?
Yet lowly be, that the womb of thy Wit
That rare Conception may yield readily,
Their mother so to glad and glorify;
Thou art from Heaven my Muse, the^ be thou such,
As Heavenly be, full of humility;
Is thy skill much? be Humility does best become the highest knowledge.

Extreme precisenes or affectation in words and style does quench the heat of
our invention and bridleth the freedom of our wits. We must use words as we
use Coin, that is, those that be common and current; It is dangerous to coin
without privilege.


meek then more the^ much,
For Pride's most damned, that heavenly things does touch.
Plunge thee ore head and ears in Helicon,
Dyue to the Bottom of that famous Fludd,
Although it were as deep as Acheron,
Thence make thy fame vp-dive although withstood
With weeds of Ignorance, and Envies Mudd:
But though thy fame fair Sol should equalize
For height and glory, yet let al thy good
Consist in that, If thou woul'st thou could rise,
But love bum-basted mountings to despise.
Yet let me give this Poesy is the Caesar of Speech.
Caesar but his due
( Caesar of speech that monarchizeth Ears)
Sweet Poesy, that can al Souls subdue,
To Passions, causing joy or forcing Tears,
And to it self each glorious sp'rite endeeres:
It is a speech of most maiestike state,
As by a wel-pen'd Poem well appeeres; Poesy more perdurable then Pros^.

The^ Prose, more cleanely coucht and dilicate,
And if well done, shall live a longer Date.
For, it does flow more fluent from the Tongue,
In which respect it well may termed be,
(Having a Cadence musical among)
A speech melodious full of harmonee,
Or Eare-enchanting matchless melodee:
Succinct it is, and easier to retain
(Since with our Some Philosophers supposed our souls to be music, some
others Number.
spirits it better does agree)
Then, that which tedious ambage does contain,
Albe't the Wit therein did more then reign.
Its decked with Coulors fresh, and figures fine,
Which does the Judgment ay inveagle so
(Making the Ear to it of force incline)
That Poesy inveagles ^he judgment to assent to her assertion^.
Judgment often does her self forgo,
And like Wax, bends Opinion to and fro;
In Prose the speech is not so voluble,
Because the Tongue in numbers does not flo,
Ne yet the accent half so tunable,
Then, to our spirits much less suitable.
And, for its ofter used, it cloies the Ear
Being not contrived with Measures musical,
And not alow'd that beauty Verse does bear,
Nor yet the Cadence so harmonicall,
Much less the Relifh, and double-relish words of art incident to the
Soule-incha^ting Art of music.
relish so Angelical:
Its not adorned with choice of such sweet Words
( Words that have power to sweeten bitter'st Gall)
Nor licence't that fine Phrase, Art Verse affords,
Which makes huge Depthes, often times, of shallow Foorde^^
Therefore the Poets from the Worlds first Age,
As best persuaders, whose sweet Eloquence
(They playing best parts on this Earthly Stage)
Was the first retorick borne of Sapience,
That glory gives to VVisedomes influence: Oracles delivered always in Verse.

Herehence it came that divine Oracles
( Apollos speech of highest excellence)
Were still expressed in measured Syllables,
The voice of Wisdoms truest Vocables.
In which respect, it was meet'st to make Records
Of memorable Accidents of Time,
Of Princes lives and actions of great Lords,
Which Poets first did Chronicle in Rhyme;
And far above Chronography did clyme:
For they were first of all that did observe
(Though Poets now are neither flush nor Prime)
The works of Nature for Man's use to serve,
But now against Nature their works make the^ They give those me^ fame that
recompense them with famine.
sterve.
They searched the causes of things generable,
With their effects and distinct properties;
And made them (by their skill) demonstrable,
Mounting from thence unto the lofty skies,
To note their motions and what in them lies:
They first did find the Heavens plurality, Poets first found the distinction
of the Spheres.

And how they did each other so comprise
That in their motion they made melody,
Caused by their closnesse and obduracy.
Yea, sought to find each substance separate,
And in their search they were most curious
Of divine Essenses to know the state,
Which having found^ were most laborious
Them to express in Poems precious:
They were therefore the first Astronomers^ Poets were the first Astronomers
Metaphisicks, and Philosophers.

(That traveled through the Heavens from house to house)
First Metaphisicks and Philosophers,
Unfolding Heaven and Earth, Sun, Moon, and Starre^.
Thus much for Poets, and sweet Poesy,
In whose praise never can be said too much:
Yet Pride their praise may blemish utterly,
For she defiles like pitch what she does tuch:
And maks both heaven and earth at it to grutch:
For no Perfection can be touched with pride
But it will look as if it were not such,
Deformed in favor, which none can abide;
For Grace is base being thus double did.
But that which grates my Galle, and mads my Muse,
Is (ah that ever such just cause should Be)
The stewe^ once stood where now Play Houses stand.
To see a Player at the put-downe stews
Put up his Peacockes Tail for all to see,
And for his hellish voice, as proud as he;
The Peacock.
What Peacocke art thou proud? Wherefore? because
Thou Parrat-like can speak what is taught thee:
A Poet must teach thee from clause to clause,
Or thou will break Pronunciations Laws.
Lies al thy virtue in thy Tongue still taught,
And yet art proud? alas poor skum of pride!
Peacocke, look to thy legs and be not haught,
No patience can least pride in thee abide;
Neither delights he in any ma^s legs. Psalm. 147.10.
Look not upon thy Legs from side to side
To make thee prowder, though in Buskine fine,
Or silk in grain the same be beautifide;
For Painters though they have no skill divine,
Can make as fair a leg, or limb as thine.
Good God! that ever pride should stoop so low,
That is by nature so exceeding hie:
Base pride, did thou thy self, or others know,
Would thou in hearts of Apish Actors lie,
That for a Reproves where they are well deserved, must be well pa^ed.
Cue will sell their Quality?
Yet they through thy persuasion (being strong)
Do vveene they merit immortality,
Only because (forsooth) they use their Meant of those that have nothing to
commend them but affected acting, and offensive mouthing.
Tongue,
To speak as they are taught, or right or wrong.
If pride ascend the stage (o base ascent)
Al men may see her, for naught comes thereon
But to be seen, and where Vice should be shent,
Yea, made most odious to every one,
In blazing her by demonstration
Then pride that is more then most vicious,
Should there endure open damnation,
And so she does, for she is most odious
In Men most base, that are ambitious.
Players, I love ye, and your Quality,
As ye are Men, that pass time not abused:
And W. S. R B.
some I love for Simonides says, that painting is a dumb Poesy, and Poesy^ a
speaking painting.
painting, poesy,
And say fell Fortune cannot be excused,
That has for better uses you refused:
Wit, Courage, good-shape, good parts, and all good,
As long as al these goods are no worse used,
And though the stage does stain pure gent^e blood,
Yet Roscius wa^ said for his excellency in his quality, to be only worthy to
come on the stage, and for his honesty to be more worthy the^ to come thereon.
generous ye are in mind and mood.
Your Quality, as fa^^e as it reproues
The World of Vice, and gross incongruence
Is good; and good, the good by nature loves,
As ^her is good use of plays and pastimes in a Co^mo^-weale for thereby those
that are most uncivil, p^one to move war and dissension, are by these
recreations accustomed to love peace and ease. Tac 14. An. Ca 6.
recreating in and outward sense;
And so deserving praise and recompense:
But if pride (otherwise then morally)
Be acted by you, you do all incense
To morta^l hate; if all have mortally,
Princes, much more Players they vilify.
But Pride has skill to work on baser Skils,
For each Bagg-piper, if expert he be,
Pride fills his Soul, as he his Bag-pipe fills,
For he supposes he and none but he
Should be advanced; For what? For Rogueree.
He can repine, and say that men of Though these words be unfit ^or his mouth
yet he fits his mouth to these words
parts
Are not esteemed; Go base Drone, durtie Be,
Rest thou in dung, too good for thy deserts;
For dirt to dirt should go, and praise to Arts.
Though no man can more willingly commend
The Soule-reioycing sound of Musickes voice,
Fair figure of that bliss that nere shall end,
Which makes our sorrowing Souls (like it) rejoice;
The end of Arts gives the^ their true valuation.
Yet at the best its but a pleasure choice
To make us game, when we are vvoe-begon;
It is too light grave Arts to counterpoise,
Then no cause is there to be proud thereon
Albe't thou were as good as Amphion.
Pride, vvilt thou still be subject to my Muse?
Be subject to her still, and so to me:
But now she should (if she did well) refuse
Longer to have to do with cursed Thee;
For she has found thee in the low'st degree,
The Hangman saved, whose ba^^^esse does surpass:
Yet he of London, that detested He
Gentlemen should hate Pride ^owe, since she is become the Ha^gma^s love.
(Whose heart is made of Flint, and face of Brass)
Of decollation brags, but let that pass.
Then pride farewell, base beastly pride farewell,
Or fa^e far worse, then ill in worst degree,
Since thou scorn'st not in such an heart to dwell,
That by the fruit lives of the Gallow tree:
Who will not scorn now to be touched by thee?
Sincke to Earthes Bowels from her burd'ned Breast,
(For on the Earth thou can no lower be)
Since Hell's thy Sphere where thou should ever rest, Hell, the home of Pride.

For, on the Earth thou mov'st but to unrest.
Thus having past these Passions of the Soul,
That are as founts from whence the lesser flow;
We are arrived (through fair ways and foul)
Unto the third Womb situate below The third womb.

The Midrife; where the growing power does grow:
But for it is so far removed from thence
From whence the Soul does her arch-wonders show,
(Namely the Seat of the Intelligence)
We Will balke the same for its impertinence.
Referring it unto Anatomists,
Who mark each Mortesse of the Bodies frame,
The Pynns, the Tenons, Beams, Bolts, VVindings, Iists,
All which they mark when they do it vnframe:
To these Crafts-masters, I refer the same;
Suffizeth me to look with my right Of mine understanding.
Eye
(Though it dim sighted be and so to blame)
Into the Seat of each souls faculty,
Fixed to VVitts wonder-working Ingeny.
Yet as I could I have the Soul expressed,
If not with proper Coulors, yet with such
As do distinguish her kind from the rest,
Which Kind, by kind, in Beasts and Plants does couch:
But to paint her in each least part were much;
Philosophers have been to All Philosophers have erred touching the Soul.
seek herein,
Although they sought but slightly her to touch,
And have through Error much abused bin,
When her fair Picture they did but begin.
Crates.
For Crates said, there is no Soul at all,
But that by Nature, Bodies moved be:
Hippa^ch^s and Leucippus.
Hipparchus, and Leucippus, Fire it call,
With whom (in sort) the Stoickes do agree:
A fiery Sp'rite between the Atomee
Democritus.
Democritus will have it: and the Air
Diogenes.
Some say it is: the Barrell'd Cynick, he
And with him others of another hair,
Do thus depaint the soul, and file her fair.
The soul (say they) is Air, the Mouth takes in,
Boiled in the Lights, and temp'red in the Heart,
And so the body it throughout does rin;
This is the soul (forsooth) made by their Art.
Hippias.
Hippias would have it water, all or part:
Heliodorus.
Heliodorus held it earth confixt;
And Epicurus said it was a ()
Namely, a Sp'rite of Fire and Air commixt:
And Zenophontes, earth and water mixed.
A diametrical repugnancie of opinions, among the Philosophers touching the
soul.
Thus (simple Souls!) they make the simple soul foul,
Of simple Elements, or else compound:
Meane-while they make her (most fair creature)
And dim her glory which is most renownd,
Through mists of Ignorance, which them surround.
Others, of other substance ween it is,
Critias.
For Critias with blood does it confound,
Hippocrates
Hippocrates (that went as wide as this)
Said it was a thin sprite spread through our Bodis.
Some, Flesh would have it with the senses use;
Some the complexion of the Elements:
Galen.
And Galen does not much the same refuse,
For to an hot Complexion he assents,
For so's the soul (says he) and not repents:
Not that Complexion, (some say) but abides
In some point of it; and those Continents
They hold the Heart, or Brain, where it resides
As Queen enthroned, and all the body guides.
Some Light would have it, as Heraclitus; Heraclitus.

Others, some thing tide to no certain place,
But wholly present in each part of us;
Which, whether sprung from the Complexions grace,
Or made by God, yet they ween cleer's the case,
From Natures lap the same of force must fall.
Some others said a Quintessence it was:
Some, an unquiet Nature moving all:
A number, some, that it self moves, it call.
The Caldees say it is a formelesse Force,
Which nerthelesse al forms does apprehe^d;
And Aristotle does him self enforce Aristotle.

To make the same upon the Corpse depend;
For these his words do sort out to that end:
It is (says he) an high perfection
Of body, that life's power does comprehend,
Which understanding gives it, sense, and motion;
This in effect is his description.
Plato (surnamed divine) affirmed, it is Plato.

A divine substance which it self does move,
Indu'd with understanding. He does miss
Less then the rest, though Truth does all reprove:
And Senec says the soul is far above Seneca

The knowledge of the most intelligent;
Which speech of his Lactantius does approve,
Thus do they all about the soul dissent,
As Well for substance, as where resident.
Hippocrates.
For in the brains Hippocrates it puts,
Strato.
And Strato, in the space between the eyes;
Diogenes.
In the hearts hollow vein the Dog it shuts,
That always in a Tub enkenell'd lies:
Stoickes.
The Stoics say, the Heart does it comprise:
Democritus.
In all the body, says Democritus:
In all the breast, say others as unwise:
Hierophilus.
In the brains ventricles, says Hierophilus:
Thus al in all were most erroneous.
Empedocles.
Empedocles in blood the ^ame does bound:
Galen.
Galen would have each limb a soul to have:
Renowned Galen, how wast thou renowned,
That did thy self so foolishly behave!
Thus for the place they with each other straue,
And for the souls continuance no less.
Epicures.
The Epicure the body makes her Grave,
And dies and lies with it. But some confess
She Is capable of everlastingnesse.
Pythagoras.
Pythagoras, by transmigration
Will have it everlasting, or at least
As long as beasts shall have creation;
Man is the Horizo^ between Angels and Beasts^ as far from Beasts as Angels.
For it does pass (says he) from Man to beast:
What Fool could more ridiculously jest?
Yet he disciples had, and not a few,
That this gross doctrine did with ease digest;
Therefore no Beasts, these more beasts, ever slew
Since they their friends souls held, for ought they knew.
The Stoickes, held the mean tvvixt Epicures
And Pythagoreans: for that soul (they say)
That Is vicious, whilst the body it immures,
Does die, and with the body quite decaie:
But if it virtuous be, it lives aie:
Some parts of it (as Aristotle holds) Aristotle.

That have seats corp'ral, with them fall away:
But understanding which no Organ holds,
(As free from filth) AEternitie infoldes.
Thus for their ending or continuance
Do they contend; and no less Christians strive Christians differ touching the
souls beginning.

For their beginning: some, the same advance
To heaven, and say they there did ever live
Since Angels fell. And other some believe
That one soul does another propagate:
Some others, their commencement do derive
From time that first the Angels were create,
Which sacred Austine does insinuate.
Others there be, who constantly affirm
That souls created are from day to day, Thomas Aquinas his opinion touching
the souls beginning.

Which he of Aquine boldly does confirm:
For since the soul does form the bodies clay,
It with the body must be made, they say.
Whereto agrees each modern Schoole-divine:
So that these Men do from each other stray
Touching the souls birth, which they mis-assigne,
"For they speak ill that cannot well define.
And Epicures the same do mortal make:
The Pythagoreans it do transmigrate;
Some say, the heavens do the same retake: Diverse opinions concerning the
souls continuance.

Some put it into hell, in endless date:
Others would have it earth perambulate.
Some say there is but one universal soul,
Whereof particulars participate;
Which saying Plato does not much co^trole; Plato.

But that he would have either to live sole.
Some, make each Man two distinct souls to have,
The Intellective, and the Sensitive,
And that the Sensitive the parents gave,
But the Creator the Intellective:
Others, the soul do of the same deprive,
Some make two distinct things of the Soul and understanding.
For they the soul and Understanding part.
Some make no difference, but do believe
The Understanding is the chiefest part;
Thus in Conceit they from each other start.
Some suppose that humane souls are portions of the divine nature.
Some, held opinion Souls are bred in Heaven,
And of the divine Nature portions are,
Decked with all virtue, by that Nature given,
Together with all skill and knowledge clear,
Which in that nature ever do appear:
From whence they did descend to animate
Men's bodies, which by nature filthy were;
Which did those pure Souls so cotaminate,
That they those Skills and virtues quite forgot.
So that they could not use the^ further forth
Then they were taught, which made the^ to suppose
That what skill, virtue, or what other worth
Our minds do remember Sciences, not learn them. Plato.
The Soul bewrai'd, was but a minding those
It had in Heaven, and so knows al it knoes:
So that the portions of the divine fire
Being well near que^cht by Blood, which the^ orefloes,
Must be rekindled and made to aspire
By Doctrine, which the spirit does desire.
Whereon they do conclude, that since the soul
By entering in the Body most unclean
Is made prodigious, and extremely foul,
To Heaven cannot Truth it self faith, no unclean thing can enter into the
heavens. Galat. 5.21.
return being so obscene,
Till it by Discipline, be purged clean;
And decked with the rights of her Birthright,
Which to regaine, Instruction is the mean:
Or from the Body being parted quight,
They may be purged, some say, though most unright.
Now, when we balance al these Arguments
In the sincere Scales of the Sanctuary,
We find them viler then VVitts Excrements,
And lighter then the Skumme of Vanity:
For true it is The Blind eats many a Fly. A Proverb.

But that Man has a Soul, none is so blind,
But sees her almost with Eyes bodily:
And that she is endless the dymst Eyes of Mind
By Natures dymest light, may lightly find.
God is a sp'rite, the World a Body is, God and the world are epitomized in
man.

Both which in Man are plain Epitomized,
Of God he is Abstract in that soul of his;
And in his Corpse the World is close co^priz'd:
As if the divine Wisdom had devised
To bring into a Centers Center all
His greatness, that cannot be circuliz'd,
And the huge magnitude of the Earthes Ball;
For Microcosmos men Man fitly call. Microcosmos.

Who in a Minute can the Earth surround,
And sincke unto her Center, then ascend The agilitie, subtilty, and capacity
of the Soul.

And compass, with a trice, the Heavenly Round
Yea Heaven and Earth at once does comprehend
Not touching either; But does apprehend
A thousand places, without shifting place,
And in a moment ascend, and descend
To Heaven and Hell, and each of them embrace;
It self being compast in a little space.
This, Man can do without the Bodies aid,
Man is said to be man in ^espect of his humane Soul.
Then must he do it as a Man he is;
And in respect of his soul he is said
To be a Man, for by that Soul of his
And only by that Soul, he acts this:
When the Mind is busy the outward Senses be at rest.
Which sees when the Bodies eyes be closed,
And when those Eyes be open, often sight does miss:
It travels when the Body is reposed,
And rests when as the same by Toile's disposed.
Th'external senses may loose all their power,
If but the Instruments of them decay,
Yet Life and Reason may continue sure;
But Senses stay not if Life do not stay,
Life and Sense depend upon the Soul.
And Life the soul does stay or bear away:
The more the Corpse decaies, so much the more
The soul is strengthened; which sick-men bewray,
Who when their Bodies are most weak and poor,
Their Minds reveal most strength, and riches store.
The Soul is no Quality but a Substance
Then its a substance and no Qualitee,
For Qualities in Substances subsist;
The^ that which makes another thing to Be,
No Quality can be, but does consist
In its own substance, which does sole exist:
Then since a man's a man, that is to say
A lyving Creature with right Reason blist,
He has a soul that forms, and him does sway,
Else were he but a livelesse Lump of Clay.
Which soul is Bodilesse, else could it not
The Soul is of capacity to comprehend Heaven and Earth.
Contain so many Bodies small and great,
By some of which it would be over-shott;
For all this All, were it much more co^pleate,
In it may sit, without place for a Seat.
Yet does our body bound it, which is small,
But were a Corpse it could not do that feate;
For that which can contain Heaven, earth, and all
Which they contain, cannot be corporal.
The more it has, the more it will receive,
The more it holds, the more it does desire, The more the soul does the more
it may receive.

The more things be, it best does them conceive,
Whether they be distinct or else entire;
All which at once may in the Soul retire
Without disturbing or annoying either:
All which to effect does such a Soul require,
That infinite had need be altogether, The soul is in a sort infinite.

And in a sort the soul can be no other.
We may in Mind conceive another Mind;
Then, that which can conceive things bodylesse
Can be no body (though pure as the wind)
But merely Sp'rituall, which may have egresse
Into each Sp'rite, and from thence make regresse,
Without those Sp'rites perceaving of the same: We may enter into another
mind with our mind

Then must the substance that makes such access
Be immateriall in deed and name;
The soul therefore is of a sp'rituall frame.
Two forms at once of quite repugnant kind
No Matter can receive: but the soul can; No matter ca^ hold 2. forms at one
instant of contrary kinds.

Black, White, Fire, Frost, Moist, Dry, these place do find
Without resistance in the soul of man;
Then souls we see at Matter nere began:
Nay, since the less with Matter we do mell, The less flesh the body has the
more wit the soul has commonly.

The more we understand: it follows than,
That naught can more against the soul rebel
Then matter, which the soul does hate as Hell.
For, were Material, whereof is it made?
If of the Elements, how give they sense
That never Life since their creation had?
Much less then can they give Intelligence,
That cannot give Sense that is se^slesse, nor intel^igence that is
vnintellectual
In whom nor Life nor sense has residence:
A Body's merely Passive; But the Sp'rite
Is absolutely Active: And from thence
The Bodies Actions do derive their might,
Or else no Limb could stir or wrong, or right.
And that the soul is an immortal Mind
(Not mortal, like the Body) does appear,
That whereas Time in his turns, up does wind
The Bodies substance, which those turns do wear;
The Soul not subject to Time.
Yet can those motions, the soul nothing steer;
But to more staidness, they the same do turn,
And make her more immortal (as it were)
Who (like the Power divine) can Time adiorne,
Or make it stay, or it quite overturne.
The Time past, present, or to come, are all
(As to the souls sire) present to the soul,
Which makes her matterlesse and immortal;
For that which can stay Time, when he does roll,
Must be Divine, naught else can Time control:
Time is the Souls subject
Then Time is subject to the soul (we see)
Which as his Sov'raigne him does overruled,
And though in Time the soul was made to Be,
Yet she makes Times turns to her tunes agree.
The Souls food (Truth) argues she is immortal like her food.
Beside, her Food does her immortal make,
For mortal Creatures feed on mortal things,
As Beasts on Grass, and Beasts men's hunger slake;
But she does feed on Truth, which truly bringes
Immortal state without al varyings:
For Truth's as free from al corruption,
As from Times Turns and restless alterings,
The^ since the Soul does feed on Truth alone,
It needs must be immortal in Reason.
What soul can doubt her immortality, The doubt of our Souls immortality,
prooves their immortality.

But such as is immortal? for that doubt
Does rise from Reas'ns discourse ingeniously;
Then if by Reason she brought that about
That souls are mortal: That soul's not without
The power of Reason: and who has that power,
Must needs be of that rare Celestial Route,
Which Iron Teeth of Time cannot devour:
For Reas'n made Time, and past Time does endure. God the Fountain of Reason.

No Soul humane but covetts still to Be,
Which could not be if she but mortal were: The eternity past, overwhelmes
the Soul as being too great for her capacity, but that which is to come she
can and does co^ceave.

When she looks back AEternitie to see,
She sees she cannot past beginnings bear;
But being begun would feign past Time appear:
Then how is it that Men are al so feign
If Nature thereunto all do not steer?
But how is it natural if it be Nature made nothing in vain.
vain?
And vain it is, if it do naught obtain.
If ever thou resolved were to dye,
Consider how thy Soul discoursed then:
Could she persuade her self that she must fly The Soul cannot p^ssiblie
persuade her self that she is mortal.

(Since she was made of naught) to naught again,
And as Beasts died, so did mortal Men?
Maugre thy soul while she does thus discourse,
She slipps from al Conclusions, and does ren
Quite from her self by Natures proper force,
To weigh which way she wends, freed from her Corse.
The damned Epicurean-Libertine
At Deaths approach, (stirred up by Natures might)
No Athist but would feign dye the death of the righteous.
To Life immortal would his Soul resign;
And in his soul resistlesse reasons fight,
To prove the soul immortal by Birthright:
Do what he can his Thoughts to pacify
Whiles they immortal strive to make his Spright,
He cannot for his soul them satisfy,
But they will still believe she cannot die.
If one weak thought say thy soul's but a Blast,
That with thy Breath is vapored to naught;
A stronger thought says it does ever last,
For naught can mortal be, that has that thought:
The Soul is taught by natural reason, and by the light of nature that she
is immortal.
By Reason thus the soul is inly taught.
If wandering thoughts persuade that Souls depend
On that which Nature in the Body wrought,
Domestic thoughts against those thoughts contend,
And say, Souls Bodilesse can never end.
They came from God, to him themselves they lift,
They mount as high as they dismounted be;
Simil.
Even as a Fountain does her Current shift
As high, as it descended, naturally:
So Souls do mount to him of whom they Be.
Beasts know no more but natures parts externe,
But our souls into Natures secrets see;
Nay stay not there, but they thereby do learn
Who gave them sight such secrets^ to discern.
Some say the Soul and Body are but one,
Because their outward Sense perceaues no more:
They might deny God too by like reason
Because they see him not: yet evermore
They see his deeds, for which we him adore.
Then let the actions of thy soul persuade The actions of our Souls prove
their immortality.

Thy thoughts thou have a soul; and let the lore
Which God in her infused, when he her made,
Teach thee to know that thy soul cannot fade.
The soul consists not by the outward The Soul is not subject to the
impression of the Senses because she is of an incorporall nature.
sense,
But by the soul the outward sense consists:
The outward sense has no Intelligence,
(Which in and by an Instrument subsists)
But as an Instrument sense her assists:
The sense can see a Fort, but if w'inferre,
Men made the same, and it the Foe resists,
This does surmou^t the outward senses far, The Souls discourse surmountes
the reach of the outward sense

And does conclude, our souls above the^ are.
Our Reason often gives our sense the lie,
When sense would misinforme the Intelligence:
For sense gaine-saies the Heavens plurality,
But Reason proves the same by consequence: Our Reason does often correct our
erring sense.

The Moon at full has greatest light says sense,
But Reason by clear Demonstration
Does prove her then to have least radience:
Then Reason by this illustration
The soul, not sense, makes Her foundation.
The Sunn's one hundred sixty six times more The Suns magnitude.

Then the Earthes Globe in compass; but the sense
With Tooth and Nail with-stands it evermore,
And says, (nay swears) there is no less difference
Then twixt the Center and Circumference:
But Reason by right Rules them both does meat,
Which she has made by her experience;
And finds the Sun (as erst we said) more great
By Demonstration is the Pillar whereon al science depe^ds.
Demonstration more then most complete.
We by our souls conceive (as erst was said)
Wisdom and knowledge bee'ng incorporal:
But outvvard sense is altogether stayed,
On qualities of things mere corporal:
The Soul makes general rules of many particulers: but sense insists upon
particulers.
The soul, by reason, makes rules general
Of things particular: but sense does go
But to particulers material;
The soul by the effect the cause does sho,
But sense no more but ba^e effects does kno.
The true essence of things is unknown; and to man known by their accide^ts
and actions.
The proper essence of things is obscured,
And by themselves of us cannot be known:
Therefore the knowledge of them is procured
By accidents and actions of their own,
Which to the soul by wits discourse is shown;
Who understands his ways? and the storm that no man can see? for the most
part of his works are hid Eccle. 16.21.
For, she concludes by Reasons consequents
(Though of themselves they merely are unknown)
That thus they are; which high experiments
Lie far above the reach of sense ascents.
In them which will not understand this Truth,
In the^ which will not understand true doctrine ignorance is sin, and in them
which cannot, it is the pain of sin.
Their ignorance is sin most pestilent;
But they which cannot, (ah the more the ruth)
Their ignorance, of sinne's the punishment:
And who denies a Truth so evident,
Has neither grace, nor sense; for all may see
The soul's immortal, and divinely bent,
And has most force when she from flesh is free,
Which proves her power and immortalitee.
If souls and bodies then be so distinct,
The soul is free from sin as she was made by God.
And that the soul, as she of God was made,
Is free from sin, and by her own instinct
She hates that sense that does to sin persuade,
How is it then that she should be so bad? Sin deriues her force from the
soul.

For from the soul, sin does her force derive,
Which with her weight the body does orelade; To God all things are lawful
that like him, and nothing likes him that is unlawful.

Can she both cause, and yet against sin strive?
She may (quoth All) but few do it believe.
This is a Gulffe that swallows up the soul,
And quite confounds her, if she enters it:
This secret deep, deep wisdom did enroule,
In that still-closed book of secrets, fit
For Her alone to know, not erring wit^
Therefore the more presumption we show
In search hereof, the more are we unfit
A secret so unknown as this, to know:
For they know most thereof whose spirits are low.
The less sobriety we use herein,
The more we Some certain things though true are not uttered of God without
danger who^ we seem best to know when we confess him and his councels to be
incomprehensible.
err in by-pathes of Offense;
And (giddy headed) headlong fall to sin,
From which we hardly rise by penitence;
For sins presumptuous, grace do most incense.
Then let us In doub^full matters wherein we may be ignorant without danger, it
were better suspend out judgments then offer occasi^n of contention Calv.
curb our headstrong thoughts, when they
Would run beyond the reach of sapience;
And make them stop, where wisdom points a stay,
That is, to go no further then they Warrantably.
may.
Many a curious Question has bin moved
Touching this Divine matters are full of obscu^ity. Cat.
secret, and no fewer Iarres
Has it procured; and all to be reprou'd;
Since every one his own conceit preferres,
Th^s secret must be looked unto not into.
Which to maintain, still maintains wilful wars.
Some so desire to know, that feign they would
Break through the Faithf^ll ignor^unce is ^etter then rash knoweledge.
Bound that humane knowledge bars,
To pry into His breast which does infold
Secrets unknown: These, strange opinions hold
But let it us suffize thus much to know,
That though the soul cannot be soild with sin
As God created her; yet sin does flow
From Sin flows from Adam to the soul, and enters into her when she first
gives motion to the body.
Adam to the soul; and enters in
When she the body does to move begin:
Nor must we make her sinful in respect
She with the Corpse is Cased, as soild therein,
The fault of Adam only infects the soul
But make the Fault of Adam her infect,
Which is, indeed, sole cause of that effect.
At large to prove her immortality,
I should (like her) well-neere be It is far off, what may it be? and it is a
profou^d deepnesse, who ca^ find it? Eccl. 7.26.
infinite;
For, if the Image of the Deity
Be found in Man, in his soul it is right:
And though by Adam she be made unright,
Yet by the second Adam (full of grace)
She is again Since the elementary and divine parts of Man are corrupted one
by another and both from Ada^, they must be borne again, by elementary and
divine means, by Water and the Spirit.
reformed and made upright,
Which makes her strive when sin would her deface,
To foil it, or at least not give it place.
Enough my Muse of that, which nere enough
Can well be said, and let me (restless) rest;
For, I must ply my Pen which is my Plough,
Eccl. 25.3.
Since my life's sun is almost in the West,
And I provided yet but for unrest:
Time flies away, these Numbers number time,
But goods they number not: for their interest
Is naught but Air, which though to heaven it clime,
Is but mere Vapor rising but from slime.
There is no end in making many books, and much reading is a weariness of the
Flesh. Eccles. 12.12.

Yet this we do, and pleasure take in toil
Although we do but plow the barraine Soil.
FINIS.
An Ecstasy.
WEther, entranced, or in a dream of dreams,
Procured by Fancy in our sleeps extremes,
Or whether by a strong imagination,
Bred in the Bowels of deep Contemplation,
My soul, when as my body waking was,
Did see, what does ensue, in Fancies Glass:
I know not well; but this full well I know,
If it no substance were, it was a show:
A show whereat my Muse admired much,
Which she with her best sense can scarslie touch;
It was so strange and full of mystery,
Past apprehension of her ingeny.
Me thought I saw, (at least I saw in thought
As on a Rivers side I lay long-straught
Eyeing the Waters eie-delighting glide)
An heavenly creature more then glorifide
Upon the waves come tripping toward me,
Who, scarce the water touched, did seem to flee:
Her face was lovely, yet me thought she looked
As one that had long time and travel brookt.
The Robe she ware was lawne (white as the Swanne)
Which silver Oes, and Spangles overran
That in her motion such reflection gave,
As fil^'d, with silver stars, the heavenly wave.
Her Brows, two hemi-circles did enclose
Of Rubies ranged in artificial Roes:
Whose precious hair thereto was so confixt,
That gold and Rubie seemed intermixed.
Upon her head a silver crown she ware,
(Depressing so that rising golden Hair)
In token that she knew no marriage Bed,
Which ne^thelesse was richly garnished
With rarest Pearl, that on the arched bents
That rose from that rich Crowns embattlements,
Did shine like that brave party-coulord Bow,
That does Heavens glory, and their mercy show.
About her Neck hung Natures Nature sittes in a precious Stone as in her
Throne of Majesty.
Miracle,
A Carcanet of glorious Carbuncle;
Which did the Sun eclipse, and closed mine Eyes,
That they could not behold her other guise.
This sight (though glorious) much amated me,
From which, rowzing my self, I sought to flee:
But with the offer I fell down again,
As one whose Legs could not his Corpse sustain,
Yet still I off'red (bootelesse) to be gone,
For, Sights divine daunt the stout'st Champion
At the first sight; for, Nature does not love
To see (frail Creature) ought her self above.
When lo, this heavenly Apparition,
Bad me not fear, with sweet persuasion!
For, I am she (quoth she) that lately was
Thy Sov'raigne; freed from this Earthy Mass:
I now can like an Angel with a trice,
Shift place to serve the Prince of Paradise.
And, I am come to thee by his permission,
That (notwithstanding thy obscure condition)
Thou should by me have light, and clearly see
(As in a Glass) what shall hereafter be
Touching this Land, I did predominate:
Look in these Waves (quoth she) and see her fate.
But I yet fearing lest by some delusion,
I might be drawn to drown me, in conclusion,
Did backward seem to do this later heast,
Though in the premises I seemed blessed.
Then she (as seeing with immortal eyes
The mortal fear that did my Soul surprise)
Skipt from the Water to the verdant Shore,
And took me by the hand, and cheered me more.
Her touch, me thought, sent to my soul such joy,
As quite expelled, wh^t erst did it annoy.
That hand, me seemed, I kissed with reverence,
Which yielded sense-reviving redolence:
I held it fast, and swai'd it as I would,
For she encouraged me, and made me bold.
When to my self, I wished I had had might,
To Have swaid or staid it when it once did write,
When it did (shaking) write Elizabeth,
Name giving Life to be a name of Death.
I often have held hands, while I have taught
Those hands to write, as (handsomely) they ought;
But had I held her hand then, when it was,
I would have taught her hand all hands to pass
In love-procuring skill; and when she wrate
Elizabeth great R. abridging date
Of Life and Name, she should have written thus,
Live live great R: for dying often for us.
And though she had in Earth no interest
Now freed from it by eternal rest,
Yet, was my soul, me thought, extremely glad
So to converse with her immortal Shade:
And to my self I said, with submisse voice,
If Princes Shades our Spirits so rejoice;
What will their Substance where they please to grace?
That, in the Soul must needs have greater place.
Arise (quoth she) because the VVater's deep,
And thou (perhapps) do fear therein to peep:
Come follow me to yonder shadie Grove,
Which Zephirus does gently breathing move,
Upon the further side of this green Meade,
There shall thou see, what shall thy Fancy feed.
Then up I sprange with rare agilitie,
Which gave me power, me thought, with her to fly
As swift as thought, to that designed place;
And there she laid me down, with sweet embrace:
Which so entranced me, as a while I lay
Engulf'd in joy, yet all the while did pray
That the Catastrophe of this sweet Scene,
Might answer the beginning and the mean.
She feeling with her hand my Pulse to beat
As one whose Soul did seek to shift her Seat,
She chafte my Temples which did showring rain
The liquid Pearl which often proceeds of Pain:
And with a loving check she did control,
The Passion of my over-passion'd Soul.
I am (quoth she) no Soule-confounding Fiend,
Assuming Angels form for wicked end;
But come to grace thee graceless forlorn Man
With divine favors; why do fear me than?
VVhereto with trembling Tongue I made reply:
I fear thee not, sense-mazing Majesty;
But the delight my silly Soul conceaues
For this high grace, my soul of sense bereaves.
Well then I conjure thee in Love (quoth she)
That thou fear not, But mark what thou shall see.
No sooner these sweet words accented were,
But in our pres^nce livelie did appear
A Lady of a most maiesticke state,
Cladd like a VVorld-commanding Potentate;
With all that might object prosperity,
To VV^tt or Observations Eagles Eye:
On whom attended two still-striving Dames,
In manners diverse, diverse too in frames:
The one still eyde the Mould, with downe-cast look,
In black invested, in her hand a Book:
Her Breast close-clasped up unto the Chin,
That no lascivious Eye might pry therein:
A Cipers veil ore-canapide her face,
Where under shone a World of modest grace.
Nothing about her was superfluous,
And nothing wanting, fit for Natures use:
I took her for some VVorld-despising Dame,
Whose conversation was not in the same.
The other was the true Arch-tipe of that
Which Men for Levitie do wonder at.
Near to her Body she (fantastic) ware
A thin veil of Carnation coulor'd ware:
On which, with Stars of gold embost, was drawn
As it were an upper Smock of purest Lawne;
Which seemed as if a Silver Cloud had spredd
Over the face of Phoebus blushing redd:
Upon all which she ware a Gabberdine,
For form as strange, as for stuff, ^ich and fine:
To which there was a certain kind of Train,
Which (vselesse) was turned up threefold again:
The VVings whereof, (where her Arms out were let)
were of pure gold with Smarags thick besett:
So were the verges of it set with stone,
As costly as the Whores of B^bilon.
On either side from her Arms to her VVast,
It was vnsow'd, and made with Buttons fast
Of orient Pearl, of admirable size,
Which loopes of Azur'd silk did circulize:
So as ye might between the Buttons see,
Her smock out-^^ft to show her levitee.
The Sleeves whereof were meanly large, yet so
As to the hands it less and less did gro:
About whose wrists being gathered in fine pleates,
It was made fast with orient Bracelets
Of Pearl as big as Plumbes, and intermixed
With other Iemmes, of diverse hues tran^fixt;
Which ore her hands hunge as superfluously
As (like the rest she ware) most combrously.
Morisco-wise her Garment did orehang
Her Girdle, set with stone and many a spang:
Which nerethelesse could not be seen at all,
By reason of that Robes orefolding fall:
Saving that when the VVinde blew up the same
It might be seen like lightnings sudden flame.
This Garment though it were but too too long,
Yet too too short, or short'st of all, it hunge.
Her nether Vesture strecht but to her calfe,
Yet lower rought then that above, by half:
For, she the upper tuckt and trebl'd so,
As like a Vardingale the same did sho.
Upon her legs she ware a Buskin fine,
Of stuff that did like cleerest Amber shine,
Down half way folded, with a Brouch below,
Which on the shinne she rightly did bestovv.
Her nether smockes or smock-like Petticotes,
Each gale of wind a loft in Aier flotes:
Which she assisted with prompt reddynesse,
Glad of so good a coulor (as I guess)
To show the coulor of her skin below,
Which scarce the Smocks of modest Matrones know.
Her Breast lay open almost to the VVast,
That by the eye, men might be drawn to taste
The bitter sweetes, which in her did abound;
"For, beauty through the eye the heart does wound.
Her Pappes were varnisht ore with shining stuff,
To give the Sight a lusty counterbuffe:
Twixt whom there hung a Jewel of rare Iemmes,
That the eye dazzled with resplendant beams.
About her Neck a chain of Pearl she ware,
That to her Breast did cover all the bare;
Saving that here and there ye might epsy
A dy-like Square of polisht Ivorie.
Her Ruff (or Rebata.
what you will) about her Neck,
Was cut and keru'd the more the same to deck:
And in the cuts, between the foldes, did lurk
Frogs, Flies, Snakes, Spiders, al of Gold-smithes work;
So lively made, as that the sight wou^d swear
They were alive, for each did seem to steer.
Upon the hemme whereof did looslie hang
Many a glittering siluer-golden spang:
Which, with the motion of her body light
Did (twinkling) seem like stars in winters night.
Her face, though fair, was painted cunningly,
Which trebl'd beauty, to bewitch the eye.
In center of her forehead (which did shine
As if the same had been all christalline)
Between rare Pearls, disposed all in fret,
A rich coruscant Rubie in was let.
Upon the verge of whose gold-stayning hair,
Illustrious Saphires ev'nly ranked were:
Saving that here and there ^^owde Pomp did place
Great pointed Diamonds to give them grace.
Her hair, though fair, yet was it made to line
A curled Periwicke of Hair more fine;
Not hair, but golden wire drawn like the Twist
The Spider spins with her vnfing'red fist.
Behind, the rest was so in tramells folded
(Which precious Pearl and Rubies rich infolded)
That all, like speckl'd Snakes, in Knots was vvound,
And every one with diverse flowers crowned.
Her gate was painful, tripping on the Toes,
As if Desire should say, lo, there she goes.
She stood, as if she stood upon no ground,
But on some water-waue that made her bound;
For, now she sinckes on this leg, then aloft
Upon that other she advanced often.
And no less often she would cast down her eye
Upon her Ivory paps; and vvantonly
She seemed to smile on beauty without peer,
To dravv all vvanton eyes to note it there.
In sum she was such as Voluptusnesse
With all her coulors cannot well express.
These damsels straue (as erst I said) to gain
The love of her that was their Sovereign:
Who seemed to each indiff'rently disposed;
But after much a do their strife she closed
With this decree; that who her most could move
By Reasons force, should be her leefest Love.
Virtue.
Then Virtue lo, (for so it seemed she was)
With modest look, and favor full of grace,
Began to tune her tongue unto that ear
Which she desired to her to indeere.
Albion.
Quoth she, dear Albion, (so I knew her name
That first of all into our presence came)
If thou will me imbozome, I will make
Both Heaven and Earth to love thee for my sake.
Thy conscience I will calm, and in thy breast
Thou shall perceive the heaven of heavens to rest.
Thine understandings eye shall be as bright
As that fair eye that all the World does light.
Al Nations shall do homage unto thee,
As unto her that gives them eyes to see.
Thou shall reduce to thine obedience
Without the Sword, the Earthes circumference.
The wisemen of the East shall come from far,
Drawn by thy grace, led by thy virtues sta^re,
And offer thee Gold, Mirrh, and Frankensence,
And what else may delight thy Soul or sense.
Thou shall have power to crush the crowns of kings
And with their neighbors swords to clip their wings;
If they shall rise against thee in their pride;
So keep them down, and yet thy hands vndide.
God and the World (though it be nere so il)
Shall hold those cursed that do resist thy will.
For, thou shall nothing will but what is good,
As long as thou and I, be one in mood.
I will break open Heavens gates with might and maine,
And on thy head shall Blessings power amain.
Yea, to thy comfort it shall well appear
That al desired increase shall crown each year.
The golden days of peaceful Solomon,
Shall ever wait thy blessed years upon.
The sea shall yield thee from her liquid Womb,
What shall enrich thy poor and basest Groom.
Thy Mountains shall with cattle still be crowned,
The whiles the Vales with corn shall ore-abound.
Thy Sonns, and Daughters, shall yield comfort to thee,
That whilome did endeavor to undo thee.
Thy young men shall see Visions, and thine Old
Shall dream dreams, by which things shall be foretold
That shall concern thy good in times future,
And that prevent, which may thine Ill procure;
Angels shall guard thy walls and on thy strand
In legions they shall lie as thick as Sand,
To keep thy Fo-men from assailing thee,
In Battle ranged by Heavens Divinity.
Thy Schools shall yield thee Saints, which shall direct
In Life, and Doctrine, whatsoever Sect.
Thy Cities like Bee-hives shall still contain
Men as Bees busy for the Common gain.
All idle Drones that live by others sweat
They shall cassiere, or not allow them meat.
There shall no Beggar in thy Streets be found,
Nor cries of wretches at thy Gates shall sound;
But, with the foizone of Heavens blessings all
(By means of me) their Baskets fill they shall.
Thy Peers shall strive for peace, and who shall be
In Virtue (not in State) in highst degree.
There shall be no Contention in thy Body,
Which heretofore has made thy members bloody.
The Poole of Grace shall overflowe thy Land,
Glyding in Crystal streams on Pearly Sand.
The Horrors that consort the hateful Crew,
Shall never come so near as in thy view.
No humane quarters shall oretopp thy Gates,
For seeking to ore top thy Maiestrates.
No Heading, Hanging, Burning, or the like,
Shall need to use, ne with the Sword to strike
Those that do wear good Swords but to badd ends;
For all shall live in peace like loving friends.
The Word Oppression, much less shall the deed
Be never heard, where all are well agreede.
Each one shall know his place, and in the same
Shall labor to preserve an honest name.
One Heart, one Hand, one Faith, one Soul, and Mind,
Shall al thy People in one Body bind.
Thou shall not need to fear the Chamber-scapes,
The sins against Nature, and the brutish Rapes,
Which with the godless Nations are too rife;
For every Man shall have his lawful Wife:
Which duly in an undefiled Bed,
Shall get right Members for their upright Head.
Thou shall not need to pinch thy Peoples Purses,
And so incur thereby thy Commons curses:
Or money- Bladders seek, in Seas of Blood
To bear thee up, from sincking in that Flood.
For, thou shall have Exchequers richly stor'de,
That thou to well deservers may affoorde
Royal rewards, without the Commons Cost;
For, Crowns are richly blessed, with Peace y-crost.
Taxe-vndergrowne, (o odious Tyranny!
Bredd in the Womb of Sensuality)
Shall nere so much as once be named in thee,
But thou shall punish Kingdoms, where they be.
The cloudie Pillar shall guide thee by day,
The fiery Flame by night shall show thy Way.
Beauies of Quails, and Manna ( Angels food)
Shall shower from Heaven to do thy Children good.
Who shall therefore, sing Hymns of praise divine,
And merry make each one beneath his Vine.
The voice divine shall thunder from on hie,
And talk with thee ( beloved) familierly.
Thou shall with Moises Rodd divide the Deepes,
And make their raging Waves to stand on Heaps,
That Man, and Horse which to thee do belong,
Shall pass, as on dry Land, those Waves among.
For thine Advantage thou shall open the Earth,
And send repyning Rebels quick beneath,
If any should arise; but doubtless Those
Can never spring, where Virtue still ore-flowes.
If thou will use me, thou will use me still,
For I will please thy Soul, thy Wit, thy Will.
And though I seem t'vncircumcized Sense
But passing plain, and full of Indigence,
Yet in my Breast true Glory is enthroned,
And al my Friends shall be with Glory Crowned.
On me do wait the Ministers of Joy,
To be disposed as I shall them employ.
Death, and Damnation I tread underfoot,
And over Lethe lake with ease I flote.
I am the Darling of the TRINITY,
That ore Sin, Death, and Hell has Emperie.
When Heaven shall melt, and Earth shall meare away,
I in his blessed Bozome live for aie.
If thou through human frailty chance to trippe,
I Will stay thy foot, that down thou shalt'uot slip:
Or if in mire of sin down flatt thou fall,
I Will wring Tears from thine Eyes to wash off all.
What shall I say? if thou will cherish me,
I Will still make peace between thy God and thee:
That neither Satan, Sin, nor ought beside,
Shall have the power your Union to devide.
Think what a comfort it will be to thee,
By me t'enioy this Worlds felicitee,
And when Confusion shall dissolve the same,
Thy Soul to live with God, with Saints thy fame:
Which al eternity shall comprehend,
In joy past joy; thus she with joy did end.
When lo, the other (painted Butterfly
That looked too like voluptuous Vanity)
Seemed greatly chafed with this long discourse,
And often mewed and mop^; and which is worse
The speech disgraced interruptingly,
With What might make the same seem al a ly.
But now she began to face her Countenance,
With many a smile and Eye-delighting glance.
And thus with voice, that did her speech become,
She brake into her Tales Exordium.
Dear Albion, whom as my Soul I prize,
In whom (as in my Heaven) my glory lies;
If ever thou, by following sound advice,
Would taste the truest joys of Paradise,
The^, listen to me, while I breath such breath,
As shall create a complete Heaven on Earth.
If thou will me embrace, as did that Solomon.
Prince
That was the Sourse of humane sapience,
Who in his wisdom knew well what he did
(Since he knew more then all the world beside)
When monge a thouza^d Loves, his wisdoms power
Did choose me for his chiefest Bellamoure:
If therefore thou will me indeere to thee,
That but one soul may be twixt thee and me,
I knowing what such wisdo^e high did please,
Will plunge thy soul in depth of pleasures Seas:
Where thou shall meet with Joys vnsou^ded deep,
To lullabie thy waking Cares asleep.
But to particulate what they shall be,
Requires the Tongue of some Divinitee.
Yet coldly, as I can, I will express
This only heav'n-surmounting happiness.
Dear sweet, quoth she, (and sweet she lisped forth)
If thou will well conceave thine own high worth,
Listen to me, and I will tell thee what Vanity is instant to get attention
because sense is betraide thereby.

Shall glad thy Soul, and correspond with that.
As stands thy case, thou well may prize thy Head,
With the extremest rate of Jove's God-hed:
And since above he reigns in boundles bliss,
Thy blisful reign below should be like his.
I therefore will draw Wit, and Industry
(Al whose defects my science shall supply)
To strain their powers to their extreme extent,
So to accomplish thy souls ravishment.
Thou on Triumphant Chariots (like the Sunn's,
That on the cristal Heavens in glory runs)
By Horses shall be drawn, as white as milk,
And al thy way shall covered be with silk
Of choicest kind, and of the Tyrian die,
As well to show thy state, as please thine eye.
Thy Robes shall be pure gold ten-times refined,
That like the Air shall gently turn and wind:
Not faced with Ermine, but with every thing
That to the heavens bright eye may wonder bring:
Which shall send back, when that eye on it stays,
(In counter change) more glittering-glorious Rays!
Thy Horses heads, with Phoenix feathers decked,
Shall work on Angels eyes the like effect.
The pillars of thy Pallaceis shall be
Hewne out of rocks of purest Porphyree,
Their walls of Jasper square, and every Joint
Dissolved Amber, passing clear, shall point.
The columns of thy windows shall be Iet,
Inlaide with Pearl, in many a curious fret.
Their Glass of christ all: in whose upper part
With stone of price, past price, and matchless Art
Shall Be inserted stories of thy deeds;
That both the eye delights and Spirit feeds.
Their Heav'n-high Roofes shall be embattelled
With Adamant in gold enuelloped.
Their Tile of Currall, and in Lozenge-wise,
Mother of pearl their sides shall circulize.
Upon their crest, as thick as they may stand,
Saint George on horseback with a Lance in hand,
Charging a Dragon, both of precious stone,
To wit, the Emeral'd, and Calcedone.
The rooms within, al rooft in arched wise,
(Like to the Convexe of the vaulted skies)
Shall Be with purest Bice enammeld fair,
Enchas'd with stars, like Jove's etherial chair!
The chimny-peeces reaching through the sa^e
Of glorious Chrysolites, that seem to flame:
On whose fore-fronts below, cut out shall be,
In Indian Berill, curious Imageree.
The hangings of thy walls, of that same ware
That Solomon in all his glory ware.
Thy floores shall be (most glorious to behold)
Couerd with cloth of Bodkin, Tyssue, Gold.
Thy chair of state (t'amuse the gazers sight)
Cut out of one vnvalued Margarite
Shall stand on top of Twelve most fair Ascents,
Like that wherein Jove sits in Parliments.
Each step of stone, of richest price, and hue,
Decked on each end with beasts, of dreadful view,
(Huge Lions, Dragons, Panthers, and the like
That in th'aspectors hearts do terror strike)
Shall seem like that more then celestial Throne,
Which Jupiter in state does sit upon.
Thy cloth of state that it ore-canopies,
Shall Be stuff brought from Earthly Paradise
By spirits immortal, which shall wait on thee,
And do thy Heasts, if thou will rule by me.
This precious gear (no name is good ynuffe
To Express the glory of this precious stuff)
With Sunne-like Carbuncles in form of eyes
Shall Be embossed, as if each were spies,
Which with their luster creep in each dark hole,
That thou thereby may pull thence by the Polle
Who shall unseen envy thy glorious state,
So, with thy Sword of Justice pole their Pate:
And, when thou sitt'st upon that royal seat,
Thou shall seem Jupiter, if not more great,
Sitting on his celestial Throne of Thrones
Compas'd about with many thousand Suns!
Thy privy chambers (where thou privilie
Shall glut thy self, without satietie,
With what shall tickle al thy veins with pleasure
Measured by loves sweet motions without measure)
Shall Be like Orchards framed so by mine Art,
That thou shall seem in Heaven when there thou art;
There will I have an artificial Sun
In the like Heaven al day his course to run,
That though the day abroad do lowre like night,
Thy Sun within shall shine exceeding bright.
The Moon and stars (like to the lamps of heaven)
By night shall light thee, set in order even:
And by their constellations and their frames,
Th'astronomer shall call them by their names.
Al kind of Trees, of what soever suit,
That either Branches bear, or Branch with fruit,
There vvil I cause (or at least, seem) to grow,
That Nature from her own them shall not know.
Plu^bs, Pears, Dats, Filbeards, Apples, glistering Cherries,
Pomgranats, Peaches, Medlars, and Mulberies,
Lymmons and Orenges, some ripe, some green,
What shall I say! al fruit that ere were seen
This artificial Eden shall contain,
Thine eye with pleasure still to entertain!
Hard by shall run, from Artificial Rocks.
Confected waters sweet, whose falling mockes
The voice of birds; which made by science shall
Tune their sweet notes, to that swee^e waters fall.
Here shall arise an hand-erected Mount,
From whose green side shall glide a silver foun^
Increasing breadth, as it runs, by degrees;
Hemd in with Couslips, Daffadils and Trees
That ore the same an Arche of Bows shall make,
Through which the Sun shall parcel-gild the Lake!
Beneath which, in this little silver Sea
Shall bathe the daughters of Mnemosine:
Singing like Sirens, playing Lyres upon
Beheav'ning so this hand-made Helicon!
Behind the Trees coucht, drowned in Daffadillis
Oxslips, wild Cullambines, and water Lillis,
Shall Elu^s and Fairies their abiding make,
To listen to these Ladies of the Lake!
Acteon here shall metamorphiz'd be,
Great Obron there shall ring his companee:
And here and there shall be variety
Of what so ere may charm the ear or eye!
Under a gloomy Bower of stil-greene Baies,
That still green keep their mortal makers praise,
(Where Eglantines with flowers thrust in their Noses,
Entangled with the slips of damask Roses,
Still fresh and flourishing, as month of May)
There shall thou hear of love the svvetest lay:
Which shall thy greedy sense so much inchaunt,
That where thou art, thou shall be ignorant;
And what thou art thou shall not much respect,
Since heav'n-rapt souls that What, do quight neglect
There, Angels notes shall so inchant thine Ears,
That thou shall swim in joy, though sunck in Cares.
Here Lab'rinthes intricate of winding walks,
Of Mirtles filld with Maie-bowes in the Balkes,
Where out shall breath soule-ravishing perfume
(Which time will rather prosper then consume)
Shall lull frail sense asleep in pleasures lapp,
From melancholy freed and al mishapp.
Each foot of grasse-made ground, orelaid shall be
With Natures Daizie-decked Draperee.
And therewith-al, to yield the more delight,
Angell-fac'd Fairies (clad in vestures white)
Shall come in tripping blithsome Madrigalls,
And foot fine Horne-pippes, Iigges, and Caterbralls.
That done, the Driads and the Silvane crew,
Successively thy solace to renew,
In Matecheines, Lavolts, and Burgamasks
Shall hardly plie these time-beguiling Tasks.
Each Tree shall drop down sweet Ambrosia,
Or cordial Spices, Myrrh, and Casia.
The Baies shall sprinkle from their dewey Bows,
Rose Water clear to cheer thy hands and Brows.
Naught shall be wanting in this Earthly Heaven,
That Art and Nature to Delight have given;
Or by the power of Spirits may be fulfilled,
To ravish sense with all that Heaven may yield!
For I will dive into the infernal deep^s,
Where Pluto Prince of riches revell keeps,
And make him dance attendance on my Train,
To Effect thy pleasure, dear sweet Sovereign!
There shall thou see (without al cause of fear)
The glorious worthies of the world that were:
How Caesar in rich Triumph entered Rome;
And Scipio when he Africa had overcome!
There shall the stately Queen of Amazons,
Penthesilea, with her Minions,
Present thee with a Maunde of fruit divine,
Culled from the golden Tree of Proserpine!
Hector, Achilles, Priam, Hecuba,
Great Agamemnon, Pyrrhus, Helena,
Or whom soever thou desir'st to see
Shall at a beck do homage unto thee!
I Will ripp the Bowels of the subtle Air
And bring the Spirits therein (in fashion fair)
To counterfeit the Music of the Spheres,
And with Heavens harmony to fill thine Ears!
To fetch for thee, from the extreme extent
Of Earthes huge Globe, what ere may thee content!
To fly upon thine errand with a trice,
To fetch thee fruit from Earthly Paradise!
To entertain thee, when alone thou art,
With all the secrets of each hidden Art:
And whatsoere the heavenly Cope does cover,
To thee (that thou may know it) to discover!
The Stone so sought of all Philosophers,
The making of which one, so many marrs,
Thou shall directly make it at thy pleasure,
To Enrich thy kingdom without mean or measure!
The great Elixer (making small ones great)
Like dust thou shall make common in the Street!
And if thou will, high ways shall paved be
With burnisht gold, made only but by thee!
If thou would have the Aier turned, and tossed,
To strike a terror in each Clime, or Cost,
These Spirits that Lord it ore that Element,
Shall do the same for thee incontinent!
And when thou would ^pare their society,
They, with a vengance, through the Air shall fly
Without the least hurt done to thee, or thine,
Except it be in making you divine!
There shall no kingdoms Cares, that life destroy,
And like Hell-paines the Heart and Mind annoy,
Once dare to ceaze upon thy blisseful Heart;
For I will charm them so, by Pleasures Art,
That they shall seem as dead and never sterr,
Thy solace to disturb in peace, or war.
I Will reave sweet voyced Boys of what they may
Ill spare, (if spare) to sing thy Cares away.
I Will make some others spend their total time,
To make sweet strings express the twangs of Rhyme;
Which tickle shall thy hart-strings with such mirth,
That thou shall say, ha, this is Heaven on Earth!
Thy royal- Table shall be served with Cates
Surmounting far Celestial Delicates:
Ambrosia, shall be thy coursest Cheat,
And Manna ( Angells-foode) thy Grooms shall eat!
Delicious VVines, that make sweet Nectar sour,
Beauties divine in precious Boles shall power,
To comfort Nature and to glad thy Heart
With comfort that surmounteth Natures Art.
The Samos Pecocke, and the Malta Crane,
The dainty Lamprey in Tart^sia taken,
The Phrigian Woddcock, and the Ambracian Got,
The fine fish Asinellus, hardly got,
The Oisters of Tarentum, fish of Helops,
The Goldny of Cilicia, Chios Scalopps,
The Nutts of Tasia, and the Egyptian Dates,
In few, all kingdoms choicest Delicates
That to the Palate pleasure may afford,
Shall ore abound upon thy bounteous Board!
When, from a Silvered Tent, to please thine Ear,
Cornett^, Recorders, Clarions thou shall hear:
Whiles to delight thy sight as well as hearing,
Stately Dumb shows before it shall be sterring:
Which well tongued Mercury shall fair relate
Still pointing to thy praise, and glorious state.
When, with these Sweetes thou art well satisfied,
I Will make thee Beds of flowers, divinly did:
Where thou, and thy Loves, (for your Limbs reposes)
May drowned your selves among sweet damask Roses.
And while your rest, the sacred Muses nine,
(Singing full sweetly Ditties most divine,
That for Hearts joy will cause the Eyes to weep)
Shall lullabie your blisful Souls asleep.
Continual Iusts, and roial Tournaments,
Furnished with all Eye-pleasing ornaments:
Mummings, Masks, Plays; Plays that shall play with Care
As Catt with Mouse, to kill her coming There.
What booteth it to wear a golden Crown,
If thorny Cares it line, to make thee frown:
Away with Care therefore, away with thought,
What should thou do with that, that is good for naught:
Let the^ go wait on Bishops, to whose See
They do belong, but let the Prince be free.
VVilt thou be Servant to the common Trash,
That often leaves their Master in the lash?
Or spend thy VVitte, and Spirits for such Riffraffe,
And so consume the Corn to save the Chafe?
VVilt thou orewhelme thy self in all anoy,
That they may swime aloft in Seas of Joy?
What! will thou place thy pleasure in thy pain,
And make thy Subject, be thy Sovereign?
Wilt loose thy royal sole prerogative,
To make ungrateful base Bash rags to thrive?
O be indulgent to thine own dear Heart,
And of Heavens blessings take a blisful part.
Do not deprive thy self of that rare bliss,
That unto none but thee peculier is.
And here upon the sudden (great mishap)
I found my self in Oxford my loves lap.
Where thinking seriously upon this thing,
I heard some say, God save king James, our King.
And therewithal I heard a Trumpets clang,
That in an unison that Dittie sang.
Then did I more admire what I had seen,
But grieved I had so double lost the Queen!
And grieved no less, since I saw not the rest
Of that wherein I held me highly blessed!
Had I so blessed bin, to have seen the event,
I should have thought my time divinely spent.
But as I cannot now divine what shall
Unto this Land (orewhelm'd in bliss) befall;
So will I not suspect the worst; for why?
God, only good, keeps good Kings company.
JOHN DAVIES.
To the Right Ho. and most most Reverend Father in God my Lord Archb. of
Canterb. his grace.
THou temperate Soul, that holdst promotion
To be but Virtues meede; and virtuously
Do higher prize the Souls devotion
Proceeding from the low'st humility:
Passion-suppressing wel-disposed spirit,
Clear glass wherein true Pastors may behold
The hall'wed life that heaven does inherit,
Whose praises Glory writes in liquid gold.
O helpeful, harmless, virtuous virgin- Priest!
O loving tender-harted gaullesse Dove!
O that Art could in thy praise so insist
As answer might the measure of my love!
But for my love herein surmounts my skill,
Accept this poor show of my rich good will.
I. D.
To the most gracious Prince the Duke of Lennox, etc.
FOr no respect (great Lord) but for the love
I owe to grace and greatness ioin'd in one,
Does my weak Pen her strongest virtue prove
To grave thy name upon this paper-stone;
That if it chance the turns of Time to brook,
(Which grind to powder all produced in Time)
Thy Name at least (which is my most) may look
Like to it self, in my hard-fauour'd Rhyme.
If voice of those that love the voice divine
Be true (the truth whereof none ought to doubt)
Thou like the Moon, among heavens la^ps do shine,
While Sol thy Sov'raigne goes the Globe about.
Long may thou (as he does) give light to all
That pleased, or pained, do foot this earthy Ball.
I. D.
To the R. Honorable, and highly valued Lord the Earl of Northumberland. etc.
WHo cannot reign in height of lofty style,
That has so high a subject for the same
As thy heroicke worth and glorious name,
Is abject, nay, then abject far more vile.
Magnificke thoughts to think on, thoughts does mount
Above the sphere of common intellect;
The thought of thy thoughts causes this effect,
Which maks my towering thoughts the^selus surmou^t.
I think of thee and them, as of those things
That move to rest in honors highest Sphere,
Since virtue is the scale the same to rear,
Which will make thee as near, as dear to kings:
As long (great Lord) as Virtue guides thee,
Thou shall be blessed of God, King, State, and me.
I. D.
To the Right Honorable the Earl of Worcester, etc.
Were thou (most noble Lord) a scurge to me
Plagueing my misses with an Iron Rod,
Yet would I, in my heart, still honor thee;
For, though he punish me; I honor God.
Thou do hurt no man simply for his harm,
But as the Surgeon does, his hurt to heal;
Would wounded, or diseased states did swarm
With no worse Surgeons for their Commonweal!
I honor thee for that which God himself
Does honor Men; that is, for drawing near
To his great goodness (not for Port, or Pelf)
I honor thee for that, dear Lord; and dear
Shall such be to me for their virtue sake,
Though I thereof no use at all do make.
I. D.
To the Right right Honorable the Earl, and Countess of Rutland.
FOr infinite respects to thee' (sweet Lord)
My Muse does consecrate these zealous lines;
Which is the All her nothing can afford,
Serving for nothing but for true loves signs.
To thee that do enjoy fruit of his loins
From whoseworsts parts proceeded naught but good;
(Whose weakest vvorths, brake Envies strongest foines)
These lines I send; and to his dearest blood.
Sweet couple that have tasted sweet and sow^e,
The sweetest potion worldly weal can taste;
O let each others sweetes that gaull devour
Which with this sour Worlds sweetes is interlac't:
And that you may do so, your unknown yours,
Will pray, so you vouchsafe to call him ours.
I. D.
To the Right Honorable Earl of Cumberland.
Neptunes vicegerent, Sea-controling Spirit
That makes her pay thee tribute, and thy land;
Of which thou do, therefore, great honor merit,
And worthy art thou on both to command.
So long thou have the Northen-pole regarded,
That nature now, has made that pole thine head:
So, looks are, with what was looked for, rewarded;
Then by his light, let thy course still be led.
If so, thy fame the world inviron shall,
For, his light leads to glory infinite;
Then eye him well and his staid motions all,
Yea, draw as near him as is requisite:
So, Fame thy name will on the Skies enrole.
So shall thou honored be by this North Pole.
I. D.
To the Right Noble and entirely beloved Earl of Southamton^ etc.
WElcome to shore vnhappy-Happie Lord
From the deep Seas of danger and distress;
Where, like thou wast to be thrown over board
In every storm of discontentednesse.
O living Death, to die when others please!
O dying Life to live how others will!
Such was thy case (dear Lord) such al thine ease;
O Hell on Earth; can Hell more vex the Will!
This Hell being harrowed by his substitute
That harrowed Hell, thou art brought forth from thence,
Into an Earthly Heaven absolute,
To taste his sweetness, see his excellence^
Thy Liege well wotts, true Love that soul must wou^d,
To whom Heavens grace, and His, does so abound.
I. D.
To the Right Noble, and no less learned then judicious Lord, William Earl
of Pembrooke. etc.
Dear Lord, if so I could, I would make known
How much I long to keep thee still alive;
These Lines (though short) so long shall be thine own
As they have power Vitality to give:
I consecrate this Myte of my devotion
To the rich Treasury of thy dear fame;
Which shall serve (though naught else worth) as a Notion
For Time to sever thy fame from thy name:
WILLIAM, Sons Son of William dreaded Earl
Of Pembrooke; made by Englands H. 8.
dreadful'st King:
Nephue to Sidney (rare VVorths richest Pearl)
That to this Land her fairest fame did bring:
These Worthies worthes are treasured in thee,
So three in one, makes one as dear as three.
I. D.
To the same.
Within my Soul I sensibly do feel
A motion, which my Minds atte^tion marks;
That is, to strike Loves Flint against Truths Steel
More hard, to kindle thy love by the Sparks:
But if the fire come not so freely forth
As may inflame the Tinder of thy love,
The tender of my Zeal shall be henceforth
Offered in flames, that to thy grace shall move:
Which is their Sphere where they desire to rest,
And resting there they will in glory shine;
I am thine own by double interrest
Since once I vowed my self to thee and thine,
O then had I but single love of you,
I should be double bound to VV.
Your Honors peculier John Dauies.
To the Right Honorable and highly renowned Lady the Countess of Pembrooke,
the Virtuous Lady, Lady Anne her daughter, and the Right Worthy and
Worshipful Phillipp Herbert Esquier her Son.
THus must poor Debtors pay their Creditors,
And share a little, where the due is more;
I owe my self to you, great Favorers,
And I am little; so are great Ones, poor:
I owe my self unto my self; and so
Do ^ to those whom as my self I love;
I owe you more; the three in One below,
Which I have honored most next That above:
If more, what more? since that is more the^ I have
(for I am not so much mine own, as yours;)
More by as much as what I else might crave
I wish it mine for you; for, in your powers
All that and more, (if more could be possessed)
Should, while you held me yours, yours firmly rest.
I. D.
To the Right Honorable the Earl of Mar. etc.
LO, how my Muse (inflamed by desire
To win thy love in paying thee thine own)
Does strive with VVitts dull sword, and loves quick fire,
To honor thee; but how? that is unknown.
And if unknown to me, then needs it must,
To All to whom my Thoughts are less revealed;
In me it is like an Embrio, or like Dust,
Wherein the first Man lay, at first concealed:
I am devising how to fash'on it,
God grant I spoil it not in hammering;
And if I do, I Will sacrifize my Wit
In fire of Zeal, the while my Muse does sing,
Like to the Swanne when death the song ensu'th,
Most blessed to die with sweet Mar in her Mouth.
I. D.
To the Right Honorable and Loiall-harted Lord the Earl of Clanricard.
OUR English Crowns approved Irish friend,
That raign'st in our true love for such thy truth,
Let thine own rare perfections thee co^me^d,
For, perfect praise, perfection still ensu'th.
I never was so happy as to see thee,
Much less to know thee, whom I long to see:
But, in thy predecessor did foresee thee;
For, if Fame fable not, much like you be.
To add then to thy glory more bright beams,
Love His, thy other-selfe, with dearest love;
For she has martir'd bin with greefes extremes,
Dear Innocent, whose virtues all approve.
Her love to thee does argue thy hie vvorth
Then love such love, that setts thy glory forth.
I. D.
To the Right Honorable and no less virtuous Lady the Countess of Clanricard.
HOnor attend, as virtue guides thy life,
Dear Lady, loved of all that are beloved,
As it has done thee, virgin, VViddowe, Wife,
For which thou were of all, in all, approved.
By Heaven assigned to Natures Miracles,
Mirrors of Manhood, and Heroic parts;
World, Flesh, and Fiends, to such are obstacles,
But God, Saints, Angels guerdo^ their deserts.
In thee it is, the love of such ^'alure,
And bind them to thee with loves Gordian knott;
It is thy grace and reputation pure
That made these worthies fall so to thy Lot:
God give thee joy of this, for in the rest
Thou seemd'st accursed, because so highly blessed.
I. D.
To the most heroic, and meritoriously renowned Lord, the Lord Mount joy, Lord
Deputy of Ireland.
TO praise thee (noble Lord) were but to do
What all the world does; and to do the same,
Were to offend, and that extremely too;
And al extreme offense incurrs defame.
Praise is not seemly in a wicked mouth;
The World is wicked, and her mouth is worse,
Full of detraction, false-praise, and untruth;
Then, should I praise according to her course?
O no! thy virtue merits more regard;
Let Virtue praise thee, as thou her do praise;
For, sacred virtue is her own reward,
And Crowns her self, in spite of Fortunes Naye^:
She is thy guide, and Glory her attends,
Which, her in thee; and thee in her commends.
The true lover of your honor and virtue I. D.
To the Right honorably honored and right wel-beloved young Earl of Essex etc.
Dear offspring of that all-belooued One,
Dear unto all, to whom that one was dear;
The Orphans God requites thy cause of moan
By Him, that does to all like God appear.
Al those that love you (al-beloued Two)
Will bless and love him for it; blessed of God
To comfort Innocents, and Orphans too,
That ruined were by fell Disasters Rod.
Live like His Son, that lived too like him self;
And did like one, dear to Him without like;
He wrackt his fortunes on false Favors shelfe,
Which are this worlds; that smiles when it does strike.
And, that thou mai'st thy country glorify
No less then he, all pray; then needs must I.
I. D.
To the R. Honorable Sr. John Popham Knight Lord chiefe-Iustice of England, etc.
IVstly seveare, seveare in Mercies cause,
Since it is mercy, mercie-wanting men
To cut of with the razor of the laws,
That wounds the wounders of their brethren.
To thee (grave Cato) are these lines adrest,
As proofs of what respect they bear thy fame;
Which, with these Worthies, shall be here impressed
By my best Pen, in Honor of thy name.
If best deseruers of the public weal
Should not be memorized of the Muse,
She should her proper virtue so conceal,
And so concealed, should that and them abuse:
To free her then, and thee, from so great wrong,
Live lines with Pophams earned praises long.
I. D.
To the R. Honorable and most learned Lord, the Lord Henry Haward, etc.
WHat hope the noble, virtuous, and the learned
May have, they having now so rare a King,
In thee learned, virtuous, noble Lord's discerned,
In whom these flourisht without cherrishing.
Where virtue reigns, her subjects shall bear rule,
The learned, and virtuous, she will have to sway:
For vice wel-learned, is but armed Misrule,
By whom the virtuous still are made away.
Honors do alter manners in ^those men
That are to honor and good manner foes;
In thee that is not to be feared then,
For each with thee, from thy conception groes.
And since Apollo now does water them
They will grow great together with the stem.
I. D.
To the Right Noble, Robert Lord Sidney Baron of Penshurst. etc.
THy virtue, and the conscience of the grace
Thou have vouchsau'd me, not deserving it,
Does like two spurs provoke my will and wit,
Thy name with my loves lines to interlace.
Thy honored name, name honored of all
That honors grace by man made glorious,
Can of it se^fe rowze up the dullest Muse
To make thereof divine memorial.
Then, should ^ it commend to Monument,
No miracle should I perform thereby,
Since it by Nature lives eternally,
Such life to Sidneys being incident.
And since divine Sr Philip lives in thee,
Be thou that Monument; and so ease me.
I. D.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Home, etc.
The place, me^ say, thou holdst, (great Lord) in court
Leicester, Essex, Worcest.
Was held before by three Superlatiues;
Most wise, most loved, most lowly in high port;
The place, I ween, has such prerogatives.
Then, were thy virtue not in that degree,
The virtue of the place would it reject;
But its a powrefull argument to me,
That thou art virtuous (Lord) in each respect.
The rather, since thy Liege that placed thee there,
Does heave up none so high, but for high worth;
Whose Judgments eye is admirable clear,
Which warrants me to put thy praises forth:
My coulors ready are, I lack but light
(Which I will have) to paint them out aright.
I. D.
To the Right Honorable, the good Lord of Kinlosse, etc.
Praise that proceeds from a Poets Pen,
That faines by nature, may want power percha^ce
To add renown to the renownes of Men,
Whom goodness without glozing does advance.
If then my Pen (though it too open be
To gloze) disabled be by Envies spite
To register the right that is due to thee,
Yet should it wrong thee to conceal thy right.
Thy VVorld-conte^ning Thoughts the world do make
(As knowledging the ods twixt good and Ill)
To reverence thee for thy rare goodness sake,
Which hearts with love, and mouths with praise does fill:
They style that praise but with one only word
Which being, Good, with God does still accord.
I. D.
To the Right Noble Lady, the Lady Rich.
TO descant on thy name as many do
(Since it is sit to express thine excellence)
I should (dear Lady) but allude unto
That, which with it compared, is indigence.
Yet to be rich was to be Fortunate,
As all esteemed, and yet though so thou art,
Thou wast much more then most unfortunate,
Though richly-well thou plaid'st That hapless part
Thou did express what Art could never sho,
The Souls true grief for loss of her Loves soul;
Thine Action speaking-passion made, but o!
It made thee subject to a Iailes control.
But, such a Iaile-bird heavenly Nightingale,
For such a cause, sings best in greatest bale.
I. D.
To the entire Body of the Kings Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
WHere Love divided is, she hardly can
Be like her self; But, when she is entire,
In sacred flames she burns more hot then fire,
Be it in abstract Forms; or mortal Man.
Yet Love, and reverence are due to those
Whose, wakefull wits still work for public good;
So reverence I your honored Fatherhood,
As Founts from whom our public proffit floes.
In you wise Pilots of this ioy-fraught Bark
( Bark of our blessed Commonweal) it is
To make her keep her course in lasting bliss,
Which charge requires your well-directing carke:
You cannot better spend life's benefit
Then for so good an end, at Stern to sit.
I. D.
To my much honored, and entirely beloved Patroness, the most famous
University of Oxford.
TO mount above Ingratitude (base crime)
With double lines of single-twisted Rhyme;
I will (though needless) blaze the Sun-bright praise
Of Oxford, where I spend some gaining days:
Who entertaines me with that kind regard,
That my best words, her worst deeds should reward:
For like a Lady full of roialtie,
She gives me Crowns for my Charactery:
Her Pupils crown me for directing them,
Where like a King I live, without a Realm:
They praise my precepts, and my Lesso^s learn,
So does the worse the better well govern.
But Oxford, o I praise thy situation
Passing Pernassus, Muses habitation!
Thy Bough-deckt-dainty Walks, with Brooks beset
Fretty, like Crystal Knots, in mould of Iet.
Thy sable Soile's like Guians golden Ore,
And gold it yields, manured; no mould can more.
The pleasant Plot where thou have footing found,
For all it yields, is yelke of English ground.
Thy stately Colleges like Princes courts,
Whose gold-embossed high-embattl'd Ports
With all the glorious workmanshippe within
Make Strangers deem they have in Heaven bin,
When out they come from those celestial places,
Amazing them with glory and with graces.
But, in a word to say how I like thee,
For place, for grace, and for sweet companee,
Oxford is Heaven, if Heaven on Earth there be.
JOHN DAVIES.
To the most Honorable and Valorous Knight Sir Thomas Erskin etc.
Honey of Hybla if my Pen could dropp
Nay Nectar subtilized to the Spright,
Were not too sweet to varnish Virtues Propp
That help t'vphold our stay in Treasons spite.
Against Traitors did thy trustiness appear,
Who were the Foiles to make thy Truth to shine,
How blessed were thou that did thee so besteere
As made Treas'n pay, for her demand Death the fine of al flesh
a Fine?
How art thou bound to Opportunity
That put her Fore-locks freely in thy Fist?
And how ought we to praise thy valiancy
Where through, and through our Kings, we all are blist!
One hardy Hand joined to a valiant Kings
A Tribe of Traitors to confusion bringes!
I. D.
To the thrice Noble and valorous Knight Sir Edward VVingfield.
TO thee Belonas choicest Champion
Whose wounds, if steept in dew of Castalie,
(As they deserve) would make thee such an one
As Pagans used for God to glorify.
How often have thou thy self to wounds exposed
To let in glory through thy gored sides!
That through thy flesh it might be so disposed
As in each part thereof it now abides?
How prodigal have thou bin of thy blood?
No more is left the^ merely life maintains:
The fatt Calfe must be killed to do thee good
Thy heart to comforrt, and to fill thy Veins.
O it is a glorious prodigality
That spends what not? for God and Conterie!
I. D.
To the Noble, discreet, and wellbeloved Knight Sir Henry Nevill.
THere was a Time when, ah that so there was,
Why not there is? There is and was a Time,
When Men might call Gold, Gold; and Brass, but Brasse^
And say it, without check, in Prose or Rhyme.
Yet should I call thee Gold, some ( Brass perchance)
Would say! erred because I nere touched thee,
And so did call thee through mere ignorance,
Or (which is worse) through abject Flatteree.
I am too ignorant (I do confess)
To judge thy woo^th, which worthiest Men commend,
Yet may I say (I hope) and not transgress,
Thou Art Virtue, Valor, Truth, and Honors friend;
All which presume thou art not gilt by guile
Because thy noble name Ne-vile.
denies the vile.
I. D.
To the Right Worshipful and most worthy Knight Sir Edward Dyer.
THough Saturn now with Jupiter does sit,
Where erst Minerua and the Muse did reign,
Ruling the Commonwealth of will, and wit,
Placed in the kingdoms of thy heart, and brain:
Those Planetts I adore, whose influence
Insuseth wisdom, Counsel, gravity;
Min^^ua and the Muse joys my Souls sense,
Since Soule-delighting lines they multiply.
In both respects, for that that was and is
I tender thee the service of my Muse,
Which shall not mar thy fame though it may miss
To give the same that which to it accrues;
Yet this Gi^t, through thy Gifts, she gives to thee:
Times future, Dyer, die shall never see.
I. D.
To the right worshipful and venerable Prelate, Doctor Tompson Deane of
Windsor.
MY friend, my father, naie, which is more dear,
My self should I, ere thee, ( beloved) forgett,
Whose love to me, to me does thee indeere,
Whose Co^versation
life my will for like on edge does set:
In the womb fashiond for a right Divine,
Pleasing to God, to Angels, and to Men;
In whose face wit, and piety does shi^e,
To lead the blind, draw perverse Brethren.
An heart of flesh, closed in a Breast of Brass,
To feel Men's pains, and pain endure to ease the^;
Charities Mirror, or thick crystal glass,
Wher-through God: Su^- beams burn what does disease the^.
Good to the good and badd, to great and small,
And my good friend, though I be worst of all.
I D.
Memories tribute due to the most worthy and no less learned Gentleman,
Edward Herbert of Mountgomeroy Esquier.
CAN I forgett that is aie mine Eyes before?
If so I could, I may not thee forgett,
That vowed my Memory to thee of yore,
Then, thou of me may claim that as thy Debt.
There are in thee parts worth my memory,
Although it could thy pa^tes immortal make:
Who knows ^hee will my judgment justify,
If not, he does both thee and m^e mistake.
I cannot judge of coulors, with such Eyes.
As cannot be deceaved; but I can
Discern the known fool, from th'approved wise,
And without Spectacles, a Beast from Man:
If then (sweet Sir) should thou but please the sense,
Sense must needs praise thy pleasing excellence.
He in whose Memo^ie you shall live, till you sail to be what you are, or it
what it is. I. D.
To all the right noble Nobility of England.
IF I were not disabled, through Defect,
(For my Inventions Poise, which wit vp-wound,
Lies now, for want of strength, stock-still on ground)
No virtuous Peer I would, by name, neglect.
The Wheels which did my Fancy (working) turn
Are at a stand; O then impute it not
To want of Will, as if I had forgott
In wilful wise, to name you in your turn.
But when my VVitts have strength recovered
To wind the Poise up to Inventions height,
I Will do my best to give each one his right,
Though by your selves you are most honored:
Mean while with Favors Eye look on my Will
Which may excuse my present want of skill.
I. D.
To all the right Honorable Earls and Lords of Scotland.
I Want no love, how ere my skill may fail,
In Honors Catalogue your names to putt,
Yet now am forced the^ (al unseen) to shutt
In these strait Lines, as in the Muses ^aile.
Where I Will detain the^ (not without your leave)
Till I do set them forth with better grace,
Each one in his true Coulors, form, and place,
And as I found them fair, so them to leave.
When you awhile before my Muse have sat,
(For Painters make the^ sit, whose forms they paint)
Her skill shall fail, but then she will depaint
According to the Life, your life, and State:
Pictures are used, life, after death to s^o,
And youres, my Pen must picture, shall be so.
I. D.
To the most fair, most fortunate, and no less famous Magdalen College in
Oxford.
And can I seem, much less then can I be
Grateful, if I should thee, or thine forget,
Whose Head, and Members bind me so to thee,
That thou may give or take me as thy debt?
Thy discreet head's a Bond that binds my head,
My heart, my hand, and what besides is mine
To him for thee, to thee for him, in Deed;
So being bound in Deed, in deed am thine.
The Members of thy body (not of stone
Squared by the cunning of a mortal hand,
But living, loving, made by Love alone)
Have by their love, in ever-lasting Band
So tide me to them, that as they do move,
So move I, forced by force of mutual love.
Again.
Blessed be that Thought, past time beyond al thought,
That first did move that wise, as holy William Wainflet Bishop of Winchester.
heart,
To rear this Trophey where his virtues fought
And co^quer'd Rage, with who^ those Hen. 6. Ed. 4.
times took part:
A sacred Trophey left for Virtues use,
Not only (as are others) for mere fame;
But as a nere-dri'd Dugge unto the Muse,
That times, past time, might suck sweets from the same.
Sing sweetly (blessed Babes, that suck the Breast
Of this sweet Nectar-dropping Magdalen)
Their praise in holy Hymns, by whom ye Feast,
The God of Gods, and VVaineslet best of Men:
Sing in an Union with the Angels Quires,
Since Heavens, your house co^tenting your desires.
I. D.
To the World.
PErhaps in Judgments eye it may appear
I loved Him living whom I honor dead;
Whose love, I think, to all was no less dear,
Since he was such as all men honored.
All? that is, some, or rather most of All;
If some did not, the harm I wish to them
Is, that they may deserve love general,
Or else made free of new Jerusalem.
No creature bearing God-almighties form,
But I desire to love, and wish him well;
If good desires, far worse Affects deforme,
It comes from that for which the first Ma^fel:
But howsoere, I am resolved herein,
To wish al grace, in spite of flesh and sin.
I. D.
To my beloved Mr. John Davies of the Middle Temple Councellor at the Law.
WHy should it not content me, since thy praise
Pertaines to me, to who^ thy name pertaines;
If thou by Art to heaven thy fame can raise?
All Is but John Davies that such glory gains;
Admit it lives enrol'd in lasting lines
In the Exchequer of the sacred Muse,
Thy name, thy fame unto my name co^bines
In future times, nor Thou nor I can choose.
For, if John Davies such, such times brought forth,
To wit, these times in which we both do live,
Then must John Davies, share John Davies worth,
For, times to come can no distinction give.
Then what need I to beat my tired brains
To make John Davies live to after Ages,
When thou have don't by thy praiseworthy pains,
For, were I idle, I have thy Works wages.
Or, what if like an intellectual Sprite,
I able were Arts Spirits to purify,
To ravish Worlds to come with rare delight
They would with my fame thy name glorify.
Then may I play since thou do work for me;
And since thy works do so in beauty shine,
What need I then for Eccle. 2. 15.
fame thus busy be,
Since thine is mine, and mine is likewise thine?
It is because my Mind that is aie in motion
Has to the Muses Measures most devotion.
Again,
John unto John, Davies to Davies sends
This little draught of new loves large Demise,
If words do want to pass what it pretends,
Supply that want, the Grant need no supplies.
To you, and to your Heirs, the same does run,
Simply in love for aie to hold in fee,
A good estate, you have, and your Sons Son;
A kind acceptance shall your out-rent be:
You Counsel can your self, a fee then save,
Mende you the draught, loves Deed no fault should have.
I. D.
The Book of it self.
I am, that was not; and I was, that am;
I was unmade; that was, in state confused:
I am, for Art has formed that formlesse Frame,
Yet formed my nature was, ere Art was used.
Mother Tongue, and VVi^, Observance, and goodwil
Have made me what I am, or good, or ill.
Not unto us (o Lord) not unto us, but to thy name give the praise and glory.
Psalm. 115.1.

Again: to Envy and Detraction
DEAR Envy and Detractio^, dear to those
That unto Virtue are immortal foes,
Let me, although I hate you, yet entreat
That I, if good enough, may be your meat;
You cannot grace me more, then gnaw me still;
For what you spare is too far spent in ill.
Tear me in pieces with your grizlie fangs,
You Crown my Soul with glory by such Pangs.
He is a Devil that to die detests
In Hel-hounds mouths, to live in Angels Breasts.
JOHN DAVIES.
FINIS.
In love and affection of Master John Davies, mine approved good friend, and
admiration of his excellence in the Art of VVriting.
THat heavenly Spark, from which th'immorall Soul
Had her first being, striveth to enroule
Her wondrous Gifts in characters of Brass,
That when (dissolved from this earthie Mass)
She mounts aloft, her never-dying Glory
May fill the Volumes of a learned Story;
Which after-Ages, reading, may admire,
And (inly burning with the like desire)
To rare Atcheiuements (emulous of Fame
Striving t'immortalize their dying Name)
May bend their Practice, dedicate their Days;
And, so excited, purchase datelesse Praise.
Our active Soul feels never weariness,
But her true love to Fame does best express
In hating Idleness: whence comes this notion,
Her working Faculties are still in motion.
Ore some then others, greater Soveraigntie
This divine Essence of Humanity
Has power to exercise: For baser Swains
Abhor the check of her immortal Reigns.
From whence it is, that Midas brood possess
The greater Share in earthly Happiness;
While those pure Minds, who most submissiue stand
At the least wrentch of her almighty Hand
(Obscurely hidd in Corners at their Book)
Are hardly grace't so much as with a look
Of this injurious World. O wretched Age
Wherein the sacred Arts to Vassalage
Subjected are! while muddy Minds aspire,
While greater Heroes daine but to admire
And praise (with bootlesse breath) the polisht Lines,
VVherin, Co^ceipt has traveld through the Mines
Of rich Invention, many a weary hour
(Spent with the Muses in a gloomie Bower)
To times swift feathers imping greater store,
Whilst thus they plough the barrain fruictles Shore
Earths brightest Angels, these, o these be they
Whose Corpse are framed of fire, and not of clay!
Whose either Part, both mortal, and divine
So sweet a Symphonie does intertwine,
That both accord to prosequute that Fame
Which, but for Virtue, stellifies our Name.
Among which Number (famous by Desert)
The Laurel Crown be his, whose every Part
To th'intellectiue Soul (their Sovereign)
Pay true Subiectiue Duty, and do gain
By restless labor that perfection
Which, save by him, has bin attained by none;
By him (the Subject of these worthles Rimes)
Whose Art lends luster to our English climes,
Davies, discoverer of hidden Deepes,
True Microcosme, whose peircing Spirit creeps
Into the darkest Cavernes, in-most Den
Where Wit inhabits mong the sons of Men,
And plucks out Knowledge (by the golden locks)
From where she long had slept within the Rocks
Of hard Obscurity, whence every Eye
May judge it self; o wondrous Mystery!
Whence we our selves, our selves may truly know,
Which is indeed most hard, how ere in show.
But endless were it, and impossible
(Unless my Muse to his were suitable)
Here to delate that Grace in Poesy
Which his witt-fraughted works can testify.
Cast back thine Eye, read, and (admiring) see
The Quintessence of humane Ingenie,
Way well the rich Conceit; so shall thou know
That few, (if any) could have written so.
Descend we then from that internal Flame,
To Qualities external: whence the name
Of Excellence has purchased been of many,
But, as of Davies, never yet of any.
In praising whom, the best my Lines can say
Will, for his VVorth, be worthless every way:
Yet, for I love his Name, admire his Skill,
Out of the heat and fervor of Good Will
These colder Lines this frozen passage found,
Force't by the League wherein al Friends are bound:
And reason it is, those Men that merit Fame
Above the rest, should franckly have the same.
And be it far from every gentle Heart
To deem that, Soothing, or a glosing part
When one good Friend an other shall commend
More then that, Hatred, when our speeches tend
In whom we love, some fault to rectify
Which wrongs himself, defames his Progeny.
Praise is the guerdon of a due Desert
Making us better act the praised Part.
There never Man deserved Memory
For perfect Science in his Faculty,
If Dauies Name deserve to be forgott,
If, when his mortal Part in earth shall rott,
The riches of his Soul (man's greatest treasure)
Shall Be made subject to the greedy seasure
Of dark Oblivion, if such Perfection
Shall from the Graves rude hand have no protection.
Maugre the Gripe of Time, in spite of Fates
And ought beside that, Fame, determinates,
His Name would live to all Posterity
In the fair lines of his Characterie,
Could any Hand the A steel ^nst^ument.
graver so command,
As can, the pen, his vvonder-writing Hand.
But, for no Graver, or stamped Letter can
(Or ought else framed by the Wit of Man)
Show Times future true proose of such rare Skill
By demonstration, mine Artlesse Quill
Strives to commend to lasting Memory
A glimps (though darkely) of that Quality.
For (if mine aim Love has not much betrayed)
This Book must live till Time his course has staid:
So that, to those not yet conceived, I send
This poor effect which my loves cause has pend,
Neglecting Art, affecting to descrie
Love to my friend, and to his Quality.
Whose Matchless Art in managing the Pen
Time never equaliz'd; and Times again
(When his diurnal Howerglasse has ran
The dated Minutes of a mortal Man)
Will hardly parallel: for such true Skill
May scarce be purchased by pain, or Will:
He that as Davies would as fairly write,
Must of necessity have Davies spright.
Who knows not that this wondrous Faculty
Is not conceived by coorse Capacity,
But makes there her only Habitation
Where she does find a strong Imagination!
For none habitually can her possess
That is not made of fire and liuelynesse.
Could never Hand so curiously convay
The nice Delineaments, so every way
In just proportion (purest Sumetrie)
Unless directed by a perfect Eye,
And first imprinted in the Fantasy:
Which, weaker Brains can never apprehend,
Much less an Active Demonstration lend.
The strange Meanders, and the Gordian knots
Now straight, now larger, as the Hand alots;
The curious VVorkemanshippe in every letter,
This pleasing best, that other pleasing better,
A third exceeding both, when every one
For perfect shape is singular alone;
The rare Diversity which one selfe-hand
Can, with that little Instrument command,
Does so bewitch th'amaz'd Beholders eye,
And so delight th'invegled Fantasy,
That what our eyes behold our Tongues commend,
Nor, wondering, can admit or mean, or end.
Come lend, ye Lovers of this sacred Art,
Your voice with mine, to celebrate a part
In his deserved Praise, whose matchless Skill
To blazon perfectly, would tire the Quill
Of Hermes self: for rightly to commend
This Art of VVriting, were to comprehend
Within our Numbers her Antiquity,
And, how through her, the living Memory
Of famous Worthies has preserved been;
Whose Works these latter Ages had not seen,
But (rake't in Darkness with their Authors head)
Without her help, had ever perished.
Nor should we slightly touch the Praises Due
Which, through this Art, to Learning still accrue;
Without whose aid, in vain were Sapience,
In vain were every other Excellence;
Since Strangers might not then participate
What Reading, Wit, and Labor had begat,
But greatest Clarks should vainly spend their days,
Leaving, with Life, their Glory, Name, and praise:
Her daily Use, her pure Necessity
May tell the Virtue of this Mystery;
Suffices me, to run (though slightly) over
Part of his Parts, whose Pen can best discover
Her fairest Beauty; such, as does excite
In All that view Her, wonder and delight.
All Characters that ere the Graver wrought
Are obvious to him, and quickly brought
To deck the Triumph of the golden Pen
Which he long since has merited: for when
(T'approue his Excellence) he challenged All
Or English bred, or foreign National
To strive for glory, and a golden Price
(Which one or both might every sort entise)
Unanswered, he Monarchiz'd alone;
What greater Conquest than withstood by None?
The Germans, skilled in every curious Art
(Whose practick Hand does to the World impart
Such quaint Devises) giving Right his due,
Extol our Davies, and his Fame pursue
With printed lines, writ in the Latin tongue,
As loath to do his Cunning so much wrong
In the distastiue Germane Idiom
To leave that Monument for Times to come,
Because they knew their Dialect too lame
To bear the weight of his immortal fame.
O you thrice famoused for Raritie,
The grace and beauty of your Fair w^iting.
Quality,
That breathe the Air of Italy, and France,
Come, do your Homage and Allegiance
To him whose Pen reigns in fair Paper Reames,
(Content therewith as Kings with Diadems)
Whose Subjects Letters are of every Suite
Made all aright by rule most absolute.
To him, from Paris, move thine antique station
Beauchene, the perfectst Penman of thy Nation;
To him, from Venice, bring those Gifts of thine,
Renoun'd for wondrous writing, Camerine;
VVarne thou the Romans that thou must be gone
To visit England, curious Curion;
Come all at once, that all at once may learn
To mend your Hands, and rightly to discern
Between the Good, and most most-Excellent;
Nor will (perhapps) your Travail be misspent,
Since each, in's Native Hand, may gain perfection
By practicing His Counsel and Direction.
In former Times, ere wiser Times begatt
(That which for ever Men shall wonder at)
The Printing Mystery, that curious Hand
Which could the Pen most perfectly command
Had not a Finger vnbegirt with Gold,
Such meede had Merit in the days of old:
Had Dauies lived, when such Pre-eminence
Was only given to Men of excellence,
The scribbling VVriters of that golden Time
Had (wa^dring) sought some more auspicious Clime;
For none, save He alone, had thrived in this,
The gift of Exellence being only his.
To him, from Heaven, descends this Quality:
For, Will, Desire, all-gaining Industry,
Time, Promptitude, Wit, Steadiness of Hand,
Swift apprehension, Fingers at command,
Strongest Conceit, Art Geometrical,
Or ought attained by Science natural,
Poetic Fury, and the Muses aid,
(All which are Propps whereon this Art is stayed)
Nor these, nor other Adiuments have power
To purchase that (with many a toyling hour)
Which from above, by pure Instinct was sent
To grace our Dauies, Englands For writing.
Wonderment.
In whose deserved Praise, if ardent Zeal
(Striving my near Affection to reveal)
Has larger been then well becomes the Place,
This short Apology may purchase Grace;
In Virtues praise can nere be said too much;
Such is our Subject, his Demeanor such.
NICHOLAS DEEBLE.
In Microcosmum, sive Parvum Ioh. Davisij Heref. Mundum.
DVm Microcosmum scribis, and Parvum vocas
Mundum, libellum: fructus ingenij tui
Magnum, (Davisi) quem vocas Parvum, facit.
Fecisse Mundum gaudeo, immundi at nihil
Metuimus vnde munda sunt orta omnia.
Sed fabricator factus es parcus nimis
Qui munda sed minuta nobis exhibes.
Minuta querimur, quodmodum supra placent,
Minuta querimur scripta vel mirum in modum.
Si dum occidentem subdis Hispano iugo
Philippe gentem, Phil. 2. Hisp. Rex.
quereris arctatum suis
Limitibus Orbem; nec sat est vni Tibi
Vel totus Orbis: dederit invidia locum Totus non sufficit O^bis.

Si Microcosmu^ hunc auribus and oculis nimis
Nimisque strictum turba doctorum putet.
Prodesse cunctis (sat scio) Davisicupis,
Quin and placere disce iam tandem omnibus;
Placere vero sivelis, doct a manu
Extend Mundum hunc, vel crea Mundos novos.
NVnc scio quod quaevis pars est habitabilis Orbis,
Sunt in front alij, nos sumus Antipodes:
Scribimus hic, illic; nobis tua nempe (Davisi)
Principio placuit pagina, fine placet.
Meque iuvat, nostrum quod carmen vtrinque legatur,
Te vt laudent oriens, occiduumque latus.
ED LAPVVORTH.
FINIS.

