A POETICAL RAPSODIE, Containing: Diverse Sonnets, Odes, Elegies, Madrigals,
Epigrams, Pastorals, Eglogues, with other poems, both in Rhyme and measured
verse.

For variety and pleasure, the like never yet published.

The Be and Spider by a diverse power,
Suck Honey and Poison from the self same flower.
Newly corrected and augmented.



LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Roger I^ckson dwelling in Fleetstreet
near the great Conduit. 1611.

To the most Noble, Honorable, and worthy Lord* William Earl of Pembroke, Lord
Herbert of Cardiffe, Marmion, and Saint Quintine.
GReat Earl, whose brave Heroike mind is higher
And nobler, then thy noble high Degree:
Whose outwarashape, though it most lovely be
Does in fair Robes a fairer Soul attier:
Who rich in fading wealth, endless Treasure
Of Virtue, Valor, Learning, richer art,
Whose present greatness, men esteem but part
Of what by line of future Hope they measure.
Thou worthy Son unto a peer elesse mother,
Or Nephew to great Sidney of renown,
Who have deserved thy Coronet, to crown
With Laurel crown, a crown excelling the other
I consecrate these Rimes to thy great Name,
Which if thou like, they seek no other fame.
FRA. DAVISON.

To the Reader.
BEING induced by some private reasons, and by the instant entreaty of special
friends, to suffer some of my worthless poems to be published, I desired to
make some written by my dear friends Anonymoi, and my deerer Brother, to bear
them company: Both without their consent, the latter being in the Low Country
wars, and the rest utterly ignorant thereof. My friends names I concealed;
mine own and my brothers, I willed the Printer to suppress, as well as I had
concealed the other, which he having put in without my priuity, we must now
undergo a sharper censure perhaps then our namelesse works should have done,
and I especially. For if their Poems be liked, the praise is due to their
invention: if disliked, the blame both by them, and all men, will be derived
upon me, for publishing that which they meant to suppress.

If thou think we affect fame by these kinds of writings, though I think them
no disparagement even to the best judgments, yet I answer in all our
behalfes, with the princely shepherd Dorus*

Our hearts do seek another estimation. If thou condemn Poetry in general,
and affirm that it does intoxicate the brain, and make men utterly unfit,
either for more serious studies, or for any active course of life, I only say,
Iubeo te stultum esse libenter. Since experience proves by examples of many,
both dead and living, that diverse delighted, and excelling herein, being
Princes or Statesmen, have governed and counseled as wisely, being soldiers,
have commanded armies as fortunately, being Lawyers, have pleaded as iudicially
and eloquently, being Divines, have written and taught as profoundly, and being
of any other profession, have discharged it as sufficiently as any other men
whatsoever: If liking other kinds, thou mislike the Lyricall, because the
chiefest subject thereof is Love; I reply, that louc being virtuously intended,
and worthily placed, is the whetstone of wit, and spur to all generous
actions: and many excellent spirits with great fame of wit, and no stain of
judgment, have written excellently in this kind, and specially the
euer-praiseworthly Sidney: So as if thou will needs make a fault, for mine own
part,

Hand timeo, ^i iam neque^ defendere crimen Cum tanto commune viro. If any
except against the mixing (both at the beginning and end of this book) of
diverse things written by great and learned personages, with our mean and
worthless scriblings, I utterly disclaim it, as being done by the Printer,
either to grace the forefront with Sir Philip Sidneys, and others names, or to
make the book grow to a competent volume.

For these Poems in particular, I could allege these excuses, that those under
the name of Anonymos were written (as appears by diverse things to Sir Philip
Sidney living, and of him dead) almost twenty years since, when Poetry was
far from that perfection, to which it has now attained; that my brother is
by profession a Soldier, and was not 18 years old when he writ these toys:
that mine own were made most of them six or seven years since, at idle times
as I iourneyed up and down during my trauails. But to leave their works to
justify themselves, or the Authors to justify their works, and to speak of
mine own; thy mislikes I contemn, thy praises (which I neither deserve, nor
expect) I esteem not, as hoping (God vvilling) ere long, to regaine thy good
opinion, if lost; or more deservedly to continue it, if already obtained, by
some grauer work. Farewell.

FRA. DAVISON.

An alphabeticall Table, of all the Sonnets, Odes, Poems, Madrigals, Epigrams,
Elegies, Pastorals, Eglogues, Dialogues, Hymmes, and Epitaphes, with all other
the principal matters contained in this present Volume.
A
A Contention betwixt a Wife, a Widow, and a Maid. 7 A Fiction how Cupid made a
Nymph wound her self. 21 A living death, see Poem. 1 Absence. 190. 191 Absence
and time, see Ode. 11 Affection, see Poem. 25 Ajax who killed himself, see
inscription. 1 Allegory of his love to a ship, see Sonnet. 3 Allusion to
Theseus voyage against the Minotaure, see Sonnet. 4 Anacreons Odes. 159. An
answer to what love is. 90 An i^uectiue against love, see Sonnet. 5 Anatomy
of love, see Poem. 33 Astreas praise with silence, see Dialogue. 7
B
Bacheler 2 Beauty causes love, see Sonnet. 15 Beggars life praised. 161
Belides his torments. 53 Blankes. 7. Bodkin. 6 Bracelets. 6 Break heavy
heart, see Poe. 4 Brutus his inhabiting of this I Will, see Poem. 30
C
Cato Vtican, who slew himself, see inscription. 5^ Chain. 6 Child's Epitaphs,
see Epitaph. 1 Christian Stoicke, see Poem. 34 Climenestra to Orestes,
Inscription. 57 Commendation of bea^ie, etc. see Ode. 13 Commendation of
verses, see Sonnet. 44 Comparison betwixt the strength of beast, see Ode. 1
Comparison of love in Beggars and Kings. 160 Comparison to a candle-flie, see
Madrigall. 6 Comparison with perfect love, see Poem. 23 Complaint of love very
wittily. 30 and 56 Conceit, see Poem. 25 Contention betwixt a Wife, a Widow
and a Maid. 7 Contention of love and reason, see Sonnet. 8 Contrarieties of
love, see Poem. 24 Corinaes singing, see Poem. 26 Counterfeit answer, see
Ode. 26 Country Gentleman. 2 Courtier. 1 Courtiers rule, see Epi. 1 Courtly
life dispraised, see Pastoral. 3 Coyfe and Crosse-cloath. 6 Crambo the l^wzie
shifter, see Epigram. 5 Cuccolds Epigram, see Epigra^. 3 Cuddies Emblem. 40
Cuddies Pastoral Eglogue, see Eglogue. 6 Cupids dialogue with a lover, see
Dialogue. 2 Cupid made a Nymph to wound her self, see Eglogue. 5 Cupids
marriage with dissimulation, see Ode. 6 Cupid proved a Fence^, see Madrigall. 7
Cupid shootes light, but wounds sore, see Poem. 6 Curtizans Epigram, see
Epigra^ 4 Cushinet. 7 Cynthia Queen of Fortune. 3. and 196.
D
Deadly sweetness, see Poem. 7 Death in love, see Poem. 8 Death living, see
Poem. 1 Description of love, see Sonnet. 2 Desire. 202 Desire and hope, see
Ode. 7 Desire has conquered revenge, see Sonnet. 9 Desires government, see
Poem. 9 Dialogues. 1. Between a lover and his Lady. 23 2. Between a lover
and Cupid. 50 3. Between a Lover, Death, and Cupid. 49 4. Between a lovers
flaming heart, and his Ladies frozen breast. 59 5. Between the lover and his
heart. 49 and 123 6. Between the soul and the body. 188 7. In praise of
Astrea, 26
Didoes inscription, see Inscription. 4 Discommodities of love, see Sonnet. 20
Disdain at variance with desire, see Ode: ^ Disdaines Altar and Sacrifice* 177
Disdainful love, see Ode. 2 Dispraise of a courtly life, see Pastoral. 3
Dispraise of lovers folly, 145 Divine. 1 Dozen of points. 5 Dyall. 7
E
Eglogues. 1. Between a Shepherd and a Heardman. 47 2. Between Eubulus and
Astrea. 59 3. Between Strephon and Urarania, with her answer. 57 4.
Concerning old age. 83 5. How Cupid made a Nymph wound her self. 24 6. Of
Cuddy. 3^ 7. Upon the death of sir Philip Sidney. 41
Elegies. 1. Letters in verse. 99 2. Of discontent. 91 3. Of his verse. 21^ 4.
Of women's inconstancy. 203 5. To his Lady who vowed virginity 106 6. Why he
obtaines not his Ladies favor. 93
Epigrams 1. A rul^ for Courtiers. 66 2. For a looking glass 5 3. On a limping
Cuccold. 67 4. On a painted Curtezan. 66 5. On Crambo a low^ie shifter. 67 6.
To A. S. 46 7. To all poor scholars. 64 8. To his friends. 65 9. To Sir Phi.
Sidney. 162 10. Translations (...) of Martial. 63 11. Ad p^ssimos Coniuges. 65
12. In Asinium. 60 13. In Aulam. 65 14. In Aul^m. 67 15. In Quintu^. ibid. 19.
In Saba^. ibid.
Epitaphes. 1. Upon the death of a child. 96 2. Upon the heart of King H. of
France and Poland. 202
Execration of his passed Love, see Sonnet. 10
F
Fabricius Curio his virtues, see Inscription. 5 Face see Poem 11. and
reporting Sonnet. Fair face and hard heart, see Poem* 11 Falling band. 6
Fan. ibid. Farewell to his unconstant Mistress, see Ode. 10 Fiction how a
Nymph was wounded by Cupid, see Egl. 5 Fortunes wheels. 5
G
Garden, see Poem. 40 Garters. 6 Girdle. 5 Glass. ibid. Gloves. ibid. Gift,
see Poem 28
H
Hand, see Madrigall. 14 Hand kerchiefe. 5 Hexameters to sir P. Sid. 162 His
heart arraigned of theft and acquitted, see Poem 13 Hopeless desire soon
withers and dies, see Poem. 14 Horace imitated. 59 Himnes. 1. In praise of
Music 167 2. In praise of Neptune. 183

I
In praise of a beggars life, see beggars life. 161 In praise of her eyes, see
Sonnet. 17 In praise of Music. see Him. 1 In praise of Neptune see Him. 2 In
praise of sir P. Sidney, see Epigram. 9 In praise of the two Countesses of
Cumberland and Warwick, see Sonnet. 41 In praise of the Sun, see Poem. 15
Inscriptions. 1. Of Ajax who killed himself, 58 2. Of Cato Vtican who slew
himself. 59 3. Of Clytemnestra and her Son Orestes. 57 4. Of Dido. 97 5. Of
Fabritius Curio. 58 6. Of ^mulus who was nursed by a she w^lse 58 7. Of Thisbe.
57
Inuectiue against his Lady, see Poem. 113 Inuectiue against Love, see Poem.
11 Inuectiue again women, see Poem. 16 Inuerted rimes of Love. 28 Ixion his
torments. 115
K
Kerchiefe, see Hand-Kerchiefe K. H. 3. Epitaph, see Epitaph. 2 Knives. 5
L
Lace 5 Ladies eyes serve Cupid for darts and fire, see P^. 19 Lawyer. 1 Lenn^y
in riming Phale^taks. 128 Looking glass. 5 Lottery presented before the late
Queen. 3 Lots 5 Love Eclipsed, see Son. 2 Love enters by fame, see Son. 46
Love is deadly sweetness, see Poem. 7 Love like childrens Physic, see Son.
7 Love punishable with love, see Son net. 19 Love the only price of love, see
Poem. 20 Lovers complaint, see Ode. 14 Loves allegory to a ship, see Son. 54
Loves anatomy, 197 Loves contention, see Son. 8 Laues contrarieties, see Po. 21
Loves description, see Son. 2 Loves discommodities, see Son. 20 Loves dispraise
and lovers folly. see Ode. 145 Loves hyperbol^s, see S^. 11 Loves inuectiue,
see Sonnet and Poem. 17 Loves natural comparisons, see Poem. 23 Loves
properties, see Po. 22 Lie wherein is glaunced at some general vices in sundry
states of men. 15
M
Madrigall. 1. Allusion upon the confusion of ^ahell. ^4 2. Answer to the
question what love was. 90 3. Cupid proved a (...). 89 4. For a kiss. 57 5.
For the hearts division. 111 6. He compares hims^ to a candle fly. 89 7. Her
outward gesture deceiving his inward hope. 127 8. Her praise is in her want.
ibid. 9. Of a Ladies dreaming that she saw her lover dead. 365 10. Of his loves
attire 21 11. Of love 149 12. Taken out of a Greek Epigram. 44 13. Of Cupid.
125 14. To her hand upon giving a Glove. ^ 15. Verbal love. 698 16. Upon a
kiss received. 75 19. Upon departure from his love. 85 18. Upon her beauty and
inconstancy. 92 19. Upon her commending of his verses. 96 20. Upon her hiding
her face from him. 92 21. Upon her long absence. 91 22. Upon his Mistress
sickness and his own death. 94 23. Upon his timorous silence in her presence.
91 24. Upon seeing his face in her eye. 92
Maid. 3. and 8 Married man. 3 Mariners song and speech. 4 Mask. 5 Meditation
upon the frailty of this life, see Poem. 2 Merchant. 2 Musicks praise, see
Hymn. 1
N
Necklace. 7 Neptunes praise, see Hymn. 2 Nutmeg. 7
O
Odes. 1. A comparison. 157 2. A defiance to disdainefull love. 153 3. A
Dialogue between him and his heart. 103 4. A Prosopopoeia wherein his heart
speaks to his Ladies breast. 86 5. Being in Italy desires her to write unto
him. 82 6. Cupids marriage with dissimulation. 144 7. Desire and hope. 126 8.
Disdain at variance with desire. 139 9. Dispraise of love and lovers folly.
145 10. His farewell to his unconstant Mistress. 85 11. His Lady condemned of
ignorance or cruelty. 100 12. His restless estate. 76 13. In commendatio^ of
her beauty. 88 14. Lovers complaint. 133 15. Of absence and time. 205 16. Of
Cynthia. 212 17. Petition for leave to die. 132 18. That all creatures have
abiding in heaven, hell, or in one of the four Elements, but Man in all of
them. 90 19. That only her beauty and voice please him. 71 20. The more favor
he obtaines the more he desires. 121 21. The tomb of dead desire. 154 22. To
her eyes. 138 23. To his heart. 151 24. To his Muse. 147 25. Unhappy eyes. 135
26. Upon a countersaite answer. 86 27. Upon her absence. 130 28. Upon
protestation of kind affection. 78 29. Upon visiting his Lady by Moone-light.
130 30. Where his Ladie-keepes his heart. 120
Of absence and time, see Ode. 15 Of Cupid, see Eglogue. 5 Of Cynthia, see Ode.
16 Of love matters out of Anacreon: see Anacreon
P
Pair of Bracelets. 6 Pair of garters. 5 Pair of gloves. 5 Pair of sizzers.
6 Pair of writing tables. 6 Palenesse, see Poem. 43 Passionate Pris. see
Poem. 35 Pastorals. 1. Eglogue of Eubulus and Astrea. 59 2. Gratulatory made
by Sir Philip Sidney. 17 3. In dispraise of a courtly life. 19 4. Of Cuddy. 68
Petition to have her leave to die, see Ode. 15 Petrarcks description of love,
see Sonnet. 2 Petrarcks Sonnet, pace non trouo. etc. see Sonnet. 22
Phaleuciacks of love. 141. and 146 Phaleuciacks of Wisd. 173 Physician. 2
Picture, see Son. 25 Plain ring. 5 Pockes, see Poem. 46 Poemes. 1. A living
death. 170 2. A meditation upon the frailty of this life. 187 3. An inuectiue
against love. 156 4. Break heavy heart. 169 5. Care will not let him live, nor
hope let him die. 163 6. Cupid shootes light, but w^und sore. 155 7. Deadly
sweetness. 142 8. Death in love. 168 9. Desires government. 169 10. Dispraise
of love, and lovers folly. 165 11. Fair face, and hard heart. 157 12. Her
outward Iesture deceiving inward hope. 145 13. His heart arraigned of theft,
and acquitted. 140 14. Hopeless desire soon withers and dies. 171 15. In
praise of the Sun. 166 16. Inuectiue against his lady. 174 17. Inuectiue
against love. 169 18. Inuectiue against women. 209 19. Ladies eyes, wherefore
they serve. 143 20. Love the only price of love. 139 21. Loves contrarieties.
170 22. Loves properties. 170 23. Natural comparisons with Perfect love. 191
24. Of bearance and silence. 209 25. Of conceit, affection and desire. 201 26.
Of Corrinnaes singing. 199 27. Of his Mistress face. 198 28. Of love gift. 213
29. Of silence. 209 30. Of the first inhabiting this I Will by Brute and the
Trojans. 160 31. That he is unchangeable. 147 32. That love is unlike in
beggars and in kings. 182 33. The Anatomy of love, per ignotum. 214. 34. The
Christian Stoicke 71 35. The effects of absence and presence. 151 36. The
passionate prisoner. 171 37. The true love knot. 206 38. To her eyes. 138 39.
To his eyes. 148 40. To his Ladies Garden. 203 41. To time. 186 42. Upon
beginning without making an end. 113 43. Upon her absence. 150 44. Upon her
palenesse. 199 45. Upon his L^* buying of Lut^ strings. 142 46. Upon his ladies
sickness of the small Pocks. 189 47. Upon seeing his face in her eye. 92
Posie of a Ring. 5 Prayer Book. 6 Praise of Beggars life, see Beggars life.
Praise of her eyes, see Son. 17 Praise of Music, see Hymn. 1 Praise of sir
Philip Sidney, see Epigram. 9 Praise of the two Countesses of Cumberland and
Warwick, see Son. 41 Prosopop^ia 86 Purse. 5
Quatraine. 94
R
Reporting sonnet of praise. 200 Ring plain 5 Rings posie. 182 Romulus, who
was nursed by a she wolf, see Inscrip. 4 Round-lay very pretty in inuerted
Rimes 28
S
Samuel Daniel, Prince of English Poets. 95 Sapphicks upon the passion of
Christ 166 Scarffe 6 Sickness, see Poem 29 Sickness and recovery, see
Sonnet. 23 Silence, see Poem* 29 Sisyphus his Torment 115 Sizzers 6 Snufkin
ibid. Song in praise of a Beggars life. 162 Sonnets. 1. A Pr^sepopoeia between
him and his Lady. 86 2. A true description of love. 197 3. Allegory of his love
to a ship. 11 4. Allusion to Theseus bis voy^g 10 against the Minotaure. 167 5.
An inuectiue against love. 1^9 6. Comparison of his heart to a tempest-beaten
she. 105 7. Compared by childrens Physic. 207 8. Contention of Love and
reason. 101 9. Desire has conquered revenge. 128 10. Execration of his passed
love. 116 11. He calls his senses as witnesses of her virtues. 99 12. He
demands pardon for looking, loving, and writing. 98 13. He desires leave to
write to his love. 108 14. He paints out his torments. 115 15. Her beauty makes
him live even in despair. 104 16. His sighs and tears are bootlesse. 104 17.
In praise of her eyes. 99 18. In protestation of love. 58 19. Love punishable
with love. 98 20. Loves discommodities, 115 21. Loves Hyperboles 113 22. Of
Fran. Petrarcha. 114 23. Of her sickness and recovery. 180 24. Of his Ladies
Picture. 697 26. Of his Ladies weeping, 102 27. Of his own and his Mi^es
sickness. ^79 28. Of ^gring love. 112 29. Of re^iting the heart being (by
poetical fiction) once severed. 209 30. Of the Moon. 118 31 Of the Sun 117
32. Of the impossibility to dissemble love. 70 33. Of unfeigned love. 38 34.
That he cannot leave to love, though commanded. 108 35. That love made him a
Poet. ibid. 36. That she has greater poweroner his happiness and life, then
either fortune, fate or stars. 101 37. That time cannot end or diminish Love.
112 38. To Mistress Diana. 62 39. To Pity. 71 40. To prove love. 38 41. To
the two Countesses of Cum berland and Warwick. 196 42. Upon a gold Rings
poesy. 182 43. Upon acknowledgement of desert, rejecting affection, with the
Answers. 84 44. Upon her commending his verses. 89 45. Upon her looking out of
a Window. 181 46. Upon loves entering by fame. 190 47. Upon loves entering by his
Ears. 178 48. Upon presenting of a new yeares-gift. 94 49. Upon the lovers
absence from his Lady. 91 50. Upon the 7 deadly sins. 195 51. Vherein the
Lover begges but his Ladies heart. 190 52. Why her lips yield him no (...) of
comfort. 120
Soldier. 1 Sphec^ of Graie^ Inn Mask presented before the Q. 71 Stomacher.
6 Strephons Palinode. 27
T
That time cannot end or diminish love. 112 Ten Sonnets to Philomel. 178 The
bellish torments of Tantalus Titius, Ixion, Sisyphus, and the Belides. 115 The
Lie, see Lie, 15 The Lots, see lots. 5 The Mask, see Mask. 71 The mean
estate is best. 20 The tomb of dead desire see Ode. 154 Thisbe, see
inscription. 1 Time, see Ode. 15 To her eyes, see Poem 38 To his eyes, see
Poem. 39 To his heart, see Ode. 23 To his Ladies garden, see Poem. 40 To his
Muse, see Ode. 24 Tongue, see reporting Sonnet. To time, see Poem. 4 True
lovers knot. 191
V
Verbal love, Urania her Answer. (...)
W
Widow. ^ Wife. Wisdom, see Phaleuc. 2 Wit, see reporting Sonnet. Woman's
weight in Latin and English. 132 Women's hearts and inconstancy, see Elegy, 4
Women's inconstancy, see Madrigall. 18 Women's Innectine, see Poem. 18 Wonders
of the world never yet descried. 1
D. P.

YET OTHER TWELVE WONders of the World, never before published, By JOHN DAVIS.
I. The Courtier.
LOng have I lived in Court, yet learned not all this while
To sell poor suitors, smoke: nor where I hate to smile:
Superiors to adore, inferiors to despise,
To fly from such as fall, to follow such as rise,
To cloak a poor desire under a rich array,
Not to aspire by vice, though twere the quicker way.
II. The Divine.
My calling is Divine, and I from God am sent,
I will no chop-church be, nor pay my patron rent,
Nor yield to sacrilege, but like the kind true mother,
Rather will loose all the child, then part it with another.
Much wealth I will not seek, nor worldly masters serve,
So to grow rich and fat, while my poor flock does sterue
III. The Soldier.
My occupation is the noble trade of Kings,
The trial that decides the highest right of things:
Though MARS my Master be, I do not VENUS love,
Nor honor BACCHVS often, nor often swear by LOVE:
Of speaking of my self, I all occasion shun,
And rather love to do, then boast what I have done.
IIII. The Lawyer.
The Law my calling is, my robe, my tongue, my pen,
Wealth and opinion gain, and make me Judge of men,
The known dishonest cause, I never did defend,
Nor spun out suits in length, but wished and sought an end:
Nor counsel did bewray, nor of both parties take,
Nor ever took I see for which I never spoke.
V. The Physician.
I study to uphold the slipperie state of man,
Who dies, when we have done the best and all we can.
From practice and from books I draw my learned skill,
Not from the known receipt of Pothecaries bill.
The earth my faults does hide, the world my cures does see.
What youth and time effects, is often ascrib'de to me.
VI. The Merchant.
My trade does every thing, to every land supply,
Discover unknown coasts, strange Countries does ally:
I never did forestall, I never did ingrosse,
Nor custom did withdraw, though I returned with loss.
I thrive by fair exchange, by selling and by buying,
And not by Jewish use, reprisall, fraud, or lying.
VII. The Country-Gentleman.
Though strange outla^dish spirits praise towns, and country scorn
The country is my home, I dwell where I was born:
There profit and command, with pleasure I partake,
Yet do not Hawks, and dogs, my sole companions make.
I rule, but not oppress, end quarrels, not maintain,
See towns, but dwell not there t'abridg my charg or train
VIII. The Bacheler.
How many things as yet are dear alike to me,
The field, the horse, the dog, love arms or liberty.
I have no wife as yet, whom I may call mine own,
I have no children yet, that by my name are known.
Yet if I married were, I would not wish to thrive,
If that I could not tame the veriest shrew alive.
IX. The married man.
I only am the man among all married men,
That do not wish the Priest, to be vnlinkt again:
And though my shoo did wring, I would not make my moan
Nor think my neighbors chance more happy then mine own
Yet court I not my wife, but yield observance due,
Being neither fond, nor cross, nor jealous, nor untrue.
X. The Wife.
The first of all our Sex came from the side of man,
I thither am returned, from whence our sex began.
I do not visit often, nor many, when I do:
I tell my mind to few, and that in counsel too.
I seem not sick in health, nor sullen but in sorrow,
I care for somewhat else, then what to wear to morrow.
XI. The Widow.
My husband knew, how much his death would grieve me,
And therefore left me wealth to comfort and relieve me.
Though I no more will have, I must not love disdain,
PENELOPE her self did suitors entertain.
And yet to draw on such, as are of best esteem,
Nor younger then I am, nor richer will I seem.
XII. The Maid.
I marriage would forswear, but that I hear men tell,
That she that dies a maid, must lead an Ape in hell.
Therefore if fortune come, I will not mock and play,
Nor drive the bargain on, till it be driven away.
Titles and lands I like, yet rather fancy can,
A man that wants gold, then gold that wants a man.
A Lottery presented before the late Queens Majesty at the Lord Chancellors
house. 1601.
A Mariner with a box under his arm, containing all the se^erall things
following, supposed to come from the Carricke, came into the Presence singing
this Song.

CYNTHIA Queen of Seas and lands,
That fortune every where commands,
Sent forth Fortune to the Sea,
To try her fortune every way.
There did I fortune meet, which makes me now to sing,
There is no fishing to the Sea, nor service to the King.
All the Nymphs of THETIS train,
Did CYNTHIAES fortune entertain:
Many a jewel, many a iem,
Was to her fortune brought by them.
Her fortune sped so well, as makes me now to sing,
There is no fishing to the Sea, nor service to the King.
Fortune that it might be seen,
That she did serve a royal Queen,
A frank and royal hand did bear,
And cast her favors every where.
Some toies fell to my share, which makes me now to sing
There is no fishing to the Sea, nor service to the King.
And the Song ended, he uttered this short speech.

GOd save you fair Ladies all: and for my part, if ever I be brought to
answer my sins, God forgive me my sharking, and lay usury to my charge. I
am a Mariner, and am now come from the sea, where I had the fortune to light
upon these few trifles. I must confess I came but lightly by them, but I no
sooner had them, but I made a vow that as they came to my hands by fortune, so
I would not part with them but by fortune. To that end I have ever since
carried these Lots about me, that if I met with fit company I might divide my
booty among them. And now (I thank my good fortune) I am lighted into the best
company of the world, a company of the fairest Ladies that ever I saw. Come
Ladies try your fortunes, and if any light upon an unfortunate blanke, let her
think that fortune does but mock her in these trifles, and means to pleasure
her in greater matters.

THE LOTS.
1. Fortunes wheels.
FOrtune must now no more on triumph ride,
The wheels are yours that did her Chariots guide.
2. A Purse.
You thrive, or would, or may, your Lots a Purse,
Fill it with gold, and you are nere the worse.
3. A Mask.
Want you a Mask, here fortune gives you one,
Yet nature gives the Rose, and Lilly none.
4. A Looking Glass.
Blind fortune does not see how fair you be,
But gives a glass that you your self may see.
5. A Hand-kerchiefe.
Whether you seem to weep, or weep indeed,
This hand-kerchiefe will stand you well in steed.
6. A plain Ring.
Fortune does send you, hap it well or ill,
This plain gold Ring, to wed you to your will.
7. A Ring with this Poesy, As faithful as I find.
Your hand by Fortune on this Ring does light,
And yet the words do hit your humor right.
8. A pair of Gloves.
Fortune these gloves to you in challenge sends,
For that you love not fools that are her friends.
9. A dozen of Points.
You are in every point a lover true,
And therefore fortune gives the points to you.
10. A Lace.
Give her the Lace that loves to be straight laced,
So fortunes little gift, is aptly placed.
11. A pair of Knives.
Fortune does give this pair of knives to you,
To cut the thread of love if ^ be not true.
12. A Girdle.
By fortunes Girdle you may happy be,
But they that are less happy are more free.
13. A pair of writing Tables.
These Tables may contain your thoughts in part,
But write not all that's written in your heart.
14. A pair of Garters.
Though you have fortunes Garters, you must be
More staide and constant in steps then she.
15. A Coyfe and Cross cloth.
Frown in good earnest, or be sick in jest,
This Coife and Crosse-cloth will become you best.
16. A Scarf.
Take you this Scarf, bind CUPID hand and foot,
So love must ask you leave before he shoot.
17. A falling Band.
Fortune would have you rise, yet guides your hand,
From others Lots to take the falling band.
18. A Stomacher.
This Stomacher is full of windows wrought,
Yet none through them can see into your thought.
19. A pair of Sizzers.
These Sizzers do your huswifery bewray;
You love to work, though you were borne to play.
20. A Chain.
Because you scorn loves Captive to remain,
Fortune has sworn to lead you in a Chain.
21. A Prayer Book.
Your fortune may prove good another day,
Till fortune come, take you a book to pray.
22. A Snuftkin.
It Is Summer yet, a Snuftkin is your Lot,
But it will be winter one day, doubt you not.
23. A Fan.
You love to see, and yet to be unseen,
Take you this fan to be your beauties skreene.
24. A pair of Bracelets.
Lady your hands are fallen into a snare,
For CVPIDS manacles these bracelets are.
25. A Bodkin.
Even with this Bodkin you may live unharmed,
Your beauty is with virtue so well armed.
26. A Necklace.
Fortune gives your fair neck this lace to wear,
God grant a heavier yoke it never bear.
27. A Cushinet.
To her that little cares what Lot she winnes,
Chance gives a little cushinet to stick pinnes.
28. A Dyall.
The dyal's yours, watch time lest it be lost,
Yet they most lose it that do watch it most.
29. A Nutmeg with a blanke parchment in it.
This Nutmeg holds a blanke, but chance does hide i^:
Write your own wish, and Fortune will provide i^.
30. Blanke.
Wot you not why fortune gives you no prize,
Good faith she saw you not, she wants her eyes.
30. Blanke
You are so dainty to be pleased, God wot,
Chance knows not what to give you for a Lot.
32. Blanke.
It Is pity such a hand should draw in vain,
Though it gain naught, yet shall it pity gain.
33. Blanke.
Nothing's your Lot, that is more then can be told,
For nothing is more precious then gold.
34. Blanke.
You feign would have, but what, you cannot tell:
In giving nothing fortune serves you well.
FINIS.
I. D.

A contention betwixt a Wife, a Widow and a Maid.
Wife. Widow well met, whither go you to day?
Will you not to this solemn offering go,
You know it is ASTREAS holy day:
The Saint to whom all hearts devotion owe.

Widow. Marry what else? I purposed so to do,
Do you not mark how all the wives are fine,
And how they have sent presents ready too,
To make their offering at ASTREAS sh^ine?
See then the shrine and tapers burning bright,
Come friend and let us first our selves advance,
We know our place, and if we have our right,
To all the parish we must lead the dance.
But soft what means this bold presu^ptuous maid staide,
To go before without respect of us?
Your forwardness (proud maid) must now be
Where learnd you to neglect your betters thus?

Maid. Elder you are, but not my betters here,
This place to maids a privilege must give:
The Goddess being a maid holds maidens dear
And grants to them her own prerogative.
Besides, on all true virgins at their birth,
Nature has sent a crown of excellence,
That all the wives and widows of the earth,
Should give them place and do them reverence.

Wife. If to be borne amaid be such a grace,
So was I borne and graced by nature to,
But seeking more perfection to embrace
I did become a wife as others do.

Widow. And if the maid and wife such honor have,
I have been both, and hold a third degree,
Most maids are Wards, and every wife a slave,
I have my livery sued, and I am free.

Maid. That is the fault that you have maidens been,
And were not constant to continue so:
The fall of Angels did increase their sin,
In that they did so pure a state forgo.
But Wife and Widow if your wits can make,
Your state and persons of more worth then mine:
Advantage to this place I will not take:
I will both place and privilege resign.

Wife. Why marriage is an honorable state,


Widow. And widowhood is a reverend degree:


Maid. But maidenhead that will admit no mate,
Like majesty it self must sacred be.

Wife. The wife is mistress of her family,


Widow. Much more the widow, for she rules alone:


Maid. But mistress of mine own desires am I,
When you rule others wills and not you own.

Wife. Only the wife enioyes the virtuous pleasure,


Widow. The widow can abstain from pleasures known:


Maid. But th'vncorrupted maid preserues such measure
As being by pleasures wooed she cares for none.

Wife. The wife is like a fair supported vine,


Widow. So was the widow, but now stands alone:
For being grown strong, she needs not to incline

Maid. Maids like the earth, supported are of none.


Wife. The wife is as a Diamond richly set,


Maid. The maid unset does yet more rich appear,


Widow. The widow a Jewel in the Cabinet,
Which though not worn is still esteemd as dear.

Wife. The wife does love, and is beloved agai^e,


Widow. The widow is awakt out of that dream,


Maid. The maids white mind had never such a stain,
No passion troubles her clear virtues stream.
Yet if I would be loved, loved would I be,
Like her whose virtue in the bay is seen:
Love to wife fades with satietie,
Where love never enjoyed is ever green.

Widow. Then what is a virgin but a fruitless bay?


Maid. And what is a widow but a rose-lesse bryer?
And what are wives, butwoodbinds which decay
The stately Oaks, by which themselves aspire?

Widow. And what is marriage but a teadious yoke?
And what virginity but sweet self-love?

Wife. And what is a widow but an axell broke?
Whose* one part failing neither part can move?

Widow. Wives are as birds in golden cages kept,


Wife. Yet in those cages chearefully they sing:


Widow. Widows are birds out of those cages lept,
Whose joyful notes makes all the forest ring.

Maid. But maids are birds amidst the woods secure,
Which never hand could touch, nor net could take
Nor whistle could deceive, nor bait allure,
But free unto themselves do music make.

Wife. The wife is as the turtle with her mate,


Widow. The widow as the widow dove alone*
Whose truth shines most in her forsaken state,

Maid. The maid a Phoenix, and is still but one.


Wife The wife's a soul unto her body tied,


Widow The widow a soul departed into bliss:


Maid The maid an Angel which was stellified,
And now t'as fair a house descended is.

Wife Wives are fair houses kept and furnished well,


Widow Widows old castles void, but full of state:


Maid But maids are temples where the Gods do dwell,
To whom alone themselves they dedicate.
But marriage is a prison during life,
Where one way out, but many entries be:

Wife. The Nun is kept in cloister, not the wife,
Wedlock alone does make the virgin free.

Maid The maid is ever fresh, like morn in May,


Wife The wife with all her beams is beautified,
Like to high noone the glory of the day,

Widow The widow like a mild sweet euentide.


Wife An office well supplide is like the wife.


Widow The widow like a gainefull office void:


Maid But maids are like contentment in this life,
Which all the world have sought, but none enioid,

Widow Go wife to Dunmow, and demand your flitch.
Go gentle maid, go lead the Apes in hell.

Wife Go widow make some younger brother rich,
And then take thought and die, and all is well.

Widow Alas poor maid, that have no help nor stay:
Alas poor wife, that nothing do possess:

Maid Alas poor widow, charity does say,
Pity the widow and the fatherless.

Widow But happy widows have the world at will,


Wife But happier wives, whose joys are ever double:


Maid But happiest maids whose hearts are calm and still,
Who^ fear, nor hope, nor love nor hate does troble.

Wife Every true wife has an indented heart,
Wherein the covenants of love are writ,
Whereof her husband keeps the counterpart,
And reads his comforts and his joys in it,

Widow But every widows heart is like a book,
Where her joys past imprinted do remain,
But when her judgments eye therein does look*
She does not wish they were to come again.

Maid But the maids heart a fair white table is,
Spotless and pure, where no impressions be,
But the immortal Caracters of bliss,
Which only God does write, and Angels see.

Wife But wives have children, what a joy is this?


Widow Widows have children too, but maids have none


Maid No more have Angels, yet they have more bliss,
Then ever yet to mortal man was known.

Wife The wife is like a fair manured field:


Widow. The widow once was such, but now does rest,


Maid The maid, like Paradise, undressed, vntil'd,
Bears crops of native virtue in her breast.

Wife Who would not die a wife as Lucrece died?


Widow Or live a Widow as Penelope?


Maid Or be a maid, and so be stellified,
As all the virtues and the graces be.

Wife Wives are warm Climates well inhabited:
But maids are frozen Zones where none may dwell

Maid But fairest people in the North are bred,
Where Africa breeds Monsters black as hell.

Wife I have my husbands honor and his place,


Widow My husbands fortunes all survive to me.


Maid The moon does borrow light, you borrow grace
When maids by their own virtues graced be.
White is my color, and no hew but this
It will receive, no tincture can it stain.

Wife My white has took one color, but it is
An honorable purple dyed in grain.

Widow But it has been my fortune to renew
My color twice from that is was before,
But now my black will take no other hue,
And therefore now I mean to change no more.

Wife. Wives are fair Apples served in golden dishes


Widow widows good wine, which time maks better much


Maid But Maids are grapes desired by many wishes,
But that they grow so high as none can touch.

Wife. I have a daughter equals you my girl.


Maid The Daughter does excel the mother then,
As pearls are better then the mother of pearl,
Maids loose their value, when they match with me^.

Widow. The man with who^ I matched, his worth was such,
As now I scorn a maid should be my pear,

Maid. But I will scorn the man you praise so much,
For maids are matchles, and no mate can bear.
Hence is it that the virgin never loves,
Because her like, she finds not any where:
For likeness evermore affection moves,
Therefore the maid has neither love nor pear.

Wife Yet many virgins married wives would be,


Widow And many a wife, would be a widow feign.


Maid There is no widow but desires to see,
If so she might, her maiden days again.

Wife There never was a wife that liked her lot:


Widow Nor widow but was clad in mourning weeds.


Maid Do what you will, marry, or marry not,
Both this estate and that, repentance breeds.

Wife. But she that this estate and that has seen,
Does find great ods between the wife and girl.

Maid Indeed she does, as much as is between
The melting hayle stone, and the solid pe^le.

Wife. If I were widow, my merry days were past,


Widow Nay, then you first become sweet pleasures guest.
For mayden*head is a continual fast,
And marriage is a continual feast.

Maid Wedlock indeed has o^t compared bin,
To public ^easts, were meet a public rout;
Where they that are without would feign go in,
And they that are within would feign go out.
Or to the Jewel which this virtue had,
That men were mad till they might it obtain,
But when they had it they were twice as mad,
Till they were dispossessed of it again.

Wife Maids cannot judge, because they cannot tell,
What comforts and what joys in marrige be:

Maid Yes, yes, though blessed Saints in heaven do dwell,
They do the souls in Purgatory see.

Widow If every wife do live in Purgatory,
Then sure it is that widows live in bliss:
And are translated to a state of glory,
But maids as yet have not attaind to this.

Maid Not maids? To spotless maids this gift is given,
To live in incorruption from their birth:
And what is that but to inherit heaven,
Even while they dwell upon the spotted earth?
The perfectest of all created things;
The purest gold that suffers no allay:
The sweetest flower that on the earths bosom springs,
The pearl vnbord, whose price no price can pay.
The Crystal glass that will no venom hold,
The mirror wherein Angels love to look:
DIANAES bathing fountain, clear and cold,
Beauties fresh Rose, and virtues living book.
Of love and fortune both the mistress borne,
The sovereign spirit that will be thrall to none:
The spotless garment that was never worn,
The Princely Eagle that still flies alone.
She sees the world, yet her clear thought does take
No such deep print as to be changed thereby,
As when we see the burning fire does make,
No such impression as does burn the eye.

Wife No more (sweet maid) our strife is at an end,
Cease now: I fear we shall transformed be
To chattering Pies* as they that did contend,
To match the Muses in their harmony.

Widow Then let us yield the honor and the place,
And let us both be suitors to the maid:
That since the Goddess gives her special grace,
By her clear hands the offering be conuaide,

Maid Your speech I doubt has some displeasure moved
Yet let me have the offering, I will see:
I know she has both wives and widows loved,
Though she would neither wife nor widow be.

JOHN DAVIS.

THE LIE.
Go soul the bodies guest
upon a thankelesse arrant,
Fear not to touch the best
the truth shall be thy warrant:
Go since I needs must die,
and give the world the lie.
Say to the Court it glowes,
and shines like rotten wood,
Say to the Church it shows
what is good, and does no good.
If Church and Court reply,
then give them both the lie.
Tell Potentates they live
acting by others action,
Not loved unless they give,
not strong but by affection.
If Potentates reply,
give Potentate; the lie.
Tell men of high condition,
that manage the estate,
Their purpose is ambition,
their practice only hate:
And if they once reply,
then give them all the lie.
Tell them that brave it most,
they beg for more by spending,
Who in their greatest cost
like nothing but commending.
And if they make reply,
then give them all the lie.
Tell zeal it wants devotion
tell love it is but lust,
Tell time it meets but motion,
tell flesh it is but dust.
And wish them not reply
for thou must give the lie.
Tell age it daily wastes,
tell honor how it alters.
Tell beauty how she blasteth
tell favor how it falters
And as they shall reply,
give every one the lie.
Tell wit how much it wrangles
in tickle points of nycenesse,
Tell wisdom she en tangles
her self in over wisenesse.
And when they do reply
straight give them both the lie.
Tell Physic of her boldness,
tell skill it is prevention:
Tell charity of coldness,
tell law it is contention,
And as they do reply
so give them still the lie.
Tell fortune of her blindness,
tell nature of decay,
Tell friendship of unkindness,
tell justice of delay.
And if they will reply,
then give them all the lie.
Tell Arts they have no soundness,
but vary by esteeming,
Tell schools they want profoundnes
and stand so much on seeming.
If Arts and schools reply,
give arts and schools the lie.
Tell faith its fled the City,
tell how the country erreth,
Tell manhood shakes of pity,
tell virtue least preferred.
And if they do reply,
spare not to give the lie.
So when thou have as I,
commanded thee, done blabbing,
Because to give the lie,
deserves no less then stabbing,
Stab at thee he that will,
no stab thy soul can kill.
Two Pastorels, made by Sir Phillip Sidney. Upon his meeting with his two
worthy Friends, and fellow Poets, Sir Edward Dier, and M. Fulke Greuill.
Join mates in mirth to me,
Grant pleasure to our meeting:
Let Pan our good God see,
How grateful is our greeting*
Join hearts and hands, so let it be,
Make but one mind in bodies three.
Ye Hymns and singing skill
Of God APOLLOES giving,
Be pressed our reeds to fill,
With sound of music living.
Join hearts and hands, etc.
Sweet ORPHEUS Harp, whose sound
The steadfast mountains moved,
Let here thy skill abound,
To join sweet friends beloved.
Join hearts and hands, etc.
My two and I be met,
A happy blessed Trinity,
As three most jointly set,
In firmest band of unity.
Join hands, etc.
Welcome my two to me, E. D. F. G. P. S.
The number best beloved,
Within my heart you be
In friendship vnremooued.
Join hands, etc.
Give leave your flocks to range,
Let us the while be playing,
Within the Elmy grange,
Your flocks will not be straying.
Join hands, etc.
Cause all the mirth you can,
Since I am now come hither,
Who never joy but when
I am with you together.
Join hands, etc.
Like lovers do their love,
So joy I, in you seeing:
Let nothing me remove
From always with you being.
Join hands, etc.
And as the turtle Dove
To mate with whom he lives,
Such comfort, fervent love
Of you to my heart gives.
Join hands, etc.
Now joined be our hands,
Let them be never asunder,
But linkt in binding bands
By metamorphoz'd wonder.
So should our severed bodies three
As one for ever joined be.
Sir PH. SIDNEY.

Dispraise of a Courtly life.
WAlking in bright PHO^BVS blaze,
Where with heat oppressed I was,
I got to a shady wood,
Where green leaves did newly bud
And of grass was plenty dwelling,
Decked with pide flowers sweetly smelling.
In this wood a man I met,
On lamenting wholly set:
Ruing change of wonted state,
Whence he was transformed late,
Once to Shepherds God retaining*
Now in servile Court remaining.
There he wandering malcontent,
Up and down perplexed went,
Daring not to tell to me,
Spoke unto a senseless tree,
One amongst the rest electing
These same words, or this effecting.
My old mates I grieve to see,
Void of me in field to be,
Where we once our lovely sheep,
Lovingly like friends did keep,
Often each others friendship proving,
Never striving, but in loving.
But may Love abiding be
In poor shepherds base degree?
It belongs to such alone
To whom art of Love is known:
Seely shepherds are not witting
What in art of Love is fitting.
Nay, what need the art to those,
To whom we our love disclose?
It is to be used then,
When we do but flatter men:
Friendship true in heart assured,
Is by natures gifts procured.
Therefore shepherds wanting skill,
Can Loves duties best fulfill,
Since they know not how to feign,
Nor with Love to cloak Disdain:
Like the wiser sort, whose learning
Hides their inward will of harming.
Well was I, while under shade
Oaten Reeds me music made,
Striving with my mates in Song:
Mixing mirth our Songs among,
Greater was the shepherds treasure,
Then this false, fine, courtly pleasure.
Where, how many Creatures be,
So many puffed in mind I see,
Like to Iunoes birds of pride,
Scarce each other can abide:
Friends like to black Swans apearing
Sooner these than those in hearing.
Therefore Pan, if thou may be
Made to listen unto me,
Grant I say (if seely man
May make treaty to God Pan)
That I, without thy denying,
May be still to thee relying.
Only for my two loves sake, Sir Ed. D. and M. F. G
In whose love I pleasure take,
Only two do me delight
With their euer-pleasing sight,
Of all men to thee retaining.
Grant me with those two remaining.
So shall I to thee always,
With my reeds sound mighty praise,
And first Lamb that shall befall,
Yearly deck thine Altar shall,
If it please thee to be reflected,
And I from thee not rejected.
So I left him in that place,
Taking pity on his case,
Learning this among the rest
That the mean estate is best,
Better filled with contenting
Void of of wishing and repenting.
Sir Ph. Sidney.

A Fiction how Cupid made a Nymph wound her self with his Arrows.
IT chanst of late a Shepherds swain
That went to seek a straied sheep,
Within a thicket on the plain,
Espide a dainty Nymph asleep.
Her golden hair ore-spred her face,
Her careless arms abroad were cast,
Her quiver had her pillowes place,
Her breast lay bare to every blast.
The shepherd stood and gazed his fill,
Naught durst he do, naught durst he say,
When chance, or else perhaps his will,
Did guide the God of love that way.
The crafty boy that sees her sleep,
Whom if she wak't he durst not see,
Behind her closely seeks to creep,
Before her nap should ended be.
There come, he steals her shaftes away,
And puts his own into their place,
Ne dares he any longer stay,
But ere she wakes, hies thence apace.
Scarce was he gone, when she awakes,
And spies the shepherd standing by:
Her bended bow in have she takes,
And at the simple swain let fly.
Forth flew the shaft, and pierst his heart.
That to the ground he fell with pain:
Yet up again forth with he start,
And to the Nymph he ran amain.
Amaz'de to see so strange a sight,
She shot, and shot, but all in vain:
The more his wounds, the more his ^ght.
Love yields strength in midst of pain.
Her angry eyes are great with tears,
She blames her hands, she blames her skill:
The bluntness of her shafts she fears,
And try them on her self she will.
Take heed sweet Nymph, trynot thy shaft,
Each little touch will prick the heart:
Alas, thou know not CVPIDS craft,
Revenge is joy, the end is smart.
Yet try she will, and prick^ some bare,
Her hands were glou'd, and next to hand
Was that fair breast, that breast so rare,
That made the shepherd senseless stand.
That breast she pricked, and through that breast*
Love finds an entry to her heart:
At feeling of this new-come guest,
Lord how the gentle Nymph does start.
She runs not now, she shootes no more,
Away she throws both shaftes and bow*
She seeks for that she shunned before,
She thinks the shepherds have too slow.
Though mountains meet not, lovers may,
So others do, and so do they:
The God of Love sits on a tree,
And laughs that pleasant sight to see.
A Dialogue between two Shepherds, Thenot, and Piers, in praise of ASTREV.
Then. I Sing divine ASTREAS praise,
O muses help my wits to raise,
And heave my verses higher.

Piers. Thou needst the truth but plainly tell,
Which much I doubt thou can not well,
Thou art so often a liar.

Then. If in my song no more I show,
Then heaven and earth, and Sea do know,
Then truly I have spoken.

Piers. Suffices not no more to name,
But being no less, the like, the same,
Else laws of truth be broken.

Then. Then say, she is so good, so fair,
With all the earth she may compare,
Nor Momus self denying:

Piers. Compare may think where likeness holds,
Naught like to her the earth enfolds,
I looked to find you lying.

Then. Astrea sees with wisdoms sight,
Astrea works by Virtues might,
And jointly both do stay in her.

Piers. Nay take from them, her hand, her mind,
The one is lame, the other blind,
Shall still your lying stain her?

Then. Soon as Astrea shows her face,
Straight every ill auoids the place,
And every good abounds.

Piers. Nay long before her face does show,
The last does come, the first does go:
How loud this lie resoundeth.

Then. Astrea is our chiefest joy,
Our chiefest guard against annoy,
Our chiefest wealth, our treasure.

Piers. Where chiefest are, there others be,
To us none else but only she,
When will thou speak in measure?

Then. Astrea may be justly said,
A field in flowery Roabe arraid,
In season freshly springing.

Piers. That spring indures but shortest time,
This never leaves Astreas clime,
Thou lie, in stead of singing.

Then. As heavenly light that guides the day,
Right so does shine each lovely Ray,
that from Astrea flies.

Piers. Nay, darkness often that light in clouds,
Astreas beams no darkness shrowdes:
How loudly Thenot lies?

Then. Astrea rightly term I may,
A manly Palm, a maiden bay,
Her verdure never dying.

Piers. Palm often is crooked, bay is low,
She still upright, still high does grow,
Good Thenot leave thy lying.

Then. Then Piers, of friendship tell me why,
My meaning true, my words should lie,
And strive in vain to raise her?

Piers. Words from conceit do only rise
Above conceit her honor flies:
But silence, naught can praise her.

Mary Countess of Pembrooke.
A roundelay in inuerted Rimes, between the two friendly Riuals, Strephon and
Klaius, in the presence of Urania, Mistress to them both.
Strephon. O Whither shall I turn me,
From thine eyes sight,
Whose sparkling light
With quenchles flames present, and absent burn me?
For I burn when as I view them,
And I burn when I eschew them.

Klaius. Since I cannot eschew them,
But that their light
Is in my sight,
Both when I view them not, and when I view them:
Ere their flames will cease to burn me,
From my self, my self must turn me.

Strephon. When none are present by you,
I feel their might
And your eyes bright
Appear more glorious, others being nigh you.
So alone, or else compared,
Wretch, I am by them ensnared.

Klaius. Since that I am ensnared
by your eyes bright,
And feel their might:
Whether alone they be, or else compared,
Wheresoever I am nigh you,
Love I must, if I be by you.

Strephon. When you look kindly on me,
They love incite,
And spite of spite
I love them likewise, when you frown upon me.
So, how ere your looks are framed,
By your looks I am inflamed.

Klaius. Since that I am inflamed,
Even by their spite:
And they incite
Soul-warming flames when they are mildely framed,
How so ere you look upon me,
Love I must, if you look on me.

Strephon. O when shall I them banish,
Since against right,
Nor day nor night,
Though absent from me, from me they do vanish?
So no respite time does grant me,
But incessantly they haunt me.

Klaius. Since they (alas) do haunt me
Both day and night,
And wonted right,
Obtained by absence, absence does not grant me,
Night and day may sooner vanish,
Then from me I can them banish.

Strephon. They, when the Day does leave me,
Lodge in my spirit:
And of their sight,
No sight by day discerned can bereave me.
So, nor day ought else reuealeth,
Nor the night the same concealeth.

Klaius. Since day, like night concealeth
Each other sight,
And to my spirit
Concealing darkness them like day reuealeth.
Time of time must quite bereave me,
Ere your looks sweet looks, will leave.

Walter Dauison.

Strephons Palinde.
Strephon, upon some unkindness conceived, having made show to leave Urania, and
make love to another Nymph, was at the next solemn assembly of shepherds, not
only frowned upon by Urania, but commanded with great bitterness out of her
presence: Whereupon, sorry for his offense, and desirous to regaine her grace
whom he never had forsaken, but in show, upon his knees he in this song humbly
craves pardon: and Urania finding his true penitence, and unwilling to lose so
worthy a servant, receives him again into greater grace and favor then before.

SWeet, I do not pardon crau^,
Till I have,
By desires this fault amended:
This, I only this desire,
That your ire
May with penance be spended.
Not my will but fate did fetch
Me poor wretch,
Into this unhappy error.
Which to plague no Tyrants mind
Pain can find,
Like my hearts self guilty terror.
Then, O then! let that suffice
Your dear eyes
Need not, need not more afflict me,
Nor your sweet tongue dipped in gall,
Need at all
From your presence interdict me.
Unto him that hell sustaines.
No new pains
Need be sought for his tormenting.
O my pains, hels pains surpass:
Yet, alas!
You are still new pains inuenting.
By my love, long, firm, and true,
Borne to you.
By these tears my grief expressing,
By this Pipe which nights and days
sounds your praise
Pity me, my fault confessing.
Or if I may not desire,
That their ire
May with penance, be suspended:
Yet let me full pardon crave,
When I have,
With soon death my fault amended.
Vraniaes answer in inuerted Rimes, Staff for Staff.
SInce true penance has suspended
Fained ire,
More I Will grant then you desire.
Faults confessed are half amended,
And I have,
In this half, all that I crave.
Therefore banish now the terror,
Which you find
In your guiltless grieved mind.
For though you have made an error.
From me wretch
First beginning it did fetch.
Nere my sight I Will interdict thee
More at all.
Nere speak words more dipped in gall,
Nere, nere will I more afflict thee
With these Eyes,
What is past, shall now suffice.
Now new joys I Will be inuenting,
Which (alas)
May thy passed Woes surpass.
Too long thou have felt tormenting,
Too great pains
So great love and faith sustaines.
Let these eyes (by thy confessing
Worthy praise)
Never see more nights nor days.
Let my woes be past expressing,
When to you
I cease to be kind and true.
Thus are both our states amended,
For you have
Fuller pardon then you crave,
And my fear is quite suspended,
Since mine ire
Wrought the effect I most desire.
Fra. Dauison.

I. EGLOGVE.
A Shepherd poor, Eubulus called he was
(Poor now alas, but erst had jolly been)
One pleasant morn when as the Sun did pass
The fiery horns of raging Bull between,
His little Flock into a meade did bring,
As soon as daylight did begin to spring.
Fresh was the Meade, in Apri^s livery dight,
Decked with green Trees, bedewed with silver Brooks,
But ah! all other was the shepherds plight,
All other were both sheep and shepherds looks.
For both did show by their dull heavy cheer
They took no pleasure of the pleasant year.
He weeping went, ay me that he should weep!
They hung their heads, as they to weep would learn,
His heavy heart did send forth sighing deep,
They in their bleating voice did seem to yearne.
He lean and pale, their fleece was rough and rent
They pinde with pain, and he with dolours spent.
His pleasant Pipe was broke, (alas the while)
And former merriment was banished quite.
His shepherds Crook that him vpheld ere-while,
He erst had thrown away with great despite.
Tho leaning against a shrub that him sustained,
To the earth, sun, birds, trees, Echo thus he plained.
Thou all-forth-bringing earth, though winter chill,
With blustering winds blow off thy mantle green,
And with his Snow and hoary frostes do spill,
Thy Flora-pleasing flowers, and kill them clean.
Yet when fresh Spring returns again
To drive away the winters pain,
Thy Frost and Snow
Away do go.
Sweet Zephyres breath cold Boreas does displace,
And fruitful showers
Revive thy flowers,
And naught but joy is seen in every place.
But ah! how long, alas how long does last
My endless winter without hope of Spring?
How have my sighs, my blustering sighs defact
The flowers and buds which erst my earth did bring.
Alas the tops that did aspire,
Lie troaden now in filthy mire,
Alas! my head
Is all bespread
With too untimely snow: and eke my heart
All sense has lost,
Through hardened frost,
Of cold despair, that long has bred my smart.
What though some rising Torrents ouerflow
With nought-regarding streams thy pleasant green.
And with their furiou s force do lay full low,
Thy drowned flowers, how ever sweet they been?
Soon fall those floods, as soon they rose,
(For fury soon his force does lose,
And then full eath
Apolloes breath,
The cold, yet drying North-winde, so does warm,
That by and by
Thy meades be dry,
And grow more fruitful by their former harm.
O would the tears that Torrent-like do flow,
A down my hollow cheeks with restless force,
Would once (O that they could once) calmer grow,
Would like to thine, once cease their ceasses course.
Thine last not long, mine still endure:
Thine cold, and so thy wealth procure:
Hot mine are still,
And so do kill
Both flower and root, with most unkindly deaw:
What sun or wind
Away can find,
The root once dead, the flowers to renew?
Thou, though the scorching heat of Summers Sun,
(While ill-breath'd Dog the raging Lion chaseth)
Thy peckled flowers do make of color dun,
And pride of all thy greeny hair defaceth:
And in thy moisture wanting side,
Deep wounds do make, and gashes wide:
Yet as they weat,
By Phoebus heat,
To turn to wholesome dryness is procured.
So Phoebus heat
By South-windes weate
As soon assuaged, and al thy wounds recured.
Such heat as Phoebus has me almost slain.
As Phoebus heat? ah no, far worse then his.
It is Astreas burning-hot disdain
That parched has the root of all my bliss:
That has (alas) my youth defaced,
That in my face deep wounds has placed.
Ah that no heat
Can dry the weat
The flowing weate of my still weeping eyes!
Ah that no weat
Can quench the heat,
The burning heat within my heart that lies!
Thou do, poor earth, bear many a bitter stound,
While greedy swains forgetting former need,
With crooked plowes thy tender back do wound,
With harrowes biting teeth do make thee bleed,
But earth (so may those greedy swains
With pitteous eye behold thy pain)
O earth, tell me,
When thou do see,
Thy fruitful back with golden ears beset,
Does not that joy
Kill all annoy,
And make thee all thy former wounds forget?
And I, if once my tired heart might gain
The harvest fair that to my faith is due:
If once I might Astreas grace regaine:
If once her heart would on my sorrows rue,
Alas, I could these plaints forgo,
And quite forget my former woe.
But (O! to speak
My heart does break)
For all my service, faith, and patient mind,
A crop of grief,
Without relief,
A crop of scorn, and of contempt I find.
Soon as the shepherds Sarre abroad does wend,
(Nights harbinger) to shut in brightsome day:
And gloomy night, on whom black clouds attend,
Does Tyrant-like through Sky usurp the sway,
Thou art (poor earth) of sun deprived
Whose beams to thee all joy derived.
But when Aurore
Does open her door,
Her purple door to let in Phoebus waine,
The night gives place
Unto his race,
And then with joy, thy Sun returns again.
O would my Sun would once return again!
Return and drive away the infernal night,
In which I die, since she did first refrain
Her heavenly beams which were mine only light.
Iu^her alone all my light thin'd.
And since she shind not, I am blind.
Alas, on all,
Her beams do fall.
Save wretched me, whom she does them deny.
And blessed day
She gives always,
To all, but me, who still in darkness li^.
In mourneful darkness I alone do lie,
And wish, but scarcely hope, bright day to see,
For hoped so long, and wished so long have I,
As hopes and wishes both abandon me.
My night has lasted fifteen years,
And yet no glimpse of day appears.
O do not let,
Him that has set
His joy, his light, his life in your sweet grace,
Be vnrelieu'd,
And quite deprived
Of your dear sight, which may this night displace.
Phoebus, although with fiery-hoofed steedes,
Thou daily do the steepy Welkin beat,
And from this painful task art never freede,
But dailye bound to lend the world thy heat:
Though thou in fiery Chariot ride,
And burning heat thereof abide,
Yet soon as night
Does dim the light,
And hale her sable Cloak through vaulted skle,
Thy iournie's ceast,
And thou do rest,
In cooling waves of Thetis sovereignty.
Thrice happy Sun whose pains are eased by night,
O hapless I, whose woes last night and day.
My pains by day do make me wish for night,
My woes by night, do make me cry for day.
By day I turmoile up and down,
By night in Seas of tears I drown:
O painful plight*
O wretched night,
Which never finds a morn of joyful light:
O sad decay,
O wretched day,
That never feels the ease of silent night*
Ye chirping birds, whose notes might joy my mind,
(If to my mind one drop of joy could sink)
Who erst through Winters rage were almost pin de,
And kept through barren frost from meat or drink,
A blessed change ye now have seen,
That changed has your woeful teene,
By day you sing,
And make to ring
The neighbor groves with Echo of your song:
In silent night,
Full closely dight,
You soundly sleep the bushes green among.
But I, who erst (ah woeful word to say)
Enjoyed the pleasant spring of her sweet grace,
And then could sing and dance, and sport and play*
Since her fierce anger did my spring displace:
My nightly rest have turned to detriment,
To plaints have turned my wonted merriment.
The Songs I sing
While day does spring,
Are bootelesse plaints till I can plain no more.
The rest I taste,
While night does last:
Is broken sighs, till they my hartmake sore.
Thou flower of the field that erst did fade,
And nipt with Northern cold did hang the head:
And trees whose bared bows have lost their shade
Whose wit^ered leaves by western blasts were shed,
Ye 'gin to bud and spring again,
Winter is gone that did you strain.
But I that late
With upright gate
Bare up my head, while happy favor lasted:
Now old am grown
Now overthrown,
With woe, with grief, with wailing now am wasted.
Your springing stalk with kindly juice does sprout,
My fainting legs do wast and fall away:
Your stretched arms are clad with leaves about,
My griefe-consumed arms do fast decay.
You gin again your tops lift up;
I down to earth-ward gin to stoop.
Each bow and twig
Does wax so big,
That scarce the rind is able it to hide:
I do so faint,
And pine with plaint,
That slops and hose, and Galage wax too wide.
Echo, how well may she that makes me moan,
By thy example learn to ^ue my pain?
Thou hearst my plaints when as I wail alone,
And wailing accents answerest again.
When as my breast through grief I beat,
That woeful sound thou do repeat,
When as I sob,
And heartly throb,
A doleful sobbing sound again thou sendest:
And when I weep,
And sigh full deep,
A weepy, sighing Voice again thou lendest.
But ah! how often have my sad plaints assaide,
To pierce her ears, deaf only unto me?
How often my woes in mournful ink arraide
Have tried to make her eyes my griefs to see?
And you my sighs and tears, how often
Have ye sought her hard heart to soften?
And yet her eye,
Does still deny,
For all my woes one bitter tear to shed:
And yet her heart
Will not impart
One hearty sigh for grief herself has bred.
Nor I, alas, do wish that her fair eyes,
Her blessed-making eyes should shed a tear,
Nor that one sigh from her dear breast should rise,
For all the pains, the woes, the wrongs I bear.
First let this weight oppress me still,
Ere she, through me taste any ill.
Ah if I might
But gain her sight,
And show her ere I eye, my wretched case:
O then should I
Contented die:
But ah I die, and hope not so much grace.
With that his fainting legs to shrink, begun,
And let him sink with ghastly look to ground
And there he lay as though his life were done,
Till that his Dog, seeing that woeful stound
With pitteous howling, kissing and with scraping,
Brought him again from that sweet sour escaping.
Then began this Tears so swiftly for to flow,
As forced his eie-lids for to give them way,
Then blustering sighs too boistrously can blow,
As his weak lips could not his fury stay,
And inward grief withal so hugely sweld,
As tears, sighs, grief had soon all words expeld.
At last when floods of tears began to cease,
And storms of weary sighs more calm to blow
As he went on with words his grief to ease.
And remnant of his broken plaint to show:
He spide the sky ore-spread with nightly clouds,
So home he went, his flock and him to shrowde.
Eubulus his Emblem. Vni mihi Pergama Restant. F. D.

I. Eglogue entitled Cuddy.
1
A Little Heard-groome (for he was no bett*)
When course of year returned the pleasant spring,
At break of day without-en further let^
Cast with himself his flock afield to bring,
And for they had so long been pent with pain,
At sight of Sun they seemed to live again.
2
Such was the flock all bent to brouse and play,
But nothing such their master was to see.
Down hung his drooping head like rainy day,
His cheeks with tears like springs bedewed be.
His wringed hand such silent moan did make,
Well may you guess he was with love y'take.
3
The while his flock went feeding on the green,
And want only for joy of Summer plaide,
All in despite as if he n'ould be seen
He cast himself to ground full ill appaide.
Should seem their pleasance made him more complain,
For joy in sight not felt, is double pain.
4
Unhappy boy why live thou still, quoth he,
And have thy deadly wound so long ago?
What hope of after hap sustaineth thee?
As if there might be found some ease of woe,
Nay beter die ten thousand times then live,
Since every hour new cause of death does give.
5
The joyful Sun, whom cloudy winters spite,
Had shut from us in watery fishes haske,
Returns again to lend the world his light,
And red as rose begins his yearly task.
His fiery steedes the steepy welkin beat,
And both the horns of climing bull do heat.
But ah! no Sun of grace aspires to me,
Close hid she lies, from whom I should have light,
The clouds of black disdain so foggy be,
That blind I lie (poor boy) be reft of sight:
And yet I see the Sun I seek to find,
And yet the more I see, the more am blind.
7
Thrice happy ground, whom spoyld with winters rage,
The heat of pleasant spring renewes again:
Unhappy I, who in my spring of age,
The frost of cold despair has welnigh slain.
How shall I bide your stormy winters smart,
When spring itself has frorne my bloodles heart?
8
I see the beauty of thy flowers renew,
Thy mantle green with sundry colors spread,
Thou see in me a change of former hew,
Palenes for white, blacknes for lively red.
What hope of harvest fruit, or Summer flowers,
Since that my spring is drowned with tears like showers?
9
And last of all, but lieu'st of all to me,
Thou leany flock, that did of late lament,
And winesse wast for shepherds all to see,
(Thy knees so weak, thy fleece so rough and rent)
That thou with pain did pine away unfed,
All for thy master was with love misled.
10
Thou 'ginst at erst forget thy former state,
And range amid the buskes thy self to feed,
Fair fall thee little flock both rathe and late,
(Was never Lovers sheep, that well did speed)
Thou free, I bound, thou glad, I pine in pain,
I strive to die, and thou to live full feign.
11
Woe worth the stund, wherein I took delight,
To frame the shifting of my nimble feet,
To cheerful sound of Pipe in Moone-shine night,
Such pleasance past at erst now makes me greet.
I wee'nd by night have shunned the parching ray,
But night itself was twice more hot then day.
12
Then first of all (and all too soon for me)
I saw thilke Less (nay grau'd her in my breast)
Her crystal eyes more bright then Moon to see,
Her eyes, her eyes, that have robbed me of rest:
On them I gazed, then saw I to my cost,
Through too much sight mine only sight is lost.
13
Where been the dapper ditties that I dight,
And Roundlaies, and Virelaies so soot?
Whilome with Collins self compare I might,
For other swain, to strive was little boot,
Such skill I had in making all above
But all too little skill to conquer love.
14
What helps it me to have my piping prai'zd
Of all save her, whom I would only please?
Naught care I, though my fame to sky be raiz'd
For pleasant song that brings my heart no ease.
Wherefore both Pipe and song I all forswear,
And former pleasance wilfully forbear.
15
With that he cast his look to Welkin high,
And saw the doubled shadows flit away:
And as he glanst half in despite awrie,
He spide the shepherds star shut in the day*
Then rose, and homeward with his flock him went,
Whose voice did help their masters case lament.
Cuddies Emblem. Questo per amar s'aqu^sta.
The Christian Stoicke. The virtuous man is free, though bound in chains,
Though poor, content, though banished, yet no stranger,
Though sick, in health of mind, secure in danger,
And over himself, the world, and fortune reigns,
Nor good haps, proud, nor bad, dejected make him,
To Gods, not to man's will, he frames each action;
He seeks no fame, but inward satisfaction,
And firmer stands, the more bad fortunes shakes him.

AN EGLOGVE. Made long since upon the death of Sir Philip Sidney.
Thenot. Perin. PERIN, arreed what new mischance betide,
Has reft thee of thy wonted meriment?
Fair ^eeds thy flock this pleasant spring beside,
Nor Love, I ween, has made thee discontent,
Sild age and love, do meet in one consent.

Perin. Ah Thenot, where the Joy of heart does fail,
What marvel there, if mirth and music quail?
See how the flowers of the field do spring,
The purple Rose, the Lilly white as snow,
With smell and color for an harvest King.
May serve to make us young again, I trow,
Yet all this pride is quickly laid full low.
Soon as the root is nipt with northern cold,
What smell, or beauty, can we then behold?

Thenot. As good not hear, as heard, not understand,
My borrell brains through eld been all too dull,
Sike mister meaning nill by me be scand,
All as my face, so wrinkled is my skull,
Then say me Perin, by thy hope of VVull,
And by thine Ewes blown bags, and bagpipes sound.
So not one Aneling^ thy flock be found.

Perin. Ah Thenot, by thine all-derliefest Less,
Or whatsoever is more dear to thee:
No bagpipe name, let song and solace pass,
Death has undone my flock, my pipe and me,
Dead is the sheeps delight, and shepherds glee,
Broke is my pipe, and I my self forlorn
My sheep unfed, their fleeces rent and torn.

Thenot. I mickle mus^de such uncouth change to see,
My flocks refus'de to feed, yet hale they were:
The tender birds sat drooping on the tree,
The careless Lambs went wandering here and there,
My self unknown a part of grief did bear,
Ne wist I why yet heavy was my heart,
Untimely death was cause of all this smart
Up Perin, up, advance thy mournful lays,
Sound loud thy pipe, but sound in doleful wise.

Perin. Who else but Thenot, can the Muses raise,
And teach them sing and dance in mournful give
My finger's stiff, my voice does hoarsely rise.

Thenot. Ah, where is Collin, and his passing skill?
For him it fits our sorrow to fulfill.

Perin. T'way sore extremes our Collin press so near,
(Alas that such extremes should press him so)
The want of wealth, and loss of love so dear,
Scarce can he breath from under heaps of woe,
He that bears heaven, bears no such weight I trow.

Thenot. Has he such skill in making all above,
And has no skill to get, or Wealth, or Love?

Perin. Praise is the greatest prise that Poets gain,
A simple gain that feeds them never a whit.
The wanton less for whom he bare such pain,
Like running water loves to change and flit.
But if thou list to hear a sorry fit,
Which Cuddy could in doleful verse endite,
Blow thou thy pipe while I the same recite.

Thenot. Ginne when thou list, all be my skill but small,
My forward mind shall make amends for all.

Perin. YE Nimphs that bathe your bodies in this spring:
Your tender bodies white as driven snow:
Ye Virgins chaste which in this grove do sing,
Which neither grief of Love, nor death do know:
So may your streams run clear for aye,
So may your trees give shade always.
Depart a space,
And give me place,
To wail with grief my restless woe alone,
For fear my cries
Constrain your eyes
To shed forth tears, and help lament my moan.
And thou, my Muse, that whilome wont to ease,
Thy Masters mind with lays of sweet delight,
Now change those tunes, no joy my heart can please*
Gone is the day, come is the darksome night,
Our Sun close hid in clouds does lie,
We live indeed, but living die:
No light we see,
Yet wander we,
We wander far and near without a guide:
And all astray,
We loose our way,
For in this world n'is such a Sun beside.
Ye shepherds boys that lead your flocks a field
The whilst your sheep feed safely round about,
Break me your Pipes that pleasant sound did yield,
Sing now no more the songs of Colin Clout.
Lament the end ^f all our joy,
Lament the source of all annoy.
Sidney is dead,
That wont to lead
Our flocks and us in mirth and shepherds glee:
Well could we sing,
Well dance, and spring,
Of all the shepherds was none such as he,
How often has his skill in pleasant song,
Drawn all the water-nimphs from out their bowers?
How have they lain the tender grass along,
And made him Garlands gay of smelling flowers.
Phoebus himself that conquered Pan,
Striving with VVilly, nothing wan.
Me thinks I see
The time when he
Plucked from his golden locks the Laurel crown,
And so to raise,
Our VVilies praise,
Bedeckt his head, and softly set him down.
The learned Muses flock to hear his skill,
And quite forgot their water, wood, and mount,
They thought his songs were done too quickly still,
Of none but VVillies Pipe they made account.
He song, they seemd in joy to flow,
He ceast, they seemed to weep for woe,
The rural rout,
All round about,
Like Bees came swarming thick, to hear him sing.
Ne could they think,
On meat or drink,
While VVillies music in their ears did ring
But now (alas) such pleasant mirth is past,
Apollo weeps, the Muses rend their hair.
No joy on earth that any time can last,
See where his breathless corpse lies on the bear.
That self same hand that reft his life,
Has turned shepherds peace to strife.
Our joy is fled
Our life is dead,
Our hope, our help, our glory all is gone:
Our Poets praise
Our happy* days.
And nothing left but grief, to think thereon.
What Thames, what Seuerne, or what western Seas,
Shall give me floods of trickling tears to shed?
What comfort can my restless grief appease,
O that mine eyes were fountains in my head!
Ah Collin! I lament thy case,
For thee remains no hope of grace.
The best relief
Of Poets grief:
Is dead and wrapped full cold in filthy clay,
And naught remains
To ease our pains,
But hope of death to rid us hence away.
Phillis thine is the greatest grief, above the rest,
Where bin thy sweetest Posies featly dight,
Thy Garlands with atrue-loues knot addressed,
And all that erst thou Willie did behight?
Thy labor all is lost in vain
The grief shall aye remain
The Sun bright,
That falls to night,
To morrow from the East again shall rise,
But we decay,
And wast away,
Without return, alas thy Willie dies.
See how the drooping flocks refuse to feed,
The rivers stream with tears above the bank:
The trees do shed their leaves, to wail agreed,
The beasts unfed, go mourning all in ranks,
The Sun denies the Earth, his light,
The spring is killed with winters might:
The flowers spill,
The birds are still,
No voice of joy is heard in any place.
The meadows green,
A change have seen,
And Flora hides her pale disfigured face.
Watch now ye shepherds boys with waking eye
And loose your time of sleep, to learn to sing.
Unhappy skill, what good is got thereby
But painted praise that can no profit bring?
If skill could move the sisters three,
Our Willy still alive should be.
The wolf so wood
Amazd flood,
At sound of Willies pipe, and left his prey:
Both Pipe and Skill
The sisters spil,
So worse then any wicked Wolf are they.
O flattering hope of mortal men's delight,
So fair in outward show, so foul within!
The deepest streams do flow full calm to sight,
The rau'ning Wolves do ie^ in Weathers skin.
We deemd our Willy aye should live,
So sweet a sound his Pipe could give:
But cruel death
Has stopped his breath:
Dumb lies his Pipe that wont so sweet to sound:
Our flocks lament
His life is spent,
And careless wander all the woods a round.
Come now, ye shepherds daughters, come no more
To hear the songs that Cuddy wont to sing:
Hoarse is my Muse, my throat with crying sore,
These woods with echo of my grief do ring.
Your Willies life was Cuddies joy,
Your Willies death has killed the boy:
Broke lies my Pipe
Till reeds be ripe
To make a new one, but a worse I fear:
Save year by year,
To wail my Dear,
All Pipe and song Ivtterly forswear.

Thenot. A lack and weladay may shepherds cry
Our Willy dead, our Collin killed with care:
Who shall not loath to live* and long to die?
And will not grief our little Cuddy spare,
But must he too of sorrow have a share?
Aye how his rufull verse has pricked my heart!
How feelingly has he expressed my smart?

Perin. Ah Thenot had thou seen his sorry look,
His wringed hands, his eyes to heaven vpkest,
His tears, that streamed like water in the brook,
His sighs, that made his rimes seem rudely dressed.
But ^ie we homeward, night approaches near,
And rainy clouds in southern skies appear.

A. W.

II. EGLOGVE.
Shepherd. Heardman. COme gentle heardman, sit by me,
And tune thy Pipe by mine
Here underneath this willow tree,
To shield the hot Sunshine.
Where I have made my Summer bower,
For proof of Summer beams,
And decked it up with many a flower,
Sweet seated by the streams.
Where gentle Daphne once a day,
These flowery banks does walk
And in her bosom bears away
The pride of many a stalk.
But leaves the humble heart behind,
That should her garland dight:
And she sweet soul the more unkind,
To set true loves so light,
But whereas others bear the Bell,
As in her favor blessed:
Her shepherd loves her as well,
As those whom she loves best.

Heard-man. ALas poor Pastor, I find,
Thy love is lodged so high,
That on thy flock thou have no mind,
But feed'st a wanton eye.
If dainty Daphnes looks besot
Thy doting hearts desire,
Be sure, that far above thy lot,
Thy liking does aspire.
To love so sweet a Nymph as she,
And look for love again:
Is Fortune fitting high degree,
Not for a shepherds swain.
For she of Lordly lad's becoyd,
And sought of great estates,
Her favor scorns to be enjoyed
By us poor lowly Mates.
Wherefore I warn thee to be wise,
Go with me to my walk,
Where lowly lasses be not nice,
There like, and choose thy Make.
Where are no pearls nor gold to view,
No pride of silken sight,
But peticoats of Scarlet hew,
Which veil the skin snow-white.
There truest Lasses been to get
For love and little cost:
There sweet desire is paid his det,
And labor seldom lost.

Shepherd. NO Heardman, no, thou rau'st too loud
Our trade so vile to hold
My weed as great a heart does shroud,
As his that is clad in gold.
And take the truth that I thee tell,
This song fair Daphne sings
That Cupid will be served as well,
Of Shepherds as of Kings.
For proof whereof, old books record,
That Venus Queen of love,
Would set aside her warlike Lord,
And youthful Pastors prove.
How Paris was as well beloved,
A simple shepherds Boy,
As after when that he was prou'de,
King Priams Son of Troy.
And therefore have I better hope,
As had those Lads of y'ore,
My courage takes as large a scope,
Although their haps were more.
And for thou shall not deem I jest,
And b ear a mind more base,
No meaner hope shall haunt my breast,
Then dearest Daphnes grace.
My mind no other thought retains,
Mine eye naught else a^mires:
My heart no other passion strain,
Nor other hap desires.
My muse of nothing else entreates,
My Pipe naught else can sound,
My veins no other fever heates,
Such faith's in shepherds found.

Heard-man. AH Shepherd, then I see, with grief
thy care is past all cure,
No remedy for thy relief,
But patiently endure.
Thy wonted liberty is fled,
Fond sancy breeds thy bane,
Thy sense of folly brought a bed,
Thy wit is in the wane.
I can but sorrow for thy sake,
Since love lulls thee asleep.
And whist out of thy dream thou wake,
God shield thy straying sheep.
Thy wretched flock may rue and curse
This proud desire of thine,
Whose woeful state from bad to worse
Thy careless eye will pine.
And even as they, thy self likewise
With them shall wear and wast,
To see the spring before thine eyes,
Thou thirsty can not taste.
Content thee therefore with conceit,
Where others gain the grace,
And think thy fortune at the height,
To see but Daphnes face.
Although thy truth deserved well,
Reward above the rest,
Thy haps shall be but means to tell
How other men are blessed.
So gentle Shepherd, farewell now,
Be warned by my reed,
For I see written in thy brow,
Thy heart for love does bleed.
Yet longer with thee would I stay,
If ought would do thee good,
But nothing can the heat allay,
Where love enflames the blood.

Shepherd. THen Heardman, since it is my lot,
and my good liking such,
Strive not to break the faithful knot,
that thinks no pain too much,
For what contents my Daphnes best
I never will despise:
So she but wish my soul good rest
when death shall close mine eyes.
Then heardman, farewell once again,
for now the day is fled:
So might thy cares, poor shepherds Swain,
fly from thy careful head.

IIII. Eglogue. Concerning old age. The beginning and end of this Eglogue are
wanting.
Perin. FOr when thou art not as thou wont of y'ore,
No cause why life should please thee any more.
Whilome I was (in course of former years,
Ere freezing Eld had coold my youthly rage)
Of mickle worth among my shepherds Peers.
Now for I am some-dele 'ystept in age,
For pleasance, strength, and beauty giunes assuage.
Each little heard-groome laughs my wrinkled face,
Each bonny less for Cuddy shunnes the place:
For all this woe none can we justly twight,
But hateful ^ld, the foe to pleasant rest,
Which like a these does rob us of delight.

Wrenocke. Perin, enough few words be always best,
Needs must be borne that cannot be redrest.
Se fe am I as thon see in thilke estate,
The grief is eath to bear that haz a mate:
But sicker for to speak the truth indeed,
Thou seemst to blame that blameles seems to me,
And hurtlesse Eld to s^eb (ill might he speed,
That slayes the dog, for wolves so wicked be)
The faults of men thou lai'st on age I see,
For which if Eld were in it self to blame,
Then I and al my Pears should taste the same.

Perin. Wrenocke, I ween thou doat'st through rusty Eld,
And think with fained words to bleare mine eye,
Thou for thy store art ever blesfull held,
Thy heaps of gold, nill let thee sorrow spy,
Thy flocks full safe here under shade do lie,
Thy weanlings fat, thine ewes with bladder blown:
A iollier Shepherd have we seldom known.

Wrenock. For thilke my store, great Pan y'herried be:
But if for thy, mine age with joy I bear,
How falls it that thy self unlike to me,
Art vexed so with grief and bootelesse fear?
Thy store will let thee sleep on either ear.
But neither want makes age to wisemen hard,
Nor fools by wealth from grievous pains are barred

Perin. See not how free yond' Lambkin skips and plays:
And wags his tail, and buts with tender head:
All for he feels the heat of youngthly days,
Which secret law of kind has inly bred?
Thilke ewe from whom all joy with youth is fled,
See how it hangs the head, as it would weep,
Whilome it skipt, vneaths now may it creep.

Wrenock. No fellowship has state of beasts with man,
In them is naught but strength of lim and bone,
Which ends with age, as it with age began.
But man they sai'ne (as other creature none)
Has uncouth fire conuaid from heaven by one,
(His name I wist) that yields him inward light,
Sike fire as Welkin shows in winter night.
Which neither age nor time can wear away,
Which waxes bett' for use, as Shepherds Crook,
That ever shines brighter day by day:
Also though wrinkled seems the aged look,
Bright shines the fire that from the Stars we took,
And sooth to say, thilke ewe laments the pain,
That thilke same wanton Lamb is like sustain.

Perin. Ah Thenot, be not all thy teeth on edge,
To see youngths folk to sport in pastimes gay?
To pitch the bar, to throw the weighty sledge,
To dance with Phillis all the holy day,
To hunt by day, the Fox, by night, the Gray?
Sike peerless pleasures wont us for to queeme,
Now lig we laid, as drownde in heavy dream

Deest.
SONNETS, ODES, ELEGIES, MADRIGALS, ANDEPIGRAMs.
By Francis Dauison And Walter Dauison Brethren.
A compiaint, of which all the staves end with the words of the first, like a
Sestine.

1
YE ghastly groves, that hear my woeful cries
Whose shady leaves do shake to hear my pain,
Thou silver stream that do with tears lament:
The cruel chance that does my grief increase:
Ye chirping birds whose cheareles not es declare
That ye bewail the woes I feel in mind,
Bear witness how with care I do consume,
And hear the cause why thus I pine away.
2
Love is the cause that makes me pine away,
And makes you hear the Echo of my cries
Through griefs increase: And though the cause of pain
Which does enforce me still thus to lament,
Proceed from love, and though my pain increase
By daily cries which do that pain declare,
And witness are of my afflicted mind,
Yet cry I will, till crying me consume.
3
For as the fire the stubble does consume,
And as the wind does drive the dust away,
So pensive hearts are spent with doleful cries,
And cares distract the mind with pinching pain.
But all in vain I do my cares lament;
My sorrow does my sobs, sighs, tears, increase:
Though sobs, sighs, tears, my torments do decl^re,
Sobs, sighs, nor tears, move not her flintie mind.
4
I am cast out of her ungrateful mind,
And she has sworn I shall in vain consume,
My weary days, my life must wast away,
Consumed with pain, and worn with restless cries.
So Philomele too much oppressed with pain
By his misdeede that causes her lament,
Does day and night her mournful lays increase,
And to the woods her sorrows does declare.
5
Some ease it is, hid sorrows to declare,
But too small ease to such a grieved mind,
Which by repeating woes does more consume,
To end which woes I find at all no way,
(A simple salve to cure so great a pain)
But to deaths deafened ears to bend my cries,
Come then ye ghastly owls help me lament,
And as my cries, so let your shrikes increase.
6
For as your shrikes (the tunes of death) increase
When sun is set, and shadows do declare
The nights approach: so I from my dark mind
Since my bright Sun is fled, in cries consume,
My night of woes, and though you fly away
Soon as the days returns and cease your cries,
Yet I by day find no release of pain,
But day and night so foul a change lament.
7
But while I thus to senseless things lament
Ruth of my case in them thereby d'encrease
Which she feels not, with scosses she does declare
My pangs to him, who first her wanton mind,
From me did win: Since when I still consume
Like wax against fire, like snow that melts away
Before the sun: Thus thus, with mournful cries
I living die, and dying, live in pain.
8
And now adieu delight, and farewell pain
Adieu vain hope I shall no more lament
Her fained faith which did my woes increase;
And ye to whom my griefs I thus declare,
Ye which have heard the secrets of my mind,
And seeing then my lingering life in pain consume,
Grove, Brook, and Birds adieu, now hence away,
By death I will, and cease my deadly cries,
E. D.

Inscriptions.
Thisbe.
YE woeful Sires, whose causeless hate has bred
Grief to your selves, death to my love and me,
Let us not be dis-ioynd when we are dead,
Though we alive conioind could never be.
Though cruel stars denide us two one bed.
Yet in one tomb us two entombed see.
Like as the dart was one and one the knife
That did begin our love and end our life.
Clytemnestra to her son Orestes, coming to kill her for murdering his
father AGAMEMNON.
HOld, hold thy hand, vile son of viler mother,
Death I deserve but O not by thy knife.
One parent to revenge will thou kill the other,
And give her death that gave thee (wretch thy life.
Furies will plague thy murder execrable,
Stages will play thee, and all mothers curse thee.
To wound this womb or breast, how art thou able,
When the one did bear thee, and the other nurse thee?
AJAX.
THis sword is mine, or will Laertes Son
Win this as he Achilles armor won?
This sword which you O Greeks often bathed have known
In Trojan blood, i will now bath in mine own.
This fearelesse breast which all mine enemies fierce
Have left vnpierst, now I my self will pierce.
So men shall say, Ajax to none did yield
But t'Aiax self, and Ajax, Ajax killed.
ROMULUS.
NO common womb was fit me forth to bring,
But a pure virgin Priest, child to a King.
No mortal father worthy was to breed me,
Nor humane milk was fierce enough to feed me,
Therefore the God of war by wonder bred me,
And a she wolf by no less wonder fed me.
In fine, the Gods because earth was too base
T'entombe me dead, did me in heaven place.
Fabritius Curio, who refused gold of the Samnites, and discovered to King
Pirrhus his Phis^tion that offered to poison* him.
MY famous Country values gold far less,
Then conquest brave of such as gold possess.
To be overcome with wealth I do not use,
And to overcome with poison I refuse.
No hand loves more then mine, to give to many,
No ha^rthates more then mine to take of any.
With so firme^steele virtue my mind has armed,
at^ ot by gold, ^or iron it can be harmed.
Cato Vtican, who slew himself because he would not fall into Caesar's hands.
CAESAR, thou have overcome to thy great fame
Proud Germans, valiant Gauls, and Brittons rude,
Romes liberty (but to thine eternal shame)
And her great Champion thou have eke subdu'de.
Yet neither shall thy triumphs with my name
Be graced, nor sword be with my blood imbrude.
Though all the conquered earth do now serve thee,
Cato will die unconquered, and free.
A Dialogue in Imitation of that between Horace an^ Lidia, beginning, Donec,
gratus eram tibi, etc.
1 Lover. WHile thou did dest love me, and that neck of thine
More sweet, white, soft, then roses, silver, down,
Did wear a necklace of no arms but mine,
Ienuide not the King of Spain his crown.

2 Lady. While of thy heart I was sole Sovereign,
And thou did sing none but Mellinaes name*
Whom for brown Cole thou do now disdain,
Enuide not the Queen of Englands fame.

3 Lover. Though Cole be less fair, she is more kind,
Her graceful dancing so does please mine eye,
And through mine ears her voice so charms my mind
That so dear she may live, i will willing die.

4 Lady. Though Crispus cannot sing my praise in verse,
I love him so for skill in Tilting shown,
And graceful managing of Coursiers fierce:
That his dear life to save, i will lose mine own.

5 Lover. What if I sue to thee again for grace,
And sing my praises sweeter then before,
If I out of my heart blot Cloes face,
Will thou love me again, love him no more?

6 Lady. Though he be fairer then the morning star,
Though lighter then the floting Cork thou be,
And then the ^rish sea more angry far,
With thee I wish to live, and die with thee.

Madrigall.
Though you be not content
That I (poor worm) should love you,
As Cupids power, and your sweet beauty cause me,
Yet (dear) let pity move you
To give me your consent.
To love my life, as law of nature draws me,
And i^ my life I love, then must I too
Love your sweet self, for my life lives in you,
Madrigall.
Borrowed out of a Greek Epigram.

^ee's rich enough whose eyes behold thee,
Who hears thee sing a Monarch is:
A Demy-God who does thee kiss,
And love himself whose arms infold thee.
Madrigall.
Upon ^er dreaming that she saw him dead.

O fair, yet murdring eyes,
Stars of my miseries,
Who while night clouds your beams,
How much you wish my death show in your dreams:
Is It not enough that waking you do spill me,
But you a sleep must kill me?
O kill me still while you your sleep are taking,
So you lend me kind looks while you are waking.
The sound of thy sweet name, my dearest treasure,
Delights me more then sight of other faces,
A glimpse of thy sweet face breeds me more pleasure,
Then any others kindest words and graces.
One gracious word that from thy lips proceeds,
I value more then others Doue*like kisses:
And thy chaste kiss in my conceit exceeds*
Others embraces, and loves chiefest blisses.
Sonnets.
WHen traitrous Photine, Caesar did present
With his great riuals honorable head,
He taught his eyes a stream of tears to shed
Hiding in his false heart his true content.
And Hanniball when Fortunes balance light,
Raiz'd low*brought Rome and swaid proud Carthage down,
While all but he, bewailed their yielding town
He laugh't to ease his swelling hearts despite.
Thus cunning minds can mask with diverse art,
Grief under fained smiles, Joy under tears
Like Hanniball I cannot hide my fears
Setting clear looks upon a cloudie heart.
But let me ioies enioie, Dear you shall try,
Caesar hid not his ioies so well as I.
Sonnet.
While Love in you did live, I only lived in you,
While you for me did burn, for you alone I burned,
While you did sigh for me, for you I sight and mourned,
Till you prou'de false to me, to you I was most true.
But since Love died in you, in you I live no more,
Your heart a Servant new, mine a new Saint enjoys:
My sight offe^ds your eyes, mine eyes your sight annoieth
Since you held me in scorn, by you I set no store.
Yet if dead Love, if your late flames return,
If you lament your change, and count me your sole treasure,
My love more fresh shall spring, my flame more bright shall bu^ne.
I Will love none else but you, and love you without measure,
If not (untrue) farewell: in sand I Will sow no grain,
Nor plant my love but where love yields me love again.
To Mistress Diana.
PHoebus of all the Gods I wish to be:
Not of the world to have the ouerseeing:
For of all things in the worlds circuit being
One only thing I always wish to see.
Not of all herbs the hidden force to know,
For ah my wound by herbs cannot be cured:
Not in the Sky to have a place assured,
For my ambition lies on earth below.
Not to be Prince of the Celestial quire,
For I one Nymph prize more then all the Muses:
Not with his bow to offer Love abuses
For I Loves Vassal am, and dread his ire.
But that thy light from mine, might borrowed be,
And fair Diana might shine under me.
Upon his departure.
Madrigall.
SVre (Dear) I love you not, for he that loves,
When he from her does part
That Is Mistres of his heart,
A deadly pain, a hellish torment proves.
But when sad Fates did sever
Me far from seeing you I would see ever,
I felt in my absenting
No pain, nor no tormenting.
For sense of pain how could he find,
That left his heart and soul behind*
Epigrams translated out of Martial.
Ad Aelian. 76. l. 1. Si memini, fuerant tibi quatuor, Aelia, dentes,
Expuit vna duos tussis, and vna duos.
Iam secura potes ^otis tussire di^bus,
Nil istuc quod agat tertia tussi^ habet.

Four teeth of late you had, both black and shaking,
Which durst not chew your meat for fear of aching,
But since your cough (without a Barbers aid)
Has blown them out, you need not be afraid.
On either side to chew hard crusts, for sure
Now from the Too^h-ach you live most secure.
In Herm. 15. l. 2. Quod nulli calic em tuum propinas Humane facis, Herme, non
superbe.
A Monsieur Naso, Verole.
Naso let none drink in his glass but he,
Think you it is curious pride? it is courtesy.
De Manuella. 51. l. 1 Os and libra tibi lingit, Manuella cat^llus. Mon* miror
merdas si libet esse cani.
I muse not that your Dog turds often does eat,
To a tung that licks your lips, a turd's sweet meat.
De Milone.
MILO dominon est, peregre Milone profecto,
Arua vacant, vxor non minus inde parit.
Cur sit ager sterilis, cur vxor lact tet, edam,
Quo fodiatur ager non habet, vxor habet.
MILO lives long in France, and while he is there,
his ground bears naught, his wife does children bear
Why should the one barren, the other fertile be?
His ground lacks plowing up,, so does not she.
De Codro. Li. 15* 3. Plus credit nemo, quam tota Cod^us in vrbe, Cum sit tam
pauper quomodo? coecus amat.
CODRVS although but of mean estate,
Trusts more then any Merchant in the city*
For being old and blind he has of late,
Married a wife, young, wanton, fair, and witty.
Ad Quintum. 117. L. 5. Quae legis causa nupsit tibi Laelia, Quinte. Vxorem
hanc poteris dicere legitimam.
THy lawful wife fair Laelia needs must be,
For she was forct by law to marry thee.
Nil mihid as viuus, dicis post fata daturum, Si non es stultus, scis Maro quid
cupiam. To A. S.
RIch Chremes whiles he lives will naught bestow,
On his poor Heirs, but all at his last day.
If he be half as wise as rich I trow,
He thinks that for his life they seldom pray.
Semper eris pauper, si pauper es, Aemiliane, Duntur opes nullis nunc nisi
diuitibus. To all poor Scholars.
Fail ye of wealth, of wealth ye still will fail,
None but fat sowes are now greez'd in the tail.
In Cinnam. 42. L. 7. Primum est vt proestes, si quid te, Cinna rogabo,
Illud deinde sequens, vt ^ito, Cinna, neges.
Diligo praestantem, non odi. Cinna, negantem,
Sed tu nec praestas, nec cito, Cinna, negas.

To his friends
MY just demands so one grant or so one deny,
The One friendship shows, and the other courtesy:
But who nor soon does grant, nor soon say no,
Does not true friendship, and good manners know.
In Cinnam. 107. L. 5. Esse nihil dicis, quicquid petis, improbe Cinna, Si nil
Cinna petis, nil tibi Cinna negos
WHat so'ere you coggingly require,
It Is nothing (Cinna) still you cry*
Then Cinna you have your desire,
If you ask naught, naught I deny.
De Philone. 48. L. 5. Nunquam se caenasse domi Philo jurat, and hoc est, Non
coenat quoties nemo vocauit eum.
PHilo swears he never eats at home a nights:
He means, he fastes when no man him inuites.
12. L 12.
YOu promise mountains still to me,
When over night stark drunk you be.
But nothing you perform next day,
Hence forth be morning drunk, I pray.
Ad Pessimos Coniuges. 35. L. ^. CVm sitis similes, paresque vita:
Vxor pessima, pessimus maritus,
Miror non been conuenire vobis.

WHy do your wife and you so ill agree,
Since you in manners so well matched be?
Thou brazen-faced, she impudently bold,
Thou still do brawle, she evermore does scold*
Thou seldom sober art, she often drunk,
Thou a whore-hunting knave, she a known Puncke.
Both of you filch, both swear and damn, and lie,
And both take pawnes, and Jewish usury.
Not manners like make man and wife agree,
Their manners must both like and virtuous be.
Epigrams.
A Rule for Courtiers.
HE that will thrive in Court must often become,
Against his will, both blind and deaf and dombe.
On a painted Curtizan.
Whosoever says thou sellest all, does jest*
Thou buy'st thy beauty that sels all the rest.
In Aulam.
HEr Sons rich Aula terms her Letchers all,
Whom other Dames loves, friends, and servants call.
And sure me thinks her wit,
Gives them a name more fit.
For if all mothers them their sons do call
Whom they have only borne nine months in all,
May she not call them sons with better reason,
Whom she has borne nine times as long a season?
For a looking glass.
IF thou be fair, thy beauties beautify,
With virtuous deeds and manners answerable:
If thou be foul, thy beauties want supply,
With a fair mind and actions commendable.
In Asinium.
THou still were wont in earnest or in jest,
To praise an Ass as a most worthy best,
Now like an Ass thy self thou still commendest.
Whats'ere thou speakst with thine own praise thou endest
Oh! I perceive thou praisest learnedly,
An Ass in Thesi and Hipothesi.
On a limping Cuckold.
THou evermore do ancient Poets blame,
For faining Venus wife to Vulcan lame.
I blame the stars and Hymen to that gave
A fair straight wife to thee a foul lame knave,
And naught does ease my grief but only this,
Thy Venus now has got a Mars to kiss.
On Crambo a lowzie shifter.
BY want of shift since lice at first are bred,
And after by the same encreast and fed*
Crambo I muse how you have lice so many,
Since all men know you shift as much as any.
In Quintum.
QVintus is burnt, and may thereof be glad.
For being poor he has a good pretense,
At every Church to crave benevolence
For one that had by fire lost all he had.
In Sabam.
WHy will not Saba in a glass behold
Her face, since she grew wrinkled, pale and old?
Doubtless I think she doubts that ougly sight
Like Cow-turnd IO would her self affright.
In Aulum.
AVlus gives naught, men say, though much he crave,
Yet I can tell to whom the pox he gave.
F. D.

Sonnets, Odes, Elegies, and Madrigals.
Sonnet. I.
Dedication of these Rimes, to his first Love.

IF my harsh humble style, and rimes ill dressed,
Arrive not to your worth and beauty glorious,
My muses shoulders are with weight oppressed,
And heavenly beams are over my sight victorious.
If these dim colors have your worth expressed,
Laid by lovers hand, and not by Art laborious,
Your Sun-like rays have my wits harvest blessed,
Enabling me to make your praise notorious.
But if alas! (alas* the heavens defend it,)
My lines your eyes, my love your heart displeasing,
Breed hate in you, and kill my hope of easing:
Say with your self, how can the wretch amend it?
I wondrous fair, he wondrous dearly loving,
How can his thoughts but make his pen be moving?
Sonnet. II.
That he cannot hide or dessemble his affection.

I Bend my wits, and beat my weary brain,
To keep my inward grief, from outward show.
Alas I cannot: now it is vain I know,
To hide a fire, whose flame appears plain.
I force my will, my senses I constrain,
T'imprison in my heart my secret woe,
But musing thoughts, deep sighs, or tears that flow,
Discover what my heart hides, all in vain.
Yet blame not (Dear) this undissembled passion:
For well may love, within small limits bounded,
Be wisely maskt in a disguised fashion.
But he, whose heart, like mine, is thoroughly wounded,
Can never feign, no though he were assured,
That faining might have greater grace procured.
Sonnet. III.
Upon his absence from her.

THe fairest eye, (O eyes in blackness fair)
That ever shinde, and the most heavenly face,
The daintiest smiling, the most conquering grace,
And sweetest breath that ere perfumd the air,
Those cherry lips, whose kiss might well repair
A dead man's state: that speech did displace
All mean desires, and all affections base,
Clogging swift hope, and winging dead despair,
That snow-white breast, and all those faultles features
Which made her seem a personage divine,
And far excelling fairest humane creatures,
Has absence banished from my cursed eine.
But in my heart, as in a mirror clear,
All these perfections to my thoughts appear.
Sonnet. IIII.
Upon presenting her with the speech of Grayes-Inne Mask, at the Court, 1594.
consisting of three parts. The story of Proteus transformations, the wonders of
the adamantine Rock, and a speech to her Majesty.

WHo in these lines may better claim a part,
That sing the praises of the maiden Queen,
Then you fair sweet, that only sovereign been,
Of the poor kingdom of my faithful heart?
Or to whose view should I this speech impart,
Where th'Adamantine rocks great power is shown:
But to your conquering eyes, whose force once known
Makes even iron hearts loath thence to part?
Or who of Proteus sundry transformations,
May better send you the new-fained Story,
Then I whose love unfeigned felt no mutations,
Since to be yours I first received the glory?
Accept then of these lines, though meanly pend,
So fit for you to take, and me to send.
ELEGY I.
He renounceth his food, and former delight in Music, Poesy and painting.

SItting at board sometimes, prepar'de to eat,
If It hap my mind on these my woes to think,
Sighs fill my mouth in stead of pleasant meat,
And tears do moist my lips in lieu of drink:
But yet, nor sighs, nor tears, that run amain,
Can either starve my thoughts, or quench my pain*
Another time with careful thought, o're-tane,
I thought these thoughts with musicks might to chase:
But as I began to set my notes in frame,
A sudden passion did my song displace.
In stead of Rests, sighs from my heart did rise,
In stead of Notes, deep sobs and mournful cries.
Then, when I saw, that these my thoughts increasde,
And that my thoughts unto my woes gave fire,
I hoped both thoughts and woes might be releasde,
If to the Muses I did me retire:
Whose sweet delights were wont to ease my woe,
But now (alas) they could do nothing so.
For trying often (alas) yet still in vain,
To make some pleasant numbers to arise,
And beating often my dullen weary brain,
In hope some sweet conceit for to devise:
Out of my mouth no words but groans would come,
Out of my Pen no ink but tears would run.
Of all my old delights yet one was left,
Painting alone to ease my mind remaind:
By which, when as I looked to be bereft
Of these heart* vexing woes that still me straind,
From forth mine eyes the blood for colors came,
And tears withal to temper so the same.
Adieu my food that wontst my taste to please,
Adieu my songs that bred mine ears delight,
Adieu sweet Muse that often my mind did ease,
Painting, adieu, that often refresht my sight,
Since neither taste, nor ears, nor sight nor mind,
In your delights can ought save sorrow find.
SONNET. V.
To Pity.

Wake Pity, wake, for thou have slept too long,
Within the Tygrish heart of that fierce fair,
Who ruins most, where most she should repair,
And where she owes most right, does greatest wrong.
Wake Pity, wake, O do no more prolong
Thy needful help I but quickly hear my pray're
Quickly (alas) for otherwise despair
By guilty death, will end my guiltless wrong.
Sweet Pity wake* and tell my cruel sweet,
That If my death her honor might increase,
I would lay down my life at her proud feet,
And willing die, and dying, hold my peace.
And only live, and living mercy cry,
Because her glory in my death will die.
ODE. I.
That only her beauty and voice please him.

1
PAssion may my judgment bleare,
Therefore sure I will not swear,
That others are not pleasing:
But I speak it to my pain,
And my life shall it maintain,
None else yields my heart easing.
2.
Ladies I do think there be,
Other-some as fair as ^hee,
(Though none have fairer features:
But my turtle-like affection,
Since of her ^ made Election,
Scorns other fairest creatures.
3
Surely I will not deny,
But some others reach as high
With their sweet warbling voices:
But since her notes charmde mine ear,
Even the sweetest tunes I hear,
To me seem rude harsh noyses.
Madrigall. I.
To Cupid.

Love, if a God thou art,
Then evermore thou must,
Be merciful and just.
If thou be just, O wherefore does thy Dart,
Wound mine alone, and not my Ladies Heart?
If merciful, then why
Am I to pain reserved,
Who have thee truly served:
While she that by thy power sets not a fly,
Laughes thee to scorn, and lives at liberty?
Then, if a God thou will accounted be,
Heal me like her, or else wound her like me.
Madrigall. II.
Upon his mistress sickness, and his own health.

In health and ease am I,
Yet, as I senseless were, it naught contents me.
You sick in pain do lie,
And (ah) your pain exceedingly torments me.
Whereof, I can this only reason give,
That dead unto my self, in you I live.
Madrigall 3.
He begs a kiss.

SOrrow slowly kills any,
Sudden joy soon murders many.
Then (sweet) if you would end me,
It Is a fond course with lingering grief to spend me.
For, quickly to dispatch me,
Your only way is, in your arms to catch me,
And give me doue-like kisses,
For such excessive and unlooked for blisses,
Will so much ouer-ioy me,
As they will straight destroy me,
Madrigall 4.
Upon a kiss received.

SInce I your cherry lips did kiss,
Where Nectar and Ambrosia is,
My hungry maw no meat requires:
My thirsty throat no drink desires.
For by your breath which then I gained,
Camelion-like my life's maintained.
O grant me then those cherries still,
And let me feed on them my fill.
If by a surfeit death I get,
Upon my tomb let this be set:
By cherries twain his life he cherisht,
By cherries twain at length he perished.
ODE II.
Upon her protestation of kind affection, having tried his sincere fidelity.

I
Lady, you are with beauties so enriched
Of body and of mind,
As I can hardly find,
Which of them all has most my heart bewitched.
2
Whether your skin so white, so smooth, so tender,
Or face well formed and fair,
Or heart-ensnaring hair,
Or dainty hand, or leg, and foot so slender.
3
Or whether your sharp wit and lively spirit,
Where Pride can find no place:
Or your enchaunting grace,
Or speech, which does true eloquence inherit.
4
Most lovely all, and each of them do move me,
More then words can express:
But yet I must confess,
I love you most, because you please to love me.
ODE II.
His restless estate.

Your presence breeds my anguish,
Your absence makes me languish:
Your sight with woe does fill me,
And want of your sweet sight, alas does kill me.
If those dear eyes that burn me,
With mild aspect you turn me,
For life my weak heart pants:
If frowningly, my sp'rit and life blood faints.
If you speak kindly to me,
Alas, kind words undo me*
Yet silence does dislike me,
And one unkind ill word, stark dead would strike me.
Thus, Sun nor shade does ease me,
Nor speech, nor silence please me:
Favors and frowns annoy me.
Both want and plenty equally destroy me.
ELEGY. II.
Or letters in Verse.

MY dearest sweet, if these sad lines do hap
The raging fury of the Sea to escape,
O be not you more cruel then the Seas,
Let Pity now your angry mind appease.
So that your hand may be their blessed Port,
From whence they may unto your eyes resort,
And at that throne pleading my wretched case,
May move your cruel heart to yield me grace.
So may no clouds of elder years obscure
Your Sun-like eyes, but still as bright endure,
As then they shone when with one piercing Ray,
They made my self their slave, my heart they pray:
So may no sickness nip those flowers sweet,
Which ever flowring on your cheeks do meet:
Nor all defacing time have power to race,
The goodly building of that heavenly face.
3
Fountain of bliss, yet wellspring of my woe,
(O would I might not justly term you so!)
Alas, your cruel dealing, and my fate,
Have now reduc'de me to that wretched state,
That I know not how, I my style may frame
To thanks, or grudging, or to praise, or blame:
And where to write, I all my powers do bend,
There wot I not how to begin or end.
And now my drisling tears trill down apace,
As if the latter would the former chase,
Whereof some few on my pale cheeks remain,
Like withered flowers bedewed with drops of rain:
The other falling in my Paper sink,
Or dropping in my Pen increase my ink.
Which sudden Passions cause if you would find,
A trembling fear does now possess my mind,
That you will not vouchsafe these lines to read,
Lest they some pity in your heart may breed:
But or with angry frowns refuse to take them,
Or taking them the fires fuel make them:
Or with those hands (made to a milder end)
These guiltless leaves all into pieces rend.
O cruel Tyrant! (yet beloved still,)
Wherein have I deserved of you so ill,
That all my love you should with hate requite,
And all my pains reward with such despite?
Or if my fault be great (which I protest
Is only love, too great to be expressed)
What, have these lines so harmless* innocent,
Deserved to feel their Masters punishment?
These leaves are not unto my fault consenting:
And therefore ought not to have the same tormenting.
When you have read them, use them as you list,
For by your sight they shall be fully blessed:
But till you read them, let the woes I have
This harmless Paper from your fury save.
4
Clear up mine eyes and dry your selves my tears,
And thou my ^eart banish these deadly fears:
Persuade thy self, that though her heart disdain,
Either to love thy love, or rue thy pain,
Yet her fair eyes will not a look deny,
To this sad story of thy misery.
O then my dear, behold the Portraiture,
Of him that does all kind of woes endure,
Of him whose Head is made a hiue of woes,
Whose swarming number daily greater grows:
Of him whose senses like a Rack are bent,
With diverse motions my poor soul to rent:
Whose mind a mirror is, which only shows,
The ougly image of my present woes:
Whose memorie's a poisoned knife to tear
The ever bleeding wound my breast does bear,
(The ever bleeding wound not to be cured,
But by those eyes that first the same procured.)*
And that poor heart, so faithful, constant, true,
That only loves, and serves, and honors you,
Is like a feeble Ship, which torn and rent,
The Mast of hope being broke, and tackling spent,
Reason the Pilot dead, the stars obscured,
By which alone to sail it was enured,
No Port, no Land, no Comfort once expected,
All hope of safety utterly neglected,
With dreadful terror tumbling up and down,
Passions uncertain, waves with hideous sound,
Does daily, hourelie, minutelie expect
When either it should run, and so be wrect,
Upon despaires sharp Rock^, or be o're-throwne
With storm of your disdain so fiercely blown.
5
But yet of all the woes that do torment me,
Of all the torments that do daily rent me,
There Is none so great (although I am assured,
That even the least cannot be long endured:)
As that so many weeks (nay months, and years)
Nay tedious ages, (for it so appears)
My trembling heart (besides so many anguishes,)
T'wixt hope and fear uncertain howerly languishes*
Whether your hands, your eyes, your heart of stone,
Did take my lines, and read them, and bemone
With one kind word, one sigh, one pitying tear,
Th'unfained grief which you do make me bear,
Whether y'accepted that last Monument
Of my dear love, the book (I mean) I sent
To your dear self, when the respectlesse wind
Bare me away, leaving my heart behind:
And daigne sometimes when you the same do view
To think on him, who alwaie thinks on you.
Or whether you (as Oh I fear you do)
Hate both my self, and gifts, and letters too.
6
I must confess (unkind) when I consider,
How ill, alas, how ill agree together
So peerless beauty, to so fierce a mind,
So hard an inside to so fair a rind,
A heart so bloody to so white a breast,
So proud disdain, with so mild looks suppressed:
And how my dear (Oh would it had been never,
Accursed word, nay would it might be ever:)
How once I say, til your heart was estranged,
(Alas how soon my day to night was changed)
You did vouchsafe my poor eyes so much grace,
Freely to view the riches of your face,
And did so high exalt my lowly heart,
To call it yours, and take it in good part.
And (which was greatest bliss) did not disdain,
For boundless love to yield some love again.
When this, I say, I call unto my mind,
And in my heart and soul no cause can find
No fact, no word, whereby my heart does merit,
To love that love, which once I did inherit,
Despair it self cannot make me despair
But that you will prove as kind as you are fair,
And that my lines, and book (O would it were true)
Are, though I know*t not yet, received by you,
And often have your cruelty repented.
Whereby my guiltless heart, is thus tormented,
And now at length in lieu of passed woe,
Will pity, kindness, love and favor shoe.
7
But when again my cursed memory,
To my sad thoughts confounded diversely,
Presents the time, the teare-procuring time,
That with^r'd my young ^oies before their prime:
The time when I with tedious absence tired
With restless love and rackt desire inspired,
Coming to find my earthly Paradise,
To gla^e my sight in your two heavenly eyes,
(On which alone my earthly ioies depended,
And wanting which, my joy and life were ended)
From your sweet rosy lips, the springs of bliss,
To draw the Nectar of a sweetest kiss:
My greedy ears on your sweet words to feed,
Which canded in your sugared breath proceed,
In daintiest accents through that currall door,
Guarded with precious Pearl and Rubies store:
To touch your hand so white, so moist, so soft,
And with a ravished kiss redoubled often,
Revenge with kindest spite the bloody theft,
Whereby it closely me my heart bereft:
And of all bliss to taste the consummation,
In your sweet graceful heavenly conversation.
By whose sweet charms the souls do you inchant,
Of all that do your lovely presence haunt:
In stead of all these ioies I did expect,
Found naught but frowns, unkindness and neglect.
Neglect, unkindness, frowns? nay plain contempt,
And open hate, from no disdain exempt,
No bitter words, side looks, nor ought that might
Engrieue, increase so vnderu'd despite.
When this (I say) I think, and think withal,
How, nor those showers of tears mine eyes let fall
Nor wind of blustering sighs with all their force,
Could move your rockie heart once to remorce,
Can I expect that letter should find grace,
Or pity ever in your heart have place?
No no, I think, and sad despair says for me,
You hate, disdain, and utterly abhor me.
8
Alas my Dear, if this you do devise,
To try the virtue of your murdering eyes,
And in the Glass of bleeding hearts to view
The glorious splendor of your beauties hew,
Ah! try it on rebellious hearts and eyes
That do withstand the power of sacred lights
And make them feel, (if any such be found)
How deep and eurelesle your eyes can wound:
But spare, O spare my yielding heart, and save
Him whose chief glory is to be your slave:
Make me the matter of your clemency,
And not the subject of your Tyranny.
ODE. IIII.
Being by his absence in Italy deprived of her looks, words, and gestures, he
desires her to write unto him.

I
MY only star
Why, why are your decreeies,
Where all my liefs peace lies,
With me at war?
Why to my ruin tending,
Do they still lighten woe,
On him that loves you so,
That all his thoughts in you have birth and ending.
II
Hope of my heart,
O wherefore do the words
Which your sweet tongue affords,
No hope impart?
But cruel without measure,
To my eternal pain,
Still thunder forth disdain,
On him whose life depends upon your pleasure.
III
Sunshine of joy,
Why do your gestures, which
All eyes and hearts be witch,
My bliss destroy?
And pities sky o're-clouding
Of hate an endless shower
On that poor heart still power,
Which in your bosom seeks his only shrowding?
IIII
Blame of my wound,
Why are your lines, whose s^ght
Should cure me with delight,
My poison found?
Which through my veins dispersing,
Make my poor heart and mind
And all my senses find
A living death in torments past rehearsing.
V
Alas my Fate
Has of your Eyes deprived me,
Which both killed and revived me,
And sweetened hate:
Your sweet voice, and sweet Graces,
Which clothed in lovely weeds,
Your cruel words and deeds
Are intercepted by far distant places.
VI
But O the Anguish
Which presence still presented,
Absence has not absented,
Nor made to languish.
No, no, t'encrease my paining,
The cause being (ah) removed,
For which the effect ^ loved,
The Effect is still in greatest force remaining.
VII
O cruel Tiger,
If to your hard hearts center,
Tears, vows, and Prayers may enter,
Desist your rigor:
And let kind lines assure me
(since to my deadly wound
No salve else can be found)
That you that kill me, yet at length will cure me.
Madrigall 5.
Allusion to the confusion of Babell.

THe wretched life I live
In my weak senses such confusion makes
That like the accursed rabble,
That built the Tower of Babble.
My wit mistaketh,
And unto nothing a right name does give.
I term her my dear love, that deadly hates me,
My chiefest good, her that is my chiefest evil,
Her Saint and Goddess, who is a Witch, a Devil*
Her my sole hope, that with despair amates me.
My Balm I call her, that with poison fills me,
And her I term my life, that daily kills me.
Sonnet VI.
Upon her acknowledging his desert, yet rejecting his affection.

IF love conioin'd with worth and great desert,
Merit like love in every noble mind,
Why then do I you still so cruel find?
To whom you do such praise of worth impart
And if (my dear) you speak not from your heart,
To heinous wrongs you do together bind,
Two seek with glozing words mine eyes to blind,
And yet with hateful deeds my love to thwart.
To want what one deserves engrieues his pain,
Because it takes away all self accusing:
And under kindest words to make disdain,
Is to a vexed soul too much abusing.
Then if it befalse, such glosing words resraine:
If true, O then let worth his obtain.
Sonnet 7.
Her answer in the same Rimes.

IF your fond love want worth and great desert,
Then blame your self that you me cruel find:
If worth alone move every noble mind,
Why to no worth should I my love impart?
And if the less to grieve your wounded heart,
I seek your dazzled eyes with words to blind,
To just disfavor I great favor bind,
With deeds and not with words your love to twhart*
the freeing of your mind from self accusing,
By granting your deserts should ease your pain.
And since love is your fault it were some abusing,
With bitter words t'enuenome just disdain.
Then if it be true, all glosing I refrain,
If false, why should no worth worths due obtain?
ODE 5.
His farewell to his unkind and unconstant Mistris^.

SWeet, if you like and love me still,
And yield me love for my good will,
And do not from your promise start,
When your fair hand gave me your heart,
If dear to you I be;
As you are dear to me:
Then yours I am, and will be ever,
Nor time nor place my love shall sever.
But faithful still I will persevere,
Like constant marble stone,
Loving but you alone.
But if you favor more than me,
(Who love thee dear, and none but thee)
If others do the Harvest gain,
That Is due to me for all my pain:
If you delight to range,
And often to chop and change:
Then get you some newfangled Mate,
My doting love shall turn to Hate,
Esteeming you (though too, too late)
Not worth a pebble stone,
Loving not me alone.
ODE VI.
A Prosopopoeia, Wherein his heart speaks to his second Ladies breast

I Dare not in my Masters bosom rest,
That flaming Etna would to Ashes burn me:
Nor dare I harbor in his Mistress breast,
The frosty Climate into ice would turn me,
So, both from her and him I do retire me,
Lest the one should freeze me, and the other fire'me.
VVing'd with true love, I fly to this sweet Breast,
Whose snow, I hope, will cool, but t'yce not turn me,
Where fire and snow, I trust, so tempred rest,
As gentle heat will warm, and yet not burn me.
But (O dear Breast) from thee ^le ne'fe retire me,
Whether thou cool, or warm, or freeze, or fire me.
ODE VII.
Upon her giving him back the Paper wherein the former Song was written, as
though it had been an answer thereunto

Lady of matchless beauty;
When into your sweet Bosom I delivered
A paper, with wan looks, and hand that quiuered
Twixt hope, fear, love, and duty:
Thought you it nothing else contained,
But written words in Rhyme restraind?
O then your thought abused was,
My Heart close wrapped therein, into your Breast infused was.
When you that Scroule restored me,
With grateful words, kind grace, and smiling merrily,
My Breast did swel with joy, supposing verily,
You, answer did afford me.
But finding only that I writ,
I hopp't to find my Heart in it:
But you my hope abused had,
And poison of despair instead thereof infused had.
Why, why did you torment me,
With giving back my humble Rymes so hatefully?
You should have kept both heart and paper gratefully?
Or both you should have sent me.
Hope you my Heart thence to remove
By scorning me, my Lines, my Love?
No, no; your hope abused is,
Too deep to be removed, it in your breast infused is.
O shall I hide or tell it:
Dear with so spotless, zealous, firm Affection,
I love your Beauty, Virtue, and perfection,
As nothing can expel it.
Scorn still my Rimes, my Love despite,
Pull out my Heart, yea kill me quite:
Yet will your hate abused be,
For in my very soul, your love and looks infused be.
ODE 8.
Commendation of her Beauty, Stature Behavior and wit.

SOme there are as Fair to see too:
But by Art and not by Nature.
Some as Tall and goodly be too:
But want Beauty to their Stature.
Some have gracious Kind behauour,
But are soul, or simple Creatures:
Some have Wit, but want sweet favor,
Or are proud of their good features.
Only you, and you want pity
Are most Fair, Tall, Kind, and Witty.
MADRIGAL 6.
To her hand, upon her giving him her glove.

O Hand of all hands living,
The softest, moistest, whitest:
More skilled then Phoebu^ on a Lute in running:
More then Minerua, with a Needle cunning:
Then Mercury more wily,
Instealing Hearts most slily.
Since thou dear hand, in theft so much delightest,
Why fall'st thou now a giving?
Ay me! thy gifts are thefts, and with strange Art,
In giving me thy Glove, thou steal'st my Heart.
MADIGRAL 7.
Cupid proved a Fencer.

Ah Cupid I mistook thee,
I for an Archer, and no Fencer took thee.
But as a Fencer of t^faines blows and thrusts,
Where he intendes no harm:
Then turns his balefull Arm,
And wounds that part which least his foe mistrusts.
So thou with fencing Art,
Fayning to wound mine eyes, have hit my heart.
Sonnet 8.
Upon her commending (though most undeservedly) his verses to his first Love.

PRaise you those barren Rimes long since composed?
Which my great Love, her greater Cruelty,
My constant faith, her false inconstancy,
My praises style, her over praised worth disclosed.
O, if I loved a scorneful Dame so deerly:
If my wild years did yield so firm affection:
If her Moon-beames, short of your Suns perfection,
Taught my hoars Muse (as you say) to sing clearly
How much, how much should I love and adore you,
Diuinest Creature if you deigned to love me?
What beauty, fortune, time should ever move me
In these staid years to like ought else before you?
And O! how should my Muse by you inspired?
Make heaven and earth resound your praise admired.
My then green Heart so brightly did inflame.
MADRIGAL 8.
He compares himself to a Candle fly.

LIke to the seely fly,
To the dear light I fly
Of your disdainful Eyes,
But in a diverse wise
She with the flame does play,
By night alone; and I both night and day.
She to a Candle runs:
I to a light, far brighter then the Suns.
She near at hand is fired:
I both near hand, and farre-away retired.
She fondly thinks* nor dead, nor burnt to be*
But I my burning and my death foresee.
MADIGRAL IX.
Answers to her question, what Love was

IF I behold your Eyes,
Love is a Paradise:
But if I view my Heart,
It Is an infernal smart.
ODE IX.
That all other Creatures have their abiding in heaven, hell, earth, air,
water or fire, but he in all of them.

IN heaven the blessed* Angels have their being,
In hell the Fiends appointed to damnation.
To men and beasts Earth yields firm habitation*
The winged Musicians in the air are fleeing.
With finnes the people gliding,
Of Water have the enjoying.
In Fire (all else destroying)
The Salamander finds a strange abiding:
But I poor wretch, since I did first aspire,
To love your beauty, Beauties all excelling,
Have my strange diverse dwelling,
In heaven, hell, earth, water, air, and Fire.
Mine Ear while you do sing, in Heaven remains:
My mind in hell, through hope and fears contention.
Earth holds my drossy wit and dull invention.
Th*ill food of airie sighs my life sustaineth.
To streams of tears still flowing,
My weeping Eyes are turned.
My constant heart is burned
In quenchlesse fire within my bosom glowing.
O fool, no more, no more so high aspire:
In Heaven is no beauty more excelling,
In hell no such pride dwelling,
Nor heart so hard in earth, air, water, fire.
MADIGRAL 10.
Upon his timorous silence in her presence.

Are Lovers full of fire?
How comes it then my verses are so cold*
And how, when I am nigh her,
And fit occasion wills me to be bold,
The more I burn, the more I do desire,
The less I dare require?
Ah Love! this is thy wondrous Art,
To freeze the tongue, and fire the heart.
Madrigal 11.
Upon her long absence.

If this most wretched and infernal anguish,
Wherein so long your absence makes me languish,
My vital spirits spending,
Do not work out my ending,
Nor yet your long-expected safe returning,
To heavenly joy my hellish torments turning,
With joy so ouer*fill me,
As presently it kill me:
I will conclude, hows'euer Schools deceive a man,
No Joy, nor Sorrow, can of life bereave a man.
Upon seeing his face in her eye.

FAirest and kindest of all womankind:
Since you did me the undeserved grace,
In your fair Eye to show me my bad face,
With loan I Will pay you in the self same kind*
Look in mine Eye, and I will show to you,
The fairest face that heavens Eye does view.
But the small worthless Glass of my dim Eye,
Scarce shows the Picture of your heavenly face
Which yet each slightest turn does strait deface.
But could, O could you once my heart epsy,
Your form at large you there engrau'd should see,
Which, nor by Time, nor Death can razed be.
Madrigal XII.
Upon her hiding her face from him.

Go wayling Accents go,
With my warm tears and scalding tears attended,
To The Author of my woe,
And humbly ask her, why she is offended.
Say Dear, why hide you so,
From him your blessed Eyes,
Where he beholds his earthly Paradise,
Since he hides not from you
To His heart, wherein Loves heaven you may view?
^
Madrigal 13.
Upon her Beauty and Inconstancy.

Whosoever longs to try,
Both Love and ^ealousie,
My fair unconstant Lady let him see:
And he will soon a jealous Lover be.
Then he by proof shall know,
As I do to my woe,
How they make my poor heart at once to dwell,
In fire and frost, in heaven and in hell.
A Dialogue between a Lovers flaming heart, and his Ladies frozen Breast.
Heart. Shun not (sweet Breast) to see me all of fire.


Breast. Fly not (dear Heart) to find me all of snow.


Heart. Thy snow inflames these flames of my desire.


Breast. And I desire, Desires sweet flames to know.


Ha. Thy snow n'il hurt me. Br. Nor thy fire will harm me.


Ha. This cold will cool me. Br. And this heat will warm me*


Heart. Take this chaste fire to that pure virgin snow,


Breast. Being now thus warmed, I Will ne^e seek other fire:


Heart. Thou give more bliss tha^ mortal hearts may know,


Breast. More bliss I take than Angels can desire.


Both together. Let one joy fill us, as one grief did harm us,
Let one death kill us, as one love does warm us.

ELEGY 3.
For what cause he obtaines not his Lady favor.

Dear, why has my long love, and faith unfeigned,
At your fair hands no grace at all obtained?
Is It, that my Pock-hol'd face does beauty lack?
No: Your sweet Sex, sweet beauty praises:
Ours, wit and valor chiefly raises.
Is It, that my musk-lesse clothes are plain and black?
No. What wise Lady loves fine noddies,
With poore-clad minds, and rich-clad bodies?
Is It, that no costly gifts mine Agents are?
No. My true Heart which I present you,
Should more then pearl or gold content you.
Is It, that my Verses want invention rare?
No: I was never skilful Poet,
I truly love, and plainly show it.
Is It, that I vaunt, or am effeminate,
O scornful vices! I abhor you.
Dwell still in Court, the place fit for you.
Is It, that you fear my love soon turns to hate?
No: Though disdained, I can hate never,
But loved, where once I love, love ever.
Is It, that your favors jealous Eyes suppress?
No: only virtue neuer-sleeping,
Both your fair Minds and Bodies keeping.
Is It, that to many more I love profess?
Goddess, you have my hearts oblation,
And no Saint else lips invocation.
No, none of these: The cause I now discover:
No woman loves a faithful worthy, Lover.
AQuatrain.
IF you reward my love with love again,
My bliss, my life, my heaven I will deem you,
But if you proudly quite it with disdain,
My curse, my death, my hell I must esteem you.
Sonnet 10.
To a worthy Lord (now dead) upon presenting him for a New-yeares gift, with
Caesar's Commentaries and Cornelius Tacitus.

WOrthily famous Lord, whose virtues rare,
Set in the gold of never stained Nobility,
And noble mind shining in true humility,
Make you admir d o^ all that virtuous are:
If as your Sword with envy imitates
Great Caesar's Sword in all his deeds victorious,
So your learned Pen would strive to be glorious,
And write your Acts performed in foreign States;
Or if some one with the deep wit inspired,
Of matchless Tacitus would them historifie,
Then Caesar's works so much we should not glorify,
And Tacitus would be much less desired.
But till your self, or some such put them forth,
Accept of these as Pictures of your worth,
To SAMVEL DANIEL Prince of English Poets.
Upon his three several sorts of Poesy.
Lyricall, in his Sonnets. Tragical, in Rosamond and Cleopatra. Heroical, in
his Civil Wars.
OLympias matchless Son, when as he knew
How many crowns his fathers sword had gained,
With smoking sighs, and deep-fetch'd sobs did rue,
And his brave cheeks with scalding tears bedew,
Because that Kingdoms now so few remained,
By his victorious Arm to be obtained.
So (Learned Daniel) when as thou did see,
That Spencer erst so far had spread his fame,
That he was Monarch deemed of Poesy,
Thou did st (I guess) even burn with jealousy,
Least Laurel were not left enough to frame,
A neast sufficient for thine endless Name.
But as that Pearl of Greece, soon after past
In wondrous conquests his renowned sire,
And others all, whose names by Fame are placed
In highest seat: So has thy Muse surpast
Spencer, and all that do with hot desire,
To the Thunder-scorning Lawrel-crowne aspire.
And as his Empires linked force was known,
When each of those that did his Kingdom share,
The mightiest Kings in might, did match alone*
So of thy skill the greatness thus is shown,
That each of those, great Poets deemed are,
Who may in no one kind with thee compare.
One shared out Greece, another Asia held,
And fertile Egypt to a third did fall,
But only Alexander all did wield.
So in soft pleasing Lyricks some are skild,
In Tragic some, some in Heroical,
But thou alone art matchless in them all.
Non equidem inuideo, miror magis.
Three Epitaphs upon the death of a rare Child of six years old.
1
WIts perfection, Beauties wonder,
Natures pride, the graces treasure,
Virtues hope, his friends sole pleasure,
This small Marble stone lies under.
which is often moist with tears,
For such loss, in such young years.
2
Lovely Boy, thou art not dead,
But from Earth to Heaven fled,
For base Earth was far unfit,
For thy beauty, grace and wit.
3
Thou alive on earth sweet Boy,
Had an Angels wit, and face:
And now dead, thou do enjoy
Iu high Heaven an Angels place.
An Inscription for the Statue of Dido.
O most unhappy Dido,
Unhappy Wife, and more unhappy Widow!
Unhappy in thy Mate,
And in thy Lover more unfortunate,
By treason the one was reft thee,
By treason the other left thee.
That left thee means to fly with,
This left thee means to die with.
The former being dead,
From Brothers sword thou fliest:
The latter being fled,
On Lovers sword thou dyest.
Piu meritare, che conseguire.
FRANCIS DAVISON.

MORE SONNETS, ODES, etc.
SONNET 1.
He demands pardon, for looking, loving, and writing.

LEt not (sweet Saint) let not these lines offend you,
Nor yet the Message that these lines impart:
The Message my unfeigned Love does send you,
Love, which your self has planted in my heart.
For being charmed by the bewitching art
Of those inueagling graces which attend you,
Loves holy fire makes me breath out in part,
The neuer-dying flames my breast does lend you.
Then if my Lines offend, let Love be blamed.
And if my Love displease, accuse mine Eyes:
If mine Eyes sin, their sins cause, only lies
On your bright eyes, which have my heart inflamed.
Since eyes, love, lives, err then by your direction,
Excuse mine Eyes, my Lines, and my affection.
Sonnet 2.
Love in Justice punishable only with like Love,

But if my Lines may not be held excused,
Nor yet my Love find favor in your Eyes,
But that your Eyes as Judges shall be used,
Even of the fault which from themselves does rise,
Yet this my humble fuite do not despise,
Let me be judged as I stand accused,
If but my fault my doom do equalize,
What er'e it be, it shall not be refused.
And since my love already is expressed,
And that I cannot stand upon denial,
I freely put my self upon my trial,
Let Justice judge me as I have confessed:
For if my doom in justice scales be wayed
With equal love, my love must be repayed.
Sonnet III.
He calls his ears, eyes, and heart as witnesses of her sweet voice, beauty,
and inward virtuous perfections.

Fair is thy face, and great thy wits perfection,
So fair alas, so hard to be expressed.
That if my tired Pen should never rest,
It should not blaze thy worth, but my affection
Yet let me say, the Muses make election
Of your pure mind, there to erect their nest,
And that your face is such a flint-hard breast,
By force thereof, without force feels subjection.
Witness mine ear ravished when you it hears,
Witness mine eyes ravished when you they see,
Beutie and virtue, witness eyes and ears,
In you (sweet Saint) have equal sovereignty.
But if nor eyes, nor ears can prove it true,
Witness my heart, there is none that equals you.
How they make my poor heart at once to dwell.
In fire and frost, in heaven and in hell.
Sonnet IIII.
Praise of her eyes, excelling all comparisons.

I Bend my wit, but wit cannot de^ise,
Words fit to blaze the worth, your eyes contains,
Whose nameles worth, their worthles name disdains,
For they in worth exceed the name of eyes.
Eyes they be not, but worlds in which there lies,
More bliss then this wide world besides contains.
Worlds they be not, but stars, whose influe^ce reigns,
Over my life and life's felicities.
Stars they be not, but Suns, whose presence drives
Darkness from night, and does bright day impart:
Suns they be not, which outward heat deriues,
But these do inwardly inflame my heart.
Since then in Earth, nor Heaven, they equaled are,
I must confess they be beyond compare,
ODE I.
His Lady to be condemned of ignorance or cruelty.

As she is fair, so faithful I,
My service she, her grace I merit,
Her beauty does my love inherit,
But Grace she does deny.
O knows she not how much I love?
Or does knowledge in her move
No small remorce?
For the guilt thereof must lie
Upon one of these of force,
Her ignorance, or cruelty.
As she is fair, so cruel she,
I sow true love, but reap disdaining,
Her pleasure springs from my paining,
Which Pitties source should be.
Too well she knows how much I love,
Yet does knowledge in her move,
No small remorce.
Then the guilt thereof must lie
Her undeserved cruelty.
As she is fair, so were she kind:
Or being cruel, could I waver,
Soon should I, either win her fauer,
Or a new Mistress f^de.
But neither our alas may be,
Scorn in her, and louein me,
So fixed are.
Yet in whom most blame does lie
Judge she may, if she compare
My love unto her cruelty.
Sonnet V.
Contention of Love and Reason for his heart.

REason and love lately at strife contended,
Whose right it was to have my minds protection
Reason on his side Natures will pretended,
Loves title was my Mistress rare perfection.
Of power to end this strife, each makes election,
Reasons pretense discoursiue thoughts defended,
But love soon brought those thoughts into subjection
By beauties troops which on my Saint depended,
Yet since to rule the mind was Reasons duty
On this condition it by love was rendered,
That endless praise by reason should be tendered,
As a due tribute to her conquering beauty.
Reason was pleased withal, and to loves royalty
He pledged my heart, as hostage for his loyalty.
Sonnet VI.
That she has greater power over his happiness and life, then either Fortune,
Fate, or Stars.

LEt Fate, my Fortune, and my stars conspire,
Jointly to pour on me their worst disgrace:
So I be gracious in your heavenly face,
I wey not Fates, nor Stars, nor Fortunes ire,
It Is not the influence of heavens fire,
Has power to make me blessed in my race,
Nor in my happiness has Fortune place,
Nor yet can Fate my poor life's date expire.
It Is your fair eyes my Stars all bliss do give,
It Is your disdain my Fate has power to kill*
It Is you (my Fortune) make me happy live,
Though Fortune, Fate, and Stars conspire mine ill.
Then (blessed Saint) into your favor take me,
Fortune, nor Fate, nor Stars can wretched make me.
Sonnet VII.
Of his Ladies weeping.

WHat need I say how it does wound my breast,
By fate to be thus ravished from thine eyes
Since your own tears with me do Simpathize,
Pleading with slow departure there to rest?
For when with floods of tears they were oppressed,
Over those Iuory banks they did not rise,
Till others envying their felicities,
Did press them forth, that they might there bear rest,
Some of which tears, pressed forth by violence
Your lips with greedy kissing straight did drink:
And other some unwilling to part thence,
In amour'd on your cheeks in them did sink.
And some which from your face were forc,d away,
In sign of love did on your garments stay.
Sonnet VIII.
He paints out his torment.

Sweet, to my cursed life some favor show,
Or let me not (accursed) in life remain:
Let not my senses, sense of life retain,
Since Sense does only yield me sense of woe.
For now mine eyes only your frowns do know,
Mine ears hear nothing else but your disdain,
My lips taste naught but tears, and smell is pain,
Banished your lips, where Indian Odours grow.
And my devoted heart your beauties slave,
Feels naught but scorn, oppressions and distress,
Made even of wretchedness the wretched cave,
Nay, too too wretched for vild wretchedness.
For even sad sighs, as loathing there to rest,
Struggle for passage from my griefe-swolne breast.
ODE II.
A Dialogue between him and his heart.

AT her fair hands, how have I grace entreated,
With prayers often repeated,
Yet still my love is thwarted:
Heart let her go, for she will not be converted.
Say, shall she go?
Oh no, no, no, no, no.
She is most fair though she be marble hearted.
How often have mysighs declared mine anguish*
Wherein is daily anguish,
Yet does she still procure it:
Heart let her go, for I cannot endure it.
Say shall she go,
Oh no, no, no, no, no.
She gave the wound, and she alone must cure it.
The trickling tears that down my cheeks have ^wed,
My life have often showed:
Yet still unkind I prove her:
Heart let her go, for naught I do can move her.
Say, shall she go,
Oh no, no, no, no, no.
Though me she hates I cannot choose but love her.
But shall still a true affection owe her
Which prayers, sighs, tears do show her.
And shall she still disdain me?
Heart let her go, if they no grace can give me.
Say, shall she go?
Oh no, no, no, no, no.
She made me hers, and hers she will retain me.
But if the love that has, and still does burn me,
No love at length return me:
Out of my thoughts i will set her:
Heart let her go, oh heart, I pray thee let her:
Say, shall she go?
Oh! no, no, no, no, no.
Fixed in the heart, how can the heart forget her?
But if I weep and sigh, and often wail me,
Till tears, sighs, prayers fail me,
Shall yet my Love preserver?
Heart let her go, if she will right thee never.
Say, shall she go?
Oh! no, no, no, no, no.
Tears, sighs, prayers fail, but true love lasts ever.
Sonnet VII.
His sighs and tears are bootlesse.

I have entreated, and I have complained,
I have disprais'd, and praise I likewise gave,
All means to win her grace I tried have,
And still I love, and still I am disdained.
So long I have my tongue and Pen constrained,
To praise, dispraise, complain, and pity crave,
That now nor tongue, nor Pen, to me her slave
Remains, whereby her grace may be obtained.
Yet you (my sighs) may purchase me relief,
And ye (my tears) her rockie heart may move:
Therefore my sighs sigh in her ear my grief,
And in her heart my tears imprint my love.
But cease vain sighs, cease, cease ye fruitless tears,
Tears cannot pierce her heart, nor sighs her ears.
Sonnet VIII.
Her beauty makes him live even in despair.

WOunded with grief, I weep, and sigh, and pain,
Yet neither plaints, nor sighs, nor tears do good,
But all in vain I strive against the flood,
Gaining but grief for grief, and pain for pain.
Yet though in vain my tears my cheeks distaine:
Leaving engraven sorrow where they stood
And though my sighs consuming up my blood,
For love deserved, reap undeserved disdain:
And though in vain I know I beg remorce
At your remorcelesse heart more hard then steel,
Yet such (alas) such is your beauties force,
Charming my sense, that though this hell I feel,
Though neither plaints, nor sighs nor tears can move you,
Yet must I still persist ever to love you.
Sonnet IX.
Why her lips yield him no words of comfort.

Often do I plain, and she my plants does reed,
Which in black colors do paint forth my woe,
So that of force she must my sorrow know:
And know, for her disdain my heart does bleed.
And knowledge must of force some pity breed,
Which makes me hope, she will some favor show
And from her sugared lips cause comfort flow
Into mine ears my heart with joy to feed:
Yet though she reads, and reading knows my grief
And knowledge moves her pity my distress,
Yet do her lips, sweet lips yield no relief.
Much do I muse, but find no cause in this,
That in her lips, her heavenly lips that bliss them,
Her words loath thence to part, stay there to kiss them.
Sonnet X.
Comparison of his heart to a tempest beaten Ship.

LIke a Sea-tossed Bark with tackling spent,
And stars obseur'd his watrie iournies guide,
By loud tempestuous winds and raging tide,
From wave to wave with dreadful fury sent,
Fares my poor heart, my heart strings being rent,
And quite disabled your fierce wrath to bide,
Since your fair eyes my stars themselves do hide,
Clouding their light in frowns and discontent:
For from your frowns do spring my sighs and tears,
Tears flow like seas, and sighs like winds do blow
Whose joined rage most violently bears
My tempest beaten heart from woe to woe.
And if your eyes shine not that I may shu^ it,
On rock, despair, my sighs, and tears will rue it.
ELEGY.
To his Lady, who had vowed virginity.

6
Even as my hand my Pen and Paper lays,
My trembling hand, my Pen from Paper stays,
Lest that thine eyes which shining made me love you,
Should frowning on my suit bid cease to move you,
So that I fear like one at his wits end,
Hoping to gain, and fearing to offend,
What pleases hope, the same despair mislikes,
What hope sets down, those lines despair out strikes.
So that my nursing murdering Pen affords,
A grave and cradle to my newborn words.
But whilst like clouds tossed up and down the air,
I racked hang t'wixt hope and sad despair,
Despair is beaten vanquished from the field,
And unto conquering hope my heart does yield.
For if that Nature love to beauty offers,
And Beauty shun the love that nature profsers:
Then, either unjust beauty is too blame,
With scorn to quench a lawful kindled flame,
Or else unlawfully if love we must,
And be vnlou'd, then nature is unjust,
Unjustly then nature has hearts created,
There to love most, where most their love is hated,
And flattering them with a faire^ seeming ill,
To poison them with beauties sugared Pill.
7
Think you that beauties admirable worth
Was to no end, or idle end brought forth?
No no, from nature never deed did pass.
But it by wisdoms hand subscribed was.
But you in vain are fair, if fair, not viewed,
Or being seen, men's hearts be not subdued,
Or making each man's heart your beauties thrall,
You be enjoyed of no one at all.
For as the Lions strength to seize his pray,
And fearful hearts light-foote to run away,
Are as an idle talent but abused,
And fruitless had, if had, they be not used.
So you in vain have beauties bonds to show,
By which, men's eyes engaged hearts do owe,
If time shall cancel them before you gain
Th'indebted tribute to your beauties reign.
8
But if (these reasons being vainly spent)
You sight it out to the last argument,
Tell me but how one body can enclose,
As loving friends two deadly hating foes?
But when as contraries are mixed together,
The color made, does differ much from either.
Whilst mutually at strife they do impeach
The gross and luster proper unto each.
So, where one body jointly does inuest
An Angels face, and cruel Tigers breast,
There dies both allegiance and command,
For selfe-deuided kingdoms cannot stand.
But as a child that knows not what is what,
Now craves this, and now affects that,
And having weighs not that which he requires.
But is vnpleasde, even in his pleased desires.
Chaste Beauty so, both will, and will not have
The selfsame thing it childishly does crave:
And wanton-like, now love, now hate affects.
9
And love or hate obtained as fast neglects,
So (like the web Penelope did weaue,
Which made by day, she did at night vnreaue)
Fruitless affections, endless thread is spunne,
At one self instant twisted, and undone.
Nor yet is this chaste beauties greatest ill,
For where it speaks fair, it there does kill.
A marble heart under an amorous look,
Is of a flattering bait the murdering hook:
For from a Ladies shining-frowning Eyes,
Deaths ^able dart, and Cupids arrow flies.
10
Since then, from Chastity and Beauty spring,
Such muddy streams, where each does reign as king:
Let tyrant chastities usurped throne,
Be made the seat of beauties grace alone:
And let your beauty be with this suffiz'd,
Raze not my heart, nor to your beauty raise,
Bloud-guilded Trophies of your beauties praise:
For wisest conquerors do towns desire,
On honorable terms, and not with fire.
Sonnet XI.
That he cannot leave to love, though commanded.

HOw can my love in equity be blamed,
Still to importune though it never obtain,
Since though her face and voice will me refrain,
Yet by her voice and face I am inflamed?
For when (alas) her face with frowns is framed,
To kill my love, but to revive my pain:
And when her voice commands, but all in vain,
That love both leave to be, and to be named:
Her Siren voice does such enchantment move,
And though she frown, even frowns so lovely make her
That I of force am forced still to love.
Since that I must, and yet cannot forsake her,
My fruitless prayers shall cease in vain to move her,
But my devoted heart never cease to love her.
Sonnet XII.
He desires leave to write of his love.

MVst my devoted heart desist to love her?
No: love I may, but I may not confess it,
What harder thing than love* and yet depresse it?
Love most concealed, does most it self discover.
Had I no Pen to show that I approve her,
Were I tong-tide that I might not address it,
In plaints and Prair's unfeigned to express it,
Yet could I not my deep affection cover.
Had I no Pen, my very tears would show it,
Which write my true affection in my face.
Were I tong-tide, my sighs would make her know it,
Which witness that I grieve at my disgrace.
Since then, though silent, I my love discover,
O let my pen have leave to say, I love her!
Quid pluma leuius? Puluis. Quid puluere? Ventus.
Quid vento? Mulier. Quid muliere, Nihil.
Translated thus.
DVst is lighter than a feather,
And the wind more light than either:
But a woman's sickle mind,
More than Feather, Dust, or Wind.
W. D.

Sonnets, Odes, Elegies, and other Poesies.
Ten Sonnets by T. W.
A Dialogue between the Lover and his heart.

L. Speak gentle heart, where is thy dwelling place,


H. with her whose bi^th the heavens themselves have blessed


L. What do thou there?


H. Sometimes ^ehold her face, And lodge sometimes within her crystal breast.


L. She cold, thou hot, how can you then agree?


H Not nature now, but love does govern me.


L. With her will thou remain, and let me die?


H. If I return, we both shall die for grief.


L. If still thou stay, what shall I get thereby?


H. I Will move her heart to purchase thy relief.


L. What if her heart be hard, and stop his ears?


H. I Will sigh aloud, and make him soft with tears.


L. If that prevail, will thou return from thence?


H. Not I alone, my heart shall come with me.


L. Then will you both live under my defense?


H. So long as life will let us both agree.


L. Why then despair, go pack thee hence away. I live in hope to have a happy
day.


A Dialogue between a Lover, Death, and Love.
Lover. COme, gentle Death*


D. Who calls*


L. One that is oppressed.


D. What is thy will?


L. That thou abridge my woe, By cutting off my life.


D. Cease thy request, I cannot kill thee yet.


L. Alas why so?


D. Thou want thy heart.


L. who stole that same away?


D. Love whom thou seru'st, entreat him if thou may.


Lover. COme Cupid come.


C. Who calls me so often?


L. Thy vassal true who^ thou should know by right.


C What makes thy cry so faint?


L. My voice is soft, Quite broke and spent with crying day and night.


C. Why then what is thy request.


L. That thou restore To me my heart, and steal the same no more.


And thou O Death when I possess my heart, Dispatch me then at once.

D. Alas why so?


L. By promise thou art bound to end my smart.


D. But if thy heart return, then what is thy woe?


D. That brought from frost, it never will desire To rest with me that am more
hot then fire.


That time has no power to end or diminish his love.
TIme wastes years, and months, and days, and hours
Time does consume, fame, riches, wit, and strength,
Time kills the greenest herbs, and sweetest flowers,
Time wears out youth, and Beauties pride at length,
Time makes every tree to die and rot:
Time turns often our pleasures into pain.
Time causes wars, and wrongs to be forgot,
Time cleares the sky that first hung full of rain.
Time brings to naught the mightiest Princes state,
Time brings a flood from new resolved snow,
Time calmes the Sea where tempests roared late,
Time eats whatso'ere the Moon does see below:
Yet shall no time upon my heart prevail,
Nor any time shall make my love to fail.
Loves Hyperboles.
IF Love had lost his shafts, and love down threw
His thunder* bolts, or spent his forked fire,
They only might recou'red be anew
From out my heart crosse-wounded with desire.
Or if debate by Mars were lost a space,
It might be found within the self same place.
IF Neptunes waves were all dried up and gone,
My weeping eyes so many tears distill,
That greater seas might grow by them alone:
Or if no flame were yet remaining still.
In Vulcans forge, he might from out my breast
Make choice of such as should befit him best.
IF Aeole were deprived of his charge,
Yet soon could I restore his winds again,
By sobbing sighs which forth I blow at large,
To move her mind that pleasures in my pain,
What man but I could thus incline his will,
To live in love, that has no end of ill?
An Inuectiue against Love.
Love is a sour delight, a sugared grief,
A living death, an euer-dying life.
A breath of reasons law, a secret thief
A sea of tears, an everlasting strife.
A bait for fools, a scourge of noble wits,
A deadly wound, a shot that ever hits.
Love is a blinded god, away-ward boy,
A laborinth of doubts, an idle lust,
A slave of beauties will, a witless toy,
A ravenous bird, a tyrant must unjust.
A burning heat in frost, a flattering foe,
A private hell, a very world of woe.
Yet mighty Love regard not what I say,
Who in a trance do lie, reft of my wits
But blame the light that leads me thus astray,
And makes my tongue thus rave by frantic fits,
Yet hurt me not, lest I sustain the smart,
Which am content to lodge her in my heart.
Petrarks Sonnet translated.
Pace non trouo, and non ho da far guera.

I Joy not Peac^ where yet no war is found,
I fear and hope, I burn, yet freeze withal.
I mount to heaven, yet lie still on the ground,
I nothing hold, yet I compass all.
I live her bond, which neither is my foe,
Nor friend, nor holds me fast, nor lets me go.
Love will not that I live, nor let me die,
Nor locks me fast, nor suffers me to escape,
I want both eyes and tongue, yet see I cry.
I wish for death, yet after help I gape.
I hate my self, yet love another wight,
And feed on grief in lieu of sweet delight.
At self same time, I both lament and joy,
I still am pleased, and yet displeased still:
Love sometimes seems a God, sometimes a Boy,
Sometimes I sink, sometimes I swim at will.
T'wixt death and life, small difference I make,
All this (dear Dame) endure I for thy sake.
He proves himself to endure the hellish torments of Tantalus, Ixion, Titius,
Sisyphus and the Belides.
IN that I thirst for such a Goddess grace,
As wants remorse, like Tantalus I die,
My state is equal to ^xions case,
Whose mangled lims are turned continually.
In that my rolling toiles can have no end,
Nor love, nor time, nor chance will stand my friend.
IN that my heart consuming never dies,
I feel with Titius an equal pain,
Upon whose heart a vulture feeding lies.
In that I rise through hope, and fall again,
By fear like Sisyphus ^ labor still
To turn a rolling stone against a hill.
IN that I make my vows to her alone,
Whose tears are deaf, and will retain no sound,
With Belides my state is all but one,
Which fill a Tub whose bottom is not sound.
Thus in my heart since love therein did dwell
Are all the torments to be found of hell.
Loves discommodities.
WHere heat of love does once possess the heart,
There cares oppreste the mind with wonders ill.
Wit runs awry not fearing future smart,
And fond desire does ouermaster Will.
The belly neither cares for meat nor drink,
Nor ouer-watched eyes desire to wink.
Footsteps are false, and wavering too and fro:
The pleasing flower of Beauty fades away,
Reason retires, and pleasure brings in woe,
And wisdom yee^deth place to black decay.
Counsel and fame, and friendship, are contemned,
And bashful shame, and Gods themselves condemned.
WAtch full suspect is linked with despair,
Inconstant hope is often drowned in fears,
What folly hurts, Fortune cannot repair,
And misery does swim in seas of tears.
Long use of life is but a lingering foe,
And gentle death is only end of woe.
Allegory of his Love to a Ship,
THe Soldier worn with wars delights in peace,
The Pilgrim in his ease when toils are past,
The ship to gain the Port, when storms do cease,
And I rejoice dischargd'd from love at last.
whom while I served, peace, rest, and land I lost,
With wars, with toiles, with storms, worn, tired, and tossed.
SWeet liberty now gives me leave to sing,
What world it was, where love the rule did bear,
How foolish Chance by lots ruled every thing,
How Error was man* sail, each wave a tear.
The master love himself, deep sighs were wind,
Cares row'de with vows, the Ship a pensive mind.
FAlse hope the healme, often turned the ship about,
And constant faith stood up for middle mast,
Despair the Cable twisted all with doubt,
Held griping grief the piked Anchor fast.
Beauty was all the rocks, but ^ at last.
Have gained the Port, and now my love is past.
Execre^ition of his passed love.
I Curse the time, where in these lips of mine,
Did pray or praise the Dame that was unkind.
I curse my Ink, my Paper, and each line,
My hand has writ in hope to please her mind.
I curse her hollow heart, and flattering eyes,
Whose sly deceits did cause my mourning cries.
I Curse the sugared speech and Syrenes song,
Wherewith so often she has bewitched mine ear*
I Curse my foolish will that staid so long
And took delight to bide twixt hope and fear:
I curse the hour, wherein I first began,
By loving looks to prove a witless man.
I Curse those days which I have spent in vain
In loving one ungrateful and unkind,
I curse the bow and shafts that bred my pain,
And Love I curse that Archer naked and blind.
But on that hour that my fond love did end,
Millions of blessings I will ever spend.
FINIS. T. VV.
A Sonnet of the Sun: A Jewel, being a Sunne-shining upon the Marigold
closed in a heart of gold sent to his Mistress, named Mary.
THe Sun does make the Marigolde to flowrish,
The Suns departure makes it droupe again,
So golden Mary's sight, my joys do nourish,
But by her absence all my joys are slain.
The Sun, the Marigold makes live and die,
By her the Sun-shines brighter, so may I.
Her smiles do glad the Sun, and light the air,
Revive my heart, and clear the cloudy sky.
Her frowns the air make dark the Sun to lowre.
The Marigold to close, my heart to die,
By her the Sun, the flower, the air, and I,
Shine and darken, spread, and close, live and die,
You are the Sun, you are the golden Mary,
Passing the Sun in brightness, gold in power:
I am the flower whom you do make to vary.
Flowrish when you smile, droupe when you do lowre.
Oh let this heart of gold, Sunn, and flower,
Still live, shine, and spring in your hearts bower.
Cha. Best.

A Sonnet of the Moon.
Look how the pale Queen of the silent night,
Does cause the Ocean to attend upon her,
And he as long as she is in his sight,
With his full tide is ready her to honor:
But when the silver wagon of the Moon
Is mounted up so high he cannot follow,
The sea calls home his crystal waves to move,
And with low ebb does manifest his sorrow:
So you that are the sovereign of my heart,
Have all my joys attending on your will,
My joys low ebbing when you do depart.
When you return, their tide my heart does fill.
So as you come, and as you do depart
Joys ebb and flow within my tender heart.
Cha. Best.

Three Sonnets for a Proeme to the Poems following.
That love only made him a Poet, and that all sorts of verses, both in rhyme
and measure, agree with his Lady.

Sonnet 1.
SOme men they say, are Poets borne by kind,
And suck that Science from their mothers breast*
An easy art that comes with so great rest,
And happy men to so good hap assignde.
In some desire of praise enflames the mind,
To clime with pain Parnassus double crest:
Some hope of rich rewards has so possessed.
That gold in Castle sands, they seek to find.
Me, neither nature has a Poet made,
Nor love of glory mou'de to learn the trade,
Nor thirst of gold persuaded me to write:
For Natures graces are too fine for me,
Praise like the Peacock prides her self to see,
Desire of gain the basest minds delight.
Sonnet 2.
WHat mou'de me then? say Love, for thou can tell:
Of thee^ learned this skill, if skill I have.
Thou know the Muse, whose help I always crave,
Is none of those that on Parnassus dwell.
My muse is such as does them all excel,
They all to her alone their cunning gave,
To sing, to dance, to play, to make so brave:
Thrice threefolde graces her alone befell.
From her do flow the streams that water me,
Here is the praise, if I a Poet be*
Her only look both will and skill does give.
What marvel then if I those laws refuse,
Which other Poets in their making use,
Since by her looks I write, by which I live?
Sonnet 3.
THus am I free from laws that other bind,
Who diverse verse to diverse matter frame,
All kind of Styles do serve my Ladies name,
What they in all the world, in her I find.
The lofty verse does show her noble mind,
By which she quenches loves enraged flame:
Sweet Liricks sing her heavenly beauties fame,
The tender Elege speaks her pity kind,
In mournful Tragic verse for her I die,
In Comicke she reuiues me with her eye,
All serve my Goddess both for mirth and moan,
Each look she casts does breed both peace and strife,
Each word she speaks does cause both death and life,
Out of my self I live in her alone.
ODE.
Where his Lady keeps his heart.
SVVeet Love, mine only treasure,
For service long unfeigned,
Wherein I naught have gained,
Vouchsafe this little pleasure,
To tell me in what part,
My Lady keeps my heart.
If in her hair so slender,
Like golden nets untwined,
Which fire and art have fined,
Her thrall my heart I render,
For ever to abide
With locks so dainty tide.
If in her eyes she bind it,
Wherein that fire was framed,
By which it is inflamed,
I dare not look to find it:
I only wish it sight,
To see that pleasant light.
But if her breast have dained
With kindness to receive it,
I am content to leave it,
Though death thereby were gained.
Then Lady take your own,
That lives for you alone.
To her eyes.
Feign would I learn of thee thou murdering Eye,
Whether thy glance be fire, or else a dart:
For with thy look in flames thou make the fry,
And with the same thou strik'st me to the heart.
Pierst with thy looks I burn in fire,
And yet those looks I still desire.
The Fly that buzzeth round about the flame
Knows not (pooresoule) she gets her death thereby,
I see my death, and seeing seek the same,
And seeking, find, and finding, choose to die.
That when thy looks my life have slain,
Thy looks may give me life again.
Turn then to me those sparkling Eyes of thine,
And with their fiery glances pierce my heart.
Quench not my light, least I in darkness pine,
Strike deep and spare not, pleasant is the smart.
So by thy looks my life be spilt,
Kill me as often as thou will.
ODE 2.
The more favor he obtaines, the more he desires.
AS soon may water wipe me dry,
And fire my heat allay,
As you with favor of your eye,
Make hot desire decay.
The more I have,
The more I crave:
The more I crave, the more desire,
As piles of wood increase the fire,
The senseless stone that from one hie
Descends to Earth below,
With greater have it self does ply,
The less it has to go.
So feels desire
Increase of fire,
That still with greater force does burn,
Till all into it self it turn.
The greater favor you bestow,
The sweeter my delight:
And by delight desire does grow,
And growing gathers might.
The less remains,
The more my pains,
To see my self so near the brinke,
And yet my fill I cannot drink.
Love the only price of love.
THe fairest Pearls that Northern Seas do breed,
For precious stones from eastern coasts are sold.
Naught yields the earth that from exchange is freed,
Gold values all, and all things value Gold.
Where goodness wants an equal change to make,
There greatness serves, or number place does take.
No mortal thing can bear so high a price,
But that with mortal thing it may be bought,
The corn of Sicill buies the Western spice,
French wine of us, of them our cloth is sought.
No pearls, no gold, no stones, no corn no spice.
No cloth, no wine, of love can pay the price.
What thing is love, which naught can counteruaile?
Naught save it self, even such a thing is love.
All worldly wealth in worth as far does fail,
As lowest earth does yield to heaven above.
Divine is love, and scorneth worldly pelf,
And can be bought with nothing, but with self.
Such is the price my loving heart would pay,
Such is the pay thy love does claim as due.
Thy due is love, which I (poor I) assay,
In vain assay to quite with friendship true:
True is my love, and true shall ever be,
And truest love is far too base for thee.
Love but thy self, and love thy self alone,
For save thy self, none can thy love require:
All mine thou have, but all as good as none,
My small desert must take a lower flight.
Yet if thou will vouchsafe my heart such bliss,
Accept it for thy prisoner as it is.
His heart arraigned of theft, and acquitted.
MY heart was found within my Ladies breast,
Close coucht for fear that no man might him see,
On whom suspect did serve a straight arrest,
And Felon-like he must arraigned be.
What could he mean so closely there to stay,
But by deceit to steal her heart away?
The bench was set, the Prisoner forth was brought,
My Mistress self chief Judge to hear the cause:
Th'end^tement read, by which his blood was sought,
That he (poor heart) by stealth had broke the laws:
His Plea was such as each man might descrie,
For grace and truth were read in neither eye.
Yet forced to speak, his farther Plea was this,
That sore pursu'de by me that sought his blood,
Because so often his presence I did miss,
Whilst as he said, he ^ bour'd for my good*
He void of help to have his harms redrest,
Took sanctuary in her sacred breast.
The gentle Judge that saw his true intent,
And that his cause did touch her honor near,
Since he from me to her for succor went:
That ruth migh reign, where rigor did appear,
Gave sentence thus: that if he there would bide,
That place was made, a guiltless heart to hide.
MADRIGAL I.
THine eyes so bright
Bereft my sight,
When first I viewed thy face.
So now my light
Is turned to night,
I stray from place to place.
Then guide me of thy kindness,
So shall I bless my blindness.
Phaleuciak I.
TIme nor place did I want, what held me tongtide?
What charms, what magical abused Altars?
Wherefore wished I so often that hour unhappy,
When with freedom I might recount my torments,
And plead for remedy by true lamenting
Dumb* nay dead in a trance I stood amazed,
When those looks I beheld that late I longed for:
No speech, no memory, no life remained,
Now speech prat^th apace, my grief bewraying,
Now bootlesse memory my plaints remembers,
Now life moves again, but all auailes not.
Speech, life and memory die altogether,
With speech, life, memory, love only dies not.
Deadly Sweetness.
Sweet thoughts, the food on which I feeding sterue,
Sweet tears, the drink that more augme^ts my thirst,
Sweet eyes the stars by which my course does swerue,
Sweet hope, my death* which wast my life at first.
Sweet thoughts, sweetteares, sweet hope, sweet eyes,
How chance that death in sweetness lies?
Madrigall II.
Verbal love.
IF love be made of words, as woods of trees,
Who more beloved then I?
If love be hot where true desire does freeze,
Who more then she does fry?
Are droanes that make no honey counted Bees?
Is running water dry?
Is that a gainefull trade that has no fees?
He live, that dead does lie*
What else but blind is he, that nothing sees,
But deaf that hears no cry*
Such is her vowed love to me,
Yet must I think it true to be.
Ladies eyes, serve Cupid both for Darts and Fire.
Often have I mused the cause to find,
Why love in Ladies eyes does dwell:
I thought, because himself was blind,
He looked that they should guide him well.
And sure his hope but seldom fails,
For love by Ladies eyes preuailes.
But time, at last, has taught me wit.
Although I bought my wit full dear,
For by her eyes my heart is hit,
Deep is the wound, though none appear,
Their glancing beams as darts he throws,
And sure he has no shafts but those.
I mus'de to see their eyes so bright,
And little thought they had been fire,
I gazde upon them with delight,
But that delight has bred desire.
What better place can love require,
Than that where grow both shafts and fire?
Loves Contrarieties.
I Smile sometimes amids my greatest grief,
Not for delight, for that longsince is fled,
Despair did shut the gate against relief,
When love at first, of death the sentence read.
But yet I smile sometimes in midst of pain,
To think what toys do toss my troubled head
How most I wish, that most I should refrain,
And seekethe thing that least I long to sinde,
And find the wound by which my heart is slain,
Yet want both skill and will to ease my mind.
Against my will I burn with free consent,
I live in pain, and in my pain delight,
I cry for death, yet am to live content,
I hate the day yet never wi^h for night,
I freeze for cold, and yet refrain the fire:
I long to see, and yet I shun her sight,
I scald in Sun, and yet no shade desire,
I live by death, and yet I wish to die,
I feel no hurt, and yet for help enquire,
I die by life, and yet my life defy.
Heu, cogor votinescius esse mei.
ODE III.
Desire and hope.

DEsire and Hope have moved my mind,
To seek for that I cannot find,
Assured faith in woman-kinde,
And love with love rewarded:
Self-love, all but himself disdaines,
Suspect as chiefest virtue reigns,
Desire of change unchanged remains.
So light is love regarded.
True friendship is a naked name,
That idle brains in pastime frame,
Extremes are always worthy blame,
Enough is common kindness.
What floods of tears do lovers spend?
What sighs from out their hearts ^hey send?
How many may, and will not mend?
Love is a wilful blindness.
What is the love they so desire?
Like love for love, and equal fire:
Good loving worms, which love require,
And know not when they have it.
Is love in words? fair words may feign.
Is love in looks? sweet looks are vain.
Both these in common kindness reign,
Yet few or none so crave it.
Thou would be loved, and that of one,
For vice? thou may seek love of none,
For virtue? why of her alone?
I say no more, speak you that know the truth,
If so great love be aught but fear of youth,
ELEGY. III.
Her praise is in her want.
SHe only is the pride of Natures skill*
In none but her, all graces friendly meet.
In all save her, may Cupid have his will,
By none but her, is fancy under feet.
Most strange of all her praise is in her want,
Her heart that should be flesh, is Adamant.
Laudo quod lugeo.
Her outward gesture deceiving his inward hope.
SMooth are thy looks, so is thy deepest stream,
Soft are thy lips, so is the swallowing sand.
Fair is thy sight, but like unto a dream,
Sweet is thy promise, but it will not stand.
Smoth, soft, fair, sweet, to them that lightly touch.
Rough, hard, foul, sour to them that take too much,
Thy looks so smooth have drawn away my sight,
Who would have though that hooks could so be hid?
Thy lips so soft have fretted my delight,
Before I once suspected what they did.
Thy face so fair has burnt me with desire,
Thy words so sweet were bellows for the fire.
And yet I love the looks that made me blind,
And like to kiss the lips that fret my life,
In heat of fire an ease of heat I find,
And greatest p^ace in midst of greatest strife.
That if my choice were now to make again,
I would not have this joy without this pain,
Phaleuciacke II.
HOw, or where have I lost my self* unhappy!
Dead, nor live am I neither, and yet am both.
Through despair am I dead, by hope revived,
Weeping wake I the night from even to morning
Sighing waste I the day from morn to evening.
Tears are drink to my thirst, by tears I thirst more
Sighs are meat that I eat, I hunger eating,
Might I, O that I might refrain my feeding,
Soon would ease to my heart by death be purchased.
Life and light* do I lack, when I behold not
Those bright beams of her eyes, Apollo darkning:
Life and light do I lose when I behold them,
All as Snow by the Sun resolved to water.
Death and life I receive her eyes beholding,
Death and life I refuse not in beholding,
So that, dead or alive I may behold them.
Lenuoy in riming Phaleuciacks.
Muse not, Lady, to read so strange a Meeter,
Strange grief, strange remedy for ease requires
When sweet joy did abound, I writ the sweeter,
Now that wears away, my Muse retireth.
In you lies it alone to cure my sadness,
And therewith to revive my heart with gladness.
Sonnet IIII.
Desire has conquered revenge.
Wronged by desire I yielded to disdain,
Who called reueng to work my spite thereby.
^ash was Revenge and swear, Desire should die,
No price nor prayer his pardon might obtain.
Down to my heart in rage he hastes amain.
And stops each passage, lest Desire should fly:
Within my ears disdainsull words did lie,
Proud looks did keep mine eyes with scornful train
Disire that erst but flickred in my breast,
And wanton-like now pricked, now gave me rest,
For fear of death sunk deeper in my heart.
There reigns he now, and there will reign alone
Desire is jealous, and gives part to none,
Nor he from me, nor I from him can start.
That he is unchangeable.
THe love of change has changed the world throughout
And naught is counted good, but what is strange,
New things wax old, old new, all turn about,
And all things change, except the love of change.
Yet feel I not this love of change in me,
But as I am, so will I always be.
For who can change that likes his former choice
Who better wish, that knows he has the best?
How can the heart in things unknown rejoice,
If joy well tried can bring no certain rest?
My choice is made, change he that list for me,
Such as I am, so will I always be.
Who ever changed and not confessed his want?
And who confessed his want and not his woe*
Then change who list, thy woe shall not be scant
Within thy self thou feedst thy mortal foe.
Change calls for change, no end, no ease for thee,
Then as I am, so will I alwaie^ be.
Mine eyes confess they have their wished sight,
My heart affirms it feels the love it sought.
Mine inward thoughts are fed with true delight,
Which full consent of constant joy has wrought.
And full consent desires no change to see,
Then as I am so will I always be.
Rest then (my heart) and keep thine old delight,
Which like the Phoenix waxes young each day,
Each hour presents new pleasure to my sight,
More cause of joy increases every way.
True love with age does daily cleerer see,
Then as I am, so will I always be.
What gained fair Cresside by her faithless change,
But loss of time, of beauty, health, and life?
Mark Iasons hap, that ever loved to range,
That lost his children, and his princely wife.
Then change farewell, thou art no mate for me,
But as I am, so will I always be.
Iamais aultre.
To his eyes.
Unhappy eyes the causers of my pain,
That to my foe betrayed my strongest hold,
Wherein he like a tyrant now does reign
And boasts of winning that which treason sold.
Too late you call for help of me in vain,
Whom love has bound in chains of massy gold
The tears you shed increase my hot desire,
As water on the Smithie kindles fire.
The sighs that from my heart ascend,
Like wind disperse the flame throughout my breast,
No part is left to harbor quiet rest,
I burn in fire and do not spend:
Like him, whose growing maw,
The vulture still does gnaw.
ODE IIII.
Upon visiting his Lady by Moone-light.
THe night say all, was made to rest,
And so say I, but not for all:
To them the darkest nights are best,
Which give them leave asleep to fall*
But I that seek my rest by light
Hate sleep, and praise the cleerest night.
Bright was the Moon, as bright as day,
And Venus glistred in the West,
Whose light did lead the ready way,
That brought me to my wished rest:
Then each of them encreast their light,
While I enjoyed her heavenly sight.
Say, gentle Dames, what moved your mind
To shine so bright above your wont:
Would Phoebe fair Endimion find?
Would Venus see Adonis hunt?
No no, you feared by her sight,
To lose the praise of beauty bright.
At last, for shame you shrunk away,
And thought to reaue the world of light:
Then shone my Dame with brighter ray,
Then that which comes from Phoebus sight*
None other light but hers I praise,
Whose nights are cleerer then the days.
Upon her absence.
THe summer Sun that scalds the ground with heat,
And burns the grass, and dries the rivers source,
With milder beams, the farthest earth does beat,
When through the frozen Goat he runs his course.
The fire that burns what ever comes to hand,
Does hardly heat that farthest off does stand.
Not so, the heat that sets my heart on fire,
By distance, slakes, and lets me cool again:
But still, the farther off the more desire,
The absent fire does burn with hotter pain^*
My Ladies presence burnt me with desire,
Her absence turns me into flaming fire.
Who so has seen the flame that burns bright,
By outward cold in narrow room suppressed,
Increase in heat, and rage with greater might,
May guess what force of fire torments my breast:
So run the swelling streams with double force,
Where looks or piles are set to stay their course.
For when my heart perceived her parting near,
By whose sweet sight he lives that else should die,
It closed it self to keep those beams so clear,
Which from her look had pierst it through the eye.
The fiery beams which would break out so feign
By seeking vent, increase my burning pain,
But if my dear return alive and sound.
That these mine eyes may see her beauty bright,
My heart shall spread with joy that shall abound,
And open wide, receiving cleerer light.
She shall recover that which I possess,
And I thereby enjoy no whit the less.
ODE V.
Petition to have her leave to die.
WHen will the fountain of my tears be dry?
When will my sighs be spent?
When will desire agree to let me die?
When will my heart relent?
It is not for my life I plead,
Since death the way to rest does lead,
But stay for thy consent,
Lest thou be discontent.
For if my self without thy leave I kill,
My Ghost will never rest:
So has it sworn to work thine only will,
And holds that ever best.
For since it only lives by thee,
Good reason thou the ruler be.
Then give me leave to die,
And show thy power thereby.
The Lover absence kills me, her presence cures me.
THe frozen Snake oppressed with heaped snow
By struggling hard gets out her tender head,
And spies far off from where she lies below
The winter Sun that from the North is fled.
But all in vain she looks upon the light,
Where heat is wanting to restore her might.
What does it help a wretch in prison pent,
Long time with biting hunger ouer-prest,
To see without, or smell within the sent,
Of dainty fare for others tables dressed,
Yet Snake and pris^ner both behold the thing,
The which (but not with sight) might comfort bring.
Such is my state, or worse if worse may be,
My heart oppressed with heavy frost of care,
Debarred of that which is most dear to me,
Killed up with cold, and pinde with evil fare,
And yet I see the thing might yield relief,
And yet the sight does breed my greater grefe.
So This be saw her lover through the wall,
And saw thereby she wanted that she saw:
And so I see, and seeing want withal,
And wanting so, unto my death I draw.
And so my death were twenty times my friend,
If with this verse my hated life might end.
ODE VI.
The kind lovers complaint in finding nothing but folly for his faithfulness.
IF my decay be your increase,
If my distress be your delight,
If war in me procure you peace,
If wrong to me, to you be right.
I would decay, distress war, wrong,
Might end the life that ends so long.
Yet if by my decay you grow,
When I am spent your growth is past:
If from my grief your joy do flow,
When my grief ends, your joy flies fast:
Then for your sake, though to my pain,
I strive to live, to die fullfaine.
For if I die, my war must cease,
Then can I suffer wrong no more:
My war once done, farewell your peace,
My wrong, your right does still restore:
Thus, for your right I suffer wrong,
And for your peace, my war prolong.
But since no thing can long endure,
That sometime has not needful rest,
What can my life your joy assure,
If still I wail with grief oppressed?
The strongest stomach faints at last,
For want of ease and due repast*
My restless sighs break out so fast,
That time to breath they quite deny:
Mine eyes so many tears have cast,
That now the springs themselves are dry.
Then grant some little ease from pain,
Until the spring be full again.
The Giant whom the Vulture gnawes,
Until his heart be grown, has peace:
And Sisyphus by hellish laws,
Whilst that the stoue ^oules down, does cease*
But all in vain I strive for rest,
Which breeds more sorrow in my breast.
Let my decay be your increase,
Let my distress be your delight:
Let war in me procure your peace,
Let wrong in me to you be right:
That by my grief your joy may live,
Vouchsafe some little rest to give.
ODE VII.
Unhappy eyes.
CLose your lids, unhappy eyes,
From the sight of such a change:
Love has learned to despise,
Self-conceit has made him strange:
Inward now his sight he turns,
With himself in love he burns.
If abroad he beauty spy,
As by chance he looks abroad,
Or it is wrought by his eye,
Or forced out by Painters fraud:
Save himself none fair, he deemeth,
That himself too much esteems.
Coy disdain has kindness place,
Kindness forc'de to hide his head:
True desire is counted base,
Hope with hope is hardly fed:
Love is thought a fury needless,
He that has it, shall die speedlesse.
Then mine eyes why gaze you so^
Beauty scorns the tears you shed,
Death you seek to end my woe,
O that you of death were sped:
But with love has death conspired,
To kill none whom love has fired.
Cupid shoots light, but wounds sort.
Cupid at length I spy thy crafty wile,
Though for a time thou did me sort beguile,
When first thy shaft did wound my tender heart,
It touched me light, me thought I felt some pain:
Some little prick at first did make me smart,
But yet that grief was quickly gone again.
Full small account I made of such a sore,
As now does ranckle inward more and more.
So poison first the sinews lightly strains,
Then straies, and after spreads through all the veins,
No otherwise, then he, that pricked with thorn,
Starts at the first, and feels no other grief,
As one whose heart so little hurt did scorn,
And deigned not to seek despised relief:
At last, when rest does after travel come,
That little prick the joint with pain does numme.
What may I think the cause of this thy craft,
That at the first thou stick'st not deep thy shaft:
If at the first, I had thy stroke espi'de,
(Alas I thought thou would not dally so)
To keep my self always I would have tried,
At least, I think I might have cured my woe,
Yet, truth to say, I did suspect no less,
And knew it too, at least, I so did guess.
I saw, and yet would willingly be blind,
I felt the sting, yet flatt'red still my mind,
And now too late I know my former guilt,
And seek in vain to heal my curelesse sore.
My life, I doubt, my health I know is spilt,
A just reward for dallying so before:
For I that would not when I might have ease,
No matuell though I cannot when I please.
Clipeum post vulnera.
A true description of love, Paraphrastically* translated out of Petrarkes 103
Sonnet, beginning,
S' Amor non e, che dunque e quel ch'io sento.
IF love be nothing but an idle name,
A vain devise of foolish Poets skill:
A feign de^re, deuoid of smoke and flame,
Then what is that which me tormenteth still
If such a thing as love indeed there be,
What kind of thing, or which, or where is he?
If it be good, how causes it such pain,
How does it breed such grief within my breast?
If naught how chance the grief that I sustain,
Does seem so sweet amidst my great unrest?
For sure me thinks it is a wondrous thing,
That so great pain should so great pleasure bring.
If with my will amidst these flames I fry,
Whence come these tears? how chance I thus co^plain?
If force perforce I be are this misery,
What help these tears that cannot ease my pain?
How can this fancy bear such sway in me,
But if my self consent, that so it be?
And if my self consent* that so it be,
Unjust I am thus to complain and cry,
To look that other men should succor me,
Since by my fault I feel such misery.
Who will not help himself when well he can,
Deserves small help of any other man.
Thus am I tossed upon the troublous Seas,
By sundry winds, whose blasts blow sundry ways:
And every blast still driving where it please,
Brings hope and fear to end my lingering days,
The Steers man gone, sail, helm, and tackle lost,
How can I hope to gain the wished coast?
Wisdom and folly is the lucklesse fraught,
My ship therewith ballast unequally:
Wisdom too light, folly of too great weight,
My bark and I, through them in ieopardy:
Thus, in the midst of this perplexity,
I wish for death, and yet am loath to die.
Fair Face, and hard Heart.
Fair is thy face, and that thou know too well,
Hard is thy heart, and that thou will not know:
Thou fear and smil'st, when I thy praises tell,
But stop'st thine ears when I my grief would show.
Yet though in vain, needs must I speak,
Or else my swelling heart would break.
And when I speak, my breath does blow the fire,
With which my burning heart consumes away:
I call upon thy name, and help require,
Thy dearest name which does me still betray:
For grace, sweet grace thy name does sound,
Yet ah! in thee no grace is found.
Alas, to what part shall I then appeal?
Thy face so fair disdaines to look on me,
Thy tongue commands my heart his grief conceal,
Thy nimble feet from me do always flee.
Thine eyes cast fire to burn my heart,
And thou reioycest in my ^mart.
Then, since thou see the life I lead in pain,
And that for thee I suffer all this grief,
O let my heart this small request obtain,
That thou agree it pine without relief!
I ask not love for my good will,
But leave, that I may love thee still.
Quid minus optari per mea vota potest?
ODE VIII.
Disdain at variance with desire.
Disdain that so does fill me,
Has surely sworn to kill me,
And I must die,
Desire that still does burn me,
To life again will turn me,
And live must I.
O kill me then disdain!
That I may live again.
Thy looks are life unto me,
And yet those looks undo me,
O death and life!
Thy smile some rest does show me,
Thy frown with war overthrow me,
O peace and strife!
Nor life nor death is either,
Then give me both, or neither.
Life only cannot please me,
Death only cannot ease me,
Change is delight.
I live that death may kill me,
I die that life may fill me,
Both day and night.
If once despair decay,
Desire will wear away.
An Inuectiue against Love.
ALl is not gold that shines bright in show,
Not every flower so good, as fair, to sight,
The deepest streams, above do calmest flow,
And strongest poisons often the taste delight,
The pleasant bait does hide the harmless hook,
And false deceit can lend a friendly look.
Love is the gold whose outward hew does pass,
Whose first beginnings goodly promise make,
Of pleasures fair and fresh as Summers grass,
Which neither Sun can parch, nor wind can shake:
But when the mould should in the fire be tried,
The gold is gone, the dross does still abide.
Beauty the flower, so fresh, so fair, so gay,
So sweet to smell, so soft to touch and taste:
As seems it should endure, by right, for aye,
And never be with any storm defast,
But when the balefull Southern wind does blow,
Gone is the glory which it erst did show.
Love is the stream, whose wa^es so calmely flow
As might entice men's minds to wade therein:
Love is the poison mixed with sugar so,
As might by outward sweetness liking win,
But as the deep over flowing stops thy breath,
So poison once received brings certain death.
Love is the bait, whose taste the fish deceiues,
And makes them swallow down the choking hook,
Love is the face whose fairness judgment reaues,
And makes thee trust a false and fained look.
But as the hook the foolish fish does kill,
So flattering looks, the lovers life do spill.
Vsque adeo dulce puella malum est.
Upon an Heroical Poem which he had begun (in Imitation of Virgil,) of the
first inhabiting this famous I Will by Brute, and the Troyans.
MY wanton Muse that whilome wont to sing,
Fair Beauties praise and Venus sweet delight,
Of late had changed the tenor of her string,
To higher tunes then serve for Cupids fight.
Shrill Trumpets sound, sharp swords and Lances strong,
War, blood, and death, were matter of her song.
The God of love by chance had heard thereof,
That I was proved a rebel to his crown,
Fit words for war, quoth he, with angry scoff,
A likely man to write of Mars his frown.
Well are they sped whose praises he shall write*
Whose wanton Pen can naught but love indite.
This said, he whiskt his parti colored wings,
And down to earth he comes more swift then thought,
Then to my heart in angry have he flings.
To see what change these news of wars had wrought:
He pries, and looks, he ransacks every vain,
Yet finds he naught, save love and lovers pain.
Then I that now perceived his needless fear,
With heavy smile began to plead my cause:
In vain (quoth I) this endless grief I bear,
In vain I strive to keep thy grievous Laws,
If after proof, so often trusty found,
Unjust Suspect condemn me as unsound.
Is this the guerdon of my faithful heart?
Is this the hope on which my life is staide?
Is this the ease of neuer-ceasing smart?
Is this the price that for my pains is paid?
Yet better serve fierce Mars in bloody field,
Where death, or conquest, end or joy does yield.
Long have I served, what is my pay but pain?
Often have I sude, what gain I but delay?
My faithful love is quited with disdain,
My grief a game, my pen is made a play.
Yea love that does in other favor find,
In me is counted madness out of kind.
And last of all, but grievous most of all,
Thy self, sweet love, has killed me with suspect:
Could love believe, that I from love would fall?
Is war of force to make me love neglect:
No, Cupid knows, my mind is faster set,
Then that by war I should my love forget.
My muse indeed to war inclines her mind.
The famous acts of worthy Brute to write:
To whom the Gods this Islands rule assignde,
Which long he sought by Seas through Neptunes spite,
With such conceits my busy head does swell.
But in my heart naught else but love does dwell.
And in this war thy part is not the least,
Here shall my muse Brutes noble Love declare:
Here shall thou see thy double love increast,
Offairest twins that ever Lady bare:
Let Mars triumph in armor shining bright,
His conquered arms shall be thy triumphs light.
As he the world, so thou shall him subdue,
And I thy glory through the world will ring,
So by my pains, thou will vouchsafe to rue,
And kill despair. With that he whisk'this wing,
And bad me write, and promised wished rest,
But sore I fear false hope will be the best.
Upon his Ladies buying strings for her Lute.
IN happy time the wished fair is come,
To fit my Lute with strings of every kind,
Great pity it is, so sweet a Lu^e be dumme,
That so can please the ear, and ease the mind.
Go take thy choice, and choose the very best,
And use them so, that head and heart find rest.
Rest thou in joy, and let me wail alone,
My pleasant days have taken their last farewell:
My heartstrings sorrow struck so long with moan,
That at the last they all in pieces fell*
And now they lie in pieces broke so small,
That scarce they serve to make me frets withal.
And yet they serve and bind my heart so strait,
That frets indeed they serve to fret it out:
No force for that, in hope thereof I wait,
That death may rid me both of hope and doubt.
But death, alas, draws backward all too long,
And I each day feel now increase of wrong.
Care will not let him live, nor hope let him die.
MY heavy heart with grief and hope torment,
Beats all in vain against my weary breast,
As if it thought with force to make a vent,
That death might enter to procure my rest.
But foolish heart, thy pains are lost I see,
For death and life both fly and follow thee.
When weight of care would press me down with pain,
That I might sink to depth of death below,
Hope lends me wing* and lifts me up again,
To strive for life and live in greater woe.
So fares the Boat, which winds drive to the shore,
And tides drives backward where it was before.
Thus neither hope will let me die with care,
Nor Care consent that hope assure my life:
I seek for life, death does his stroke prepare,
I come to death, and life renewes my strife.
All as the shadow, follows them that fly
And flies from them that after it do hie.
What is my hope? that hope will fail at last,
And grief get strength to work his will on me*
Either the Wax with which hopes wings are fast,
By scalding sighs mine eyes shall melted see.
Or else my tears shall wet the feathers so,
That I shall fall and drown in waves of woe.
ODE 9
Cupids Marriage with dissimulation.
A Newfound match is made of late,
Blind Cupid needs will change his wife:
Newfangled Love does Psyche hate.
With whom so long he led his life.
Dissembling, she
The bride must be,
To please his wanton eye.
Psyche laments
That love repents,
His choice without cause why.
Cytheron sounds with music strange,
Unknown unto the Virgins nine:
From flat to sharp the Tune does range,
Too base, because it is too fine.
See how the bride
Puffed up with pride,
Can mince it passing well:
She trips on toe,
Full fair to show,
Within does poison dwell.
Now wanton Love at last is sped,
Dissembling is his only joy,
Bare Truth from Venus Court is fled,
Dissembling pleasures hides annoy.
It were in vain
To talk of pain,
The wedding yet does last,
But pain is near,
And will appear,
With a dissembling cast.
Despair and hope are joined in one,
And pain with pleasure linked sure,
Not one of these can come alone,
No certain hope, no pleasure pure.
Thus sour and sweet
In love do meet,
Dissembling likes it so,
Of sweet small store,
Of sour the more,
Love is a pleasant woe.
Amor and mellis and fellis.
ODE 10.
Dispraise of Love, and Lovers follies.
IF Love be life, I long to die,
Live they that list for me:
And he that gains the most thereby,
A fool, at least shall be.
But he that feels the sorest fits,
Scapes with no less then loss of wit^*
unhappy life they gain,
Which love do entertain.
In day by fained looks they live,
By lying dreams in night,
Each frown a deadly wound does give,
Each smile a false delight.
Ifthap their Lady pleasant seem,
It is for others love they deem:
If void she seem of joy,
Disdain does make her coy.
Such is the peace that lovers find,
Such is the life they lead.
Blown here and there with every wind
Like flowers in the mead.
Now war, now peace, now war again,
Desire, despair, delight, disdain,
Though dead in midst of life,
In peace, and yet at strife.
In amore haec insunt mala.
In praise of the Sun.
THe Golden Sun that brings the day;
And lends men light ^o see with all,
In vain does cast his beams away,
Where they are blind on whom they fall,
There is no force in all his light,
To give the mole a perfect sight.
But thou my Sun more bright then he,
That shines at noone in Summer tide.
Have given me light and power to see,
With perfect skill my sight to guide.
Till now I lived as blind as Mole,
That hides her head in earthly hole.
I heard the praise of beauties grace,
Yet deemed it naught but Poets skill.
I gazed on many a lovely face,
Yet found I none to bind my will.
Which made me think that beauty bright,
Was nothing else but red and white.
But now thy beams have cleared my ^ight,
I blush to think I was so blind.
Thy flaming eyes afford me light,
That beauties blaze each where I find.
And yet these Dames that shine so bright,
Are but the shadow of thy light.
ODE XI.
To his Muse.
REst, good my Muse, and give me leave to rest,
We strive in vain.
Conceal thy skill within thy sacred breast,
Though to thy pain.
The honor great which Poets wont to have,
With worthy deeds is buried deep in grave.
Each man will hide his name,
Thereby to hide his shame,
And silence is the praise their virtues crave.
To praise, is flattery, malice to dispraise,
Hard is the choice,
What cause is left for thee, my Muse, to raise
Thy heavenly voice?
Delight thy self on sweet Pernassus hill,
And for a better time reserve thy skill,
There let thy silver sound,
From Cyrrha wood rebound,
And all the vale with learned Music fill.
Then shall those fools that now prefer each rhyme,
Before thy skill,
With hand and foot in vain assay to clime,
Thy sacred hill.
There shall thou sit and skorne them with disdain,
To see their fruitless labor all in vain:
But they shall fret with spite,
To see thy glory bright,
And know themselves thereto cannot attain.
Death in Love.
MIne eyes have spent their tears, and now are dry,
My weary hand will guide my Pen no more.
My voice is hoarse, and can no longer cry,
My head has left no new complaints in store,
My heart is ouerburd^ned so with pain,
That sense of grief does none therein remain,
The tears you see distilling from mine eyes,
My gentle Muse does shed for this my grief.
The plaints you hear are her incessant cries,
By which she calls in vain for some relief.
She never parted since my grief begun,
In her I live, she dead, my life were done.
Then (loving Muse) depart, and let me die,
Some brauer youth will sue to thee for grace,
That may advance thy glory to the sky,
And make thee scorn blind Fortunes frowning face.
My heart and head that did the entertain,
Desire and Fortune with despite have slain.
My Lady dares not lodge thee in her breast,
For fear, unawares she let in love with thee.
For well she thinks some part in thee must rest,
Of that which so possessed each part of me.
Then (good my Muse) fly back to heaven again,
And let me die, to end this endless pain.
Break heavy heart.
Break heavy heart, and rid me of this pain,
This pain that still increases day by day:
By day with sighs I spend my self in vain:
In vain by night with tears I waste away,
Away I wa^e with tears by night in vain,
Tears, sighs by night, by day increase this pain.
Mine eyes no eyes, but fountains of my tears
My tears no tears, but floods to moist my heart:
My heart no heart, but labor of my fears,
My fears no fears, but feelings of my smart.
My s^art, my fears, my heart, my tears, mine eyes
Are blind, dride, spent, past, wasted with my cries.
And yet mine eyes, though blind, see cause of griese,
And yet my tears, though dride, run down amain:
And yet my heart, though spent, attends relief.
And yet my fears, though past, increase my pain.
And yet I live, and living feel more smart,
And smarting, cry in vain break, Beaui^ heart*
Desires government.
WHere wit is ouer-ruld by will,
And will is led by fond desire,
There reason were as good be still,
As speaking, kindle greater fire.
For where desire does bear the sway,
The heart must rule, the head obey.
What boots the cunning Pilots skill,
To tell which way to shape their course*
When he that steers will have his will,
And drive them where he list perforce.
So reason shows the truth in vain,
Where fond desire as King does reign.
Loves properties.
TWixt heat and cold, t'wixt death and life,
I freeze and burn, I live and die:
Which jointly work in me such strife,
I live in death, in cold I fry.
Nor hot, nor cold, nor live, nor dead,
Neither, and both, this life I lead.
First burning heat sets all on fire,
Whereby I seem in flames to fry:
Then cold despair kills hot desire,
That drenched deep, in death I lie.
Heat drives out cold, and keeps my life
Cold quenches heat, no end of strife.
The less I hope to have my will,
The more I feel desire increase.
And as desire increases still,
Despair to quench it does not cease.
So live I as the Lamp whose light,
Often comes, often goes, now dim, now bright.
Living Death.
IF means be none to end my restless care,
Ifneeds I must overwhelmed with sorrow lie:
What better way this sorrow to declare,
Then, that I dying live, and cannot die?
If naught but loss I reap in stead of gain,
If lasting pain do every day increase:
To thee (good Death) alas I must complain,
Thou art of force to make my sorrow cease.
If thou, because I thee refusd sometime,
Now shut thine ears, and my request deny,
Still must I love, and wail in woeful rhyme:
That dying still I am, and cannot die.
Spiro non viu^.
The passionate prisoner.
YE walls that shut me up from sight of men,
Inclosd wherein alive I buried lie,
And thou sometime my bed, but now my den,
Where smothred up, the light of Sun I fly:
O shut your selves, each chinke and creuisse strain
That none but you may hear me thus complain.
My hollow cries that beat thy stony side,
Vouchsafe to beat, b^t beat them back again,
That when my grief has speech to me denide,
Mine ears may hear the witness of my pain*
As for my tears, whose streams must ever last,
My silent couch shall drink them up as fast.
Hopeless desire soon withers and dies.
THough naked trees seem dead to sight,
When Winter wind does keenely blow,
Yet if the root maintain her right,
The Spring their hidden life will show.
But if the root be dead and dry,
No marvel though the branches die.
While hope did live within my breast,
No Winter storm could kill desire,
But now disdain has hope oppressed,
Dead is the root, dead is the spire.
Hope was the root, and spire was love,
No sap beneath, no life above.
And as we see the rootlesse stock,
Retain some sap, and spring a while
Yet quickly prove a life-lesse block,
Because the root does life beguile:
So lives desire which hope has left,
As twilight shines when Sun is rest.
ODE XII.
To his heart.
NAy, nay, thou striu'st ^n vain, my heart,
To mend thy miss:
Thou have deserved to bear this smart,
And worse then this.
That would thy self debase,
To serve in such a place.
Thou thoughts thy self too long at rest,
Such was thy pride.
Needs must thou seek another breast
Wherein to bide.
Say now what have thou found?
In fetters thou art bound.
What has thy faithful service won,
But high disdain?
Broke is thy threede thy fancy spunne,
Thy labor vain.
Fallen art thou now with pain,
And can not rise again.
And can thou look for help of me
In this distress*
I must confess I pity thee,
And can no less.
But bear a while thy pain,
For fear thou fall again.
Learn by thy hurt to shun the fire,
Play not withal*
When climing thoughts high things aspire,
They seek their fall.
Thou ween'st naught shone but gold,
So wast thou blind and bold.
Yet lie not for this disgrace,
But mount again,
So that thou know the wished place,
Be worth thy pain.
Then though thou fall and die,
Yet never fear to fly.
Phaleuciacks. III.
Wisdom warns me to shun that once I sought for.
And in time to retire my hasty footsteps.
Wisdom sent from above, not earthly wisdom.
Long, too long have I slept in ease uneasy,
On false worldly relief my trust reposing:
Health and wealth in a boat, no stern nor ank^r.
(Bold and blind that I was) to Sea be-taking*
Scarce from shore had I lancht, when all about me,
Waves like hills did rise, till help from heaven
Brought my Ship to the Port of late repentance.
O nauis, referent in mare te noui fluctus.
ODE XIII.
Adefiance to disdainful love.
NOw have I learned with much ado at last,
By true disdain to kill desire,
This was the mark at which I shot so fast,
Unto this height I did aspire.
Proud love, now do thy worst, and spare not,
For thee and all thy shafts I care not.
What have thou left wherewith to move my mind?
What life to quicken dead desire?
I count thy words and oaths as light as wind,
I feel no heat in all thy fire.
Go change thy bow, and get a stronger,
Go break thy shafts, and buy thee longer.
In vain thou bait^st thy hook with beauties blaze,
In vain thy wanton eyes allure.
These are but toys, for them that love to gaze,
I know what harm thy looks procure:
Some strange conceit must be devised,
Or thou and all thy skill despised.
Scilicet asserui iam me, fugique catena^.
Being s^orned and disdained, be inueighs against his Lady.
SInce just disdain began to rise,
And cry revenge for spiteful wrong:
What erst I praisde, I now despise,
And think my love was all too long.
I tread in dirt that scornful pride,
Which in thy looks I have descride,
Thy beauty is a painted skin,
For fools to see their faces in.
Thine eyes that some as stars esteem,
From whence themselves, they say take light,
Like to the foolish fire I deem,
That leads men to their death by night.
Thy words and oaths are light as wind,
And yet far lighter is thy mind:
Thy friendship is a broken reed,
That fails thy friends in greatest need.
Vitijs patientia victa est.
ODE 14.
The Tomb of dead Desire.
WHen Venus saw Desire must die,
Whom high disdain,
Had justly slain,
For killing Truth with scornful eye,
The earth she leaves and gets her to the sky:
Her golden hair she tears
Black weeds of woe she wears:
For help unto her father does she cry:
Who bids her stay a space
And hope for better grace.
To save his life she has no skill,
Whom should she pray,
What do, or say,
But weep for wanting of her will?
Mean time Desire has taken his last farewell,
And in a Meddow fair,
To which the Nimphs repair,
His breathless corpse is laid with worms to dwell:
So glory does decay
When death takes life away.
When morning Star had chasde the night,
The Queen of love
Looked from above,
To see the grave of her delight?
And as with heedfull eye she viewd the place,
She spide a flower unknown,
That on his grave was grown,
Instead of learned verse his Tomb to grace.
If you the name require,
Hearts-ease from dead desire.
An Altar and Sacrifice to disdain, for freeing him from love.
My Muse by thee restored to life,
To thee Disdain, this Altar reares,
Whereon she offers ^uslesse strife,
Self-spending sighs, and bootlesse tears.
Long Suits in vain,
Hate for good will:
Still-dying pain,
Yet living still.
Selfe-louing pride,
Looks coyly strange,
Will Reasons guide,
Desire of change.
And last of all,
Blind Fancies fire,
False Beauties thrall,
That binds desire.
All these I offer to Disdain,
By whom I live from fancy free:
With vow, that if I love again,
My life the sacrifice shall be.
Vicimus and domitum pedibus calcamus amorem.
Certain Poemes upon diverse Subjects by the same Author,
Three Odes translated out of Anacreon, the Greek Lyricke Poet.

ODE I.
OF Atreus Sons feign would I write,
And feign of Cadmus would I sing:
My Lute is set on Loves delight,
And only Love sounds every string.
Of late my Lute I alt'red quite.
Both frets and strings for tunes above,
I sung of fierce Alcides might,
My Lute would sound no tune but Love.
Wherefore ye worthies all farewell,
No tune but Love my Lute can tell.
ODE II.
A comparison betwixt the strength of beasts, the wisdom of Man, and the
beauty of a woman's face.
THe Bull by nature has his horns,
The Horse his hooues to daunt their foes,
The light-foote Hare the hunter scorns,
The Lions teeth his strength disclose.
The Fi^h, by swimming, scapes the we will,
The Bird, by flight, the fowlers net,
With wisdom Man is armed as steel,
Poor women none of these can get.
What have they then? fair beauties grace,
A two-edged Sword, ^a trusty shield,
No force resists a lovely face,
Both fire and sword to Beauty yield,
ODE III.
OF late, what time the Bear turned round
At midnight in her wonted way,
And men of all sorts slept full sound,
Overcome with labor of the day:
The God of love came to my door,
And took the ring, and knocks it hard:
Whose there, quoth I, that knocks so sore,
You break my sleep, my dreams are marred?
A little boy, forsooth quoth he,
Dung-wet with rain this Moonles night,
With that me thought it pitied me.
I op't the door, and candle light.
And straight a little boy I spide,
A winged boy with shafts and bow,
I took him to the fire side,
And set him down to warm him so.
His little hands in mine I strain,
To rub and warm them therewithal:
Out of his locks I crush the rain,
From which the drops apace down fall.
At last, when he was waxen warm,
Now let me try my bow, quoth he,
I fear my string has caught some harm,
And wet, will prove too slack for me.
He said, and bent his bow, and shot,
And wightly hit me on the heart,
The wound was sore and raging hot,
The heat like fury reekes my smart.
Mine host, quoth he, my string is well,
And laugh't, so that he leapt again:
Look to your wound for fear of swell,
Your heart may hap to feel the pain.
Anacreons second Ode, otherwise.
NAture in her work does give,
To each thing that by her do live,
A proper gift where she may,
Prevent in time her own decay.
The Bull ahorne, the Horse a hoof,
The light-foote hare to run aloof:
The Lions strength, who may resist?
The birds aloft fly where they list.
The fish swimmes safe in waters deep,
The silly worm at least can creep:
What is to come, men can forecast,
And learn more wit, by that is past.
The woman's gift what might it be,
The same for which the Ladies three,
Pallas, Juno, Venus straue,
When each desired it to have.
T. S.

Anacoreons third Ode, otherwise.
Cupid abroad was lated in the night,
His wings were wet with ranging in the rain,
Harbor he sought, to me he took his flight,
To dry his plumes, I heard the boy complain,
I opt the door, and granted his desire,
I rose my self, and made the wag a fire.
Prying more narrow by the fires flame,
I spide his Quiver hanging at his back:
Doubting the boy might my misfortune frame,
I would have gone for fear of further wrack.
But what I feared, did me poor wretch betide,
For forth he drew an Arrow from his side.
He pierst the quick, and I began to start,
A pleasing wound, but that it was too high,
His shaft procurde a sharp, yet sugared smart,
Away he flew, for now his wings were dry.
But left the Arrow sticking in my breast,
There sore I grieve, I welcomed such a Guest.
Natural comparisons with perfect love.
THe lowest trees have tops, the Ant her gall,
The fly her spleen, the little sparks their heat:
The slender hairs cast shadows, though but small,
And Bees have stings, although they be not great.
Seas have their sourse, and so have shallow springs,
And love is love, in Beggars, as in Kings.
Where rivers smoothest run, deep are the fords,
The Dial stirs, yet none perceiues it move,
The firmest faith is in the fewest words,
The Turtles cannot sing, and yet they love.
True hearts have eyes, and ears no tongues to speak,
They hear, and see, and sigh, and then they break.
An answer to the first staff, that love is unlike in Beggars and in Kings.
COmpare the Bramble with the Cedar tree,
The Pismires anger with the Lions rage:
What is the buzzing fly where Eagles be?
A drop the spark, no Seas can Aetna svvage.
Small is the heat in beggars breasts that springs,
But flaming fire consumes the hearts of Kings.
Who shrouds himself where slender hairs cast shade?
But mighty Oaks may scorn the Summer Sun:
Small cure will serve, where Bees the wound have made,
But Dragons poison through each part does run.
Light is the love that beggars bosom stings,
Deep is the wound that Cupid makes in Kings.
Small channels serve, where shallow springs do slide,
And little help will turn or stay their course*
The highest banks scarce hold the swelling tide,
Which overthrows all stops with raging force:
The baser sort scarce wet them in the springs,
Which ouer-whelme the heads of mighty kings.
What though in both the heart be set of love,
The self same ground both corn and cockle breed:
Fast by the Bryar, the Pine Tree mounts above,
One kind of grass, the Jade, and Iennet feeds:
So from the heart, by secret virtue springs,
Unlike desire in beggars and in kings.
A song in praise of a Beggars life.
BRight shines the Sun, Play beggars play.
Here Is scraps enough to serve to day.
What noise of Viols is so sweet,
As when our merry clappers ring,
What mirth does want where beggars meet,
A beggars life is for a king.
Eat, drink, and play, sleep when we list,
Go where we will, so stocks be mist.
Bright shines, etc.
The world is ours, and ours alone,
For we alone have world at will,
We purchase not, all is our own,
Both fields and streets we beggars fill.
Nor care to get, nor fear to keep,
Did ever break a beggars sleep.
Bright shines, etc.
A hundred head of black and white,
Upon our gowns securely ^eede,
If any dare his Master bite,
He dies therefore as sure as Creed.
Thus beggars lord it as they please,
And none but beggars live at ease.
Bright shine the Sun, etc.
Upon beginning without making an end.
BEgin, and half is done, yet half undone remains,
Begin that half, and all is done, and thou art easd of pains
The second half is all again, new work must be begun
Thus he that still begins, does nothing but by halues,
And things half done, as good undone, half oxen are but calves.
An Epigram to Sir Philip Sidney in Elegiacall verse, translated out of Iodell,
the French Poet.
Cambridge, worthy Philip, by this verse builds thee an Altar
Against time and tempest, strong to abide for ever,
That praise of verses no length of time can^ abolish,
With Greece and Italy purchased endless honor.
I then pursuing their steps like glory to purchase,
Will make thy memory famous in after ages,
And in these measured verses thy glory be sounded,
So be thy holy favor, help to my holy fury.
Hexameters, upon the never enough praised Sir Philip Sidney.
What can I now suspect, or what can I fear any longer*
Often did I fear, often hope, whilst life in Sidney remained:
Of nothing can I now despair, for naught can I hope for:
This good is in misery, when great extremity grieves us,
That neither hope of good, nor fear of worse ca^ affright us
And can I the^ complain, when no complaint ca^ avail me?
How can I seem to be disconte^t, or what can I weep for?
He lives eternal, with endless glory bedecked:
Yea still on earth he lives, and still shall live by the Muses.
Another upon the same.
What strange aduenture' what now unlooked for arriull,
Has drawn the Muses from sweet Boeotia mountains
To choose our country, to seek in London abiding?
Are fair Castalian streams dride? stands Cyrrha no longer?
Or love the Muses, like wantons often to be changing?
Scarce can I that suppose, scarce think I those to be Muses.
No sound of melody, no voice but dreary lamenting.
Yet well I wot too well, Muses most dolefully weeping.
See where Melpomene sits hid for shame in a corner
Here ye the careful sighs, fetched from the depth of her entrails?
There weeps Calliope, there sometimes lusty Thaleia.
Aye me^ alas, now know I the cause, now seek I no further,
Here lies their glory, their hope, their only rejoicing.
Dead lies worthy Philip, the care and praise of Apollo:
Dead lies his carcass, but fame shall live to the worlds end.
Others upon the same.
Whom can I first accuse? whose fault account I the greatest,
Where kept the Muses, what countries haunted Apollo?
Where loitred bloody Mars, where lingered worthy Minerua?
What could three sisters do more then nine in a combat?
Was force of no force? Was fair entreaty refused?
Where is the music, that sometimes moved Alecto?
That gained Eurydice, that left Proserpina weeping?
Choose whether of the two you list, your skill to be nothing:
Or your most faithful servants unkindly rewarded.
And thou that braggest of skillful surgery knowledge,
That can of Simples discern the quality secret,
And give fit plasters for wounds that seem to be curelesse,
Whereto auailes thy skill, that cannot Sidney recover.
And could thou whilome prevail with destiny fatal,
For king Admetus against course of natural order,
And can do nothing to save so faithful a servant.
As for Mars well I wot, cold frost of Thracia kingdom,
Has killed all kindness, no ruth of him can be looked for,
And dainty Pallas disdaind forsooth to be present,
Envy perhaps, nay grief as I guess, was cause of her absence.
Only we poor wretches, whom Gods and Muses abandon,
Lament thy timelesse decay with sorrowful outcries.
But yet if hap some Muse, would add new grace to my verses,
Germany, France, Italy, Spain, Denmark, Persia, Turkey,
India where Phoebus climes from the sea to the Skie-ward,
India where Phoebus declines from sky to the Sea-warn'd,
Tartary, Pole, Lettow, Muscouy, Bohemia, Norway,
All Coasts where rising or falling Phoebus appears,
Should hear, and wonder to hear thy glory resounded.
Armenian Tigres enraged for theft of a yongling,
Princely Lions roaring, for want of prey to be starued,
Fierce Bears, and grunting wild Boares, upon Arcady mountains,
Should stand a stonisht, forgetting natural offspring,
Forgetting hunger, forgetting slaughter appo^nted,
As when Calliopes dear son, sweet harmony singing,
Unto the true consent of his Harp strings tuned in order,
Drew from their places wild beasts and trees by the music.
Swift flowing Hebrus stayed all his streams in a wonder,
As if chill coldness frorne had them down to the bottom.
But for I wot too well my slender skill to be nothing,
Here will I quite forswear both Verse and Muse in an anger
Lest hap my rudeness disgrace thy glory by praising.
Dignum laud virum Musa vetat mori. To Time.
Eternal Time, that wastes without wast,
That art, and art not, die, and live still:
Most slow of all, and yet of greatest have,
Both ill and good, and neither good nor ill.
How can I justly praise thee, or dispraise,
Dark are thy nights, but bright and clear thy days.
Both free and scarce, thou give and take again,
Thy womb that all does breed, is Tomb to all:
What so by thee has life, by thee they fall.
Constant, inconstant, moving, standing still,
Was, is, shall be, do thee both breed and kill.
I lose thee, while I seek to find thee out,
The farther off, the more I follow thee:
The faster hold, the greater cause of doubt,
Was, is, I know, but shall, I cannot see.
All things by thee are measured, thou by none:
All are in thee, thou in thy self alone.
A Meditation upon the frailty of this life.
O Trifling toys that toss the brains,
While loath some life does last!
O wished wealth, O sugared joys,
O life when death is past:
Who loathes exchange of loss with gain?
Yet loath we death as hell.
What woeful wight would wish his woe?
Yet wish we here to dwell.
O fancy frail that feeds on earth,
And stays on slippery joys:
O noble mind, O happy man,
That can contemn such toys.
Such toys as neither perfect are,
And cannot long endure,
Our greatest skill, our sweetest joy,
Uncertain and unsure.
For life is short and learning long,
All pleas^re mixed with woe.
Sickness and sleep, steal time unseen,
And joys do come and go.
Thus learning is but learned by halfes,
And joy inioy'de no while,
That serves to show thee what thou want,
This helps thee* to beguile.
But after death is perfect skill,
And joy without decay,
When sin is gone that blinds our eyes,
And steals our joys away.
No crowing Cock shall raise us up,
To spend the day in vain,
No weary labor shall us drive,
To go to bed again.
But for we feel not what we want,
Nor know not what we have,
We love to keep the bodies life,
We loath the soul to save.
A Dialogue between the Soul and the Body.
Soul. AY me poor soul, whom bound in sinful chains,
This wretched body keeps against my will!

Body Aye me poor body, whom for all my pains,
This froward soul causeless condemns still.

Soul Causeless? when as thou striu'st to sin each day?


Body Causeless, when as I strive thee to obey.


Soul Thou art the means, by which I fall to sin.


Body Thou art the cause that setst this means a work


Soul No part of thee that has not faulty bin.


Body I show the poison that in thee does lurk.


Soul I shall be pure when so I part from thee.


Body So were I now, but that thou stainest me.


Saphi^kes upon the passion of Christ.
HAtred eternal, furious revenging,
Merciless raging, bloody persecuting,
Scandalous speeches, odious reuilings
Causeless abhorring:
Impious scoffings by the very abiects,
Dangerous threatening by the Priests anointed,
Death full of torment in a shameful order,
Christ did abide here.
He that in glory was above the Angels,
Changed his glory for an earthly Carcass,
Yielded his glory to a sinful outcast,
Glory refusing.
Me that in bondage many sins retained,
He for his goodness, for his only goodness,
Brought from hel-torments to the joys of heaven,
Not to be numbered.
Dead in offenses, by his aid revived,
Quickened in spirit, by the grace he yields,
Sound then his praises, to the worlds amazement
Thankefully singing.
DIVERSE POEMS OF sundry Authors.
A hymn in praise of Music.
PRaise, pleasure, profit, is that threefold band,
Which ties men's minds more fast then Gordions knot
Each one some draws, all three none can withstand,
Of force conioynde, Conquest is heardly got.
Then music may of hearts a Monarch be,
Wherein praise, pleasure, profit so agree.
Praiseworthy Music is, for God it praises,
And pleasant, for brute beasts therein delight,
Great profit from it flows, for why it raises
The mind overwhelmed with rude passions might:
When against reason passions fond rebel,
Music does that confirm, and those expel.
If Music did not merit endless praise,
Would heavenly Spheres delight in silver round?
If joyous pleasure were not in sweet lays,
Would they in Court and Country so abound?
And profitable needs we must that call,
Which pleasure linkt with praise does bring to all.
Heroic minds with praises most incited,
Seek praise in Music and therein excel:
God, man, beasts, birds, with Music are delighted,
And pleasant it is which pleases all so well.
No greater profit is then self content:
And this will Music bring, and care prevent.
When antique Poets Musicks praises tell,
They say it beasts did please, and stones did move:
To prove more dull then stones, then beasts more fell,
Those men which pleasing Music did not love,
They feigned, it Cities built, and states defended
To show the profit great on it depended.
Sweet birds (pooremens Musicians) never flake
To sing sweet Musicks praises day and night:
The dyings Swans in Music pleasure take,
To show that it the dying can delight:
In sickness, health, peace, war, we do it need,
Which proves sweet Musicks profit does exceed.
But I, by niggard praising, do dispraise
Praiseworthy music in my worthless Rhyme:
Ne can the pleasing profit of sweet lays,
Any save learned Muses well define.
Yet all by these rude lines may clearly see,
Praise, pleasure, profit, in sweet music be.
I. D.

Ten Sonnets to Philomel,
Sonnet 1.
Upon Loves entering by his ears.
Often did I hear, our eyes the passage were,
By which Love entered to assail our hearts
Therefore I guarded them, and void of fear
Neglected the defense of other parts.
Love knowing this, the usual way forsook:
And seeking found a by-way by mine ear.
At which he entering, my heart prisoner took,
And unto thee sweet Philomel did bear.
Yet let my heart, thy heart to pity move,
Whose pain is great, although small fault appear
First it lies bound in fettring chains of Love,
Then each day it is rackt with hope and fear.
And with loves flames it is evermore consumed,
Only because to love thee it presumed.
Sonnet 2.
OWhy did fame my heart to love betray,
By telling my Deares virtue and perfection?
Why did my Traitor ears to it convey,
That Syren-song cause of my hearts infection?
Had I been deaf, or Fame her gifts concealed,
Then had my heart been free from hopeless Love,
Or were my state likewise by it revealed,
Well might it Philomel to pity move.
Then should she know how Love does make me languish
Distracting me twixt hope and dreadful fear:
Then should she know my care, my plaints and anguish,
All which for her dear sake I meekely bear.
Yea I could quietly Deaths pains abide,
So that she knew that for her sake I di'de.
Sonnet 3.
Of his own, and of his Mistress sickness at one time.
Sickness entending my love to betray,
Before I should sight of my dear obtain:
Did his pale colors in my face display,
Lest that my favor might her favor gain.
Yet not content here with, like means it wrought,
My Philomels bright beauty to deface:
And natures glory to disgrace it sought,
That my conceived love it might displace.
But my firm love could this assault well bear,
Which virtue had, not beauty for his ground:
And yet bright beams of beauty did appear,
Through sickness veil, which made my love abound
If sick (thought I) her beauty so excel,
How matchless would it be if she were well.
Sonnet 4.
Another of her sickness and recovery.
PAle Death himself did love my Philomell,
When he her virtues and rare beauty saw,
Therefore he sickness sent: which should expel,
His riuals life, and my dear to him draw.
But her bright beauty dazzled so his Eyes,
That his da^t life did miss, though her it hit:
Yet not there with content, new means he tries,
To bring her unto Death, and make life flit.
But Nature soon perceiving, that he meant
To spoil her only Phoenix, her chief pride,
Assembled all her force, and did prevent
The greatest mischief that could her betide.
So both our lives and loves Nature defended,
For had she di'de, my love and life had ended.
Sonnet 5.
Allusion to Theseus voyage to Crete, against the Minotaure.
MY love is sailed against dislike to fight
Which like vild monster, threatens his decay:
The ship is hope, which by desires great might,
Is swiftly borne toward the wished bay:
The company which with my love does fare,
(Though met in one) is a dissenting crew:
They are joy, grief, and neuer-sleeping care,
And doubt which nere believes good news for true:
Black fear the flag is, which my ship does bear,
Which (Dear) take down, if my love victor be:
And let white comfort in his place appear.
When love victoriously returns to me.
Least I from rock despair come tumbling down,
And in a sea of tears be forc^tto drown.
Sonnet 6.
Upon her looking secretly out at a window as he passd by.
ONce did my Philomel reflect on me,
Her Cristall pointed eyes as I past by:
Thinking not to be seen, yet would me see,
But soon my hungry eyes their food did spy.
Alas, my dear could thou suppose, that face
Which needs not envy Phoebus chiefest pride,
Could secret be, although in secret place,
And that transparant glass such beams could hide?
But if I had been blind, yet Loves hot flame,
Kindled in my poor heart by thy bright eye,
Did plainly show when it so near thee came,
By more the usual heat then cause was nie.
So though thou hidden were, my heart and eye
Did turn to thee by mutual Sympathy.
Sonnet 7.
WHen time nor place would let me often view
Natures chief Mirror, and my sole delight,
Her lively picture in my heart I drew,
That I might it behold both day and night,
But she, like Philips Son, scorning that I
Should portraiture, which wanted Apelles Art,
Commanded Love (who naught dare her deny)
To burn the picture which was in my heart.
The more Love burned the more her picture shined:
The more it shined, the more my heart did burn:
So what to hurt her Picture was assigned,
To my hearts ruin and decay did turn.
Love could not burn the Saint, it was divine,
And therefore fired my heart, the Saints poor shrine.
Sonnet 8.
To the Sun of his mistress beauty eclipsed with frowns.
WHen as the Sun eclipsed is, some say,
It thunder, lightning, rain, and wind portendeth:
And not unlike but such things happen may,
Since like effects my Su^ eclipsed sends
Witness my throat made hoarse with thundering cries,
And heart with loves hot flashing lightnings fired:
Witness the showers which still fall from mine eyes,
And breast with sighs like stormy winds near riued.
O shine then once again sweet Sun on me,
And with thy beams dissolve clouds of despair
Whereof these raging Meteors framed be,
In my poor heart by absence of my fair.
So shall thou prove thy beams thy heat, thy light,
To match the Sun in glory, grace and might.
Sonnet IX.
Upon sending her a gold ring, with this Poesy, Pure and Endless.
IF you would know the love which I you bear,
Compare it to the Ring which your fair hand
Shall make more precious, when you shall it wear:
So my loves nature you shall understand.
Is it of metal pure? so you shall prove
My love, which never disloyal thought did stain.
Has it no end* so endless is myloue,
Unless you it destroy with your d^sdaine.
Does it the purer wax the more it is tried?
So does my love: yet herein they dissent,
That whereas gold the more it is purifide,
By waxing less, does show some part is spent.
My love does wax more pure by your more trying,
And yet increases in the purifying.
Sonnet X.
The Hearts captivity.
MY cruel dear having captiu'de my heart,
And bound it fast in chains of restless love:
Requires it out of bondage to depart,
Yet is she sure from her it cannot move.
Draw back (said she) your hopeless love from me,
Your worth requires a far more worthy place,
Unto your suite though I cannot agree
Full many will it lovingly embrace.
It may be so (my dear) but as the Sun
When it appears does make the stars to vanish:
So when your self into my thoughts do run,
All others quite out of my heart you banish.
The beams of your perfections shine so bright,
That straightway they* dispell all others light.
I. D.

A Himme in praise of Neptune.
OF Neptunes Empire let us sing,
At whose command the waves obey:
To whom the rivers tribute pay,
Down the high mountains sliding:
To whom the scaly Nation veelds
Homage for the Crystal fields
Wherein they dwell.
And every Sea-god paies a Iem,
Yearly out of his watrie Cell,
To deck great Neptunes Diadem:
The Tritons dancing in a ring,
Before his Palace gates, do make
The water with their echoes quake,
Like the great thunder sounding:
The Sea-Nimphs chant their accents shrill,
And the Sirens taught to kill
With their sweet voice:
Make every ecchoing rock reply,
Unto their gentle murmuring noise,
The praise of Neptunes Empery,
Th. Campion.

This Hymn was sung by Amphitryte, Thamesis, and other Sea-Nimphs in
Grates-Inne Mask at the Court. 1594.
Of his Mistresses face.
ANd would you see my mistress face?
It is a flowery garden place:
Where knots of beauty have such grace,
That all is work, and no where space.
It is a sweet delitious morn,
Where day is breeding, never borne:
It is a meadow yet unshorn,
Which thousand flowers do adorn.
It is the heavens bright reflexe,
Weak eyes to dazzle and to vex:
It is th'Idaea of her sex,
Envy of whom does world perplexe.
It is a face of death that smiles,
Pleasing, though it kill the whiles:
Where death and love in pretty wiles,
Each other mutually beguiles.
It is fair beauties freshest youth,
It is a feigned Eliziums truth:
The spring that wintred hearts renu'th,
And this is that my soul pursu'th.
Upon her Palenesse.
BLame not my cheeks, though pale with love they be,
The kindly heat into my heart is flowne:
To cherish it that is dismayed by thee,
Who art so cruel and unsteadfast grown.
For Nature called for by distressed hearts,
Neglects, and quite forsakes the outward parts.
But they whose cheeks with careless blood are stained,
Nurse not one spark of love within their hearts,
And when they woo, they speak with passion faind,
For their fat love lies in their outward parts.
But in their breasts where love his court should hold
Poor Cupid sits, and blows his nails for cold.
Tho. Campion.

Of Corinnaes singing.
WHen to her Lute Corinna sings,
Her voice reuiues the leaden strings,
And does in highest notes appear,
As any challenged echo clear.
But when she does of mourning speak,
Even with her sighs the strings do break.
And as her Lute does live or die,
Led by her passions, so must I:
For when of pleasure she does sing,
My thoughts enjoy a sudden spring.
But if she do of sorrow speak,
Even from my heart the strings do break.
Tho. Campion

A Dialogue betwixt the Lover and his Lady.
LAdy, my flame still burning,
And my consuming anguish,
Does grow so great, that life I feel to languish,
Then let your heart be moved,
To end my grief and yours, so long time proved.
And quench the heat that my chief part so fireth,
Yielding the fruit that faithful love requires,
Her answer.
Sweet Lord, your flame still burning,
And your consuming anguish.
Cannot be more than mine, in which I languish,
Nor more your heart is moved,
To end your grief and mine, so long time proved*
But if I yield, and so your love decreaseth
Then I my lover lose, and your love cease,
Ignoto.

An Elegy of a woman's heart.
O Faithless world, and thy most faithless part*
A woman's heart:
The true Shop of variety, where sits,
Nothing but fits,
And feauers of desire, and pangs of love,
Which toys remove.
Why was she brone to please, or I to trust
Words writ in dust?
Suffering her eyes to govern my despair,
My pain for air,
And fruit of time rewarded with untruth,
The food of youth*
Untrue she was, yet I believed her eyes,
Instructed spies,
Til I was taught, that love was but a school
To breed a fool.
Or sought she more the^ triumphs of denial,
To see a trial,
How far her smiles commanded my weakness?
eelde and confess.
Excuse not now thy folly, nor her nature:
Blush and endure
As Well thy shame, as passions that were vain*
And think thy gain,
To know that love, lodged in a womans breast
Is but a guest.
H. W.

A Poesy to prove affection is not love.
COnceit begotten by the eyes,
Is quickly borne, and quickly dies:
For while it seeks our hearts to have,
Mean while there reason makes his grave:
For many things the eyes approve,
Which yet the heart does seldom love.
For as the seeds in spring time sown,
Die in the ground ere they be grown,
Such is conceit, whose rooting fails,
As child that in the cradle quails:
Or else within the mothers womb,
Has his beginning, and his tomb.
Affection follows Fortunes wheels:
And soon is shaken from her heels,
For following beauty or estate,
Her liking still is turned to hate.
For all affections have their change,
And fancy only loves to range.
Desire himself runs out of breath,
And getting, does but gain his death,
Desire, nor reason has, nor rest
And blind does seldom choose the best,
Desire attained is not desire,
But as the cinders of the fire.
As ships in ports desired are drowned,
As fruit once ripe, then falls to ground,
As flies that seek for flames, are brought
To cinders by the flames they sought:
So fond desire when it attaines,
The life expires, the woe remains*
And yet some Poets feign would prove,
Affection to be perfect love,
And that desire is of that kind,
No less a passion of the mind.
As if wild beasts and men did seek,
To like, to love, to choose alike.
W. R.

MADRIGAL
In praise of two.
FAustina has the fairer face,
And Phillida the better grace,
Both have mine eye enriched.
This sings full sweetly with her voice,
Her fingers make as sweet a noise,
Both have mine ear bewitched.
Ay me! since Fates have so provided,
My heart (alas) must be divided.
To his Ladies garden, being absent far from her.
GArden more then Eden blessed,
Art thou thus to have thy bowers,
Freed from winter, and still dressed,
With her faces heau'n-set flowers?
Happy too are those thy allies,
Where her fair feet deigne to tred,
Which departing earths low valleys,
Shall to the milkie way be led,
Thy trees whose arms her embraced,
And whose fruit her lips do kiss,
In whose virtuous mind well placed
The rare tree of knowledge is,
Happy are so thy birds be,
Whom she taught to sing by art,
Who in heavenly harmony
With the Angels bears a part.
Happy blessed, and fortunate,
Bowers, Allies, Trees, and Birds,
But my most unhappy state,
Far surmounts all reach of words.
Upon his Ladies sickness of the small Pocks.
Cruel and impartial sickness,
Sword of that Arch-Monarke death,
That subdues all strength by weakness,
Whom all kings pay tribute breath.
Are not these thy steps I tracke,
In the pure snow of her face,
When thou did attempt to sack
Her lives fortress, and it race.
Th'heauenly honey thou did suck,
From her Rose cheeks might suffice,
Why then did thou mar and pluck
Those dear flowers of rarest price?
Mean thou thy Lord to present
With those rich spoils and adorn,
Leaving me them to lament,
And in lnkes black tears thus mourn?
No: I Will in my bosom wear them,
And close lock them in my heart*
Thence, nor time, nor death, shall bear the,
Till I from my self docdepart.
Th. Spilman.

A Sonnet in the grace of wit, of tongue, of face.
Her face, her tongue, her wit, so fair, so sweet, so sharp,
First bent, the^ drew, now hit, mine eye, mine ear, my heart:
Mine eye, mine ear, my heart, to like, to learn, to love,
Her face, her tongue, her wit, does lead, does teach, does move
Her face her tongue, her wit, with beams, with sound, with art
Does blind, does charm, does rule, mine eye, mine ear, my heart,
Mine eye* mine ear, my heart, with life, with hope, with skill
Her face, her tongue, her wit, does feed, does ^east, does fill.
Oface, o tongue, o wit, with frowns, with checks, with smart
Wring not, vex not, wou^d not mineey, mine ear, my heart
This eye, this ear, this heart, shall joy, shall bind, shall sw^are,
Your face, your tongue, your wit, to serve, to love, to fear.
Sonnet.
For her heart only.
Only (sweet Love) afford me but thy heart
Then close thine eyes within their iuory coue^s,
That they to me no beam of light impart,
Athough they shine on all thy other lovers.
As for thy lip of ruby, cheek of rose,
Though I have kissed them often with sweet content,
I am content that sweet content to lose,
If they sweet Will will not bar me, I assent.
Let me not touch thy hand, but through thy glove,
Nor let it be the pledge of kindness more:
Keep all thy beauties to thy self, sweet lnue,
I ask not such bold favors as before.
I beg but this, afford me but thy heart,
For then I know thou will the rest impart
ODE.
That time and absence proves* ^ather helps then hurts to loves. ABsence, hear
thou my Protestation,
Against thy strength,
Distance, and length:
Do what you can for alteration.
For hearts of truest mettle*
Absence does join, and time does settle.
Who loves a Mistress of such quality,
He soon has found
Affection ground
Beyond time place, and all mortality
To hearts that cannot vary,
Absence is present, time does tarry.
My senses want their outward motions:
Which now within
Reason does win,
Redoubled in her secret notions:
Like rich men that take pleasure,
In hiding, more then handling Treasure*
By absence, this good means I gain,
That I can catch her,
Where none can watch her,
In some close corner of my brain.
There I embrace and kiss her,
And so I both enjoy and miss her.
The true loves knot.
Love is the link, the knot, the band of unity
And all that love, do love with their beloved to be:
Love only did decree,
To change his kind in me.
For though I loved with all the powers of my mind,
And through my restles thoghts, their rest in her did find,
Yet are my hopes declind,
Since she is most unkind.
For since her beauties Sun my fruitless hope did breed,
By absence from that Sun* I hoped to sterue that weed,
Though absence did indeed
My hopes not starve, but feed.
For when I shift my place, like to the stricken Dear,
I cannot shift the shaft, which in my side I bear:
By me it rests there
The cause is not elsewhere.
So hau^ I seen the sick to run and turn again,
As if that outward change, could ease his inward pain^
But still alas in vain,
The fit does still remain.
Yet goodness is the spring from whence this ill does grow
For goodness causd the love, which great respect did owe
Respect true love did show,
True Love thus wrought my woe.
Ignoto.

Sonnet.
BEst pleased she is, when love is most expressed,
And sometime says that love should be requited,
Yet is she grieved my love should now be righted,
When that my faith has proved what I protest.
Am I beloved whose heart is thus oppressed,
Or dear to her, and not in her delighted?
I live to see the Sun, yet still benighted,
By her despair is blam'de, and hope suppressed,
She still denies, yet still her heart consents:
She grants me all, but that which I desire,
She fuel sends, but bids me leave the fire,
She lets me die, and yet my death lamenteth.
O foolish love, by reason of thy blindness.
I die for want of love, yet killed with kindness.
Sonnet.
WHen a weak child is sick, and out of quiet,
And for his tenderness cannot sustain
Physic of equal strength unto his pain,
Physicians to the Nurse prescribe a diet.
O I am sick, and in my sickness weak,
And through my weakness dead, if I but take
The pleasantest receipt, that art can make,
Or if I hear but my Physician speak.
But ah (fair God of Physic) it may be,
But Physic to my Nurse would me recover,
She whom I love with beauty nurseth me,
But with a bitter mixture kills her lover.
Yet I assure my self, I should not die,
If she were purged of her cruelty.
Sonnet.
WEre I as base as is the lowly plain,
And you (my love) as high as heaven above,
Yet should the thoughts of me your humble swain,
Ascend t^ heaven, in honor of my love*
Were I as high as heaven above the plain,
And you (my love) as humble and as low
As are the deepest bottoms of the Main,
Whereso'ere you were, with you my love should go,
Were you the earth (dear love) and I the skies,
My love should shine on you like to the Sun,
And look upon you with ten thousand eyes,
Till heau^n wax't blind* and till the world were dun.
Where so'ere I am, below, or else above you,
Whereso'ere you are, my heart shall truly love you.
I. S.

Madrigall.
MY love in her attire does show her wit,
It does so well become her:
For every season she has dressings fit:
For Winter, Spring, and Summer,
No beauty she does miss,
When all her Robes are on,
But beauties self ^he is,
When all her Robes are gone.
A Poem.
WHen I to you of all my woes complain,
Which you make me endure without release,
With scornful smiles you answer me again,
That lovers true must bear and hold their peace.
Dear I will bear, and hold my peace, if you
Will hold your peace, and bear what I shall do.
F. D.

Sonnet.
THe Poets feign that when the world began,
Both sexes in one body did remain,
Till love (offended with this double man)
Causd Vulcan to divide him into twain.
In this division he the heart did sever,
But cunningly he did indent the heart,
That if there were a reuniting ever,
Each part might know which was his counterpart.
See then (dear love) th'indentute of my heart,
And read the cou'nants writ with holy fire,
See (if your heart be not the counterpart,
Of my true hearts indented chaste desire.)
And if it be, so may it ever be,
Two hearts in one, twixt you my love and me.
I. S.

An inuectiue against women.
ARe women fair? I wondrous fair to see too,
Are women sweet? Yea passing sweet they be to:
Most fair and sweet to them that inlie lone them,
Chaste and discreet to all, save those that prove them.
Are women wise? Not wise but they be witty,
Are women witty? Yea, the more the pity:
They are so witty, and in wit so wily,
That be ye never so wise, they will beguile ye.
Are women fools? Not fools, but fondlings many.
Can women fond be faithful unto any?
When snow-white swans do turn to color sable,
Then women fond will be both firm and stable.
Are women Saints? No Saints, nor yet no devils
Are women good? Not good, but needful evils.
So Angel-like, that devils I do not doubt them,
So needful ils, that few can live without them.
Are women proud? I, passing proud, and praise them.
Are women kind* I, wondrous kind and please them:
Or so imperious, no man can endure them,
Or so kind-hearted, any may procure them.
Ignoto.

Loves embassy in an Iambicke Elegy.
Unhappy verse! the witness of unhappy state,
Make thy self fluttring wings of thy fast flying thought
And fly forth unto my love, wheresoever she be.
Whether lying restless in heavy bed, or else
Sitting so cheerlesse at the cheerful board, or else
Playing alone careless on her heaun'ly Virginals.
If in bed, tell her that mine eyes can take no rest:
If at board, tell her that my mouth can taste no food:
If at her Virginals, tell her I can hear no mirth.
Asked why say waking Love suffers no sleep:
Say that raging love does appall the weak stomach:
Say that lamenting love marre^ the Musical.
Tell her, that her pleasures were wont to lull me a sleep
Tell her* that her beauty was wont to feed mine eyes:
Tell her, that her sweet tongue was wont to make me mirth.
Now do I nightly waste, wanting my kindly rest:
Now do I daily starve, wanting my lively food:
Now do I always die, wanting my timely mirth.
And if I waste, who will bewail my heavy chance?
And if I starve, who will record my cursed end?
And if I die, who will say, this was Immerito.
Edmund Spencer.

Sonnet.
Loves seven deadly sins.
MIne eye with all the deadly sins is fraught,
1. First proud, since it presumed to look so hie:
A watchman being made, stood gazing by,
2. And Idle, took uo heed till I was caught:
3. And Envious bears envy, that my thought
Should in his absence be to her so nie:
4. To kill my heart, mine eye let in her eye,
And so content gave to a murder wrought:
5. And covetous, it never would remove
From her fair hair, gold so does please his sight.
6. Unchaste, a bawd between my heart and love,
7. A glutton eye, with tears drunk every night.
These sins procured have a Goddess ire:
Wherefore my heart is damned in loves sweet fire.
Sonnet.
To two most Honorable and virtuous Ladies and Sisters, the Lady Margaret
Countess of Cumberland, the Lady Anne Countess of Warwick.
YE Sister-Muses, do not you repine,
That I two sisters do with nine compare,
Since each of these is far more truly rare,
Then the whole troop of all the heau^nly nine.
But if ye ask me which is more divine,
I answer, like to their twinne eyes they are,
Of which, each is more bright then brightest star.
Yet neither does more bright than other shine.
Sisters of spotless fame, of whom alone
Malicious tongues take pleasure to speak well,
How should I you commend, since either one
All things in heaven and earth so far excel?
The only praise I can you give, is this,
That one of you, like to the other is.
H. C.

ODE.
Of Cynthia:
THe ancient readers of heavens book,
Which with curious eye did look
Into Natures story,
All things under Cynthia took
To be transitory.
This the learned only knew,
But now all men find it true,
Cynthia is descended,
With bright beams, and heavenly hew,
And lesser stars attended.
Lands and Seas ^e rules below,
Where things change, and ebb, and flow,
Spring, wax old, and perish:
Only time which all does mow,
Her alone does cherish.
Times young hours attend her still,
And her eyes and cheeks do fill,
With fresh youth and beauty:
All her lovers old do grow,
But their hearts, they do not so
In their love and duty.
This song was sung before her sacred Majesty at a show on horseback,
wherewith the right Honorable the Earl of Cumberland presented her Highness
on May day last.
Of love gift.
WHo gives a gift to bind a friend thereby,
Does set or put his gift to usury:
And he that gives a gift that is not free,
Give where he lift, so that he give not me.
For bought and sold is friendship strange,
Who lives by selling, lives by change.
And he that loves to change his friend,
Will turn to nothing in the end.
The Anatomy of Love.
NOw what is love, I pray thee tell?
It is that fountain and that well.
Where pleasure and repentance dwell:
It is perhaps that sounding bell,
That tols all in, to heaven, or hell,
And this is Love, as I hear tell.
Now what is love, I preth thee say?
It is a work on holy day,
It is December matched with May
When lusty bloods in fresh array,
Hear ten months after of their play:
And this is love, as I hear say.
Now what is love, I preth thee feign,
It is a sunshine mixed with rain,
It is a gentle pleasing pain,
A flower that dies, and springs again.
It is in faith that would full feign,
And this is love, and not a stain.
Yet what is love I preth thee say,
It is a pretty shadow way,
As well found out by night as day,
It is a thing will soon decay:
Then take the vantage while you may,
And this is love as I hear say.
Now what is love, I preth thee show,
A thing that creepes and cannot go,
A prize that passes too and fro,
A thing for one, a thing for mo^.
And he that proves shall find it so
And this is some sweet friend I trow.
In vain I live, such sorrow lives in me,
In vain lives sorrow, since by her I live:
Life works in vain, where death will Master be,
Death strives in vain, where life does virtue give.
Thus each of us would work an others woe,
And hurts himself in vain, and helps his foe.
A Poem.
IF wrong by force had Justice put to fligh^,
Yet were there hope she might return again,
If l^wlesse war had shut her up from sight,
Yet lawful peace might soon restore her train.
But now alas, what hope of hope is left,
When wrongful death has her of life bereft?
The Sun that often falls, does often rise,
The Moon that waineth, waxes full with light:
But he that death in chains of darkness ties,
Can never break the bands of lasting night.
What then remains but tears of loss to wail,
In which all hope of mortal help does fail?
Who then shall weep, nay who shall tears refrain,
If common harms must move the minds of all?
Too few are found that wrongful hearts restrain,
And of too few, too many death does call*
These common harms I wail among the rest,
But private loss denies to be expressed.
A Poem in the nature of an Epitaph of a friend.
IF stepdame nature have been scant,
In dealing beauties gifts to me:
My wit shall help supply that want,
And skill in steed of shape shall be.
My stature I confess is small,
And therefore nill I boast of war.
My name shall fill the heavens and all,
This skin shall serve to hide that skarre.
My head to bear the helm unfit,
My hands unapt to murder men:
But little heads often hold much wit,
And feeble hands can guide a Pen.
Loves contentment.
Death is my doom, awarded by disdain,
A lingering death that will not let me die,
This length of life is lengthning of my pain,
And length of pain gets strength of pain thereby:
And strength of pain, makes pain of longer last,
Ah who has ^y'de my life to pain so fast?
And yet I seem, as if I did but feign,
Or make my grief much greater then I need,
When as the care to hide my burning pain,
With secret sighs, constraines my heart to bleed.
Yet well I wot, be killed I shall not be,
Until by death a proof thereof you see.
But if this lodge, the witness of my woe,
Whose stony walls enteard my plaints contain,
Had sense to feel, and tongue my pain to show,
Which he inclosd, I utter all in vain,
You soon should know that most I make my moan,
Alone, if he that loves can be alone.
Why should I seek to make my shame be known,
That foolish love is causer of my pain*
(Forgive me love) the speech is not mine own,
But so they speak that thee and thine disdain.
And I my self confess my skill too small,
To plead for love, and clear my self with all.
What reason can my simple wit devise,
Why bootlesse grief should thus my mind afflict?
I love the thoughts, that love it self despise,
I seek for that I never look to find.
Often have I heard, for which I think I die,
Thine angry tongue all kind of love defy.
Yet is my life upon thy promise staid,
By which thou have assured me of thy love,
And though thereby my heat be not allaide,
No stay of flight, where gain is still above.
Yet since thy heart can yield to love no more,
I rest content, although I die therefore.
Quis Deus opposuit nostris sua numina votis? A repentant Poem.
Though late my heart, yet turn at last,
And shape thy course another way,
It Is better lose thy labor past,
Then follow on to sure decav.
What though thou long have straid away*
In hope of grace for mercy cry.
Though weight of sin does press thee down,
And keep thee grou'ling on the ground,
Though black despair, with angry frown,
Thy wit and judgment quite confound:
Though time and wit have been misspent,
Yet grace is left if thou repent.
Weep then my heart, weep still and still,
Nay melt to floods of flowing tears,
Send out such shrikes as heaven may fill,
And pierce thine angry Judges ea^es,
And let thy soul that harbors sin,
Bleed streams of blood to drown it in.
Then shall thine angry Judges face,
To cheerful looks it self apply,
Then shall ^hy soul be filled with grace,
And fear of death constraind to fly.
Even so my God, oh when? how long?
I would, but sin is too too strong.
I strine to rise, sin keeps me down,
I fly from sin, sin follows me.
My will does reach at glories crown,
VVeake is my strength, it will not be.
See how my fainting soul does pant,
O let thy strength supply my want.
To the Epitaph upon the heart of Henry the third, late King of France and
Poland: slain 1589. by a Iacobine Friar. Upon the Tomb of his heart in the
Church of Saint Clou, near Paris, adjoining to the house where he was slain.
Adsta viator, and dole Regum vicem,
Cor Regis isto conditum est sub marmore,
Qui iura Gallis, iura Sarmatis dedit.
Tectus Cucullo hunc sustulit Sicarius,
Abi Viator, and dole Regum vicem.
Th^s Paraphastically Englished.
WHether thy choice, or chance thee hither brings,
Stay Passenger, and while the hap of kings.
This little stone, a great Kings heart does hold*
That ru'ld the fickle French, and ^olackes bold:
Whom with a mighty worlike host attended
With traitorous knife, a coused monster ended.
So frail are even the highest earthly things.
Go passenger, and wail the hap of Kings.
F. D.

Addit. per Cha. Best. Arm. An Epitaph on Henry the fourth the last French King.
THat we should more bewail the hap of kings,
Great Henry Bo^bons death occasion brings,
To Henry Valois ne^t crowned King of France,
Next both in blood, in name, in reign, in chance.
Perils his youth, wa^s did his manhood spend,
His old a^e peace, till murder his life did end:
His conquests glory, his wisdom peace did wi^,
His faith heaven, Christ pardon for his sin.
An Epitaph on Queen Elizabeth.
ELiza that great maiden Queen lies here,
Who governed England four and forty year,
Our coins refinde in Ireland tamde, Belgia protected,
Friended France, foiled Spain, and Pope rejected:
Princes found her powerful, the world virtuous,
Her subjects wise and just, and God religious:
God has her soul, the world her admiration,
Subjects her good deeds, Princes her imitation.
Unions Jewel.
Diverse rare gems in thee O union shine:
First seven Margarites in thy Jewel stand:
Matildaes three, three Ianes of regal line,
Two royal Mary's, two Elizaes, and
One Isbell, Anne, Sibill, and Margery,
All royal gems, set princely shine in thee,
But first in it does Agasia shine,
Who first with Durstus it began to make.
Then Margret, next of our King Edgars line,
Whom Malcolme King of Scots, to wife did take.
Whose grandchild Mawde our Empress did conioine
Scots, Saxon, Norman blood in our Kings line.
For their child Mawde, our first Henry did marry,
Of them Matild our said Empress did spring:
By whose second husband our Kings did carry
Name of great Plantagenet, then Scots King
First Alexander did Sibilla wed,
Who sprung from our William conquerors bed.
The third Matild their first king David married,
Earl VValdoffes daughter, niece to great K* William:
Jane our King John's daughter thither was carried
By their second Alexander, after came
Their third King Alexander who did marry
An other Margret, daughter of our third Harry.
From them two did another Margret spring,
Who by Norwaies Prince a fourth Margret had,
Scots infant Queen whom first Edward our king*
To have married to his son, would have been glad.
So Scotlands Pears would too* her death said nay,
Which only this great union then did stay.
Though that most noble and victorious king.
This natural union could not then advance,
Another he as great to effect did bring
When he his son married to the heir of France
Isbell, by whom since all our kings have claimed
The crown of France, which some of the have gained.
Though this our second Edward did prevent,
That he from Scotland did not not take his wife,
His daughter Jane performed his intent
With second David spending there her life.
He did the child of second Edward marry
As third Alexander did of our third Harry.
Without issue they died, then Margery,
Their first King Roberts daughter Bruise by name,
Scots Queen by birth, must needs remembered be:
By whom Lord Stewart did increase his fame.
From them second Robert, and James Stewart from him
Third Robert namde, whence first James did begin.
A valiant Prince who spent his youthful prime,
In martial deeds, with our fifth Henry in France:
To whom our sixth king Henry in his time,
Jane our third Edwards grandchild did advance.
In marriage, she of Henry Bewford sprung,
Somersets Earl was virtuous, fair and young.
Fifth Margaret Richmonds Countes forth did bring
Our seventh Henry, who one division ended,
With Eliza, heir of our fourth Edward king:
From both whom great'st Margret of all descended:
From whom and fourth James, fifth James Scottish king,
And from him Mary Scots last Queen did spring.
Fourth James being dead, Margret did Douglas marry,
They a daughter Margret had, Earl Lyneux wife*
Whose son Lord Darnley married their last Mary,
Of whom comes Charles James finisher of strife.
Who with Anne makes union by the childlesse death*
Of our Queens Mary, and Elizabeth.
The rarest pearls, and richest Margarits all,
Which ever did in any Jewel stand*
The rarest Jewel too, and most Angelical,
Almost made up by God and Natures hand,
By men to be finished to this Isle sent,
Then to be worn for her best ornament.
A Panegyricke to my sovereign Lord the King.
GReat King, since first this I Will by Jove's own hand,
Was set apart within great oceans arms,
And was appointed by her self to stand,
Fenc'^ round about with rocks from foreign harms:
She into sundry parts has often been torn,
And greatest wounds by her own blows has borne.
But all the fractions now which man did make,
Since it in one whole number nature gave,
Are added up, and brought to one great stake,
And being all sum'de up, one total have.
For Britain now to all the dividend,
In one whole quotient all does comprehend.
For thou the Monarch of this western I Will,
Now all her shiuered parts have brought together:
Spreading thy Empires wings eight hundred mile,
In length, and four in breadth, there staying neither*
But ore'old oceans breast thy arm do stretch
Through Ireland, making it to India reach*
To Jude thou the tribes have brought again,
Which by themselves did in Samaria dwell*
Iordane by thee whose stream did run amain,
Is now dride up, that every tribe may well
To other go: thou have broke down the wall,
Which Adrian made, and which we picticke call.
Thou virtues orb where fame is still ascendent,
And never can her highest auge attain,
Conquetour of a I hearts, all flattries transcendent,
Who hold'st it loss to take, to give great gain.
Of bounteous deeds the euer-running spring,
To many wealth, to all do gladness bring.
The Muses dearling who with golden Pen,
And silu'red tongue thy princely mind can tell,
In whom learning a Princes richest Iemme,
Both humane, and divine abounding dwell.
The great contriuer of this triple I Will,
To one imperial diadem and style.
The royal product of the princely dove,
Which Englands Noah from peaces Arc sent forth,
After wars deluge, who olive branch of love.
Do bring with thee in thy return from North:
How joyfully did Britain reach her hand,
To take thee int' the Arc of this her land?
With great Eliza glory of her own,
Wonder of future times, true Churches nurse,
The ancient faiths reuiuer, on whom were shown,
Heavens blessings, all men's prayers, no man's curse.
Fortunes favors, natures wealth, Gods high grace,
The Muses lodge, all virtues dwelling place.
Our Sun did set with great Elizabeth,
Before night thou a new daylight did bring,
Our summers peace did close at her cold death,
Without wars winter thou renewd'st our spring*
All our lives joys with her dead seemd to be,
Before intombde they were reuiude by thee.
Center of royal births, in whom do meet*
Lines drawn from all the noble conquerors blood,
Which ever in any part with warlike feet,
Of this great Isles circumference have stood,
With thy fair Queen, a sea whither do run,
Streams of all royal blood of Christendom.
Both royal plants whence princely branches spring,
VVhereon grow our best fruits of hope and joy
Great of-springs both, of many a noble King*
An antidotesh' against this lands annoy.
In whose mild looks has princely majesty,
A marriage made with modest courtesy.
She virtues book bound in a golden cover,
Wherein nature has writ with Gods own quill,
All beauties learning, where thou her true lover,
May read sweet lectures of delight at will.
And on the frame of whose diuinest feature,
All graces shine that can be in a creature.
Sprung of a double, knit to a triple King,
Late quadruple, the holy number, Three,
Grateful to God did seem more apt to bring,
Peace to this land, with love and unity.
Plant royal set by Juno in this land,
Whose ancestors by Mars here once did stand.
Sacred beauty her makes seem angelical,
Thee heavenly wisdom to the stars do raize,
Minerua her, Apollo thee do call
Their dearlings, both truest theames of all praise.
Together live and love, and long do reign,
To our, to your, to Gods* joy, bli^le, and gain.
To my Lord the Prince.
DEarling of these, of future times the glory,
Branch royal sprung from many a regal stem,
On whose fair structure, written is the story
Of natures chefest skill, worlds choicest Iemme,
Wits richest Cabinet, virtues best array,
Center where lines of all hearts loves do meet*
Sweet ground whereon the Muses love to play,
Ripe in wit, though green in years, of form most sweet
Scotlands fair fruit, Englands great hope, Frances love*
Irelands awe, Cambriaes joy, great Britains ^ame,
Abridgement of all worth, the mighty Jove,
Long lengthen your good days, and still your name,
And when you shall have honored long this land
Grant you a glorious Saint in heaven to stand.
To the excellent Lady Elizabeth her Grace.
Fair virtues Iemme* set in most royal gold,
The worthiest owner of the fairest mansion,
Rich prize for which nature and fortune hold
With Muses and graces Great contention:
All which by agreement this partition make,
None of themselves worthy of all discerning,
Nature your beauty, Graces your virtues take,
Fortune shares your honor, Muses your learning.
Map of perfection, who deserve to be,
And are the worthiest mark the world can yield,
For all great Christian Princes loves, they see
Such virtues wheat, growing in beauties field:
Long may you live, a holy and happy life,
A royal maid first, then a royal wife.
De lapsu hominis in Adam.
PAuper amabilis and venerabilis est benedictus,
Dives inutilis, insatiabilis, est maledictus,
Qui ^ona negligit, and mala diligit, intrat abyssum.
Nulla potentia, nulla pecunia* liberat ipsum.
Irremeabilis, insatiabilis, illa vorago,
Hic vbi mergitur, horrida cernitur omnis image.
Uir miserabilis Euaque flebilis hoc subierunt,
Hic cruciamina, per sua crimina, cum m^ruerunt.
Iussa Dei pia, iussa salubria si tenuissent,
Vir neque f^mina, nec sua semina, morte perissent,
Sed quia spernere iussaque soluere non timuere,
Mors grauis irrujt, hoc merito fuit, and periere.
Ianua mortis passio fortis crimen little,
A^tulit ^rbi semina morbi, totque malorum.
Illa parents, atque sequentes culpa peremit,
Atque piar^m deliciarum munus ademit.
^lebile fatum dans cruciatum, dansque dolorem,
Illa merenti perdere tanti regis honorem.
Est data saeuam causa per Euam perditionis,
Dum meliorem sperat honorem voce draconis,
Hoc male credens, nos quoque laedens crimine magn^,
Omnia tristi subdidit isti saecula damn^.
Stirps miserorum plena dolorum postea creuit,
His quoque damnis pluribus annis subdita fleuit.
De restitutione hominis per Christum.
SEd Deus omnipotens, qui verbo cuncta creauit,
Sic cecidisse d^lens homines quos semper amauit,
Ipse suum verbum transmi^it ad in^im a mundi,
Exulibus miseris aperire viam redeundi.
Filius ergo Dei descendit ab arce superna
Nunquam discedens a maiestate paterna,
Qui corpus sumens animatum, numine salu^
Processit natus sacrae de virginis alu^.
Uerus homo, verusque Deus, pius and miserat^r,
Uerus saluator, nostraeque salutis amator,
Sponte su^ mor^ens mortem moriendo peremit
^t sic p^rpetua miser^s a morte redemit,
Namque pia de morte resurgens, vt Leo f^rtis,
Restituit vitam prostrato principe mortis.
Of the fall of man in Adam.
THe poor man beloved, for virtue approved, right blessed is he,
Where covetous chu^f who never has enough, accursed shall be.
Who goodness rejects, and evil affects, shall fall in the pit,
No plenty of pence shall free him from thence, no power nor wit.
Both vnrepassable and insatiable, that gulf will appear,
Imbogd he shall be, where naught he shall see, but horror and fear.
Adam unstable, and Eve variable, the very first time,
By falling from God, deserved this rod, (O horrible crime,)
For had they adhered to God, and him feared, by keeping his reed
The^ death had not come on, the man or the woman, or any their seed.
But when as the man, from Gods will began, basely to revolt,
For his grievous sin, death came rushing in, and on him laid holt,
This was the great crime, which at the first time, by craft of the devil,
Did bring in the seed, of sickness and need, and all other evil:
This was the sin, which first did begin, our parents to kill,
And heavenly food, prepared for our good, did utterly spill.
Unhappy the fate, which first such a state, such sorrow did bring,
To him that had lost, so much to our cost, our heavenly king.
The credulous Eve, it was she that did give, the cause of such evil,
Hoping that honor, would come more upon her, deceived by the deui^*
Believing of him, did make her to sin, to all our great loss,
For mankind e're sense, received from hence, an horrible cross.
For all the nations, through all generatio^s, which after have been
With grief of their heart, have tasted the smart of that primitive ^in.
Of the restoring of man by Christ.
But Jove omnipotent, all things by his word who created,
Gri^uing man to be fal^e, whose love was in him so innated
Sent from above his word, for man to prepare a returning
Thence, where else had he lien, through all eternity burning*
So Gods only begotten son, came down to redeem us,
Yet did he still himself, his fathers glory beteeme us.
A body formde with a soul, to his divinity taking.
And to be borne of a virgin, his humanity making.
Borne very God, very man, he a man God, merciful, holy,
Purchased our salvation, was our Savior wholly.
For by his willing death, he deaths self wholly defeated,
And so us all from eternal death, by death ^ebegetted
From death again rising, he deaths prince mightily maimed,
Whereby his own from death, to eternal life he regained.
FINIS.

