DOOMES-DAY: OR, A TREATISE OF THE RESURRECTION of the BODY.

Delivered in 22. Sermons on 1. Cor. 15. Whereunto are added 7. other Sermons,
on 1. Cor. 16. BY The late Learned and Judicious Divine, MARTIN DAY, Doctor in
Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, and sometimes Rector of S.
Faiths, LONDON.

Matthew. 22.31. Have you not read what God has spoken to you, touching the
Resurrection of the Dead? LONDON, Printed by T. H. and M. F. for Nathanael
Butter, and are to be sold at the sign of the Pide Bull near Saint Austins
gate. 1636.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, and his most Ho. Lord, JOSEPH, By the
Divine Providence, Lord Bishop of EXCESTER.
MY LORD,
REligious spirits are usually Indulgent Patrons to Orphans: They imitate in
this Act him who said, I will be a Father to the Fatherless. I doubt not but
that I shall find your Honor of this generous disposition to these printed
Posthumes of Doctor Days licensed by Authority, and now seeking to your
Lordship for protection.

I have adventured to present these papers coming to my hands to your Honor,
hoping the child will be well liked for his Fathers sake, who was well known unto,
and entirely beloved of your Hon. in his primitive time in Cambridge, as also
while he was our Pastor here, and continued it toward him in his charge in
your Lo. Diocese, even until his dissolution: however I have done this to
show my readiness upon any occasion of service to your Lordship. Thus craving
your favor to shelter and fence this work from open depravers, and to
continue your love to the Authors memory, I humbly take leave, being

Your Lordships Servant, NATH. BUTTER.

To the Readers.
YOu cannot expect that these Sermons should have such exact politenesse and
neat dressing as if the Author had lived to revise them. Yet you may discover
Dr Days spirit, expression, method and matter, to speak in all of them:
praesentemque refert concio quaeque patrem.

I would wish you then to read them without any prejudicate opinion, as they
are exercises (whose Author was famous in his time) and which cannot choose but
yield you matter of counsel and comfort. You have but few Authors in English
upon this Epistle, and fewer upon these subjects. Lose by reading of them you
cannot, gain you may. I doubt not but they will prove beneficial to the
whole Church, for whose sake I have published them. Thus wishing you to gather
honey out of these, where it may be had, I rest,

Yours N. B.

1 COR. 15.29. What shall they do that are baptized over the dead, if the dead
rise not at all? Why therefore are they baptized over the dead?
THis gracious Apostle, the blessed organ and instrument of the holy Ghost;
does so wondrously dispute his cause, and contrive his arguments, for the
maintaining of this holy article of our faith, the resurrection of the body:
that as Saint Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in locum.
he leaves nothing unfetched either from God or men; for in five or six verses
before the text, he disputes from the omnipotency of God; in raising Christ
his Son. He has discoursed also, of Christ's kingdom; and of the delivery of
the kingdom of his mediation: and of the end of all things, the perfect
consummation of all; that God may govern, and be all in all.

Now he descends to a lower kind of sphere: to arguments taken from the
actions of men, and presidents here below upon the earth. And he says that
there were certain men in the world, that were baptized for dead, that is,
they are baptized in a certain hope of the resurrection of the dead: whose
labor is lost, and their faith frustrate, and to no purpose; if they have not
the end of that whereof they now make profession here. So some expound it. But
that is to bring us back into the same labyrinth we were in before: Verse 14.
for he says before, that our hope is vain, and our Preaching vain, if there
be no resurrection. Therefore waving that opinion; I take it that the Apostle
speaks of some other more peculiar and particular cause, that is, concerning
the state of the Church of God in persecution; wherein men despairing of help
in this world, despairing of any life or contentment; they did come and offer
themselves in a voluntary martyrdom, and took the baptism of death, that is,
they were baptized to this purpose: being willing to offer themselves as dead
men, to persecution for the Gospel sake, which they would not have done,
unless they had been certainly assured of the resurrection of the body.

Other senses there be, but I must proceed in order from one to another: and
labor to find out the likeliest, for in truth there are innumerable many; and
the place is very difficult. Only two things we are most sure of in this
argument and discourse, here set down to our hand.

First, that whatsoever this baptising over the dead was, (and therein is all
the difficulty) yet it was a thing that was public, notorious, and known to
the Corinthians, it was a matter that was not obscure to them, although it be
to us. For the Apostle speaks not to them in clouds, but by way of familiar
and evident example: thereby to win their judgments to this conclusion,
concerning the bodies resurrection.

Secondly, another thing is, that whatsoever this baptism was; yet certainly
it was a thing of much force, it was a great argument to prove that which the
Apostle intended. For it is not his manner to deal weakly in proving and
disputing: but he uses all the strength of the holy Ghost, as Chrysostom
says, Chrysostom.
that is, as much strength, and demonstration, and evidence of the spirit, as a
man can be capable of. And so upon this ground we must gather, that that
opinion is most likely, and to be embraced, that makes most for the
resurrection of the body. And if there be any sense of more force then other,
or any sense more pertinent than other, to prove that maine conclusion:
certainly that is the sense which the Apostle intends. For all those that be
of lesser weight, and smaller moment; they are besides the Apostles purpose.
Questionless if there be any vigor or power, in any more than another; we
must imagine that that is it the Apostle aimed at, and that he would have us to
aim at.

All the doubt comes out of the ambiguitie of this one word Baptism. While
some take this baptism for the sacramental washing; others again take it for
a ceremonial washing: either such as were in the Law among the legal
ceremonies; or such as were known in the common course of life, the washing of
the bodies and corpse of the dead, when they were laid forth for the Coffin.

Concerning these words for the dead: there is also some doubt, some expounding
it for sin: some for sinners; and some, for them that are naturally dead:
that is, when the spirit in the common course of nature is separated from the
body. But in all this discourse, if we can but gain the true and most perfect
sense; we have sufficiently handled this text; for,

We must first consider what the words mean,

And then how the words prove, and argue. For if we find once but the true
signification, we shall then find the perfect demonstration and proof that
arises from them.

First, then, the Church has taken it, as though the Apostle alluded to a
gross error of the Cerinthians and Montanists: and as Saint Chrysostom says
of the Marcionits, which out of these words, have gathered a ridiculous kind
of baptising of young Christians. And they said, when there was any
Catechumeni, (that is, those that were not baptized, but were yet in their
principles, and in their catechism:) for then they baptized none, for the most
part, till they were come to years of discretion, that themselves were able to
make profession of their own faith. Now if any of these were taken away by
death (upon the sudden, or by any casualty) which had intended to be baptized
at the appointed season, which was Easter: in this case, they were to
substitute and appoint some friend that was alive, to answer for the dead man:
and to be baptized for him. And then in a kind of stage-playing, they laid the
dead child, or the dead man, upon a form, or upon a table, or on a bed: and
the substitute or appointed friend, was to go under the bed or table; and to
answer to those questions that the Priest did usually make, to the party
baptized.

The first question was, whether he would be baptized or no? and if the dead
man could not, his friend was to say; yea.

The second question was, whether he believed or no? the party was to answer
affirmatively for the dead man, to that also.

The third question was, Chrysostom.
whether he renounced the Devil and all his works? and he was to answer to
that too. So says Chrysostom, this is a ridiculous thing, that every Christian
should laugh at in his mind, to see their folly: yet there is some show of
argument to be drawn from it: for that out of men's follies, God can ordain
strength. And this proves, that they had a conceit of the resurrection: or else
they would never have descended to such vain and ridiculous fantasies.

Afterward, that the Church of God took up this custom: yea, such as were
not heretics, but were brought up in the Church; yet they thought it as
possible for one man to be baptized for another, as for one man to be helped by
another prayers: but this has no show of consequence in it.

For the one, we have a command and a promise: for the other, we have neither.
Besides, prayer is general for all; but the receiving of the Sacrament is
personal, for one, for him alone that receives it. So that one cannot be
baptized for another. Yet some in the Church mistaking this text of Scripture,
thought that when any that intended to be baptized, were taken away before the
due time; they might appoint some that was his friend, that had first been
baptized for himself. And they thought this was profitable to him that was
deceased, But these are but mockeries of the Sacrament, and questionless, it
is a thing that the Apostle alludes not to. For the Apostle would never have
endured this error in the Corinthians; or if he had, yet it proves nothing. It
does not follow, that because foolish men abuse the Sacrament to a hope of the
resurrection, that therefore there shall be a resurrection. For foolish actions
have no probation, there is no force in that which is without reason. And
seeing the Apostle is curious, to rebuke them for lesser matters: as concerning
meat offered to Idols, and women being uncovered in the Church; which seem to
be matters of less moment; yet he particularly reproves the^; much more would
he have rebuked this, and not have suffered such a gangrene of error, to eat
into the body of the Church, as this was, that makes a mockery of the
Sacrament. Therefore seeing it has no force to prove, and because it is likely
that the Apostle would not suffer such a thing to be extant there: nor is there
mention any where in his Epistles, of such an error that was crept into
Corinth. Therefore we reject the exposition, although some other of the
Fathers, think, that out of their common abuse, the Apostle makes a good use,
and draws an argument, as in some cases it is necessary. It is lawful,
sometimes, to draw arguments from the follies and dreams of the heathen; so
our Divines do out of Plato, and out of the history of Err, who (they say)
after his death lived, and was seen again of his friends: and the story of
Epimenides, he that slept so many years, and revived again. But the Apostle
uses not to insist upon such arguments; he draws something indeed from
Menander, and from Epimenides; but it is matter of common knowledge and
experience, that no man could gainsay. And so I come to the second opinion.

What shall they do that are baptized for the dead? That is, it was a custom
(for the first 500. years, almost) that those that were baptized into the name
of Christ, they thought good to defer it till the latter end of their life,
and so when they lay sick upon their death bed, they called for baptism. For,
they thought (according to the error of Novatian) that when a man had once
received baptism, and had tasted of that heavenly gift, as the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 6. if they then fell into sin, Heb. 6.6.
there was no Sacrament for them, nor no hope to be reconciled to God, which is
the cutthroat of all faith and repentance; but they being carried thus, by
natural reason, thought that after they were baptized, and had made defiance
of the world, the flesh, and the devil; and then fell back and relapsed into
sin; they thought there was no pardon for them. And because they knew their
own weakness and infirmity, that they could not so renounce the world, the
flesh, and the devil, but that they were often entangled with them, or with some
of them: therefore unless they should bring upon their souls an inevitable
necessity of damnation, they thought it good not to meddle with that
Sacrament, till they were past the necessity of sinning, which when that is, no
man knows. For unless the grace of God subdue our affections; as long as a
man lives, the power of sinning is not past: But they imagined, that old age
would bring a cessation, and a supersedeas of all offenses: and that then, they
might better serve God, and with more quietness, according to their
profession. Therefore they deferred baptism to their last age; and then they
were baptized. And in this error, we see what great men lived. As Valentinian
the Emperor, whom S. Ambrose commends highly in his funeral oration. For he
purposed to be baptized when he came home, but he was intercepted by death.
Austin.
And Nebridius, S. Austins great friend, was not baptized till he was old: and
S. Austin himself was not baptized till his man's estate. This error, God
confuted by the death of Valentinian, and other great spirits: which although
they were persuaded of the truth of religion, yet they put off God, and would
not take his time, but have a time of their own choosing, and therefore God
gave them no time; as Ambrose says of the Emperor; he wanted not the grace of
baptism, because he had the faith of baptism. He yielded his consent unto the
truth, and although he went away unbaptised, yet he was truly baptized: as one
who in his heart yielded to the faith, and promises of Christ. And if we should
take it thus, this is the sense of S. Paul in these words; what shall they do
that are baptized for dead? that is, when they are ready to die, and go out of
the world; if there be no resurrection? his argument follows, that that which
they did so late, they would not do it at all: that which they did by
constraint, putting it off to the last time of their life; they would not do
it at all, except it were for the hope of the resurrection; so that if there be
no resurrection, there is a maine frustration, and a mere delusion of these
men; that suffer themselves so far to be overgone with deadly sickness, as
that they look every hour for death: and yet then they take upon them the
baptism of life, as a certain pawn and pledge of the common resurrection.

This sounds somewhat like a truth: but yet it is likely that the Apostle would
have condemned this, as well as the other: being as ridiculous, because this is
injurious to God, and to the Sacrament, and pernicious to men's own souls; to
tempt God whether he will give them a time of their own choosing: to put off
the Sacrament, that should be embraced upon all opportunities: to refuse it
when God offers it, which we should take thankfully and chearefully. No doubt
but the Apostle would have confuted this error, as the former: and not have
suffered the Corinthians to have been so tardy in a point of salvation.
Wherefore I take this opinion not to be according to the Apostles mind: for as
I said, that opinion is most probable and most agreeable to S. Paul's meaning,
that proves the strongest, but this proves nothing; that because a man that is
driven to it, in extremity at the time of his death, to do an action; that
therefore that action should be of force; that may be done in amazement and
fear, or by the instigation of others; a man (it may be) is not lead to it by
his own will, so much as by the persuasion of another: and there is no reason
that a man should ground upon such a weak stay, to infer such a strong
conclusion.

The third opinion, What shall they do that are baptized for the dead? that
is, for the forgiveness of sins, which are dead works. For so indeed the Lord
seems to signify, when he says, God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living: and also the Apostle, when he says, ye were dead in sins and
trespasses. It is true our Savior Christ, includes in that speech, both them
that were dead naturally, and them that were dead spiritually. For in one
place, he says, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: speaking of
natural death. In another place, let the dead bury their dead: speaking of
them that were dead spiritually, and so we may apply it: that those that are
baptized for dead, that is for remission of sins; wherein, the body, and
soul are dead: and for the quickening and reviving of them by spiritual
grace. But this is too far off: for the Apostles meaning is not here to
speak of a thing that is common, (that being common to all believers, to be
baptized, for the remission of sins) but he speaks of some peculiar
baptism, that was not common to all in general, but belonged to some in
particular.

Besides, the Apostle speaks not here of the spiritual resurrection, but of
the corporal, he speaks not of the rising from sin to grace, although it be
true that they that are baptized, are baptized for the remission of sins, yet
it is not proper here; for the Apostle speaks of the resurrection of the flesh:
the spiritual is allegorical: which is from the death of sin, to the life
of grace, by repentance. Therefore that proves nothing, and is not likely to be
S. Paul's mind: for he purposed not to spend his time in trifles, but to bring
the validity of his arguments, directly to conclude the cause.

Another opinion there is, that has many great and substantial followers.
They that are baptized for the dead, that is, that are baptized into the death
of Christ Jesus, to be planted with him into the similitude of his death. And
this has Chrysostom, Theodoret, Aquinas, Calvin, and many other great
Divines; for the Authors and followers of it. And that you may see that it has
some similitude of reason in it, look in Romans 6.4.5. Romans 6.4.5.
Do you not know, says the Apostle, that they that are baptized into Christ,
are baptized into his death? therefore we are buried together with him in
baptism.

It is true, that every man that makes profession of the faith of Christ's
baptism, among the rest of the articles that he professes, he must believe in
Christ that was dead, and buried, that he was crucified, and that he descended
into hell, and that he rose again the third day, etc. And he professes also,
that he is ready to dye for Christ, when he shall be called to it, and till
that time come, that he will dye spiritually in his heart and in his will to
worldly affections: which he knows, that Christ never had in him, or had any
liking to them, but utterly abhorred them. Therefore this being the symbol and
badge of our profession; it seems from hence, that every man that is baptized,
may be said to be baptized for dead: that is, for a dead Christ, in whom he
trusts, which was dead, but now is alive: and behold he is alive for evermore.
Apoc. 1.18.
He is baptized for dead; that is, to the world and the flesh; that he may live
for ever unto God.

Chrysostom proves this by an argument, that he thinks fit and convenient
for the purpose: for, says he, whether of the two is easier, to raise the body
from death, or to raise the soul from sin? no doubt, says he, it is an
easier matter to raise the dead body from the grave, than to raise a soul that
is dead in sins and trespasses, to newness of life. And behold, says he, in
the Romans, the Apostle proves the one by the other, that although we think it
easier, yet he intimates, that that which we think to be easier, is harder:
and that which seems more hard and difficult, is more easily achieved and
effected by the hand of God. And he proves it out of Matthew. 9.5. Mat. 9.5.
where our Lord discoursing with the Pharisees, when they had said, who can
forgive sins? he asks them whether it were easier to say to the sick of the
Palsy, take up thy bed and walk, or to say, thy sins are forgiven thee?
where our Lord clearly gives us to understand, that it is a harder matter, and
a more powerful thing, to say, thy sins are forgiven thee, then to give
limbs to him to walk, and to take up his bed and go his way. For sicknesses
are the punishments of sin; and the Lord removing that once, he takes away
the cause, which is greater than the effect. But although this be followed,
with so many, so great, and so worthy Interpreters, yet (me thinks) it has no
congruity with the purpose of the Apostle in this place, for (as I said before)
the Apostles meaning is not here, to instruct us in the renovation of the
soul, of newness of life, in holiness and sanctification: but to tell us of
the resurrection of the flesh; that is his chief argument, the maine point he
insisteth precisely upon. Therefore to say to be baptized for dead, is to be
baptized for the name of a dead Christ: it is too far fetched, and I cannot
see how it can be brought in. Therefore (without prejudice to these glorious
and goodly writers) we proceed to further examination of these words.

There be some others, that cannot endure what has been said before, but they
must devise tricks of their own. They say Saint Paul alludes to the
Leviticall Law, Numb. 19. Numb. 19.
when a man had touched any dead carcass, he was to be cleansed before the
even: but suppose, say they, that the man dyed by casualty, before night,
before he could come to the Priest, before he could have gotten the matter of
his purification, what was then to be done? Then, say they, his neighbor was
to be cleansed for him: and so they fall upon an opinion before named. But what
is their purpose? certainly to bring in prayer for the dead, because they
think that as there was baptism for the dead, so there should be prayer for
the dead. And if the one fall to be so, the other must needs be so too. For I
rather think that there should be prayer for the dead, than that there should
be baptising for them; to speak in a sacramental sense. They do it, to bring
in their superstitions of holy water, and sprinkling the graves and sepulchers,
and coffins of dead persons: thereby to make them more pure before God; and
that which is more ridiculous, that the Priest should undertake in times past
(and it may be now too, in our times) when he was sent for to a sick body to
give him the host, and that the party were dead before he came, he in the
presence of the company, was to eat it, for him that was deceased: and thought
that that would be availeable to him, for the forgiveness of his sins, and
for the receiving him into heaven. These things have no ground nor warrant:
neither in this Epistle, nor in the old Law: There is no such thing that there
was any such purification by a proxy; but it was always done in a man's own
person: and there was no fri^nd admitted in any such action. Therefore in that
devise, they make one lie to salve another: as their custom is, in other of
their proceedings.

Further, there is yet another opinion, that says, that baptising for the
dead, it is meant of those that came, and offered themselves voluntarily to
afflictions and persecution. And this is more near the point, for indeed in
the Scripture, it is a most usual and common saying, to call afflictions by
the name of baptism. So Math. 20. Math. 20.
Mark. 9. Mar. 9.
when the sons of Zebede come to our Lord and desire a boon of him;
requesting that one of them might sit at his right hand, and the other at his
left in his kingdom: Christ answers them again, that they knew not what they
asked. And he proceeds further; says he, Can ye drink of that Cup whereof I
shall drink, and can ye be baptized with the baptism that I shall be baptized
withal? and they answer again, they could. Christ tells them again, that
indeed they should drink of that cup, and be baptized with that baptism; but
to sit at his right hand, and at his left, etc. where we may see, he speaks of
the baptism of fire and trouble, and persecution. That which is intended in
those words, the same also by comparison, may be taught here, and interpreted
in this place. They that are baptized for dead, that is, those that scorned
their lives, that cared not for them: those that were ready to drink the cup
of Christ, that were ready to throw themselves into danger, for the glory of
their Lord, and Master. To what end are they thus forward, if there be no
resurrection from the dead? There be many things that favor this
interpretation, as the sequel that follows in the next words. Where the
Apostle says, why are we in danger or jeopardie every hour, if the dead rise
not? as if he would bring the argument from abroad, home to himself; and then
the sense of the place is this. To what purpose do men adventure their lives,
and cast themselves into apparent danger of death, except they have a certain
hope of the resurrection to life: and that that God that takes away their life
now, can give it them again, with advantage in the world to come?

This is true, but whether it be fully proper or no, to rest in this baptism,
as absolute; I think it lies not in any man's power by any strong and full
authority to determine. It is true, our Lord says, Luke 10. Luke 10.
I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I pained till it be past!
Where he means in the same sense, the baptism of affliction. For a man in
affliction, is as it were a dead man: a man in prison, as though he were in the
bottom of the water in another element, when there is persecution and trouble
on every side.

But yet there is another opinion, which shall be the last that at this time I
will trouble you withal; that is, of Beza, Beza.
and others that hold with him: that all this that is spoken of baptism here;
is not meant of any sacramental washing; but as the word is often used, for a
legal washing and purifying; common and ordinary, at the carrying forth of the
dead, as in Heb. 9. Heb. 9.
there are many washings, and the word is thus used in diverse places in the
Gospel. As where Christ says, the Scribes and Pharisees, when they come from
the market, they baptized their hands, and they baptized their Cups and their
Platters, and Dishes. It is the same word there, and it signifies to dip, to
wash, and make clean. And so it was a custom among Christians, they used when
they laid their dead bodies forth, to wash them and annoint them. And all this
was done, as a certain assurance and sign of the resurrection. So the body of
our Lord Jesus, was imbalmed by Joseph of Arimathea, and Nichodemus: and should
have been more fully embalmed, upon that which we call our sunday morning; but
that the women received relation of his resurrection, before they came to the
grave. This custom was used in Egypt, as we see in the Scriptures: and in
express words, Acts 9. Dorcas or Tabitha, when she was dead, she was washed
and laid in an upper room. And it seems this custom was used by profane men
themselves, in most Countries: as the Poet speaks of Tarquynus, when he was
dead being slain, for his foul acts and tyrannizing parts, a good woman,
says he, took him, and in devotion, washed his body, and anointed him
according to the solemnity of funerals. So the substance of the argument (as
Beza thinks) is this; that all this expense about these corses, carrying them
to their graves in pomp, that we cast them not out as beasts unburied, but
commit them to the bowels of our mother earth, to lie there in certain hope of
the resurrection. All the charge and cost that we bestow for them, our washing
of their bodies, that we suffer them not to carry any pollution or stain with
them: all this is done in hope of the resurrection. And this we would not do,
except we had a hope of the resurrection, but would cast them away, without any
care. But we have a stately sumptuous care of their obsequies, and proceedings
in this business: therefore we have a certain hope of the resurrection.
Tertullian Tertul.
says, if you ask me the fashion of my life, and how I eat and drink; and
how I wash my self in my bath: I wash my self in such a bath as is convenient
for the health of my body, and I look for another bath, when I am dead:
alluding to the custom that was then among Christians; which was received from
the Jews or Hebrews; that had great skill in it, and wrote it in books, and
put it into their Thalmud, where there is a great long Chapter to this purpose,
how the funerals of men should be solemnized. And of a truth there is some
force of an argument, from the customs and manners of the people of God: to
prove the certainty of our common faith in the resurrection. But I am persuaded
S. Paul did not greatly care for these fashions: because they were but weak,
for though they prove something, yet men might object and say, what do you
tell us of idle customs, that because men are carried by their friends with
weeping and lamentation to their graves; and those that be of greaer rank with
pomp and solemnity: because they do thus, shall we therefore believe that
there is a resurrection? because this argument may suffer the traverse,
therefore it is not full, although it prove something, as Calvin Calvin.
says well, because death seems to be the last extirpation, and
extinguishing, and rooting out of men, therefore it has been the wisdom of
men, and the nature of faith, to devise life in death, and to represent life by
death. For men that have friends, that are men of respect, and are able to have
it so, are carried to their graves with more pomp and magnificence, than ever
was done to them in all their life. Because they would overcome death, and make
their scaffold of joy and delight in the height of death, more then before in
their life time, to out-worke the fear of death in those that are living, and
to give assured hope of those that are dead, therefore it was profitable for
the Church to invent these things, and the Church approves of it. And then the
Apostles argument is, to what end are all these solemnities for the dead? to
what end is this cost? to what end is this pomp? in celebrating their
funerals? but as so many arguments of the resurrection? And they tell us
plainly, that except we hoped to see the man again in glory in the world to
come: we would not trouble our selves about these things, but cast him away as
a thing of nothing. But by this we show our esteem of them, that we account
them to be those, whose lives are laid up with God in Christ.

To conclude this, because I have been too troublesome to you in it; Chrysostom.
August.
I think that the fittest, and the best sense, is that of Saint Chrysostom
and Saint Austine: who though they lived in several parts of the world, yet
with one spirit they agree upon it: What then shall they do that are baptized
for the dead? say they, what is all this mortifying to the world? what is this
continual expectation of death in the world? what is all this preparation for
the world to come? which is in the opinion of worldly men, nothing but a mere
death: They think that men that live thus, are as dead coarses, that have no
society of mankind: those that are of retired life, and conversation, they are
accounted dead men; that man that is a man of abstinence, that is a man of
fear and trembling; that is a man that betakes himself to God, and neglects
the world; that addicts himself to a pure strain of devotion; Luk 2.36.
that like Hanna the daughter of Phanuell, is in the Temple day and night,
praying, and praising God: these men are civilly dead men: these that are
baptized to this kind of holiness, that make this profession of the Son of
God; that live a strict course of life; that use abstinence from the world, and
the delights therein; that they may be vacant for God alone: they are dead men
alive, or living men dead: or men twice dead; for so the world esteems of them.

Now then, what shall their profession and undertakings come to, if there be no
resurrection? shall we say that these are deluded men? that they are deceived?
far be it from us! far be it to think that God will deceive them, or put
them besides their end! Therefore they shall be partakers of that they look
for; they shall have a most blessed and copious reward in heaven; their labor
is not lost in the Lord; there is no part of their labor,, but it shall be
fruitful and glorious in the Lord. And if there be no resurrection, why are
they baptized for dead? that is, why are they taken for dead men, that live not
out their time; as other men do; in jollity, in mirth, and bravery of the
world; as it has been, and is a Proverb among heathens; while we live, let
us live. As if to use a sober carriage, were a kind of death; for men to
refrain from the delights and pleasures of this world: therefore while they
live, they will have a life of it; and spend their time in mirth. But the
children of God have another promise.

Whether this be the true sense of S. Paul, or that of the cup of persecution:
they are almost both coincident, and one of these certainly is Saint Paul's
reason. For he speaks of some singular persons: all were not ready to offer
themselves for Christ; but he speaks of a singular company, that were
different from the common sort of men. Certainly we must take it in one of
these two senses. And for that of Beza, though it be true, and have some force
in it; yet Saint Paul seldom insists upon the weak actions of men. It is
true, that which men do publicly, it comes to have the nature of a law in
it: and this has been a public thing in all nations; to honor the going of
their friends out of the world: therefore Saint Paul might have drawn a good
argument from that; if he used such in other places. But because we find not
that, therefore we cannot settle upon this. His manner is not to fashion
himself to the world, or to the actions of men; to draw things of such weight
as these: especially from heathen and simple men, that did that which it may be
they had no reason for. And besides, it is no argument to prove the
resurrection, from the dead: although a child of God understand, and God has
put into their hearts, good affections: because these vessels, these parties,
are not dead, but sleep; therefore God teaches them to honor the ashes of
his Saints, because they have hope in Christ; but to say that the world and all
mankind dreams of a resurrection, because they honor their friends departed;
this does not argue. For they may do it to their friends, out of love, or out
of fondness: or for fashion, to show their gallantry, or the like. I will not
contradict that learned man; but yet I think, that which is most agreeable
here to Saint Paul's great spirit, is that opinion about the cup of affliction.
Those that gave themselves freely to persecution, to stoning, to sword, to
banishment, to affliction, (as the Apostle speaks in another place) men that
are always working upon their own passions and lusts: this I take to be the
proper sense. To what end do these men macerate their bodies, and trouble
themselves by mortification, and by yielding themselves to persecution and
sword; if they be not fulfilled with a lively hope of the resurrection?

In that sense, the argument thence drawn, teaches us thus much. That
whatsoever action or president Gods children and Saints have given in this
world; they are all of them of singular and excellent use, to prove the glory
of God in this article of the resurrection. I say the president of Gods Saints
in former times, and of those in our times, that are before our eyes: they are
arguments invincible, and we should not offer to cast any scruple against the
power and validity of them. There be a company of men, that will follow none
but themselves, under pretense of following none but Christ: whereas, indeed,
they follow none less than Christ: in presuming to follow him alone, without
any other, they follow none at all. Christ is then followed, when he is
followed in his members, as well as in himself: therefore the Apostle bids us
be followers of him, as he is of Christ. It is true, the point of proof and
imitation, it rests not in man as he is man, but as he is a follower of God. So
far we must take the force of the argument, as it has a higher reference and
relation unto God; which is the Prince of reason, and the ground of all
demonstration. Therefore he that neglects and condemns the presidents of
Martyrs in former times; or of the ancient Fathers, or our precedent Fathers,
that lived in the days of persecution; that suffered fire and banishment from
their Country, for Christ: he that calls these things idle fopperies, or weak
infirmities without any ground or reason, or that they were deceptions of
stubborn flesh, that dyed for the maintenance of erroneous opinions: he that
speaks thus blasphemously against the honor of Gods holy presidents, he
pluckes the argument out of Saint Paul's hand, and makes it nothing worth. For
so might the Corinthians have answered the Apostles argument; that they would
not be ruled by any man but by Christ: they would have none over them, but
Christ: they would have no president, but God: they would have no direction,
but Gods ways: and as for men, they are but men; and to be no further
followed, then they follow God. But Saint Paul he raises a mighty argument
from them: and so in other places he says: Observe, and walk as you have
seen us walk, and observe them that are as lights before you, that are as
lights shining in a dark generation. The children of God are borne for
example; and either they win men by their rare, and excellent accommodation
to God; or else they stop their mouths for ever, that they shall have nothing
to say at the day of judgment: because they have had such examples before
them: and had no hearts to follow them. All the presidents of Gods Saints in
former times, if they be followed; they further our salvation: but if they be
neglected, they shall fall heavy upon us to our condemnation. All things that
were done before, were done for our learning, and for our sakes: as (whatsoever
was written before time, Romans 15.4.
was written for our learning) to confirm and strengthen us, and build us up
in our most holy faith. Let us glory in this; let us study the history of the
Martyrs that have been before us. After this manner Christ comforted his
Apostles; saying, Rejoice and be glad in that day, Math. 5.12.
for great is your reward. Why should they rejoice? because so they persecuted
the Prophets before you: so the example of those that have been before us, are
convincing arguments to us. The God of glory and peace, that has given us so
many rare examples before us; give us power to follow them, Amen.

FINIS.
1 COR. 15.29.30. What shall they do that are baptized for the dead, if
altogether the dead rise not, why are they baptized over the dead? and why are
we in danger and jeopardy every hour?
THis is one of Saint Paul's difficult and hard places, which Saint Peter puts
us in mind of, 2 Pet. 3.16. 2 Pet. 3.16.
says he, In Paul's Epistles there are certain things that are hard to be
understood: which the reprobates do wrest as they do the rest of the
Scriptures, to their own damnation. But this Text, which is so difficult and
hard; may be best explained and expounded by the context: by the sense that
follows after. August.
Saint Austin gives us a Rule; when says he, I find the Scriptures dark and
obscure, then I look to the scope and purpose, and drift of them; and surely,
it seems, that these latter words which I have now read to you, Wherefore are
we in jeopardy and danger, every day and every hour? are an exposition of the
former. Wherein, he translates the argument from the common passion of the
Church, to his own personal sufferings; and those that were the first and
principal, in persecutions and troubles; and he concludes, that they were mad
men that would undergo such misery, except they hoped for something: unless
they had a certain hope of reward, and recompense, in those bodies, in which
they suffered: For it is the body that suffers here; the soul cannot be
martyred, but the body. Therefore the Apostle says, Every man shall receive in
their bodies, according as they have done in their bodies, 2 Cor. 5.10.
whether it be good or evil. Now for a man to undertake such great hazard and
danger, to be always in jeopardy, to be every hour in peril: it is as bad as
to be utterly consumed. A man were better to be utterly dispatched, than to be
always hanging in suspense: for men to be still in anxiety, to lead their lives
in extremity and trouble, to have nothing to comfort them here, nor to have any
expectation in the world to come, of the common resurrection: there were no
madness comparable to this.

But because in these things, we must not be presumptuous; but must take them,
as the spirit of God has suggested, and dictated them to other men; therefore
I will not build certainly upon this sense, although I think it to be the most
true, and natural consequent that can be. But we will consider also, what the
spirit of God has spoken otherwise.

This gift of interpretation, is not acknowledged, nor understood among simple
men; although it be the greatest gift of all other. For a man cannot tell what
to build on, he cannot tell what to think, he knows not what to say, or what
to conclude on. If he ground upon a false interpretation, Jerome in Gal. 1.
as Saint Jerome says upon Galath. 1. (upon these words, I mervaile that you
are gone to another Gospel) says he, what makes this another Gospel? false
glosses, and interpretations: by giving a false sense of the Scriptures: that
which in it self is the pure Gospel of Christ, may be made the Gospel of
man; nay, that which is worse, the Gospel of the devil: so Saint Jerome.
Chrysostom.
And Saint Chrysostom discoursing upon the same argument, says he, If Christ
himself shall not interpret the word which is obscure and dark in it self, I
shall neither gather the doctrine, nor settle the conclusion: so that the gift
of interpretation, is of all others, the chief and prime foundation of
divinity. Therefore, observing the great variety of the ancient Fathers in the
Church of God; I must of necessity abandon all kind of dark and obscure
speech: and all that savours of affected language or eloquence; yea, and speak
plainly as Saint Austin says. It is a far better thing that the Grammarian,
or that the Critic should reprehend us, then that the people should not
understand us.

In the diverse senses of this Text, I touched some: others remain, which I
will conclude as briefly as I can: and then come to the other argument, taken
from his particular, Why do we thus? Why do we live in danger and jeopardie
every hour?

What shall they do that are baptized for the dead? The first opinion was,
that the Text is to be understood according to the letter: to be baptized for
dead men. This opinion is followed by many great and learned men: and by
Musculus, which I wonder at, for he was a most rare instrument of light to the
Church of God, throughout all the Scriptures; and yet he thinks this to be a
good and a true construction. That as Christ Jesus commended the fact of the
unrighteous and unjust Steward, although he did not commend the fact, yet his
wisdom is commended: so the Apostles purpose is to show that though it were a
vain thing for them to baptize the dead in the person of the quick, (to
baptize them by a proxey) yet it argued that which the Apostle would infer,
that they had a hope of the resurrection, or else they would never have done it.

But because this has been condemned by the Fathers as heretical and
foolish; therefore I wave that opinion, as not being the Apostles meaning.

A second opinion was, concerning those that did put off their baptism till
their death: as the fashion was in the first 4 or 500. years after Christ.

The third, what shall they do that are baptized for the dead? that is, that
are baptized into a dead Christ. This is followed by a great number of worthy
Divines: Chrysostom, Theophilact, Oecumenius, Theodoret, and Calvine.

Another opinion, What shall they do that are baptized for the dead? that is,
from the dead: so the word signifies sometimes; and so Luther Luther.
says, that in the primitive times they baptized their children in the Church
yards, where the dead bodies were buried; and were wont to stand upon the grave
of the dead man, and say, This man shall rise again, I believe it, and I take
the Sacrament upon it, and here I am baptized. If we could find such a
custom in the Church, this were a clear evidence; but there is no history
that makes this appear unto us. Notwithstanding, if there had been such a
custom as that, (it being something superstitious) it could not greatly
infer the argument: and there is no reason, to think they should be baptized
upon the graves of the dead; seeing the custom seemed to be contrary to
baptize them in their Baptisteria, or Fonts which were in little houses near
their Churches: in which there was no burying of the dead for diverse hundred
years after Christ: that is, not till the Fonts were brought into the
Churches: till when, they buried in the Church yards, and in the Cloisters
below. Yet notwithstanding, this might be true in some places: as in the Church
of Asia, and in the parts upon the Euxine sea; where they never baptized any,
but at the time of Easter, and Whitsuntide: and then they baptized them upon
the graves of the dead, to assure them, that the dead that were contained in
those graves, and turned to dust, should rise again; which they would now
verify, by taking the Sacrament of baptism upon it. Therefore I give this
interpretation the authority it deserves: and take it as a true gloss on the
Text: but yet it is not the fullness of the great things the Apostle here
intended.

The next opinion was, they that are baptized for the dead, that is, dead to
the world; civilly dead; that betake themselves to the study of mortification;
and will not live in those pleasures and delights, which the world accounts the
only life. Those kind of pleasures and epicurious delights, which worldly men
take to be the life of life; the Saints of God detest, and abhor them: and in
baptism they do renounce them: the pompes and vanities of the wicked world:
and make themselves dead men to the world, that they may live unto God. And so
they may be said to be baptized for dead. This is a true exposition; yet I
think it is not full: because all are thus baptized; there are none baptized,
but with this condition: and as I said before, this Text implies some special,
peculiar thing, which pertaines to some men in particular, and not to all in
general. If it had pertained to all, the Apostle would have said, Why are we
all baptized for dead? But he speaks of a certain number of men, and what
shall they do? those few eminent men, that are baptized for dead, if the dead
rise not?

Concerning the other opinion of Beza, Beza.
that Baptizati here must be taken for Loti, for washing; as they used in
funeral pomp to carry their dead out of the world: I confess that may be
admitted too, because those that spend their time and cost, in sending forth
their dead in burying of them; they would not do it, but that they testified
thereby, that they have a certain hope of the resurrection of the dead. But
yet me thinks, this cannot be the full sense; for it follows not, because
that all nations carry forth their dead with pomp, that therefore the dead
shall rise again: there is no force in this argument; for they may do it out
of love; or they may do it, because it is the common fashion, and custom: or
they may do it out of superstition: because they think there is a kind of
commerce between the dead and the living. Therefore,

To conclude all, I hold that by baptising for dead, is meant those that are
baptized in the cup of blood, in the cup of affliction and persecution for
Christ: according as Christ says himself, I have a baptism to be baptized
with, Luke 12. Luke 12.50.
And as he says to the sons of Zebedee, Can you be baptized with the
baptism that I shall be baptized with, and drink of the cup that I shall
drink of? which baptism, is affliction. And this the Apostle proves by the
sequel of the Text: for as I said, there is no way to understand the
Scriptures, but to consider that which goes before, and that which comes after:
and to mark what he says in the words following.

Why do we suffer, why are we in jeopardy every hour? As if he should have
said, my reason why there is a certainty of the resurrection, is this: because
both the Church in general, and we in particular, and special; are in danger
and jeopardy every day; and we would not be so mad, as to take dangers unto us,
without some reason: unless we looked for something, and expected some
recompense. Therefore certainly, unless we will under-value all the actions
of Gods Saints, and all the sufferings of his Martyrs: except we will say they
did it in a madness, and in a fury; and that it was superstition, (which we
cannot do without blasphemy) we must confess, that it is a pregnant proof,
and a forcible argument of the resurrection from the dead. For, indeed, there
is nothing that does so well conclude it, as those that suffer for it, as the
sufferings of those that profess it. And one maine cause of persecution, is
the doctrine of the resurrection: as the Apostle says, Acts 23.6. Acts 23.6.
For the hope of the resurrection am I judged and accused, and called in
question this day. The devil and his accomplices, seek to impugn it, it being
the highest and strongest tower of our faith; for there is nothing whereby the
minds and consciences of Gods children, are stablished, but in the expectation
of the promises, propounded in the Gospel: which are none at all, if they be
not to the body. For all the service of God, is performed with these our
bodies: and if these vessels, these bodies, shall lie rotting and unregarded;
all the service of God shall be void of recompense and respect: because those
parts that were used to Gods service, shall have nothing for their service. Now
the God of heaven is the best Master that can be; he will suffer no man to
serve him for nothing: Job 1.9.
as the devil confessed of Job, Does Job fear God for nothing? The Apostle
therefore brings the argument from the common passion that was abroad in the
Church; to that which was particular in himself. And he says, we also our
selves, we whom you know: there be many in the world that you know not, which
have suffered for Christ: but we whom you see, and converse with; why are we
subject to danger every day? and not only suffer them with an averse
disposition, but we take them of our own will, upon our selves: we seek for
them, for the glory of Christ, and for the propagation of the Gospel, and
either we shall have a reward and recompense for this, or else we are of all
men most mad, that will undertake such dangers, without any reward and
recompense. To proceed in order,

First here we are to consider the manner of his proposition in question wise;
Why do we suffer? Division into four parts.
and before, Why are they baptized for dead?

Secondly, the subject of the proposition, (...) and we also.

Thirdly, the predicate, we are in jeopardie, in danger, and it is the worst
life in the world, to live in danger: as it is the best life, to be secure.

Fourthly, the extent of it: not for an hour, or for a short time, but every
hour, every moment; there is no minute of our lives, but we are in jeopardie.

Lastly, the force of the argument, how this proves: because there have been
many heretics in times past, that have suffered themselves to be in danger,
in affliction, and oppression for falsehood. How proves this then, that to be in
danger for the Resurrection, is an argument that there shall be a Resurrection?
because that many for falsehoods, have been in danger: these be the passages of
this Text, of which briefly, and in order.

First, concerning the manner of his proposal: 1 The manner.
He does it by way of question. It serves to stir up our dullness to
understand these things, that be plain; and implies, that we have lost our
time, unless we palpably discern these matters here propounded. For those
things that are propounded by way of question, (says Isidore Isidore.
) are more effectual: and exprobrate and upbraid men for the dullness of their
spirits, if they do not conceive those things that are plain and obvious to
the world. Why do we thus? As if he should have said, You spectators that
look upon our passions, you are senseless, if you knew not the end why we do
thus. So he argues from the end and scope of the thing: which is the chief and
principal argument that can be. For all things work for some end; all men
suffer for some end; there is no action that a man does, but it tends to some
end and purpose; and unless we be the most senseless people of all others, we
will work for some end too. And to what end do we thus trouble our selves, if
there be no hope of a resurrection? So when we read the Scriptures, we should
observe the manner of this phrase. It teaches us much; and we should check
our own dullness and infirmity, that the spirit of God must rouse us up by
questions, and interrogations, and not only propound the simple and plain
truth; but must give us certain cross propositions, to teach us that we
cannot raise our selves, until we be raised of God: and to make us more
sensible after, he follows us with a multitude of questions.

2 The subject.
Now for the subject of the proposition, (...) and we also.

First, the Holy Ghost would teach us here, that the Apostle, and those that
adhered to him, they did conform themselves to the presidents of ancient
times. And we also, that is, the Prophets before us, suffered for the testimony
of the truth: for the doctrine of the Messiah: some of them were sawne in
pieces with sawes; some of them were killed with the sword: some of them were
banished: some slain between the Temple and the Altar. Jerusalem was full of
blood, in former times, and all for the profession of the Messia, the Lord
Jesus; and for the hope of the Resurrection conceived by him. And we also
follow them.

This is the sweet harmony of Gods Church; it still consists of unisons, and
still they follow in the direction and union of one spirit, to speak the same
thing, to teach the same thing, to suffer for the same thing. And we also do
it. The Church of Christ seeks for no delicacies; but it treads in the steps
of her ancestors: and look what they have given for example before, they
follow in it diligently after.

If there were any kind of worldly wisdom in this; that men should see and
discover the heresies, and lies, and errors of former times; it were madness
for the latter times to embrace them. But says the Apostle, we do so too. If
our forefathers had been in errors, and had maintained lies: we that live in
these times (me thinks) should be admonished and advised; by process of time,
and the great means that we have to discover them. For if we should yet live
in their errors, our error would be greater than theirs: because we have more
help than they: and we have the advantage of time to see and contradict them.
But behold, says the Apostle, we are so far from contradicting of them; that
look in what steps they have gone before, we trace after them, and follow with
an even pace, may we go beyond them, and transcend their perfections. If they
suffered something, we suffer more: if they were driven to some extremities; we
are acquainted with more. The glory of Christ's Church is this, that still there
is a succession of Martyrs and professors, (...), and we also do thus.

In matters of the world, and the devises of Philosophy; you shall have no man
so valiant, as to suffer for another man's opinion: although in heresies, and
schisms, it has been so, (the cause of which I shall show afterward) yet
among the Philosophers, so many men, so many minds; every man against his
fellow. As in the confusion of Babel, or in the destruction of Madian, their
own swords were against one another. But in the school of Christ, the doctrine
is pure and clear; the parties are zealous, and unanimous: they go together,
(...) and we also tread in the steps of our forefathers. This is one thing the
Holy Ghost would teach us.

There are some other things that the Fathers have related to us, (...) and we
also. That is, (says Ambrose Ambrose.
) we that are well instructed and illuminated, because he would make that good
in his exposition, which he had said before. As I told you that the Apostle
would prove the resurrection of the dead, from an ill custom of them that were
baptized for the dead, by a proxey; so Ambrose makes (...) and we also. As if
the Apostle should say; What do you tell us of the foolish superstitions, of
the Cerinthyans of the Manichees and Montanists, and others, afterward (which
the Apostle foresaw would be) What do you tell us of those foolish people,
that baptize over the dead? that is to say, the living for the dead? What do
you tell us of these, that are in a gross error? But I tell you we that are
not erroneous, but know what we say, and what we do; we that are illuminated
from the Almighty, we that are orthodoxe: we suffer afflict^ons and
persecutions. We also. Ambrose to defend his former opinion, makes this kind
of exposition of (...), but as the former was weak, so this is much weaker.
Therefore I let that pass: as being not the (...) here spoken of. Saint
Chrysostom, Oecumenius, and Theophylact, expound (...) and we also, as a
gradation or height of the argument: bringing it from profession to passion. As
if he should have said, What do you speak of them that are baptized for the
dead? that is, into the death of Christ. For that was their opinion; that
baptising for the dead, was into the death of Christ for remission of sins,
and for the resurrection of the bodies, that are dead in sin. So then the
sense should be this; Why do we also suffer? As if he should say, they that
are baptized to the death of Christ, and to the faith of the resurrection; they
do only affirm it by word, but we affirm it by deed, by passion, by
suffering. And it is a stronger argument, that is taken from deeds, then that
which is taken from words. It is an easier matter to make profession, then to
enter into passion. Now, behold, they that are baptized into the death of
Christ, they make profession in words, that they believe this flesh shall rise
again: but it may be they will not stand to it, when they are put to the
trial of afflictions for the defense of it. But you see we do: Therefore, as
the trial from deeds and actions, is better then that in word and profession:
so the argument is clear when he says, Why do we travel, or are in jeopardy
every day? I confess this is the sentence of a grave, learned, and a holy
Father: and it is true that he says, but yet I take that truth to be most
proper, that I spoke of before; concerning the argument drawn from the
sufferings of the Church: and that the Apostle does speak of all the passions
of the Martyrs, of all the Prophets and blessed men, witnesses of Christ, that
have been in the world to this very day. And although they did excellently in
their times and places, yet now the sufferings of Christ are made most
glorious: and they never came to that height and pitch of excellency and
perfection, till the Apostles times. Therefore to conclude this point.

We may learn here, that the Apostle is not vainglorious, to take all the
praise to himself; but he communicates the glory with his brethren: and says,
and we also. It is true, that he boasts of his own afflictions, 2 Cor. 11.23.
etc.
2 Cor. 11. where he speaks of perils among false brethren, of perils by sea,
of perils by land: and of innumerable dangers, greater than other men had;
because then he was driven to it: his enemies forced him by their detraction.
But when he is left to himself, he communicates the glory of his passion, to
his fellow Apostles: and says in the plural number, We also suffex.

This should teach all men humility: to think when they conceit highest of
themselves, that there are other men as great as they. As the Poet says, there
are a kind of men that will be Domine fac totum, the chief in all matters:
such men that take to themselves the glory and praise of business, the whole
act must be theirs, though there be no such matter. As though they had trod the
Wine Press alone, and not Christ: as though they had borne the burden, in the
heat of the sun by day; and in the cold by night. These the Apostle speaks
of; when he says, they measure themselves by themselves, 2 Cor. 10. 2 Cor.
10.12.
These kind of Bragadocio's, are confronted by the spirit of God in every
place. What art thou, beside a member of Christ? and What have thou, that thou
have not received? and what can thou do, more than another man? and why is
not another man as good as thou? Let men be ashamed to take the glory of things
to themselves; but let them communicate it with the Church: and say in the
plural number, (...), And we also. The Apostle, although he best deserve to
take the glory to himself, single: yet he will not exclude the other: he takes
in his Collegians: all of that livery with him; and says, We also are in
danger.

Lastly, for this point, in that he says, and we also: we must labor to prove
this, by our own lives, and examine how this comes to us. The Saints before,
suffered for the profession of Christ: we must look to put our (...) to it: to
make our selves participants, and to say, and we also.

But how do we participate with them? we see they suffered afflictions for
Christ: but we are voluptuous, riotous, and wicked. Here is a fair (...) and
we too. They gave their lives from the world to God: and for other things, they
cared not. We care for nothing, but this life present, and the pampering of our
bellies, the very source of damnation. Here is a goodly (...), a goodly
imitation. Yet we must imitate them, if we will be saved: our fore-elders were
honest, pure, and sincere; a man might trust them; upon their word: but we are
false, and fraudulent, cozening creatures: here is a goody (...) and we too.
Our forefathers were given to hospitality, to do good: but the men of our
times, coop themselves up in corners; and keep all to themselves, to spend
upon their bellies, and upon their backs. Here is a fair (...) and we too. We
imitate well! this is a left hand imitation. Our fathers scorned to give any
thing for Church Livings, or Ecclesiastical promotions: they took it to be
(as it is) a monstrous and mortal sin. But men now care not which way they
come by any thing: whether by God or the devil; it is no matter, so they have
it. Here is a goodly (...) and we too.

Let us either labor to be sons of the faithful, in our sufferings, and in
the manner of our conversations; or we shall never come to the happiness of
their condition. It is to no purpose, for men to dream of a stately seat in
heaven: when they live damnable and base lives upon earth. So much for that
point, the subject of the proposition.

3 The Predicate.
Now for the predicate, We are in danger, The word (...) in the Greek, is very
elegant, to move sorrow and grief. For so, (certainly) all danger and jeopardy
does, as the Poet says, Death it self, is not so terrible, as the fear in
the staying and long delaying of it. The apprehension of danger, moves
continual fear; and continual fear must needs make a continual slavery. As
the Poet says, It is impossible for a man to live in freedom, in liberty, and
in fear too; for that is a part of servitude, and of slavery. Now therefore
this jeopardy the Apostle speaks of; it was the apprehension of danger from
false brethren, from persecutors, from the tyrants of the time, of peril from
the sea, of peril from the land. Whatsoever could hold him in matter of fear,
this is the danger he speaks of; that he was in ieopardy of, etc. For a man to
have his life hang before him, Deuteronomy. 28.66.
as the Lord says, Deuteronomy. 28. If you will not obey my will and commandments, I
will make your lives hang in doubt before you: that is, you shall be in
suspense, you shall not know when you shall live, and when you shall dye; thus
God threatens the wicked, but when the godly in a voluntary profession, take
this anxious life, to hang always in suspense: we must imagine what a mighty
perturbation it is. There is no persecution in the world, like that, when a man
is prolonged in the fear of another: when he is held still in doubting and
suspense. A man were better to fall at once, than always to hang thus; he had
better be dispatched, than to live still in trouble, in misery and torment; and
there is no such hanging to the soul, as fear; still representing the evil,
and no end of the evil. Behold the state of the primitive children of God. The
Church of God upon earth, is still in jeopardie: there is nothing safe and
secure, although they have, indeed, a security from God, that is better than
all: the security of conscience, the peace and quiet of heart and mind: yet in
respect of the world there is nothing secure; but they are ever moving. The
children of darkness, are always working against the issue of light; to make
their lives nothing but a mere jeopardy. What these perils were, the Apostle
in another place, explaines. I cannot now insist upon them: but come to the
extent, which is the next part which follows.

They were without intermission (...), 4 The Extent.
Every hour: this is that which makes it more miserable. In all the diseases
and troubles of this life, there be some lucida intervalla; some kind of good
fits, some tempers, that do comfort and make up some kind of strength to
nature; for those breaches which the distemper afterward breeds. So there is
no ague, that always holds a man; except it quickly dispatch him: but there is
some kind of intervall; there is some interim and space between one fit and
another: there is seldom in the world such a plague, that still lies as a
heavy burden upon men's shoulders. But the children of God are sure to have it
so: not only to have dangers, but to have one upon another: Psalm. 42.7.
one deep calls upon another, because of the noise of the water pipes, as the
Prophet speaks; they shall have fears without, and terrors within: the end
of one evil, is but the beginning of another succeeding evil. Behold then
your calling: that whereunto you are called, says Saint Chrysostom: we are
set out for the purpose: not only to be vexed in this world, but to be vexed
continually. That we cannot eat our meat, nor drink our drink, without
vexation. The Lord mingles our bread with tears, Psalm. 80.5.
and our drink with weeping. It is the property of the wicked to feed without
fear: but even in our feeding and repast, we are possessed with fears and
terrors.

Jude 12.
And says Saint Bernard, Know thy portion: know thy portion, Math. 10.25.
Oh Christian, in the Cross of Christ: it was his case, and it must be thine:
it is enough for the servant to be as his Master: it is no reason he should be
above his Master.

This (...) Every hour; is that which God requires at our hands: if we do
good for him, we must do it every hour: if we suffer ill for his sake, we
must suffer every hour. The Crown of all our actions, and of all our
obedience, is this perseverance and continuance. Every hour. It is not for an
hour, or for some few hours of a day: but all the time of our life, we must
be under the Cross, and have the hand of God to pound and bray, and beat upon
us, to get out those sweet smelling spices of patience and godliness, which
the holy Ghost has infused into us. This is the trial of a Christian, to be
every hour in ieopardy; and to be more constant in suffering, than his
adversaries can be in tormenting: to be so complete in that panoplia, the
Armor of the spirit of God, that so long as the world can strike, he can
endure the stroke: and be greater at length, than all his temptations.

It is the miserable condition of all our services; they be not lasting. We are
weary of well-doing: Galat. 6.9.
when we are in prayer, we are weary before we can raise our selves to any
kind of zeal in our hearts: we have done before we begin. When we are in
meditation, it is a weariness to flesh and blood. When we are doing of good
deeds to Christ in his poor members, we are weary; and say come no more, I have
done so much and so much for you already. These are the cutthroats of
obedience. This noysomnesse, and tediousness, and faintness of ours, deprives
us of all hope of reward. Therefore the Apostle says, Gal. 6. Be not weary of
well-doing, for we shall receive in time, Galat. 6.9.
if we faint not: he that gives every hour and moment, to the service of God,
shall have an eternal hour: that is, of blessedness, and continuance of
felicity in the power of God Almighty. But, as I said, it is with this
condition, If we faint not, we shall receive. Implying, that if we faint, we
shall not receive: all our precedent benefits, all our good deeds that we have
done in former time, if we hold not on, they have no place or acceptance with
God. Perseverance is the Crown of the graces of God: to be every hour, every
moment of time, addicted to the glory of God: it is the glory of Gods servants:
It is to no purpose, to give a poor creature a small piece of money, or some
little means, to help him, if afterward, seeing him in the same case, and
being as able to help him, we leave him. For his life still continues, and as
long as life, and occasion continues, so long must our charity continue: or
else it is to no purpose. It were in vain for a woman to nurse a child, a
quarter or half a year, if she do it not till it be brought to some
reasonable age and strength: that it be able to help it self. It is better
not to begin a thing, than not to finish it after it is begun: for a man to lay
a foundation of a house, and not to be able to build it up, is to make himself
a mere mockery to the common people: Luke 14.30.
to say, This man began to build, and was not able to finish it, as our Savior
says: so in the matters of God; whether we do good, or suffer ill for his
name: it must either be continually done, or else it is not done at all. Luke
9.62.
To look back, when we have laid our hand to the Plow, is to loose our
reward. He is a bad debtor that pays his debts by halves: he is a bad servant
that will do but half his service: that will not give account for the whole
time, his Master has conferred on him, and put him in trust withal. So they
must needs be accounted base sufferers, and runnagate Soldiers; that when they
have once put their hand to the action, for fear of danger, fly back. The
Lord takes up no such Soldiers.

Therefore let us pay God his service, with a full hand, for so his gifts
deserve. The blessings of God are so infinite, that they deserve not a
perfunctory service: a kind of time-service; to be now up, and now down: but
as the blessings of God be eternal upon the soul of man, so the service and
the affections of man, should be eternal to God again. This little short life
that we have, is our eternity: the eternity which God has, is unspeakable
without end. As God has promised us life eternal, joy eternal, blessedness
eternal: so let us labor, that all that we do, may be as much as in us lies,
eternal. Let our prayers be eternal, our devotion eternal, our patience
eternal, our charity eternal. There is nothing tending to the praise of God,
that should be for a short time: but as his blessings and promises are
eternal, so we should stretch and extend our selves as much as may be, to make
our services eternal. The glory of a Christian, is constancy and
perseverance: he has constancy against the number of the dangers that come:
and perseverance against the continuance of them. This was the glory of the
Apostle, when he says, that he was in ieopardy every hour: we wrestle with
great difficulties: the dangers are great, and many: therein we show our
constancy. Again, we know they be long and durable: or else we might the
better bear them. Every moment we are oppressed; every hour of our life, it
waits upon us, as a heavy burden upon our shoulders. And yet we suffer still;
we are in danger every hour, and therein we show our perseverance. But I will
conclude in a word with the use and force of this argument.

For it has been still the reason that heretics have taken to themselves,
Apostles disputation. The devil has fitted the world, with such seduced men
to suffer, and to suffer for a lie. Now then the argument can have no just, nor
no necessary consequence: that because men suffer every hour, therefore there
shall be a resurrection. For then, heretics may object and say, because they
suffer for this erroneous conceit, that therefore it is no conceit: but there
is such a thing. Certainly, as Tertullian says, Not only the true orthodoxe
faith of Christians, is increased by the Martyrs blood, but also heretics are
increased by their Martyrs. There was never any heresy so bad, but it had some
to testify it with their blood: the devil has his Martyrs, as well as Christ.

But we must understand, the difference must be taken, partly from the cause,

And partly from the persons that give the testimony. For it is the cause that
makes the Martyr, and the foundation of the cause, is to be fetched from the
word of God. The word of God teaches a man for what cause he should suffer,
and for what he should not suffer. And the cause of the Apostles sufferings,
were grounded on the word of God: the Lord Jesus told them that they should
suffer many things for his name. John 15.21.
And as it was the lot of the Prophets, in former time, to suffer, so it was
their portion to take their course: and to suffer for the truth: and they were
defended by the apparent word of God, fetched from all antiquity. The cause was
good, for which they suffered: and the cause makes the Martyr, and the
witnessing to the cause. The witnessing to a lie, can no way make a falsehood
true; all the liars in the world, cannot do it, but witness must be given to
the truth; as the Apostles witnessed to the verity of Christ. Because Christ
the (prime Martyr) has set to his hand, that these things are true, Ioh. 3. He
is the true witness that has sealed it with his blood: Ioh. 3.32.33.
and has confirmed it by his miracles, and by the approbation of all the
world. This is one difference. It is true, men may labor to bolster out bad
causes, by their obstinate spirits: but what is that to this? Our cause is
judged; we have the words of Scripture for it. And although heresies (in all
times) have been bred out of the Scriptures; yet they are mere wrestings, and
sophistries, dreams, cavillations, and coacted things of their own devising.
But this, was a cause: that was thoroughly proved by the word revealed. And (as
I said) the word of God tells us for what cause a man should suffer: and for
what not: when he should live secure, and when in ieopardy. That is one reason.

Secondly, from the persons. Popish Traitors.
Although it be true that Antichrist will come and dye, as Martyrs do: yet we
must observe, they either do it to maintain factions, that have been formerly
begun, or to get a name to themselves; or else they seek to fly from the
danger, if they can make an escape. Acts 5.41.
But the Apostles were in danger, willingly; they yielded themselves to it with
gladness of heart: and rejoiced in afflictions, and tribulations. But for the
other, they break prisons, they lie and equivocate, to save their lives: do
any thing to rid themselves from the danger. The Apostles and Martyrs (as
simple sacrifices) gave themselves to God, in mere devotion to be disposed at
his pleasure, to rest upon his will; to be as sheep for the slaughter, when he
called for them. They sought not to fly from their enemies, or by equivocation
and lies, to get away: but rejoiced in their persecutions, and sang even in
prison. And although S. Paul made an escape, Acts 16.25. 2 Cor. 11.33.
and were let down in a basket from a window; yet that was but to reserve
himself for further times: for at last he meant to give up himself as a
sacrifice to Christ. Therefore the argument is strong, that we must confirm
our selves from the passion of the Saints, before; and take no limit of the
voluptuous delights of the world. These are not the way to heaven.

The course that we hold now a days, in our conversing one with another: in
merriments, in eating and drinking, and idle complements; they are no ways to
give us comfort at the hour of death, at the day of judgment: but our comfort
must be taken from the sufferings of the Church: from the passion of the
blessed Saints before: from the noble army of Martyrs, from that cloud of
witnesses: from those that have sealed the truth of Christ with their blood:
that have endured jeopardy: that have embraced danger all the hours of their
life. These are they, whose steps we must follow, and insist in: those worthy
presidents before us. And as far as we conform our selves to these; so much
comfort we shall have, when we suffer with them that suffer, to be conformed to
the passion of Christ: that we may also be conformed to his glory. Luke 22.28.30
For if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him, as our Lord Jesus
says: which the Lord grant unto us for his sake, Amen.

FINIS.
1 COR. 15.31. I dye daily by the rejoicing that I have in Christ Jesus our
Lord.
THe frequent reading, studying, and conversing in the Scriptures; is like the
dressing of an armor, or the cleansing of a fountain; for an armor, the more
it is furbushed, the brighter it looks: and the Spring or Fountain, the more
it is scoured, the clearer the water runs: so the holy field of the
Scriptures, the more it is tilled with diligence and frequencie, the more fair
and goodly fruit it brings forth. The precious pearl of the truth, often times
is so hid, in the ambiguity of words, (words of equivocation; that is, words
that may be taken in diverse senses) that unless a man look very narrowly to
them, and observe well the passages of them, he is in danger to be drawn into
some error. This most difficult portion of Scripture, that we have taken in
hand, begins now to appear, by our continuance, and dwelling upon it. The
truth, the pearl which before lay hid in the casket, begins to show forth his
own luster. As Jerome Jerome.
says, Truth often times lies hid in the ditch of words; so the ambiguity of one
word here, has puzzled the fair and clear stream of the truth: that without
much searching of the Scripture, we had not found it out. But by our frequency
and diligence, I hope we have found in the end the proper sense and full
meaning of the Text: for one Scripture whets and cleares another.

Now the Apostle brings the passion of the Martyrs to his own particular
instance, and says; as the common ordinary number of Saints were baptized in
blood; so the College of the Apostles much more; and he himself most of all.
This I conclude to be the sense of the Text: and of those difficult words,
verse 29. of baptising for the dead. It is that which the Apostle renders here,
and in the verse before going in other terms.

For first, in verse 29. he calls it baptising for the dead. In verse 30. he
calls it Ieopardy every hour, and now in this verse he says, I dye daily. All
the three phrases have but one sense and signification: only distinguishing
the persons, from whom he draws the argument. For the thing is all one, the
state of Christ's Church here on earth; is always like it self: in this life,
always in an afflicted condition.

So then, his argument first in verse 29. (which is a great graund argument to
prove the Resurrection) he takes it from the passions and sufferings of the
Martyrs, and professors of Christ: and it holds in all these three verses, and
that which follows.

In the first of the three, he brings the argument general.

In the second, particular.

In the third, he brings it personal.

First general, verse 29. his argument is drawn thus. If there be no
resurrection of the dead, why should any man be so mad, as to be baptized in
blood for the testimony thereof? that is, to forsake Father and Mother, and
Land and Country, and Life, and al for the witness of the Gospel, which
chiefly stands in the hope of the resurrection: for this is the baptism that
Christ speaks of, when he says, Can ye be bapti sed with the baptism that I
shall be baptized with? and can ye drink of the cup that I shall drink of?
that is, the baptism of tears, of affliction, the baptism of blood, for the
testimony of the truth. And so he draws his argument from the common example
of the Martyrs, in their sufferings: implying, that they were mad men, if
they would suffer in confidence of a bad cause; to lose the best thing in this
world, for a lie. Therefore their sufferings are a plain argument, a strong
and perfect subscription and consent, to this maine point of our faith, the
Resurrection of the dead: that for which the Saints in all the world, the
Prophets before Christ, the Apostles after Christ; have been baptized. For, as
James, the brother of John, Acts 12.
who was killed with the sword: Stephen, the first Martyr: and all that were
slain in the first general persecution: the Apostle draws his argument
thence: that if there were no Resurrection, then they had laid down their
lives in vain: but they had not laid them down in vain; therefore there
shall be a Resurrection. This is the scope of that argument.

In the second place, he comes to the College of the Apostles, in verse 30.
and says, Why do we live in ieopardy every hour? that is, why do we live in
danger of death, in peril all our life long: to dye, as it were, every hour:
and to be baptized for the dead? As a man that is under water (as it was the
custom in baptising) he is as it were lost, so long as he is there, he is a
dead man: and although, perhaps he may get up again, and lift up his head; yet
as long as he is in that element, it being not the element of our life, he is a
lost man. So they that betake themselves to the profession of the Gospel, they
are baptized; they are under water; they are thrown over board; they are cast
away out of the ship of the world, and made away to plain destruction, to
ignominy, to baseness, to poverty, and every kind of persecution, that their
enemies hand can make over them; they are baptized for dead, because they are
in danger all the day long, in all the passages of their life; they are in
jeopardy of death, and deeply drenched in the conceit and fear of death:
which is worse than death it self.

Now (in the third place) in this verse, he comes to the personal proof of
the point; and that which is usual with all the Martyrs in general, with the
College of Apostles in particular, he applies in his own personal instance,
and says, I dye daily. I protest (and it is no mean protestation) if you will
not believe my word, yet take my oath; I set my seal to it, and swear: and I
swear by the Lord Jesus, by the rejoicing that I have in our Lord Jesus
Christ, I dye daily. This is the sum of the words. Now you perceive the
argument, we will proceed on. The greatest thing in such passages, is to find
out the sense: the matter will be evident enough. In other places, the matter
is deep, and the sense is evident: but in this, and in passages of like
nature, it is contrary. To proceed in order.

Here, first, we are to consider the mavelous strange assertion that the
Apostle makes: Division into two parts. 1 The Assertion 2 The Probation

where he says, I dye daily: he dies, and yet he lives: and he dies daily.
There was no part of his life, but still the shadow of death overwhelmed him,
which is the miserablest thing in the world, to dye after death; and still to
be dying: it is the worst kind of death, and yet the Apostle says, he dyed
daily. It is an assertion, that the Saint of God pronounces for himself: for
there is no man that can understand him, but he that takes delight in these
meditations: he that has part in the kingdom of Christ, knows what this
means. For experience teaches this, and not speculation: or any argument that
reason can afford.

Secondly, we are to consider the probation of this: because it is a strange
paradox (as Luther Luther.
says) What do thou mean, Paul, to contradict thy self, and all common
sense and reason? Do I not see thee walk? Do I not see thee eat and drink?
Do I not hear thee preach, and yet art thou dead? I see no sign of a dead
man in thee. Therefore the Apostle makes it good by an oath, and says, I
protest by the rejoicing that I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I dye daily.

Where first we are to consider the manner of his inference: it is by way of
oath:

And then, the thing he swears by; by the rejoicing that I have in Christ. A
dead man, and yet rejoice? it is a very strange mixture.

Thirdly, we are to consider the ground of his rejoicing, where it is placed.
In Jesus Christ our Lord.

Fourthly, to consider the force of this argument, and how we may preserve and
keep the strength of this argument, always unavoydable; to be able to say, and
to swear, and lay to pawn, and gage, this Rejoicing that we have in Christ:
when we find this confidence in our selves.

1 Part. The Assertion.
First, touching that mavelous assertion of the Apostle: I dye daily.

If an ordinary sinful man had spoken this, it had been no news: but that it
should come from a most sanctified vessel of the holy Ghost; a chosen vessel:
one, that for his life, was unblameable; and for all learning, and the graces
of the spirit, incomparable: that he should utter this, it is a very strange
mervaile. Indeed a reprobate, a man that follows his own lusts; that lives
not to God, but to himself: he may truly say I dye daily. For the Lord makes
his life to be hanged before him, as a perpetual sign of death: that as the
children of God are said to have the earnest of the spirit, and of the kingdom
of heaven: so the servants of sin, may be said to receive the earnest of
hell. So many passages of his life as there be, they are as so many flakes of
hell, burning before him; and do assure him, that at the last he shall be
tumbled and divolved into the damnation of the devil, and his Angels. That
gnawing worrne of conscience, makes his life a continual death. But that the
Saints of God should be thus troubled too; it is this, that moves the wonder.
And yet the Apostle here says, nay, and swears it too; that not only wicked
men, are troubled and galled with the conscience of sin; that they are always
in death, (because they are the sons of death, and study that which tends to
death) but he that had the fruit of life; he, that had the spirit of God and of
Christ in him: Gal. 2.20.
nay, that had Christ himself (as he says) It is no longer I that live, but
Christ lives in me: that he should he subject to this death, and to this
frequencie of death: that there was never a day came over his head, but a new
death was presented to him: It seems strange.

The reason of this we must fetch out of the rest of his writings, for there he
has set down the sum of every thing, that we are to conceive of this
mystery.

The first reason or means of this death, it was that he carried the devil
about him, as Gregory Nazianzen says in his 32. Nazianzen Orat. 32.
Oration to the Bishops at Constantinople, when he was to leave the place.
Says he, Even as it was with Paul, 2 Cor. 12.7.
so do I carry the devil about me, alluding to that place, 2 Cor. 12. where
the Apostle complains of the messenger, and instrument of Satan, that was
sent to buffet him, continually, that he could not be at peace and quiet for
him: and he prayed to the Lord thrice, against it, but the Lord answered him,
My grace is sufficient for thee. Romans 7 23.
This was it that made him to say, I protest by the rejoicing that I have in
our Lord Jesus Christ, I dye daily. For my life is such a kind of condition,
as wherein the flesh, and the spirit are continually conflicting together: good
and evil, righteousness and sin; are always countermanding one another. A
good conscience, and an evil conscience; sorrow, and joy, heaven and hell, God
and the devil, are continually in an agony and combat. This conflict that I
sustain between the flesh and the spirit, is that which makes me dye daily:
and makes me cry out, Oh wretched and miserable man that I am, Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from this body of death? that is, from the sting of the
law in my members: whereby I am carried in contradiction to the good spirit of
God. And so (as Nazianzen says) he did carry Satan about him, nay within him
also. For the relics of sin, (which he calls the messenger of Satan) the
instrument of the devil, the remainders of corruption, were in him: yea, and
are in all the sons of God. For there was none ever without them, but that
Son of God, that came to take away the sins of the world.

The second reason why the Apostle said he dyed daily, was because the devil
bare him outwardly, by envy and trouble, and persecution, he carried him on his
shoulders: he was the beast that he was set on. And no marvel, for if the
devil could make our Lord sit on his back, Math. 4. Mat. 4.
and that our Lord Jesus rode upon the devil, as a man would ride upon a
horse: if he were so impudent as to set himsel^fe under our Lord, and carry him
about to the pinnacle of the Temple, and to the mountain, then well may he come
to the shoulders (nay to the very bowels) of his members. If he did so to the
head, he will do to the members much more. Acts 17.4.12.
Thus he still carried Paul wheresoever he came, by the envy of the world, by
the malice of the Jews and Gentiles, as upon the occasion of those devout and
religious women's believing; whereupon they raised persecution against him: and
that wheresoever he came, there was either stoning or fire and faggot, or
banishment; some mischief intended. Treason by false brethren; treason by his
opposers, or treason, of those that were best trusted of him; every where he
was enclosed with peril. This was the devil without him, as some of the
Fathers imagine, 2 Cor. 12 7.
from that place, 2 Cor. 12. that messenger of Satan, there sent to buffet
him. They say, it was not so much any inward thing he speaks of. But I yield
not to this: for I suppose it was somewhat inward. Romans 7.23.
But the Fathers say he means another matter; he speaks of men, and of the
malice of men that would not suffer the Gospel to pass in the world: and that
for this, he says he dyed daily: by the perpetual hand of those murderers. I
cannot go any where, but the malice of men persecutes and follows me, so that
I cannot rest: and if they could trap me once in their snare, and make a prey
of me, I were surely theirs, and then I were gone: the fear of this makes me
dye daily.

Thirdly, another cause that made the Apostle dye daily, was the opposition
that he had by Idolaters, wheresoever he came; Idolaters still labored to put
down the Gospel. As we see at Athens, Acts 17. Acts 17.16.
The Text says, His spirit was sore troubled when he saw the City given to
idolatry: And so likewise when he came to Ephesus, they cry, Acts 19.28.
Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Diana the Idol of Ephesus, had like to have
cost him his life. Therefore the vexation of his spirit, to see men fall down
to stocks and stones, and to forget that loyalty they ought to God: Romans 1.25.
To worship the creature, in stead of the Creator: This made him tear his
clothes, and ready to tear his flesh: for the vexation of his spirit, to see
whole Cities so given over.

Fourthly, another cause of this daily death of the Apostle; it was the
opposition that he had by Witches, and Sorcerers: wheresoever he came (almost)
the devil would still set some Witch in the place: so in Acts 16.17. Acts
16.17.
when he comes to Lidia, there Satan had entered into a woman: and she having
the devil in her, Verse 18.
uttered these words of Paul and Silas: These are the men that teach the way of
truth: but the Apostle understanding that the devil spoke that for some
cozening, for the hinderance of the Gospel: the Text says, he grew into
vexation and trouble of spirit, and commanded the devil to come out of her:
Another time he comes to Paulus house; Acts 13.8.
and there Elymas the sorcerer opposes him: whereupon being moved with grief,
he grows to those high terms, that he never spoke the like language but only
there, Verse 10.
Thou full of all subtilty, thou child of the devil, w^lt thou not cease to
pervert the right ways of God? these things, therefore, occasioned him new
pangs; and brought his death on; multiplied his sorrows, and made him say as
he does here, in the vexation of his spirit, I dye daily. For these Idolaters,
for these opposers; for the inward troubles from his own flesh; for outward
troubles from his own corrupt nation; these things so every where beset him,
that he could make no evasion or escape. Therefore he swears, By the
rejoicing I have in Jesus Christ our Lord, I dye daily.

But the chief and maine thing that made the Apostle dye daily, (to dye upon
the nest as it were) it was the care of the Churches, 2 Cor. 11.28 29
2 Cor. 11. the great compassion he had, that great Armado of cares and
business, and toil that lay upon him. As he says, The trouble and care of
all the Churches lies upon me: Who is weak, and I am not burdened? who is
offended, and I burn not? The grief that he conceived to see men
back-sliders, to see how hardly men were brought to it; and how ill they lived
in their profession, that they lived not answerable to their calling in Christ:
to see men fall from grace, to this world, as he says of Demas, He has
forsaken me, 2 Timothy 4.10.
and embraced this present world: these strange alterations and turnings in the
Church of God, did so vex and trouble, and grieve his spirit, that he could
take no rest or repose in any thing in the world, but was as a dead man, free
among the dead: and he cries out here, I protest by the rejoicing I have in our
Lord Jesus Christ, I dye daily.

I dye daily. This is a great aggravation of the misery. To dye, is the bane
of nature; the horrible of horribles: which none of us all can endure to hear
of: the least approach of it casts us into infinite fears and horror: but to
dye daily, to know no end of death, no period to determine it, but to be in the
continual act of dying: here is the height of all the patience of the Saints.
As they dye, so they dye daily: there is no time that shines perfectly clear
to them, but all is in clouds and disasters and misfortunes here, I dye daily.
Every day brings its burden with it: that as we beg our daily bread, so
there is a daily death: and we have not such assurance of our daily bread, as
we have of our daily death. Men often by fasting, pull down themselves, and
keep down their bodies, that they eat not their bread: but there is no day,
but a Christian tastes of death. Though he have no taste of bread, or any
relish of victuals; yet he shall be sure to taste of death.

I dye daily, as though my life were of steel, and my bones of marble; as
though this short thread of mine, were of Adamant; so thy terrors work upon
me. Like a moath that frets a garment, and leaves nothing but flocks and dust,
and ruin of the goodliest garment: so the terrors of God, the terrors of
conscience, the terrors of the world; the discontents, and fears, the malice
of the devil, the malice of some false brethren, and the falling away of
others: these things did so work upon him, and so vex him, that they did even
bring him to nothing; that there was no hour, but it was full of distraction
and perturbation.

I protest, by the rejoicing I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I dye daily. This
daily death is the general condition of Gods Saints. Saint Paul suffered it
not alone, but he left it also as our inheritance; he dyed daily: and we may
say, who does not dye daily? He that knows Christ, and has a will to follow
him, he shall find his life (in this life) to be a continual death wrestling
with him, and tyrannizing over him: as Job says, My soul rather desires
strangling, Job 7.15.
than to live as I do: Saint Paul had his death: and the ministers of the
Gospel, now have their death; and though they live in a time of peace and
plenty, yet they want not their death to gnaw on them. The envy of men, the
malice and slander, and villainous reports; whereby they defame and disgrace
their brethren, to the pit of hell: the non-proficiencie of men; their scorning
of the word: these are as death to a man that is sensible of God or of his
government. The Apostle seems to make all the day, being divided into two
parts, to be a continual dying. The day, is either natural or artificial,
and both these are full of deaths, the day natural is that we work in, and
sleep in: the day artificial, is that only which we work in, in the common
course of nature: and in both these there were deaths to the blessed Apostle:
In the day time, the time of work; I dye daily, in all the passages of my
life, in all the practices and exercises of religion: whether it be Prayer,
Meditation, or Teaching, and admonishing the people. In all these exercises, I
dye daily.

In my prayers I dye with coldness and dullness: I have not zeal to wing my
affections to God.

In my preaching, I dye with weakness and neglect: I cannot set forth that
glorious word as I ought to do.

In my Meditations, I dye with sluggishnesse and laziness, that I cannot hold
on my beginnings in that course.

In my Meat and drink, and other refreshings, I dye: I am either too
excessive, or else too superstitiously vain and fearful.

Nay, in that very time of the day, wherein nature brings rest and repose; in
the time of night, when I should sleep and rest, I dye: in my very sleep.
That is full of startling dreams, and fearful fantasies, and perturbations
to vex my soul, so that every day I dye: whether it be in that part of the
day, which is for work, or that which is for rest: every where, I dye.

When the Sun shines, it is as a blazing star, that opens the day to
mischief and discomfort.

When the Moon appears, it is as a Commet or candle to waken me to distracted
thoughts.

The Stars are as so many clouds that drown me in darkness.

My hours are as Jobs messengers, that bring me sad reports, one after
another.

Every minute is like the bodrags in the heart and brain of a man, that are
still accrewing fearful shows and signs of evil. So that I protest by the
rejoicing I have in the Lord Jesus, I dye daily.

2 Part. The Proof.
Now I come to the second point, which is the proof of this. For there is no
man that would believe it; because flesh and blood cannot understand how a man
should be dead and yet alive. As the Poet says, As long as a man lives,
whatsoever happen to him, he is well; break a hand or a foot of him; break
his bones, and let him have life, he is indifferent well. But the children of
God, do not judge so of these things. For life is not to live merely, but to
be in a good estate: to be in a healthy condition: therefore seeing the Apostle
lived, and had his being among men: he being not now laid in his grave, but
conversing in our common element; why then does he say he died daily? Why even
because of troubles, and of cares.

It is true: but because men would not believe, how he should have such cares,
1 By way of an Oath.
and how they should be the cutthroat of his life: therefore, now he
interposeth his bond, and it is a firm bond, his oath: which though it be but
an imperfect argument, yet is it taken of godly men, for the strongest argument
that is in Rebus humanis. For things that are uncertain, are determined by the
oath of an honest man; and men take it for the most certain truth that can be,
because an oath is a bond that gives testimony to the truth. So the Apostle in
this, and in other places, uses a strange kind of reasoning, drawn from the
contrary, and we are to believe him upon his Word. It is true, his friends, and
those that are sanctified, will easily believe him: but those that are without,
that are yet to be won: they are hardly to be persuaded. Therefore for their
infirmity, and for the weakness of the Corinthians, he puts his oath to it,
and swears it is true, I protest by the rejoicing I have in Christ Jesus our
Lord, I dye daily. Now you see the nature of the argument: and if we consider
it well, it will appear that the wisdom of God, in the state of his
children, which is so far above man's reach and reason; that the Angels
themselves can scarcely make a delivery of it. For mark, he had said before, I
dye daily: and now he proves it by another thing clean contrary: by his
rejoicing daily. By the rejoicing that I have in Christ Jesus, continually; by
that rejoicing, that is always with me: by that rejoicing I dye daily. A strange
thing! that a man should have fear and care; and yet be joyful too, at the
same time: to dye, and yet to rejoice, or boast at the same instant, for so the
word signifies; to boast in the apprehension of a good thing: to joy in a
singular measure, for Joy is the apprehension of a singular good, in a singular
measure: that these two should be put together; to say I rejoice daily, and I
dye daily: this is a wonder, which the Lord has hid from flesh and blood:
which he has not manifested to the great ones of the world, but to his little
despicable ones, even those that take delight in the kingdom of Christ. By the
rejoicing I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I dye daily.

There is some variety in the reading of these words. Some read it, by your
rejoicing: and so that which I must honor, our last translation has it in the
Margin, by your rejoicing: some read it, or rejoicing. But there is no great
difference, for the sense comes all to one. So Saint Jerome, Saint Augustine,
Saint Chrysostom, and Theophilact: they read it, by your rejoicing.

But then on the other side, there are a number of the Fathers that read it,
our rejoicing, as Basile upon Psalm. 14. Athanasius; and of later Writers,
Luther and Calvin. Only Beza holds with the Ancients, and says, your
rejoicing; making, notwithstanding, no difference in the Text, or in the sense:
for (says he) the Apostles meaning is, by the rejoicing that I have of you:
and by the rejoicing that you have of me; and says Saint Chrysostom, he
calls the proficiency of the Corinthians, his rejoicing; as he says, 1 These.
2. What is our crown, 1 These. 2.19.
and our rejoicing, and our glory? are not ye? And he answers his own
question, and says, yes! Ye are our crown, and our rejoicing, in the day of
the Lord. This I take to be the more fit and the more lively, and fuller, our
rejoicing; rather than to read it yours: although it be true, it is the
common Rejoicing of Gods children: they have all the same spirit and the same
joys: yet a man may not lawfully swear, by that which is in another man; but
a man may swear for himself. Thus Saint Paul, although he knew that the
Corinthians were forward and full of the gifts of the holy Ghost, and of joy:
yet he had no reason to be so confident in them, as to swear by their
rejoicing. Because a man knows not what is in his neighbor, he is not
certain: he may judge the best, but he knows nothing certainly, and he were a
mad man therefore, that would swear for that which he knows not, therefore
the Apostle makes this oath: not of the joy or gloriation, or boasting, that
was in the Corinthians; but the boasting and gloriation of his own spirit, in
the presence of Christ Jesus. This I take to be the sense, although it be true
that the Apostle gloried much in his passions and sufferings at Corinth: and he
gloryed too for the preaching and success of the Gospel: this was matter of
great gloriation, and boasting, yet it was the inward comfort and testimony of
his conscience, that made him swear, by his rejoicing in Christ.

Others go about to put it off with a kind of Asseveration only; (...). Vide
Bezae Annotat. in locum.
that is another reading which Saint Ambrose follows, and the vulgar Bibles,
and so the common translations at this day; though they touch upon this, and in
a manner are weary of the other. As if the Apostle should say, for your glory
sake. But those that know the Greek tongue, they know that (...), being not
written with letters, but like a half circle: it is easily brought to be like
the word (...), and so the Scripture may be read promiscuously, with either of
them in this place.

But this is against the tenent of all the Fathers of the Church: which have
still thought this to be an oath. As Saint Austin writing to Hillary in his 89.
Aug ad Hilla. ep. 89. Et lib. 3. de Trin.
Epistle, he proves it lawful for a Christian man to swear, because the
Apostle writes by an oath. And in his third Book of the Trinity, he says, The
Apostle did not fear to confirm the certainty of his salvation by swearing;
for (says he) by the confidence that I have in Christ Jesus, I dye daily.
Among the Greeks, none doubted of it, but those that were simple and
unlearned. Therefore (I say) this was an oath: and so the strongest
confirmation that can be.

2 The thing he swears by. Esaias 45.23.
But how does Saint Paul swear, by that which is not God? It is not lawful to
swear by any thing, but the name of God: as the Lord says, Every knee shall
bow to me, and every tongue shall confess me, and swear by my name. Heb. 6.13.
It is true, that when God swears, having no greater to swear by, he swears
by himself: and when man swears, he must always swear by a greater. For that
is the end of an oath, to protest an unknown truth, by the presence and
countenance of a greater person then himself, and one which cannot lie.
Therefore it is unlawful for a Christian to swear by any name, but the name
of God: and that not often, much less always, or in frivolous causes: for this
our Lord Christ condemns, when he says, swear not at all; Math 5.34.
that is, not often; nor out of passion. But as an oath is a special service
of God; so it is to be taken upon special occasions: but now we are bound to
swear by no name, but the name of God: and rejoicing in Christ, is not Christ
himself. Wherefore then does the Apostle swear, by his rejoicing in Christ?

We must understand, that to swear by any immediate fruit of the spirit of
God, by any thing that flows immediately from God to us; it is all one, as to
swear by the name of God it self. This is so individual and inseparable a
thing (the comfort, namely, and the joy of Christ has brought into the world)
that it is as inseparable from the spirit, as the shadow from the body.
Therefore, as a man may swear by the shadow, that there is a body: and
swearing the one, he intimates the other, and concludes the other: so the
Apostle here, he swears by this fruit of the holy Ghost, which is joy and
peace: even the peace of God which passes all understanding: which he found in
his heart by the means of Christ Jesus, who makes our joy to be full, who is
the fountain of joy; swearing by this, he swears by the chief jewel of
salvation: which is the penny that Christ had given him as an earnest, as a
pawn and gage of his love.

Out of this that he says Our rejoicing, observe (I beseech you) the wondrous
temper of a Christian: how he is composed of strange, extreme contraries; of
death and life, of sorrow and joy, of peace and war. There is nothing in the
world that can be imagined so contrary, as be the several parts of a Christian
man's constitution. Upon this ground, the holy Apostle goes, 2 Cor 4. 2 Cor.
4.8. etc.
where he makes the definition of a Christian, after the same manner. Says he,
we are indeed oppressed and persecuted; but yet not crushed altogether: we are
as men dead, and yet behold we live; poor, and yet making many rich, as having
nothing, and yet we possess all things. This is that mavelous mixture, that
God has appointed his children to come to: that they should be conformable to
the sufferings of Christ, and so be in death, and yet that they should revive
again by the spirit of God: and so no man be less in death, being always in
life: and having the certain pledge and pawn of life eternal. As for the men
of this world, the sons of flesh and blood; when they think themselves most
lively; then are they most deeply in death: every thing works against them,
the storms of Gods wrath attend them, and work upon their consciences (at
some time or other) such fearful deaths, as out of which they can make no
evasion or escape. But with the children of God, it is contrary: when they are
in the midst of death, they are in the height of life. 2 Cor. 4.16.
As the Apostle says, Although our outward man dye daily, and is corrupted;
yet the inward man is renewed and revived by the spirit of Christ. So in all
the passages of their life, where death seems to have the greatest sway and
predominancie: even there, is life abundantly over death: and the root of
life, shall at length eat out the fruit of death. And although death make a
flourish for a time, upon the Saints of God; yet because there is a root of
life, it shall still grow and bud, and bring forth at length: that death may be
swallowed up into victory. 1 Cor. 15.54.
In all things, the children of God have full contentment in this life:
although they be in the midst of death. This is the great miracle that God
does in the world: Every holy man is a wonder: every good man is a miracle,
like the children of Israel, Exodus 14.22.
that walked through the deep, where there was never way known before: like
the three children in the furnace, Dan. 3.25.
that walked in the midst of the fire, as if they had been in a pleasant
Meadow: like the Israelites, and all their cattle that passed over Jordan: Acts
16.25.
like Paul and Sylas, singing at midnight in chains and fetters in prison. A
miraculous spectacle to God and men! which draws the eyes of Ang^^s to the
contemplation of it. For in sickness, a Christian is full of the saving health
of God. In persecution, he is full of quiet and contentment of the holy Ghost.
In prison, he is full of Psalms and spiritual Songs, as were Paul and Sylas.
When he is bound in shackles, he is free, and expedite, and loose. As the
Apostle says in another place, though I be bound, 2 Timothy 2.9.
yet the word of God is not bound: the Gospel of Christ is not bound. In all
things he is a breathing miracle of the power of God: that sounds unto us as so
many silver Trumpets; the omnipotency of God, that makes such a correspondence
and proportion between life and death, that makes death and life dwell
together in one body: and yet he will evacuate death by the power of life,
that life may surmount, and death may be put under; that at the last, death may
be debased, and life may be advanced.

And in that he says, Our rejoicing, or your rejoicing: For it is not
material whether way it is read, for it is a common joy. If I read it, yours,
I have it; if mine, you have it; for it is a common joy in our common Savior.

This is that which all of us confess, when we make our prayers to God: we
call him our Father, and we call the Savior of the world, our Savior, and so
we may call the spirit our comforter; because this common vein of joy, it
flows and runs into all the parts of Christ's mystical body: in all the
parts of the world. The communion of Saints is taught us here. Christ is alike
to every one. Our rejoicing: mine in Asia, yours in Europe; mine in Ephesus,
yours in Corinth; mine on this side the sea, yours beyond the sea. My
rejoicing, or our rejoicing in our common Lord and Savior. It is ours, because
Christ is ours; because he is the Lilly of the field, Cant. 2.1.
and the Lilly of the valley; he is the Lilly of the field, not of the garden:
a garden is a private place, reserved for the particular owner of it: but he is
the flower of the field, that all passengers may take him up, and smell to his
sweetness. He is the Lilly of the valley, who conveyes grace and sweetness,
and beauty, and majesty, to all that approach him. He rules in the midst of the
seven golden Candlestickes; because his virtue may be equally diffused: as
lines from the center to the circumference, all concurring together in the
center. So all nations and people in the world, have seen the salvation of
God: because they have met together in the center; our Lord Jesus Christ.

By our rejoicing in Christ Jesus our Lord. 3 The ground of this rejoicing.
Here is the ground and foundation, Christ Jesus our Lord. Christ is that
fountain, from whence all streams. If the old man work death, the new man
shall work life, and we have put off the old man, that we may put on the new;
that is, that we might be more invested with the one, and less with the
other. By our rejoicing in the Lord Jesus. This common sun, which is the joy
of the world, is sometimes ours, and sometimes not ours. When it rises to us,
it sets in another place, to another world of people. The Antipodes have not
the sun when we have it; and again, when they have it, we want it: because
of day and night, and intercourse of times. For the sun compassing the globe
of the earth, must (of necessity) by interposing the shadow, make this
difference, so that the Sun is not always ours, although it be the light of
the world. But the Sun of righteousness is always ours, he is always above our
horizon: always beneath our horizon to the Antipodes; as well as to us: and to
as many as the Lord shall call, that Lord, is the same he is: the bright
morning star; that was yesterday, to day, and for ever the same. Heb. 13.8.
Apoc. 1.8.
He is Alpha and Omega.

By the rejoicing that I have in Christ Jesus our Lord. And herein we are to
observe the causes of this joy, for first he is Jesus, and then he is Christ,
and then he is our Lord: all this makes up the fullness of our joy.

If he were not Jesus, he could not work this miracle in our frail
tabernacles. For as he is God, he is called Jesus: as he is man, he is called
Christ. He is called Jesus, because he is a Savior: now man cannot save. He
is called Christ, because he was anointed: and God cannot be anointed. It is
the property of a man, to receive annoynting from a higher thing. This makes
the fullness of our joy, for being Jesus, he is able to confer upon us
streams of joy, being the omnipotent fountain of life; all that we receive
being from him: from him we receive grace for grace, as it is Ioh. 1. Ioh. 1.16.
he being the fullness of joy from God the Father; at whose birth the Angels
sang, Glory to God on high, joy on earth, to men good will; Luke 2.14.
It follows, therefore, that he is able to work joy in the spirits of men:
that he can give light in darkness. There is nothing difficult to him, but
his spirit can make all things lightsome, he can make a man rejoice in
tribulation and affliction, as he is Jesus.

And then Christ: that is, anointed: Psalm. 45.7.
for he is anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows. And what
is that annoynting, but the oil of joy and gladness? that is, that great
fullness of joy, wherewith he is anointed: that it should not stay upon the
head of Aaron or his beard; Psalm. 133.2.
but should run down to the skirts of his clothing: that all the body of
the Priest, should be filled with joy. As our Savior says to his Disciples,
that when they came to a house, Luke 10.5.
they were to salute it, and to say, Peace be to this house. When Christ comes
once to a man, he brings joy: he is that anointed one; he takes of that oil
of gladness, and gives it to his fellows: that is, to the followers of his
salvation.

Lastly, he is our Lord. Therefore he is a good Master, and wishes well to his
servants: he has a horn of oil, and he poures it out: that Amalthean horn
of joy and comfort, and consolation for all the elect of God. And he is
willing to do it for us, because we acknowledge him to be our Lord. Therefore
we must examine our selves by this, whom we acknowledge to be our Lord. And we
shall soon see the reason, why we want this joy: if a man be under the devil,
and acknowledge him to be his Lord, he has nothing to give him but misery and
terror, and discomfort, sorrow and distress; a man can receive nothing else
there, because he serves a bad Master; but if thy Master be Christ, the
anointed of God; he shall bring thee joy and peace of conscience: and then,
certainly, it will manifest it self. It will appear in thy countenance, in
thy words, in thy patience in suffering with Gods Saints: it will appear in
all the passages of a man's life, that men may perceive, that the oil of grace
is poured out upon him, and is infused into him: and it opens it self plainly
and manifestly, in every thing that passes from him, that is endued with the
spirit of God.

Let us therefore labor (which is the last point of the Text, to preserve the
force of this argument: 4 The force of the A^gument.
that we may be sure of our salvation, and of our rejoicing in Christ. And (if
need be) to protest and swear it; to lay it to pledge, as a man does his lands
and estate. When he would make a thing certain, he infeoffes a man in those
things that are most near and dear to him: the best things that he has. So
the best thing that the Apostle had, it was his rejoicing in Christ; his
comfort of conscience; the peace of God: which far transcended his passions,
and sweetened his afflictions, and made him rejoice in tribulation (that comfort
of Christ) that he had within in his spirit, and from abroad by the
proficiency of his Scholars, to see them grow up in the fear of God, in the
knowledge of Christ; in the profession of the faith: this is the rejoicing the
Apostle speaks of.

I would that we all had this rejoicing: espeeially those that stand in the
Apostles place, that they would rejoicing in this one Lord and master, to have
no joy in the world, or in men, in goods and profits, in pleasures, honors, or
in preferments; which the world usually buys and sels. To have no rejoicing in
these, but as they be men that belong to God; so let them rejoice only in
God. And there is all the point of gloriation. Therefore let not the rich man
boast in his riches, Ier. 9.23.
or the strong man in his strength: but let him that rejoices, rejoice in the
Lord; for it is he that executes judgment and justice, and that shows mercy
to those that rejoice in him; as the Lord speaks.

Apostle does, Rejoicing and death: we must labor by the study of pleasing
Almighty God, to keep this sweet temper in us. We are sure of the one, but we
must labor for the other. I wonder not, when I hear thee say (as the Apostle
does here) I dye daily, for every man does so: there is not the most sensual
man, but he has a touch of death every day, either by sensible misery, or by
the touch of conscience: by bringing of his sins to his view. That is
incident to nature, and a consequent of sin, to dye. But what is thy
rejoicing? what comfort have thou in Christ? This is that we should desire, and
call upon God continually for: even to make this temper and mixture in us, for
the one is as necessary as the other: and God is as ready to give the one, as
our nature is ready to draw the other upon it self. And this must be by this
one means, the making Jesus Christ thy Lord; knowing no other Lord besides
him; no, nor none against him, nor none with him; but that he may have the
pre-eminence, and be all in all: as he is to his children in the world, and
shall be for ever in another world. So thou must make him all thy aim, all
that thou desire, all thy gloriation; because thou must, or can desire
nothing, but it is seated in him.

To conclude with the time, here is a model of a christian man's estate: death
and life, sorrow and joy: he is composed of such strange differences, as the
understanding of man cannot attain unto. But yet, assuredly, the Lord is never
so heavy to him in judgment, but he is withal rich in mercy: sorrow of heart
shall never so surround him, but he shall have the joy of the holy Ghost to
survive him. As Saint Augustine Augustine.
says upon that place of Paul, Redeem the time, because the days are evil,
I (says he) it is true, the time in this world is evil: but all the days
that are in Christ, are good days; all the days of the Lord, are good; all
the days of sin are evil. Let us sell them then: he that redeemes; parts
with one thing, to get another. Let us sell these evil days in this world,
that we may get those good days, in the grace of Christ. And as Saint Gregory
Gregory.
says, Good Jesus! he that has thee, loses nothing: and though he be in
the midst of death, yet he shall be recompensed with life, although he be in
the midst, and swallowed up with sorrow and deep pangs of conscience, yet thy
spirit is there to remove that sorrow; for though sorrow indureth for a night,
yet joy comes in the morning, Psalm. 30. Psalm. 30.5.
And in thy light we shall see light; thy wrath indures for the twinkling of
an eye, but in thy pleasure, there is life for evermore.

This is the blessed state that every Christian is called unto; and the Lord
make it every one of our portions, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

FINIS.
1 COR. 15.32. If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, after the manner of
men; what does it avail me, if there be no resurrection from the dead?
THis is now the conclusion of that argument, which Saint Paul draws from his
own person. For drawing his principal argument from the sufferings of the
Church, to prove the resurrection of the dead: he begins, first with the
general, and then he descends to the particular; and last of all, he comes to
the personal.

First, the general was verse 29. What shall they do that are baptized for
the dead?

Then in the next verse, he comes to the College of the Apostles, and says,
We also are in ieopardy every day.

And for his own particular, he protests he dies daily; in the verse before
the Text.

And now he comes to explain this; how it should be taken: says he, If I have
fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men. Because he had spoken of
a thing unlikely and unusual, and unwonted: and therefore it might be
offensive to Atticke ears, (such as were at Corinth) to say that he lived, and
yet was dead; therefore now he tempers his speech, and mitigates it by this
exposition, when he says, He received the sentence of death against himself:
for he was cast to beasts to fight with them: either indeed, according to the
letter; as it was a kind of punishment and torment, that the Pagan persecutors
assigned the Christians unto: or by way of metaphore; as many and most of the
Fathers of the Church interpret it. But how ever, the force of the argument is
all one. For whether he were cast to beasts, and suffered to take his weapons;
and to defend himself: and so by the mercy of God, to escape without hurt from
them; or whether he mean by fighting with beasts, beastly minded men; as the
phrase of Scripture often insinuates: the strength of the argument is all one.
For often times, a man were better be cast unto beasts, then to men, there
being more mercy, and less fury in the paws of the very beasts, than in the
working brains of men, and the malicious conveyances that they have in the
world. So whether we take it for beasts, literally, or for men that were
beasts, metaphorically: the force of the argument is equal. For, says he, if
there were no hope of the Resurrection, then I would do as the world does: and
I would say, as they say; I would accommodate my self to all men's humors. I
would be so far from casting my self into such dangers, as to sight with
beasts, or with beastly men; as that I would seek to recover my own, which I
had once, being a Pharisie. I would live a quiet and peaceable life among my
brethren, as I did then: when I was rather ready to do others hurt, than to
suffer any. I would much rather choose that state of life, than thus to be
plagued and plunged, and drowned in misery; if there were not a hope of a
Resurrection; but the vigor and life of that hope, duls all the pangs in this
world, and sweetens the cup of affliction, which else would eat out my very
intrayles.

If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, what avayleth
it, if the dead rise not? Why should I cast my self into these dangers? why
should I endure them any longer? why should I not at the first grapling with
the troubles of this life, betake my self to that more sure and easy
condition? But because the Church before me, has done thus, therefore I
follow her steps. I see what John Baptist has suffered: I see what James the
brother of John has endured. I see what the Innocents have undergone. I see
what the blessed Martyr Stephen has suffered. All these, in great tranquillity
of spirit have yielded their souls to God. And the Prophets, in former time, I
see they have suffered for the same profession, that I now have taken upon me:
for their doctrine was the same; they all poynted to Christ; they all preached
the doctrine of the Resurrection, therefore as the Church in general has gone
before, and all the College of Apostles in particular have traced after: I
also will personally insist in their steps, 2 Timothy 1.12.
and follow too. I know whom I have believed, I have laid up my trust in his
hand, that will not deceive me, therefore I am assured there shall be a
Resurrection of this flesh, of this body, that has suffered so many torments
for the cause of Christ: it shall be again invested with so many notes of
glory and happiness, as it has endured miseries and torments: and that
according to the multitude of my sorrows, so shall my consolations abound in
Christ. This I take to be the sum and sense of this Text.

But it is intricate to consider the many senses that are given of it: which
notwithstanding, we may not neglect any of them, for then we shall slight the
grace of God, which has always been various in his Church. We ought therefore,
to view every thing, to prove all things, as the Apostle says, 1 These. 5.21.
and keep that which is best and most firm and sollid. Augustne.
As Saint Austin says, God would have his Scriptures to be hard and
difficult, and full of diverse senses; because he would have no idle fellows
to come unto it: because he would rouse up the diligence of his children. The
Lord does not take away the proper sense of the Scriptures, from them that are
studious and diligent, and careful: but only he shuts up the sense from
negligent and careless men, but he opens it again to those that knock, as
Christ says, Knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

Therefore, first we are to consider the great and maine difficulty of the
Text; in the interpreting of those two words, which are diversely taken:
Exposition of the words.


First, what it is the Apostle means, when he says, He fought with beasts.

Secondly, what it is he says, (...), after men, or after the manner of men.
And though the diverse editions and translations, have reconciled them to our
hand; yet there is nothing so authentical, but a man may give another
exposition as good, and as full of authority as that. And then after the
exposition, we are to come to

The description of this trouble, Division.
1 What it was, and 2 Where it was.


What it was, that it was such a kind of trouble, as was to death, and to very
destruction in the judgment of man, as it appears plainly by this, and by
that in 2 Cor. 1.8. where the Apostle makes a relation of it. 2 Cor. 1.8.


And then where it was, at Ephesus, the most ingenious place in the world,
where the devil had set his throne in the greatest triumph. As it is said,
Rev. 2 I know thy dwelling, Apoc. 2.13.
where Satan's throne is: there was Dyana's temple, the most famous Idol in
the world; the throne of Satan, Acts 19.35.
was there more conspicuously, then any where else: therefore it was most
likely, that there should be the greatest persecution, where men were most of
all corrupted and infected with Idolatry.

And then lastly, to gather the force of the argument: if there be no
Resurrection, what does it profit me, that I have fought with beasts at
Ephesus? As if he should have said, he is a mad man, and a fool, that will
cast himself into danger without profit. The great adventurers of the world,
they still propose to themselves ends of profit, to what good, to what end,
things may be: it is that which sets all men's wits on work: it is that which
commands the lives and labors of men to far and foreign Countries; and he
that works without an end, without apparent profit; he is of all men the most
frantic: therefore so must I be, says the Apostle, if there be no
Resurrection. To what profit is it, that I have fought with beasts? If there be
not some profit, but that I have exposed my self to danger, only to get me a
name: I were of all others the most furious and mad: but God forbid, that the
Church before me, or the Apostles with me, or I my self should be thus
deluded; to throw our selves into hazard, and to have no profit: to have no
means to comfort our selves after our trouble, to have nothing for our labor:
God forbid we should be so insensate. Therefore, because we do thus, and are
assured of Gods promise, that we shall have a reward, and an abundant
recompense: therefore as sure as God lives, we shall not loose our labor,
there shall be a Resurrection: for so the Apostles argument is framed. If there
be no Resurrection, then why do I take this pains? and if I take this pains
for no profit, then I and the rest of the faithful that suffer, are mad and
furious men; but we are not mad nor furious, but are endued with the spirit of
God, and we know what we do: we know, whom we have trusted, 2 Timothy 1.12.
and therefore we are certain of an abundant recompense. This is the sum
and ground of the argument: and these are the branches of the Text. Of these in
order, as the spirit of God shall assist me.

And first for that the Apostle says, If I have fought with beasts. A great
many sound Divines, hold it true in the letter: that Saint Paul was objected to
beasts, and was constrained to fight with them, for the saving of his life.

You shall understand, that among the several torments the Church of God was
subject unto by persecutors; this was one kind: to make the people sport, by
setting two or three of the Saints of God upon a stage; where there were so
many Panthers, Leopards, Lions, or Bears; and there they were to tugge for
their lives. We see in the Churches History, this has been always one kind of
their persecution. We see it also of ancient time. In the time of Daniel, King
Darius, Dan. 6.16.
upon the instigation of his Lords, cast Daniel into the Den: and it is said
the Lions were famished a long time before, that they should devour him
suddenly, as they judged: but we know the issue of it, the Lions (by the mercy
of God) were so couchant, to Daniel, that he had no harm. But when his
accusers came, they were so rampant, as that they crushed the bones of them,
their wives and children, before they came to the ground. Ignatius Epist. 12 ad
Romanos.
Saint Ignatius when he heard the voice of the Leopard, that was to devour
him; in the height of his spirit, he gave God thanks. Now, says he, I shall be
ground as fine flower, by the teeth of the Leopard; that I may become fine
manchet for God. I shall become bread for Gods own Table. Sylvanus Bishop of
Emesa, Nicephorus Hist. l. 7. c. 16.
and diverse others of Gods Saints, have passed this way into heaven: even by
being objected unto beasts.

But Saint Paul, certainly, was not in this manner to be cast naked and bound
as a prey unto the beasts, for that was for condemned men: but Saint Paul was
not cast as a condemned man to death, to be torn in pieces: but as a man
condemned only to trial, ad certamen, to make sport to the people. So there
were certain mercenary fellows (hirelings) that for money, would adventure
their skins and lives, and tugge with the Bears: as there was of late
amongst us. So the Court of persecutors, when they had sitten against any of
the Saints of God, as it came in their mind to make them a spectacle, and to
give sport to the people, they appointed such a one to be cast to the beasts,
not to be bound hand and foot, and torn in pieces without resistance, but to
make use of his weapon, and of the cunning he had: and if it were possible, to
make an evasion. In this sort, they say Paul was cast, and objected to the
beasts. We see also in Tertullians time, Tertul.
it was the common, exclamation still against the Christians. If the year were
too hot, or if it were too dry, or if there were barrenness or any inundation
upon the ground, they put it still upon Christians, and their word was, Cast
the Christians to the Lions. Christianum ad Leones.
This may well be: this interpretation may well stand, that Saint Paul in this
kind, was objected to the very beasts, to fight for his life. He was not cast
to them, as one bound and naked to be torn in pieces of them: but as one that
was put to a venture, ad certamen; either by miracle to be delivered by his
fortitude and skill, or else to be devoured. Thus we read of diverse in former
time; Q. Curtius.
Alexander the great caused Lysimachus his dear friend, to be cast to the
Lion: and he by his valor overcame the Lion, and slew him: and made himself
after a free man, and better accepted into favor with Alexander. In this sort
some imagine that Saint Paul was rescued and delivered by the power of God
Almighty, from the mouth of the Lion. As he says, 2 Timothy 4. 2 Timothy 4.17.
God has delivered me from the mouth of the Lion, even the Lion (literally) to
whom he was exposed at his abode at Ephesus, for he was there almost three
years. This exposition no man can possibly find fault with, it being natural
and easy, and as long as the literal sense is easy, and without absurdity
may be admitted; we ought not to fly to metaphors. But yet there is some
thing, that the contrary side of Divines hold against it.

Paul had been cast to beasts at Ephesus, to fight for his life: Saint Luke
the great Chronicler of Paul's actions, would not have omitted it, but he
speaks nothing of it, therefore there was no such thing. For, it seems, that
he that takes upon him to write the History of a man, must of necessity set
down the chief and most rare and eminent passages of his life: and what
greater and more glorious relation could there be, than that Saint Paul should
fight for his life at Ephesus, even with beasts: and that he should by the
mercy of God, be delivered, as Daniel was from the Lions in the den.
Therefore seeing Saint Luke has buried it in deep silence, and mentions
nothing less, therefore it argues, it must not be thus understood, that
Saint Paul was thus cast unto beasts.

Luke, although he were a diligent writer of the actions of Saint Paul, yet he
pretermits many things which Saint Paul himself in the Catalogue of his own
passions relates, 2 Cor. 11.24.25
2 Cor. 11. for we have not in Luke, many passages that are there. As his being
a day and a night in the deep sea, with some others; but only a brief and
short narration: so that this may well be among those things that Saint Luke
left unwritten, as referring us more fully to the narration of Saint Paul
himself, who was the best witness of his own travailes.

Another objection Beza has: surely, says he, Paul was not cast naked, ^eza.
and bound as a prey to the beasts: for then (says he) it had been unlawful
for Saint Luke, not to have taken notice of such a wondrous miracle as that.
Therefore if he were cast to them, it must be as a man to fight for his life:
and surely (says he) he came not there to fight with beasts, for that would
have taken from his reputation; he would have been thought to be a
sword-player, to venture and expose his life to fight with beasts, to please
and satisfy men. For this exercise was called venation; and condemned by the
Cannon law. A man may not for money, or for pleasing of the people, come upon a
Stage to encounter with beasts, but to account it as a bloody, furious, and
barbarous spectacle to be abhord and abstained.

But this also has no weight in it. Paul came unto it with his will; but he
was thrust on, and forced to it: and I cannot imagine, why a man should be
less reputed of, or how it should bring any shame to his profession, when he
suffers wrong.

Indeed when he offers wrong, and thrusts himself into such actions, then it
is true: but when he is thrust upon it, that he cannot avoid it; in this, there
is no matter of disreputation.

The last objection against this opinion, is of them beasts, were always cast to
them for a prey.

But that is not so. For all Civilians agree, beasts.

There were some that were condemned, according to the quality of their
offense, (as they thought) to be torn in pieces: and in that sort Saint Paul
was not cast to the beasts.

Some again were cast to them to try masteries; and so (they say) Paul was
cast among them, to strive and struggle with them: to see whether God would
favor his cause or no: whether he were of a magnanimous spirit, or whether he
would yield and shrink, when he saw the beast come near him, from his faith
or no. We cannot imagine that Saint Paul did this, seeking to please the
people: to make himself a barbarous spectacle to them: or that he did it to
tempt God, by offering his life to the beasts: but he was thrown unto them,
and compelled to it. And it was no disgrace for him, then to yield to it, being
forced by the superior powers. So Calvin, Luther, and Beza, are indifferent.
But many of the Ancients, directly expound it according to the letter: as that
these beasts, must be understood to be some kind of Tigers, Leopards, or
Lions: such things Saint Paul was exposed unto, to try the constancy of his
faith; to try his prowess and valor; to see whether God would deliver him or
no. I confess the number of the Authors are so great, and their authority and
gifts so excellent, as that I cannot deny but that this may be the true sense
of this place.

Chrysostom, Saint Augustine, Saint Cyrill, Tertullian, and diverse other
Fathers, do warrant to us as the best, and most proper sense. Namely, that
Paul fought with beasts at Ephesus, that is, with beastly men; men of beastly
conditions. And there is but one thing difficult in it; that is, that the
Apostle should forget that lenity of spirit in which he uses to speak, and
that Christ teaches all men that they should not give an ill or a railing
word. Whereas there cannot be a worse word given to a man, than to call him
beast. Our Lord and Savior Christ says, that he that calls his brother Racha,
Math 5.22.
he that calls his brother fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. Now he that
calls a man fool, speaks far more moderately and modestly, than he that calls
a man a beast. For to call a man fool, is still to call him man: for there is
nothing can be a fool, but man or woman: for it falls not within the compass
of beasts, to be wise or foolish: but still when one is called fool, he is
kept in the condition of a man: but when a man calls a man beast, he is out of
the element and latitude of men: and compared to a more base and degenerate
creature.

But for this we must understand, that our Lord Christ speaks there of the
common talk and discourse among Christians; and not of that Apostolical
authority, not of that magisteriall reproof that is in the Church, and must be
to the worlds end. For every man may not speak alike: a private man must not
speak as the Magistrate does: nor every man must not speak as the Minister
may speak, in reprooving sin, and revealing the will of God. And here we
must conceive, that this that the Apostle speaks, it was by Gods spirit
dictating it unto him: he was the Prophet of God, put in that place; and he
spoke it not from himself, but from a greater. Therefore to pitch upon this
exposition.

If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus. That is, with men that had the faces
of men, but the condition of beasts. For this is the common phrase and language
of people: when a man transcends others in bruitishnesse and cruelty, in a base
conversation; they say he has put on the beast, he has left humanity, and is
turned beast. For it is men's carriage and conditions, that distinguishes them
from beasts. So we see the Scripture has this peculiar phrase: when the
Prophet speaks, Isa. 56.10.
Isa. 56. of Prophets that would not Preach, or that preached for gain; he
calls them dumb dogs: Phil. 3.2.
and the Apostle Paul says, Beware of dogs, whereby is meant such kind of
men, as are profane as Esau: those that return to their vomit of sin, to
their former concupiscence: and contemn and scorn all holy things: Math. 7.6.
yea, and our Lord Christ says, Give not holy things to dogs; that is, to
doggish men: so the Prophet David often prays unto God, to deliver his soul
from the Lion, from the Unicorn, from the Dog, from the Wolf. And so Saint
Paul calls Nero, 2 Timothy 4.17.
Lion, 2 Timothy 4. The Lord has delivered me from the mouth of the Lion: that
is, from the Emperor Nero: Luke 13.32.
so our Lord Christ called Herod, Fox. Tell that Fox (says he) I work to
day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfect. There is nothing more
usual in the Scriptures than this: therefore I will not insist to prove or
illustrate it any further. It is an excellent thing which Chrysologus
Chrysologus.
says. The Scriptures of God make no more account of a man to be a man, after
he falls to brutish conditions, but reputes him in his rank among beasts, as
he is; a beast of the field, a beast for the slaughter. The Scripture calls them
devils, in the fashion and habit, and outward form of men: so our Savior
Christ tells us, John 8. Ioh. 8.
of a generation of Vipers; of a genealogy of devils; Ye are of your father the
devil, says he; which we know is not to be understood according to the
letter; but is to be referred to the absurd conditions of men. Of which also
the Apostle speaks, 2 These. 3.2. 2 These. 3.2.
Pray to God for us (says the Apostle) for what purpose? That we may be
delivered from absurd men, men that have no nature in them, that have no common
strain of humanity in them, but are altogether degenerated and metamorphosed
into beasts: pray for us to be delivered from them. So that place being
compared with this, it is clear, If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus; that
is, with men of brutish natures; men that cannot be contampred with at all;
men of no society, but are given over to their fury and madness; that have no
more mercy in them, than bruit beasts; and must be let go to their fury, as a
beast that does what mischief it can, without any limitation or respect. To
pass from this point.

We see what base dejection sin has brought on us, we that thought to be
equal to God, God says, Behold Adam is become as one of us, Genesis 3.22.
we are now become as the beasts that perish, Psalm. 59.20.
as the Prophet David says, Man being in honor, understood it not, but it
become like the beasts that perish. Genesis 3.21.
And as man fell to be like a beast, so God clad him in the skin of a beast.
Our first great grandfather Adam, had the skins of beasts for his garments:
to signify, that as they were turned beasts, so God gave them an outward
habit and vesture, to show them what inwardly they were become. This should
teach us, still to have our eye on that woeful calamity that sin has brought
upon us: to pray to the Lord, to take these barbarous tricks from us, and to
teach us the true civility of his Saints: even that honorable conversation,
that makes of beasts, men, and of men, Angels: and not of men, beasts; and of
beasts, devils: as our condition is by nature. 2 Timothy 3.13.
The wicked prosper from worse to worse, as the Apostle says. It is a strange
phrase, that they should prosper from worse to worse; and yet it is true, for
the prosperity of the wicked is to his greater destruction. It is the grace of
God, that exalts a man, from a beast to be a man: and from the state of a man,
to the state of an Angel. And it is the baseness of nature, that brings a man
from being a man, to be a beast, and makes him to creep or to go on all
four, to whom the Lord has given an upright positure, and an erected
countenance. So much for the first point of interpretation: I have been too
long in it, I will conclude the rest more briefly.

Second point.
Secondly, (...), according to men, or after the manner of men. This is more
intricate than the former: and as I said, we ought not to misprize what the
Church has taught us, but as dutiful children, to see the variety of the
gifts of God, as they have flowed in the whole body of the Church, from time to
time. This says Beza, Beza.
According to men, it signifies no more, but according to the fashion of men:
as men use to fight with beasts, to get the victory, and to get themselves
glory and reputation in the world: what profit shall I have by this, if there
be no Resurrection. So Beza thinks; following the opinion of Ambrose and of
diverse others before him. S. Ambrose.
But, me thinks, this concludes and inferres nothing. For a man might thus
object against this; suppose he went to fight with beasts, as commonly men do;
it is the condition of men to look for the same reward that others have; and
the same glory that other men atchieve: these men fought with beasts daily, and
they looked for their reward; but yet they thought not of the resurrection of
the body: they dreamed not of such a thing as the bodies rising, therefore the
Apostle denies, that he went after the manner of men; for vainglory, or for
an idle applause of the people, or for any worldly gain; he had no such
project: but he did it only for the hope of the Resurrection. This exposition,
though there be somewhat in it, is not close: it is not the proper sense which
the most and best follow.

Anselme Anselme.
has another sense of it, If I have fought with beasts after the manner of
men, or according to men: that is, says he, if my passions and sufferings were
seen with the eyes of men, all men that had looked upon me at Ephesus, how I
was troubled with those wicked men there; they would have thought I had rather
fought with beasts, in humane shape, then men (...), according to men's
judgment, they would rather have seemed beasts than men; so that I call them
not beasts simply my self, but in the judgment of them that are my beholders
and spectators, that see my sufferings: to see with what kind of wits I was
encumbered, they would have judged them beasts, and not men. This is too far
off: because the Apostle uses not this phrase in that sense, elsewhere in any
of his Writings.

Thirdly, If I have fought with beasts after the manner of men; that is, if I
have fought to death; so Theodoret and Theophilact. Theodoret. Theophilact.
As those men that used to fight with beasts, they fought to death still: for
the manner was, when they sent a malefactor, or a man that was condemned ad
certamen, to the stage, to fight with the beast; if perhaps he came away the
conqueror, and slew the beast, yet then the Executioner or Hangman, was
either by sword, or with a halter to strangle him, and to make an end of him:
so that still he that fought with beasts, he fought to death; for if he fought
not to death with the beast, yet he came to his death by man, because the Judge
had doomed him to dye: and though he gave him leave to use his weapon, to take
arms, and to defend himself; yet when that expectation failed, they did not
fail to take away his life another way; so that then the Apostles meaning must
be, If he fought with beasts as men used to do, to fight to death, that have
death every way: if they be cast naked, and bound, it is to death, for they are
torn in pieces: if they be armed against the beast, and prevail over him, and
be not killed by him, yet the law after took hold of them, so that still they
fought unto death. This exposition seems to be favored by that in 2 Cor.
1.8. 2 Cor. 1.8.
where the Apostle says, We took the sentence of death against our selves;
that is, there was no way with us but one; there was nothing but death
presented to us, the ghastly face of destruction and desolation: he speaks
there as it is likely of this persecution. But as I said before, they fought
not always to death, but some times for trial: and besides, if Saint Paul had
fought to death, he could not after that, have related this to us.

Therefore I come to the last opinion, and as I take it the best: because of
some reverend translations, (to whom I incline more than to any thing which
has been done in the Church, these many years) which understand the end of
it to be this. After the manner of men, that is, to speak after the manner of
men; according as it is the Apostles phrase in many other places, and a man's
meaning may be the best known by his style: by observing his speech elsewhere,
a man may trace him the better afterward; one place helps to clear another.
Now this in the Writings of Saint Paul, is a common speech, after the manner of
men, Romans 3.5. Romans 6.19. Rom 3.5. (...). I speak as a man. And Rom 6.19.
(...). J speak after the manner of men.
and in diverse other places: I speak after the manner of men; and although
here be not the word (...), yet here is the same (...), which is the same form
and phrase he uses there: and so the Apostles meaning is this; you know men
have a form of speech, to call malicious and cruel men, beasts; and according
to that form I speak, for my Lord and Savior otherwise would not give me
leave to speak so out of my own spleen, out of my own passion, to call men
beasts, for they are all my brethren; and all must be embraced in the bowels of
love, and in long suffering and patience. I must labor to bring them in, and
call them home: if they be brutish already, I must seek to make them men: to
reduce them back again. But especially I speak according to the custom of
men, for your sakes; for your weakness, for your better understanding: that
you may know the greatness of my trouble which I sustained at Ephesus. I
speak after the manner of men, as they use to call wicked men beasts, so give
me leave also to call these: who have made themselves so by their malice and
persecution.

2 Where the place was?
Concerning the place, it was at Ephesus; and when this persecution was, there
is great dissension among Writers: some think it to be that persecution that
Saint Luke mentions, Acts 19.24.
Acts 19. Paul being at Ephesus, and preaching against Idolatry, there rises
up Demetrius the silver Smith, and all the trade comes with him; he being as it
were the Master of his Company, he brings his livery after him: a whole army of
divellish beasts were raised against Paul. Demetrius being the principal man
that led all the heard after him, and so the whole forest was in a tumult and
uproare. Tertul. Beza.
So Tertullian and Beza after him, with diverse other of the Fathers. But
certainly, this cannot be so: for we read that Saint Luke sets it down
directly; that Saint Paul as soon as he had received that affront at Corinth,
that great danger when Sosthenes was beaten, and that Gallio cared for none of
these things: Acts 18.17.
he after a while, quitted the City, and went from Ephesus to Macedonia; Acts
18.18.19.
and it is certain when Saint Paul wrote this, he was at Ephesus, and says he
will stay there till Pentecost, 1 Cor. 16.8.
as he says, Cap. 16.8. Therefore it cannot be that he speaks of that
sedition, that Demetrius raised against him, that being the last period of his
stay at Ephesus: he went thence presently upon it, he knew that Christ gave him
a commission, when they persecuted and beat him away, Math. 10.14.
to shake the dust off his feet against them. Therefore this cannot be
admitted.

Another Company, expound it thus: that it was the trouble that happened to him
from the sons of Sceva, Acts 19.16. Acts 19.16.
And the sons of Sceva cast out devils in the name of Jesus whom Paul
preached. There were seven sons of Sceva, and they took upon them to cast
out devils; and the manner of their conjuration was this, We adjure you by
JESUS, Acts 19.13.
whom Paul preaches, to come forth. Verse 14.
Now the devil replied, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye? and so
he ran upon them, and prevailed against them, and tare and rent them.
Hereupon some think, the sons of Sceva raised persecution against him of envy,
because they suffered that great hurt by the devil. But this is more
uncertain then the former. It cannot be thus: for we know that the sons of
Sceva invocated the name of Christ, and nominated Christ, whom Paul preaches:
wherein they showed themselves rather friends and allies to Paul, then enemies:
and so we have a direct rule, and Canon of Christ, Math. 10.
Matthew. 10. his Disciples tell him, We saw one casting out devils in thy name,
and we forbade him: says Christ to them, Forbid him not, for he that is with
me, is not against me. Where Christ gave them to understand, that as long as
any man, although he were not of their company and College, yet as long as he
professed the name of Christ, and did their miracles in his name, they were with
him, and not against him: and though the sons of Sceva miscarried, in their
desire of lucre, and that they did not their miracles for the good of the
Church: yet they pretended friendship to Saint Paul, rather then any adverse
disposition. Therefore I say this cannot be.

But we must understand it, of the total troubles that he found at Ephesus;
which he expresses, 2 Cor. 1.8. 2 Cor. 1.8.
Brethren, says he, I would not have you ignorant of the pressures and
troubles that we sustained in Asia: how we were pressed and urged above
strength, that we even despaired of life in our own selves. This desperate
life he was cast into, by the malice of the men of Ephesus that studied
Idolatry, and for their Idol Diana: and would therefore have beat down and
destroyed Paul, and the doctrine of Christ. This sedition that they moved
against him, he calls fighting with beasts. And so we must take the sense to be
this, that seeing you know that at Ephesus I had such a world of adverse powers
against me; that I was pressed above measure, urged and crushed even to death:
that I received the sentence of condemnation against my self: 2 Cor. 1.9.
that I thought there was no way for me, but to be devoured, as with the teeth
and fury of so many wild beasts. If you have heard of it, or if you know it,
you may imagine that I have some reason to undergo these troubles. For I
brought them upon mine own head; I might have avoided them if I would, but I
would not do it, because of that abundant reward and consolation of Christ,
which shall raise this my body. So that all the teeth of beasts shall not offer
me more wrong and injury in tearing it; then Christ shall give it honor and
glory, in saving it after it has been thus deformed, and so he shall give
honor to that part which most lacked, which has most suffered here. 1 Cor.
12.24.
For this cause, I am thus ready to undergo these dangers, and to encounter
again with beast after beast, as they shall be singled out against me: that
drinking of that cup of affliction here, I may receive that eternal cup of
thanksgiving in the world to come.

This should teach us, (to conclude all in a word) that we ought not to despise
the passions of Gods children. guilty person, they take him as a malefactor:
and it is enough that he is in misery, to prove him also to be in fault. By
this means, there should no substantial argument be drawn from the
martyrdom of Gods Saints: for of all men, (to flesh and blood, and common
sense) they are most miserable and wretched, and pronounced guilty at every
tribunal: and are accounted the malefactors of the world, the plagues of the
earth; such as brought barrenness upon the earth, and other plagues from God;
because men were not enlightened by the spirit of grace, therefore they fell to
the condemnation of the righteous, which is the greatest plague in the world,
to condemn the righteous: for woe to them that call light, darkness, and
darkness, light. Esaias. 5.20.


Let us, therefore, have special regard, when we see troubles fall upon men,
to keep an upright heart to discern the cause, and the person by the cause,
and not the cause by the person. Otherwise it will not follow, that because
Saint Paul suffered these plagues for the Resurrection, that therefore there
shall be a Resurrection: but God forbid, that any man should conclude such a
peremptory sentence against Gods children, as to account them furious or mad
men. And the reason is plain: because God protests to avenge his Saints. Let
the blood of thy Saints which the heathens have shed in thy sight, Psalm. 79.11.
be avenged: and he protests for his people in Egypt; I have seen. I have
seen the afflictions of my people in Egypt. And he that gathers the tears of
his children, the tears of his Saints into his bottle, (as if to make a
special drink and receipt of them) much more does he gather the drops of
blood of his Saints, Psalm. 56.8.
that they spend for his sake, and the Gospells. And if he that gives a cup of
cold water, Math. 10.42.
in the name of a Prophet, it shall be rewarded: much more shall he be
abundantly recompensed, that gives not a cup of cold water, but a chalice of
his own warm blood; of his dearest blood, for the maintenance of the truth,
that he has received, and that is inspired into him by the holy Ghost: he that
does it not only in the name of a Prophet, but in the name of the Prince of
the Prophets; Christ Jesus; who is able to give that abundant recompense he
has promised. Let us always take it to heart, and hold it as a strong argument,
even the Churches sufferings. Because the Church in former times, has lived in
this holy faith, because the Church has bin content to dye for it: and because
the Churches in former times have mortified themselves to the world, and lived
as men of another world, to keep themselves pure and undefiled in this world.
Let the presidents of these men, be undoubted rules for us to guide our feet
and steps by, as infallible, and unerrant rules; let us follow with
unrepealable affections in that blessed truth, Application.
which has been revealed to us from time to time.

The last thing I noted to you was the Application. As it was in Saint Paul's
time, so it has been in the time of all Christians: we have always beasts in
the world. These kind of beasts, the true Christians and professors of the
Gospel, must be exposed to them. A man may find Ephesus every where: and as
much in this City, as in any place in the world, where our beasts be of diverse
natures.

Some are horned beasts.

Some are beasts, that devour with their teeth.

Some are beasts, that kick with the heel.

Some are beasts, that hiss and snarle: and with a secret kind of poison
destroy men.

For the one sort, David says they set their horns on high; I said to the
fools, deal not so madly, Psalm. 75.4.5.
and to the ungodly, set not your horns on high. Proud creatures are compared
in the Scriptures, Psalm. 22.12. Amos 4.1^
to Bulls of Bashan. There be also Kyne of Bashan: for there be horned
creatures of both sexes. Saint Paul was much plagued with women in three or
four places, in the Acts, the women still raised persecution. When men had
more modesty, and more grace; then comes Iezebel and Herodias, and raises
persecution: and although it be not now in that kind, as it was then, yet they
do it ^n a semblable way: now adays they will disgrace one Preacher, and set
up another: comparing one man with another: persuading men to withdraw the
natural allowance and maintenance due to the Ministers, and so they bring
Saint Paul to that extreme necessity, that if any man should judge the case, he
would say he were conversant with beasts, rather then men.

There are another kind of beasts, that bite with their teeth. David tells us
of them too: that as there are bulls of Bashan, and Kine of Bashan, and
Unicorns; so there are Lions, and Tigers, and Bears, and Wolves, and Dogs;
with such kind of beasts, this Forest is full too, which have most virulent
and poisonous teeth, and lay on their fangs where it pleases them, without all
respect either of place or person, or any kind of humane reference. And they
bite even to death and destruction: they will bite a man out of his fortunes,
out of his fame, out of his contentment: bite him out of his neighbors, out of
his servants, out of his children; there is no place where this dogs tooth is
not gressant and playing masteries.

As for the other, that be altogether for the heel to kick, Psalm. 32.9.
and spurn; the Prophet David says, Psalm. 32. Be not like the horse and Mule,
whose mouth must be held with bit and bridle, lest they fall upon thee: These
Cammels, these Horses and Mules, are as frequent, as the rest of the beasts of
the desert be: and they will insult and turn upon every body. There is no man
can escape them, but they will now and then give him a dash with the heel,
before he be aware of them.

And for those other that are in lurking holes, and murmr and grumble, and
like Serpents do but only hiss: our world is also replenished with them, like
fiery Serpents in the wilderness, that would creep upon a man's legs, before
he knew where he was: and on a sudden, sting him. Such kind of beasts, all
the Ministers of God must resolve to fight withal: and al Christian men. 2 Timothy 3.12.
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, (says the Apostle) must suffer
persecution: and they must be persecuted from such kind of beasts as these,
but he that is the God of men and Angels, he shall one day, either turn these
beasts into men, or else destroy them as beasts. In the mean time, our prayer
must be with David, Psalm, 3.7. Psalm. 3.7.
Lord, break the horns of the ungodly, strike the iaw bones of thine enemies,
break their teeth asunder, break the teeth of the ungodly, and send them
down their throat, that they may be able to do no more mischief. These, and
the like prayers, the Prophet has in the high spirit of revelation: whereby it
was assured him, that they would not be better. But we must pray unto God to
amend them: that it would please God to turn their faces again, and to make
him that is beastly, to remember humanity: and to come home again to himself,
and know the doctrine of the Gospel of Christ: and so settle himself in
Christian Charity and love, as Saint Paul teaches: and labor to be a member
of that body, and to keep within the compass of the Church; and no more to be
extravagant from the Commonwealth of Israel. That he may have the promise of
God here, and the performance of them in the life to come. Which the Lord grant
unto us, Amen.

FINIS.
1 COR. 15.32.33. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. Be not
deceived, evil words corrupt good manners.
IT was a true saying of Saint Augustine; August.
take away once the faith and assurance of the Resurrection, and take away all
the care of religion. Therefore this point being well proved, it brings in all
the rest: and if this point be left weak and naked, all the rest, of necessity
must shake and totter, as being imperfect. Therefore this holy vessel, this
blessed Apostle Saint Paul (whom Chrysostom calls the eye of truth, Chrysostom.
and the sun of the world, under Christ Jesus) he labors by all means (as
Tertullian says) with all the strength of the Holy Ghost (that is so much as
any man could be capable of) to make clear this point of our faith, the
certainty of the Resurrection: to lay this fundamental stone, this corner
stone, that the rest of the house and body of Religion may be built upon it.
And to the end he may do it, he leaves no stone unrolled: but takes an
argument from every thing: yea, even from his adversaries: from the Epicures;
from the common fashion of the blind world. The child of God gaynes every
where: and he mends and betters his wisdom, out of the folly of the evil
world.

Here now, the Apostle takes upon him the person of another man: and speaks as
the phanaticall and beastly people of this life would speak. Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall dye. A thing which we know the Apostle was far
from. But yet notwithstanding, he shows that it had some force of an argument
in it: if so be there were no Resurrection. For if a man must dye as a beast, I
see no reason why a man may not live so too: yea, and take his full contentment
in these things, as having no happiness after this life, because he has his
portion here. So Saint Chrysostom says well: Chrysostom.
The Apostle speaks here, as a man that were an actor in a Comedy, that puts
upon him the person of another man, the habit of another: where a beggarly
fellow, often times, comes forth in the habit of a Noble man: and contrariwise,
a Noble man or a King, in the habit of a hermit; and so they pass some
intelligible matter to the company, under those diverse representations. So the
Apostle here, after he had used arguments drawn from common sense and reason;
and from the inconvenience that might follow by admitting the contrary; Now
here he puts upon himself the person of an Epicure: and he proves out of that
(as being a strong argument) the certainty of the Resurrection. For (says he)
if this Epicurious life may be justly condemned, as the basest and most
brutish life in the world, so that their madness is hated of all men: It
follows then, that there is a hope of the godly, that they shall rise again
in their bodies; or else we would give way to their madness. For the madness
and fury of these men, has some wisdom and reason in it: except we set
down this point for certain, that there shall be a Resurrection. For what
should a man do, that has nothing to look for after this life, but take his
time while he is here? And so we, that know the Epicures to be a most
detestable sect; we make them sensible and reasonable; if we yield once to any
doubt of the Resurrection. They are now no more fools and mad men; but wise,
to take that opportunity which flies from us: which we deny our selves, and
care not for, and they enjoy. Namely, eating, and drinking; that is, all
carnal delights and satisfactions of nature, that may give content: which in
the mean time we want: so they have something, and we nothing: and if our
trust were only here, if our hope were only for this life, they were in
better case then we, a better sort of men then we. Therefore I would say as
they say, if there were no Resurrection, I would hold with their base and
damnable conclusion. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. But
because you know how brutish this is, that it is hissed out of all the
schools of common reason: you know that the Philosophers that saw nothing but
by the light of nature, they damned these vile and sensual positions.
Therefore I beseech you that are Christians, be not deceived in these things:
for evil words corrupt good manners; that is, when any motion tending to this
purpose, comes into your hearts; or when you hear it with your ears, from
other men, to deny the Resurrection, and to give assurance of happiness in the
things of this life; take heed, be not deceived; the Philosophers could not be
deceived by the Epicures; therefore much more should you that are Christians,
take heed: for he that denies the Resurrection, is an Epicure: there can be no
greater Epicure in the world, than he that denies the Resurrection, and there
is no man more beastly and filthy, than he that hopes for happiness here in
this life: such men are the very sinkes of sin, and the dregs of damnation.
This is the scope of the place.

To proceed in order.

First we are to consider the connection and joynting of these, with the words
before. Division into the Connection and the Argument.


Secondly, the argument which the Apostle propounds: which has two parts in it:

First, there is a poison.

Secondly, a counterpoyson: a remedy or antidote against this poison.

The poison is contained in these words; (for the best are feign to work with
poison sometimes, and the more infectious the disease is, the more poison they
use: now the Apostle to work this poison of theirs, into physic he brings a
counter poison.) The poison, I say, is in these words, Let us eat and drink,
for to morrow we shall dye.

The antidote, in these words; Be not deceived, evil words corrupt good
manners.

In the first, the pestilent heart he brings not in, in his own person, but in
the person of an Epicure: where we are to consider,

First, their profession, and then

The reason of their profession:

First, their profession is this; Let us eat and drink;

The reason that is alleged, is as beastly and as brutish as the other: for
we shall dye to morrow. Therefore let us eat and drink, to day; the
beastliest conclusion that can be in this world. For they that have but till to
morrow to live, had need to bethink themselves to day: and not to drink and
swill, and play the beast; which is a fearful corrupting of man's nature and
understanding.

Then for the Antidote, that the Apostle gives against it,

First he says by way of caution: be not deceived: he gives a general
caution, take heed, be not deceived and drawn away from the hope of heaven and
salvation, by the base charms of these Syrene songs, Be not deceived.

Secondly, he gives a demonstration, why they ought to beware and take heed:
For evil words, corrupt good manners: and it is a thing that we should
chiefly seek and take heed to, that our good manners be not corrupted. But
evil words corrupt good manners: there is no such gangrene, as evil words
are, to the good manners of men: therefore we ought to avoid and detest them:
for if they be evil words, they will corrupt good manners: these are evil
words, therefore we ought to take heed of them; so the Apostle argues in these
words: certainly, these are evil words: and evil words corrupt good manners;
and good manners, are the virginity of the soul: and we should keep that
inviolable. Therefore, for our life, we must strive to avoid these evil words,
as the language of the devil, and not of men. Be not deceived, evil words
corrupt good manners. These are the branches of the Text.

You must understand, that some of the Fathers read the Text otherwise: for
look on the words, and you shall see how the diverse poyntings, makes
diversity of lections; for whereas presently before the Text, the Apostle had
said, If the dead rise not again: some of the Fathers refer those words to
this part of the sentence now read: If the dead rise not again, let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. And indeed it may as well be referred
this way, as the other: for it is taken from the common tenent of the Chapter;
If there be no resurrection: which is still to be repeated upon every several
argument.

But our common reading is this, If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus after
the manner of men, what avails it, if the dead rise not? Now Chrysostom,
Chrysostom. Theophylact.
and Theophilact read it thus. If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what
does it profit me? and there they make a stop. If the dead rise not, let us
eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. But this, as you see, is not
greatly material, only I must note it for the honor of the Church of God: to
see the variety of that gift of interpretation: for (as I have often told you)
there is no gift more excellent in the Church, then the gift of proper
interpretation; to know the sense of the Scriptures, and to be able to deduce
it to the right parts; it is the greatest divinity that can be. Although the
common people understand nothing, but that which concerns manners, (that which
allureth them to good, and fears and affrights them from their sins) yet the
especial divinity is, in the matter of interpretation. But which way soever
we read it, either as a thing spoken with an high stomach, with an
indignation; Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye:

Or if we take it as a consequent; if there be no Resurrection, (as Saint
Chrysostom says,) Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall dye: the
Argument is still one and the same. But we follow the common exposition, which
all Translations follow: that the words are spoken from a high stomach, the
Apostle speaks in a holy impatience; What should I do fighting with beasts at
Ephesus after the manner of men, if there be no resurrection? If there were no
Resurrection, I would rather follow my cups as the Epicures; I would know the
things that belong to the pleasures of the world, I would make me friends of
all men; I would offend no man in matters of faith and profession: therefore it
is only the conscience to the doctrine of the faith of the Resurrection, that
binds me to resist all men, and to encounter with the beasts of the field; to
take whatsoever falls unto me by the providence of God, rather than to betray
this one point of my faith; (which is the chief of all) the Resurrection of
the body.

For the sentence that he brings in, in the person of the Epicure speaking; it
is taken out of Isa. 22.13. Isa. 22.13.
It was the voice of those obstinate and rebellious people the Jews, in the
time of that Prophet, says Isay, here is nothing but feasting instead of
fasting; killing of sheep, and slaying of Oxen. When they should have
considered the judgment of God upon their necks, they fell to pleasures: and
were so far from repenting and turning to God by contrition, that they
devised preparation for their bellies to satisfy their lusts: Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall dye. A base and detestable speech, which the
holy Ghost notes against those obstinate Jews: that when the Prophet would
bring them to a serious consideration of their miserable estate, then being
returned from Babylon, and that all was wasted round about them, and they had
nothing left but a poor ruined City: yet notwithstanding they would not be
won to God, but would fall still to their pleasures, and drown themselves in
the cups of excess, that so they might drink down their sorrow, as the
wicked wretches of the world do, that have no other comfort in misery and
affliction, but to drink and seek to be merry; to work out the crosses and
judgments of God, by some worldly jollity. Thus did Caius Marius: Plutarch
Plutarch.
says of him, that being a man of great affliction and misery in his latter
days, when he saw there was no way for him to escape the hands of Scilla, he
took the advantage of his absence, and gave himself to drinking, and
excessive courses, to forget his misery, and so indeed he shortened his days.
And it is wondrous and remarkable, that the Prophet says in that place, These
things (says he) are entered into the ears of the Lord of hoasts, and they are
most abominable in his sight, and whereas you say, Esaias 22.13.
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. As I live, says the Lord,
you shall dye indeed; the plague shall not be taken from you, till you be all
consumed, till you be all dead under the stroke of it.

It is the just judgment of God upon obstinate sinners, that resolve to make
merry when God calls to mourning: that kick against the prick, and strive
against the hand of the Almighty: that think to drown the memory of Gods
judgments in their cups at their tables. The Lord shall work the contrary
upon such a man; and he shall find that he has done himself no good by this:
but has brought upon himself his own just confusion. For so it befell these;
they dyed, indeed, and this plague was not removed from them, till they were
all consumed.

Prophet Isay lived almost 700. years before Saint Paul, and in his time there
was such a damned crew as this, that uttered this speech against heaven,
against reason, against the hand of God, and against their own consciences.
Afterward, when Saint Paul came into the stage of this world, he finds a
company of wicked men, just like the former. By this we see, that the world is
ever drowned in iniquity, it is always like it self in evil, till the hand of
God renew, reform, and regenerate our spirits; it is impossible but that flesh
should speak of flesh, and should savor the things of the world, and not the
things of God, that it may be carried with a full swing after its own
impieties, grow worse and worse, and never leave sinning, till at last it sink
in sin, and the pit close her mouth upon it.

Let us therefore be wary, in following the tract of our forefathers. If they
were naught, we have no reason to insist in their steps: except it be in good,
except it be according to the ways of God, according to the holy paths of the
Almighty. For it follows not, that because sin has been predominant in all
ages, that therefore we should use it now. It follows not, that because women
have prancked themselves in pride, and made themselves the Idols of the world;
that therefore the daughters of Sarah should do it now. It follows not, that
because drunkenness has been a common vice heretofore, that therefore men
should hunt and follow after it now. We have no reason to follow our ancients
in ill customs: except we will choose to perish in those ill customs.
Therefore the Apostle brings an ancient stale sin, and uses the same
sentence: Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye.

To eat and drink, are the most essential necessaries of our nature, the
supporters of our being: and there is no life, but the Lord has appointed it
to be sustained by these two proppes, Eating and Drinking. Eating, to supply
the dryer and more sollid part of the body: and drinking, to moysten, to be a
coach and conveyance for the meat that we eat: to be a cooling and
refrigeration of the heat of the body. And in both of them, God has set his
blessing: that by eating and drinking, the life of man should be preserved and
prolonged: in some to forty, in some to fifty, in some, longer by many years,
by the blessing of the Almighty. Therefore, to eat and drink, so far as to
recreate the body, to refresh the spirits, to strengthen us in our functions
and callings; to encourage us to give thanks to God, who is our feeder: eating
and drinking be as necessary as living. But the eating and drinking here
intended and spoken of, Let us eat to surfeiting, let us drink to
drunkenness; let us eat and drink to excess: to study these things only
for satiety and gurmandizing, and that fullness that may confound nature, and
drown the spirits of men, and not build them up in the fear of God, and in
thankfulness to him: this is that they mean here; Let us eat so, as that we
may over-eate; let us drink so, as that we may drown our understandings in
drink. When men cannot tell how to use the gifts of God moderately, they
cannot eat as other men eat, but as monsters: they cannot drink as moderate
men drink, but as spunges that devour all within their compass: that their
bodies, many times, are so full of ballast; that the whole ship is lost even in
the harbor: it is not able to hold all the water, but sinkes under the burden,
and is made a spectacle of misery to God, to Angels, and to men, to insult over.

This brutish eating and drinking, savours of bestiality. Eating and drinking,
it is the mere felicity of the beast in this world. As Cornelius Tacitus says
well: some men are like beasts, and go no further; if you give them a little
fodder, they will lie slumbering, and be idle, and take no further care: such
are those people, Psalm. 17.14. Tertul.
whose belly God fills with his hid treasure: those whose belly is their God, as
Tertullian rightly describes them.

Their stomach is their Altar.

Their belly is their God.

Their Priest is their Cook.

Their holy Ghost is the smell of their meat.

Their graces of the spirit, are their sauces.

Their Kitchen, is their Church and Temple.

And that Aculiculus (the most filthy part of all the body) is their great and
admired Idol. As the same Father goes on. Thou say thou have faith, hope,
and charity.

Thy faith is boiling in the kitchen.

Thy charity is in thy Caldron or pot.

Thy hope is in those diverse dishes brought to thy table. Thus Tertullian has
described the condition of these kind of brutish men. And we see that in
ancient times, (before men had the knowledge of Almighty God) they placed a
great happiness in this one point, of eating and drinking, to make themselves
bruit beasts without understanding, as Saint Peter calls them, 2 Pet. 2.12. 2
Pet. 2.12.
unreasonable brutish beasts. Insomuch, as one great King among them, when he
dyed, commanded this Epitaph to be set upon his tomb: This I have, that I have
eaten and drunken: all the rest is lost: that I have; all the rest, is left and
forsaken: Tully. Aristotle.
which as Tully says well out of Aristotle, what other thing then this, could
have been set upon the tomb of an Ox or bruit beast: to say I have nothing
else, but that I have eaten, but that I have consumed and driven into my
paunch, and so into the draught, that I have, and no possession else? But
Christians have another language: those things we have, that we have learned
out of Gods word; the wisdom that we have gotten of heaven, and heavenly
things: these things we have left us, when our life leaves us: and nothing
remains, but the portion of these.

Those that have read any thing of the Poets, they know what was the common
language of seduced nature. When God left them to their own dregs,
(miserable poor creatures) they had no further aims and intents, then these
transitory and perishing things, the filling of their bellies: whose belly is
their God, whose end is damnation; as the Apostle says, Phil. 3.18. Phil. 3.18.
Whose glory is their shame, and such was the glory of all the heathen.

Another of them said, Eat, drink, and play: for after death there is no
pleasure, Ede, bibe, lude, post m^rtem nulla voluptas. Horac^.
there is nothing remains. Another comes in with his vye; and says, The Sun,
indeed, may rise and set, and rise again; but when our night comes once, (the
night of death) we sleep for ever: and there we lie, and there is no more to
be heard of us.

Another of them says, We must ease our youth, and take the benefit of it, as
a flower: because it runs away with a swift foot.

And another says, use thy pleasures now; for thou know not whether ever
they will come again: thou know not whether ever after, thou shall have
opportunity to enjoy them. Thus this beastly congregation of brutish swinish
people, they apprehended with the greatest industry that could be, these vile
pleasures of eating and drinking: as though there were a necessity of pleasures
in this life; and that the greatest pleasure consisted in the palate, in
consuming of meat and drink. According as this wicked crew which the Apostle
speaks of here, said, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye.

There is no wise man would ever give himself to this most bestiall fashion,
were it but for the ill consequents of it: for to say the truth, there is
nothing makes a man less like a man, then to be a great drinker; especially to
be a great eater: such being the very monsters of mankind. Nature is content
with little; and those that exceed that measure, are hated, and ridiculous to
all men. To see, what mischief it brings to the body, to this little frame of
the world!

To see, what intolerable damage accrewes by it to the understandings of men!

What gross heaviness it brings upon the body!

How it takes away all nimblenesse and agility!

How it takes away all the powers of the spirits!

How it confounds the memory!

How it drownes every part of reasonable discourse!

How it makes a man a swadde, and deformes that proportion and comely figure
that God has imposed upon him! Every man knows these things, by common and
woeful experience: and yet these wretches cry out, Let us eat and drink: As
if they should have said,

Let us become fools:

Let us make our selves mad:

Let us drown our understandings:

Let us disfigure our selves, that men may not know us to be men: for nothing
makes a man less discerned to be that which once he was, then excessive eating
and drinking.

Let us so eat and drink, therefore, that we may eat and drink in heaven;
let us not so set our selves upon our bellies, as to become sons of Belial.
Let us take our bread here, as an earnest of that bread we shall have in
heaven. Let us sit at our tables so here, as a representation of the 12.
Tables, on which the 12 Apostles shall judge the 12 Tribes of Israel. Luke
22.30.
Christ says, They shall sit upon 12 Tables, and eat and drink with him in
the Kingdom of God. It should teach us to eat and drink these temporal
things, with conscience, with remembrance, with prefiguration, and
signification of those eternal meats and drinks, which we shall have in the
kingdom of heaven, by the mercy God. For although it is true, we shall not
eat and drink there; yet because this life consists in eating and drinking;
the holy Ghost has set us down the model of the life to come, with such
joys and delights, as may be compared, nay, which far transcend eating and
drinking; but can by no means better be expressed to us, than by these of
eating and drinking. For to eat and to drink, and to reign, and to rejoice,
and to dance and sing; there are no such things in heaven: but we cannot
understand the joy in heaven, while we are here upon earth; except it be set
forth to us by these foyles. Therefore the Lord condescends to our capacity,
and tells us of eating and drinking in heaven. Let us therefore, eat so here, as
that we may maintain a hope of heaven: Let not our tables be made a snare
here: Romans 11.9.
that which God has appointed for our sustentation, let it not turn to our
confusion. God has not appointed meat and drink to overthrow us, but to
refresh us: to make us fitter for his service, and more able to the works of
our calling: let us therefore disclaim and abhor this brutish acclamation
which these wicked wretches make, that have no portion but their belly; that
are altogether for the gut; and let us repute them among the basest of beasts:
but let us so eat, as those that shall receive eternal food in the kingdom
of God. So much for the first point, the poison propounded.

Now we are to see the cause that these men allege for themselves, 2 Point.
Reason alledg^d. To morrow we shall dye.
why they should eat and drink. For the wretched understanding of men is so
depraved and corrupted by the judgment of God, that they will drink poison
upon reason: these Epicures allege reason for their brutish course: and their
reason is, because To morrow we shall dye.

This was a close mockery; for when Isay told them in his time, they should dye
by the judgment of God for their wickedness: they mocked God in the Prophet.
As if they should say, he tells us we shall dye, he still threatens judgment,
and we know not how soon we may be taken out of this world: therefore as long
as we live, let us have a time of it; and while we live, let us live: since our
time is short, let us take the benefit of that time we have: and so make it our
happiness.

See the wondrous stroke of Gods hand, in blinding the understanding of man! We
are subject ( God knows) to the whole hand of God: and sin works shame and
confusion every where. But there is no plague like this, when a man's brain is
smitten; when his understanding is disturbed; when he draws false and base
conclusions out of Idle and foolish premises: then comes the wrack and ruin
of the poor creature. There is nothing so wretched and miserable in the world,
as a mad man. And in the body of Christianity, there are none so mad, as those
men that argue after a contrary manner; which upon strange premises, bring in
unnatural conclusions. For, I beseech you, consider; does it follow, because
to morrow we shall dye, that therefore we should feast and ioviall it out to
day? nay clean contrary. It follows, rather, thou should throw thy self
down in spirit, and humble thy soul with fasting and prayer: and in all the
parts of humiliation to God, to crave pardon for thy sins; and so to prepare
thee a way to everlasting glory. How can thy meat be digested, when thou must
dye to morrow? what man is so stout hearted, that if he knew he should dye to
morrow, would feast to day? can such a man swallow down his morsels with
pleasure? can he put over his drink with delight? can he have any taste or
relish in these things, that is destinated a dying man? It is a wretched and
divellish conclusion. And yet God gives over the wicked and wretched world, to
draw poysonful senses, and wicked conclusions, out of clean contrary premyses.
What is that thou say (says Saint Austine) To morrow we shall dye, let us
eat and drink? says he, thou have terrified me, indeed, but thou have not
deceived me. Thou have terrified me, because thou say to morrow I shall dye:
and perhaps so I may. The frailty of my nature is such, that I may dye to night
before to morrow. Yet thou have not deceived me: for if I shall dye to morrow
(as thou say) I will fast to day certainly: Augustine.
so Saint Austine concludes: and so would all reason conclude, even a natural
man: for as Plutarch Plutarch.
says, there is no man, that if the Emperor should send him word that he
should prepare himself; and that after three days he should dye: there is no
man would be so brutish, as to spend that time with Whores, or in Tavernes and
Alehouses, and places of pleasure: but rather betake himself to his study and
private meditations; to sorrow and anguish: he would spend his time so, as
might savor something of a Philosopher.

This the children of God have ever done. When Hezekias was told by the
Prophet, 2 King 20.1.
Set thy house in order, for thou shall dye, we see what was his course: He
turned his face to the wall, and wept, and prayed to God: and desired him to
remember the faithfulness of his heart: he poures out his soul before the
Lord. Here is the true disposition of a gracious man.

It is also the act of a reasonable man: for reason teaches men this, although
they be not illuminated, nor have grace from above.

But then, you will say, how follows the argument of the Apostle, where he
says, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye? Be not deceived, etc.

The reason follows, thus: because these men to whom the Apostle speaks, had
a certain knowledge of the Resurrection: they knew there was a better life:
and although the Philosopher knew it not, yet he knew that there was a greater
means to make men at peace with God; by a moderate life, rather than by an
excessive course: and yet the Apostles argument is true. For suppose there were
no Resurrection, for the good or for the bad, but that all should dye in a
brutish manner as the beasts do: then it were true, this would follow, Let us
eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. That is, let us have some thing in
this life, before we go, for we shall have nothing after: let us take the
pleasures and benefits of this life, while it lasts.

The last thing to be noted out of this point, is this, that it has been
always a received and common tenent of the world, that all men must dye. And
though this rabblement were brutish and damnable in uttering these speeches to
make so bad a use of the shortness of their life (which they should have
employed to better purposes, and have redeemed the time, death so fast coming
on) yet this bruit company were better than another generation that are in the
world, who persuade themselves, that they are immortal. There are a sort of
wicked men, whose horns are grown great; the mighty pushers of the world,
that imagine they shall never dye: and upon confidence that they are immortal,
they will do what they list in the world: not by eating and drinking (for they
might be tolerated in these things) but they take away the meat and drink
from the poor children of God: they take away their means and their
liberties, take away their good name; yea, they take away their lives: and all
upon a confidence of remaining here for ever; that no death, nor no change can
assail them. These are the great Giants of the world, that trouble us far
worse than the Epicures do, even our mighty neighbors, our bloody malicious
adversaries; our greedy enemies: who will show the latitude of their power, in
avenging themselves: that by their sinful doings and wicked practices, fill
the world with clamours, with indignation and blasphemy, and make men doubt
whether there be a God or no in the world. These are they, that upon pretense
of immortality, that they shall never be shaken; they confound all things,
Churches, Temples, Widows houses; whatsoever comes within their fangs, they
lay hold on, and greedily apprehend it, to the overthrow of the condition of
Gods people in the world, and only live by the blood of other men. These are
they that build their houses in sacrilege; Amos 2.6.
that sell the poor for old shoes; these are they that grind the faces of
Gods people: Esaias 3.15.
that join house to house, and land to land; and like unsatiable beasts are
still feeding on the blood. Esaias 5.8.
It were well if they would only say, Let us eat and drink: but they must
eat and drink the blood of Gods people, and feed upon the living Temples of
the holy Ghost. A strange and woeful thing! yet thus do al our gripple
miscreant Usurers, our great biting Extortioners: that in stead of doing
justice in their place, think that God has set them up, that they might pull
all men down, and tread upon their necks: and that they might make their
advantage of the havocke of the Church of God. These are worse than the company
here mentioned: for they do nothing but eat and drink, and are harmless in
comparison of these beasts of the forest, that destroy all that is before
them: and the steps of their feet must be upon the necks of Gods people: this
plague the Church is worse troubled with, then with the Epicures themselves.

I should now come to the Antidote which the Apostle gives: (but the time is
upon expiration) Be not deceived; and afterward to the speech the Apostle
cites out of the Poet, for the proof of his exhortation: Evil words corrupt
good manners.

Be not deceived. As if he should have said, The Antidote.
although their words are fair and plausible to flesh and blood, yet they will
merely deceive you: and there is no man that by his will would be deceived.
There is nothing that grieves a man more, than to see himself deceived, though
it be but in a trifle; if it be but in a Iigg or common Iergan; if it be but in
one of his riddles, or doubtful speeches: a man thinks himself greatly
disparaged, if he find himself deceived. But especially if it be in a matter
of moment; if it concern him much, then it grieves and vexes him extremely:
that either his wits should not serve him to find out the fallacy, or that by
his foolishness and too much credulity, he should give himself to be made a
prey to his enemies and adversaries to catch him. There is nothing that a wise
man delights in more, than to apprehend the truth: and there is nothing for
which he is more sorry, than to be deluded with lies and error. For as truth
is the light of the soul, so error is the death of the soul: the depravation
of all sense and understanding. It is a damnable mere nothing: Error being
taken from a word that signifies going out of the way. As we know a traveller
that goes a long way that he knows not, there is nothing more troublesome to
him, than when he finds himself out of his way; and to go back again, and
recover his former tract; it may be it is neither easy nor possible; and to go
forward, the further he goes, the grosser errors he runs into. Much more
(beloved) is it in point of religion. To err in humane things, it is a smaller
matter, and is soon corrected: but to err in divine matters, that concern
the souls health; it is a fearful by-sliding, a woeful outwaying: it brings a
man to downefals, and to precipices of soul and body both together. It draws
the ruin of the whole man after it. Therefore, says the Apostle, Be not
deceived; go not out of the way; but such words as these, drive you out of the
way, they tell you lies, they lead you into the broad way, and you must seek
the narrow way: for although the broad way have better passage at the first,
yet there is nothing but brambles and downefals at the conclusion. The ways
that God has chalked out to us in his word, and by common sense and reason;
from these we must not err: because we know not whether ever God will give us
that mercy, to call us into them again, or no.

So let me say to you, as the Apostle says here: Be not deceived. Look to
your judgments, look to your affections; they are always ready to deceive:
they are always ministering matter of error and seduction: they are mere
seducers: he that guides without God, he is no guide but a misguider: and he
that leads without God, he is no leader, but a misleader.

Take heed what thou think, lest thy thoughts deceive thee; take heed what
thou speak, lest thy words entangle thee: take heed what thou do, lest
thy bad practice and evil conditions, at the last bring thee into by-ways and
pitfals of destruction; that thou can make no deliverance of thine own soul.

And then, again, the Apostle would teach us this: that these very necessary
things, give us occasion of much error. Who would think that a man should
err in these? these are the plainest ways that any man can take. For what way
can a man take to save his life, but by eating and drinking in convenient time
and season? And yet there is error in these things too. Now then, God be
merciful to us for all the rest: if such gross errors be incident to the
necessaries of our life, what shall we say to the superfluities of it? if our
meat and drink be snares and pitfals, to drive us out of the way of life
eternal; what is our money? what is our malice? what is our quarrelling? what
our proud and haughty conceits against other men? what are all our
superfluities, that we give our selves to in this life, but mere hels and
distractions, and professions of our own damnation? We are subject to err in
things necessary; for what so necessary as eating and drinking? and if we err
in these things necessary, much more in our superfluities; much more in our
garish apparel; in our haughty countenance; in our ambitious carriage of our
selves in the world; in hunting after preferments and honors; we may ruinate
and break our necks for ever there: for these are superfluities. It is not
needful to go garishly, it is not needful to have haughty supercilious
looks above our brethren: behold, we may be damned in things necessary, much
more in our superfluities.

Therefore, be not deceived. There is error in the very meat and drink we
take, Romans 11.9.
as the Apostle says, Let their table be made a snare. If our table be made a
snare, what are the rest of our affairs? what are our shops, what are our
great bags put to usury? what is our bribing and feeing? what is our lawing
with our brethren? what is our slandering and seeking the states and lives of
others? what gins are these? If our table be a snare, what are these riches of
mammon? the professed weapons of the devil, flagges of defiance to all
charity: these are snares indeed: a man that walks in these, he goes in the
midst of snares, so the Prophet Hosea says, Ye walk in the midst of
snares: that is, they still entangle others and themselves. For there is no man
that can slander his brother, but first he indangereth his own soul to the
devil. There is no man that persecutes his brother, but first he himself is
rejected of God. So he thinks he is only a snare to other men; and yet he is
entangled in his own devices: God makes that net which he has devised, to
ensnare himself in: even that net he set to entrap others.

We see what a care we should have of these mean things; meat and drink:
there is great matter of error in them, we may be deceived by them, and so led
in by-ways, that we never come again into the way of salvation.

Now it remains, to come to the proof and demonstration of this, which the
Apostle brings out of a Poet: for the words following are the verse of a Poet.
The Apostle is so far from being ashamed to name a Poet, as that he does it
three or four times in his writings: to teach, us that there is use of humane
secular learning, in matters of divinity. But this I must refer to the next
time.

FINIS.
1 COR. 15.33. Be not ye deceived, evil words corrupt good manners.
THese words are a counter-poyson against the former suggestion, pretended in
the person of an Epicure, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye.
Those words are full of infection: and therefore they are in a figure brought
in by Saint Paul, as serving his turn: to prove, that if there were no
Resurrection of the body, then he accounts the Epicures good and sensible men,
to take their time While they might have it. For he that looks for no portion
after this life, there is no reason but he should take it some where: and
therefore he must have it in this life. But, now, because all men abhor the
doctrine of the Epicures, that the prime and chief good should be in
pleasures, (in eating and drinking) therefore the Apostle puts it in, only by
way of scorn. Yet showing, that the Corinthians were more senseless than
those Epicures; because it is to no purpose for a man to abdicate himself from
the pleasures of the world, if there be no hope of a Resurrection. But because
it might be offensive to Christian ears, to bring in that poisonous speech of
the Epicures, he now qualifies it, and gives an antidote against it, in these
words: Be not deceived, evil words corrupt good manners.

And every man should have a special care of his manners, they being the glory
of a man. And these words that are spoken in disgrace of the Resurrection, by
drawing men to enjoy the pleasures of this present life, as though there were
no life after this: all words that tend to this purpose, are venomous speeches,
infectious language, and corrupt the faith of men, corrupt the hope, and
corrupt the whole life of a man. For none are of a more corrupt life, then
those that think there is no life after this: and thereupon, give themselves
liberty, and let loose the reins to all kind of impiety, lasciviousness and
looseness: even because they have no hope in God, concerning those things that
are reposed for the righteous, in Jesus Christ.

So that here is first to be considered, Division into the Apostles purpose,
and his reason.
the Apostles Purpose: that he would not have us be seduced. Be not deceived,
that is, we must use all means to keep us from the contagion and infection of
these kind of discourses.

And then he gives a reason out of the Poet Menander. For, says he, all these
speeches are evil words: and all evil words corrupt good manners: they take
away the purity of life; whereby humane society is maintained. Wherein we are
to consider,

First, how it is that he cites the verse of a Poet, a profane heathen man?
To signify the lawfulness of that, when time and occasion require.

Secondly, what is the matter and substance of that verse. Wherein he puts two
great adversaries and Antagonists together: Good manners, and
Evil words.


And he shows that there is a certain action passes between them: and the
one gets the victory, and is prevalent over the other. For although good
manners be extremely contrary to evil words; yet by reason that we are borne
weak, by reason that we are borne in sin, and in natural uncleanenesse and
corruption: it comes to pass, therefore, that evil words applying themselves
to that evil leaven that is in us; they bring in this monstrous effect of
Corruption: then the which, there cannot be a greater deficiencie. For
corruption is the destruction of the state of the creature. And herein we are
to consider,

1 What are manners: and what are good manners.

2 What is conference: and what is bad conference.

3 What is corruption: and how it is rooted, and wrought upon good manners, and
how good manners should be carefully maintained. To speak of these in order:
as God shall give assistance.

1 Part. The Purpose.
First we are to note the Purpose of the Apostle here: which Saint Austin,
against the Donatists, was feign to make a large exposition of. For they
thought where the Apostle says, Be not deceived, be not seduced, that he
meant, get you from your Country, get you from your City, and run into some
other Country; for among them you shall be deceived: have no conversation with
them therefore. And by this means, they brought in that fantastical novell of
the world, That every Church thought it self the only Church, and every
nation, thought it self better than another nation: and every man, thought
himself better than his fellow. The most luciferous pride that can be
imagined, for if that once be suffered, there can be no charity; there can be
no kind of conversing one with another: nor there can be no form nor face of
the Church of God, being nothing but a mere body, of a schismatic company:
being nothing but a lump of sand, which the wind drives to and fro: whereas
the Church should be as a rock, or as the solid earth: which is not easily
dissolved. It must be a great storm, a great earthquake, that must break off
a piece of a rock; or that can scatter the earth, that is fast knit and
compacted together. Aug.
Saint Austin therefore, to take from them this weapon wherein they gloried; he
tells them the sense of the Apostle: that his meaning is not, that they should
make an outward separation, but a spiritual. He does not cease (says he) to
bid you separate in a spiritual manner: for he bids you to take heed, that
your minds be not wrought upon by these kind of witchcrafts: to believe, and
to give consent unto the things that they speak. For the Apostle fears not
your living together, in one City, or in one house; but he fears your
consent: therefore he says he would have you separate in your spirits: that
is, to take heed that you be not deceived; that you do not misbeleeve: for
those that believed the Resurrection, and those that did not believe it, they
were two great factions in Corinth; and the Apostle would have them separate:
not in place, but in manners.

Evil words corrupt good manners. And you should labor to keep the manners
of your holy faith, (which is the Queen of manners) keep that unspotted.
Therefore the Apostles meaning is, that men should separate themselves in
manners, one from another: not in changing and altering their houses or their
Cities; but not to consent to a sinner, to do as he does: nor consent to an
heretic; to think as he thinks: not to consent to any man, that is
mistaken; Augustine.
to be erroneous, as he is; so Saint Austin truly expounds the Text.

How be it Bernard Bernard.
writing to certain Ladies and Virgins, that were Nuns; says he, it is true,
if you lived in the open plain places of the world, you ought not to leave
your Country, for the contagion of the company of wicked men, but because God
has provided for you Cells, and Nunneries, and Monasteries, to live alone;
therefore I wish you to make use of them, for they are best secured, that are
within the walls: secluded from the sinful schismatic company of the world.
Upon the authority of these Fathers, therefore, we ground this sense of the
Text. The Apostle wishes, that whatsoever suspicion there may be of opinions,
and doctrines in the world, (either already prevalent, or else likely to
prevail) to hold our selves upon our tenants assured us out of the Word: and
not to suffer our selves to be carried out of the right way, either to the
right hand or to the left. For the word is taken here, from the error of a man
in his way. Go not out of the way; be not deceived; you know what the way of
God is, and therefore woe be to you, if you follow your own ways: much more,
if you follow the devils ways; by-waies of error, that lead to nothing but
destruction. There is no man that would err by his good will: it is a great
deal of lost labor; a great deal of trouble, and a great deal of danger: a
man must either come back again, which he cannot do without much sorrow and
grief, or else he must go forward, and thrust himself into further danger.
As those that use to travel, know: a man were better creep in the right way,
than to gallop in a by-way, out of the way. So it is here, in the way of
manners. It is a way of the fairest tract, and the best beaten, of al others;
and the walking in it, is of greatest consequence: for either it ends in joy
and happiness, and contentment, to him that prosecutes it, and holds on in it;
or to him that lagges in it, eternal desertion, and forsaking of God.

To teach us to walk in this way, period and end of it: which is the salvation
of our souls, for that is the maine intention of this way. Therefore, as there
is a way, so there is a quo and ad quem, to be considered: and the ad quem that
is set forth unto us, in the word of the Almighty God; it is the happy end of
our blessed travel, when we shall attain the promises; and come from
travelers, to be comprehenders. Therefore, as the way of manners is the most
considerable, and the best-way; so it stands us upon, to have care of that way,
above all others; that we be not overtaken with errors and gross mistakings,
or if so it come to pass (as men are men, and so they must needs err;) there
is none free from error, but God;) it falls out, many ways, that men (now and
then are) driven out of their way, by contrary probabilities of by-waies, which
sometimes seem fayrer than the right way) then the next way is to make their
error short; by coming again into the right way: for he that is out of his
way, the further he goes, the more fool he shows himself: and if he come
quickly into the way again, he loses the less time, and the less labor.
All errors, and foolish actions, the less time they continue, the more
honorable they are: but when they are protracted and drawn long, then they
grow to be a second nature, and come to the height of wickedness. As the Poet
says, Salvation it self, cannot save that family, that throws it self into
downefals and precipices. Therefore err not, or if you do (as you are but
men) come back presently. I call you back now, you are in an error, you
doubt of the Resurrection. This is a gross error, therefore take heed of it,
and come out of it as soon as you can: recover the loss, and the distance of
your way, and enter into the way that I set you: and I assure you at the last,
you shall come to life everlasting, which is the end of all our travel.

Now then the Apostle would teach us further, that we are apt to err in the
lawful pleasures of this life: we wander much by eating and drinking. But
there are diverse things wherein men wander worse, than in eating and drinking.
For eating and drinking, be the necessities of nature: and though there be a
great many occasions of error and stumbling in them, to those whose table is
made a snare to them: yet there are diverse other things, that are far worse
than these. As for example, in the profession of merchandise: when men have no
conscience to wrong men of their substance, of their lands, of their livings,
upon certain tricks and devices. If our table cause us to err, if our meat
and drink cause us to go out of the way: what does our buying and selling
then? what does our suits in law? what do all these slanderous base creatures,
that get their living only by doing mischief? what are those idle courses,
whereby men wrong and injure one another: and that by a profession? what do
those bloody and vile actions of men, that set themselves to such a height of
revenge, that they are not satisfied, till they have the very life of their
brethren? These things are far worse than eating and drinking, when men can
never satisfy their malice, nor suffer the devil to tumble them far enough
into these mischiefs, when they will still be eating and drinking; but it must
be the life and blood of the children of God. These men err more grossly and
damnably, then the other, by this vile and canniball behavior.

Therefore we ought to suspect these things, and call to God for mercy: a man
can hardly trade in these things, but he shall be erroneous; yea, and a far
greater wanderer, than any drunkard or Epicure. A man cannot set himself to
do mischief, to the life of another; to undermine another man's estate: but he
shall be a far more exorbitant sinner, than any that upon natural pleasures
and delights, forget them selves. So much for the first part.

I come now to the sentence it self.

Evil words corrupt good manners. Therefore take heed, 2 Part. The Reason.
be not deceived with those evil words. This verse is a saying of a Poet: a
man that knew not God, nor had any glimpse of the Gospel of God, or of Christ.
An ancient Poet, that lived about 300. years before Paul, and as Euripides
after him, so this before him was famous in those Comedies and Stages: as being
the father of good manners. Those Grecians having no better. Indeed, he is full
of rich sentences, touching the life and manners, and conversations of men.
Among which, the Apostle makes choice of this one: which is in Menander,
diverse times. As, in the Comedy called Thais: and again he has it in his
Bucolicks, says he; By conversing with evil men, thou thy self at length
shall evade and come forth, as evil as they. Euripides Euripides.
also, is full of these divine sentences. We see the Apostle scorns not their
sayings: but brings them into the garden of God, and makes a kind of flower of
them there, plants them there, as we see he does also, in diverse other places,
Acts 17.28.
Acts 17. when he would speak to the Philosophers in their own kind, he tells
them those things that they worshipped as Gods, they were no Gods, but made
with men's hands, stocks and stones that have no efficient power in them. For
(says he) We are the workmanship of God, and so he quoteth the hemystike of
the Poet Aratus: Aratus.
We are his generation; and in Titus, he quoteth Epimenides; Epimenides.
the Poet of Creete or Candie: whereof the Apostle wrote, One of their own
Prophets: he calls the Poet a Prophet: because as Saint Jerome Saint Jerome.
says, such kind of people as the Cretians were, they deserved such Prophets
as those scorners and mockers: that speak of drunkenness, and for
drunkenness, as the Prophet Hosea says: Now he says, the testimony of that
Poet was true: and he quotes it, The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts,
Tit. 1.12.
slow bellies, Tit. 1. These three the holy Apostle Saint Paul quoteth, which
were profane heathen men, all of them.

To note unto us, that all truth comes of God: and we ought not to despise the
truth, wheresoever it is spoken. For we see our Lord Jesus himself, he
dignifies Socrates and Plato with two sentences. Socrates. Plato. Math. 7.12.
For where our Lord says, That which you would have others do to you, do ye
so to them; and that which you would not have others do to you, do not to
them: This is the Law and the Prophets. This golden sentence, is the sentence
of Socrates, mentioned by Plato, which notwithstanding, our Savior Christ
honors with his own mouth: and makes the sentence his own. To show unto
the world, that all truth is from him, as he calls himself, The way, the truth,
and the life. John 14.6.
And then that other saying, where Christ says, Luke 4.23.
You will say unto me this Proverb, Physician heal thy self, which is taken
out of Plato: Plato.
being an ancient vulgar thing, as this was that Paul here cites.

So that we must not yield to the opinion of those men, 1 The lawfulness of
using humane learning in divinity.
that think there is nothing to be uttered in Sermons, but Scripture. This
has been a great means to bring in idleness, negligence, and ignorance into
the Church of God. Such simple people, understand not what perfection God
requires to be in him that is truly called a man of God; he must be like
Moses. Acts 7.22.
It is said That Moses was taught in all the learning of the Egyptians. And so
Saint Paul wishes, that the man of God may be perfect: that he may be made up
as a full and perfect number in Arithmetique, that he may be fitted to every
good work; which he cannot be, except he can speak to a Poet, after the
manner of a Poet; and to a Philosopher, in the language of a Philosopher,
unless he can acco^modate himself to the party with whom he deals, it is
impossible he should be a fit and complete man in the service of God. Now the
Apostle shows us a rule here; that those things that are vulgarly known, and
of common use; they make a better and deeper impression in the minds of men.
Therefore they are most of all to be translated, and exhibited in speeches and
Sermons to the people of God.

The reason is, (as I said before) because all truth is from God: whatsoever
these heathen men had, it was a glimmering from God.

Romans 2.15.
And also because the Apostle tells us, Romans 2. That the Heathens had the Law of
God written in their hearts, their thoughts either accusing or excusing them:
so that it follows then, we cannot reject or cast off their sayings, because
they stand as matters of greater condemnation, or matters of greater
persuasion, then other speeches: for mark how our Lord Christ concludes, out
of the heathen: Woe be to thee Chorazin, Matthew. 11.21.
and woe be to thee Bethsaida: for if those works which thou have seen, had
been done in Tire and Sydon, they had repented long ago. Behold how he argues
from the heathens: so by the heathens actions, we shall have greater
condemnation; then by those presidents we have in our own Schools: for if the
heathens do thus, it is a double shame for Christians, not to attain their
perfection.

So when our Lord says to Jerusalem, that if the mighty works that he had
done in her, had been done in Sodom and Gomorrah, they had repented long ago
in sackcloth and ashes. He confutes Jerusalem, by a strong and mighty argument
taken from the heathen. Therefore the deeds and sayings of the heathen, are
also to be noted, and remembered of us: because they contain much matter of
profit, to set forth the truth and glory of Gods word by. As Saint Basile
Basile.
says in his Oration to the young man Procelius. There is (says he) great
matter of good, that lies in the writings of the Poets and Philosophers: and
every man cannot gather all the good. As we see by experience, when a man crops
a flower from the earth, he can get nothing out of it, but the sweetness of
the smell, or the delightfulness of the color: but when the diligent Be
comes, he will make more of it: he will extract honey, which is as it were the
very spittle of the stars. So when simple carnal minded men, read the
Poets, and the Philosophers, they gather nothing but delight and pleasure: but
when the diligent Be comes, a wise man, a serious considerate man, he draws
honey out of them. As Gregory Nazianzen says, Greg. Naz.
speaking concerning the same argument; says he: As a man that comes into a
garden of Roses, into a Rose-yard, he sees goodly Roses, and goes to pluck a
Rose, but in the mean time he labors to shun the prickle: so in reading of
Poets and Philosophers, we should pluck the rose, but shun the thorn or
prickle; always take the best, and leave that which is harmefull. For there is a
mixture of these: as the rose grows in the midst of thorns; so the doctrine
of the Poets is mixed with barbarism, superstition, and corruption.

Let us separate the dross from the gold; refuse the one, and take the other.
To conclude this point; because I know every man does not apprehend it well. It
is true indeed, there is a great disorder in the quotation of humane learning
in Sermons, in quoting of Poetry, and Philosophy: and has been always.
Therefore, I do not in all points confirm it, only that it may be it is
certain, and that it must be in the Church, because arguments drawn from the
heathen, are used by Christ and all his Apostles, yet there must be some
cautions used in it.

Cautions for use of humane Learning, in Sermons.
First, they must be few, not many: for it is a most heterogeneal thing, for a
man in preaching a whole hour, to speak nothing but humane learning: for
Philosopher, an Orator, or to be a Poet, but to convert and win souls.
Therefore his chief time, and the principal part of his speech, must be the
word of God, exhortations out of Scripture, and instructions to life and good
manners, so that too many of these are condemned.

clear and plain, and fair, and that are commonly known: such as every man
is acquainted with. As this, here, was a Proverb in every man's mouth: It was a
thing notorious, no man could doubt of it. Therefore they offend against this
rule, that fetch, and hook in they know not how, nor no man knows by what
medium, they bring in such sentences: but to continue and stuff up their
speeches, they bring in long and exorbitant sentences, and heap them up
together, for ostentation.

affectation, but such as come naturally, as we speak, by way of common
proverb; for proverbs make a great impression in men's minds; common
sentences, sententious utterances, are most powerful. So to conclude this
point.

It is necessary for the Preacher (as Musculus and Calvin, and diverse other
Writers conclude) to know a great deal more, then the Bible: to know more,
then the study of the principles of Religion: they must be such men, as that no
man may except against them for their ignorance and blindness: for they must
have a taste of all things, and be able to draw out of their treasury, those
things that concern the glory of the kingdom of God. And because the heathens
had a kind of overrunning (as when the Conduit is full, the water runs at
waste) so when Gods people were full of light, and knowledge, some went over to
the heathens, for they have read and heard of our books. Therefore truth,
(which is the pearl or Jewel of God, which is scattered) we ought to gather
it together again. It was lawful for the Israelitish women, to wear the
Jewels of the Egyptian women. It was lawful for the children of Israel to
possess the lands and goods, and Vineyards of the inhabitants of Canaan. So
let us take this Jewel of God, his truth, from these men that are unworthy to
possess it, (as pearls are often found in the basest and filthiest places)
let us take it and put it into Gods Iewell-house, where it has its proper and
natural consistence.

Now for the substance of the sentence: 2 The substance of the verse, and the
two Antagonists.
it is between two great Antagonists and adversaries, good manners, and evil
words: and which gets the victory over other; evil words corrupt good manners:
that is, they put them down, and so get the victory; that they have no place
or abiding any more in a man: so that it cannot be known where they were.

The word manners, First Antagonist Good manners.
although it be well understood, yet we may add something to give further
light to it. It signifies a certain habit in a man, that is acquired with
long labor and diligence, and exercise: by which a man has gotten it to
himself. For there is no man borne with good manners: but he is borne as a
beast, (as Aristotle Aristotle.
says) a little child is more harsh and untractable, than a beast: a man were
better keep and bring up a young Lion, he may do it with less labor, then to
bring up a child. For because God will punish sin in the first relics of
it; therefore to show the misery and deformity of it, he suffers in children,
the way of impatience and harshnesse: that it is the great and wondrous mercy
of God, that ever they should come to perfection; and that they should have
nurses to bear with them, to humor them, and follow them in all the ways of
their corruption. So that manners are not natural, unless it be brutish
manners: but those here spoken of, are not gotten but with a great deal of
diligence.

What a stir have we to over-master that filth and corruption that is in our
children! with stripes, with putting them to school; with exhortations; with
all the means in the world, and all too little, to beat out of them that
natural corruption, and that pestilent humor that is crept into them by
original traduction of sin. But now the Lord has given to the education of
parents, and to those of discretion by long custom; to be guardians and guides
to these little ones: that the rudeness of their nature, and the
barbarousnesse of their affections, might be mollified. As the wild ground;
the husbandman, by long tillage of it; and the wild Vine, by pruning and
cutting of it: at the last he brings the wild ground to be good soil, and the
wild Vine to be a fruitful one: so the Lord has given a blessing upon the
gift of education: that at last he makes these wild oats to be good corn, in
the harvest of God: and he settles good manners, where there was nothing but
furious brutishness.

And when they are so settled, by long labor, by fear of punishments, by hope
of rewards, and by such means as does cultivate the ground of God: although it
be long before they be brought to this, (for there is much war between these
two adversaries in the Text) when these good manners and thus settled: then
they are called (...), sitting: (...), is Seeds, Indoles and Mos.
taken from a word which signifies to sit, and keep residence. For being thus
ingrafted, and keeping residence, they are not easily wrought out again, for
they come to be (as it were) a second nature: the law of manners, is not easily
changed, as Saint Basile Basile.
says, because they were first imprinted, when the mind of the child was
tender; therefore the impression goes the deeper, and continues the longer.

When the Lord settles the power of his grace, in a man; it is not easy for
the devil to deface that impression: and he shall never do it utterly.
Although there be diverse actions that may deface it in show, and for the
present time: but the Apostle here speaks in another respect, although he may
extend his speech to the manners of grace, among the Corinthians. But these
things that he speaks of (common profession, common religion taught) they
were brought unto them by God, who is the husband man, as Christ says, Ioh.
15. I am the true Vine, Ioh. 15 1.
and my Father is the husbandman. This culture, whereby by diligent labor they
were brought from the harsh Idolatry of the heathen, to know Christ: to come to
the knowledge of his faith, of his life, of his death, of his miracles, of the
benefits they received by the communion of his body and blood, of his blessed
Resurrection, and the promise of the reuniting of our bodies, and of the
return of our spirits: these were manners that grace had taught them; besides
the common profession of Religion, for a man may make a profession of religion,
and yet have no grace. Now if these manners remain in a man, he is past the
danger of all the paws of Satan. The devil shall not be able to pluck up
these plants, Math. 15.13.
which our heavenly Father has planted, as our Savior Christ says. But if we
go no further then common reason and profession, and content our selves with
the outward form of religion: then comes that to pass here spoken of, that
evil words corrupt good manners, and though good manners be settled of
themselves, and keep their residence strongly: yet the mightiness of our
enemy is such, that he will pull them out, except they have a deeper impression
by the spirit of God made in us.

Now we come to the other adversary, which is Evil words

Second Antagonist, Evil words.
The manners are called good; and the language ill; not according to the
estimation of men, but according to the sheckle of the Sanctuary, the balance
of the Sanctuary: it is that that makes good to be good, and evil to be
evil. For many languages among men are accounted good, that are base and
evil: and many manners are accounted evil, that are perfect and good.
Therefore, if we will examine what manners are good, we must not repair to the
Courts of men, to the fashions of men: for sometime they are accounted most
unmannerly amongst them, that are the best mortified and sanctified men of all
others.

Nor when we come to examine what are evil words, what is wicked discourse and
speech; we must not measure it by man's judgment: but according to the Rule and
Canon, and square of the word of God. It is that that judges men, to be good
or ill.

It is to be observed, that the word here has a great elegancie in it. For
(...) (...).
signifies such manners as are of great use and profit. And so, indeed, from
all kind of goodness; from all honest parts; there is great profit, profit
for a man's self; profit to his body; profit to his soul; profit to his state;
profit to his neighbor by his example: so good manners be (...), things of use
and profit: whereas the actions of ungodly, wicked men, they are unprofitable.
As the Apostle says, Have no fellowship with the unprofitable works of
darkness. This language, here, this ill language: Ephesians. 5.11.
it is called Caba, taken from a word used in war: Quaere. The Greek word
here is (...), and inde^d (...), signifies fearful, cowardly, sloa^hfull.
the Cabaly, they are flying away still, and running back: so in evil, there
is nothing but trembling and fear, and running back, and want of security: a
man knows not where to lurk safe; therefore he turns him this way and that
way, and runs before any man persecute him, as the Prophet says. We see the
quality, now, of these Adversaries.

Now we come a little to their fight, how they meet together, and who
overcomes.

Corrupt good manners. Good manners being well settled in us; and coming to be
a second nature, Thi^d point, the action betwixt Evil words, and good manners:
they corrupt them.
(as it were) the spirit of God being our guardian: they become impregnable
against the devil. But if they have a small and slack guard, and are
entrenched only within the bounds of reason, and common religion, or a
perfunctory profession: then Satan is powerful; and the examples of the world
are bewitching; and a man's own flesh, his own self, is false to himself:
and in a moment or short time, they make such a battery and assault upon him,
that all the whole Fort is yielded to the devil; and so evil words corrupt
good manners.

If good words could amend evil manners, it were excellent: and so sometimes
they do, by the blessing of God. But on the other side, there is a fearful
loss: which is frequent and common: for whereas, once good manners mend evil,
a thousand times, ill manners, corrupt good: for we have a divellish
disposition in us, till the Lord work it out by his spirit and this devil is
so false, that if we want corruption, rather then we will not be corrupted, we
will corrupt our selves, and turn devils to our own souls. For what else are
these common and daily fashions, that are used in the world, but a voluntary
seeking after corruption? Psalm. 4.2.
as the Prophet says, Psalm. 4. How long will ye seek after lies? All these
devices, whereby we pamper this flesh of ours, they are mere huntings after
corruption, that though corruption flee from us, yet we run after it, and
overtake it. This pride, and prancking of these poor tabernacles we carry
about us; which are nothing but dust and ashes.

These extraordinary eatings and drinkings,

These high surfettings,

These great and mighty spendings:

What are these, but very voluntary running a whoring after our own
inventions; and a seeking to be corrupted? And because we think there is
nothing without us, to corrupt us; therefore we will have it within us, rather
than we will want it. Bern. 1 Timothy 6.9.
Saint Bernard speaking of that place of the Apostle, Those that will be rich,
fall into diverse snares. oh (says Bernard) our rich men, if they had heard
him; they would have wished they had had more snares: and think themselves
miserable, because they have not. So although they go to hell, they care not:
if they can but make themselves heavy laden with this thick clay, Habac. 2.6.
as the Prophet speaks; They care for nothing else. The like corruption is
upon all men, and especially in these days: there was never more corruption of
manners, than in this last and sinful age of the world, of which the Lord
foretold, and we by lamentable experience find it: corruption grows so
strongly every day.

The word Corruption, signifies in the best and most common notion, to bring a
thing to worms: to bring it to lice; as the body of Herod, by the stroke of
the Angel for his proud speech, was brought to Vermin and Lice in a moment.
So all things that are corrupted, they grow to a mouldring out; of which
mouldering, there grows worms: if the matter be vegetable, or had any life in
it, corruption being in it self a mere alteration, to a not being, from a
being. As generation makes a thing to be, that was not before: so Salvianus
Salvianus.
says, those things that be corrupted, are not themselves any longer, after
they be corrupted. So consequently, in the manners of men, when they be
corrupted, there is such an alteration and change, that a man cannot say that
this is the man. We see by woeful experience, how quick corruption is, that in
a short time, a man cannot know one to be the same.

A youth that has been educated in the fear of God, for fourteen or
fifteen years, and is well grounded and settled in the schools: send him
into another part of the world, but one half year; and many times all the
frame and building of his former education, will be utterly ruinate: and the
party so corrupted, that a man would wonder at the beastliness and
strangeness of such a fatal change.

From hence come those frequent complaints, every where in the Church of God:
there are so many blasts of adverse wind; so many examples of filthiness in
the world: that they change every thing, and take away the gloss, and beauty,
and perfection of it; and instead of the Image of God, they embrace the picture
of the devil: and it is done before a man is aware, so quickly are we
deceived, and so soon brought to destruction. Bern.
As Saint Bernard says well of such. What art thou come to now? what a Saint
have thou been in time past, and what a devil art thou now turned too? thou
begunnest, far better than thou endest; and the first time, the first part of
thy graces, were more excellent than thy latter times are. Oh what a great
change there is? how unlike is this man, to that child? being a man to thy
self now, when thou wast a child: nothing is more fearful then this. Let our
gold and silver corrupt; let our garments corrupt; let thieves break through
and steal them; let all things without us corrupt.

But let us keep our manners, pure; they are our best and choicest treasure,
that should sit in our minds, and keep their residence in the Court of
heaven; in the soul, and conscience. God forbid, that they should be
corrupted; or if they be, let us labor to return presently to grace: whereby
corruption may be amended, and a reparation made, by the Spirit of God.

Evil words corrupt good manners. Where natural corruption is, it comes always
from heat; from a strange outward heat: all corruption, whether it be of
fruits, or the corruption of men's bodies, or any other thing; it comes with a
certain outward heat: which frightens the natural heat, and overcomes it, and
so works all to a beastly and monstrous disease: and so to a mere nothing, at
last.

Corruption. is made in the tenderest things; those solid, receive less
corruption, and endure longest. As stones and trees; because of the hardness,
and firmness of their natures, they remain longer uncorrupted: and perhaps
there be some stones, that never knew what corruption means, but those things
that are most tender, are most subject to corruption: because the Air (which
is the mother of life, and death, the mother of generation, and corruption)
where it is able to disperse the dimensions of it, it works corruption: as it
gave beginning, so it works an end. It is the plague of God, upon every son
of Adam, that the same air that gave him life, it works also his dissolution.

corruption we may observe, that the finer the thing is, the worse it is
corrupted: the nature of things that are most finely modulated, when they come
to be corrupted, they have the vilest stench and corruption, of all other:
there is nothing that is made so exactly, as the body of a man: yet being dead,
there is no stench like unto it; always, the corruption of the best things, is
the worst: Thus it is also in this spiritual corruption.

manners which the grace of God, and good education has planted in man (the
wild natural disposition being rooted out, and the grace of God being planted
in, and grafted) there it keeps its seat, and residence: and as long as it is
free from external, and outward danger, it is well enough; but when there
comes an outward heat; and the air to work upon it (that is, temptations from
abroad; temptations from the devil; bad examples in the world) this outward
heat, it works upon the substance of the inward stock; and before a man can
think of it, enters and pierces; Jonah 4 7.
and corruption makes way (as the cankerworme in Jonas gourd) that though it
was green and fresh in the morning, yet it was down, and withered before night.

tenderest things, soonest corrupt, so men of the best wits, of the best
judgments; men that have the greatest memories; men of the most dexterious
spirits; their minds (by Gods just judgment) are most subject to sin, and
gross corruption. Every man does not serve the devil, with like affection,
and with like spirit. Some know how to serve him, after one manner; and some
after another: weaker things, are subject to less corruption: but the finest,
and the tenderest things; are soonest corrupted. As the fairest, and goodliest
flowers, are soonest blasted and withered. To conclude this point;

When these things in men, are corrupted; it is the worst corruption, that can
be. When the understanding is corrupted, as the Apostle speaks, To the clean,
Tit. 1.15.
all things are clean: but to the unclean, all things are polluted and
corrupted; even their understandings. When a man's brain is tainted, when his
understanding is corrupted: it is most pestilent. When he takes lies for truth;
when he follows errors, instead of the Oracles of God. This is not the
condition of a man, well educated by grace. Therefore, I beseech you, let us
say with the Apostle, Evil words corrupt good manners: and let us take heed of
all ill manners, and ill speeches, which is the next, and the maine thing, that
I should come unto. I shall speak but a word of it.

The word signifies not only a passing, flying word; but a settled discourse
of a company, and society of men: a kind of league, that men have together:
for the words that are flying, and passing away, they may be rejected and cast
away. Every wicked man that speaks ill, and wickedly, he is not presently
apprehended, or liked of: but if a man still keep on, and make his discourse
of it; if he make it his disputation, and argues the case: now the danger
comes, there is nothing worse then such ill words, to corrupt good manners.

Our first parents Adam and Eve, were corrupted so, even by evil words. The
serpent offered them no violence; but only spoke an evil word: and so he
conveyed that poison. He did not offer according to the power that the
devil, the wicked Angels had, to hurt their bodies: he offered them no injury
by force: but he spoke the word, and so entered into Eve (into that grace and
justice, that was originally in he^) and corrupted it in a moment. Behold, how
soon one spark of fire, kindles a whole stacke of corn! how one scabbed
sheep, infects all the flock? It is infinite to see, how corruption grows,
and spreads it self, like a tetter: that it is seldom or never restrained and
limited, except the Spirit of God use a mighty hand in it. And as it was at the
first, so it is now: as Saint Austin says, Aug.
Thou killest not thy brother by the sword, or by a violent hand; as Cain
killed Abel: but thou do as bad, thou speak a bad word; thou give him
bad counsel; thou give him an ill example; and that is worse then to kill
with the sword: for the sword goes but to a man's body; but evil words, they
go to the heart, to the soul: and always the infection the deeper it is, and
the nearer the heart; the more dangerous, and the worse it is. Evil words,
corrupt good manners.

If evil words corrupt good manners, What do evil books then? for as long as
the word is but spoken, it is but wind; that goes and comes, there is no great
regard to be had of it, it is a lighter matter; and he is a perfect man, that
never slides, and stumbles in his words: every man will give a man leave, to
toss, and roll himself in his words: and will take it, when it comes to his
own turn again. But evil books, lascivious wicked books, that are set
forth; when they are exhibited they remain, and hold on. Therefore, certainly,
if they shall be damned, that speak ill words, which tend to the subversion of
good manners, and to the corruptions of Gods children: if they shall be damned
ipso facto (as all must confess) it follows then, those that study damnable
books, abusive things; whereby the good manners of the children of God are cast
into hazard: these shall receive double damnation. If bare evil words are so
dangerous, what are they, when they are set out to the full: when the devil
will not walk only in bare words, lest he prove foolish, and contemptible: but
he will strout it out in action; with a lively voice; with a goodly fair
complexion; in stately habit; in all pomp and gallantry of apparel: when
thus men in a goodly feature, act it for the devil (for they do nothing but
set the devils poison in a fair glass, or cup, and give it people to make
themselves drunk of it) it must needs be more venomous poison, and more
pestilent mischief, that comes to the soul by reading, these books; then by
other things.

The Philosophers tell us of a filthy kind of creature (differing from all
other creatures) which ingenders at the ear; the conception of the female is
at the ear, and the generating of the male, is at the ear too. Though this
may be a fiction (as it may be true for we are ignorant of diverse things in the
body of nature) yet it is true here; there is no man that is a child of the
devil, but he suffers him to engender at his ear: by hearing ill words, and
rotten communication. Colos. 3.8.
Let no filthy communication come out of your mouths, says the Apostle: for
this breeds embryos for the devil, it breeds brats of perdition, and
confusion; and so foulely corrupts the good manners of men, that a man cannot
tell whether the footsteps of God are left there or no.

Lastly, if evil words corrupt good manners; what do ill manners, then? They
are far more attractive then evil words; and more poisonous; they must needs
be more hurtful, to good manners: for they are directly contrary. Between
words and manners, a man would think there were small opposition: for the one,
is settled; the other, flitting: the one, being grafted; the other, moveable. As
for evil manners, they are more ingrafted, and settled; then good manners. For
there is no good man, so good; as a bad man is bad. Therefore, when a man sees
ill examples, then comes a fearful corruption, presently. When a man sees
another drunk before his face, it is a greater invitation to him, then when he
hears a word spoken in the commendation of drunkenness. When a man sees
another do a thing that is ungodly and wicked, he is animated to it more, then
if he only heard of it, or were counseled to it.

Let us take heed: for our times are not only full of evil words, for the
corrupting of our good manners; but also full of evil examples; of base
manners, that destroys almost humane society: that only among a few, there
is a reservation of the good seed of the Gospel; among the rest it is
scattered, even among many that make a greater profession of it then others.

Therefore let us conclude, that seeing evil words corrupt good manners; much
more do evil books, evil writings, evil shows, and plays, and theatricall
pomps: and most of all, evil manners. Let us take heed, therefore; and if we
cannot command our mouths, from evil speeches (corruption running so through
the generation of men, that none can free himself) yet let us take heed that
we do nothing before others, that may give ill example: for that is a great
infection to their souls.

I should now come to the kinds of ill words: for the Apostle excepts none.
And although a man cannot take notice, of all the kinds of them; yet the
speecies of all, the chief, and common kinds, our Religion, and common
understanding, will suggest unto us, namely, what is good, and what is bad, the
conscience is ruled by the word; and the word of God, shows what they are: the
word shows every thing, that is hid in darkness.

First therefore, when men will give others ill not to put up wrongs. Many will
say, If it were my case I would follow it, and not put up this wrong: when they
will incite a man to vengeance, against his brother. These are ill words, for
they corrupt good manners, the good manners of patience: and there is no
sweeter manners, in a child of God, then for a man to forgive another, as he
would be forgiven. It is that virtue, wherein every Christian should possess
his soul. And this patience, the devil goes about to corrupt, by this means.
Luke 21.19.
Therefore let us take heed of these ill words.

Again, those words that make for pride, as flattery engine of the devil)
these words corrupt good manners; even the good manners of modesty: and makes a
man so insolent, that he knows not himself. They so puff him up to
destruction, that he prooves nothing but a bladder, instead of a man: a mere
monster to men. There is nothing more ridiculous, then a proud supercilious
man. Therefore, the words of flattery, are to be weighed in the balance of the
sanctuary: that they may be known, and detested. These be corrupt words, as
can be: for they work upon the good manners of humility; which is the grace
of graces: they trouble, and molest that, and make a man forget both God, and
himself. These evil words are to be shunned and hated: which are too common
in these times: for no man can endure that a man should tell him his own; that
he should tell him the truth, but he shall be accounted an enemy for it. But
those that can soothe men up, with words smooth as oil, they shall be best
welcome: but such clawbacks, and flatterers, are carefully to be avoided.

Evil words corrupt good manners: Therefore words that tend to scandal, words
of information, and detr^ction, these corrupt the good manners of love: which
is the noblest grace that Gods child has. When friends shall continue in love
and concord, many years together; and a fellow shall come and work them at
odds, by carrying a tale of this man to the other, and of the other to him:
these words are no sooner drunk in, but poison is taken; the parties
corrupted, instantly, and those that were intimate friends, fall to be deadly
and mortal enemies. Take heed of these, and account them in the number of
evil words: for they corrupt the good manners whereby the Disciples of Christ
are known. For by this, Ioh. 13.35.
says Christ, shall all men know, that they are my Disciples, if ye love one
another.

Fourthly, Evil words corrupt good manners, therefore lasciviousness (that
idle talk that is used at Tables, concerning the love of women, concerning the
order of that blessing, that God has appointed for the multiplying of mankind)
these are common evils: every man gives himself liberty, to talk and jest of
such things. But these jests, are evil words. And whatsoever color of phrase
and figure, they seek; as figge-leaves to cover this nakedness before men;
yet it appears through and through, in the sight of God: who cannot endure
that such idle words should come from those, that should work out their
salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. 2.12.


Let us take heed of these idle jests; wherein men and women strive, who shall
go foremost, and who shall go out of the way furthest: but when they will come
in again, God knows.

Lastly, Evil words corrupt good manners: therefore those words that tend to
idleness of life; or that idle for the life to come (which are chiefly
intended here) all these are damnable instigations, and suggestions of the
devil. As when a man shall say, Take thy time; Enjoy thy pleasure; Pay no
debts; Live upon that thou have; Provide for thy self, Break, and be bankrupt.
Have no care of these things: for thou may safely crave pardon of God for
this sin, as for thy other. God forgives sins, and therefore will remit
this. This is a damnable corruption of good manners: it corrupts the good
manners of justice, and equity, even that justice and true dealing that should
be between brethren: which is the life of all society, and that which keeps
the world together. These devils are to be shunned, as the very roarings from
hell.

And especially those idle jests that concern the Scriptures, and matters of
this nature, that we now speak of: when men, like bruit beasts, will take upon
them to jest out of the book of God. Such as can prompt themselves with more
Scripture, to make jests, and fooleries; then they can remember upon their
deathbed, to give them comfort. These that in their cups, can abuse God, and
his book, to his face: they are the firstborn of the devil: even such as
either wrest the Scriptures to a bad sense; or else make jests of it, to an
idle purpose, for vanity and foolerie. These jesters with the Word of God, are
the greatest corrupters of good manners: for they take away the fear of God,
which is the great good manners of a Christian: and they take away the
authority of the Scriptures, by which we are all bound to the Lord.

So likewise, for all matters of disputation. He that speaks before weak
minds, that much may stagger their faith: this is a corrupting of good
manners. In our time, it is the fashion; we will dispute of all religions, when
we meet: and one is for this matter, and another for that; and there is a
sort of poor things about us, and they hear all, but know not who to hold
with: as having not discretion to make a difference of things. But he that
makes the greatest clamor, and that has most voices, shall carry it away. By
this means, they kill the good manners of people: and take away that orthodoxe
faith that should be in men. It is a wondrous thing to observe, how the Devil
labors to make these kind of disputations! When a man is resolved for the
truth, yet (says he) it is no matter; hear what these men can say; they bring
some color of arguments for it; they do it with a good wit: hear them: I wish
thee not to yield; only see their reasons. By this means, we have lost within
this short time, an infinite company of Protestants. The venom has been so
strong, that they have not been able to work it out: and so they have been
brought into gross heresy and Apostasy, and fallen quite away, by this
means.

Let us take heed of this: these strike at the maine; they undermine the very
foundation: other things, may more easily be mended. For when a man shall
suffer shipwreck in his understanding, and in his apprehension of God: It is a
thousand to one, if ever such a one be recovered.

So (to conclude this present point) vile speeches in a man's mouth, concerning
the Resurrection; is a damnable thing. For this is the maine end, of all our
profession: this is the hope, and fruit, the harvest of Religion; the
resurrection of the body: and if that be called in question, or made a jest of;
or the majesty of it touched: Luther.
there must needs be a great concussion and shaking of the whole house and
frame of Religion. Therefore those base words used in former time, which Luther
says were used among the Saxons. Saxons.
They had a gross proverb amongst drunken fellows. Sir (says one to his
fellow drunkard) do thou think that I have not another companion within me,
to this outward companion: that is, a soul to this body? And his fellow would
answer, Yes: Why then (says he again) I persuade my self that they will dye
together, as friends; and the one shall not outlive the other. We two spend
our time, in drinking, and good-fellowship; and it is hard if my friend within,
be not better then my friend without. But (as Luther says) if the devil
should have come from hell, he could not have spoken worser.

I am loath to speak these things; lest men take hold of it: but we must open
them to the children of God: that they may know, and beware of these evil
words.

There is another company of drunkards, that when they are met at their pots,
they will talk of the Resurrection: whether they shall know their friends, in
the other world, and discourse concerning the blood of Gods children, that has
been let out by physic; and concerning the hairs of their head, which they
have lost. Such strange devices men have, to mock out the kingdom of God, and
the glorious relation of the Resurrection.

There is another company, and they will not be buried in the Church, by reason
of the tumult that will be at the Resurrection: lest they should be overwhelmed
with the weight of them. These beastly things, these dialects of hell, if
Christians admit them into their ears; they are in danger of damnation by it:
but if they take them into their mouths, they are in danger of double and
treble damnation.

Let us know the holy things of God, let us use these holy and glorious
mysteries, with honor and reverence: and let us not meddle with them, but with
humility, and prayer, and great affection. For these words, that go about to
make these holy things profane, and to make these pearls fit for swine: they
are degenerating, corrupting, base words: and a true Christian, should wish as
the Poet in the Comedy, when he heard that which pleased him not, I would to
God, that this man were dumb, or that I were deaf: that either he could not
speak, or that I could not hear these beastly things, that ruin the state of
the soul, and abuse the apprehension of the majesty of God, to looseness,
and to beastliness.

FINIS.
1 COR. 15.34. Drunkards, awake justly, and sin not: for diverse have not the
knowledge of God. I speak this to your shame.

Or as the words signify:

Awake from your drunkenness justly, and sin not: for many (certain of you,
some of you) have an ignorance concerning God. I speak this for reproof.


AFter the Apostle had showed the great danger that comes by pestilent
discourses, and communication; and had given them charge concerning it, take
heed, be not deceived: he now concludes all that point, and makes way to
another; which is the most notable demonstration, the most gracious
remonstrance, of the manner, and order of the Resurrection. And so he gives (as
it were) a bar unto them, to stop their ears against all contrary speech,
and discourse. For those that will be content, to entertain discourse contrary
to the doctrine of the sGospell, they are seldom or never brought to be
chollers to the Gospel. Satan ever sharpens the wits, and whets the tongues
of men, to rise up in confutatorie speeches: that tend to the disgrace and
calling in question of the truth: and if men will but lend their ears to it,
the Lord will give them over in just judgment, that they shall be ensnared,
and entangled with it. Therefore as Plutarch Plutarch.
says well, concerning young men's reading of the writings of Poets, and
lascivious poems, that they should be well armed, that they should arm
themselves with Amphitedes: (which was a certain fence for the ears) Those
that were wrastlers, and fought with the club, they were armed with these
Amphitedes: which were made of some hard matter, that so they might keep the
blow from their ears; that upon the sudden they might not be stounded, and
dazelled, and struck down, but might stand the longer in the fight. Therefore
they had these Amphitedes about their ears, when they fought at the club. And
(says Plutarch) these ought every young man to take, as a special munition
against evil speeches. For there is no blow (either with staff or club) that
afflicts the body, or so stounds the brain of a man, as evil and wicked
speeches infect the soul. Therefore the best way is, to deem such speeches
base and impious: to turn the ears from them, and to give no audience to
them. For there is nothing in them, but mischief; the mouths of wicked men
being nothing, but as the raw graves, as the Prophet says: Psalm. 5.9.
Their throat is an open sepulcher: that as the grave where a corpse has been
lately buried, being newly raved in, there will a filthy vapor and stench
exhale and come forth, to the danger of all the standers by: so the throats of
evil men, their wicked speeches, are as a raw grave and sepulcher: which when
it begins to be opened, let all the company run away, as fast as they can:
for there is a deadly stench, that will infect them. Their throat is an open
sepulcher, they breathe out the blasts of death, of filthiness, and corruption.

And now he proceeds further, and tells them, that if they enter into the
substance of the things which those men speak; they are mere idle dreams of
a drunken man: their speech and communication is the most senseless of all
other. Therefore he says, Awake ye drunkards to justice, or righteousness.
Showing, that all those words that are any way against God, and his power, and
glory in the Resurrection; what discourse soever it be, that calls that in
question: it is nothing else but as Saint Basil Basil.
calls it, the mere dream of a drunken man. It is an idle thing, for any man
to hearken to a drunkards speech (especially that which he speaks between
sleeping and waking) so it is much more idle to hearken to these evil
speeches, and discourses of these blasphemous mouths.

Now because the Church of Corinth has been infected with this cup, and has
taken so much of it, that many of them are drunk with it: Therefore I will you
(says the Apostle) to wake now while God has given you time, and
opportunity: while by my ministry, and the rest that shall succeed me; he
gives you summons, and calls you to wake out of this drunken humor, from these
wicked speeches, that tend to sensuality, and carnalitie. Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall dye: and what shall become of us when we are
dead? These evil speeches, are the dregs of hell, and the lees of this deadly
wine: you have taken in abundance to your selves; therefore as soon as you
can, awake. And so wake, as you may stand up to righteousness, and follow
that, and walk therein, for ever hereafter: for there is difference in them
that are waked out of sleep.

Some are awaked with less noise: the creaking of a door, the least noise in
a chamber, will wake some. Such are those, that are of tender hearts in Gods
Church: the least advertisement and admonition will bring them home.

Others are profoundly and deadly asleep: such as are spoken of here, drunken
men; that are more violently asleep then others: they cannot be drawn from
it, without extremity; they cannot be waked, without calling, without jogging,
or pinching, and whatsoever means can be used to recover them: yea when they
are awaked, except they be taken when their sleep is mellow; they grow into
desperate fury and madness.

And some, when they are awaked, they go not to their work; they set not to
action: but like the foolish sluggard in the Proverbes, they cry, Prove. 6.10.
A little more sleep, a little more folding of the hands: a little more
turning and tossing, as Saint Austin says, Aug.
A little more sleep, a little more slumber; and I will rise now, and now: but
now, and now, have no measure nor bounds in them. Now because there is such
difference in men's wakings, the Apostle sets down the manner, how they should
wake. Awake sufficiently: not so as to return to sleep again. The sleep
natural, must be iterated and repeated; men cannot always wake: but they must
have some time to revive, and refresh their spirits, with the vicissitude and
change of sleep. But the spiritual waking, is of another nature: it must be
undertaken upon such conditions, and performed so; as that we never return (by
our good wills) unto sleep, or if our natural infirmity carry us so far,
yet never to snort, and slumber in sin any more: but to wake to
righteousness, and to do that which is good, in the sight of the Lord.

And then, because it might be somewhat doubtful, what this is that he says,
Awake justly to righteousness; he expounds himself in the next words, Sin
not. Psalm. 4.4.
A phrase common among the Hebrews, Psalm. 4. Commune with your own hearts, and
be still, and sin not. So here he tells what he means, when he says, Awake
justly, that is, give not your selves to sin, and corruption, for that is the
beginning of all these mischiefs. Sin, is like Cyrces cups that inveigles,
and drownes men in slumber; that they never rise again, without the wondrous
mercy of God. Therefore take heed you fall not into it, because that brings all
other evils: it is that which brings the corruption of good words, and good
manners, and you fall into them, because you have no care of your conversation.
That is the first part of the Text.

Then in the second, he begins to deal more nearely with them, and tells them
of their proper faults: that they were ignorant in things concerning God, that
they knew not God, which is the maine object of all our knowledge. For those
that know not God, or know him but by halves, that call in question the
omnipotency of God, concerning the raising of our bodies: they are merely
ignorant of God. He that doubts of Gods power, concerning the raising of the
dead, he were as good know nothing of God: for he limits, and straightens the
hand of God, and makes him inferior to himself, and inferior to his word.
For his power, is greater then his will, and his will is revealed in his Word,
and his Word tells us, that he will do it. Therefore, certainly, he can do it,
because he can do more then he will do. Therefore, he that calls in question
these things, he were as good to have no sense or taste of God at all. He knows
not God, he denies the prime and chief thing that is in God: and therefore he
knows him not. And so it is with some of you; you have an ignorance concerning
God: because you call in question his power, in this mighty benefit, the
resurrection of our bodies.

And then, lastly, he concludes, with mildness and sharpness; and mingleth
both together: I speak this to your shame. As if he should have said, partly I
am ashamed, that I have spent so much time, and so much labor among you: and
yet still you are in such waverings as these, and are no better persuaded in
the omnipotent power of God.

But as I speak this to your shame, so I would not have you despair: but
only to take shame of your fault, and so be brought to Repentance. I speak it
not to bring you to a confusion eternal; but to a healthy confusion: a
confusion that brings conversion; that conversion may bring salvation by the
mercy of God. I speak it not to overthrow you; but to waken you that have been
intoxicate in a deep sleep, by the wicked communication of these men. This I
take to be the sense of the Text. To proceed in order.

There are three parts. Division into 3. Parts.


First a counsel or exhortation.

Then a serious expostulation. 1. An exhortation. 2. An expostulation. 3. An
Increpation.


And lastly, a forcible dealing, by way of Increpation, whereby he does as it
were by an holy violence, compel them to enter into the ways of God: and to
be reclaimed from their sins.

The first is contained in these words, Awake to righteousness, and sin not,
1 delivered. And that,

First, in figure, and then, In plain speech.

The figure in these words, Awake to righteousness.

The plain words follow, And sin not. The one interprets the other.

In the figure, there are two things.

1 There is an Act, to awake out of wine; awake out of drink, for so the word
signifies.

Then secondly, there is the term and manner, whereto they must wake. Awake
to justice, awake to perfection: not as men half asleep, and half awake; to
turn on the other side, and take a nappe: but to wake fully, and freely. It is
such a waking, as a man may be expedite to work in the function of his life:
whereunto all waking men are disposed.

Then in the plain words or exposition; he shows likewise two things.

1 First, that sin is the mother of all error, of all gross, and base
communication.

2 Secondly, that by the grace of God (if we work with the grace of God) we
shall not sin, that is, we shall not sin in that gross manner, as these
creatures do. Although all men be sinners, yet if we will tender the grace of
God that is in us; we shall so live as that we shall not sin, according to
that phrase of Scripture, which is afterward to be expounded, namely, not with
a full consent; not with a high hand; not to continue in sin, not to despair
in sin: but we shall know, that if we do sin, we have a Mediator of our
reconciliation; we have a Mediator which is God and Man Christ Jesus, 1. Tim.
2.5. 1. Job. 1.1, 2.
who is the propitiation for our sins.

Then in the second part, in the exposition, there are two things to be
considered.

First, he tells them of their fault, ((...)). It is a word that we cannot well
utter in English, nor in Latin: it is hard to be expressed in both languages, to
be ignorant of God.

And then, because he would not offend all the company, for a fews sake; he
says, Some of you have not the knowledge of God.

And then, lastly, the Application of all to them: he says, he speaks it to
their shame, that is, either he was ashamed to spend so much time, and labor
to so little profit: or he spoke it to their shame, as the common Text reads
it, I speak it to your shame. But yet it is such a speech, as is not uttered
in a virulent manner; to cast them away; to make them despair: but to bring
them home, that they might know what they ought to do for the time to come.
These are the branches of the Text. Of every one of these, as the Lord shall
give assistance: and but a word of every one, because they are common obvious
things.

First, it is to be observed, 1. Part. The Exhortation, Awake, etc.
that the Apostle invites them, and calls upon them for waking: and for such a
waking, as if he should speak to a sort of drunkards, that were drowned in
wine and drunkenness; which is as base a kind of sleep, as can be. For all
sleep natural, of it self is justly accounted a mere loss of time; the
brother of death; the field of danger: a thing that has no profit in it; that
spends one part of our life to no purpose. And yet we cannot live without it;
for the repairing, and re-edifying, and building up of our bodies again; that
were consumed, and wasted before with daily labor. Now if the natural sleep
be a loosing of time, a loosing of our spirits, and a subjecting of us to
danger; much more, then, is it in the sleep of sin: that poisonous sleep
that comes by excess and drunkenness. These, of all other, are most
dangerous; and most hard for a man to be rouzed out of.

It is a common thing in Scripture, to compare sinners to sleepers, and sin
to sleep. There are diverse sleeps related in the Scriptures.

The sleep corporal, of the body: and spiritual, of the soul.

The sleep corporal of the body, is either natural, or violent.

Natural sleep is that, when the strength of man is weakened, and abated, and
his spirits are again renewed, by a gracious mist, and dew, that is cast upon
the body: whereby the natural spirits, the vital spirits, and the animal
spirits, are refreshed, and raised again to their work.

Violent sleep, is either by drunkenness, or disease.

When nature is overwhelmed by drunkenness, or by disease. As by Lethargies,
or palsies; which all work unto death: which is also called sleep. For our
Lord Christ says, We go to Lazarus who sleeps. And those that dye in the
Lord, they sleep. This is natural sleep.

The spiritual sleep, the sleep that falls upon the spirit of man, it is of
two sorts in Scripture.

The one is celestial, and good.

The other is infernal; for hell, and hellish purposes.

Cant. 2.7.
The first is that sleep of the Church: I charge you oh daughters of Jerusalem
by the roes, and by the hyndes, that ye wake not my beloved until she please:
that is, in the meditation of holy things; It is a divine rapture? whereby the
Saints of God have communion, and are made one spirit with the Lord. Cant. 5.1.
This is called in Scripture, a sleep: I sleep, but my heart waketh.

But that which the Apostle speaks of here, is an infernal sleep, that tends
to a sleep of damnation. As sleepie diseases nourish death in men, and there
is no more assured sign that a man shall dye, then when he is continually
sleeping, that he cannot rouse up his spirits to action: so these infernal
sleeps, these sleeps of sin, they give a certain evident prognostication,
that such a man shall be for ever damned in hell. They have slept their sleep,
says the Prophet: that is, Psalm. 76 5.
they are gone to their everlasting sleep, to hell, where their sleep is not
a refreshing, and refection, as ours is; but a continual terror, with ghastly
dreams, and apparitions: that they were better not to have any being, then to
be in that fearful manner. Therefore, the Apostle would teach us, that the
consideration of that infernal sleep, should work us from this sleep of
sin: which unless we be awaked from, we shall be like those in a Lethargy;
even in death, and extremely unable for any living actions.

Sin is compared to sleep, for many plain reasons. I need not name them.

First, as when sleep is on men, they know not what they do, or what they say:
many idle words pass from them, that they are not sensible of. So a sinner,
whatsoever he does, all is sin: yet he knows not what he does. Therefore our
Lord Christ upon the Cross, prays, Father forgive them, Luk 22.34.
they know not what they do.

Secondly, sleep exposes a man to any danger. He that lies sleeping, cannot
defend himself: the least child that comes, may cut his threat. So a man that
lives in sin, is exposed to all dangers; that on every side wait upon him.
He is in danger of God; he is in danger of Man; in danger of the devil; in
danger of his own humors, and constitution; in danger of every beast; of
every thing that comes near him: the least spider that is, may confound, and
destroy, and poison him. There is nothing so exposed to danger, as a sleeping
man: much more as a sleeping sinner. Therefore the wise man compares him to a
man that is asleep. But where? upon the top of a mast of a ship, Prove. 23.34.
in a storm of weather: which losses the ship to and fro, and he being asleep
there, it is a thousand to one, if he be not shaken over into the Sea. So a man
that lives in sin, he is asleep in the midst of his enemies; in the tents
of those that hate him. There is no security, for a man that lives in sin,
wheresoever he goes, danger dogs him; and he is exposed to the striking hand
of God, in every place.

Thirdly, sleep and sin, are compared together in the Scriptures: because
neither of them have any signification of life. A sleeper is bound in all his
senses: there is nothing remains in him, but a little breathing, and a few
wild affections, in raging dreams, and deep fantasies. So it is with a
sinner: whatsoever he does, is unpleasing to God. His words are unsavory; his
works are ungodly, his example every where detestable: himself odious to God;
odious to men; odious to his own soul. The Scripture could not find a fitter
comparison, to describe the infirmity of the soul by (which is sin) then
sleep.

And yet it is so much the more wondrous, because the Apostle says, it is not
simply a sleep, but a drunken sleep. There is a great addition to it, in
that for the sleep natural, is far more easily to be recovered: it reviveth
and refreshes the body; it leaves a sweet and easy touch and tincture behind
it. But those falls and mischiefs that a drunkard gets in his sleep, he cannot
so easily cast them off: but they stick to him, many days after. And that
facility that a man has, in rising from his sleep, it is not found in a
sinner: except the Lord work wondrously. It is an easy thing, to work a man
out of sleep, but it is an hard thing, to awake a man out of his sin. Awake
thou that sleep, Ephesians. 5.14.
stand up from the dead: bestirre thy self, a small matter will not do it.

But by this it seems, free will of himself, to convert himself, because the
Apostle says, Awake, and stand up thou that sleep, and recover thy self
again; to thy own mind, and to thy former actions. Is it in the power of
man, to waken at the voice of man? that as he cast himself into sleep, and
into sin; so to awaken himself when he pleases?

Verily no; God that must do it: all the power in heaven, and earth, cannot
waken a sleeping sinner, until God blow the trumpet. It Is God that gives his
beloved sleep. And as it is he alone, Psalm. 127.2.
that gives the sleep natural, so much more it is he, that gives the waking.
It is a great blessing of God, to bring a man that is out of this world (as it
were) by dreams and phansies; to bring him back to living actions. For a man
that is sleeping, is in another element, in another world; and they are far
from true life, that are asleep, says Pliny. Pliny.
And certainly, every life is a kind of watching; and therefore sleep must
needs be a kind of dying: it is the brother of death, as the Poet says.
Therefore the same Poet well signified it, out of that glimmering he had from
the Scriptures, that God is the author both of man's waking, and also of his
sleeping. For they make Mercury to have a certain rod which was given him
of Jupiter; whereby he had power to cast asleep whom he would, and to waken
others that were a sleep, when he would, Hom. ult. ^l.
as Homer Homer.
says. The meaning of this little learning they had in Divinity, was this,
that it lay in the hand of God (for Mercury was one of the prime, and chief
gods among them) when he would to give change of sleeping, and waking; and that
none else could do it: no not in natural things. But much more in the
spiritual sleep is it impossible, for any man to waken a sinner: but he must
be roused by the great God, that permitted him in justice to fall asleep: but
in the multitude of his mercy, he takes the pains to awaken him again.



Scripture, of three chief, and principal ways, whereby God awakeneth
sinners.

The first is, with a voice.

And then, with certain pinchings.

And lastly, with high clamours and cries.

The voice is as that which came to Samuel. When Samuel was asleep, 1. Sam.
3.4.
the voice of the Lord comes, and called, Samuel, Samuel: whereupon Samuel
rises, and goes to Ely, being now beginning to slumber, the voice of the Lord
rowseth him. Thus God deals with men, that have tender hearts, and flexible
minds: that come in at the first call of the Lord, and return home. Such a
man was David; who is called a man after Gods own heart. 1. Sam. 13.14.
Not because he had no sin; but because his heart was as wax, flexible unto
God; without any purpose to defend any sin, or to continue in any sin.

Secondly, another way whereby God wakeneth sinners. When he cannot do it with
a still voice, then he uses jogging, and pinching. As those that will not be
awaked with speaking, or with calling easily on them; we use to jogge them, and
to rub them, and sometime to give them a pinch: that by that means at least,
they may be brought unto watchfulness. Thus God does, when he sends
calamities, and adversities: when he pincheth a man in his fortunes; when he
pincheth a man in his estate; when he pincheth a man in his good name. And
these are stronger voices, then the former: when he touches the body, and
flesh of a man, as Satan said concerning Job, Touch his flesh, and thou shall
see what is in him: Job 1.11.
so God sees especially what is in a man, when he comes thus near him: then
he begins to seek the Lord; then he begins to waken from that dullness, and
slumber that he has contracted by his sins: and he returns with full
strength of spirit, and affection to God; that he may not again fall from him.
So that adversities are to be accounted, as so many pinches, and touches from
the Lord: and when adversities befall us, in any part of our estate; let us
acknowledge, This is, because I am asleep; the Lord now sends this, to rowse
me. Let me hearken to the voice of him that calls me; and that will bring me
out of this sleepie humor, to my right senses again.

Lastly, another way whereby God awakeneth sinners, is by strong cries and
clamours. When adversities will not work; then the Lord gives a man over to
great and extreme persecutions of his own soul: so that the conscience cries
out; and the inward heart of a man misgives against himself; that he is filled
with fear and horror; that his bones wax old with the disquiet of his heart,
Psalm. 32.3.
and by reason of his roaring: that he is troubled in soul and spirit, as the
Prophet David says, that he has no part of sanitie or health in his members,
Psalm 38.5.
but all is turned to stench and corruption, by reason of his foolishness.
This is that mighty clamor that God raises in the heart of a man; and makes
an allarum bell to sound, to ring him home to God by force; because gentle
means will not serve the turn. As for foolish men, when they look upon these
pinches in the world; they consider them as casual matters: a worldly man
considers them, as matters of fortune, as accidental things which he might
have avoided, if he had been careful. But now when the conscience of a man is
troubled, Prove. 18.14.
a troubled spirit who can bear? Then these inward clamours of the heart,
appear outwardly in the countenance, in the gestures and behaviors of a man's
body. As we see in Ahab himself, the clamor of the murder of Naboth, it so
rung in his ears; that it made him hang down his head like a bulrush, 1 King.
21.27.29.
and to go clad in sackcloth: it made him so humble himself, that God yielded
for that feigned repentance much pity, and commiseration in this life. So
much for the action, Do you awake. It is true it is Almighty God, that must
waken us: and if we be not wakened by him, we for ever slumber unto death. For
he that always sleeps, shall never rise again: it being the brother of death.
Therefore, as that fellow said, when he killed a sleeping man, and came to
answer the fact before the Emperor, says he, I found him dead, and I left him
dead: he thought it a sufficient satisfaction that he was asleep, and
therefore dead.

I say, therefore, although God must raise us by his own power, and it belongs
to him only to raise us: yet when we have received the power of grace, we can
then hear the call of God, and understand when he summons us: and then we have
power, to rowse up our selves. Not of our selves, for all our power is from
him: yet we have not received the grace of God so in vain, as that it should
not work. For grace is of a working nature: when it is once ingrafted, and
received.

Therefore, let us take heed, that we receive not the grace of God in vain:
but let us cooperate with it; 2. Cor. 6.1.
and let us give that regiment and government to the graces of the spirit, that
we have received in the full extent, and latitude of it. By this means, we
shall be capable of this instruction and exhortation; when he says, Awake you.
A man must not say, it lies not in my power to awake, it is God that must waken
me: let God work it if he will: and if he will not, it is not my fault;
because I cannot do it. This is absurd blasphemy. For we have received a talent
of God, and if we will use it, we may bring it to his will; and make it some
way answerable to his command. Therefore awake, God has done his part, he has
called thee; he has pinched thee; he has raised clamours, and cries in thy
conscience: therefore hearken to his voice, resist it not, hearken to him that
calls from on high, and awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead;
and Christ shall give thee light.

Now follows the manner how we must awake, and the term whereto.

Awake sufficiently: which I take to be the best sense.

It is true, as Saint Chrysostom and Beza Beza.
says, A man were better be asleep still, Chrysostom.
then to watch to wickedness: therefore the Apostle bids them wake to
righteousness, or else to sleep still. As Cato Cato.
was wont to say to his servants. Either do some thing (some business) or
sleep again. So it is in the house of God; a man were better not to be
awaked, then to spend his time idly; or to spend his time in mischief and
wickedness: there shall be less condemnation to a slumbring sinner, then to
an active sinner, that runs on in the functions of wickedness, and toils
himself in the devils service: there is none desperate as he. Therefore, as
Beza says, Awake unto righteousness, that is the true watching. A man awakes
indeed, when he awakes to work; when he wakes to do the actions of a living
man: and so you, you shall be truly raised from the sleep of sin, when you
do the work of righteousness. For this is the term whereto God has called
you: not to drowsinesse, to a slumbering lethargy; but to nimblenesse of
spirit, to be active in your operations.

But I take it, the most true and sensible exposition is, that which Saint
Basil Basil.
gives, (...), Awake worthily: that is, Awake sufficiently, competently: to
wake so, as a man never intends to return to sleep again. As Saint Austin
says upon that place, Aug.
Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light. Behold (says he) it is not enough for a man to wake, but he must
stand up, and do the actions of an holy life. It is true (says S. Austin) I
see thou are rowsed and wakened, but yet thou art drowsy, thou art rubbing
thine eyes; thou have not yet quite overcome, and mastred thy sleep: but I
tell thee, God will have thee shake off all this sleep, and drowsinesse; and
so to awaken, as Christ awakened from death: he once left the grave, never to
return, and come there any more. For in that he dyed, he dyed once for sin:
but in that he lives, he lives ever to God. Then, therefore, a man is risen
justly; when there is no part of drowsinesse remains in him: when he is not
like those sleepie creatures, that rise in their sleep, and go about their
business, and go to bed again: and when they have done all, know not of it.
There is a kind of kell or skin wanting in the brain, wherein memory should
be retentive: therefore they do many things in their sleep. But God would have
men so waken, as that there should no portion of this drowsinesse rest in them.

This doctrine is very necessary. For there is much sleep carries them away,
that are most watchful: there is infinite heaviness, and slumber waits upon
them. God is in his children, in one part; and the devil in another part; that
they now speak well, anon they do ill: many make profession of the Gospel,
and yet show no pity to the poor; nor exercise charity where they see
occasion. These men are awaked: and they be doing and stirring; but it is not
justly, as God would have them. When once a man leaves that way, and habit,
which he had before; and has a new spirit of life put into him: he is then
all for action, and for working in the ways of God.

Now I come to the Exposition. Exposition.
And sin not.

Here the Apostle expounds what he means by waking. Where first, the Apostle
gives us to understand, that the cause of all foolish, and idle speech, and
communication (as those he speaks of before, Let us eat, and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye) the cause of these idle discourses, it is merely an
inherent habit of sin: so that corruption is the plague, that causes evil
speeches, and behavior; and the one as a pestilent serpent brings forth the
other. It is sin that breeds monstrous opinions; it is sin that breeds all
the heresies in the world: they have no other mother. As Saint Ambrose Ambrose.
says, those that make shipwreck of a good life; it is no marvel, if they
make shipwreck of a good faith. They that give themselves to base manners,
they are given over by the judgment of God, to erroneous opinions. For as
Saint Chrysostom says, Chrysostom.
a wicked life is a corrupt fountain: from whence comes nothing but mud and
dirt and froth, A^g.
and as Saint Austin says well, A man having knowledge once to do the will of
God, and yet will not do it according to his knowledge: it is impossible he
should retain his knowledge: he that knows what is acceptable in the sight of
God, and yet from a stubbornness of mind, will not follow his knowledge; the
Lord shall bring that judgment upon him, that he shall lose that power, that
he shall not be able to know what is right, and what is wrong. Take the talent
from that unprofitable servant, Mat. 25.28.
and give it to him that has ten talents. Matthew. 6.23.
If the light in a man be darkness, how great is that darkness? from him that
has not shall be taken even that which he has: It is a fearful and terrible
sentence: let us all tremble under the blast of it, for it concerns every man.
As long as he lives in sin, it is the greatest miracle in the world, that he
is not drowned in it. To keep a true faith, with a bad life, it is merely
impossible: Therefore sin not. For that there is all this false and idle
communication, that there is this base conversation; these evil speeches,
these distrustful languages, concerning God, and concerning the Resurrection:
the cause of it is this inveterate sinfulness: If God punish men with
giddiness of brain, and blind their understandings, that the light in him be
darkness; it is a fearful stroke: yet this comes from sin; therefore he
joins both together, and injoynes them, saying,

Sin not. But how (says the Apostle) sin not? Ob.
Does he not know they were men? would he have them of Angelical natures? Does
not the Apostle Saint John say, If we, that is, if we that are Apostles, 1.
Joh. 1.8.
if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not
in us: And if the Physician require of his Patient a thing that he cannot
possibly do (as to tell him that is diseased, that he must fetch such an
herb from the East Indies to cure him) it were a mere trouble and delusion,
and the way to make him desperate. Therefore, what does the Apostle mean, when
he says, Sin not? Why all men are sinners, and stand in need of the glory of
God; and a man must pray as duly for the forgiveness of his sins, as for his
daily bread: they follow both as necessarily, the one upon the other, as it is
possible two benefits can do.

sin in Scripture, is taken in these senses chiefly.

First men are said to sin, that study sin, that hunt after sin, that
seek it: many men are so given to the devil in the world, that if he do not
seek them, they will seek him. The Apostle bids us take heed of that, it is a
terrible thing, when a man has a careful mind to serve Satan, and to leave
and forsake the living God. The nature of Gods children may be overtaken with
infirmities; but they do not study for it.

Secondly, they are said to sin, that go on in sin: so Saint John says,
the child of God does not sin; because they premise it not before hand, and
they call themselves to account, and to judgment for it after: they judge
themselves for their sin. There is no man, nor no bar in the world, can
devise that punishment for the child of God, that he does inflict upon
himself: he is his own judge, and his own executioner. Therefore he makes no
profession of his sin, but is ashamed, and hides his head upon every
remembrance of his sin. Therefore he is said nor to sin, by the special
grace of God, that covers his sin; because he cannot endure it. As Saint
Basil Basil.
says, If thy sin please thee not, it shall never hur^ thee.

Lastly, they are said to sin, that sin to desperatio^, tha^ care not for
pardon; that disclaim the mercy of God; that say their sin is so great that
it cannot be forgiven, like Cain and Judas: that will none of Gods compassion;
that reject his favor, and will not subject themselves to his censure: but are
ready to say, thus I have done, and I see not how it can be amended: and God
will not forgive it; and therefore they will go forward, and make a bad cause
desperate. This is the height of sin. These things (we see) it lies in the
power of grace, to keep us from: that we sin not, that is, by the grace of
God we may so command our spirits, as that we shall not study and hunt after
sin; nor we shall not sin with a high hand; nor sin to desperation: but
if we sin, we do not as the reprobates of the world, that cast away all hope,
and resist, and blaspheme God: 1. Joh. 2.1, 2.
but we have a Mediator and propitiation for our sins, the man Christ Jesus.

Now for that which he objects unto them, he tells them, They knew not God; and
he speaks it to their shame.

It is a wondrous thing, that the Corinthians that were so illuminated, and had
such knowledge, as the Apostle says, Chap. 1. that they had all knowledge, 1.
Cor. 1.5.
and all grace, and all strength: and yet now he comes and begins at the very
foundation, and taxes them, that they knew not God himself.

But we must know, in that he said before they had all knowledge, and all
faith, and all grace; it is spoken of the better part; and the better part,
denominates the whole. As when there is an heap of wheat and chafe together;
we call it an heap of wheat: because the understanding of a man, takes no
notice of that which is the riffe raffe; but of that which is good, and
commendable. So Saint Paul, because many of them were illuminated; he gives
them a title exceeding, and says, they had all knowledge, and all learning,
and abundance of all grace. In the mean time, he meddles not with these that
were the worst, and the poorest; that were fallen from their knowledge, and had
blinded themselves in sinfulness. He says therefore:

Some of you have not the knowledge of God. Where we are to consider,

First, that he that does not yield unto God in all the parts of his Word, he
does not know God: he that knows not God, as he would be known, he knows him
not at all. A man were as good to make no profession of God, as not to give him
the full extent of his own declaration. Whatsoever it has pleased God to
promise to them that belong unto him; he will certainly perform it: 2 Cor.
1.20.
he cannot lie, all his promises are Yea and Amen, in Christ Jesus. Therefore,
those know God, that know him to be all-sufficient, and true of his promise: and
they that know him otherwise, and know him not that way; they know him no way.
So that it is not for any man, to take to himself a singular dexterity of
knowledge; except he yield unto the written word of God. Many men take upon
them, to be the only witty men, to be singular in all sciences, and that the
knowledge of all belongs to them: and yet they know nothing. Why? because they
doubt of the prime and chief things: they make a doubt, whether Christ be the
Mediator of intercession, as he is of satisfaction, or no? they make a
question, whether we may pray to Saints and Angels, or no? they call in
question, how the body of Christ is determined in the Sacrament; and this
article of the Resurrection of the dead, they make it a disputable case. When
men will thus dispute, and jangle away their faith, they corrupt their
knowledge: and when they think they know all things, they are mere ignoramus;
that are not seen at all in these things. And no marvel, for God says, the
things that he has laid up for his children, they pass the minds of these
men: They are such as ear has not heard, 1. Cor. 2.9.
nor eye has seen, nor has ever entered into the heart of man to conceive.
Flesh and blood will speak of the things belonging to it self; it cannot
attain further. These earthly mansions can take in no more, then is vouchsafed
them: and no more then they use well, when they have received it. But when men
will blind themselves, they fall into absurdities: from better to worse; and
from worse, to worst of all.

Let us take heed how we brag of knowledge. Church (by the blessing of God)
we have had as great light, as any part of the world; none comparable: but when
we begin by our base manners, and evil lives, to fall from the service of God,
to our pleasures; there is nothing so blindes our understandings; nothing casts
such mists, and vapors into the world, as this: and at last, it resolves into
a mere sencelesnesse. That he that when he was an apprentise, when he was a
young man, understood the grounds of Religion; and was able to give a reason of
his faith: now when he comes to be an old man, he is grown a mere butterfly,
of a laborious silkworme. He is grown a very bruit; merely senseless, by
reason of the cares and pleasures of this world. For when a man falls into
sin, it breeds an oblivion of God: and from that, it brings a man to a mere
ignorance of him. Therefore, if we know God, let us follow him as our guide. It
is to no purpose, for us to have a guide, and to know him; if we go one way,
and he go another: but herein is our wisdom, to follow our guide, to yield to
his blessed word; to hope, and put confidence in his promises for our guidance
and direction: and to disclaim, and forsake our selves, and all things else,
Col. 3.11.
that we may be only his who is all in all.

Secondly, observe, when the Apostle lays this imputation upon them, he
restrains it, and says, Some of you.

aspersions: a Church, especially, upon a whole Church, as Corinth was. We must
speak so, that offense may not be taken; that we do not lay the fault of a
few upon all. A man must not be so base, that because two or three of a
profession live ill; to say that therefore all do so; because some few are ill
neighbors, that therefore all the street is so. No: but we must lay the fault
to the right owner; every person must answer for himself. The Church is still
to be presumed, to know God. In this Congregation (although there were fewer
understanding people, then there are) yet he that should say, All this people
were without the knowledge of God, were blasphemy. There is no Congregation of
the people of God, but they know God; and they fear God; and love God: and
though some do not so, yet the better part do: the select number that God has,
where his word is preached; they both know him, and fear him. Still therefore,
we are to comprehend the Church in this, that she knows God; and that she loves
God. And as the Church universal, so in particular Churches; in parishionall
Churches; in every company and neighborhood of men; we are to imagine that
some know God, and fear him: though some do neither.

Therefore let us labor to make much of, admonition, and reprehension: that
the children of God that do well, may not be discouraged: and that others may
not be permitted to do evil, nor suffered to go on in their foolishness. But
that there may be a difference made, and yet no particular set down. For here
the Apostle does not name them: but he leaves it to their own breasts to
consider of. He charge them not maliciously, to make them scandalous to the
world; for that way he might have made them desperate: but he leaves them to
God that knows them. The Lord knows, that all are not alike among you: that
there is a company among you, that are of the same profession, that are not
equal to the rest in the knowledge and fear of God. But he does not name
them, because he would leave them to repentance, to commune with their own
hearts: Psalm. 4 4.
that every one might examine his own conscience, whether he were the man or
no.

And lastly, he concludes all, with which I will consider.

I speak this to your shame. That is, I desire not any way to destroy you, but
to build you up: whatsoever I can do, or whatsoever I am appointed to do in the
Lords work, it must be to edification, and not to destruction. There is a
certain shamefastness, whereby a man is won to God: It is an excellent
beauty in a man or woman, to be modestly shamefast; to blush at that which is
unseemely; to be afraid of that which is unhonest: The forehead being the seat
of shame, and the cheeks, the testimony. What is received from the Rainbow
above, appears in colors beneath: and is reflected on the lower clouds: These
testify, for God, of the temper of the heart and affections. God has put a
law of difference within men, whereby they are able to discern between good
and evil. And this shamefastness if it were well managed, it would bring a
man (by the grace of God) to loath sin; and to be circumspect of his ways.
But we take a course in the world, to overwhelme this shamefastness; and to
make this modest shamefastness mere clownishnesse. There is no man so far
from brave and Courtly behavior, as a blusher: those that have shamefast
affections, those that have a divine touch and tincture of holiness in their
face; there are none accounted so base as these. And men, now, will prescribe
certain ages; how long men may be ashamed: and after that, they think it is a
shame to be ashamed. It is true, that it is a shame for a man to do that,
which is shameful; but never to be ashamed for it; for as long as there is
shame in man, there is hope of grace; there is hope of conversion, that he will
turn: it shows that he cannot endure the burden of that, that is shameful.
A man that blushes, would feign be out of the room, where he is; he would
feign quit the company; he would not hear such things as he he areth; nor see
such objects as he sees: for a man is loath to be noted, for one that is
conscious in any kind. Therefore, the grace of God seconding this natural
affection; if we be careful to maintain it in our selves; it would bring us
to a happy condition: to be one spirit with the Lord. For so we are, when we
hate that which he hates; and when we love that which he loves; when we would
not have that in our selves, or in our friend, or in our company, which ^od
likes not of. It is a gracious complexion, which is to be maintained and
cherished: the grace of God would bring it to this perfection, if it were
maintained in us. But this impudent look, this base behavior, and such as the
devil has devised to take away shame from men: it is this that has brought
men from all their glory; and made them to fall (as bruit beasts) into all
manner of sin, without shame or conscience.

I speak this to your shame. And I hope there is shame and grace left in you,
that you will not despair: for I speak it, to win you, not to destroy you.
Let this shamefastness put you in mind, what you ought to have been; and
make you ashamed of what you are, in respect of what you should be: and so let
it be a means to reduce you. As the wise man says, there is a certain shame
and confusion of face, that brings a man to the grace of God Almighty, namely,
when he is ashamed of himself, and his courses; and opens his wants, and
confesses his sins unto God; that he is not able to endure his wants: There
is another shame unto ruin: when men do that which is evil, and harden their
foreheads; and have sinnowie and steely necks: such as are without fear or
compunction. As the Lord speaks of his people, that they had made their faces
of brass, Jsa. 48.4.
and their necks of steel. When there is such a fearful conclusion as this, it
makes a man or woman the son or daughter of shame and confusion.

Therefore let us entreat the Lord God, to work these natural affections in
us, and to sanctify them to us: and they will teach us many things. These
n^turall affections of fear, and joy, and sorrow, and shame; these natural
things being in us: if God rule them, if God sit on them, and ride upon the
ass; they will carry him into Jerusalem, by the mercy of God.

Let us take heed, that we maintain these things; that we may have the
knowledge of good and evil, shining in our consciences; that accordingly we
may bear it in our countenance. For when a sinner is ashamed; he comes naked,
and confesses his fault before God and his brethren: and entreats the mercy of
the one, and the love of the other; that God may take away his afflicting hand;
and that his shame here, may keep him from eternal shame in the world to
come. Which the Lord grant.

FINIS.
1 COR. 15.35. But some man will say, how are the dead raised? with what kind
of bodies do they come? Fool, that which thou sowest is not made alive, except
it dye.
THis is the question of an idle and ignorant man, to which the Apostle frames
an answer, Fool, that which thou sowest, etc.

Here begins that mavelous part of this Chapter. Which contains a plain
declaration of the rising of the dead, from natural arguments. So that all the
body of nature, does preach a resurrection to us: and there is no one change or
vicissitude in the things of this world, but it has some step of this
doctrine in it. This is that, which the Apostle declares throughout, to the end
of the Chapter. And (as Austin says) all the frame of nature does make open
proclamation of the certainty of this doctrine; Aug.
if we attend to the voice of nature.

For it is seen in the falling, and rising of the Sun.

In the descending, and ascending of the stars.

It is seen in the intercourse of Summer and Winter.

It is seen in the vicissitude of day and night.

It is set forth in the continual intercourse of generation and corruption in
the world.

And especially it is seen in this one thing, in the seed that is sown in the
ground. For a man in his garden, may observe the certainty of the
Resurrection; in his field, in the hope of his harvest: he may see that God is
able to do as much for his body, as he does for those seeds that he commits to
the ground. As S. Chrysostom says well; Chrysostom.
there is a twofold kind of sowing, or semination.

1 One of seed. 2 Another of bodies.
All men sow seed, so God sowes bodies; and the Churchyards are called Gods
acre, in some countries, because there is sown that seed, that God preserves
to eternal life; he is able to bring them from the bosom of the earth: and
we must trust, and credit him with it, to bring them from dust to be invested
with glory; and to be made conformable to the body of his Son.

Therefore, here the holy Apostle out of arguments drawn and observed from
nature; out of the common course, that men are acquainted with daily: he brings
a very forcible remonstrance, to prove the necessity of the Resurrection.

And that he may do it with the more force, and emphasis, he brings it by way
of prosopopeia: making a man to speak and move questions, and then to give
himself the answer.

He brings in a simple man, an ignorant man; either disgracing the doctrine of
the Resurrection: or else being simple and ignorant; desiring to know what the
truth of it were. And he moves two questions.

The one, touching the Resurrection in general: as though it were impossible
the dead should rise.

The other, touching the manner and quality of their bodies; if the dead
should rise, how, with what bodies shall they come? To which questions, he
returns a twofold answer.

The first, more bitter, by way of reprehension.

The second, of demonstration, showing the reasons why, and the manner how,
they shall come.

For the first, Thou fool (says he) that which thou sowest, it is not
quickened, except it dye. Does not thy self teach thy self, that there must
needs be a raising of these dead bodies of ours? because God has used thee, as
an instrument to make a kind of Resurrection. For when thou committest thy
seed to the ground, God gives it a body at his pleasure: but thou take
pains, and usest the means to effect it, that it may come to pass. That now
which thou do to thy corn, will not God do to his corn? Are we not all the
seeds of God? are we not all the corn of the Almighty? has thy ground by thy
diligence and culture, better ability, and power, to bring forth a new ear of
corn, then the earth, to yield up thy body by Gods work, and blessing upon
it? So he answers the first question.

The second answer is in the next words; concerning the manner, and quality of
the bodies, when they are raised. As they shall come bodies, so they shall be
bodies: but with certain qualifications, otherwise qualified then they are now.

In the prosopopeia, in the questions that he makes; and in the answer that
the Apostle returns to them in the next verse, we are to observe:

First that he speaks indefinitely: Division: into 1. A question.
bringing in a simple ignorant man, moving questions: arguing, and disputing
and talking against the resurrection.

2. The matter of it. 3. The answer. in the matter, 2 questions. 1. Of the
generality.
Secondly, he notes to us the matter of his questions, what he demands. And
there are two questions.

One is, concerning the generality of this maine Article, How can the dead
rise? how can they be raised again?

2. of the form of the bodies raised.
The second is, concerning the form and disposition of their bodies, when they
be raised. Suppose there shall be such a thing, as the raising of the dead; yet
with what kind of bodies shall they come?

3. In the Answer we have 1. A reprehension.
And then in the answer we are to consider:

First, a reprehension of this boldness: for meddling with Gods mysteries too
much, for meddling too far. Fool. So that to move questions, is not always a
sign of wit, and great learning. Though questions may be moved in a sober
manner, when men do it for satisfaction; but to multiply question upon question
(to no purpose) this is gross folly: and rather makes men giddie in their
understandings, then gives them any instruction. Therefore he calls him fool.

2. A demonstration.
And then he demonstrates it out of the actions, that men are every day
conversant in: That which thou sowest. I will show thee out of thine own
field, out of thy plot of ground; that this is not incredible: but that there
shall be a resurrection. Why? because that which thou sowest must first dye,
that it may live after. For it is never quickened, until the corn come to a
very jellie; and be turned to nothing but corruption, and rottenness, and
putrefaction in the earth: and then it pleases God to raise it. Therefore as
the corn in the ground first dies, that after it may live: so Gods corn must
dye, there must be a passage to a temporal death, that God may raise it
thence, unto eternal life.

Of these briefly, and in order. 1. part. The Question.


First concerning the questionist in this place; the party that moves the
question. You must first note, that the Apostle will not lay the imputation
upon the Corinthians; because he would not too much offend them. He does not
charge them, that they should be so long taught in the school of Christ; and
yet be so little edified, as to move such idle questions as these. For he
takes it as a thing confessed among them: and although (indeed) many denied it;
yet he will not cast it upon them every where: but he labors to keep
himself peaceable, and quiet with them; that so he might work the better upon
them. Therefore he brings in a man at large: he supposes such a man in the
world; one that understood nothing of the power of God, nor yielded unto it: he
supposes him to speak such a word as this, How are the dead raised, etc.

And this (as Saint Chrysostom says) teaches us that we should not be
personal or particular, Chrysostom.
in our reprehensions. When we are to deal with Gods people, in a public
place; we must not deal so personally, and particularly, that any may think
themselves pointed at. For by that means, they may be made incorrigible: but
such things must be supposed, in the person of a stranger: there must be a
kind of compassing, a kind of wheeling about; as we see Nathan did, when he
came to David.

Now what the mind of this man should be, that moves this question; whether he
came with a mind to cavil, or whether he came as one that would feign be
instructed in the mysteries of Religion, as one that would feign understand
this mystery to the full: this we cannot easily determine. It may well be
taken either way. But I think it fittest, to take it in the best sense: to
judge the best of a thing, that is doubtful.

If he came as one to cavil, then he was such one as the Sadduces, that came
to Christ, Matthew. 22. they inveyed against this point of our faith, Matthew.
22.28.
the Resurrection; and they brought an argument against it, from a woman, that
had seven husbands: and they ask him whose wife she should be in the
resurrection, for seven had her to wife. Such kind of gross cavils, served
the turn to blind their eyes; because they could not understand the glorious
state of the Saints at the Resurrection. Act. 17.32.
So the like we have, Acts 17. when the Apostle comes to the Philosophers at
Athens, and tells them of the doctrine of the Resurrection: they begin presently
to laugh it out, as a thing merely absurd, and that could not be any way
believed. As Saint Basil Basil.
says, to this day (says he, and he lived four hundred years after Christ)
when I preach to the Grecians, the doctrine of the Resurrection, they cast
forth a broad, and loud laughter: because it seems to them a matter altogether
incredible. So that if the party whom the Apostle supposes here, came with
the mind of a caviller; we must know that the world was never free from them.
Yet these must not dismay, but strengthen us; for the finding out of answers
and arguments to stop the mouths of such cavilling spirits, as those are.

But I rather follow the other; that they are the words of a man that was
simple and ignorant; and would feign be instructed, and see how these things
were.

And then this teaches us further; doctrine and the Articles of our faith so
plain as we can: that if it be possible, the manner it self may be declared.
It is true, it is a dangerous thing to ask questions, where God has set no
resolution. Zachary was stricken dumb for asking how he could be the father
of John Baptist, Luk 1.18.
because he and his wife were stricken in age. And yet sometimes it is not
unlawful so to question: as Nicodemus asks Christ saying, How can these
things be? Joh 3 4.
being desirous to be informed. And the Virgin Mary when the Angel Gabriel tells
her she should be the mother of God, the Savior of the world; she desires to
know the manner: How can these things be; Luke 1.34.
seeing I know not a man? So that if men come with a conscience, that desires
to know the truth, and come not in mockery, to disgrace the word of God, to
cast mists on it, that so they may make it incredible to other people, as it is
to themselves: I say, if they come with humble minds, it is lawful to ask
questions, even concerning the manner how these things shall be? For although
the Apostle call him fool, for his labor, yet the reason is not simply,
because he asks the question, but because he asks it with a kind of doubting
and distrust: because he thought it impossible, that it could not be; and
therefore he asks in a kind of gybing. As Sarah when the Angel tells her she
should have a child, she laughs, and says, How shall my lord and I fall to
lust that are old? Gen 18.12.
So jesting out that which was spoken. Now because there was such a smacke of
ingratitude and infidelity, in this question: therefore the Apostle finds
fault with him, and returns him the fool for his labor.

2. Part. The matter of the question.
But now for the matter that is moved. The question propounded, is first, about
the generality of the Resurrection, and the possibility thereof.

And secondly, about the quality of the bodies, that shall rise. These are the
two questions here moved.

1 The generality and p^ssibility of the Resurrection.
Concerning the first. It has always been the maine and principal project of
the devil, so to blunder our faith in this point; as to make it to be thought
a mere dream and fable: even the glorious Resurrection. And to that purpose,
he has heaped up a number of questions, one upon another; even to overwhelme
the clearness of this truth, and to make us run wild in this labyrinth;
there being such diversities of questions in it, and so intricate, as that men
might make no evasion out of it. There is nothing that has been more loaded
with questions, then this point. As how the dead shall rise? In what place they
shall rise? R^ndezv^u^.
where their randevouse shall be, where they shall all meet together? in what
time they shall come? in what time of the world? in wh^t year of the world?
how long this Resurrection shall be in the accomplishing? whether many days,
or in one day, or in the twinkling of an eye as the Scripture speaks? to what
purpose it shall be done? after what manner men shall live, when they are
risen? In what sex they shall rise? These, and such like questions, the
Schoolmen themselves have been too too busy to treat upon: and Satan has
by this means entered into the understandings and consciences of many men, to
make them either deny, or very deeply to doubt, whether these things shall be
so or no.

Therefore, it must be a warning to us, questions in those things, that are
not revealed: but to rest in those things that God has opened unto us. For it
is impossible for us (in any great measure) to know the things here, that are
reserved for a better life. 1. Cor. 2 9.
Those things that eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, nor has ever
entered into the heart of man to conceive. Can any man tell, how he lived in his
mothers womb? Can any man tell how he lived the first year, when he was a
babe in the world? he may see, and judge of it, by the experience that he takes
from others: but to speak it of his own person, it is impossible. So much
more impossible is it, for a man to reach to those things that are above. A man
goes beyond himself, and beside himself; and turns fool when he looks into
those things, that God would keep secret; that he would never have us see,
till we come to that life of vision: till we come to see face to face. It is
enough, that the Lord has said there shall be a life: but what kind of life
it shall be, or what actions we shall be employed in; other then the praising
and glorifying of God, we cannot determine. Therefore, let us learn to extend
this point, as in all other things, to come with modesty. For if men will still
be moving of questions, and never make an end: the Apostle calls it doting
about questions. 1 Timothy 6.4.
He that is not content (says he) with these things, but will teach other
things; he is sick about questions: he labors of a great sickness, the
sickness of the soul, which is the greatest sickness that can be. And so
about the matter of Baptism, that we are now to celebrate; the devil does
plie doubting spirits with many questions. As how is it possible that water
should wash away sin: That a tincture and touch of water should do this* what
is the grace that God conferres in Baptism? whether it be an inherent thing in
the soul? whether it be a habit that can be removed, or not removed? whether
it be necessarily effected by the collation of Baptism, or no? Such things
should not trouble us; but we ought to follow the ordinance of God: and to know
that he that has promised, is able to perform it; he that became a
sacrifice for mankind, and was a sweet smelling savor unto God, for the sin
of man, he alone was able; and had power and authority to ordain a Sacrament;
and to bless it, with all those gracious appendices, to make it a passage unto
life, the seal of glory. And therefore he has given us his Word; and we
cannot seek further. We know that a Prince can make a Knight of the Garter, by
sending his George: though it be a Prince in France, or in another Country,
and he never saw the man, nor came near him; yet by sending his Garter, he is
invested into that Order. So much more the great God of heaven and earth, when
he sends us these badges and symbols: even the two Sacraments, Baptism and the
Lords Supper. These are the seals and signs of our investing into this holy
order; and we cannot miscarrie in our faith in this: we are sure these signs
are never frustrate, but they put us into that honor, and they possess us of
that order, which our Prince has sent unto us. And as a Prince that sends a
pardon to a malefactor; or that sends a letter of grace, and honor, and
advancement: we know that those letters are still efficacious, and have their
work upon the person to whom they are sent. Much more is the letter of
Baptism powerful, which is sent from God: which is turned from a letter, to a
working instrument. It is not idle, and fruitless, but is always working to
eternal life: and it puts them into honor; that he that was a mean man
before, is now advanced to high dignity: it follows upon him, he is as sure of
it in his person (by means of that letter and conveyance) as men are of any
possessions in the world. So that this honor that God gives to Christians by
Baptism, it is true and permanent: it is inherent, it is really conferred upon
him. Therefore we are not to move doubts and questions upon it; but in our holy
faith to follow our holy God: and to know that he is able to do whatsoever he
will, Psalm. 135.6.
both in heaven, and earth, and in the sea, and in all deep places.

And for the conferring of grace, it is certain, that by the prayers of the
people, by the faith of the Church, and the faith of the parents, there is a
measure of grace conferred in Baptism too: That is, those three Cardinal
virtues, those three principal stems (faith, hope, and charity) though they
do not yet work, and appear in the child (because it is weak, and must come
to age first) yet as reason lies hid in the child, for diverse months (and
perhaps for diverse years, before it show it self by speech and conversing) so
these graces are actually, and really in the child, although they do not work
till God give them their fullness, and growth, as the Lord has appointed to
every thing its own time and operation. So much for the first question, that
is, about the Resurrection in general.

2 The qua^ities of the resurrection.
The second is, concerning the qualities of the bodies raised. And herein the
nature of man troubles it self, more then in all the rest. So curious, and so
sickish to know, what correspondence there sh ll be between man, and man? to
know in what kind of stature they shall rise in? what color they shall have?
what employment they shall be ra sed for? whether a child shall rise as a
child? whether an old man, shall r^se in his old age? whether crooked, and
deformed men, shall rise crooked, and deformed* whether a Prince, shall rise in
the quality of a Prince? and a pr^vate man, as a private man? S ch fool^sh
things, the weak mind of man doats upon: The quality and manner, being of
all other things the most hard to be conceived. It is an easier matter, to
persuade a man of the substance of the thing, that there shall be a
Resurrection; then to persuade him of the difference, and of the qualities of
men at the Resurrection. What? sexes, again; male and female: and so as the
Sadduces thought, man and w fe? and consequently, a new love, and concordance,
and generation of the world? Thus the foolish heart of man conceives.

To this, then, let us give that answer (to our selves, and to all others that
dare meddle with these hidden matters) which the Apostle gives: for we can
give no better, Fool, thou think it is a great part of wit, to devise these
things; but they are such as languish the soul: they are fearful decays, and
defacings of the image of God. Chrysostom.
For (says Saint Chrysostom) such a desire of questioning, shall never be
stayed any where; it multiplies, and rebounds still on a man: and at last
overwhelmes him. Therefore the only wisdom is, for men to betake them to
principles, and fundamental doctrines: which are the ^nely things that God
would have us to build on. As for these curiosities, they shall once appear;
but not yet: God has kept them for another world.

We see the Lord is mavelous, in concealing of his works in material
corporal things. What a while was it, before America was found out? and when
Plato Plato.
said there was another world as big as Africa, the world laughed at him. And
when other Philosophers affirmed it, still they were laughed at for their
labor. And Pope Vitellius deposed a Bishop, because in his conference he said
there were such a people as the Antipodes. We see then, how long the world was
in gross ignorance, in things that are created, in things that are obvious,
and common to sense. We know by experience, that it is but the other day, since
half the world was found out: nay it is certain, that some part of the world
lies still hid. So secret does God keep his riches; that when men have
gotten all they can, that they should know, that there is more behind still:
so to fill the desires of men, and to draw their affections unto him. As it is
thus in these corporal things, which are with less labor found out; still
there is an infinitum, a kind of infinite labor and toil in it; that they
are not found out but by the hand of God. So many golden mines in the earth
that are undiscovered; so many precious things, that are not yet revealed. Much
more must it needs be, in those holy secrets; those gracious things in heaven
(in the glorious Court above) when the footstool is so infinite and secret.
Psalm. 77.19. Aug.
As the Psalmist says, his footsteps are not known. Says Saint Austin well,
If the steps of his feet be not known, how then shall the counsels of his
head be discovered? Therefore in these things, we must settle our selves; and
return the fool upon our own souls, when we meddle with these deep and
secret matters, we know not a great number of things that are created: the
herbs that are under our feet; we know not the difference of them: we know
not the qualities of them, nor their natures and operations; and shall we then
mount up into heaven, to see what is done there before our time? The Lord will
give it us in time, if we keep our selves within the limits of modesty, and
restrain our selves within that compass which he has commanded us.

learn out of this, in that the Apostle calls him fool, and calls these things
foolish: therefore we should not affect these things, and give our selves over
to them. We learn what to judge of all curious Divinity and d^scourses: that
it is rather a part of folly, then any show and remonstrance of wisdom. And
by this reason, a great number of Students and Scholars in this Land, spend
their time merely in folly. 1. Tim. 6.10.
As the Apostle says, It is science falsely so called: they study and employ
themselves, that they may be mad with reason: that is, by following a kind
of sublime reason (as they think) they fall from reason, and loose themselves.
Like the Philosopher, that so long conversed, about the mystery of the Sun,
that at the last he made a question, whether ever there were a Sun or no? he
knew not whether the light came from the Sun, or from any super-illuminating
cause, or no. The Lord blindes men that are too quick sighted, to search into
things that he has not provided for them. Such things there be indeed, as
Saint Austin says, Aug.
there are certain idle delicacies and dainties: but they are not for us; they
are for no man to know, that would work out his salvation with fear and
trembling. Phil. 2.12.


Lastly, in that he calls him fool or mad man; we see how lawful and how
necessary it is, sometimes to use the authority of the Spirit: to use the
majesty of the Spirit in the Gospel; to call them fools, that speak foolish
things. And although Christ forbid us to do it, in our particular and private
talk; and he that calls his brother fool, Mat. 5.22.
is in danger of hell fire: yet it is one thing what a common Christian may do,
upon a little slight cause; and it is another thing, what the Magistrate, or
what the Minister of the Word may do; upon an urgent occasion. Gal. 3.1.
We see Saint Paul calls the Galathians mad men, and foolish men: and this
questionist, here, he calls him fool. Luke 12.20.
Yea our Lord Christ calls the rich man fool: Thou fool, this night shall they
take away thy soul. Mat. 3.7.
And Saint John Baptist; Oh generation of vipers. So that there is left in the
Church, a power, and authority, which must be used when there is occasion, to
draw the sword against contumacious rebels, which will not be reclaimed by
other means. As Saint Ambrose Ambrose.
says, the preacher of the Word must be like unto the Be: he must have both a
sting, and honey. And Saint Chrysostom upon this place, says he, Chrysostom.
he gives him a sharp term; but he passes by him quickly: he gives him,
indeed, a poor title, but yet it is a fit one. He was afraid, lest he should
cut him too deep; therefore he would not stand too long upon him: lest he
should make him run away. For as a wise man will easily endure such a word as
this, from the mouth of a wiser: so a man when he is followed, and baited too
far, he will kick against the pricks, and be ready altogether to cast off
the reprehension.

Now we come to the demonstration.

That which thou sowest, etc. 2 The demonstration.
Here is the substance of the Answer to the first question: the answer to the
second, follows in the next verse.

The Lord of his great goodness, and mercy, has made the possibility of his
own truth apparent unto us, in all the common actions of nature. What more
usual? what more ordinary? what more necessary, then the sowing of seed? Now
the seeds man, if he do but mark what he does, when he imployes himself; he
shall easily perceive that God teaches him, out of his own trade, what he is
to think of this great mystery. To sow the corn in the ground, we know that
to flesh, and blood, and common sense, it is a mere loss of it: and if we
had not seen it done before, we should conclude so. Therefore, there are some
men, that are celebrated as famous in the Poets, for inventing this, the
casting of the seed into the ground: from whence people thought there was no
returning. Indeed that conceit might be, in barbarous rude Nations; but it is
certain, that this doctrine was taught unto Adam in Paradise: and has been
transmitted to all his posterity. Yet there are some Nations, that to this day
do not know the common necessity of sowing; nor use it not: they understand not
the mystery, the Lord has so far blinded them. So it is in this sowing of
the body. In all judgment of flesh and blood, when the body is put down into
the grave (into the coffin, into the earth) it seems to be gone for ever: and
it goes from worse to worse, till it come to dust and ashes, the prime
principles of our creation. We ought to compare therefore, these things
together: and we shall see how wondrous God is in the one; and learn thereby
how glorious he will be in the other.

The seed that is sown, it is quickened, and has life (that vegetable life,
th t things of like nature have) to grow again, and to be greater; to feed it
self, and to feed us also. For God has made the seed, of a singular piercing
quality: that the lesser it is, the more power it has. Therefore the
mustard seed (which is the least grain) when it comes up, it grows to be a
great tree. For in these small things, God sets forth his power (often times)
more gloriously, then in greater matters. And the corn grows thus: because it
has a double end For (as you know) it is made after a kind of a long f^shion,
with two ends: out of which co es the moisture, and juice, which is the life
and soul of the seed. For if those ends should be cut or bitten off, the seed
could never rise again. Therefore the Ants and p^smires (those creatures that
hoard up corn against the Winter when they carry it into their holes, where
they lay it; they are careful to bite off both ends of the corn, to snappe
them off. For they understand by nature, that if they should let them alone;
the corn would sprout, and so they could not live on it. God has given them
this instinct, to know that out of the two ends, comes the soul, and life, and
juice: as being in those ends brought to a point, out of which the life
works. This, now, the husbandman easily understands.

But the mystery concerning the body, he does not understand so well: but yet
he must make the argument from his field, to Gods field; from his hand, to Gods
hand, from the blessing upon the corn, to the blessing upon the body: and then
he shall see, that the argument will follow clearly. Is it possible that the
Lord should have such a care and providence of a poor dead corn that falls
into the earth; that he should raise it again, with a new color, and in
great abundance: and multiply it that it grows from one state to another: from
a blade, to an ear; and from thence, to full corn in the ear? Is it possible
the Lord shall thus proportion and suite his power, to a grain of corn that
falls into the ground; and will he neglect the temples of the holy Ghost? will
he neglect the image of God? the body, upon which he has drawn the lineaments
of Christ; and for which he has made a promise, that he will conform it unto
his body? If God be careful for the fowls of heaven, and for the lillies of
the field; Mat 6.30.
much more will he be careful for us, oh we of little faith: Therefore the
bodies of the Saint: are so precious in Gods sight; that all the corn in the
world does not amount to that sum, as one of those bodies. For God gave the
body of his Son, to redeem the body of the meanest of his: and shall we
doubt, but that he that is so rich in glory, upon the weak dead body of the
corn, will be much more glorious, and powerful in raising up these roots of
life again? which though they seem to be dead, are breeding of immortality,
by the power of him that is able by his mighty power, to subdue all things to
himself.

Saint Chrysostom asks the question, says he, why did not the Apostle rather
run to the same argument, that he alleges to the Philippians? to the
omnipotency of God, Phil. 3.21.
rather then to take this argument: For when he treats there, with the
Philosophers, Phil. 3. concerning this argument, he proves it from that maine
point, because God can do all things, therefore he will do this. From whence
we look for the Savior, who shall change our vile bodies, and make them like
his glorious body: according to his mighty power, etc. But (says he) the
Apostle here to these, thought this the best teaching.

Hence we may learn, teaching; when a man can instruct his scholar by the
trade that he is frequently exercised in; which he is most familiar with. That
teaching is most operative and working, the most impressive teaching that can
be. So our Lord Jesus teaches his disciples that were fishermen, out of their
own trade: Come, Mat. 4.19.
and I will make you fishers of men. So when he speaks to the common people, to
the multitude; he teaches the plough-man by a plough-man. Matthew. 13.3.
A sower went forth to sow seed, and some fell on the high way, and some fell
on thorny ground: and some on good ground. So Saint Paul, Act. 17. he teaches
the Athenians (which is a strange doctrine) by their own idols, Act. 7.23.
Ye men of Athens, I see ye are too much given to superstition, and idolatry:
for as I came by one of your altars, I see it written there, To the unknown
God. So our Savior Christ teaches men to make them friends of the unrighteous
mammon: Luke 16.9.
by the common lucre and gain which was gotten among the Publicanes. And in S.
John Baptist, every man has a lesson out of his own trade: he said to the
soldiers, do thus; and to the Publicans, Luke 3.
do thus: still he teaches them out of their own particular calling, and
actions. To teach us, to labor, and desire in this manner: every one to be
taught out of those things, that are common and obvious daily to us; for
therein, is the greatest power of persuasion. He that is conversant about the
fire, in fireworks, and especially such as work in glasse-houses: where if he
cannot see a clear picture of hell, he is a very senseless man, and very
brutish in his understanding. Psalm. 107.23.
He that goes down to the sea in ships, and exercises his business in great
waters: if he cannot see a wondrous act of Gods providence, in his
preservation; he understands nothing. He that is a Student, and does not see
in his books, and the difficulties of learning and remembering: if he do not see
the infinite and admirable blessing of the Almighty, in saving his wits and
memory; and in raising him from one degree of learning to another: he
understands nothing. In our ordinary meats and drinks, he that sees not God,
sees nothing: he has his feeding and preservation from him; and therein he
has a sign of his everlasting refreshment and preservation.

Let us therefore scorn no Art; nor think basely of any kind of labor and
good exercise: because there is matter of good doctrine lies, in the poorest
profession that can be. That which thou sowest, I will prove out of thine own
actions, out of thy own trade; this doctrine that I teach. Thou that
propoundest this question, thou art not more simple then a plough-man: and I
will prove it unto thee from thence, by the poorest labor in the earth; for
the man that tils the ground, he is of less account, then an Artizan: yet even
the very plough-man shall prove and make good, that this doctrine that I teach,
is probable, and possible. And why? because That which thou sowest, is first
dead: and then it is quickened again.

Concerning the dying of the corn, the Philosophers make a distinction:
because they knew not this doctrine of the Resurrection. They thought when the
habit was gone, when the privation had put out the habit: that it could never
come back again. Therefore they thought that the corn had ever life in it.
But the Scripture tells us, that it is dead: that is, it is dead to us, which
are the judges of life and death. For who can tell what is dead, and what is
alive in the creature; but he that is Lord of the creature? Therefore, though
it have a kind of action, though it have a kind of life, lurking in it; yet
to our sense, it is to no purpose: it is of no use, it is a mere jellie, that
is good neither for man nor beast. Therefore it is dead. So our Lord Christ
says, Ioh. 12.24. Verily (says he, comparing himself to the wheat-corne) the
corn of wheat (says he) except it fall into the ground and dye, it remains
alone, and brings forth nothing, but is single still; but when it falls into the
ground, when it is buried, and dies in the earth; then it brings forth much
fruit. So the Son of Man, if he should live still in the world, and not dye;
he should remain alone; he should do no good; he should be a single Christ;
no man could be saved by him: but if he dye, and rise again, he shall raise a
mighty harvest unto God. So we see the truth of this doctrine manifested,
against the Philosophers. That the corn is simply dead; it is demonstrated
hence: because the corn of God, which is far better then the common corn;
it dies; the bodies of men are truly dead: yea the body of that wheat corn,
the Son of God himself, was dead. It is idle, therefore, for them to
imagine, that it has a perfection to it self, though it be corrupted to us.
For it is certain, that all these things dye, the corn dies; man dies; the
Son of God dyed; according to that part of his humane nature, which was
mortal. Therefore he compares himself to a wheat corn: to show the great
and sweet convenience between him which is the head, and we that are his
members; how it is figured in these parcels of nature. First, the Lord has
made the corn of the earth, to feed man; and has given a gracious abundance
unto it, that it comes forth in a goodly beauty, and with strange variety.
And then he teaches us, that the bodies of men shall rise so too; which are
much more dear then corn. And lastly, he has given us a pattern in his own
body, being cast into the earth; which else should have remained single: but
being once interred, and rising again, brings forth abundance of fruit.

This we may see in the bread of this life; and in the bread of heaven, how
they both work to give us an assurance of the Resurrection. The bread of this
life, is corn; the bread of heaven, is Christ: he is the Mannah that came
down from heaven: Job. 6.58.
and these breads (the bread of the body, and the bread of the soul) make up
the conclusion as a certain thing; that that which is nourished by both these
breads, shall follow the quality of them. The body of man, is nourished with
the one; and the soul of man, with the other. Therefore the substance of the
man must rise, because the bodily bread rises; and the spiritual bread
rises; and we feed of them; and according to that which a man feeds on, he is
conformed. As the Philosopher says, man is nourished of that thing, whereof he
consists: and he consists of that, whereby he is nourished.

And further we may observe in the phrase, he does not say, that the corn
lives, but it is enlivened: as Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
and Saint Basil Basil.
observe. Because he would give us to note, that all is in the power of God,
that works all in all. Therefore he says, It is quickened. It signifies a
passion or suffering, and to be wrought upon, from a higher cause. It is
quickened, it is enlivened from a higher superior power. So that the growing of
the corn, is not merely from the influence of the Sun, or of the Moon: no
nor from the goodness of the soil, nor from the diligence of the husbandman;
nor from any natural inherent quality: but God gives it a body; God gives it
life. And if his eye of providence be so watchful, in these particular cases;
in things of this small quality: much more will he be watchful, in that great
work, wherein he has bound himself by a promise; and if that be too little,
he has sworn it; we have his oath, that it shall be so. He has given us to
know in his Word, 1. Cor 3.6.
that it is not in Paul that plants, nor in Apollo that waters, but God that
gives the increase: that is, there is nothing that can bring forth fruit, no
not a tree, except the Lord give the increase. All the second causes are
nothing; it is God that works all, as the Psalmist says. Psalm. 127.1, 2.
It is to no purpose for men to rise early, or to go to bed late, and to eat
the bread of carfulness. It is in vain for the watchmen to watch the City,
except the Lord keep it. The Apostle does not say, It does not live, except it
dye: but he says, It is not quickened, it is not enlivened: still he reflects
upon God; and yields unto him the praise and glory of all things: for from him
only comes the blessing and increase.

And lastly, to conclude with the time, he says that after the corn is dead,
it is quickened again; it is enlivened again: so it shall be with the bodies
of men after they be dead; but he says, except it first be dead, it cannot
be alive: so that dying is the necessary reason of living. It is a condition
absolute: if we must live, we must of necessity dye first.

teach us, that there is no exemption and privilege from death: if we look to
be of their number, that shall come to life. Men cannot possibly be clad over
this body, with glory: this body is not capable of the garment of glory, except
either it be brought to a change, as they shall be that live at the coming of
Christ: or else it dye, and be raised again: It is impossible that the robe of
glory, should cover this body of ours, as it is.

comfort us against death, that because we shall dye first, therefore we shall
be quickened again: it has the force of a cause or condition in it: it cannot
be otherwise. Because the corn dies, therefore it lives: and the reason that
it lives, is because it first dies. There is no hope of recoverie of life,
except first there be a passage through death. Hence we have exceeding
comfort, against the sorrows of death. Those things that seem to argue clean
contrary against us, they make most for us. For because there be such
unlikelihoods of the Resurrection, therefore we shall rise: because we shall be
dead, therefore we shall be alive: because we shall be closed within the grave
as in a prison, therefore we shall be enlarged: because we are brought to dust
and ashes, therefore we shall be brought to glory, and to a heavenly
condition: because we are brought to stink and putrefaction, therefore we
shall come to be a sweet smelling savor unto God: because the corn is brought
unto a jelly, therefore it comes to be a goodly blade to an ear; and to bring
forth in some thirty, in some sixty, in some an hundred fold, according to the
mighty working of God.

So likewise, troubles and miseries of this life, which are the presages and
forerunners of this death. For the heavier the hand of God is in any sort upon
a man, the more occasion is given him, to work himself to a certainty of
Gods favor. Because thefore the Saints of God groan, and labor, and travail
under pressures, and burdens; therefore they shall have a certain redemption,
and a speedy and glorious deliverance. For as the Apostle says, we are not
only content to suffer persecution, and affliction; but we rejoice in them.
For God so sweetens them, and takes off the edge of all our afflictions in this
world: he so tempers and mitigates them; that when we think they strike most
against us, they make most for us. This is the sweet blessing of God Almighty;
because the corn dies first, therefore it shall live: because the body is
brought to baseness, and terms of putrefaction; therefore the voice of God
shall raise it. For the mercy of God uses to take a hint of our misery: that
as our miseries abound, so his mercy toward us might abound much more.

1 COR. 15.36. That which thou sowest, is not that body that shall be; but bare
corn; as perhaps of wheat, or some other of the rest: but God gives it a
body, according as he pleases: and to every seed his own proper body.

Thus another copy reads it.

And what sowest thou? thou sowest not that body that shall be, but a bare
grain; as perhaps of wheat, or some thing like: but God gives unto it a
body, according as he pleases; and to every seed his own proper body.


I Am sorry that I shall trouble you with this inarticulate voice, this poor
creaking sound He was hoarse with a cold.
especially in this great audience, and in regard of this weighty argument.
And chiefly it grieves me, because I would feign have spoken a word, in the
furtherance and helping forward of the suite for There was a Brief for a
collection, for a monastery at Jerusalem.
Jerusalem, and for the priesthood in Golgotha. It is certain, there is no
Christian man that can seriously remember the state of Jerusalem; without
tears, and much compassion: and whatsoever may be pretended and said against
it; the very love to the place where Christ wrought our Redemption, will
overquell all that can be said or surmised. As Saint Chrysostom Chrysostom.
says, concerning Rome, because Saint Paul, and Saint Peter suffered there:
and at Rome there was kept Saint Peter's chair, and Saint Paul's chair, says
Saint Chrysostom. If I had health and opportunity, to go from my charge at
Antioch; I would travel by sea and land, to view those noble Relics, of
Saint Peter, and Saint Paul: I would fall down before them; I would embrace
them, I would kiss those holy chaires. Thus was Saint Chrysostom wrapped in
the consideration of the poor chaires of the two Apostles, Saint Peter, and
Saint Paul. Now if the chaires of Saint Peter, and Saint Paul were thus
amiable, as to draw a man above a thousand miles out of his own country; in
great reverence to see, and to worship before them: what should the monument of
the grave and sepulcher of our blessed Lord Christ? how should it affect us?

It may be thought, now, to be superstition: for we are grown now so far
from all sensible and visible things, we are grown so spiritual; that we
account any outward apparent glory, a part of superstition. But certainly,
those Christians that lived long before us; many thousand great Princes and
Nobles (the worthies of the world) if they were alive at this day, to see what
great thraldom and slavery that noble place is brought unto: If they could not
regaine it with their swords, they would weep out their eyes for grief and
anger. Therefore, to give a little alms to such a glorious place: if it be but
for the names sake; if it be but for the mention sake: the very name Jerusalem
is enough, to draw an understanding Christian to some mercy. For the Lord has
drowned it in his deep anger; Jer. 19.8. Isa. 13.14.
and has made it a hissing unto all Nations, and a place for zijms and I^^ms,
a walk for Owls and Ostriches: and yet notwithstanding there shall come a
glory upon it in the end of the world that shall make it ten times greater then
ever it was. I cannot tell, whether it shall be by a worldly transplantation,
but I am sure it shall be by the apparition of the Son of God, when he shall
come to judgment. Therefore, 1. Cor. 16.3.
as Saint Paul desires them for the Saints of Jerusalem; so the very love of
the place, ought to raise up an affection in all those, Joel 3.2.
that look for Christ's appearing in that noble valley; where the persons of men
must be doomed in the day of the Lord. I leave it to your Christian
consideration, and press it no further.

The Text read unto you, is the Answer to the second question made before, in
the person of an unskilful man: which was either one that was a caviller, or
else one that was a learner; and would gladly be resolved in that particular,
and therefore he asks, With what kind of bodies men should rise? Whereunto
the Apostle now answers: retaining his former similitude taken from corn,
and things that grow upon the earth. And this is the most fit and commodious,
for the illustration of this great mystery of the Resurrection. In sum, he
says thus much: That the bodies of the Saints that shall rise again at the
last day, they shall be so much different from the bodies that the same Saints
have now; as we see the difference in those things that sprout and grow out of
the earth, from that which is cast into it. As there is infinite difference
between a small kernel, and a great tree; as there is infinite difference
between a small corn, and a goodly stem or stalk of corn: or (perhaps)
two or three upon one root; as there is great difference in these; so there
shall be between our bodies now, and at the Resurrection. As Tertullian
Tertull.
says, they shall be changed, not by abolition, and destruction, to come to
nothing: nor by alteration, so as that they shall not be the same bodies, but
another instead of this body: not by substitution, but by ampliation, by
enlarging, by being made greater, and more glorious. And says Saint
Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
they shall be made more brightsome, and fair, more excellent, and perfect in
every kind of perfection. Origin Origin.
had this for one of his gross heresies, for which he is said to deny the
Resurrection: notwithstanding he denied it not; but he had a conceit, that the
bodies of men and women should rise; and then after that they should dye
again: and another Resurrection should come after that; and another after
that: and in every Resurrection they should be less and less, until they
were brought to nothing. Thus in effect he denied it. But the truth is, by the
doctrine of the Scriptures, and of the Apostles, that the Resurrection shall
make our bodies nothing lesser; but greater: and it is certain, that the
stature and proportion of those that shall be raised to glory in the life to
come: shall be infinitely more great, then that which they have now, Numb.
13.33.
they shall be like giants in respect of grassehoppers: according to their
speech, that went to spy out the land of Promise. We see now in this small
stature that we have in this world, what a goodly sight it is to see a tall
proper man: they be as it were the giants of the earth, the glory of the world:
they be the chief copies of Gods great and wondrous power, and there is that
state and majesty in their bodies, which is not to be found in the persons of
little men. As also we see, that those countries which naturally bring forth
such tall and mighty men; they have great privileges and presidents of honor
given unto them: that God has done by them mighty and mavelous works in the
world. Therefore, the glory of manhood consists now, in a strait, and tall
procerity, in a goodly proportion of limbs, and bigness of body. In which
regard Saul was commended, that he was higher then all the people by the head
and shoulders. And so in Homer, 1. Sam. 9.1.
Homer.
great men have still this commendation, they are men that are eminent above
their fellows, that are of such a proportion. I say then, if it be the glory of
humanity; if it be the glory of manhood, not to be dwarfish and small; but to
be of a goodly stature in this world: we must imagine that God will bring us
to all perfection, in the other world: he will bring all his Saints to a goodly
bigness, to a comely tallnesse, and proportion; as a little corn of wheat,
brings a goodly tall and beautiful ear of corn, out of a small grain that
is cast into the ground. Therefore there is no diminution to be imagined; as
if the body should grow less and less; till it come to nothing; but there
shall be a great ampliation: the Lord extending and driving out the body,
drawing it to the full lineaments, and to the perfect length. So the Apostles
similitude inferres, against Origin; and those that maintained his opinion.

Now these things are very plain, in the open experience of nature, but
because we see not the things signified by them, which we are to believe;
therefore they are held to flesh and blood incredible: to a man that is not
acquainted with the field, that is not seen and experimented in this kind: he
would think it impossible that out of such a poor principle as a grain of
corn, there should come such a deal of grace and beauty, as that verdure of
color: and such a flower and leaf of grass, as the flagge of it: that there
should come so much straw to support it; and that there should be such a
structure in the knops of it: that there should be such abundance in the
treasure of it. We should think these things merely impossible, but that
common use, and experience makes us cease to wonder. And if we could see that
which is spiritual, as we do this that is outward; we should as well be
induced to subscribe, and consent to it. But in the outward thing in the world,
we see the sowing, and the mowing: we see the sowing, and the reaping; the seed
time, and the harvest: Therefore by much experience, we are taught to believe
it without doubting. But for that which is spiritual (for the Resurrection) we
see only the time of sowing; but we cannot live to see the time of mowing in
this world. For the bodies are sown, and the seed lies rotting in the ground;
some five thousand years, some less, but all a long time: yet it pleases God
to bring as it were the dew of heaven upon them, to raise them from their
graves unto the harvest. Then that truth which we now believe, shall appear as
plainly; as that which we apprehend by sense.

The thing which the Apostle would teach us here, I will but summarily touch at
(because all this sp^ech except it were better uttered; is merely unprofitable,
In regard of his extreme cold.
and unpleasant also) I will therefore cut off all superfluity: and only touch
that which is merely necessary, and elementarily pointed at.

First, the Apostle tells us, what is man's part.

And then, what is Gods part, in the matter of sowing: and so we must apply it
to the Resurrection. For that is the Apostles purpose; as being a parabolicall
doctrine, from a similitude, and therefore he rests not in the outward letter,
but referres and reduces us to the purpose and intent of it: which is to prove
the truth of the Resurrection.

Now the part that man does, he speaks of it, Division into 1. Man's Part. 2.
Gods Part.

first negatively, what he does not sow. And then affirmatively, what is sown.

Negatively, what he does not sow: he sows not that that shall be.

And then he shows affirmatively, what he does sow: a bare grain, a bare
corn, devoyd of such ornaments as God afterward gives unto it.

Then in the next part what God does: he gives it a body, to every seed the
same body. The same body in essence and substance: but so changed, and
bettered, and altered, that a man would think it were impossible to bring out
of such a foundation, such a kind of conclusion.

And because the Lord is wondrous in all his works; therefore he gives to every
seed its own peculiar body: although there be many changes and differences,
yet it comes to it self again, to that it was before; and it runs (as it
were) in a kind of a circle: he gives it its own body.

And the way, and manner, and reason of all this, is, As he pleases. For he
does whatsoever it pleases him, in all the works of nature, and in all the
works of grace.

1. Part. Man's part handled, first negatively 2. Affirmatively.
Concerning the first point, it is said, the sower sows not that body that
shall be. Which we know to be true: for he sows neither an ear; nor he
sows not a flagge; neither sows he a hawne, nor a straw; nor a knot in the
straw; he sows none of these; 1 Negatively: what man sows not. Not that body
that shall be.
yet notwithstanding he sows that which has all these in it potentially; in
the power of it (by the blessing of God) it is able to bring forth all these.
This is the wondrous act of Gods hand, that out of a black bean, or out of a
brown corn of wheat; that the Lord should bring a new flower, a green
livery, the next Spring: and that he should give it such a dew in the earth,
that it should come with such leaves and flagges about it: that in many places,
they are feign to let their cattle eat it twice or thrice over, for fear of
too much rancknesse. Not that the corn is endangered, but only they take away
the superfluity of it: so that still there remains a profit, out of that poor
dry thing, that seemed unsufficient to afford any moisture. This is the
wondrous hand of God.

teaches us, that it has pleased him to hide for his chosen children, such
treasures of heavenly furniture; and such possibility of bringing forth rare
abundance; that although the hunger-bitten beast of death, or sickness, or
affliction, or trouble, or persecution, in the world; bite upon it, and eat it
several times: yet the corn grows still. According to the conceit of the
Greek Poet, of the goat that was eating and gnawing the vine: he brings in
the vine thus speaking to the goat: Apud Sueton.
Although thou eat me to the root, yet I will rise again, and bring forth so
much fruit as shall make wine to cast upon thy carcass, when thou shall be
offered in sacrifice. This is that glorious work of the Lord which he calls
corpus futurum the body that shall be: which the Lord shall bring from diverse
changes. As from putrefying in the earth, to sprout and to take root downward:
and then to shoot upward. For so the Lord guides the thing, as the blessed
Prophet Isaiah says, Isa. 28. the Lord gives the plough-man wisdom in his
heart, to do these things; the Lord contrives the work by his own blessing;
that first it takes root downward, and lays a foundation: and as Saint
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom.
look what the foundation is in houses which men build, the same is the root
in vegetable things, that grow upon the earth: they work themselves a
foundation to stand on. The diverse branches that we see a tree to have, it
has roots answerable; it is a tree beneath the ground, as well as above
ground: or else it could not stand against those blasts and storms that come
from the air. So it is in the corn: it has an extensive variety, a great
number of little branches, and roots, that stretch themselves in the earth, to
make it firm, and solid beneath; it were impossible else, but it should be
broken in pieces, with every wind, and storm, and rain.

And then when God has given it power to work that way, to make the
foundation downward; then it shoots upward, and begins like a tender green
grass, that peepes out of the earth. And that grass is soon after covered
with such a deal of grassie substance of flagges and leaves, and in the
midst of that flaggie part, there arises that that must be the care: the
choice of all, which God builds up by a strange Art, and makes it consist
(because it is to rise to some height) of certain knots; that every knot may
be as it were a post or pillar to support the ear of corn: and therefore as
they be nearer the earth, so the thicker, and greater they be. That the
flagges that are about it, should come in to feed it; and make the substance of
the fruit: that there should come of one corn, thirty or forty: it is the
wondrous act of God, called Corpus futurum, The body that is to come.

2 Man's part affirmatively. What he sows
The next thing on man's part is affirmatively, what he sows: bare corn, that
has none of these things to see too; says Tertullian, it has not any garment
of it self; it has not any leaves to cloth is about: it has not a
foundation of any root; it has not any fence of a hawne, or husk, to defend
it from the fowls of the air; or to keep off the injury of the adversaries,
the beasts of the field: it has no tall and comely proportion; but is as a
dead forlorn: thing, that is given for lost in nature. But when it rises
again, it comes up with the greatest interest that can be. There is no usury
in the world, no interest in the earth, comparable to that that comes of the
earth. Though men's gains (often times) be cruel, and bloody: yet notwithstanding
it never makes such a noble in come as this, that a man should find an hundred
for one. For so we read in the Scriptures, of Isaac, that the Lord gave him
in one year an hundred fold, Genesis 26.12.
he received an hundred for one, that he sowed that year; whereby he was made
admirable, and honored of all the country. This is now, that glorious hand,
that is called the body that shall be. And so it is, in the rising of the
bodies of men. For it is to no purpose for us to stand in the straw of the
similitude; but we must rise up to the corn; to the thing that is purposed:
the doctrine of the Resurrection. The best man in the world, when he dies, he
must be sown in the ground: his body is sown as a bare seed, as a bare
grain: it is divested of all the goodlinesse it had before, when it lived, and
flourished in this world. It had then many fair blossoms, it had a goodly
ear, a tall stately position, and positure, above many of his fellows. It was
indewed as the highest topped corn in the field of God; with riches, with
honor, with strength, and beauty, and wisdom: and moreover, with spiritual
graces. But what are all these, when a man must come to lie down in the grave?
when he must be cast into the furrows of the earth? when all these flowers and
feathers must be plucked off? then he must forget his own honor, he must
depose, and lay aside his riches being not able to carry them with him. Job
1.21.
For naked we came into this world, and naked we shall return. It is the
common sentence of all the grain of the earth, and as the Apostle says,
certainly, 1. Tim. 6.7.
as we brought nothing into the world, so we shall carry nothing out of it:
for bare corn, naked corn, must be sowed.

This must humble us, and teach us; pomp, and glory, and are compassed about
with variety of plenty, and apparel; now the corn is in the flourish; now
the tree is in the spring; or rather in the goodliest time of the year: but
there will a Winter come, that will dash down the leaves of the tree, and make
the fruit to fall off: and will bring it to a dry stick again, and make it as
bare, as ever it was goodly and flourishing before, bare corn.

Secondly, observe what this fruit is: not the spirit, but the body. This is
the great mercy, and blessing of God; that although the body be never so
naked, yet the promise of the Resurrection is made unto that. For the spirit
needs no Resurrection, the spirit cannot rise: for it never falls. And as
Saint Chrysostom says, the Resurrection must be, of that which falls but the
spirit never fell otherwise then by sin: and it is not otherwise raised, then
by repentance, a spiritual kind of resurrection. But the Apostle meddles not
with that here; but he calls it the resurrection of the body: and he shows that
this comfort the body has, that although it be never so poor, and never so
bare, though it be cast into the furrows of the earth, never so forlorn, and
forsaken, and be stripped of all the glorious weeds that it had before: yet it
has a promise, that it shall resume unto it its former glory: nay, a far
greater glory: a glory that shall endure for ever. Indeed the corn when it
comes out of the earth again, it flourishes for a time; and then afterward is
resolved into the old corn again, and becomes like it self: all the
greenness, and goodlines of it, with two or three months drying Sun, fades
away: or with the blast of a tempest, it perishes. But these bodies when they
shall be raised again, God shall give them that singular beauty that he
intends to bring them to: he shall give them that durability, that duration,
that no wind shall weather-beat them; no Sun shall scorch them: the Sun
shall not hurt them by day, Psalm. 121.6.
nor the Moon by night: for the Lord is their protection, and their candle for
evermore.

2. Part. Gods part.
I come now to the second part of the Text, which is Gods part. He denies it to
man, and says, that he does not sow that which shall be; but he says, God
gives it a body: that is, that body that God means to give it, man does not
sow actually.

How comes it then?

By the hand of him that guides, and governs all things: he gives to every seed
a body, as he pleases: and to every seed, his own proper body.

Where first the Apostle would reduce the glory of all the action of this
creation, to God: all the operation in this great work, it is of God. And to
make us to settle only in that, he uses a phrase, that is most sweet and
gentle: when he says, God gives it a body. He does not say, God creates, and
makes it a body, for those are works of labor: we understand and conceive
always by those works, something that is painful, and hard to be gotten. And
although God take no pains in the work of creation; yet it is so propounded
to us, as a matter of great difficulty. Therefore he took six days to make
the world in, to raise our intentions to understand the greatness of the
work, and the order that God took: it was not a confusion; therefore he did
not all things at once, as he might have done; but in succession of time. But
(I say) those words when they are used in Scripture, they are spoken still in
the sense, and notion of labor. But the word giving, is always taken in another
sense; as a matter of facility, and easiness: to show both the quickness,
and facility, and also the goodness of the giver. So in this, that he says
that God gives it a body, he shows, that it is a customarie thing, for him out
of his hidden treasures; still to draw forth, and to pour down his benefits
upon mankind, with cheerfulness, and good will: his mind is set to do it;
not only to his friends, but to his enemies; Mat. 5.45.
for he makes his Sun to shine, and his rain to fall upon the just, and
unjust: and he makes that corn to grow; even the corn of Infidels, as well
as Christians. So great is his goodness to mankind!

God gives it a body: It should teach us, always to receive these creatures, as
gifts from God: as earnests of Gods love unto us. A man that uses these
temporal things, either he must make them assurances of things eternal: or
else he must abuse them. And being the gifts of God, of whom we receive every
thing: therefore they must be used to the honor of God, which is the donour.
Our bread, and food, and all the parts of our maintenance, as they spring and
issue from him, so they should be returned to him with a retribution of
thankfulness, and a gracious conversation.

God gives it a body, and to every seed his own body.

This is the maine point, with which the Apostle intends to comfort the present
body, that is afflicted in this world. For there were certain Heretics, that
said there was one body, that fell, and another body, that rose: that there was
one body, that rotted, and corrupted in the grave: and instead of that, God
gave another body. And so there was a kind of mutation or substitution: to let
one body dye, but another to be raised out of the ashes: as the Phoenix is said
to rise out of the ashes of her mother. But it is not so, says the Apostle.
There is no substitution; there is only (by the blessing of God) a restitution
of the same thing, unto a higher, and a better, and a more beautiful estate.
There is not one body that dies, and another body that is raised: for then
there could be no resurrection; For what kind of victory can this be said to
be, over death; if the same thing that was foiled and conquered, be not
conqueror again, by the powerful hand of God? Therefore Christ is so
careful to prove this point unto us; that it was the same body of Christ that
rose, that suffered upon the cross: he was so careful (I say) that we
should know this, that he ordained it so; that Thomas should be so
distrustful, that he should gage his wounds, Joh. 20.27.
and find the print of the nails: that he might look on them, that he might
touch them, and handle them: that he might see that it was the same identicall
body, that he had before he went to the grave. For he foresaw, that there would
such a doctrine of devils arise, in the latter end of the world: to say that
Christ both in his body personal, and in his body mystical, that there was a
mutation of bodies, that one body should dye, and another rise in the place of
it. But against this, the Apostle says, He gives to every seed his own body.
In the body of nature, the corn does oftentimes so degenerate; that wheat will
turn to barley, and barley to oats: the better corn, will turn to worser;
by reason of the badnesse, and hungrinesse of the ground: or by reason of the
weakness of the seed, or the unseasonablenesse of the times: or the
indiligence of the husbandman. These things often times cause these mutations.
But in this seed (our bodies) it is impossible: for the body shall never grow
worse and worse, by degeneration; but it shall be brought by the power of God,
to that high perfection, that it shall still be infinitely better, and yet
still it self: it shall still be the self same in essence, though not in
qualities. It shall be the same in substance, and nature, but not the same in
eminency of grace and glory. It shall be the same in being, but not the same
in seeming, or in circumstance. And so Saint Chrysostom says, It is the same,
and not the same: it is the same, as touching the fundamental essence of it,
and it is not the same concerning the augmentation, and the rare qualities,
that God shall impose upon it, and invest it withal, And so I say, it is that
comfortable doctrine to this flesh of ours, that there shall not be any other
flesh glorified for it: but that this flesh, that has suffered martyrdom,
this flesh, that has suffered hunger, and thirst, sickness, and persecution
in the world: this flesh, that has suffered for Christ: this flesh, and no
other but this; shall receive the crown of glory, according to the manifold
evils it has endured.

Otherwise, there could be no true consolation in this life: seeing the spirit
also shall have larger indowments. The soul of man, the wit shall be greater;
and the memory greater; and all the parts and faculties shall be more excellent
in the soul. Now these being not visible parts; therefore they are not that
which shall rise. For it is that which is visible, which belongs to the
Resurrection: the glory of the soul, cannot be manifest; it is still hidden,
and inherent in the inner-man. But this glory that shall be at the
Resurrection, it shall be manifest: and there is no manifestation made, but to
the eye, and the outward senses. Therefore here comes the comfort, to every
poor distressed body, that the same that suffers, and is miserable, afflicted,
and tormented in this world: the very same body, shall receive abundance of
joy, and comfort, and glory, and beauty, in the day of the Lord. The poor
creple, that goes double; that moves every man's heart to pity, to see him in
the streets; he shall rise with a glorious, and goodly body: being incorporate
into Christ by faith, he shall receive a body full of ample complements, and
blessed perfections.

To every seed his own body. If it be the same body, how then is it a new
body? Ob.
and how then in the Scripture is it called a glorious body; which makes it
different?

This (I told you) shall be by addition of certain accidents of glory, that
shall acrew unto it: separated (as accidents may be from their subject) but
they endure with it continually. And that consists:

1. Partly, in that goodly proportion, that I spoke of before; wherein all men
shall be raised in one size: Not as they are now, where there is great
difference; but all shall be of one stature, and perfection. And therein they
shall more resemble the Image of God, then if they should be made in greater
variety.

2. Secondly, another quality wherewith they shall be endowed, is the
clearness and brightness of those bodies. For although they shall not be
transparent, and translucent (which is no property of a true body) yet they
shall be so full of light, and gloriousness, as the Lord Jesus his body were,
when he was transfigured in mount Tabor: his garments did so shine, that no
Dyer or Fuller in the earth was able to make such a tincture, or to give such a
color, and gloss, Mat. 17.
as the garments of our Lord had. Much more then was his countenance glorious
and shining. And if in the old Law, Exodus 34.30.33
the glory of Moses face were so great, that the Jews could not endure to
look upon him, but he was feign to take a veil and cover his face, when he
read the Law; that so they might hear what he spoke without astonishment: much
more shall the glory of the bodies of the Saints be, at that day. They shall be
all lightsome, they shall shine like the stars in the firmament: they being
often compared in the Scriptures, to the stars which cannot be numbered.

Thirdly, another quality wherein they shall be like unto the corn. The
corn, that seemed to be a dead grain; yet after comes to have an excellent
green color, and live: so these bodies shall exceed in proportion of beauty.
There is great difference, now: some are fair, and some are foul creatures:
and those that are the fair ones of the world, they think themselves only
happy: and those that are deformed, they think they had better been unborne,
then to live in the world: Indeed it is a matter of great dejection, and scorn
to a natural man; to have a poor deformed body. Therefore the Lord shall so
alter all things in that day, that every man shall have equal beauty. The
glorious Saints in heaven, their perfection is one and the same perfection:
they shall have a common perfection, like the Angels that wait before the
Lord: and the Seraphins, that have the self same perfection and beauty,
shining upon them all: although it be not sensible to us, but is seen only
among themselves.

Fourthly, all this gloss, stature, and goodlinesse that they shall have,
except it have also strength and vigor, it is little worth: Therefore God
shall give them that too. That as the corn rises with an high stalk, to a
goodly stem, and has knops to underproppe, and support and keep it up;
whereupon it is builded: so the Lord says, Rev. 3.12.
he that hears the word of God, he will make him a pillar in the house of his
Father; that is, he shall have the strength, and glory, and the fortitude of
the great men of God: that he shall be able to do any thing, that God shall
assign him to, with great dexterity.

And all this, with a further grace of incorruption; for the seed that is
sown, although it come up with a fair gloss for a time; yet it presently
corrupts, and is brought unto a dry straw and stubble: and that which is
green now, to morrow it is cast into the fire. But the Lord shall give unto
this glorious gloss, whereunto he shall bring the bodies of his Saints, he
shall give them an incorruptible crown. 1. Pet. 1.18.
It is a crown that is incorruptible, an inheritance immortal; that never
has any change. The best beauty in this worldly glory, a fit of an Ague will
change it; and long sickness will turn the fairest rose into an ashy coal:
there is nothing so subject to change, and alteration, as the gloss of beauty.
But that strength and beauty, and goodlinesse of the creature, after the
resurrection, shall be supported by that ever mighty power of Almighty God; so
that there shall be no old age, to draw wrinckles in the face of his Saints:
there shall be no sickness, to make them wither; there shall be no grief of
heart, no discontent of mind, to make an alteration in the outward man, there
shall be nothing to make a change, because God shall crown them in heaven,
with incorruption.

And lastly, the Lord shall give them another quality, which shall be the
rarest of all the rest. And that is, a strange agility and nimblenesse of body:
that they shall be able to move upward or downward, as it shall please them.
While we are here in this life, we have heavy bodies: a man must walk upon his
own foundation, he must have the scaffold of the earth under him. But if he
presume any further, and offer to go any higher; with Daedalus, and with
Icarus, he shall be cast into the sea: he exposes himself unto danger, and
his waxen wings will be fired by the beams of the Sun. But then at that day,
though our bodies (in all things substantial) shall be like these, and shall
still be true bodies: yet the glory of them shall be so great, and the
strength and power that the spirit shall have over this flesh, shall be so
absolute; as to command it which way it pleases. When we move now; either we
go forward or backward, or side-wayes or else downward; but upward we cannot:
but then, the Lord shall give us ability to move upward too. And this is that
the Apostle says: we shall be taken, we shall be snatched up, to meet the
Lord in the clouds: 1. These. 4.17.
there shall be such a mighty power and prevalencie, in the spirit of man, to
rule and command the body.

The Lord has given us instances of it, in some things in the Gospel. Mat. 14
26.29
Our Lord himself, walked upon the water: and not only he himself, but he
gave Peter power to walk with him. And this was a sign of that he means to
do; at the day of the Resurrection. As their bodies then walked, and were
sustained by the power of God in the air, and was able to make that which is
fluent, and soft, and yielding in it self, to make it a sollid pavement like
unto the stones to walk upon: the same power shall also work in our bodies
that agilitie, which is in the Eagle. So the Prophet speaks, yea our Lord
compares us where he says, Where the body is, Mat. 24.28.
thither will the Eagles resort; which is meant not only of a spiritual
flight by faith; but also of the bodies assumption. And this our Lord confirmed
by the Ascension of his own body: Job. 14.2.
for he went before to prepare a place for us, that believe in him. Now we know
that his body ascended to heaven: it had the power to move upward, as well as
any other way. We have examples of it also, in Henoch and Elias, which were
both translated: Elias carried in a fiery Car to heaven. 2. King. 2.11.


And all this with eternity and immortality; that there shall not any thing
of it pass away: there shall be no expectation of death; there shall be no
fear of change. This is the greatest thing of all, when God shall give
fullness of glory, to have also full security. For whatsoever glory men have in
this world; so long as they know that there is a worm that can gnaw it; or
that it is possible for them to be outed; this glory is nothing: because it is
glory, that may be no glory. Such is the state of these worldly things: that
there is nothing so great, but it is subject to be brought from that
greatness. But the Lord shall give this glory for ever and ever, as himself
is: he that is eternal in himself, he is eternal to all those that he shall
make his followers and companions, in that blessed kingdom. For they also
shall receive that part of eternity, as far as they are capable. It is this
safety and security, that makes this blessing amiable: and for that the Lord
has given us an example for security, in Scripture: where for forty years
together in the wilderness the Lord so provided; that there was no man's
clothes that were rent, or worn: not so much as the soale of his shoe impaired
by that long and tedious travel. We see also they had security of food
continually: it never ceased to follow them; but in convenient time, was still
administered to them. Therefore it follows, that God that can do these things
for garments, for these rags that we wear upon our bodies: he means much
more to do it, to the bodies themselves. As Christ says, Is not the body
better then raiment? Mat. 6.25.
then garments? Seeing therefore, that he did it unto garments, that are of
far less worth; will he not do it unto the bodies themselves? He that kept
their garments 40. years without wearing (and yet what wears so soon as a
garment) he was able to have done it for eternity, if it had pleased him. But
God gave them that for an instance; to show that these things belong in a
higher nature, and degree, and measure to the setting forth of the lif^
^ternall: and were to foreshew, and to be an earnest of that infinite glory,
which God has reposed for them that wait for the coming of his Son. Which
the Lord work for us all. etc.

1 COR. 15.39. All flesh is not the same flesh; but there is one flesh of man,
there is another flesh of beasts; another of fishes, and another of fowls.
THere is nothing more plain and easy, then the sense of these words; they are
known to every man by experience. And yet it is very hard to find out the
intent and reason, why they were uttered. Diverse men have diversely commented
upon them. For some think (as Tertullian, Tertull.
and others that follow him) that the Apostle speaks not as he seems to do,
of the flesh of beasts, and of the flesh of men, and of fishes, and birds: but
by an allegory comprehends some other thing, concerning the diversity and
degrees of men. And so he interprets.

The flesh of men, that is, of holy, and just, and good men. There is one flesh
of men, that is, of holy men: for they are properly to be called men. A man so
far forth as he is unholy, so far forth he comes short of a man: and those
are only truly and really men, that be good.

And then by the flesh of beasts, he says the Apostle means the flesh of
beastly heathen men: the flesh of Ethnicks; of those that do not believe in
God; those that do not believe in Christ the Savior of the world. He says,
such are beasts, for they differ not world. He says, such are beasts, for they
differ not from beasts: neither in their sense, nor in their conversation.

Then for the third, there is another flesh of fishes; he says by fishes are
meant those that are baptized, and regenerate by water: the fishes of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Mat. 4.19.
whereof he said to his disciples, I will make you fishers of men. And in many
places in Scripture, men are compared to fishes; by reason of the laver of
regeneration.

Lastly, he says there is another flesh of fowls or birds: and he says by
those are meant the bodies of the Martyrs, that have dyed for the testimony of
Christ. Those are like unto birds, that fly from this world; Psalm. 55.6.
that take unto themselves the wings of a dove and fly away to be at rest:
that separate themselves from the world, and worldly things; that forsake
father, and mother, and country, and land, and goods, and life it self, to be
for Christ, and for his profession. So Tertullian Tertull.
makes the sense to be this: that in the Resurrection, some shall rise as good
and perfect men; and some shall be as beasts: that is, in great ugliness and
deformity: and some shall rise as fishes: that is, with the benefit of their
baptism: and some with their glory and crown of martyrdom, as the birds and
fowls of the air.

But in this exposition, there is a great deal more wit then soundness: for
we must not endure, to expound Scripture in this manner. It is a dangerous
thing for a man to build allegories: to ground upon idle conceits; to destroy
the letter withal. For the letter of the Scripture must stand: and if there be
any possible construction to keep it, it must be kept and maintained. If not,
we are to abhor niceties: and then to expound it by way of similie and
allegory; but never till then.

Others expound it, as if the Apostle meant it of the different degrees of joy
in heaven: whereof we shall have more occasion to speak (if God permit) when we
come to speak of the difference of stars, One star differs from another
in glory. Diverse men have diversely distracted the sense of this Scripture;
while they think the Apostle speaks of the different flesh of men: because
that beasts, and fishes, and fowls; they are things that belong not to the
Resurrection: and what then, should they do in this argument?

But I take it the best and true sense is, that the Apostle takes it according
to the letter; and out of that, he draws an argument, to persuade us of the
glorious bodies that shall be in the Resurrection. For in the similitude that
went immediately before, he teaches us how we shall find the doctrine of the
Resurrection, in our gardens, in our fields, in the things that we sow, and
admit into the ground. Now he rises to a higher argument; and teaches us how
we should find it in our flesh; in this flesh that we carry about us: for that
is the principal thing that is here spoken of. It is the flesh, that must rise
again: and if we can find an argument so near home, in this our flesh; it is
certainly a plausible and delightful argument: and the Apostle tells us, that
if we come from our fields, and our gardens; if we come home to our selves, and
look upon this flesh of ours; we shall see in that a most lively
representation of the glorious Resurrection. And whereas all the whole body of
living creatures, is nothing else but flesh; although it be diversely, and with
a strange variety distinguished: the same God that can make such variety in
the self same thing; that can make one flesh to be washy and waterish, as the
flesh of fish: another to be ayrie, and spiritly, as the flesh of birds:
another to be sullen, and drowsy, as the flesh of beasts: another to be
temperate and mean, as the flesh of men: the Lord that works this difference,
in this frail subject; much more in the Resurrection, can he work a
diversity in the form and shape, and in the color, and representation in the
flesh, that shall be then glorified. To proceed in order.

Division into 3. parts. 1 The Resurrection proved from flesh. 2 A fourefold
diversity of that flesh. 3 How this pe^swades the Resurrection.

First, he would have us to consider, that the flesh it self affords an
argument of the Resurrection; and he rises from things sown in the earth, to
flesh, that moves in the world: and that in what part soever they are; whether
in the air, or in the water, or upon the earth.

And then he tells us, that that flesh is not all one; but there is a
diversity. And he makes the diversity four fold; as the flesh of men, the
flesh of beasts, the flesh of fishes; and the flesh of birds.

Thirdly, we are to consider the use of this argument; how it inferres and
persuades the souls of men, that there is a likelihood, and certainty of the
resurrection.

1. Part. Argument of the Resurrection raised from flesh: and raised higher and
higher
Concerning the first, the Apostles method is most singular and excellent: he
proceeds in his arguments from things that are less perfect, to those that are
of greater perfection. All the seeds that be abundant in the earth, they argue
(indeed) the mighty hand of God, in their power and variety; and in their
growth, and success: but yet flesh is a far more constant body then they be.
Now if the Resurrection do appear in things that grow upon the earth; much
more does it appear in things sensible; in things that have life. For the
vegetables, although they argue somewhat; yet the argument is obscure, as their
life is obscure: but the sensibles, those things that stir, and move; they
are far more clear preachers of the Resurrection, then the other can be.

The flesh (as Methodius Methodius;
says) it is nothing but the middle way, between incorruption and corruption:
the flesh is neither corruption nor incorruption of it self; but the middle
way between both. For the flesh was so created at the first, by the hand of
God; that if man had not purchased corruption by sin, if he had not brought
in the sting of sin, to rot it, it had never putrified: but had continued in
that goodlinesse and beauty wherein the Lord created it. But now by reason of
the sin of man, there is entered a worm into the flesh (which is a necessity
of dying) which is always gnawing upon it; and decreasing and abating of it,
till it bring it to the terms of corruption. And yet the Lord suspends the
action for a time, and gives the flesh a certain flourish in this world; in
some, to twenty years; in some to forty; in some to a great many more: but the
flower cannot last long; the flesh may live when the gloss is gone. So this
body of flesh, wherein God has set his glory more a great deal, then in
plants and trees, and things that grow out of the ground: it does afford us a
stronger, and more forcible argument, that the bodies shall rise in a glorious
quality, when the day of judgment shall come. There, where God has now taken
more pains, and has showed his hand most glorious; there he intends
hereafter to be more glorious. Now the resurrection of the flesh, is that
which we believe; the resurrection of this flesh that is of men: and chiefly of
them that believe in Jesus Christ, how the Lord has set his hand upon this
flesh; his workmanship appears to be wonderful.

How he has laid the foundation of it in the bones.

How he has brought the flesh over it, to be a covering and veil for the
soul.

How he has inlivened it, that wheresoever there is flesh, there is life: and
has put the soul in it to dwell in the cabinet of the flesh.

How he has divided and distinguished the parts, in their several joints: in
their several uses, and proportions.

How he has watered it with blood and veins; and with juice and moisture,
every where.

How he has inflamed it with arteries.

How he has made it sensible with sinews.

How he has extended and stretched it out, with muscles.

How he has covered all, with a fair and beautiful skin.

How he has fenced some parts with hair; as in men: and with diverse other
fences more thick and solid: as in the diversity of beasts: with feathers, as
in fowls: with skales, as in fishes: and yet all to live after one manner, that
there is none of these can live but they have veins, and arteries, and sinews,
and a brain, which is the place of sense; and a heart, which is the place of
life; and a liver, which is the place of concoction: and they have blood,
whereby they live.

That the Lord (I say) should set such a wondrous hand upon flesh now; it
argues he will do greater matters for it hereafter. For he would not be so
liberal of his grace and providence upon it here; except he intended further
glory for it hereafter. Indeed, in the trees, and plants, and fruits, that grow
upon the earth; there is a glorious and sweet luster, and great variety: but
being compared unto flesh, it is nothing. And therefore in the Scriptures, the
flesh is made the subject of the promises; and manhood it self, is termed by
the name of flesh: as being that habitation or house, that God means to raise
again, when it is fallen down; to rebuild it up, better then ever it was
before. For the flesh must fall, as the flower of the field; although it
continue longer then the flower of the field: but the Lord shall rail it unto
everlasting glory.

So then, this must teach us in the general; flesh, or upon the flesh of
others: we ought still to possess our minds with holy meditations, of the
glory that shall be revealed upon that flesh: to think of the resurrection of
that flesh. As the Lord has built it wondrously, and beautified it to singular
purpose in this world; so when it is ruinated, he shall rebuild it to a far
greater beauty; that shall never fade away; but shall have a constant being, as
he himself is for ever.

It should teach us also, to have a care of this flesh, God has so graced; and
that we do not disgrace it, and betray it to the devil: that we do not subject
it to damnable purposes; that we do not swell it with drunkenness; that we do
not spoil it, with filthiness; that we do not distract it, with worldly
cares; that we do not any way abuse, and imbezell that substance that God
means to grace; that he has set his image, and stamp upon here; and that
hereafter means to better this his workmanship: let not us profane that,
which God has made holy. So much for the first point; that the Apostles
argument goes greater and higher: the further we go in nature, still the more
insight we have, in the work of the Lord, and in the certainty of the
promises. Therefore the Apostle rises from things that grow in the earth; from
vegetables, to things that live, and move: and there he shows the resurrection
more clearly.

2. Part. The fourefold diversity of flesh.
Then the second thing to be considered is this, that the Apostle says, that
all flesh is not one flesh: For there is d^versitie of it. It is true, all
flesh agrees in the general; they all live with a soul: all men, and beasts,
and fishes, and birds, they all have a soul, and live in one manner by their
blood, and by digestion of meat, which turns into blood and nourishment. So in
the general, all flesh is one; but in their several kinds they are so
varied, that there is scarce any proportion one with another, when we go to the
particular differences of them. For (says he) although they be one in the
maine; yet they be different in their specialties.

The first, and chiefest that he names, is the flesh of men:

And then after that, the flesh of beasts:

Thirdly, the flesh of fishes:

Fourthly, of birds and fowls of the heaven.

For indeed, according to their different motion, the diversity of their flesh
may be conceived.

That the motion of men should be upon the earth; and yet by reason of an
heavenly aspect his countenance should be erected unto heaven: where his
thoughts ought to be continually.

That the beasts should have a prone dejected motion, looking always toward the
earth: and as it were grovelling there.

That the fishes should glide in the watery element: being as it were not of
our world, but of another country.

That the fowls should mount up in that spirit, and vigor, that God has given
them, by reason of a wing, and a feather: whereby they leave the seat wherein
we must live, and betake themselves unto the upper region. By this variety of
their motion, we may necessarily gather this: that there is a great variety in
their natures. For there is nothing more argues the variety of a thing, then
the ordinary motion of it, to observe how it is moved.

The Apostle puts no other difference, that might be conceived (as the flesh of
serpents, etc.) because that may be referred to some of these; it may be
referred unto beasts, or unto fishes: but he contents himself with these
four, as comprehending in them all the world of flesh, which God created.

And in the first rank, in the prime place, he says there is one flesh of
men, whereon the Lord has stamped his own image, and has made it the
goodliest of all flesh: setting such an admirable beauty in it, and indowing
some flesh with such excellent wisdom and judgment, and that which is the
chief of all, setting the stamp of holiness upon it, which is the only
ornament of the flesh, and of the spirit also: that there is nothing that can
compare with man. I mean no visible thing in the world, can enter into any
terms of comparison, with that glorious image of God.

Such a goodly aspect to heaven.

Such a majesty and power in behavior.

Such an erect upright and tall stature.

Such a goodly complexion, and proportion, in the parts of the body.

Such an admirable dexterity, in all his actions.

Such valor, such wisdom, such constancy, that in the flesh of men there
dwells the strength of God. But above this, there is nothing in the world that
makes this flesh so glorious, as that the only Son of God has married
himself unto it: to grace this flesh, and to bring it to the highest
perfection; the second person in the Trinity was incarnate: and the Word
became flesh, and dwelt amongst us. This is the means, whereby our flesh has
attained this great perfection. And although the Angels do far surpass us,
in some kind of abilities, (as they have more understanding, and better
experience, and are stronger, and swifter, and more nimble in their motion) yet
notwithstanding, because they are not sensible but intellectual creatures; and
are only to be perceived by the eye of reason, and of argument, and not by the
eye of the body; which is the most delightful kind of apprehension. Therefore
the Angels themselves cannot compare with the flesh of men: since it is now
graced, and beautified by the Son of God, which was incarnate, and took our
flesh upon him.

There is one flesh of men. And this flesh of men although it be one, yet it
differs in the several individuals. To see how wondrously God has set
variety upon this flesh, that there is one kind of color in one, and another
kind of color in another. There is the flesh of Moors and Maroccoes; and the
flesh of those that are fair, and well colored: such infinite variety, as
would astonish a man to consider of it: yea even of those that be of the best,
of the most likeliest and goodly beauty: there is variety in them too. There is
one kind of flesh in children, and another kind of flesh in strong men: and
another kind of flesh in old folk: the flesh of children, is puffed up and
swelled; and is not brought to the proportion: by reason of the abundance of
juice, and humors, in their bodies.

The flesh of young men is brought to some perfection, and has that grace and
flower that it can attain to possibly, in this life. The flesh of old age is
so withered and decayed, that a man cannot almost tell, that this was ever that
babe, or that young man. Thus the Lord works wondrously, in one, and the self
same flesh: and not only in a distance of time, that alters and works such
a change, in these things: but in a very instant almost. So that take the
goodliest body in the world, that is now flourishing and healthy, and let it
fall into a desperate sickness: it will alter and change the flesh so
wonderfully; it will so mortalize it, as we may say that there is no man,
almost, can know it to be the same. The finger of God works admirably, in the
self same flesh. This inferres the argument of the Apostle: that that God that
can work his own will in such a strange difference, in the same flesh here in
this life, he will much more work a gracious, and glorious difference when
this life is ended, upon that flesh, which he determines to crown with glory.

For the second sort of flesh here spoken of, the flesh of beasts: the word
signifies not all beasts; but those beasts that are for use to men. The word
signifies helping: because they are helpful to the life of man. It is true
the argument goes along, as well unto wild beasts, and those that have no
help in them, as to the other: but the Apostle properly insists upon these,
because the mercy of God is most wonderful in these: the Lord has given
variety of flesh among the beasts, infinitely too.

That those beasts that are for the sustentation of man, should have the
sweetest flesh, the sweetest humors and breathing; and be wholesome and good:
so far differing from the other, that those beasts that be not for our use,
for the help of our life; many of them are very noisome, so extremely
noisome, that a man cannot abide to be with them: many of them being so
abominable, that a man runs, and flies at the very smell, a great way off:
which is no small blessing of God, nor no little wonder; neither should it be
in our eyes, a matter of small moment: but we should consider it duly, that
the Lord has given to those creatures that we stand in most need of, the most
temperate, and the most sweetly composed flesh: and because we are to feed upon
that which is clean, and not on that which is unclean; he has made
therefore, the difference of cleanness and uncleanness, according to the
nature and constitution of the beasts. Some, he has made for the feeding of
man; some, for variety, and some (perhaps) to exercise his patience, and
courage, in the rooting them out.

And the flesh of beasts that is fit for the use of man, to see in what a
wondrous difference the Lord has made it! So that one should have one relish,
and taste, and another another; notwithstanding they feed all upon grass, upon
the same food: even because he would have us to have choice, that we should not
always feed upon the same thing. We see the taste of the creatures that we have
about us at home; and the taste of those that we hunt for abroad in the field;
they are all pleasant: but yet mavelous different. This the good God does, in
the flesh of the creature, working there the foundation of use, and of life,
and nourishment, according as he is purposed to help mankind by the means
of it. And how marvellously has he set forth his glory, even in that, to give
them all a prone aspect looking to the ground; and in covering some of them
with most profitable woolls, for the benefit, and clothing of mankind: some
of them, he has covered with skins, of most singular benefit; sweet and
operative: as in outlandish parts. To see how he has garnished them, in the
diversity of their munition! what fences they have! that some of them defend
themselves with their heels; some with their horns, some with their teeth! How
the blessed God has wrought these wondrous things, it is not to be slightly
regarded; but to be deeply considered. For, in truth, a man that looks upon
them, shall be forced to say with the Prophet, When I see the work of thy
fingers, sheep and oxen, and all cattle: I am feign to say, Oh Lord God how
wondrous is thy name, throughout all the world!

The third kind of flesh that he speaks of here, is that which seems least of
al to be flesh: that is fishes. And herein God is more infinite then in all the
rest. For set all men together, even all birds, and beasts; and they cannot
make the half number of fishes, which are in the vast and wide Ocean: and if
we compare their quantities, the difference, there, is wonderful. That the
fishes should mount, and rise in quantity, from the least drop, to a great
whale; which is the mightiest of all the creatures. The Lord says to Job (as
it were boasting of his work) Did thou ever see the Whale? Job 41.
Did thou ever see the goodly proportion that he has? and the carelessness
and contempt that he has of thee, and of all the weapons that thou can bring
against him? I say in that vast element the wonders of God appear more, then
upon the face of the earth. What shoales, what millions; what mighty armies of
fishes; every year pass, and repasse the sea, and keep their seasons and
times! that rather then men shall want, they come and offer themselves in their
seasons, to be meat for man: that as some kind of birds fly unto us, at
certain times in the year; so also at certain seasons, the fishes of the Sea
do swim unto us. For God has given the Sea that quality, that invites them,
he makes the South sea so hot, that the fishes are feign to come and refresh
themselves in the North: and every where where they come, they fill the shores
with plenty. And to this kind of creature, God has given a flesh that is
waterish; like to the element where it lives. And withal, he has given it the
blessing, to be fit for the use, and food of man: and that in admirable
delicacie, and great variety. For whereas there is not of all the beasts and
birds upon the earth (set them all together) not forty kind of several dishes
(for there are but fourteen kind of beasts that are fit for meat, and but
twenty five or twenty six of birds, and no more) there are of several kinds
of fishes, very near two hundred, that are wholesome, and good for the food and
use of man. And this food it is not ordinary; but to some bodies, and in some-
Countries, it is a great deal more nourishing, and faemiliar, and good, then
either that of beasts or birds. Therefore the Lord has glorified himself in
this creature, wondrously: by the miracle of the two fishes, he wrought that
upon the fish; that we do not read in the Gospel, he wrought upon flesh. Luk
9.16.
For in that Country, as their fish was most delicate, so their meat most
ordinarily was fish. His Apostles were fishermen; and his last apparition to
them, was in giving them a dish of broyled fish upon the shore, where a fire
was kindled: and the fish was laid upon it, no man knew how. It was a dish,
which the Lord gave them: they found the fire, and the broyled fish upon it, by
a miraculous act of Christ's hand: that as he commanded the fish to have money
in its mouth; so he commanded preparation to be made, by the ministry of
Angels, for his Apostles dinner in that place.

The last flesh he speaks of, is the flesh of fowls or birds: and that is
another wonder indeed, and of great variety. For the water and the air, they
differ but in their thickness, and thinness: the air, is a thin water; and
the water, is a thick air; and so the motion of the fishes, and the motion of
the birds, do differ accordingly. For the fishes do move with that speed, that
they may be said to fly in the water: and the birds do fly with that
facility, that they may be said to swim in the air: they are wondrous
things, that the Lord has wrought in these two elements. But there is nothing
that comes to that height of excellency (for natural motion) as the birds:
which can be in any place. They can rest upon the waters, as many of them do:
they can rest upon the land, and yet they can travel in the air: and in a
short space of time, they can overcome a great journey. To see that a massy
heavy body, should be carried up with the help of a feather, of a wing, and
hang in the air! that if a man should see them, that had never seen it
before; he would think they should all break their necks: and that it were
impossible for them to be free from danger. And yet the Lord has given them
such a poyse, and such a measure, that though they be made with round bodies,
yet their spirits are so thin, and fiery, and nimble; that they can sustain
themselves even in the clouds, and soar aloft for many hours together. This
argues, also, the power that shall be in the bodies, that shall be raised from
the dead. For they shall have that ability, and power, to soar about Christ;
Mat. 24.28.
to flock about him, as the Eagles about the body. And this flesh of birds, to
see in what a wondrous variety it is, is strange!

For the cleanness, and uncleanness of them.

For their several kinds.

For their form, and figure, and proportion.

For their quantity.

For their colors.

For their feathers, in some goodly, and glorious: in others for necessity: in
others their feathers are like the streams of a flagge, rather then feathers.
Of those (I mean) that are heavier bodies, and cannot mount aloft. The great
God is wondrous, in all these things; and we ought not to look upon them, with
an idle eye: but to make it a Sabbath days exercise, to instruct our selves in
these varieties, and to praise, and bless God, where we see any step of his
greatness.

I will conclude in a word. 3. Part. How this variety of fleshes, proves the
resurrection.
Now we come to the use of all this. It is true, there is one kind of flesh of
men, another of beasts, another of fishes; and another of birds: but what is
that to the purpose? how does this prove, that there shall be a resurrection?

The Lord has made all these things, that be in the world; to be types and
paternes of better things, that are reserved for another world: therefore, if
he have set a glorious variety here, much more will he do it there: even those
things that we account here, to be the best of things; they shall be so far
short, of that which shall be then revealed, as that the best things that are
now, shall come short (by far) of the worst that shall be then. We can
distinguish among the beasts, which are best, and which are worst: and among
the fishes and fowls, and in the parts of our bodies; all are not so
beautiful, as the eye: there are some parts of less, and worse respect: and
in the beauty, and color, and complexion, of the faces of men, and women,
there are better, and worse. Some are exceeding goodly; some are extremely
deformed: and we make a difference always, between that which is worst, and
that which is best, in every kind. So the Apostle argues thus. God shall so
alter and change the things that remain for a better life; he shall so alter
them to a betterment, and perfection, that the best things that are here, shall
not compare with the worst thing that shall be there. Look how far the most
excellent beauty excels them that are most deformed in face: look how far
the best body excels the worst, the most crooked, and impotent body: look how
far the best wit, and the best sense, and judgment, excels the natural
fool: look how far the strongest man, excels the weakest child: so far
the bodies that shall be raised up in that glorious day, shall excel the
best, and the brightest bodies, that are here in this world. For (says he) as
God has made several sorts of flesh, now; and has given a bestnesse, and a
worstnesse in them; that there is great difference (and it is well known to us
how they differ) so in the Resurrection, there shall be nothing there, the
worst shall be more glorious then the best, and most noble perfections that are
here. And so I think it to be true, as the Fathers imagine; that it is spoken
of the difference that shall be: but it cannot be directly prooved by
Scripture, as Peter Martyr Peter Mart.
says. Although it be true, that there shall be some inferior unto others,
there; yet we must not rest upon it, nor make comparisons of it. There is
nothing that shall be so bad, in that kingdom; but it exceeds all the best
things that are in this. There is nothing that shall be so mean, in that
life; but it shall exceed the most glorious things, in this life. This I take
to be the purpose and meaning of the Apostle, in bringing in this difference:
to show, that if there be a difference here; much more shall there be there.
There is as much difference, between the body that dies here; and the body
that shall rise then (being compared together) as there is between fish and
flesh; as much difference, as is between one part and member, and another. All
of them are indeed flesh; but yet there is one kind of vigor, and one kind
of use, and life, and motion in the one; and another kind in the other: and so
it shall be at the Resurrection.

To conclude, the sum of all is this, prepare our selves in a continual
expectation: with blessed Job, looking for our change: Job 14.14.
to depend upon the Lord God; to trust in him, that is able to set his Image,
in a far more glorious stamp, then he did before: that can renew his broad
seal; and out of one piece of elementarie dust, can raise such wondrous
matters, as are here spoken of. What is the most beautiful body in the world?
what is the goodliest flesh? what is the fairest color, in comparison, but a
bag of dust? and yet how marvellously has God wrought upon this dust! out of a
poor mean ground, to draw such a lively color; such an excellent picture,
upon nothing but dust? It is a strange thing, so to fortify it with comely
bones; to fill it every where (every concavitie of it) with a fair beauty of
flesh; to adorn it with such a goodly gloss, and color, like the flourishing
flowers of the field; to continue it thus for twenty or thirty years, in this
fair gloss, and goodly composure: this is the most wondrous act of God!

Teaching us, further matter that remains: that he that has wrought upon dust
in this manner now; his hand is not shortened, but he can work upon the dust
that shall be raised out of the grave again; he can draw the lines upon it,
and breathe upon it, as he says by his holy Prophet: Hear the word of the
Lord ye dry bones: Ezekiel. 37.4.8.10
and it is said, the bones gathered together, and the Lord breathed into them
the breath of life, and they stood up. The Lord is able to do these things; and
certainly, these colors, and this flesh, that we carry in this world; they are
as earnest penies of that glorious flesh, that shall be collated and confirmed
upon us, when this life shall be ended.

Only, as we look for these things; so let us sanctify our selves to the
Lord God: let us keep our selves unblameable in the ways of the Lord: let us
reconcile our selves by true and unfeigned repentance; Iam. 1.27.
let us keep our selves unspotted of the world: that this flesh may not be
tainted, with the pollutions of sin; but that it may be preserved for that
use, which it was appointed for: even to be a temple and tabernacle for the
Holy Ghost: for so it shall be sure, to have this blessed change put upon it.
There is as much difference between that which is now, and that which shall
be; as there is difference between any parts of the body natural: as much
difference, as there is between unsensible and sensible creatures: as there is
between men, and beasts: as much difference as there is between the flyer and
the swimmer, between fish and fowls. Yet still the same flesh shall be the
same flesh shall rise, that dyed; but the Lord shall add unto it, Ambr.
he shall ampliate it (says S. Ambrose) he shall make it better; he shall not
destroy the substance, but he shall add a new quality, a new glorious
quality, which shall endure for ever.

1 COR. 40.41. And bodies heavenly, and bodies earthly: but one is the glory of
the heavenly, and another that of the earthly: one glory of the Sun, another
glory of the Moon; and another glory of the Stars: for one star differs
from another in glory. So also is the Resurrection of the body.
THis noble and divine order, which the Apostle has taken for the assurance of
our faith, in this grand point of the Resurrection, is noted by all
Interpreters, to be the glory of that spirit within him; that he could not
possible show a greater evidence of the holy Ghost, then in this manner of
proceeding. Therefore Tertullian Tertull.
says, that Saint Paul did with all the strength of the holy Ghost bend, and
employ himself in this Argument. His meaning is, with all the strength of the
holy Ghost that Saint Paul was capable of. For otherwise, it cannot be said of
any man, that he can use all the strength of the holy Ghost: for the strength
and power of the holy Ghost, is more then any man can comprehend. But the order
(I say) is so excellent, and divine, that he leaves no part of nature
unransacked, and unpierced, for the finding of some argument, and some
evidence, of the Resurrection.

First, he taught us to find it in our gardens, in our fields, in the things
that are sown: in those things that are under our feet.

Then afterward, he rises somewhat higher: and teaches us to find it in our
flesh, that we carry about us: in the flesh of men, in the flesh of beasts; in
the flesh of birds, in the flesh of fishes: in which, as there is great
variety; so all this present variety, serves to show and portend a variety in
the world to come, in the bodies that shall rise.

And now he rises higher: and teaches us to find the Resurrection, and the
variety of the bodies that shall be in the Resurrection, from a comparison
that he takes from heaven, and heavenly things: that we may see it also above
our heads, Psalm. 104.1.
God has drawn out the heavens as a curtain, that it might be full of
glorious stars: and every star, gives a certain document and lesson of
this that he treats of; the certainty of the Resurrection. So that there is no
part of nature void, but all proclaim this doctrine of the Resurrection. And
he proves, that look what difference there is between the bodies that be in
heaven, and those bodies that be here in earth: the same difference there shall
be between the bodies that shall be then, and the bodies that are now. And
although there be in some bodies that are in this world (as in the bodies of
Princes, and the bodies of beautiful men and women) a rare luster and a goodly
glory; a mavelous feature, and a stamp of Gods Image incomparable: yet in
comparison of that which shall be, it is nothing. That body that shall be in
the world to come, does as far surpass this whatsoever it be (suppose it
the fairest and most delicate body in the world) as the lightsome stars, do
pass the poorest stones on the earth: or any common form, and figure in the
earth, is not so much transcended by the glory of the stars, as the bodies in
the Resurrection do transcend and surmount the glory of any thing that is seen
here below: This is the sum of the words.

Now that we may proceed in order.

First we are to consider, Division into 2. comparisons.
how he draws this Argument from heavenly bodies; and compares them with
earthly bodies (wherein he gives the preferment to the heavenly bodies) in
these words: where he says, There is not the same glory to the one, as to the
other; There is one glory of the heavenly, and another of the earthly: That is,
there is a far inferior glory of the earthly, in comparison of that which is
heavenly.

Then, secondly, he makes a comparison of the heavenly bodies among themselves:
that as there is great difference between the stars of heaven, and the
stones upon the earth; so there is great difference between the stars of
heaven, one with another: not only being referred to the earth, which can make
no comparison with them: but in comparison one with another, as they are in
heaven; some of them being of one magnitude, and some of another: some of them
being of one luster, and some of another; there is great difference there also.
Some of the Fathers have understood this, of the different state of glory that
shall be in heaven. In the first similitude, they say, the glory that shall be
revealed upon the sons of God, shall be as infinitely beyond all the glory
that is now; as the glory of the stars in heaven, excels the glory here on
earth. And for the other point of difference in the stars themselves; thereby
is signified, that the just shall all shine in heaven, as stars, but in a
different manner; as the stars do now: One star differs from another in
glory.

And so he concludes all this parable and similitude, So is the resurrection of
the dead: That is, even as we see these earthly things, to be far exceeded by
the heavenly, in all kind of beauty, in all kind of glory; in all kind of
durabilitie; and in all kind of qualities which are commendable: so the
Resurrection shall be. That is, the bodies that shall rise then, shall far
exceed these that are now: as far as heavenly things exceed earthly things.
And even as now, there is a difference between stars, that all are not alike
in glory; and all have not a like luster, nor like power and influence: so then
in the Resurrection there shall be difference and degrees, every man shall have
enough; yet notwithstanding, every man shall not have the same. Of these things
briefly, and in order: as it shall please the Lord to give assistance.

And first concerning the nature of the Apostles Argument: 1. Part, or
comparison.
he takes it now from heavenly bodies. The higher a man goes in the body of
Nature, the more he learnes, and the better he sees the work of him that is
the Author of nature, the Creator himself. There is a great mystery, great
power of instruction, in the works of God, Romans 1. The wisdom and majesty of
God, is seen in his works. But then is he best seen, when a man does ascend
and rise up the skale: and proceed from lower works, to higher. For even as he
that climbeth to the highest top of an hill, may see the furthest off: so he
that ascends in the works of God, in the disposing of the world; the more he
advances, the more clearly he sees; and the greater revelation is made unto
him.

All the works of God, they are great masters and teachers unto us: if we will
learn any thing. There is nothing so dull, there is nothing so poor, but it
is able to teach us. But yet among the rest, there is nothing comparable to the
heavens: being the fairest book, and the goodliest volume; wherein the glory
of God is expressed, above all other things. As the Psalmist says, Psalm. 19.3.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament show his handy work.
There is no voice nor language, in the earth, wherein the speech of heaven is
not heard. As there is no angle nor corner, that is hid from the light of the
Sun, Verse. 6.
and from the heat and power of the Sun; but he searches it out: so there is
no man that is indewed with any sense, but he is taught by that heat, and
light, the greatness of the Almighty, which these earthly things cannot
attain unto. For they be restive, and they be dull; they be contained in their
places: they have not that diffused power, and operation, that the Sun and
the stars have to work every where. Therefore there is no work of God, more
teaching, and instructing, then the book of the heavens. And therefore Saint
Paul now makes his argument from the stronger, that if our gardens could teach
us: and if our seeds could teach us; if our fields could teach us; and if our
flesh can teach us (even this flesh that we carry about us) if these could
teach us, (these things that are elementarie and sublunarie) if these have a
power of instruction: no doubt then, that golden book, that rare-volumne that
is above, that is written with so many stars (as so many golden letters) and
so fairly written, Hab. 2.2.
that he that runs may read it: no doubt (I say) but this is fuller of
discipline; and can much more easily draw the Scholar; as containing in it
more familiar precepts, and more moving examples to win us unto God.

His comparison here, is taken in the name of bodies: heavenly bodies, and
earthly bodies. By heavenly bodies, is meant the stars: because they are
created substances, and not imaginary things, as the Philosophers would have
them in their flattery and foolery: they thought that the great men that
deserved well in this world, were turned into stars: and so they imagined
Hercules, and Antonius, and Arctophilax; and a great number of toys, and
trifles that they devised: as though the stars were the bodies of men, or
that they were persons of a spiritual substance. But the Lord teaches us,
that they are no earthly bodies; they are things that were created in the first
beginning: and they are bodies, which notwithstanding seem to be nothing less
then bodies: they seem to be spiritual things; to be spirits, rather then
bodies: being of such a swiftness, and of that rare operation, and
brightness. Yet the Lord tells us that they are bodies: that is, that they have
a kind of earthlinesse in them, they have a kind of matter in them. For
although they be far different from these inferior things, from these
inferior bodies: yet in respect of the first Creator, they are but bodies. For
there is but one spirit, there is but one pure Spirit: which is God himself.
All things else, have a kind of dreggie matter in them, which makes them
bodies: the bodies which are heavenly, (that is, the stars) are bodies;
because they are visible, because they are circumscribed, because they have
figure, and proportion: and they are bodies, because they are kept within a
certain compass and limit.

Whence it follows, that seeing they are bodies; therefore they are not to be
worshipped: as the Heathens used to do, and as the Indian people at this day
worship them: but hence we see they ought not to be worshipped. Why? even
because they are but bodies: nay, they are insensible bodies, they have not
sense to guide them. So that for all their purity, and the use they are of to
the world; yet in the perfection of life, they are not comparable unto the
beasts of the field: for the beasts of the field, that have sense, are more
perfect in their kind, then the Sun in the firmament: Eatenus.
because to have life and sense, is a better kind of being, then to be without
it. The stars are bodies without sense; they are bodies without souls; and
they are overruled by other things: or else, as they be bodies, they could
not possible rule themselves.

Now these goodly bodies, how they should be carried up and down every 24.
hours: after what manner? whether they fly, as the birds in the air: so they
in their spheres and orbs: or whether they swim as the fishes in the sea;
as diverse men have imagined: a man would think, that one of those ways they
must needs be moved: but it is certain, they do neither of them. For they have
a mighty power that God has given them: and the Angels execute this power: and
they turn the whole globe over, Psalm. 104.2.
as the Psalmist says, where he calls it the curtain of heaven, which is
bespangled with stars: and the whole curtain is turned over together, as an
Ancient or Flagge displayed, that is imbossed with gold, all the whole compass
and circumference is moved together: or as a woman, when she turns the rimme
of a wheel about; both the circle and the center are moved together, and so
all the wheel moves round together: so the power of the Angels move the
celestial bodies, by the appointment of God; that in twenty four hours they
compass the whole earth, which is as much in effect, as if a bird should fly
fifty times the space of the world in half a quarter of an hour. The
rareness therefore of this motion, and the strangeness of it, argues, that
God has set over them some spiritual mover, which we call their standings,
and their Intelligences; which move them to and fro, in an unspeakable manner.

And for the manner of it, that it should be in such a contrary course, that
never a star should rise to morrow, in the same manner as it does to day: and
that the Sun should never rise at one and the same point, twice in the year;
but still vary: and by varying, make the compass of the year, as the Moon
makes the compass of the month. For the Sun has one motion, whereby he
makes the day: and the Moon another motion, whereby she makes the night.
Again, there is another motion of the Sun, whereby he makes the year: and
the Moon has another motion, whereby she makes a month. And so for the rest
of these heavenly bodies, some of them fulfill their course, and period, in
twelve years: some, in five years; some, in thirty, some, in a hundred
years: the Lord having set such a rare guidance in these things, that there is
nothing but a man may know it before hand: a man may tell fifty years, yea an
hundred years before hand; when there shall be an eclipse: and the presages of
these things are certainly known. This argues, that these bodies celestial,
are moved by spirits celestial. For of themselves being but bodies, they could
not possible do thus; they could not keep this exact and swift motion: nor
they could not roll over of themselves, it is impossible being but bodies,
that they should do these things.

Now I come to the second point, 2. Part, or comparison.
wherein the Apostle compares these bodies together, in respect of their glory.
There is a great glory indeed, in terrestrial bodies; there is a great glory
in gold and silver: and many men esteem them more then the stars of heaven.
There is a great glory and luster in jewels, and precious stones; there is a
goodly transparent beauty in them, in the luster that they give. There is a
great glory in the beauteous faces of Gods Saints, and in the gorgeous and
pompous out-settings of Kings and Princes, in their Courts of state. There is
great glory in every part of humane felicity: but being compared to this glory
of the heavenly bodies, they are mere foyles to that. For, says the Apostle,
there is one glory of the heavenly, and another glory of the earthly. That is,
there is a far greater glory of the heavenly, then can be supposed to be in
the earthly.

For first of all, the glory in the heavenly bodies, is pure; but the glory in
the earthly, is mixed: the purer the glory is, and the more it is separate, the
more singular and excellent it is. Now the glory which is in the stars above,
is pure in comparison of these earthly things. And although they be speckled,
and spotted in respect of God, and be full of dregs, in comparison with the
Angels: yet in relation to earthly things, they are most pure: even purity it
self. All these inferior things, in their glory, they have a mixture. They
are mingled of four things: there is nothing so glorious, but it is composed
of the four elements, even of Earth, Water, Fire, and Air, and these elements
are never so well glued together, but they will work themselves asunder i^
time: whereas that celestial beauty is pure without mixture, it is an Essence
that is elaborate to the full. God has brought it to that high perfection,
that there is in it no contradiction. In these things that are here below, one
Element fights against another, until they all come to destruction: the best
beauty in the world, at the last, the earth works all the other elements out,
and by a melancholy adust humor, it brings the highest spirits, the mightiest
strength, and noblest resolution, it dissolves it, and so brings it to its
foot, that earth it must be. It turns all to earth, and ashes: yea the very
gold, that seems to outvie time, and to last always: yet it comes at last to
be consumed by rust. As one said of him that made his gold his god; what a
miserable God (says he) is that which cannot defend himself from rust? and
although it wear long, and is the most compact thing in nature: and though it
can endure the fire, and be never the worse; yet it is subject to something,
which in time will consume and devour it, by reason of the mixture of it. For
it is made of the four Elements, and they have that discordance among
themselves, that at the last one works out another. But in the stars, and
the glory that is above, there is no enemy, no adversary: but it is a pure
glory of it self, without any mixture, so far it does transcend and exceed
all the glory that is in the earth.

Again, it is more excellent in respect of duration. For the glory that is in
the earth, is but a blast: but the glory of heavenly things, is the same always.
In these earthly things, there is a change; God changes them as a garment: but
the heavenly things, they continue still: and although they also shall be
changed, and the Lord shall fold them up, Heb. 1.12.
because he only remains forever; Yet for any thing that we see, there is no
change in them, but they are still as they were before. For in precious stones
and pearls, (which I think the Apostle has some reference unto in this
place) he compares the stars to precious stones, which are the most goodly
things in the earth: and those things, wherein God has set an emblem of the
stars, and drawn the picture of heaven: although there be much glory in
them; yet some of them are so dark of themselves, that their glory comes unto
them by accident; as the Diamond, which of it self is black: and except by
cutting the angles, the lines reflect one upon another, and be multiplied;
there is no glory in it. So the light and glory of the Diamond is not of it
self, but from the light that is above: and is only by accident, because of
the cutting and proportion of one part with another. And so in the rest of
these precious Jewels, and orient pearls in the world, their light is from
that light which is above: and only in reflection of that light. And for their
duration, they cannot hold and keep time with that glory which is in the
heavenly bodies. For the light and brightness which is in Jewels, has an old
age; a time of fading: therefore the Philosopher speaks of an old age of
Jewels and pearls, and the reason is, because the natural power is exhaled by
a certain force: or else (rather I think) because that the outward air
brings a kind of slough upon it, that duls the Jewel, and makes it that it
cannot show so bright as it was before. And chiefly, because the virtue and
power of it (as in other things) grows to the Center. As we see in an apple,
which is full when it is green; but when it is kept long, then the pulpe or
the flesh of it goes to the core, and leaves the skin withered, and wrinckled,
and destitute. So it is in Iemmes and Jewels, the power of it inclines inward.
As Scaliger Scaliger.
says, that he had a lodestone, and other stones, that had so lost the power
attractive, that it could not draw, until he brake it in the midst, and then
that part which was inward, had the attractive power which it had before, but
the outside was dulled. But now the glory that is above in the stars, that
is not dulled by any of these contraries or adversaries, but it still shines in
its own brightness and clearenesse: it is not the worse for wearing. Therefore
this glory, it is more excellent, because it is more durable: it is more
transcendent; There is one glory of the heavenly, and another of the earthly.

And lastly, the glory of things that are in heaven, is that they are full of
action, full of life and operation: but these earthly things are nothing but
very idleness (as it were) a non-agency: they do nothing, but are merely
restive, not having power to stir. The glory of men and women, if they stir
and move, they move to their own destruction: and they are every day more
subject to decadency. As for the glory of pearls and Jewels, it must rest in a
place, unless it be carried, it cannot carry and help it self, nor work its
operation, therefore men must carry them. As the Prophet says of Idols, that
they cannot stir till the Idolaters carry them: so those Idolaters that worship
their gold, they must carry it, or else it cannot stir of it self. But the
glorious bodies that are above, they move in an infinite strange variety, and
are of wondrous operation, so that when they meet together, in some points,
they govern the whole world. It is a strange and terrible thing to imagine,
what may be prognosticated and truly foretold, by the meeting, and by the
constellation of the stars. There is no great meeting in the world; no great
war; no deluge or inundation of waters, but a wise man may (without any
meddling with the devil) by the meeting and constellation of the stars, tell
when it shall be. So the Lord has set an infinite glory in these heavenly
bodies; he has given them a perpetual motion, that they never rest, but they
whirle about the earth, in an indefatigable course: they are always quiet, and
yet they never rest: their circular motion being their joy; and all their rest
being in their moving and stirring. So that in these regards, the Apostle
says, There is one glory of the heavenly, and another glory of the earthly.

And now he comes and expresses himself what he means by this: and speaks
to our capacity more plainly then he did before. For (says he) there is one
glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon, and another glory of the
Stars: For one Star differs from another in glory. This now is the second
part of the comparison: wherein he leaves the earthly things, and medleth no
more with them: every man knows what infinite difference there is there: but
now he wishes us to consider, what great difference there is in the heavenly
things, that seeing God has made every where a variety, therefore we should
not think it much, that God should do so also at the Resurrection. For we
must not imagine, that those bodies that dyed crooked, shall rise crooked; nor
that those bodies that dyed weak, and lame, and young; shall rise so: but God
shall make a great variety there, because he has made a wondrous variety here.

There is one glory of the Sun. I will not show my infancy, in discoursing
of these things: but only give a touch, and so pass to the hypothesis, where
the Apostle says, so is the resurrection.

The glory of the Sun, is the greatest of all the glories in heaven: all the
created bodies we see are nothing comparable: he is that great Giant that God
has set in his chamber, which is always ready to run his course. Psalm. 19.5.
The great messenger of the world, which searches and vieweth, and gives
intelligence of all nations: and reports of them to God: from whose heat,
there is no nation, nor latitude of people can be hid: his glory is this; That
he is both the chief, of all the heavenly bodies, and that this glory is his
own too.

First, he is the chief: you know (as the Philosopher said well) if it were
not for the sun, whatsoever the Moon, and Stars, could do, we should have
a continual night. For that is that great and mighty lamp of the world,
wherein God has recollected and bound up all the body and bulk of light; and
it is of that unspeakeable beauty, and of that rare excellency, that all the
stars in heaven, borrow their light from thence, so that it is the chiefest and
the greatest.

And his own light it is also: he does not take it from other stars, as the
rest do derive their light from him: but God took that light which he made
the fourth day before, (for the light was the first thing that God made for a
work of distinction: it was a chaos and confusion before, but when the light
was made the distinction, did appear) and as a man cannot work without light,
so God describes himself unto us: and therefore he made light for himself to
work by, although indeed he be light it self, 1 Timothy 6.16.
and dwells in that light that none can attain unto; The Lord (I say)
gathered that light which was in the creature before, and put it into the body
of the sun: and so made that light proper and peculiar to the sun, that he
should have a power to diffuse and communicate his light to all the stars in
heaven. There is no star that shines in his own light; but all the light
they have, they borrow it from the sun: because that God would bring all the
light to one head and principle; as all things do depend and have their being
in one God.

And this very beauty of the sun, (which we know is the greatest and the
goodliest) yet it is not always alike: but there is a difference in that too.
The sun shines not so bright in the winter, as he does in the summer:
because his beams in the winter, be not so direct as in the summer, and in the
southern parts of the world, where the sun is directly over the vertical
point, directly over their heads: as they have more heat, so they have a far
greater light then we, that have but an oblique or slant, or side way beam,
their light is far more. For according to the nature of the beam, so is the
proportion of the light and heat, in the winter less: because the sun is in
a lower circle, and though he be nearer the earth, by his bodily presence, yet
he is further off by his power and operation: and in summer, when he seems to
be near, yet he is furthest off in body, but is nearer by his operation:
because of the directnesse of his beam. I say the Lord has made a difference
in the beat and light that is in the body of the sun; that there is one
kind of heat and light in summer, and another kind in winter. So wondrous is
God, in making of difference, and planting variety in every thing.

The second is the glory of the Moon. There is another glory of the Moon. The
glory of the Moon, we know how far it comes short of the first, of the glory
of the sun: for it is neither a full glory, neither is it her own glory: but
that which it has, is derived from the body of the sun: and in the day time,
when the sun is in his strength, the Moon is like a cloud, if it be then
above our horison: and when there is any shadow, by the interposition of the
earth: the shadow of the earth does so drown her, and so deprive her of the
light of the sun (for the time) that either totally, or in so many parts, she
is utterly darkened. And evermore one side of the Moon is black, because of
the distance of the sun. For that side which is next to the sun, is light:
and that side which is from the sun, is as a black cloud, and according as
it goes further from the sun, or comes nearer to him, because her motion is
swifter than the suns, (for she does that in a month, which the sun does
in a whole year, because he is further off from the earth) accordingly I say,
as she comes nearer to him, or goes further off, so is her light: sometimes
she appears to be half light; sometimes full Moon: and sometime again,
nothing at all: because the beams of our eye cannot discern her, when there
is a meeting of the sun and her body.

And yet we may observe, what a wondrous variety GOD has given her: that this
which is the lowest and the meanest plannet in the heavens, the meanest star,
and the least of all others: although it be the least, and the blackest and
most unlightsome of all the rest, yet the LORD does by it as wondrous things,
as he does by all the stars of heaven: nay he does something more by it,
then he does by the sun it self. For all the rising of waters, all the
ebbing and flowing of the sea; all the motion of the blood in the creatures;
all the guydance of the brain of man; all the distemper of lunatiques and
frantiques: and whatsoever thing almost is in the trees in the vegitables, or
in the sencible things, to be guided and governed: they are dependent
(directly) upon the regency of the Moon: so that although it have a lesser
light, yet because it is nearer, it has a more wondrous operation.

lesson, that although God have given lesser gifts to some men; that although
they be like the Moon, in comparison of others, that are like the sun: yet
because they are nearer home, because they look to their charge; because they
keep their flock, because they look to their families that God has put unto
them: even these men that have a weaker light, they do more good then those
that are greater men, that are further off; that are careless and negligent:
therefore the Moon has a greater operation, being nearer the earth: although
in other respects, it be the weakest and poorest of all the planets.

Lastly, there is another glory of the Stars. The stars are not comparable,
either to the Sun, or to the Moon: Genesis 1.16.
therefore it is said, God made two great lights, the one to rule the day, and
the other to rule the night. The meaning is not, because the Moon is greater
than any of the stars of heaven, for that it is not: but it is spoken
according to the opinion of men, because it seems to be greater; to be the
second to the sun, and almost as big as it; therefore it is called a great
light, and because of the great office she has in guiding the night; and
likewise in respect of her use; the benefit of her in the growth of all things,
being great; and her guydance also in the humors of men's bodies. The stars,
therefore, are innumerably different: and for their number, numberless. And
although the Mathematicians describe them to be no more, but a thousand
thousand and two and twenty stars (according to the 48. Images, which they
describe in the firmament) yet it is certain, that there be other stars that
are not discerned, which pass all number. All these stars, are sorted out
into six magnitudes, even into six differences: not to stand now upon them.

In the first magnitude or difference, there are but fifteen stars: seven of
them are in the South, and three of them in the North, and five in the
Zodiaque. And these are goodly stars, that Navigators commend: and say, that
the stars toward the South pole, are more glorious then these which we see;
because of their double number.

The sixth magnitude, is the least of all, and yet the least star that is in
the heavens, is so great, that it exceeds the earth eighteen times over: yet
is it a wondrous thing, that God has made all these stars, to draw their
light from the Sun. For although they have a proper light of their own, yet
it is so rustie, that it has no clear explication of it self; till it be
enlivened by the light of the Sun. The stars, therefore, are never
eclipsed; because they always see the Sun: the Moon is sometime eclipsed; it
does not always see the Sun: there is an interposition of the shadow of the
earth, that comes between her and him; and that interposition, makes her
eclipse and lose her light. But where the Apostle says here, that one star
differs from another in glory; his meaning is, that one star is of one
magnitude; and another, of another: and according to their bigness, is their
glory, their shining, and their brightness.

magnitude in the world. He that is in the first magnitude, to carry himself
in a more glorious and brighter luster, then he that is in the second; and the
second, then the third: every man should keep his magnitude, here upon the
earth; for God has appointed, that the greatest magnitudes should serve for
the greatest purposes in this world. One star differs from another in
glory: that is, as in bigness and greatness, so in use too. Thus much of the
bodies, that he names.

Now we come to the hypothesis.

So is it in the resurrection of the dead. This is that which the Apostle
intends to prove: first comparatively, with these earthly bodies.

Secondly comparatively, with the bodies that are glorious among themselves.

In the first sense, he means thus. As the Lord has made several magnitudes,
and great disproportion among the stars; so that one differs from another
in glory: even so, as they differ in their bignesses, so do the bodies at the
Resurrection, as they shall be great and goodly; bigger then these, so they
shall be fuller of glory and excellency. The Lord shall make this earth, to be
heaven: he shall so translate the properties of things; he shall so amplify
and augment things (far surpassing the mind of man to imagine, or to
comprehend that wondrous picture, that God shall draw upon this poor carcass,
which now languisheth in this world) that look what difference there is
between the creeping on the earth; look what difference there is between a
worm and an Angel; between the pebble stones upon the earth, and the stars
in heaven: the Lord shall make the same difference above our expectation,
according to his promise in the bodies that he shall restore again at the
Resurrection. Therefore his meaning is, do not ask, how they shall rise? do
not ask, with what bodies they shall come? For still the Apostle answers that
question. For they might object, If the body that shall be raised, shall be
glorious; then it shall not be the same: and if it shall be of a spiritual
nature; the body shall be destroyed, and shall not be the same. Yes (says the
Apostle) it is the same, even as all earthly bodies, are the same among
themselves, in the general element: and the heavenly bodies (as the stars)
are all celestial bodies; and yet there is a difference, and one is more
glorious then another: So it shall be in the day of the Resurrection.

And for that point which our Divines, and which the Fathers stand so much on;
indeed it is not safe for us to venture too much into it. For although it be
likely, and true (as Luther Luther.
says) that Saint Paul shall have more honor in heaven, then a thousand other
Christians (he shall perhaps have more honor then all his persecutors, that
were converted by him: he shall have more honor then all his scholars, that
followed him) yet these things are spoken but by way of humane conjecture; and
cannot be proved directly by the holy Scriptures. How be it, because it is the
common tenent of the Fathers, we ought not to find fault with them, Pro.
22.28.
nor to remove the ancient bounds and limits, but to follow them in the
doctrine they have taught us. Therefore, these things may assure us; that as
Saint Paul says here, one star differs from another in glory, so we must
extend it to this sense: That in the day of the Resurrection, the sons and
daughters of God, shall shine in the firmament as stars; they shall all be
stars: but yet not of the same magnitude; not of the same beauty and
proportion: not of the same excellency. And to this purpose the School men
have devised a distinction in the laurel crowns, that the Saints of God shall
have: and they say, the joy in heaven is either substantial, or accidental.

1 Mat. 20 9.
The substantial joy, that is all alike in every man: for when they went into
the vineyard, the Lord gave unto every man a penie, and no more. The
comfortable vision of God almighty, the fruition of Christ, and all his
Saints: that is the substantial joy, that is the penie.

There is another joy, which is accidental: which is according to the labors
of men; according as they have employed themselves in this world. And there are
diverse similitudes that set out this, in the Gospel. Mat. 25.
As of him that received ten talents, and was made Lord of ten Cities. Mat.
19.29.
Of him that sowes plenteously, and reapes plenteously: whereas another sows
sparingly. Of him that offers his blood for the Lord Jesus Christ, and receives
an hundredfold for it. Of the D^sc^ples that shall be chief, and prime in the
kingdom of heaven; Mat. 19.28.
and sit upon twelve thrones to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel: Luk 6.23.
and that promise that the Lord makes, Great shall your reward be in heaven:
There shall be a great reward for you, therefore it seems there shall not be
so great a reward for other men, as for the Apostles. This joy is accidental:
it happens to them, because they have wrought in their callings; because they
have been diligent in their places. So the Schools say, a man of learning
(which is an accidental thing, for learning comes accidentally; it is not a
thing that is substantial: a man is ^ot borne with learning) therefore they
say, according to the wisdom which a man has used well in this world, he
shall be rewarded in heaven in a greater measure. In respect of the
substantial joy, he shall have all one penie with the rest: but in respect of
his accidental joy, honor for his wisdom and learning, and for his
almsdeeds, (which is by way of accident) and so according to his works, he
shall have a reward: according to a man's works, so shall his reward be. This I
take to be very true: although I cannot well see, how it should be an
infallible ground. But we follow the Fathers direction.

Saint Austin, speaking of the purity of virginity, Aug.
of the professed virgins of his time: well, says he, those that shall come to
the common immortality hereafter, they shall have a great reward above the
rest; because they had something in the flesh, which was not of the flesh: they
had something in the flesh which had no use or benefit of the flesh. And in his
146. Epistle, says he, If God have made all bodies visible; and these visible
bodies be so different each from other, in distance of place, in operation, and
power, and in evidence: much more must we think he will make a difference at
the day of the Resurrection. And although all shall be as stars, that shall
shine in the firmament, yet all shall not have one kind of glory, and of
luster.

Tertull.
And Tertullian. How shall there be many mansions in Gods house? How does Christ
say, In my Fathers house are many mansions; Job. 14.2.
except it be for the variety of men's merits. You must not be offended for
this word merit; for the Fathers in old time, took it not in a proud sense:
but for the deeds done in the flesh, whether good or evil. So men should be
rewarded, according to their works, or fruits they had done: the Saints shall
differ, as one has had greater works then another, and greater deeds.

And Chrysostom brings this argument: that unless this be granted, that the
Saints of God shall have a different portion of glory, in the world to come;
and not be all alike: it would make men that believe the Resurrection, to be
careless how they lived in good works: or at least, how they abounded in good
works. Because, when a man once sees salvation, that it is common; and that
every man shall have as good a share in it, as he: he will not seek to be
better then his fellow: and so, good works, and almsdeeds would grow faint.
Therefore it is the best way, to encourage them; and to make them open and
enlarge themselves: to make them as capable as they can, that God may fill them.

To this purpose the Fathers have a comparison of diverse vessels, that are cast
into the water, and all are filled; a pottle is filled, and a pint is filled;
and yet there is great difference, every one has as much as it can contain,
but yet the pint has not so much as the pottle: so the Saints of God, they
shall all be full of joy, and full of glory, but according to their capacity,
the Lord shall fill them. Therefore we should make our selves large unto God,
that God may fill us, to be large handed, and large minded, and large hearted
to God, this brings largeness of glory, and beauty, and makes men principal
stars in the firmament.

Theophilact brings another reason, Theoph.
which presses better, and urges further then this, If we mark it (says he)
we see the damned in hell, have a different torment: therefore the Saints in
heaven, shall have a different glory. The other is plain, by that saying,
where our Lord says, Matthew. 11.
It shall be easier for Sodom and Gommorrah, then for that City which would
not receive the Apostles: and it should be easier for Tire and Sydon, then for
Chorazin and Bethsaida: they should have easier torment then those that
despised the Gospel. And therefore, seeing there shall be an inequality of
torment, and that those that are cast away from the sight of God, shall have a
diverse deformity, they shall all be deformed, but some more then other: there
is more unworthiness in some bodies, according to the quality of their
sins. And so it follows, on the contrary, that the mercy of God shall be
opened and manifested, in a greater measure upon one man, then upon another:
according to the quality of their good conversation and repentance; and the
good deeds that they have done in the flesh.

Saint Ambrose Ambrose.
also, discoursing upon this argument. Even as (says he) out of one lump, out
of one piece and clod of clay, God has made all things: but yet in a wondrous
variety. For out of the water, he has taken all the brightness that is in
this world, the stars of heaven are bright, because they are taken out of the
water: and the brightness of jemmes, and pearls is out of the water mingled
with earth; and out of the earth, comes all things that are obscure and dark:
so the Lord shall make out of this body (out of one lump and mass) a wondrous
variety. At that day he shall make some, as those that bring forth thirty
fold; others, as those that bring forth sixty; and some, as those that bring
forth an hundred fold; in an admirable difference: and yet all shall have glory
sufficient, and in contentment, and be full of glory. The glory shall be full
in it self: although it shall not be so great as others.

And Saint Anselme Anselme.
says clearly, that there shall be one way for chastity and purity to shine,
for them that have lived chaste in wedlock; and another way, for virginity:
there shall be one way, for a man that gives little out of much: and another
way, for him that like the poor widow, give as it were all that they have:
there shall be one way, for him that gives his goods to the poor: and another
way for him that gives his life for Christ's sake. These shall shine in a
different manner.

And as Ambrose Ambrose.
again. Even as for the penies sake, there is no man that shall be driven out
of Gods kingdom; but he that can bring the penny, and show it unto God, and
say, Here is thy Image, here is thy superscription, Caesar; know thy own, and
take me for thine own: for here I bring thee the penie. As he that can bring
the penie, shall have heaven; so there be some that have more then the penie:
and those shall have variety of mansions, and goodly places in the paradise of
God, they shall be the chief and principal.

To conclude all. Let us desire the Lord, little, it shall be full enough. The
Lord shall fill all those that follow him, as with a river in the pleasures of
his house; and to be a doore-keeper in the house of God, in that blessed
kingdom: is worth all the tents and riches in this world. Let us not dispute
much about these things: but let us rest in that doctrine, which is delivered
in the Scriptures; and let us know, that if God admit us to heaven; we can have
no mean place; any thing there, is better then all the glory of this world:
even the least, and poorest mansion that can be. And that we may have the
greatest, and the best, and principal place there; there must be an holy
ambition for heaven: and for the greatest place in heaven. As the sons of
Zebede desired that one might sit on the right hand of Christ, Mat. 20.211
and another on the left: let us know how it is to be gotten, that so we may be
made capable for it. For it is not attained without a high comprehension (there
being no means for these strait vessels to keep and hold such a latitude of
honor, they are too great for us) therefore God shall reward us according to
our works; and according to the service that we do him. Not for any merit of
ours (for that were nothing at all, but hell, and confusion) but for the merits
of Christ: upon whom we layhold by faith. By which means his merits are made
ours, and we make him ours: and shall be sure to find him ours, at that day.
Which the Lord grant.

SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection.
1 COR. 15.42. So also in the Resurrection of the dead. It is sown in
corruption, it is raised again in incorruption; It is sown in dishonor, it is
raised again in honor.
IN these words the holy Apostle describes unto us, those rare supernatural
qualities, which God will deck the bodies of the Saints withal, in the great
day of the Resurrection. He has showed heretofore by certain parables and
similies, that such a thing is likely to be, that it is possible: but now he
tells us indeed what it is; And so after that pleasing doctrine that was
uttered in similitudes, he comes to a more sad, and solemn, and sentencious
kind of doctrine, and sets it down in material propositions concerning the
future state of Gods children. It is true, that to prepare the minds of men, by
familiar similies, and examples before their eyes, is a part of wondrous art,
and great oratorie: for so our Savior used in the Gospel, still, to draw men
by those things that were before them; to teach them, by their own trades, and
by their proper callings: by that means, growing familiar with their
understandings; making those things that were hidden, plain and open, by those
things that they were most conversant in. But that kind of doctrine is not
always to be followed: because, (as they say) similitudes illustrate, indeed,
but they prove nothing; there is a kind of deeper divinity, then that which is
from similitude; which our Savior Christ mingleth with his similitudes, as the
Apostle Paul does here. For now he comes to tell us of those things which we
could not have believed, except the similitudes before had prepared us: and had
showed us that they are things possible, that the body that is so corrupt, that
it should have a new quality; that it should receive incorruption, and never
corrupt again; that the dead body which is so deformed, should have such a
glory, and beauty, that there is no creature, no visible creature which God
has made, can compare with it; that the body that is so weak, and so full of
infirmity, that it should have such a supernatural strength, whereby it shall
exceed a thousand Sampsons in strength and vigor; that the body that is a
lump, a mere carnal mass, that it should come to that nimblenesse, and
agility, and swiftness, that it should become rather a spirit then a body,
when it is raised. That these things should so happen, it were altogether
incredible, if the Lord had not made it probable before, by the things that we
familiarly use: by the corn in our fields; by the flowers in our gardens, by
the flesh of the creatures; by the difference of celestial, and terrestrial
bodies; and by the difference of heavenly bodies among themselves.

Now he comes to the general hypothesis; and makes the reduction of all those
similies that went before. So is it in the Resurrection of the dead. So, that
is, in all those 4. comparisons which I named before: you may apply all these
very well; and understand by them, the nature and the qualities of the bodies
that shall be raised up. So is it in the Resurrection of the dead. So, as it is
with the corn so, as it is with those diverse kinds of flesh; as it is in the
difference of the heavenly bodies, compared with the earthly; and as the
heavenly bodies are mutually different one from another. In the corn, as there
is a strange variety in the growth of it, from that which was sown, it comes
to an admirable plenty: so the glory that shall be revealed upon the bodies of
the Saints, out of a rotten thing, which was nothing but as an ear of corn,
putrifyed and corrupted: out of this, there comes a glorious stalk of
incorruption and beauty, that shall remain for ever. And as it is in the
flesh of beasts, and in the flesh of men, and the flesh of fouls, and of
fishes: as there is great variety, and some are sweeter then other, and some
more sollid, and compact then other; so is it in the Resurrection of the dead,
in comparison of this flesh that we have here. This flesh is like unto the
flesh of fishes, in respect of that which shall be there. The Lord himself
shall so perfume it with his glorious unction, that it shall be for ever
steadfast, and strong, and able unto all purposes: that it shall be filled with
all faculties, and prepared unto all the functions that God shall appoint unto
it.

So is the Resurrection of the dead. So, that is, in so great a variety, and
difference, from the body that is here present; as the difference is great
between heaven and earth; between the stars that are in heaven, and the
stones that lie upon the earth. And so is it in the resurrection. So, as the
particular differences are between the heavenly bodies; one star differs from
another in glory: they have not all one magnitude; they are not all of one
brightness: but according to their several magnitud^s, so is their shining
and brightness. So the Lord shall make the admirable difference, not only
between the present bodies that we have here, and the bodies which shall be
raised; but likewise between the bodies themselves: that although all shall be
full, yet all shall not have a like measure; but every one shall receive,
according to their capacity.

So now to come to that part of the Text. You see the substance is thus much,
He tells us, there shall be some rare qualities, which God shall pour upon
this flesh; which it could never attain to in this life, for that it is still
pestered with the contrary. It shall have honor; it shall have strength, it
shall have nimblenesse and subtlety: and all this shall be tied with a golden
band of incorruption, which is that that makes all sweet, and full.

For, to have good things, and to fall from them, is as good as never to have
them: but this incorruption, is the glorious tie of all the rest, the crown of
all, the rest: that the strength there, shall be without corruption, their
beauty shall be incorrupt; their agility and subtlety of body shall be
incorrupt; all these things shall be for ever; they shall be preserved by the
perpetual influence of Gods mercy, and love upon the creature. This is the
height and depth of this Text. As if the Apostle had said, You wonder in your
selves to consider the great difference that shall be between the bodies that
are raised, and the bodies which you have now in this life; I will show you
plainly how it shall be. All the difference arises from certain qualities:
for the substance, there is nothing different or contrary in it; but in the
quality, is all the difference and contrariety: and I will show you it by such
qualities, as are most contrary one to another. For what is more contrary then
corruption and incorruption? what is more contrary, then honor and dishonor?
what is more contrary, then weakness and power? what is more contrary, then
natural and spiritual? and behold, God shall so turn the terms of this
present state, in that blessed world; that whereas now, here is nothing but a
mass of corruption, then there shall be a glorious piece of incorruption:
whereas now, it is compassed about with shame and deformity; in death, and in
sickness, in consumption, and in misery; then there shall be a vessel of
honor, that shall be every way shining, and glorious in the sight of God; that
whereas now this body is subject to weakness, (all the strongest lives in the
world, being full of great weakness) then, it shall be a mirror of strength:
it shall have an arm, able to break a bow of steel: that whereas now it is a
lumpish creature: then it shall be swift as a soaring eagle; and like unto an
Angel of God: for we shall be equal to the Angels of God, in heaven.

So then, Division into two parts. 1. A description. 2. A condition.

first we have here a Description of the state present, in a metaphorical
word: and the promise of the state to come, in another metaphor like unto it.

And then we have the condition, and several manner, how these shall be.

In the first, two particulars 1. The state present. 2. The state in the life
to come

Concerning the first, for the state of the body present, the Apostle says, It
is sown.

The metaphor for the life to come, is in this; that he says, It is raised up
again. It is sown in corruption, it is raised again in incorruption.

Each of these estates, differenced by four essentials: and their contraries.
And then for the essential parts of difference, he makes them four; wherein
the body is sown, and there are four contraries, wherein it is raised.

For the first, the body is sown in rottenness, It is

second, it is sown in deformity, and ugly vision, that this corruption cannot
lie hid: for then it were more tolerable: but it must come unto the eye of the
world; a man's friends must look upon him, and see the ghastly countenance in
the dead corpse. This the Apostle calls dishonor, there is nothing in the world
more dishonorable, that is, there is nothing in the world more hateful to
look upon, then the dead body of a man.

Thirdly, he says, It is sown in weakness: that is, in such a miserable
feebleness and desolation, and so deprived of all strength and power, that it
is left as a trampling stock for men and beasts.

lastly, he says, It is sown a natural body: that is, nothing but a mere
elementary thing: nothing else to the sense of flesh and blood, and to look
on. These are the woeful parts of this body, that we have in this present life.

But on the contrary; God shall invest it, in stead of corruption, with
incorruption, with impassibility, with immortality: and in stead of weakness,
it shall have strength: and so of the rest. These are the branches of the Text;
of these briefly, and in order, as it shall please God to give assistance.

And first for the two metaphors that be used, 1 Part. Metaphor of the present
life. Chrysostom.
It is sown. It is a good observation of St. Chrysostom that the holy Apostle
is so confident in the matter, that he uses the terms interchangeably,
between the sowing of the corn, and the burying of the dead body. For, (says
he) when he speaks of the sowing of the corn, he uses the phrase which
properly belongs to the burying of the dead: and when he speaks of the burying
of the dead, he uses that manner of speech which belongs unto the corn. To
teach us, that as there is nothing that could have been spoken more fitly; nor
no comparison could have been more natural then this which he takes from
corn; so likewise, that there is nothing more sure and certain, then that the
one shall come to pass as truly, as we daily see the other. For when he
speaks of the corn which is cast into the ground, he says, It is not quickened
except it die. To die, belongs properly to that which has life, which has a
sensible life, (although there be a kind of death to in other things) but yet
this word is used most properly, to signify the life of man, when it passes
from the body. And again, when he says, It is quickened; to be quickened, most
properly belongs to the highest life, the life of man. So to die, and to be
quickened again from death, are phrases, and terms, that properly belong to
the life of man: yet the Apostle uses it here in speaking of the corn, to
which it belongs not properly and significantly. And now when he comes to speak
of the burying of the bodies, he uses a phrase which is proper to the corn:
and says, It is sown, and It is raised up: that is, it is brought forth in
that variety as the corn is clothed with. And the reason, St. Chrysostom
says, is this, Because we are as sure of the one as of the other: and also to
show the fitness of the comparing of these things. There is no comparison that
could have been so fit, therefore he interchangeth the phrases of the one to
the other; to show that it comes all to one, It is sown.

The body of man has two kinds of sowings in this world.

One is, when he is sown into the esse, into the being of a man: and that is,
in the womb of his mother, as St. Chrysostom says: in which sense it is said,
that such and such descended from the seed of Abraham, and from the seed of
such progenitors.

Another sowing is this which the Apostle speaks of here, which is in the womb
of that great mother, the Earth: which is the common mother, and universal
nurse of all mankind.

Now of the first, St. Paul speaks not here: although it be true, indeed, that
some Interpreters have turned it that way. For it is certain, that the prime
principles of men are laid in corruption, and the first sation or sowing is a
concealed and secret matter, a shameful action, and sometimes a dishonest
thing, but the Apostle has no intention to speak of that: for he speaks here
by way of allusion: and says, So is it in the resurrection of the dead.
Therefore I cannot follow those extravagancies, but apply it to the
Resurrection. It is certain the Apostle means of that sowing of God, when he
sows the body in the ground: Earth to earth, ashes to ashes, as St. Chrysostom
says: Chrysostom.
that is the best sowing by far. For the first, is a sowing to misery, and
weakness; to live in troubles, and crosses, and affliction in this world; even
as Job says, Job 14.1.
Man that is borne of a woman, has but a short time to live, and is full of
misery: but this sowing of God, of his children in the grave, (of which this
Text, as also this Chapter must be understood) it is a sowing, not to a life of
misery, but to a state of glory. There shall be no trouble after that, but a
quiet, and perfect rest, and renovation, when the fullness of time shall
appear. So then, It is sown. He uses this word upon purpose, to take from
us the fear of death: the fear and trouble of that great monster, and bugg of
the world. For as much as to die, is a hopeful thing: as the sowing of the
seed is a hopeful action. Sowing, is a word of confidence and expectation: as
we see 1 Cor. 9. 1 Cor. 9.10, 11.
that he that sowes, may sow in hope; and he that reaps, may reap in hope; and
he that ears, may ear in hope. All these are words of hope: words that are
very full of contentment to the mind: for by that means, there is a certain
expectation of gain and advantage.

It is sown: That is, when a man dies, he is full of hope: there is a blessed
hope, that waits and attends upon him, As Job says, the just man, the good man
has hope in his death: and the faithful, with faithful Abraham, they hope
against hope: that when desperation assailes him, then he is strongest, in his
hope to God.

It is sown: Therefore is is not cast away; it is not brought to nothing; it
is not destroyed, but it is sown: it is laid up in a faithful hand; it is
laid up, as a depositum: and not only so, but it is put forth to Interest, and
has a great Income again. It is sown. And it is sown in a due place; in the
field of God, in Gods acre: as in many places in Germany, the Churchyards are
called Gods acre. It is not cast into the water, it is not cast into the fire
to be burned, nor to the thorns and weeds to choke it: it is not left to be
picked by the fowls of heaven: but it is sown in that place, where God has
purposed it shall repose and rest. Yea, it is given upon tale, and the earth
shall restore, and give up her dead: she shall surrender every body, which God
has committed unto her. It is sown with the diligent hand of the great
husbandman, the Lord Almighty: he that casts his seed with judgment, and lays
it up with knowledge and great wisdom: Ioh. 15. Joh. 15.1.
says Christ, I am the Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman. The Lord
therefore takes this seed, and he so lays it up, where it may bring the most
profit, and rise with the richest advantage. It is sown in the bosom of the
great mother the earth, which is fruitful, and abounds in plenty: which
receives the first and later rain, Deuteronomy 11.14.
and sets the valleys thick with corn, Psalm. 65.14.
that it makes men rejoice and sing. In such a place is this semination, this
sowing: it is sown by the hand of God, it is sown in the expectation of hope
and profit. This word the Apostle uses, to allure us to familiarity with that,
which of necessity we must undergo. Men must forgo this tabernacle, but it is
grievous to them to think of it: they are perplexed, and distressed, when such
melancholy thoughts come in their heads. Let us shake hands therefore with
that, to the which we must needs bow at the last. And let us conceive the
goodness of God, which follows us, even unto our death, and opens a gate of
hope, and makes us prisoners of hope, and gives passage to the performance of
those blessed promises wherein we are instructed, and whereto we are called by
the lure of the glorious Gospel. So much for that metaphor.

Now the other for the body to come, 2. The metaphor for the life to come.
Chrysostom.
it is very significant. It is raised up. Says St. Chrysostom, the Apostle
does not say it grows up of it self, but it is raised up, as being done by
another: so indeed, our redemption, it is not wrought by any thing that is
inherent in us; but it is an external action that comes from God: it is the
hand of God that works on us, and raises us up. It is raised, therefore, by
the power of him, that raised Christ from the dead: Romans 8.11.
It is raised by him that raised for us a horn of salvation in the house of
his servant David. Luke 1.69.
John 11.17.
It is raised as Lazarus was raised after he had been four days in the grave.
It is raised, as a house is raised from the foundation. It is raised, as the
Temple of the Lord, out of the prime materials, and beginnings. It is raised,
never to fall down again. It is raised, not to relapse again, but to stand
as a goodly monument for ever. It is raised by the mighty hand of him, that
raises the poor out of the dust and mire, Psalm. 113.7, 8.
and makes them equal to the Princes of his people.

Therefore in this word, the Apostle would teach us also wherein our hope
consists. It is sown, that is a hopeful action: but after it is sown, it
must be raised again: that is a dependant action, which is not in our selves,
but from the Lord. Therefore we must raise our hearts unto God, and return our
devotion, and best affections to him, while we live here; that he may raise
these bodies of ours, when they have no power to raise themselves: but when
they shall lie in the dust of confusion, he shall raise them up, that they may
be living Temples for the holy Ghost, for ever to inhabit. It is necessary,
before hand, to raise our spirits unto him, that he may make a requital unto
us at the great day of his Visitation. So much for the metaphors.

It is sown in corruption. Corruption, is the worst change that can be. It is
a motion from a being, to a not-being. For as generation is a work of God,
whereby something which was not, is brought to have a being; so corruption is a
work which God permits to be done, whereby a thing is brought to fall from that
being, either to no-being at all, to have no being in our sense; or else to
such a base and naughty being, that a man can see no reason why it should ever
have been so glorious and so goodly, to come to such a foul disgraceful
downfall. Corruption therefore is the destruction of the thing that was made:
as in all things we see in the world. In natural and artificial things, when
a matter is corrupt once, it grows fit for nothing: and although there be some
kind of liquors, that when they are corrupted, they serve for some use; (as
wine when it is corrupt, it turns to vinegar: and although it be not fit to
drink, yet it serves to raise the appetite in sauce) and so diverse other things
do so corrupt, that notwithstanding they serve for some use: but yet the
chiefest and greatest number of things, when they come once to be corrupted,
they come as much as to say to nothing, to a kind of dissolution: for there is
nothing that can be turned unto nothing simply, but because the use, and
property, and substance is so disgraced, and a contrary thing succeeds a
better: it is as if the thing were not at all. Now this corruption, is done two
ways: It is effected either by separation of the matter: Or by removing of the
form.


The matter and the form, you know, are the chief things of which every body
consists: and we see that in death, these things hold exactly. For the form of
man, being his reasonable soul; as long as that is in the body, it is co^pact
and free from corruption: and it keeps the beauty in the form and image of
God, in its proper frame and figure. But when the soul is gone, then
corruption works, and dissolves the matter to. Now when the matter is
dissolved, or the element is dissolved and corrupted: this is that corruption
which the Apostle speaks of here, when he says, The body is sown in
corruption; that is, the principles of the body, which consist of blood, and
flesh, and skin, and bones, and color, and complexion, and proportion, and
figure, and frame: all these go away presently after the soul is gone. And
though some hold longer then other, (as being of more sollid parts) yet they
continue not long, even but a few years: and in some grounds, a few days
destroy the whole man. This corruption began, when we began. God (it is true)
made the body of man incorrupt, had he persisted in obedience: but as soon as
man by his prevarication, by transgression of Gods command, was drawn into
sin; he brought upon him this worm of corruption: which never cease to
work upon the powers and faculties of flesh and blood, and upon every part,
till at the last it work it to an utter nothing, to a very desolation. And this
corruption, if it could be contained, it were well: if it could consist within
some terms. For corruption is proper to the body; but yet through the
infection of sin, the gangrene has so poisoned and possessed the whole man,
that corruption (by a metaphor) is brought into the soul to: which is the
special part of man. And when the best things are corrupted, the corruption is
most woeful of all. Matthew 6.23.
If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? says
the Lord Jesus. Men in this world are corrupt in body: they are corrupt in
soul: they are corrupt in their understandings, in their speeches: they are
corrupt in their ways, Psalm. 53.1.
as the Prophet says, Corrupt they are, and become abominable in their doings,
there is none that does good, no not one. They are corrupt in their
consciences: the consciences of wicked men, are defiled with hypocrisy, that
they stink in the nostrils of God, and men. And to this corruption, every man
is subject more or less. But the chief corruption, intended here, is
corruptibility: that is, the rottennes of the parts of the body, when they are
once dissolved, and melted, and fall from one another. To conclude this point:
because we know it by experience, and we bear about us these corrupt bodies:
and we are troubled with the signs of corruption every day, if we understand
any thing,

puff up the flesh, and fill the mind with vain conceits of its own
sufficiency: but rather let us study mortification, such as becomes the
children of God: let us weep for our own corruptions: for they grow so fast
upon us, that they make us odious, even unto our own selves, when we come to
have a sense of our selves.

Again, it teaches us this, to take heed how we patch over this
corruptibility as we use to do. What a deal of cost, what a deal of painting,
and art, and labor, and time, is spent now adays to conceal this corruption?
Corrupt bodies will not seem to be corrupt, but they will be immortal, and
eternal: and those offensive things that be in nature, and that grossness
and loathsomeness that lurks in these bodies, we seek by perfumes, and by
orient colors, and singular diet, to suppress them, and obscure them, that
they may not appear. But now the Lord has put a worm in this flesh: see it,
and acknowledge it, and wail over it: make not thy self better then thou art:
deceive not thy self: thou art nothing but dust and ashes, a corrupt creature,
a mass of corruption. Why then art thou proud, thou dust and ashes? which art
nothing else, but a mass and lump of poor rottenness and putrefaction. Take
heed lest as thy outward man corrupts daily, that the inward man be not
corrupted to. For there is no corruption like that: when a man has a rotten
heart, that is the most woeful putrefaction. Take heed, therefore, to thy
soul, that though thy outward man be (like it self) corrupt, 2 Cor. 4.16.
yet thy inward-man may be renewed daily in holiness and righteousness, to
serve the living God: that thou may procure peace to thine own soul. It is
sown in corruption: It is raised again in Incorruption.

Blessed be the God of Incorruption! that although our bodies of themselves be
subject to fade and molder away; yet it is but for a season: for that the Lord
has promised them another state, which is incorrupt. And although we cannot
understand how it shall be, by looking upon these earthly bodies, (for we see
every thing comes to nothing, and is dissolved) yet the Lord has given us a
sign of it, in the stars of heaven, which are incorrupt. They are incorrupt,
even in our common sense and experience: for they be not mixed, as these
elementary bodies be; they are not of such a gross composition: and therefore
they stand in the firmament in their state and place, as they have done from
the beginning. We have also a sign of it in the Angels, which are incorrupt
also: and in the soul of man that he carries within him, which is likewise
incorrupt, These are emblems of that incorruption, that God will work upon our
bodies also. It is true, the body that is tainted with sin, and it cannot be
otherwise; it must be a slave to corruption, it is bound over to corruption; it
is full of putrefaction, and it must needs say as Job, Job 17.14.
I will say unto rottenness, thou art my mother, and to the worm, ye are my
sisters, and my daughters, and my kinsfolk. Yet the Lord has made in these,
spirits, and he will waken these bodies, where he cleares and frees them from
sin: he will make in them an eternal vigor; and the everlasting influence
of his goodness and grace, shall keep that sweetness for ever, after that it
is once infused into it. And this incorruption shall come to the bodies of the
Saints, three ways.

First, by the goodness of the matter.

Secondly, by the singularity of the form.

Thirdly, by the gracious assistance of the efficient cause.

First, for the goodness of the matter. The Lord sollid, lively, and vigorous
matter, that shall never again be subject to frailty, as the body was before
by sin: that as the Indian or China dishes; the earth and clay that they are
made of, is buried certain years in the ground: that so it may ripen, and be
brought to that color, which after it comes to be capable of. So the blessed
God will bury these corrupt bodies under the ground, to bring them to be a
matter fit for his stamp, and image to be set on: which shall not be corrupt,
as the former was; but shall remain full of strength and vigor, and full of
life and sweetness, to endure for ever.

And then secondly, for the form. The form of matter to: only it shall be
refined: but the soul then shall be of such absolute power over the body, that
it shall command it every where. The body shall yield a full obedience, and the
soul shall command with a full authority, and it shall be so furnished with
new abilities, with new knowledge, with new desires, with new Zeal; that it is
impossible for any temptations to pass as they do now. Now, sometimes the
soul tempts the body; and sometimes the body tempts the soul: and they do
mutually work each others subversion: but there shall be no such contrariety,
then: but the body shall be for the soul, and the soul for the spirit, and
the spirit for God, that God may be all in all. Therefore, I say, in that
blessed world, they cannot sin: men that live in this flesh, cannot but sin:
but God shall restore that blessed life, that it shall not possibly sin, nor
conceive of sin: that is, with any inclination to sin. For it is impossible,
for any man that is well in his wits, that he should desire to be murdered: it
is impossible, for a man that loves his wealth and riches, to desire that a man
should rob him: it is impossible, that such thoughts should come into the mind
of a man that is well advised, so it is impossible for the soul and body in
that new world, that ever they should have any delight to go from God: For
then it were possible for a man to desire to be murdered, or for a man to
desire to be robbed of his wealth: for to go from God, is for a man to lose
his treasure, to lose his life, to lose his wealth, to lose all his quiet and
contentment: and there is no man that would lose these. Therefore, as these
earthly things do so affect us, that we cannot abide to be bereft of them:
much more then shall God so affect us, that we shall not endure to think of
any separation, or going from him. As the Apostle says, Romans 8.38, 39.
What shall separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus? Shall
fire, or sword, or hunger, or cold, or nakedness, or life, or death? nothing
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, i^ Christ Jesus.

incorruption shall be in respect of the gracious assistance of the efficient
cause. This, indeed, is the cause of causes: this is all in all. For though God
make a glorious matter, and habilitate it with an excellent form: yet,
notwithstanding, if it were not for the continual influence, and pouring in of
that glorious life: every thing that is made, may be marred again. As St.
Basil St. Basil.
says, Everything created, is convertible, and may be turncal. The Angels
themselves, they live not upon themselves; nor they live not upon necessity,
but by the will, and grace of God: therefore they are immortal. Nothing has
immortality, properly in it self, but God alone, as the Apostle says, 1 Timothy
6. To God, 1 Timothy 6.16.
who only has immortality. That is, who only has immortality of himself;
and of necessity has it, and cannot but have it. All others have immortality,
by a dependant grace. Here is the chief reason of our incorruption, because
God shall fill us with the sweet water of his river of incorruption: which
shall continually keep us in our youth, and in our glory and strength, and in
that state that he has bestowed on us, and the work that he has begun, he
will finish, and follow it with his continual assistance. This is the reason,
why we shall be incorrupt. For because of sinful flesh, the Lord permits it
here, to fall to its own condition: and so it comes from better to worse; and
from thence, to nothing at all, to dust and ashes. But there, by reason that
the Lord shall show his mercy, and by reason of the infinite delight that man
shall take in God again: there shall be a continual application of God to
man, by a continual influence, (as the Schools speak.) So as it is impossible,
to think of any entrance of corruption: as that place where the Sun shines
continually can never be dark: and that plot of ground, which has a sweet
well ever pouring into it, can never be dry nor thirsty. So it must needs be,
where God is always slowing in his light, and love, and grace: it is
impossible there should be any pressing in, or any suspicion of corruption to
come again. Therefore concerning these things, the Scripture tells us, Psalm.
36. Psalm. 36 9.
With thee (says the Prophet) is the well of life. As if he should have said,
thy waters run always sweet, Psalm 87.7.
and abundantly: all fresh springs are in thee, Psalm 23.1.
therefore we shall not lack, nor die for thirst, because we shall have the
well of life. Psalm. 36.8.
And Psalm. 36. Thou feedest them with the fullness of thy house, and thou
give them pleasures as out of a river. And for this purpose also, even for
that we should be assured of this, the Scripture tells us that we shall have, in
stead of sorrow, fullness of joy: in stead of darkness in this life, we shall
have eternal light: in stead of sickness, we shall have his saving health: in
stead of death, we shall have life everlasting. And so we see what this
incorruptibility is: it consists in impassibility, that the body shall not be
able to suffer from any thing: because God shall be always flowing into it his
goodness, and love in Christ Jesus. It shall not be able to suffer from a
tempting devil: it shall not suffer from it self, nor from any other created
nature: it shall not suffer from sickness, nor from time: the teeth of time
which devoureth all things, shall not be able to set its fangs upon the bodies
of the children of God. They shall not suffer from hell, nor from death: there
shall be no matter of fear in any thing: they shall not suffer from the flames
of fire, it shall not be able to consume those glorious bodies; nor the
sharpest sword shall not pierce the least hair of them, but as we see God
preserved the three children in the fiery furnace, Dan. 3.27.
when it was extraordinary hot, that there was not so much as the smell of the
singeing of the fire upon their garments. The blessed God that is able to do
this, in these corrupt bodies; much more will he do it, in that incorruptible
condition: when he shall advance them to that glory, which himself will give
them, who is the prime author, and pattern of impassibility. And if the Lions
were not able with their teeth, when they were so famished, Dan. 6.
to seize upon the body of Daniel, when he was cast into the dungeon: much
less shall infirmities have power, or any other violence be able to touch the
bodies of those that shall be glorified in the day of Jesus Christ. It shall rise
in incorruption.

I see the time is past, I will but touch the next point, and leave the rest.

It is sown in dishonor, it is raised again in honor. The greatest grief
that a man conceives in his death, is the dishonorable condition that does
accompany him: that though he were never so beautiful and beloved before, yet
his best and dearest friends will be ready to quit him now: yea they cannot
endure his company: so that he must be removed out of sight, as being an odious
spectacle to look upon: as an intolerable neighbor, that is not to be come
near: as one that will infect all the society where he is: as a pestilent
creature that must be shunned and avoided, that must be shut up close within
the ground, where he may do no harm, nor be noisome and offensive to those
that are above ground. This is the strange dishonor to our nature: that the
great Lords and Ladies which have slept before upon their beds of Ivorie; Amos
6.4.
which had their goodly Curtains, and Canopies, and singular arts to give them
pleasure and contentment: now being dead, they must be outted from their
palaces, and their goodly-roomes, and be thrust in the bowels of the earth:
they must be accounted such kind of creatures, as with whom there is no
cohabitation. Even Abraham himself, although he loved Sarah dearly as his own
heart; yet he could not endure her when she was dead: but after a certain
season when he had mourned for her, he was feign to be a suitor to the sons of
Heth, to sell him as much ground as to bury his dead in, Genesis 23.4.
to remove her out of his sight. The best, and the mightiest Monarchs in the
world, cannot secure themselves from this dishonor. If they die on the sea,
they must be cast overboard: or if they die on land, they must suffer
themselves to enter into this common misfortune: and although art, and
imbalming, and curiosity may do much; yet diverse parts of them, must of
necessity be taken and committed to the ground, lest all about them be pestred
by them: This is the woeful stroke of nature, the dishonor and deformity, the
beastly-figure of death, which makes a man terrible to all the beholders: so
that that goodly countenance should be turned to a ghastly skeleton; that those
fair cheeks should come to be pale ashes, or as a black charcoale: that those
sparkling blazing eyes should become nothing, but as a dim and dark peble: and
that which is the most fragrant piece of all, (the mouth) to become the most
ugly, and odious of all. The Lord has drawn the pattern of sin in the face of
a dead man: and has made it more sinful, and more ugly in that one spectacle,
then in any thing in the world besides. Thus he that would not rest in the
beauty of his creation, that would not maintain the glory of his countenance,
and the image of God that he had imprinted upon him: he shall now undergo
the most foul image, and figure that could be devised.

There being no beast, no creature that is half so ugly: nothing falling so
from it self, nothing so unlike it self, there being nothing traversed with
such contrary passions, and with such figures, and lines of misery, as the face
of a dead man. It is so with all men: and although it appear less in some,
then in others, yet leave them a certain time, and they all at the last become
so ghastly, that a man that has a constant mind, and can endure many things;
yet he loathes to behold a dead man. This is the dishonor of sinful flesh:
such a baseness and contempt, that a man's best friends shall run away from
him: yea and his dearest beloved, shall stop their noses at him.

This should teach us to humble our selves in this disconsolation: honors we
have in the world, if we have any, or do yet look for any. This dishonor of
death, is a cooling card that should make a man moderate in all his
proceedings: It should make him fearful in all his doings: It should make him
understand, that he ought not to be puffed up with conceits and pretenses of
honor: but to qualify himself with this, comparing his dishonor, which the
Lord will lay upon sinful flesh. There is nothing so honorable, but it shall
be covered with shame and dishonor at the hour of death, when we shall depart
this world. It is sown in dishonor.

Well! although it be thus, yet the Lord has a help for this again: it shall
be raised after another manner. It shall be raised in honor, in great glory.
As disgrace and dishonor is the worst of punishments: so honor and grace, and
glory again, is the best of preferments. There is nothing so sweet unto us, as
that, to be above others, to be beloved of others, to be admired of others, and
to be served of others: this is that sweet breath of life, and that sweet
contentment, that shall fill us with marrow and fatness. And this, God
purposes to pour upon these dishonorable bodies, that die so beastly and
deformed, that they are trampled on by the feet of beasts, if they lie abroad:
and if it be in the Church, where we usually bury, the poorest and basest of
men tread upon them. I say the Lord shall raise it at that day in such honor,
that it shall be like the stars of heaven, it shall be like the Sun in glory,
it shall be like the Angels of God, it shall be like the Son of God: Phil.
3.21.
for he shall change these vile bodies, and make them like his glorious body,
according to his mighty power, whereby he is able to subdue all things to
himself. Phil. 3.21.

Now by the contrary dishonor, we may see that the honor of the Saints shall
consist, 1. In a goodly stature. 2. In a perfect beauty. 3. In a gracious
fragrancie.


stature of the body, there shall be no uncomelinesse, there shall be no
crookedness, there shall be nothing wanting that can be required: as we use to
say of images that are drawn in wax, that they are complete; so, likewise,
God shall so paint his image in the bodies of his Saints, when they shall rise;
that it is not possible to find it so in any thing, but in the Exemplar, in the
masterpiece, the body of Christ: there is nothing else that shall be more
glorious.

As in those happy Countries, where the leaves green, and the earth is always
budding, and bringing forth: so the bodies of Gods Saints (as St. Austin says)
shall have that greenness and vigorousnesse of incorruption possess them
totally. St. Augustine.


And lastly, that it shall be of a gracious fragrancy, stench of these
carcasses. The dead body is dishonored in nothing more; then by a caryon-like
smell: for thereby it differs nothing from a beast: nay it is far worse then a
beast: for there is nothing so putrifies, as the body of a man: there is
nothing brings forth such ugly things, as that. For out of the brain, comes
scorpions and snakes: and out of the flesh, toads and serpents: which is not
usual among the beasts. For some of them bring forth bees, and some wasps: but
of Ages, and Eumines, and diverse others it is reported, that scorpions and
snakes came out of their heads after they were dead, and wreathed about their
faces. And we know by woeful experience (of late time) of diverse gentlemen that
were troubled with such a woeful thing, that they had worms in their brains,
and in their entrails. I say, therefore, answerable to this: as the misery is
great, to which the body of man is subject, (greater then other creatures,
because he is the only sinner) so at that day, God shall make an abundant
recompense, by pouring upon it the spring of beauty, and sweetness, and
fragrancie, that they shall be as a garden of spices, in the nostrills of God
and of his Saints. Every Saint shall also be as a glass to each other; and
every one shall see his fellows beauty; and they shall reflect one upon
another, in the joy and gladness of the Holy Ghost, to see the wondrous work
which God has wrought upon this piece of frailty. And even as Jacob was as the
smell of a field, when he came near his Father; Behold, says Isaac, I smell
the smell of my son as the smell of a field, Genesis 27.27.
which the Lord has blessed. There being nothing more delightful to the sense
then a blooming field of new corn, and of sweet grass, and flowers that rise
out of the earth. And therefore the holy man compares his son to a field
which the Lord has blessed. Much more shall these be fragrant fields, the Lord
blessing them with infinite variety of goodness, and of grace and sweetness,
that the field of God shall be more pleasant then the fields and gardens of
men, and then all the paradises in this world. And as the head of this company
is described, Cant. 1. Cant. 1.3, 4.
Draw me, and I will run after thee, in the odor of thine anointments: noting
unto us the sweetness that is incorporated in the body of Christ. And as we
read also of St. Paul, Acts 19.12.
that by the blessing of God he had napkins and handkerchiefs brought from his
body, that were of such sweetness, that they were able to cure diseases: so
also we may understand, what shall be the variety there, from the sweetness
that is now in the body, arising from the mixture of the blood in the veins,
which makes a perfect sympathy and harmony. The Lord, at that day, shall make
all things much more abundant. As the Church also is described by the
sweetness of her clothes, in the Canticles, Cant. 1.14.
My Spouse (says Christ) is as a garden of myrrh or of spices: and her breasts
are like the clusters of grapes, and like the fruit of Engedi: So every man and
woman shall be: although here, they be sickly and subject to never so many
infirmities and diseases in this life; yet the Lord shall so alter the bodies
of those that serve him here, in that blessed estate, there: that they shall be
sure to find a singular proportion of beauty, of strength, and of fragrancie,
that all the just shall be termed the field and paradise, which God has
blessed.

FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection.
1 COR. 15.43. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. It is sown a
natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and
there is a spiritual body. So it is also written, the first Adam was made a
living soul, and the last Adam was made a quickening spirit.

[It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power.]


THe earth is Gods storehouse, whereinto he commits his treasure: even the
bodies of his Saints, the Temples of his holy Spirit, says Tertullian. Tertull.
God has made the earth to be as a warehouse, therein to lay his commodities:
and from thence, to require, and fetch them forth again. The sowing of these
earthly bodies, is manifest to us all: but the raising of the seed that is
sown, and the coming in of the harvest, that is locked up, and hid in the
chambers of eternity, in the omnipotency of God. And there is no way for us to
have access, and to look into it, but by the eye of faith; whereby while we
live in this flesh; we have a little peeping (as it were) through the
keyhole, to see a glimmering of the happiness, and of the gracious promises,
consigned unto us in Jesus Christ. The things that here are spoken of, (the
sowing of the body) are so commonly known, as that there is no man that calls
that in question. It is sown in dishonor, it is sown in weakness, It is sown
in misery and mortality: and the Apostle concludes all, It is sown a natural
body: but it is raised again a spiritual body. And because he might seem to
offend some ears, that never heard of that distinction, that there was such a
thing as a spiritual body, (for if it be a spirit, then it is no body: and if
it be a body, then it is not spiritual: these things imply a contradiction.)
Therefore the Apostle proves that which he had said; he makes good his
distinction, and tells them, There is a natural body, and a spiritual body.
And this he proves out of the heads of them both, out of the two maine
Fountains of mankind, the two Adams. The one, working to misery, to sin,
and to corruption, and destruction: and the other, working to grace, to
obedience, and to eternal glory. And he says, The first of these was made a
living soul, but the second was made and ordained a quickening Spirit. The
first, was made to live, to have life himself; but he could not give life to
another: yea and that life that he had, was but mortal and frail. But the
second Adam, was made to have another kind of life, and to be all spirit,
intending spiritual things: and he was not only able to live in himself, but
to give life to all his followers, and to quicken all them that belong unto
him. Yea although they be dead in their graves, although they be dead in sins,
or dead in the damps of conscience: yet he is made a quickening Spirit, to
rouse and to raise them to the happiness of the children of God. This is the
sum of the words read unto you. To proceed in order.

There needs no great distribution or division of the Text: because the words
are nothing else but the probate of that which the Apostle had spoken before.
He proves it by the Scriptures, that there is such a difference, as a natural
body and a spiritual body. The Scripture he brings is in Genesis 2.7. Genesis 2 7.
where it is said, The Lord breathed into Adam the breath of life: and so Adam
(or man) became a living soul, or a living substance.

In the order of the words, there are two miserable properties, that remain to
be spoken of touching the bodies of the Saints.

Division into two miserable Properties.
That they are sown in weakness. That they are sown merely natural.
But the glory that God shall put upon them, shall be in the highest contrary.
They shall rise in great strength, and they shall be raised in a spiritual
nature in a spiritual quality, and condition.

1 Property. Sown in weakness.
Concerning the first, that the body of man is sown in weakness: every man
sees, there is nothing more weak and despicable then that: all the whole life
of man being nothing but a world of weakness: as it is the prerogative of God
to be Almighty, so it is the miserable quality of man to be all weakness. When
he comes first into the world, there is nothing more weak then he: when he
grows in the world, the least fit of disease, of an ague, any kind of
opposition whatsoever, will defeat him and bring him on his knees, to such a
degree of weakness and infirmity, that he shall scarce support, and sustain
himself. And even those that are the strongest of men, that are strong to pour
in strong drink, Esaias 5.22.
(as the blessed Prophet I say says) that spend their time in riot: those men
do soonest bring upon them this fatal weakness, and none end so foul as
they; because though they seem to struggle with the infirmities of nature, and
to overcome, and transcend them for a time; yet that inherent weakness which
is in the flesh, rebounds upon them, and works them at last to nothing, to the
foulest expiration that can be. Nay, those noble spirits, which as Tiberius was
wont to say, that there were some spirits in the world, that account their
business to be their solace; their business and labor, they account it
comfort and consolation to them: yet these men pluck, and call upon themselves
a greater weakness then other men: so that the life of man, (whether it be
base and degenerous, or whether it be noble and spritely) is nothing else but
weakness. If a man will do nothing but sleep out his time, he shall be
surprised at length with base weakness. If he be vigilant, and use the time
that God has given him to the highest and best purpose, he is still overtaken
with weakness: and especially, when the conscience of sin works upon a man;
there is nothing so weakens him as that does. Psalm. 39.11.
When thou chastisest man for sin, thou make him like a garment that is
moth-eaten. And as the Prophet David says, by reason of my sins, my bones
are rotten and corrupted, and all my ulcers stink; there is no health in my
body, Psalm. 22.14, 15.
by reason of the sins of my soul. My heart within me is like melting wax,
I am broken like a pitcher, like a broken vessel, I am like a bottle in the
smoke. The conscience that God has left in man to be his factor, brings a
weakness incomparable: there is nothing that can be equal unto it. But
chiefly, when all these meet together, (as in some they do) and when old age
begins to rivle the face, and to draw the complexion into furrows, which was
largely extended unto beauty: and when the tresles, and powers of the body
begin to fail, and the last term and period is at hand, then there is a
woeful spectacle of weakness. Even when a man cannot go, nor stand upon his
supporters, but he reeles, and falls: when he cannot taste his food, nor
smell, nor find the least relish of it: when his eyes wax dim, when he can
retain nothing in his stomach, but he casts it up again: when he can hardly
speak a word, nor know his best friends; but all the organs of life and sense,
are drowned in death. This is that poor weakness which the Apostle speaks of.
It is sown in weakness. When he is casheerd and deprived of all sense, of all
power and motion, and nothing remains, but a base and desperate imbecility:
and such a kind of infirmity, as that there is no hope in flesh and blood, that
ever there shall be made any recovery. This is the state of all men.

weep over our weakness: to think of it, in the degrees and parts of it. The
Lord has given us many prognosticants of it: every sickness, and every
qualme, and every distress of conscience, and whatsoever troubles us in this
world: they be nothing but so many Kalenders of that great weakness, that once
shall come, and make an end of us. And therefore, as it is said, Man has not
one death alone, but a number of deaths: and that which takes him away, is
called the last death: for he has many before that. This is the state of
sowing the body.

But now behold the promise of the great God! he will raise it up in power: the
weaker it is sown, the stronger it shall rise: and this weakness that we have,
it is no argument of discomfort, nor a mean to make us distrust; but it is a
surer tie to bind God to performance: and a sure evidence of our deliverance:
that as our weakness is great, so our strength shall be much more infinite,
which shall be wrought by the mighty power of God, whereby he is able to subdue
all things to himself. It is raised again in power, or in strength. For it is
raised by him, that is the strong God: by him that is El, Eli, Elohim, the God
of strength, of might, and of majesty. By that God that loves to make his
strength seen in our weakness, and to make his glory perfect in our infirmity:
by that God that delights to work in contraries, and to bring fire and water
out of the same principle: that God has undertaken to raise up this weak body.
Therefore the Apostle says, It is raised: speaking in the present tense, as of
a thing done: not in the future tense, It shall be. To bring us acquainted with
the truth, before it be done; and to make us assured of it, as if it were
performed already. We are as sure, indeed, to be raised to that glorious
strength which God has promised, as if the deed were done: for it is in the
counsel of the great God; in which, those things that he has promised, be as
if they were already performed: because he is true that has promised, and
because he is able to keep his promise: he is able to keep his word; for it is
his only prerogative to keep his word and his promise for ever. And this is
that wondrous comfort that he has given unto us; that if it were possible for
the body to have more weakness then it has: if it were possible to be debased
worse by infirmity then it is: yet then we had a stronger argument to prove the
strength to come, to which the body shall be restored. For the weakness which
we have, and carry about us, the greater it is, the stronger proof it makes
for Gods infinite mercy, in the deliverance of us. For as we see by experience,
that vessels, and barrells of gunpowder laid up in vaults and cells; the more
weight is laid upon them, the greater pyles, and mass of building there is
over them; the more furiously and strongly they break forth, at the touch and
train of the least fire. So likewise it is certain, that the bodies that are
turned into powder and to dust, these powder-bodies, of ours (for at last they
must all, all come to pulverell, to dust and powder) these bodies the more
weight is upon them, the more earth, the more difficulty, and the greater
weakness they have, whereby they are compassed and surrounded: it makes way
for the more strength to burst out, when the fire of God shall light, and touch
upon it; when there shall be a reunion of the spirit, a deduction of the
soul; when that fire shall light upon it, that comes from heaven: then they
shall rise in a glorious strength, for the more they have been held down by
weakness, the more they shall be rescued, and ransomed, and restored to a
greater vigor. It is raised in power and strength; and in a strength, that is
answerable to the weakness: that where the weakness is the greatest, there the
strength shall transcend in greatness.

And what is this strength?

It is reduced by the Fathers into four particulars.

First, St. Austin, and St. Chrysostom (and generally Fathers) think, Aug.
Chrysostom.
that the strength that shall be most eminent in the body when it rises, shall
be in the power of motion: which because I have before spoken of, I will but
now touch it.

As the top of the flame that is in a dry reed, it runs upon the reed; and you
know when such platts of ground are on fire, they set all a fire about them: so
the body of man, it shall be able to fly, to run, and to move, as swiftly as
the flame does upon the top of any combustible matter. And as the Sun, and the
Stars, and the Angels, and spirits of men do never sleep; and yet are still
in motion, and are never weary of their motion: so the body that shall be
raised, and fitted again unto the soul, shall be without labor and pain,
without weakness and weariness, and shall never fail nor faint, but shall be
able to hold out in an everlasting motion, as the Sun and the Stars do in
the firmament. In which sense (as Luther Luther.
says) they shall be able to go ten thousand furlongs in the twinkling of an
eye. I name that as a matter of recreation: because his spirit was wondrous
cheerful and merry, in the Notes that he gives tending to that purpose.

The second thing wherein this strength shall consist, shall be in the efficacy
and power of their working. So that those that be the weakest things in the
world now; that one devil (if he were permitted) were able to wrythe the necks
of ten thousand people about: then at that day, God shall give them that
strength of body, that they shall be able to encounter a whole legion of
devils, which shall then have no power over the bodies of men (as now they
have) nor shall not be able to possess them, and to rule them at their
pleasure, nor to make monsters of them: but the body of one Saint shall put to
flight and fright a whole legion of satan's accomplices. And this mighty power
whereby they work, (that I may a little still proceed in Luthers explication)
Says he, the bodies of the Saints shall be so strong at that day, that they
shall be able to remove Churches out of their places, with their finger: they
shall be able to play with mighty mountains, as children play with
tennis-balls. His meaning is, that they shall have a mighty and infinite power,
to work upon any thing that God shall set them about: or that shall be
expedient for them. But these kind of speeches and discourses are explanatorie:
and are rather for recreation, then for men to subscribe unto: and yet it is
most sure, that their working power shall be great and admirable: and although
it shall not be infinite, yet it shall be as near to infinite as can be
devised. For whatsoever it shall please God to put in their minds to effect,
they shall be able to do it, and nothing shall make resistance.

Thirdly, some other of the Fathers, and of the later Writers, Beza. Calvin.
as Beza and Calvin, expound it thus: It is raised again in power: that is, it
is freed from the necessities of nature, which is weakness. For the life of
man here in this world, must be sustained by men's: it must have meat, and
drink, and sleep, and rest, and an intercourse and change of things: there must
be physic and medicines to cure his diseases. Now at that day, the Lord shall
so temper the body, that it shall be able to live without meat and drink: and
it shall always watch without any necessity of sleep. As St. Austin says in
his 5. Tome, the 13. Book, Chap. 23. Although the bodies of the Saints shall
have power to eat and drink in that world, yet they shall not stand in need of
it: they may do it if they will, but they shall have no dependancie upon meat
and drink, as now they have in this world. So it shall rise a strong body. That
little strength that men have now, is maintained by meat and drink (under God,)
they have no way else to preserve it: and if a man fast six or seven days,
he must needs die presently; because nature can endure no further abstinence:
and besides that old age is coming upon him, although his meat be most
delicate; yet notwithstanding the power of digestion so far fails him, that he
is notable to concoct it, and transmit it into blood and nature, as he was wont
to do: and especially if his meat grow coorse, or his fare be abated; then we
know that the best and most singular strength in the world must fade and fail^.
For, commonly, according as the Commons are, so is the strength: so our life is
a mere dependence upon second causes, next under God. God gives meat a power
to nourish; and meat by a secondarie means, nourishes: whereby it comes to be
assimilated, and made like unto the body: and so we live; and as meat grows
worse, or is taken away; so the body impaires: and when for a long time it is
not able to master the meat, and to digest it into the substance of the body:
then likewise the life is impaired, and falls. But the strength that the bodies
of the Saints shall then have, it shall be without these dependances: the
children of God shall be able to live, and to keep their strength, and vigor,
and fullness, and perfection, without any of these helps of second causes: and
although they may stoop to them (when they will) for variety; yet they shall
have no necessity of them.

Aug.
Lastly, (as St. Austin says in his 3. Tome, 13. Book, Chap. 26.) this strength
(says he) that the Apostle speaks of, I take to be specially this: that
whereas now of these earthly bodies of ours, Mat. 26.41.
the Lord Jesus says, the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak: and the
Apostle says, Romans 7.19.
The good things that I would do, that I do not: and the evil things that I
would not do, that do I: Says the holy Father, I take the meaning of that
place of Scripture to be this: That whereas now the strongest part of man, (the
spirit) is willing, but the flesh is weak, and as a dull ass, the Lord shall
then prepare it so, that he shall proportion, and fit the horse to his rider:
that to the soul, which is the rider and commander of the body, he shall give
a horse of metal, that shall be able to carry it to all actions: whereas now
it jades, and tires upon every good thing. The spirit (here) is willing, but
the flesh is weak: but there shall be so perfect a concord and subjection of
the flesh to the spirit, that it shall go hand in hand, and shall hold pace
with the soul: the flesh shall be as willing to do God service, as the
spirit: and there shall be that wondrous transmutation of qualities, that it
shall seem rather a flesh made of spirit, then otherwise. For so it follows in
the Text, It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body.

It is sown a natural body, 2. Property. Sown in weakness.
it is raised a spiritual body. This is the last difference of the 4. and in
this is comprehended the sum of all: For he comprehends in the first word
[naturall] all defects, and all weaknesses and infirmities: and in the word
[spirituall] he comprehends all perfection and augmentation, that God shall
give in that day. Saint Austin says, Aug. Beza.
a natural body is a mortal body. Beza says, it is a body subject to
mutation: a changeable body. A body it is, compounded of elements, by a
soluble composition; A body, that bows to the earth, that goes to the center,
according to its own natural inclination. A body that must at last be
resolved into its principles: and as it is made of Elements, so it must go to
Elemen^s again. This is a natural body: and thus we know it is with every
body in the world. For though there must be a change of them, that survive,
when the Lord shall come; and that they shall not have this dissolution, that
our bodies must have: yet that change that they shall have, shall be in stead
of this dissolution, and who knows in what kind it shall be? and with what
pains it shall be? No doubt it shall be no great prerogative above us; and
although they shall not die, and go unto the earth as we do; yet they shall
be full of pangs and horror, as the deaths of common men are. For it is the
nature of this body, being animal, and having no better a principle, whereby it
lives, then the soul, to dissolve, and come to its own principles: dust, to
dust: to come to ashes and earth, according to Gods decree, working upon this
flesh of ours. It is sown, therefore, a natural body: that is, subject to
change and corruption. But now see the hand of God on the other side: It is
raised a spiritual body.

This is that, wherein the Apostle comprehends all the rest; to persuade that
there is a spiritual body, all the rest are included in this. It is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption. It is true, if it be spiritual, it
must needs be incorrupt: so It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in honor; It
is certain, if it be raised a spiritual body. And so for strength, if it be
spiritual, it must needs be strong. Therefore the Apostle concludes all in
this, It shall be raised a spiritual body.

But how a spiritual body?

Mark! he says not that the flesh of Gods Saints, the bodies that shall be
raised, that they shall be spirits, but spiritual bodies. Still it shall be a
body. So that there is no change in the substance, but only in the qualities
and properties. Tertull.
Says Tertullian, the Apostle does not speak of any change of the substance of
nature, but of the glorious qualities that shall come unto it. Surely (says
he) there is nothing that rises again, but that which was sown; and there
is nothing sown, but that which is dissolved and rotten in the earth: and
there is nothing lies rotting in the earth, but flesh: therefore nothing shall
rise again, but the flesh. For there was nothing that the sentence of God went
upon, but the flesh of Adam, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. So
St. Austin expounding the words, In Tom. 5. Aug.
Lib. 13. How shall they be spiritual? Not because they shall cease to be
bodies: they are not therefore called spiritual, as though they were turned
spirits, and ceased to be bodies; but because they shall subsist with a living
and quickening spirit, and because they shall be made indwellers and inhabitants
of heaven, which is the place of spirits: it shall then be the place for the
bodies of men. For now it is a strange paradoxe, to say the body of a man
should dwell in heaven: and though we know that Christ has it, by a special
privilege; yet there is no man can imagine, how the body of a man should
dwell in heaven, in those pure skies, in those bright regions; and that the
heaviness of the body should not praecipitate it down to the earth, and cast
it into the fire, and to dismal events that should consume it. But when the
Lord shall change this corruption into incorruption, the bodies of the Saints
shall be the only fit inhabitants of heaven: therefore it is called
spiritual, because it shall dwell in heaven which is the place of spirits: the
body shall then be able to inhabit there: therefore it is called spiritual, as
being fit to possess those mansions, that are destinated properly for spirits.

But Chrysostom makes a question here: Says he, Chrysostom.
What is this that thou say here, blessed Apostle? Do thou say, that the
bodies of the children of God are not spiritual now? are they all merely
animal, now? are they not spiritual? how is it said, that they are Temples of
the holy Ghost? if the holy Ghost dwell in them, he makes them spiritual: they
are called spiritual men, all the children of God: and if they be spiritual
men, then they have spiritual bodies.

But the Father answers himself again: It is true, these bodies we carry about
us now, by the power of the holy Ghost, are after a sort spiritual: but that
body which shall be then, (which he here speaks of) shall be infinitely far
more spiritual. This is only in inchoation, in beginning, in the first
fruits: that, shall be in the sum, and substance, and fullness of perfection.
And St. Bernard, If thou say our bodies shall rise again, thy meaning is
not to take away the being of the body; but to give it a new luster, as the
face of Moses, and as in the transfiguration of Jesus. Exodus 34.
For as Moses, when God put that brightness upon his face, that the people
could not look upon it, but he was feign to hay a veil on his face: his face
was still the same, but yet there was a change of glory, there was an accession
of brightness, whereby it seemed a spirit, rather then a common ordinary
visage: so the bodies of men that shall be raised, there shall be such an
accession, and augmentation of glory, and beauty, and brightness, that it
shall rather seem spiritual, then otherwise. And as it was in the
Transfiguration of Christ, Mar. 17.
his garments shone, that no Dier in the earth could make the like, and his
face shone, as the sun in his strength: the face of Christ was all one, and
his garments were the same: he had the same physiognomie, but only there was a
new accession of glory that came unto it. So the bodies of the Saints, they
shall be all one, the very same body shall be revived, which has suffered
misery here; and shall have a new glory put upon it: and that very body shall
have strength, that here was weak, and subject to death. The Lord shall then
cloathe it with glory: and although it shall rise a spiritual body, it is not
in respect of the change of the substance, but in regard of the augmentation of
glory, which shall accrue unto it. It is raised a spiritual body. So much of
those two Attributes: of the change from weakness to strength, and from
natural to spiritual.

Now in the words following, the Apostle comes to prove that such a thing there
is as a natural body, and a spiritual body. And this he does, to prevent
objections: partly, lest men should think that he coined new distinctions and
divisions, which is a thing faulty in the Church: and partly, lest men should
be drowned in error, by misconceiving his doctrine.

For the first. If a man should have said unto him, Where do you learn this?
did you ever hear any man speak such a thing, that there is a spiritual body?
Yes, (says the Apostle) there is both: there is a natural body, and there is
a spiritual body. I will make the distinction good, and prove it.

This teaches us, distinctions they bring into the Church of God: For as the
Apostle says to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.21.
and to Titus, Shun novelty of words, and inventions: shun them, they are not
to be admitted: they destroy the faith, and puzzle the understandings of all
Gods children. Vincentius Lirinensis Vincentius Lirinensis.
says, That although men ought to speak many things in the Church of God,
after a new fashion; yet they ought to speak no new thing at all. Therefore
lest they should be offended with this distinction, as though the Apostle had
brought it out of his own brain, as though it were a new device of his own
hatching: he is forced to make it good, and to prove that there is such a
thing, because he would not be thought an Inventer of new devices, and a maker
of new distinctions: which is a plague in the Church of God, throughout all
ages.

Secondly, another reason was this: because he would not suffer them to fall
into a gross error, which they might conceive by this doctrine of his. For if
it shall be raised a spiritual body, (why then say the heretics,
Apollinarius, Eunomius, and such like) then it is not the same. For it is now a
mere natural body: and what is so contrary, as natural and spiritual?
Animal and spiritual are clean contrary: therefore the Scripture still bids us
live after the spirit, and distinguishes between the sons of the flesh, and
the sons of the spirit: there is nothing more contrary then these: now it is
impossible, that a thing should be capable of that which is contrary. Therefore
(they say) if it shall be a spiritual body, then it shall not be Idem corpus,
the same body.

Another crew say, If they shall be spiritual bodies, then they are not flesh,
and blood, and bones, as these elementary bodies are, that die, and are
committed to the ground: but it shall be another thing made by God, of a
strange composure.

Against this, the Apostle tells us, that there is such a distinction of a
natural body, and a spiritual body: and yet none of these monsters follow
neither. For it is the pleasure of the great God, to add such excellencies to
that body which was before dust, and ashes, and mortal: and to draw such lines
upon it, to give it such beauty, and perfection; that it shall seem rather a
spirit, then a body: it shall be so full of quickness, and motion, and life,
and dexterity, that it shall rather seem a spirit, then a body; To speak
comparatively.

Hence we learn, That seeing the Apostle proves his distinction; that it is
not lawful for any man to make of his own head, of his own brain, any
general principles, or definitions, or divisions, or distributions, concerning
the doctrine of the Gospel: but he must show reason for it.

Then, secondly, what reason does the Apostle give for it? why, It is also
written. He proves this his doctrine, by the Scriptures: and unless he could
have proved it out of them, he must have been subject to the censure of all
these heretics, (that all that they had passed upon him should have gone for
good,) except he could have refuted them by the Scriptures. So he tells them
that

It is written.

So that here we have a maine conclusion of our faith to hold to always, and
to stick to: that we must believe no man further then the Scriptures. If he
will speak his own mind, he may do it for illustration, or for arguments
sake: but to put the devices of his own head and brain, to go for points of
religion, for matters of faith; it is a damnable thing: he must have no more
credit, then the Scriptures will afford him: he must make no distinctions, and
differences, except it be found in the written word.

If this had been well observed, the Church of God had never come to that
miserable distraction that it has been in for the space of these thousand
years: every Intruder still presuming to make his own devices fundamental:
to avert the points of religion, and to make distinctions, such as man never
saw in the Scriptures. As to talk of Purgatory, invocation of Saints, and of
other errors, newly sprung up in these later times. Such things as these have
no kind of being in the Scriptures: no nor any show of being; notwithstanding
these proud imperious spirits will bring them upon the Church of God, and lay a
heavy yoke upon the people of God to believe them, as if they were the very
oracles of Almighty God himself. We must take heed of these things. Teach
me as far as thou will out of Gods book: but if thou teach me otherwise, thou
art a liar, and no teacher, thou art a seducer, and an imposter, and no pastor;
as St. Bernard Bernard.
and also Gregory Gregory.
says. Therefore this blessed Apostle, he puts down his proof: he will have
them believe him no further, then he brings Scripture for it. It is written
(says he.) As if he should say, I make not this distinction of a natural
body, and a spiritual body; I have it made to my hand: for it is written. And
where is it written? it is a hard thing to find that: all the whole sentence is
not to be found any where: but the first part of it is written, that the first
Adam was made a living soul: the other part is made up by the spirit of the
Apostle, understanding the difference between the first and the second Adam:
to make up the antithesis of that notable difference, between the one and the
other.

Some of the Fathers do take it thus: that the whole sentence may seem to be
written: that (ofttimes) in the Scripture, things are said to be written, and
to be done, which are not written, nor done: meaning not in their kind, but in
their effects by some consequence. As St. Chrysostom says of this: Chrysostom.
from the reason and event of the thing, it was written: because that men did
see, every christian knows, that Christ Jesus does so far pass and surmount
the first Adam, as God surpasses man; as the soul surpasses the body:
therefore the event and consequent of the thing, makes it as if it were
written. For God has made it good, and so has set it as a sure writing in the
world. And so he gives instance from diverse Scriptures in the like things. As
in Heb. 12.21. Heb. 12.21.
the Apostle says, (speaking of the terror of Moses, when he was in the
mount, when the Law was given) the terror was so great, that Moses said, I
fear exceedingly. Now in the book of Exodus, Exodus 19.
Chap. 19. where those things are related, there is no such thing mentioned,
that Moses said any such words: but the Gloss expounds it, That it is certain
upon the deed, upon the teror that Moses conceived, he trembled. It was a thing
done, although it were not spoken: he did tremble. So here also, it may be
said, Although there be no such words as the second part of this sentence,
(that the second Adam was made a living spirit,) yet de facto it is true. For
all the Church of God knows and subscribes, that there is a maine difference
between them. Such other places there are, as that in Isay 7.14. Isay 7.14.
A virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son, and they shall call his name
Emanuell. Now this was never done, de facto, (as St. Chrysostom observes,
Chrysostom.
) the people never called him so, they called him Jesus, not Emmanuel. And
although the Angel gave that name to the virgin, yet the people used it not:
and yet (says St. Chrysostom) though it were not done de facto, yet it was
done de jure: it was done in right and reason: for that the things themselves
do send forth such a voice and testimony, that he was Emmanuel, God with us.
Therefore these Fathers think the meaning of the Apostle is this, That although
it were not written in express words; yet by the Spirit of God, and by the
demonstration God gave unto the world of Christ, the later part was written (as
well) in the minds of men, by the finger of the Holy Ghost, as the former part
was written in Genesis 2.

But I take it, the best sense of it is this, (and so the later Divines hold,
that the meaning of the Apostle is) to make a comparison: that as it is
written, the first Adam was made a living soul; so I aver, that the last
Adam was made a quickening spirit. So that the word, It is written, is to be
understood of the first part only, and not of the later: but the other, I
aver by the Spirit of God, and by the power of the Gospel. So that there is
no man that need doubt of it hereafter, but that there is infinite difference,
between the first and the second Adam.

To come to the sense of the words: because I have been too troublesome in
this, I will be brief.

The first man was made a living soul. As if he should say, he was made in a
mutable, changeable manner of perfection: and it was in his own free will, to
have stood, and kept close to God, if he would have been constant. For then he
should never have died. But because he would be trying conclusions, and fall
from his Maker: therefore he was animal, a living soul, although God made him
for another purpose, if he would have kept the place God set him in.

Secondly, he was made such an animal, as stood second causes: he stood in
need of meat, and drink, of rest, and labor, and sleep, and such things as
these.

Thirdly, he was made a living soul, not a life-making in himself, but not
giving life unto others.

But the Son of God was made a quickening Spirit: not only to have life in
himself, but to give life unto all his followers. So that Adam took life, but
he could not give it. Christ took life, as being man, from the Deity: and he
gives it as being God: not only the life of nature, but the life of grace and
glory. And so he became in every thing, a quickening and glorious Spirit.

The first Adam was made a living soul. That is, worldly, minding the world,
looking to the earth: he was to dig the earth, to delve in the garden; he was
made for that purpose, and for other worldly purposes. Toward the center, was
his aspect: but Christ was of another making: he was all for spirit, all for
heaven, and heavenly affairs; for the business of his Father, for the
reclaiming of souls, for the pardoning of sins, for the working of miracles,
for the gracious concurrence of those sweet principal meetings of mercy and
truth, which meet together in him. So that the difference (by this time)
appears manifestly. It is said, Adam was made a living soul; that is, to have
life in himself, but not to diffuse, and extend it to any other. Christ Jesus
was made the author of life, and of all that we all hope for and pray for: of
life eternal, of happiness and glory.

But here are diverse questions to be resolved: which I will but propound, and
name unto you, and so pass them over.

Adam was made a living soul, and that Christ was made a quickening spirit)
whether Christ were not a living soul, as well as Adam? and whether Adam were
not a quickening spirit, as well as Christ?

And certainly, these things are true: if we take them in their kind, they be
both true. For Christ was not only made a quickening spirit, but he had a body,
as Adam had, and he was a living soul, as well as Adam. And Adam was not
only made a dull, and dumpish thing, given unto worldly matters: but he was
made a quick, although not a quickening spirit. Therefore for the first, we must
understand that it is true, that the Lord Christ was made a living soul, as
well as Adam. For there is a gross error of Eunomius, Eunomius.
which thought that Christ had no reasonable soul: but that his Divinity was
his soul; that it was in stead of a soul: and that he had no other soul but
that. This is a monstrous abortion: for if Christ had not taken our whole
nature, he had not saved our whole nature. Now the best and chief part of our
nature, is the soul: and it was the soul (chiefly and principally) that
Christ came to save. Therefore it is certain, that he took our soul, as well
as he took our flesh: and so was made a living soul, as well as Adam. And it
appears also by this, in that he had two wills in him, as he had two natures:
the nature of God, and the nature of man, united in one person. So likewise he
had two wills, the will of God, and the will of man: yet he subjected always the
lower will, unto the higher: Not my will, but thy will be fulfilled: not as I
will, but as thou will. But the will of his manhood appeared in this; thas as
he was a man, he was afraid of death: Mat. 26.42.
he desired that the cup might pass from him, he would not have died at that
instant: yet as he was always obedient to God the Father, he desires that the
upper will might prevail; and says, Not my will, but thine be fulfilled. Let
the will of God prevail, and let the will of man be ruled, and overruled.
Therefore, as Christ had two wills, so he had two natures: and by consequent,
the full nature of God, and man. Or else, if he had not taken the soul of
man, as well as the body, he could not have delivered the whole nature of man,
the principal part whereof is the Soul. But here is the difference; although
Christ were made a living soul, as Adam was; yet he was more than so: he was
not made for that purpose, as an ordinary living soul; but he had an accession
of the glory, and grace, and strength of the Deity, to make this living soul
sublimate to perfection: to make it capable of unspeakable mysteries which Adam
had but in a poor pittance, in a low condition: he had a living soul,
indeed, well qualified and adorned with innocence and the power of original
justice, and a power to have life, and grace, and immortality, if he had kept
and continued in the commandment; but he had no higher matters, he had
nothing in him, whereby of necessity he might abstain from sin; but that he
might sin, and be damned for it. But in Christ there was an absolute
necessity of holiness and perfection, and of all the parts in him, which was
not in Adam.

quickening spirit, Apollinarius Apollinarius.
inferred upon this, that he had a fantastical body, and not a true body.
This is as gross as the former: for if Christ must take upon him our nature,
he must take that which stood in most need of redemption; which is the poor
body, which is subject to all miseries and calamities. For how should he be
called The son of man, if he had not a body? But as he is called The son of
God, so he is also called The son of man; and he came to save both parts of
man that were down by reason of sin: he came to take the flesh of man, to be
incarnate; and that is it that we so rejoice and boast of, that Christ was
become incarnate, and became man, and took our flesh upon him; and in that
flesh he hungered, in that flesh he suffered, in that flesh he was buried, in
that flesh he rose again, in that flesh he ascended into heaven, to make a way
by the veil of his flesh into the Holy-of-holyes, Heb. 10.20.
to all that constantly and truly believe in him.

Adam is said to be corpus animale, seeing God gave him a power of
immortality: for if it were corpus immortale, then it could not be corpus
animale, as says S. Austin, and that truly: but Adam had corpus immortale,
therefore it was not corpus animale; and by consequent, he cannot be so
different from Christ as the Apostle makes him here: For, the Apostle brings in
the two roots and fountains of mankind; and he makes the one animal, and
the other spiritual. Now (says St. Austin) I demand if Adam had an immortal
body, how was it an animal body? For an animal body is that that is frail
and changeable: an immortal body is that which is unchangeable. And again, as
the holy Father urges it further. Certainly (says he) we recover in Christ,
that which we lost in Adam; and one thing that we recover by Christ, is
immortality; therefore we lost immortality in Adam: we lost it in the first
Adam, and we recover it in the second. Now if we lost immortality in Adam, then
he lost it for us; he lost it first, as being the foundation of our kind, and
we lost it in him being his posterity. Then certainly, he had it if he lost
it: for no man can lost that which he has not; and therefore Adam having
immortality, how should his body be frail, and mortal, and an animal body?
These are things contrary each to other.

The Father answers again. These quirks and devises, make the faith of many
men to stagger; and it makes some men to answer it thus. That the body of man
was changed in Paradise. God made his body a mortal body: but after this, he
brought him to the Symbol of life, and gave him a commandment to abstain
from the tree of knowledge of good and evil; which had he done, and had kept
that commandment, then should the fruit of the tree of life have so preserved
his life, that he should have lived for ever. So these men think that the Lord
changed the condition and quality of his body in Paradise, in the giving of the
command. Aug.
But S. Austin answers it better afterward, I think (says he) that the most
safe and proper answer is this; that although it be true, that we recover
immortality by Christ; and that we lost this immortality in Adam: yet we have a
far greater advantage by Christ; we gain more by Christ, then we lost by
Adam. Adam never had this certainty of immortality that we have; he had a kind
of a possibility of it, but it was conditional. Now conditions make nothing to
be, and so this stood upon an if: If thou keep the commandment thou shall
live; and if thou do not, thou shall die; therefore a man cannot say that
there was any immortality planted in the person of Adam; because it was
uncertain, it was mutable, it was in the freedom of his will, which was
changeable; he was not made in a certain necessity of obedience, therefore it
was conditional.

To conclude all; As the holy Father says, the body of Adam, although it were
merely natural, as ours is; yet it was in a far better condition then ours
are: that is, it had no necessity of dying, as ours has, for our bodies must
needs die, but the body of Adam might have been sublimate, and brought unto
the heavenly joys, without death, which ours cannot be. For it is impossible
for flesh and blood to enter into the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 15.50.
Therefore we have no way to come to glory, but by suffering the common
calamity of nature, which is by stooping to the burden of death.

And again, Adam had in his very person, those seeds that might have
prolonged, and continued his life, by the blessing of God, and the Sacrament of
the tree of life; whereas we by his sin, have gotten nothing but the seeds of
death and mortality; working us from one misery, and sickness to another, and
from sickness to death. And (if the mercy of God intervene not) from the first
to the second death; to eternal misery and perplexity. Therefore the
difference is this; the Lord made him in a better estate then we; for he had no
necessity of death, nor no principle of death; but what by his own will he
contracted: but in us there is a necessity of death, we must die; and yet by
the mercy of God in Christ, we are restored, and renewed; by his intercession
and sacrifice, unto better things then we lost in Adam.

The Lord make us assured of this blessed and glorious estate: that thereby we
may be armed against death; against the fear of death, and that thereby we may
grow more and more spiritual, that we may become partakers of that divine
grace, which may make us while we live in this world, not to be of the world;
but Citizens of that blessed and heavenly Jerusalem, which is the mother of us
all. Gal. 4.26.
To the which the Lord bring us for his infinite goodness, and mercies sake.
Amen.

FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection.
1 COR. 15.46, 47. But that is not first which is spiritual, but that which is
natural, and then that which is spiritual. The first man is of the earth,
earthly; the second man is the Lord himself from heaven. As is the earthly, so
are they that are earthly: and as is the heavenly, so are they also that are
heavenly.
IN the former part of this Treatise, the Apostle has discoursed of the
kinds, and degrees of our future happiness, in the glorious resurrection. Now
he comes to tell us of the causes, and of the order. The substance of these
words which I have read unto you, is to give satisfaction to that common
curiosity that is in Gods people: whereby they seek to prevent the time, and
to enjoy their happiness before it be Gods will and pleasure. It is natural
to man (as Cornelius Tacitus says) to run before his fortunes: Corn. Tacit.
And so it is among Christians themselves; there is a kind of harmless
humor (although when it is too extreme and violent, it is full of sin; yet
it is construed to a good sense that) they desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ, which is best of all: that is to say, not to be dissolved after
the fashion of the common death (as S. Paul did) but to have a kind of light
mutation, and change; and so to be translated unto glory. You see in 2 Cor.
5.4. 2 Cor. 5.4.
where the Apostle tells us, We would not be spoiled of this body. that is, we
would not die: but supervestiri, we would have a garment or vestment of glory
and immortality to be put upon this body, without death. As if he should say,
we would have corruption to enter into incorruption; and we would be made
capable of heaven, with these bodies unchanged by death. To that the Apostle
answers in these words. No (says he) these things are contrary, (natural, and
spiritual) and it is impossible for a natural body, to be capable of
spiritual qualities; or a spiritual body, of natural qualities: we must
needs leave off the one, before we can take the other; we must lay down the
rags of this flesh, before we can take the garment or vestment of glory, and
eternity, in that blessed life that follows. And although we have a great
desire to go unto life, without death; yet we must mortify that desire: for
it is as vain as nurses wishes. As nurses that wish the most eminent and
excellent things to their children; so we delight our selves in this
imagination. But the Apostle tells us, that we must take things in order, for
that God has made all things in order. First, we are to taste of the naturals,
and then to be made partakers of the spirituals: so we cannot be borne into
this world, but by nature; and we cannot be borne into our spiritual
possession at the first: but first we must have a kind of natural life; and
by the grace of God, that prepares us unto the life spiritual. So God has
appointed and ordained every thing to go by succession, that all things should
not be done at once, but every thing in its time. For (says he) that which is
spiritual, is not first; but that which is natural, and then that which is
spiritual. And to this purpose he brings in the two great fountains, and
seminaries of mankind: the one for the life of nature; the other for the life
of grace; a man, and a man: both of them being men, but yet being diversely
qualified; and both leaving their qualities to those that be their followers.
For (says the Apostle) the causers of all this great difference of natural
and spiritual, be the two Adams; the one was merely natural, and was no more
but a man. The other, although he were natural, yet he was spiritual too; he
was both God and man. The one wrought unto death, the other wrought unto life;
the one was bent and inclined to sin, the other was full of all grace; the
one left an inheritance of misery, the other left great demeanes of glory to
all those that are his followers. Now as these causes be contrary in
themselves (there being as much difference between them, as there is between
East and West) so we must imagine the effects to be different too. For if the
one did work to hell and damnation, the other wrought to heaven a glorious
redemption and salvation for all Gods people; and if the wickedness of the one
were derivable upon his posterity in the flesh, much more the goodness and
righteousness of the other, is derived unto them that are true believers and
followers of him. The first man was of the earth, earthly: the second man was
the Lord from heaven. And as they be, so be their disciples: as is he that is
earthly, so are they that are earthly: and as was the heavenly, so are they
that are heavenly. They are to follow their masters cue, and to be of the same
condition, as their Chieftaine and Sovereign. The carnal man dies in Adam:
the spiritual lives in Christ, even to life everlasting. This is the substance
of the words read unto you. Now to proceed in order of the Text.

First, Division, into 3. parts. 1. The order of the Proposition. 2. The
comparison between the 2. Adams. 3. The conformity of their members.

we are to consider the verity and truth of the order of this proposition: how
the Apostle intends that that which is spiritual is not first, but that which
is natural: For it seems, that the best things should be first: and
spiritual things, being best; therefore it seems they should be first: yea it
seems to be a disparagement unto things spiritual and heavenly, to come in
time after things natural. But the Apostle says no: God has appointed it so,
and he gives no further reason, (as St. Chrysostom observes) that they may
give themselves content in this, that it is Gods will it shall be so; that is a
reason sufficient, they need seek no further.

Secondly, we are to consider the comparison between the two heads, and roots,
and fountains of mankind: the first man, and the latter man: and they are
compared in four things.

The first, is in respect of their order and succession: the first, and the
last; or the first, and the second.

The second, is in respect of the place of their nativity, whence they come:
the first, from the earth: the second, from heaven.

The third, is in the quantity of their difference and excellency: the first,
came as a servant; the second, came as a Lord: (...). And though the word
servant be not noted in the Text; yet it is to be understood by this, that he
says, The Lord himself Therefore the first came not as a Lord, but as a
servant; but the second came as a Lord in all points: yea as the Lord himself,
from heaven.

Then lastly for their qualities; the one is earthly, the other is heavenly.

The third part of the Text, is the conformity of the members that belong to
these heads, with their heads. For as there are two great foundations of
mankind, so likewise they have members answerable to them. Those that be of
Adam (that is, natural men) they be as their father is; such as the earthly
is, so they are that are earthly: and those that be of Christ's retinue, they be
such as their Master is too. For as is the heavenly, so are they also that are
heavenly: which is not meant of the manners and condition of men here in this
world: (for the Apostle meddles not with that in all this Chapter) but it is
spoken of the bodies that shall be raised at that day: that as all men be
earthly by nature, (the best Saints of God here are in an earthly condition,
and must be dissolved into earth:) and as we have that by means of the first
Adam from whence we descend; so from the second Adam we have a hope, and
shall have power to be heavenly in the Resurrection. And as sure as we are
mortal here, so sure we shall be immortal, there. These are the branches of
the Text: of these in order, as the Spirit of God shall give assistance.

First, 1 Part. The Order natural before spiritual. Chrysostom.
concerning this that he says about the Order of the thing that God has
ordained: which is natural before spiritual. Says St. Chrysostom, he does
not show for what cause; he alleges no cause of Gods order: To teach us to
be content with the dispensation of Almighty God: to show us, that it is the
wisest course that he has taken: and because also he would show us, that the
Lord does better our estate, and proceeds from that which is weak, to that
which is more perfect. For as in nature, so also in grace, things grow from
weak imperfection, unto a light and prime estate: and therefore first and last,
do not always argue excellency and superiority: but oftentimes those things
that be last, be better then those that be first. Although in Scripture we find
(in some cases) that that which is first, is best: (as in the first borne of
men, and the first borne of other creatures; in the first months, and the
first feasts, and the first fruits, and the like) yet this holds not always: but
oftentimes those things that be of a later tract, and rank in the world, are of
greater perfection: For so does both Art and nature proceed, and so does the
wisdom of God also.

In the beginning of the world, the first thing was a rude matter, a thing
without form: afterward, the Lord brought upon it forms, and bodies of
distinction.

In the first ages of the world, there was nothing but the law of nature, which
men had corrupted. Then there came another light, the law of Moses: and in the
later end of the world, there came the law of grace, the Gospel: which is as
much more perfect, and exceeds Moses law, as Moses law renewed the law of
nature. In the ages of man, the first is weak infancy, which is incapable and
unsensible: but ripeness is in the after age. In the discpline of Schools, to
be a scholar and a learner, is a long time before to be a teacher: and to be a
learner is a matter of imperfection: but to be a teacher, is a matter of growth
and ripeness. In the discipline of Christ, first they were fishers, and
afterward fishers of men: and it is a weaker thing to take fish, then to take
men: that came afterward. And so generally (almost) in all the whole body of
nature, you shall see the Lord goes from small beginnings, to great
perfection: from the kernel, to the tree: from the seed, to the harvest: from
the blade, to full corn in the ear. It is true (indeed) in some things it is
contrary: for both the Angels at their first creation, were in their fullness,
and they needed no increase, except you take that for increase, the grace of
confirmation. And likewise, the creatures that were then made, were made in
their fullness: for there was not a seed made to make a tree, or a kernel to
make a tree: nor there was not an egg to bring forth an hen: but the things
themselves were made in their full perfection. But God did not purpose to
continue that course any longer: but the making of them once in their
perfection, and being turned, and divolved by Adams sin, into imperfection;
it pleased him of his goodness and mercy, to raise these imperfections to rare
qualities: and that it should come by degrees, in success of time: that things
should not be done in a moment, but every thing in time: that so we might the
better meditate and contemplate of his exceeding glory.

Therefore (to conclude this point) seeing the Lord has so ordained, that in
all things the naturalls be the first: that is, that which is worst: and
afterward comes the spirituals.

It teaches us, order, which God has instituted; For indeed, it is the only
blessed and gracious way, that we can devise: and therefore we are to
magnify, and exalt it. For it is not fit for Gods Majesty, to go from better
to worse: that is a poor change: that is a change of weakness, of simplicity,
and folly. But as St. Austin says, it is a fair course, (a fair kind of
change) when a man changes for the better, and to be more excellent: when he
grows still more singular, when he grows from grace to grace, and from strength
to strength, till he come to appear before God in Syon. This is the course
that best beseemes the divine power of the heavenly Majesty: therefore he
would not have men to imagine, that things spiritual are first, which is the
best: and afterward, natural, which is the worst: the power of God
increases, the further it goes: it brings us first from elements and rudiments
by further degrees, unto a state and height of perfection. This is the course
that God only has sanctified; therefore we must learn to make it our course,
still to make our naturalls first, and and then our spiritualls.

It is a shame (says the Apostle) will you begin in the spirit, and end in the
flesh? And says Tertullian, Gal. 3 3.
Tertullian.
if a man will be mad, let him be mad in his youth: let him be mad in his first
age, (which is the natural part) let him spend that in vanity, (although
indeed there be no time that should be spent but to the glory of God,) but for
the other part, when he grows spiritual, let him only intend the things of
the Spirit of God.

order: for we would have our children merely spiritual, as soon as they be
borne: and we would bring them to it by force and constraint: We know not the
will of God; their naturalls must be passed first; and although there be no
time that ought to be natural, yet there must be a kind of generation, before
there be any regeneration: a man must first be borne, before he be re-borne: a
man must first be simple, and ignorant, and after come to knowledge and
holiness; as it pleases God to call men, some at the tenth hour, some at the
eleventh, some in the morning, some in the evening of their lives. So the
Fathers discourse upon this.

But I take it, that the proper meaning is, not to stretch it further than the
body. God has so appointed man, that first he should have a natural body, and
then a spiritual. I take it, the Text has no further extent. For as in all
things in nature, the weaker go before the stronger, (God has made that the
foundation) and out of the weakness of things, he works his own strength and
glory: so the Lord has appointed these bodies that be natural, a life
natural; to live in misery; to live in sickness; and at last, to be swallowed
up of death: to come to rottenness and putrefaction, which is the natural
conclusion of all bodies, that live in this world. This course, God has
appointed first; and then upon this, God will make his power glorious: to bring
the body from dust, and filth, and rottennes, to be spiritual: to bring it to
sweetness, and glory, and beauty: this is his order.

Therefore, first, they are natural bodies; miserable, and weak, and
obnoxious: and then the Lord will supervestire, he will invest them with that
glory and incorruption which is promised to us in Christ. So much for that
point, the truth of the proposition, and the order.

Now for the comparison of the two heads and fountains: they are laid down,
2. Part. The comparison of the two Adams.
as the causers of all this. Why is this so, that there is first the natural,
and then the spiritual? because God would have Adam, the natural man, to come
first; and Christ, the Spiritual man, to come last: that the one should be the
first of men, the other the last: and that they two, should carry the keys of
these closets, and treasures; the one of corruption, the other of incorruption.
Therefore from them depends all the reason of the former proposition.

First, it is to be observed, that he says, a man, First, in respect of their
order and succession: first and last.
and a man. It is spoken of Christ, that he is a man as well as of Adam: so
that they were both men, of the same nature and substance: nay the second Adam
was the son of the first. For we see St. Luke in his Genealogy, Luke 3.
Luke 3.
brings Christ from Adam. Which was the son of Adam, which was the son of
God. So that Manicheus, and Valentinus, and Martianus, have taught us
blasphemous doctrines in former times: and so have the Swenck-Feldians, which
have received their error of late. All these are from hence condemned. For as
Tertullian Tertull.
says, Why is Christ called the second man, except he were as true a man as
the first? therefore of the nature of Adam, was the Lord Christ made, even by
deduction of nature, and by a line infallible, to the Virgin Mary. Although by
reason of the sanctifying of the blood, of which his blessed body was to be
made: and because that there was no intervention of the help of man, he is not
to be ranked in the common generation of mankind: for he was not borne, as
they that are borne of women; that is, after the natural ordinary course; but
by the over-shadowing of the holy Ghost. Therefore in this regard, he is
greater, and far above Adam: but concerning the material part of his body,
which he took of the Virgin, he was the son of Adam, and so the second man,
or the last Adam: not because he was the last of all men, ( Jesus Christ has
been many years since in the flesh) but because he was to put an end to the
state of all things; that there should be no new state, after the coming of
Christ expected. Before Christ, there was the state of nature, of the law, of
the separation of the Jews and Gentiles; there were diverse kinds and degrees:
but now he is come, all the former states of nature, and the law, are no more
to be recapitulated: and there is no difference between the Jew and the
Gentile, Colos 3.11.
bond and free, male and female, but all are one in Christ Jesus.

Again, Christ is called the last Adam, because he says of himself, Rev^l.
1.8.
that he is Alpha and Omega: he is Alpha in respect of his Deity, and he is
Omega in respect of his humanity: and he is both Alpha and Omega, (both first
and last) in regard that he is coequall, and coeternall with God the Father.
For as he is God, he is Alpha, the beginning of all things created; he is the
first borne of all creatures: Colos. 1.15.
and as he is Omega, he is the last conclusion, and end of the Alphabet: that
there is no more state, no more sacrifice, no more law, no more new, to be
expected in the world. But that which a Christian is to betake him to, he must
have it in Christ, or not at all: and all other are deceived, that seek for
any other name than that: Acts 4 24.
for there is no other name under heaven whereby we may be saved. This is the
first difference in their order.

The second, 2. In respect of their places: earth and heaven.
is in respect of the places from whence they were descended. The first man is
from the earth, earthly: The second man is the Lord himself from heaven,
heavenly. The places from whence they come, are earth and heaven: and there is
no greater difference can be, in all the things in nature. We cannot say that
there is any thing more distant, than these two: nor any thing more contrary,
than these two: the one being the fountain of light, the other being the
receptacle of darkness. The one being the spring of all actions, the other
being a merely passive, and dull substance. The one being the cause
impressive, the other being the cause receptive. The one being the original
and fullness of every thing that is good; the other being participant, as much
as it is capable of it. For so much as the supreme cause works upon it, so
much it is prospered by it. The one being always moving, and stirring, and
whirling about; the other being restive, and not able to stir out of its
place. There is nothing more contrary than heaven and earth: and such is the
deduction of these two prime causes.

But how was Adam earthly more then Christ? Christ had a body of the Virgin,
and so he was of the bowels of the earth, as well as Adam? And how was Christ
more heavenly and spiritual then Adam? had not he a soul, and spirit, as well
as Christ? how can these things consist?

For the first, you must understand, that the Apostles meaning is, where he
says that Adam was from the earth: that is as much as to say, his chief
powers and abilities were still inclined to the earth: that he was frail, that
he was made in a condition to go back again to the earth: that was his
destiny: and he had a law imposed upon him, to dig and delve the earth: and
therefore he is said, to be of the earth. Not because he had not a soul from
heaven, for he had a soul from heaven, as well as Christ had: but because he
was drawn by his inferior part, by his body, which was his earthly part:
because he was drawn by that, from the contemplation of heavenly things, and
had rather to take an apple with his wife, than to follow the justice and
uprightness of God: because he declined to the earth, and base things, and
left the Creator for a poor creature: and because he left the unchangeable
good, for that which is changeable; therefore he is said to be unconstant,
base, and earthly: that is, a simple, poor, base creature: which made
himself, according to his prime original; and studied, and gaped after the
things of the earth, out of which he was extracted. He had, indeed, better
things, if he would have used them: but he was so stupefied, and drawn back to
his inferior part, that he was made like unto his first materials, the earth.

But the other, was from heaven: not because he had not a body from the earth,
but because to that body was added a glorious divinity: and that his body was
not a person, as Adams was. For if the manhood of Christ had been a person, he
must have been liable (as all persons that are borne) to condemnation: but his
was not a person, but a nature united to the second person in the Trinity: so
that although there be two natures in Christ; yet there is not two, but one
person: and the actions that come from any man, they are the actions of his
person, of the subject; and not the actions of his nature. For it is a man that
speaks, and a man that works; and not the body of a man that speaks, or the
soul of man. So, therefore, it comes to pass, that the actions that come from
Christ, they are the actions of his person; not of his humane nature, but of
his person: and so they be the actions of God and man. That is, of that person
in the Godhead, that took the manhood unto it: and so they are made the actions
of an infinite merit, and possibility.

Herein, then, is the difference: that although Adam had a soul as well as
Christ; yet he had only a living soul, that could enliven no body but
himself: but the Lord had a Spirit, that is, the Deity it self; which is able
to give life; which is the fountain of life to all the world. And although
Christ had a body from the earth; yet that body was not left unto frailty; but
was governed, and sanctified, and glorified by the beatificall vision of God,
and by the presence of the incorporate union of the Son of God. So by this
comes the difference between them: the one was a man, and nothing else but from
the earth: the other was more then a man; God and man; and so he is the Lord
from heaven.

3. In respect of their qualities.
The third difference is in their quality and condition, which is noted in this
word, he was a Lord. Therefore Adam came not as a Lord, he came as a servant:
he was to serve in all purposes: he came to till the garden, to till the earth:
he came to eat, and drink, to beget children: to be the father of a family.
He came into the world to increase and multiply, as God commanded him; Genesis
1.28.
to replenish the earth. These although they be fair courses, and God gave a
blessing unto them; yet they be carnal and fleshly; there is no respect of
excellency in these things: they are matters rather of necessity for the
present solace in this world, then of glory. But Christ came not for this
purpose. He came not to eat and drink, but his meat and drink was to do the
will of his Father. John 4 34.
He had no generation: all his generation, is a spiritual regeneration; he
came to do God service: these were the things he was exercised in. Therefore
he was the Lord from heaven. This is the high prerogative of Christ. There were
many Angels that came from heaven, as well as Christ: but they came not as
Lords, but as servants, as fellow servants, Rev. 22.9.
as in Rev. 22. when John would have worshipped the Angel, See thou do it not,
(says he) I am thy fellow servant. Heb. 1.14.
And in Heb. 1. they are ministering spirits, that serve for the salvation of
those that are elect and chosen, for the inheritance. Therefore they came not
down as Lords, but as servants. And although we read in Scripture of those
that came down as Lords: as in the apparition to Abraham, Genesis 18. he called
the Angel, Lord. Genesis 18.3.
And the Captain of the Lords Army that appeared to Joshua; though these came
in the glory, Ioshuah 5.14.
and might of the Lord; yet they were not that Lord, as here it is said, (...),
the Lord that came from heaven. For that Lord, is but one Lord, Heb. 1.2.
which is the Son of God: to whom the Father has given the inheritance of
all things. Heb. 1.2. he is the heir of all things: and the Jews themselves
confess, Come, let us kill him, this is the heir, Mark 12.7.
and the inheritance shall be ours. He, then, is the Lord from heaven. Adam
came not as a Lord, nor yet from heaven; but one only part of him, his soul,
without any conjunction of the divine nature; there came a changeable soul
into a frail body: but Christ the Lord from heaven; that is, the Son of God,
(as being Lord of hell and heaven) invested himself in a strange and wondrous
manner, into the body and womb of a Virgin, and took that mass and lump of
blood, whereof his blessed body should be compacted; and united it to himself,
and exercised the power of miracles, and of gracious wonders, and all parts of
perfection in that nature: and therefore he has exalted our nature, high above
the Angels nature: for he took not upon him the nature of Angels, Heb. 2.16.
but he took the seed of Abraham.

Lastly, in their qualities they differ; that as the first man came from the
earth, and is a servant; so he is earthly: There are two parts of man, as the
Philosopher says; there is the mind, and the understanding; that is, the
subtle, and divine, and fiery part of man, whereby he is appropincate and
draws near unto God, in the similitude of his Image. There is another, and
that is the gross and material part, Chrysostom.
as St. Chrysostom expounds it; that this earthly man is one that is dull, and
gross, and nailed, and tied to these things that are present: whereas the
other, 2 Cor. 4.18.
is heavenly, and altogether upon the things that are not seen: for the things
that are seen, are temporal, but them that are not seen, are eternal. So
then, the one by his condition, was still looking downward: the other was all
spirit, and full of vigor, full of life; always looking upward, still unto
heaven: his conversation was also heavenly, having given all his followers
power, to have their conversations there. Phil. 3.20.
Phil. 3. But our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the Lord
Christ, who shall change our vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious
body. So this is the Comparison of these two heads: which (that I may conclude
this point) we must observe very strictly. For by that means, we may be both
able to keep out all contrary heresies, and also to raise our selves to the
imitation of our head, to be conformable to him. For this very Text of
Scripture, that Christ came down the Lord from heaven, has given occasion to
a great number of lying spirits, to conclude, that the Lord had no true
natural body, that he had no true flesh: but that he brought his body down
from heaven, and that he passed as through a pipe, through the Virgin Mary.
Because (say they) if Adam and Christ be opposed together, and that Adam brings
his body from the earth; then Christ brings his from heaven. It follows,
therefore, that they are not one kind of body: and by consequent, there must be
a kind of celestial body appointed for Christ; because it must be directly
opposite to Adams.

Now there is no consequence, or sense in this. For the Apostle opposes not
Christ unto Adam, in regard of the substance of his flesh: but in respect of
the difference of his qualities. The quality that Adam put upon his flesh, was
death, and sickness, misery, and deformity; but Christ has put upon it
another kind of quality, another robe, another garment and vestment of
immortality, of grace, and perfection, and beauty, and strength, and all kind
of abilities: another kind of quality. Therefore he says not another
substance of flesh: for Christ came of David, and David came of Adam; they were
all one flesh: but because the one was the fountain of death, and the other the
fountain of life, they must needs work contrary effects. Therefore according
to the effects that they work, the Apostle proceeds, that the one works to
baseness and misery; the other to glory, to excellency, to comfort and beauty.
But these heretics will pretend a great number of places of Scripture, and a
great many arguments, whereby they do (as the Apostle says) deceive, 2 Pet. 2
14.
and draw aside unstable people, and make them at their wits end, when they are
not able to resolve the places they allege. As first, they say this, that the
Lord Jesus did deny his Mother: therefore he had no true flesh. And they prove
it out of St. Matthew 12. when he was teaching the people, they came and told
him, that his Mother and his brethren were without, Mat. 12.47, 48, 49.
desiring to speak with him; and he answers them, who is my mother? etc.
therefore (say they) Christ denies his mother.

This is false. Christ no where denied his mother. But that place shows, that
he had more care of the business he had in hand; he had more care of his
Fathers commission: of the Kingdom, of the preaching of the Gospel, of
forgiveness of sins, of curing diseases, and to do the rest of the works of
our redemption: therefore he must not neglect them, and be distracted from
them, to go to inferior things: so that his mother must give way to those
things: he does not deny his mother, but only prefers the practice of the
other things.

Again, they say, Christ cannot be adored if he have true flesh: or else he
can be but half adored: But now whole Christ must be adored, therefore he had
no true flesh. For if we adore that which is flesh, it is a creature, and so it
is idolatry: for whatsoever is given to the creature that way, is Idolatry.
Therefore Christ's body was not created, but was a super celestial thing,
above the order of mankind.

flesh of Christ was framed, and wrought above the order of mankind: and yet
so, as that still it was true flesh. And although we ought to adore whole
Christ, yet in the adoring of Christ we do it to the person. We use not to
disjoyne his natures, but we adore that God, that was pleased to take upon him
man: we adore that blessed person in the Trinity, that for our sake, and for
our salvation came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the holy Ghost in
the womb of Mary. It is that person we adore. So that we go not about with
the heretic Nestorius, to make a division of the natures; but we adore whole
Christ, God and man: not man alone, but God: not God alone, but man. Many other
shifts and sophismes they have, but these are the chiefest: and indeed they are
scarce worth repeating: but we must labor to furnish our selves, because we
know not what kind of miscreant heresies are like to grow, now in the latter
end of the world.

Now the conformity follows, in these words, 3. Part. The conformity.
As the earthly is, so are they that are earthly: and as is the heavenly, so
are they that are heavenly.

It must needs be, that as the principles are, so the things that are made, and
framed of them, must be. All things in nature, are a resemblance of their
original: and it cannot possibly be, that they should much swerve from them.
For every effect, is in his cause: a thing can draw no other inclination, then
that that is drawn from its cause. Therefore as the earthly man is, so must
the earthly be. As Adam, (for I will not meddle with other interpretations of
the Fathers, because they are not pertinent to this place) therefore, rules
all in this present life; he makes all his followers earthly, and mortal: so
Christ rules all in the blessed life to come, and makes all things contrary:
that is, immortal and glorious, and powerful. For in Adam, all the world is
ruled according to the censure of God upon sin, as God doomed sin; Earth
thou art, Genesis 3.19.
and to earth thou shall return, (which was the sentence upon Adam, and upon
all his posterity.) So we see daily, this sentence fulfilled upon us, and upon
ours, upon all our progenitors and successors. It fails upon none: and those
that shall be changed at the latter day, it shall be unto them as a kind of
death: for dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return: it is the common
voice of God upon nature. Therefore in this life, we must look to be as Adam
was; to have no other inheritance then he has left us. In the life which is
to come, we shall have an inheritance from the Lord of heaven. It is true, by
the grace of the Gospel, and by the faith we have in Christ Jesus, we have
something more then Adam gave unto us; but of that we are not put into
possession, to inherit, until the Lord shall appear from heaven. For when
Christ our life shall appear, then we also shall appear with him in glory.
Colos. 3.4. Colos. 3.4.
As is the earthly, so are they that are earthly. Not in respect of their
manners, (as some of the Fathers by way of digression have noted upon this
place: and St. Chrysostom assents unto it, and St. Augustine also yields to
it,) but to insist upon the strict terms: for we can go no further, nor we
cannot make any better sense of it, that we are like Adam, in all things in
this life.

In our birth. In our life. In our inclination. In our declination. In our
death. In our grave and sepulcher.
In all things we are like our first parent Adam, which is the father of our
nature, as Christ is the father of our state in grace.

Therefore, as at the first we are made by the hand of God as Adam was; we
are made out of a base matter as he was: the Lord made him out of the red
earth: Psalm. 119.73.
so says David, thy hands have made me and fashioned me: out of such a kind of
substance, are we made.

We are like him in our beginning. Adam was free will, to go this way of that
way. Which free will he had entire, and might have kept it, if he would. In
our infancy we are partly left that way: but custom and corruption lead us
another way, for we are forestalled by inbred corruption, (by sin) and we
are misled by the corrupt customs in the world; so that children are
corrupted, before they be sensible. Otherwise, children have that in them above
men, that they may say, This course I will take, and this course I will not
take. For when a man takes a course to be vicious, and to fall into sin, he
cannot be so free, as he that has a pure mind, which is like unto a white
paper, wherein there is nothing written. For they that fall into evil, they
set such blots upon them, that cannot be gotten out without the blood of
Christ. And indeed in the fairest paper, (in the minds of children) there is
that corruption, that the blood of Christ must wash it out: even that original
sin, though they be free from actual. Therefore in this, we are like unto
Adam, mutable and changeable. Nay our condition is worse than his; for he had a
power not to sin, and we have no power, but to sin, as long as we live in
this flesh.

Thirdly, in the inclination of our mind. As Adam inclination to eat and to
drink; a necessity of increasing in the world; of steep, and work, and the
like: so in these things we grow, and many men are so set upon these worldly
things, that they commonly fail God, and their souls, in other things.

And for our declining age, we are like unto him. Although he lived in
strength a long time, yet at last he failed of his strength, and of his wit,
and at length came to be turned to dust, to nothing. So it is with us: as is
the earthly, so are they that are earthly: we must follow his condition; we
cannot avoid it: we must be like unto him.

Adam died, and went to his grave from which he was taken: earth to earth, dust
to dust. and rotted in the earth, and there he lies now, and has lain for the
space of almost 5000. years in the dust: so the Lord will bring our bodies by
the common sentence which he has pronounced against our sins, and the sin of
Adam; he will bring them to the same state. For as is the earthly, so are they
that are earthly. In their birth, in their life, in their inclination, in their
death, in their grave, and in all the parts and passages of this mortal race,
they are all alike, each to other.

But the Lord, who is to give a new life of grace which begins here, and shall
be completed in the life of glory which shall be manifested hereafter, he shall
conform his members unto him, more then Adam does his. For if we be miserable,
because of the first Adam, much more shall we be glorious, because of Christ,
the second Adam. And if a weak cause be able to conform his members unto him;
a stronger cause shall be much more able. Therefore as the misery of man is
derived from Adam to his posterity; so the glory and majesty of God shall be
derived, and exhibited, and set forth, and fulfilled from Christ, as from a
root and fountain, to all those that follow. For from his fullness we have all
received, even grace for grace. John 1 16.
Therefore he says, those that are spiritual, shall be such as he that is
spiritual: as Christ is now in his glorious body. For this must be taken of
the glorified body of Christ, and not of his mortal body. For he had a mortal
body, in which he died: but when it was raised again, it was a glorified body.
And as it was in the Resurrection of Christ, so in the common Resurrection we
shall be like unto him, by the power of Christ, that works all in all. And if
Adam could convey unto us an inheritance of misery, and weakness, and
declining; much more shall the Lord convey a stronger inheritance of glory and
beauty, and of all that we can desire, and that can fill the heart of man: all
which the word of God has made a promise and tender of.

Therefore (as the Apostle says) comfort your selves in these words: 1 These
4.18.
even in observing the order that God would have: and be content that your
naturalls may pass away, that your spirituals may succeed. For we must of
necessity be borne, before we can be borne anew of water, and of the holy
Ghost. We must be borne first, of the will of flesh and blood; we must be
borne after, again, by the sacred laver of regeneration, not of the will of
flesh and blood, John 1.13.
but of the spirit, by the word of God, and by faith in Christ Jesus. And as
St. Austin says, we could not die, Aug.
except we had been the members of Adam: nor we could not rise again, except
we were the members of Christ. But these things be so ordained by God, that
we cannot look for the one, except we be content to taste of the other. The
Lord made not the Angels and us, in one condition: they were made in their full
perfection at the first; therefore some of them fell from that to be devils:
some of them continuing by the grace of God, and are confirmed for ever. But
man was not so made, but as a scholar, to come by diverse degrees; to grow
forward, from rudiments and principles, unto further perfection, that the glory
of God might be seen in his success and course, in his bringing on, and
production, that he appointed for man.

ordinance of God; to rejoice in it, and to be willing to suffer the cup which
God has put into our hands: even the cup of death, when the Lord shall call
for us. And we ought also to arm our selves with this exceeding comfort, that
this is the only passage and way which God has made, for that glorious state
hereafter. For if there be natural, there shall be spiritual: and if there be
no nature, there shall be no spirit. Therefore this misery and weakness, is as
it were a door, and a way unto greatness, and strength, and ability.

This is that which the blessed Apostle says, 2 Cor. 11. 2 Cor. 11:
When I am weak, then am I strong. A strange contradiction: but his meaning is,
that the Lord does so season our weakness and infirmity in this life, that it
is an infallible testimony and forerunner of that great strength and glory,
that shall be revealed in the life to come.

The Lord uses to work thus, out of weak causes, to bring more strong effects.
And if the causes were strong, God would not use them. For out of weak, and
base, and contemptible things: God brings strong and noble effects. As when
Gedeon was to fight with the Midianites, and he pretended that his Army was but
a few: Judges 7.
How many have thou? says the Lord; so many thousand. They are too many, the
Lord would not have them all: there were too many; and he commanded to cut
them off to another half, and yet there were too many: the Lord would not work
with them, they were too strong. At last, he comes to make choice of them by
lapping in the water, and they came to 300. men to fight against as many as the
sands on the sea, that covered the earth, as gras-hoppers, as it is said. And
now the Lord begins to work with these men; and how does he work? by weapons?
No; but with a few broken pitchers in their hands: and the Lord set the
Madianites one upon the neck of his fellow, that they were murderers each of
other, and became as sheep for the slaughter: the Lord gave them as a prey
into their hands.

This is the wondrous act of the great God, which is not tied to means; which
will not seem to work with second common causes, but with his own arm.

It is true, these common second causes in the world, he has honored them
much, and commanded them to be used; but when he comes to effect great things,
(such as was the destruction of the Madianites, (such as is the redemption of
man by Christ, and such as shall be the Redemption of of our bodies at the
Resurrection) then such means and causes as seem to help him forward, he
rejects them; and works not by them, but by the clean contrary. The greater
stench the bodies have sustained in the grave; shall work it unto greater
sweetness; and the greater weakness it had, the greater strength shall accrue
unto it; and wondrous puissance shall God work unto that part which lacked
honor, according to his blessed dispensation in all things.

FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection.
1 COR. 15.49, 50. And as we have borne the Image of the earthly, so we shall
bear also the Image of the heavenly. And this I say (brethren) that flesh and
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: neither corruption, can inherit
incorruption.
TO hope for the time to come, and to have now present possession; is one of
the greatest differences in humane affairs to be observed, says Chrysologus.
Chrysologus.
The one is the portion of this life; sperare, to hope in God for the things
that are promised: the other, is in that blessed life to come; to have and to
hold, and to enjoy the promises which the Apostle assures us of in this place,
that we shall have as sure, as we have had the first fruits, and the earnest;
so sure we are to enter into the full possession; and to have the performance,
of the which God has made a tender of, and promised unto us before.

The words of the Text, contain that great consolation, which is the only
comfort, and sweetness of our life. The Saints of God, are burdened with the
image of the earthly man: they are in continual suffering; they endure the
plague of Adam, which is sin every day, and every hour: and there is none
that comes of Adams blood, but he is (as it were) borne to death, to misery,
and to slavery; which are the proper consequents of sin. Now the redemption
that comes by Christ, it is not yet apparent; it is but yet begun, it is by
faith, it is in hope, it is in spe, but not in Re: and this is the cause of the
Saints mourning upon earth. Therefore to this the Apostle answers; and bids
them be content and satisfy themselves; for that which they have not now, they
shall have hereafter: therefore they must stay the Lords leisure, and all shall
be for the best. And although he stay long, yet he will come full, and make
an abundant recompense for his delatory absence, with the greatness of those
rewards, and precious things that he brings with him: For, (says the Apostle)
As we have borne the image of the earthly, and as we groan under the burden
of Adam; so we are assured, that we shall bear the image of the heavenly; in
the fullness of joy, in the fullness of rest, and holiness, in the fullness of
all strength, and perfection, and immortality, and incorruption. And therefore
his purpose is, to quiet and content the distressed souls here, in this world,
that groan under their misery, with the expectation of that glory, that shall
be revealed.

There is some difficulty in the words: as, what it is that he says of an
image, the image of the earthly, and the image of the heavenly;

What it is he speaks of flesh and blood.

For the first, we must understand, that he means not a vain show, a picture,
or representation: but the thing it self. For we have not the figure, and
proportion of Adam alone; but we have all his misery, and all his sin: his
sin comes unto us by tradition, it is an inheritance which we cannot shake
off. It is a kind of portion he has given us, that we cannot be rid of. So
that it is not an image, as we take it in the common sense, for a picture, or
an imaginary matter: but a real substantial impression, by reason of his
sin, and his breaking of the command. There lies a burden, a heavy load of
plague and misery, upon our whole nature.

And so likewise for the other, the image of the heavenly. We are not to
imagine it to be any outward light resemblance, but a true, real conformity to
him, whose image we shall bear. We shall be like unto Christ, not in a
slight, transitory fashion, but in a true, and real change.

And that that he says of flesh and blood, that they shall not inherit the
kingdom of God: we must understand it thus. Not as a thing impossible for God
to do: for flesh and blood does inherit Gods kingdom. Christ is flesh and
blood, and he is in the kingdom of God. Yea Divines have thought, that the
bodies of Enoch, and Elias (that are flesh and blood) are already in the
kingdom of God: as those also that arose up with Christ; of which there were
diverse that arose to testify his Resurrection. And Divines think generally,
that the bodies of these ascended with Christ into heaven. Now these are flesh
and blood, and yet they be in Gods kingdom. The meaning therefore is not, as
though God could not open the kingdom of heaven to flesh and blood; but not to
flesh, and blood corrupted with sin. As long as we are in this life, our
flesh is full of sin; and our blood in the veins of the body, run with
sin, and as long as they be so, they be mere matter of corruption, and
therefore they cannot enter into incorruption. Howbeit, Adam in his first
creation, was flesh and blood; and yet had he stood in the state of grace and
innocence, he had entered into heaven, with his body of flesh and blood. So
that the meaning is not, as though God could not confer so great a benefit
upon flesh and blood, but because it has corrupted it self. Flesh has
corrupted his own way, and blood is tainted with sin, it is tainted,
defiled, and polluted blood; it is not such as God made it, but it has
received a tincture from the Devil. In regard of this, it must be dissolved,
and brought to rottenness and corruption, that God may raise it a new seed;
and so make it pure, and perfect again, and make it capable of the heavenly,
and blessed inheritance.

So that the sum of the words is this: As long as we be flesh and blood, as
long as we be in this life (sinful flesh that we carry about with us) we
must not look to be translated into heaven. Adam should have been translated
into heaven, if he had lived; and kept that state wherein he was made We
desire indeed to be like him in that; but our desires, and our hopes must be
grounded upon Gods will, and not on our own fancies: and we must expect what
the Lords will has determined. He has determined, that we should come to
death, before we enter into life: that we should bear the image of the
earthly, before we come to the image of the heavenly, and we cannot have
incorruption and glory, poured upon this body that we carry about with us, by
reason of sin: because it is in sin. For sinful flesh and blood, cannot
inherit the kingdom of God. And although when Christ shall come, there shall
be alive many millions of men, that shall not die, as we do: yet they shall
have a change, and there change shall be unto them as death is unto us now. For
it is not possible, that any corrupt body should enter into incorruption. This
I take to be the sum and sense of the words read. Now to proceed in order,
we are to consider,

First the persons; that he says, as we have borne.

Then secondly the matter propounded, of those persons.

First, there is a sentence, or proposal. Division into, 1. the Persons. 2.
the Matter propounded.


Secondly, the explanation of that proposal.

The proposal that is made of these persons, is by way of comparison: as we
have borne the image of the earthly, so also we shall bear the image of the
heavenly.

The explanation of it, what he means by this image. The Corinthians might
ask, and say they doubted of his words: these are obscure things, that the
Text says, The image of the earthly, and the image of the heavenly. My meaning
(says he) is nothing but this: that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Eingdome of God, nor corruption cannot inherit incorruption: So in the
proposal or proposition in the 49. verse, we are to consider these things.

First, that God made man to an Image.

Secondly, that that Image being defaced and deformed, we are made to another
kind of Image, than we were first intended: for we are made to the image of
the earthly.

Thirdly, we are to observe the reddition: that as we bear the image of the
earthly, so we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.

Fourthly, the certainty in the sicut, so, as: according to that manner. And
this makes us assured of the thing, that this is a ground experimental: that
because we have the image of the one, therefore we are assured of the image
of the other. For still we are made to an image, that is, for the proposal.

In the explanation in the words following, brethren I say unto you, or my
meaning is this: Wherein the holy Ghost teaches us, to speak plainly; and not
to wander away in new quaint words, in obscure sentences; but to make the
doctrines clear, that we take in hand.

And then for flesh and blood, that they are not capable of heavens kingdom:
and for what reason they are not capable.

And lastly, the sum of all: corruption, (which is flesh and blood) cannot
enter into incorruption, which is the Kingdom of heaven. For that which he
call flesh and blood in one place, he renders it again in another place, by
corruption: and that which he called the kingdom of heaven in the former
words, he turns it in the latter words, incorruption. So that the Apostles
perspicuity and evidence is wondrously to be admired in this place: he labors
to speak of a high matter, a deep profound matter of dignity, so plainly to
flesh and blood. He says, flesh and blood shall not enter into the Kingdom
of God: Not because it is flesh and blood, but because it is corrupted: and
there shall not enter any thing that is corrupt into incorruption, because they
are contraries; and one contrary cannot enter into another. It is impossible
for a man to be alive, and dead, to be sick and well at one time: there is no
difference in the world greater, then the difference of corruption and
incorruption: and because flesh and blood is corrupted for sin, it is full of
misery and wretchedness by sin: and the Kingdom of heaven is an
uncorruptible crown: it is impossible that these should be coincident, and
meet and be mingled together. Therefore corruption must be evacuated and rooted
out, before incorruption can be attained. Of these things briefly and in order,
as God shall give assistance.

And first concerning the persons, 1. Part. The persons, of whom these things
are propounded.
of whom these things are pronounced. It is of Gods Saints. For as I have often
told you, this whole Chapter is spoken of, and endited, concerning the
Resurrection of the Saints only. There is (indeed) a resurrection of those
that belong not to God, which is a resurrection to punishment and shame: but
the Apostle meddles not with that, in this whole Chapter; but speaks only of
the Saints resurrection; and he says, We that have borne the image of the
earthly, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. We, that is, those
that are called of Christ, and sanctified by his holy Spirit, to these it is,
to whom this promise appertains. For every man bears the image of the
earthly, good and bad; but every man shall not bear the image of the heavenly,
but only those, for whom it is ordained. The nature of man is not capable of
heaven; for if man's nature were capable of heaven, then all men should have it;
because all men have the nature of man indefinitely, and equally; but it is the
special favor of God, that sanctifies some chosen vessels, and brings them
to the knowledge of his grace in Jesus Christ, and gives them an earnest
hungring and thirsting after grace. This makes the difference between man and
man: so that it belongs still to the We: that is, to those that are called and
incorporated into the body of Christ; to these it is, that these great things
belong.

company: to be of these that the Apostle takes in the We. For to be out of
that society, is to be out of all comfort, out of all hope, of all joy. There
is none that God intends these goodly things for, (the bearing of the stately
image and glory of Christ,) but for those that are in Christ: for those that
are baptized into his holy name, for those that seek to resemble him in a holy
life, and conversation. As we have borne the image of the earthly.

The next thing to be considered is this, that he speaks of an Image; and
first that we are all borne unto an Image. The great God would not make man
absolute of himself, as having reference to none: but he made him to an image,
having respect and relation to a superior, to a better than himself. For as
for himself, he was made frail and mutable, he was made indifferently
inclined to this or that: and unless he were sustained by a superior power,
he was not like to have any continuance in that estate wherein he was made.

And therefore God of his great goodness made him to an Image: to teach him,
dependently; that he must live according to the image of some superior, and
better thing than himself: to teach him, that he is not absolute in his own
power, and gift, to follow his own will, (for as long as he follows that,
perhaps he follows the way to the destruction of his own soul,) but still
he must have dependence and reference to the will of a higher commander, the
will of him that is above him.

It is an argument of man's unsufficiency, image; that he must have a pattern
to follow; that he must not guide himself, but live according to the Image
and similitude of him that made him; that he may thereby assure himself of
that life, and blessing, and favor, that formerly he obtained in the Creation.
And what image is this?

Surely the best that could be: for when God had thought upon all the images
and similitudes in the world, that could be devised, he made man after the
most glorious and perfect image that could be: even the image of himself. The
Image of God (says Philo Philo.
) is a kind of governing power, to be able to rule and govern, both
themselves and others. And to this image was man made, when the Lord said, Let
us make man according to our image, and let him rule. So the ruling power is
the proper act and term of Gods image: that he made man able to govern that
little body, that little world he carries about him; and to govern all the
creatures that belong unto him. And this Image remains still, although it be
so mightily defaced, and broken in the Saints of God, that they can govern and
rule their affections, that they can govern their exorbitant passions, they can
govern their families, govern their children, their friends, and those that
belong unto them. A man is known by nothing so much to bear Gods Image, as in
being a good Governor: to govern in the way of truth, in the light of life:
to govern by his good example. This is the true, and perfect Image of the high
God.

after the Image of the earthly man, if we be made according to Gods Image? God
is not earthly? and how come we to be made after Adams Image?

Adam was made after Gods Image: and we by the fall of Adam, are made into
Adams image. But when he had defaced that power of government, and became a
slave to his own desires, (to choose a base, and petty good, in respect of the
fountain of all good, to harken to the devil, and the woman, and to give a
deaf ear unto God; when Adam (I say) had thus deformed that prime light, and
image, and beauty, that was in him. Now he came to be a forlorn creature,
unknown (almost) unto his Maker; unknown to himself, to be (as it were) a
dram of misery, not able to do that which he was borne to; not able to
govern any thing; unable to govern himself; but all his passions did
altogether exceed reason. He was not able to govern others; but either he was
too cruel, or too gentle; either he was too fierce and violent in prosecuting
virtue, or else too mild and foolish, in sparing of all vice whatsoever.

This was the Image that was deformed in Adam; and to this image we are all
borne: he having lost it, we lost it also in him. We were made rulers,
especially of our selves: but now through the fall, we cannot govern so much
as that which is within us. Our anger over-tops, and confounds us; our fear
amazeth, and astonisheth us; our desires burn, and inflame, and kindle us; our
appetites, and whatsoever is in us, puts us out of order: there is no peer or
regiment in the whole house of man, till the grace of God make some
compositions and when the grace of God is come in, the disorder continues
still. As long as we live in this world, we bear the image of the earthly:
that is, of the earthly Adam: which having once lost the fullness of Gods
Image, he left unto us the base, and deformed image, which he himself had
contracted.

Those fair lives of divine perfection, were obliterate and blinded in him: so
that no man could see the proportion of it. And although there be some kind of
lineaments, and proportion, that a man might see God in some things; yet they
were so obscured and blundered over, as that a man could not discern the Maker:
only some few steps there were in the understanding; a little in the will, and
least in the affections; and a poor remainder in his actions. These, indeed,
God of his great mercy, took not utterly away from Adam; but left some kind
of relics in him. But all these cannot help us, but that still we are
earthly. For although we bear some image of God still, (as the wickedest man
in the world has the image of God one way or another) yet it is so miserably
deformed, that a man cannot know it to be the Image of God; for he shall see
such a counter-poyson of the image of the devil, of vice and vanity, and
miserable deceit, and delusion; he shall see such a mingling and mixture, such
a deformity brought upon the image of God, and such contrary colors painted
upon it, as we see in the picture that is rased, sometime there will be an
arm or a finger left plain, and all the rest of the picture, defaced: some
part of it remains, but by that a man knows not what it is. So the Image of
God (that glorious picture of beauty) was altogether soyled, and over-rased,
put out, and besmeared by man's sins and transgressions: yet the Lord has left
some sparks, and some lineaments, as a finger or an arm remains. This, now,
is called the image of the earthly. And though there be some Image of God which
is heavenly; yet it is so defaced, that it is called the image of the earthly.

Now wherein stands this Image?

You know by experience wherein it is; even in all the parts and passages of
this miserable life. So St. Austin says, Aug.
We bear the image of the earthly, in being borne into this earth, in the
miseries of the world, in the corruptions of our life, in the laboring for our
meat and drink, that we have in our hungring and thirsting; in the necessities
of eating and drinking; in being subject to sickness, in our declining and
withering away; and in our dying at length, and our rotting after we are dead.
In these things we bear the image of our Father; and the fairest son and
daughter of Adam must needs confess thus much, that either they are or shall
be drowned in baseness. An ugly physiognomie! and yet it is that which Adam
has engraven upon our sinful nature.

But blessed be God, that says we shall have another image. For as he
teaches us to groan, and to be weary of this, as being a reward, and
punishment of sin; so he has given us a lively faith, and hope, that we
shall attain unto another image, that shall rectify all this, and shall bring
upon us a face that shall never decay: not as the face of Adam, that goes and
declines from age to age, from sickness to sickness, but the face of Christ,
that shall continue one, and the same for ever.

The Image, therefore, of the heavenly, must be in a contrary quality. For if
the one were in a poor natural birth, the other is in regeneration: if the
one were(...) weakness and infirmity, the other was in strength, and power of
miracles, and high supernatural abilities: if the one was in sickness, the
other was in health: if the one was in death, the other was in eternal life:
if the one were in corruption and rottenness, the other was in sweetness and
fragrancie. This is the Image of the heavenly. And these Images (as I said) are
not vain imaginary pictures, but real impressions: things that are truly
seated in us; and so seated, as never after to be defaced, and removed.

The Image of God, it was once changeable; for it was set upon Adam, and it was
removed: the Lord began to set it again, and to imprint it on Jesus Christ:
and thence it was never removed, nor never shall be from his followers, on whom
he shall set it. As the Law that was written by Moses, was written in two
Tables, twice over. First the Lord gave one Table of stone, which Moses when
he came from the Mount, cast down in his anger, and broke them: so the Lord
took the second Table, and wrote upon it the same words, and those stood
steadfast and were never altered, nor broken and defaced. So also it is with
these two Adams. For the first was made frail and feeble; and the image of
God, and the command that was written in his heart, was broken in pieces upon
the peoples idolatry, upon his own transgression. But when the Lord renewed
his image upon man again, (which was done in the person of Christ Jesus) that
was the second writing of the Table: and when he had written the second time,
then God would write no more. For there the glory, and virtue, and power of the
Commander, stands for ever: and the beauty, and vigor of that face, is subject
to no fading; but it brings it self, and all that love it, to perfection.

4. The certainty.
The next thing to be considered is the certainty of this: for this (indeed) is
improbable; and to flesh, and blood impossible: even for a man to say, because
he has been earthly, therefore he shall be heavenly. A man may rather say,
because I have been earthly, therefore I shall not be heavenly. Yes (says
the Apostle) sicut, As we have borne the one, so we shall bear the other: As
we have borne the image of the earthly, so also we shall bear the image of
the heavenly. This is the wondrous arguing, which the Spirit of God teaches
us: even to hope against hope, and to reason against reason. For it utterly
non-plusseth all reason, to say an earthly thing shall become heavenly: that it
shall change the nature. It is impossible to make gold of dirt: yet God can do
it: and he gives us that assurance; that as sure as we are borne to the image
of the earthly, as sure experience as we have of that, so sure we shall have
the image of the heavenly: the one is an argument and a sign, and a previall
disposition to the other. That we all bear the image of the earthly; every
man, in his continual groaning, and clamor, testifies to God, to himself,
and to the world. There is no man that lives, without his burden: and God
knows our burden, how it is in continual misery and perplexity, and such
kind of defections, that if God did not sustain us, a thousand deaths would
overtake us, instead of one. And therefore this experience of misery, which we
have by Adam, is a sure sign and token, that God will advance us to the glory
of the second Adam. For these two, are dependent each upon other: A man is
borne into this world, to be borne again in a better world: a man dies here,
that he may live hereafter: a man is miserable here, that he may be glorious
hereafter: he is a sinner here, that he may be holy, and righteous hereafter:
the things here, are seals and tokens of a blessed and better inheritance.
Therefore the Apostle says, sicut: as sure as we have the one, so surely we
shall have the other. It is a semblance, it is a true and certain figure and
assurance, that as we carry the badge of Adams mortal flesh, so we shall
carry the stamp and image of Christ, in flesh mortal, and incorrupt. This is
the wondrous wisdom of God, which passes all the understanding of man: to
teach still by contraries. As in that sweet example, John 11.
Ioh. 11. of Lazarus. God would not work, but by a clean contradiction.
Lazarus was sick; they sent to Christ. Lord he whom thou love is sick. The
Lord heard it; Let him be sick, let him die too, he stays the longer, he comes
not to him. The next news was brought, Lazarus was dead. The Lord prevents the
news, and says, Lazarus our friend sleeps. He comes unto the house; when
he was come there, he teaches and converseth with the people: he goes not
about his work upon the sudden. The news comes, he is dead and buried. Let him
lie in his grave a long time, that the glory of God may the more appear. Let
him lie the first, second, and third day; and the Lord comes not. Upon the
fourth day, when all men gave him for stinking and desperate, and that there
was no hope of any good to be done upon him: then the Lord comes to work. When
Martha his sister, had given over all hope, and told Christ she knew that he
should rise again at the resurrection: but for any other rising, she never
dreamed of, or imagined that. Well then! when all things seemed to be senseless
and against reason, and possibility, then the power of God began to work. And
because Lazarus was so strongly held by death four days, therefore the
stronger was the hand of God upon him, in raising him from death. That the
strength of death might be encountered, and overcome, and countermanded by the
higher strength and arm of the Almighty; it now gave way, and made a passage
to the arm of the Lord, to work a mighty deliverance. So still the misery of
the child of God, works for good: and all things work for the best to those
that love God. Romans 8.28.


Therefore, as we have borne the image of the earthly, so we shall bear the
image of the heavenly.

This is a great encouragement to us to bear. impatient, we cannot endure any
thing: but we see that we must bear, and if we look for the image of the
heavenly; we must be content to bear the image of the earthly. We must be
content to be sick, we must be content to be poor, to be persecuted, to be
every way miserable, and wretched. We must be content to be tempted, by the
tempting devil, and often times to be foiled by him; and to be overcome in
sin, and shameful actions, and courses. We must be content with the
Christian agony, and the bloody sweat that Christ had in the garden at his
passion. We must bear these things, it is the image of the earthly: It is the
condition of the other life, the bearing of the heavenly. And except we have
the one, we cannot have the other: except we bear the image of the earthly, we
shall not bear the image of the heavenly.

But here it may be objected, that Infants have not this image.

Yes, reason tells us they do. For in their death, in their sickness, in
their distractions, and strange convulsions, (to which they are subject) they
bear the image of the earthly, although not in so great a measure as men of
grows do; yet they have for their tender years, a fearful yoke laid upon
them; which is mortality, and all the ways that tend to death. To conclude
this first point, the proposition.

Let us mingle the one with the other; and bear both. If thou be troubled in
this world, (in any sort) inwardly, or outwardly: If thou be troubled in
conscience for sin; if thou be troubled with enemies: art thou troubled in
thy fortunes, in thy state in the world? art thou troubled with sickness of
body? remember it is nothing but thine own image. Thus thou art made, will thou deny thine own face? will thou deny thy own name? will thou not take
that which thou art borne unto? art thou ashamed of thine inheritance? it is
that which thy Father has left thee: therefore bear it. And withal to
comfort thy self, bear it with this hope and lively assurance; that thou
shall bear a better image one day. The galley-slaves, that serve the Turks in
their galleys; if they could but think, that at seven years end, some
Christian would come and deliver them; they would be the better affected, and
would cheer their minds, especially if they could be assured of it. If Jacob
serve the churl Laban seven years; Genesis 29.
if he think he shall have Rachell at the end of it, he thinks it but like
unto seven days, and with patience he comforts himself in the Lord, and
stays his leisure, and is content that God shall use him unto his hand, as it
pleases him. This is the true constitution of a pure mind: therefore let us
sweeten these outward worldly miseries, with the expectation of future joy, and
the promises which God has made to us in his holy Word. There is no grief so
great, but if we tie heaven unto the end of it, it is light. As the Apostle
says, This short moment any affliction, Romans 8.18.
is not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed. Let us put them together,
and the one will be swallowed up in the other. For as we have borne the image
of the earthly; so shall we bear the image of the heavenly. Oh! when shall
that blessed day appear? So must the Christian man aspire, and hunger, and
thirst after the righteousness of God, and after his blessed kingdom. We
mourn (says the Apostle) as long as we are from Christ, in this body, we
would feign see the consummation of the promise. Why, then, there is no means
but one: that is, by incessant prayer, by continual clamours to call upon God,
to cry unto him for it. The cries and clamours of Gods Saints, must bring
Christ from heaven, again unto earth, to make up the fullness of the promise,
which he has condesce^ded unto in his holy Word. This must be the use we must
make of this doctrine. That as we are patiently to endure, the image of the
earthly man, (to endure the misery that sin has contracted, and brought upon
us) that we also be faithful, and hopeful to cry, and to call unto God, for
the sweet things that are reposed and laid up for us in the glory of the Gospel.

So much for the Proposition.

Now for the explanation in verse 50. Verse 50.


This I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
heaven: neither can corruption, inherit incorruption. In these words, the
Apostle does prevent those questionings, and objections that simple men might
make, against this doctrine. They might say, that he taught in the clouds;
that he spoke so, as that they knew not what he meant. What do you mean by
the image of the earthly, and the image of the heavenly? we have heard of no
such words, we know no such matter.

For this the Apostle tells them, that he speaks out of the phrase of
Scripture, he speaks it out of Genesis. For he had said before, that Adam was
made a living soul; and that Christ was made a quickening spirit: and so
following the course of the creation, he says there was an image which at the
first was heavenly, but it was defaced by man's fault, and so it became earthly,
and by consequence, all of Adams blood, were like their progenitor, they all
took part of the inheritance, (although it were against their will) and they
bore the image of the earthly. Now because the Corinthians, and other Readers
might perhaps not understand this, (for it is not every man's part to understand
the Scripture to the full) the Apostle explaines it; Brethren, I tell you what
I say, flesh and blood, corrupted by sin, cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.
When it is cleansed, and purified, it shall; but in this condition of
corruption, it is not capable of that incorruption.

So that the first thing we are to note here, is the diligence of the Apostle;
in the clearing of his doctrine, in the opening of his mind, This I say,
brethren, As if he should say, If you understand not what I say, I will
express my self in clearer, and fairer terms.

memorable and gracious act of Christian charity; still to open it self, and
to do as much good by way of expression, and explanation as possible may be.
It is not for a man that is in St. Paul's place, to speak in high terms; in
such phrases, as pass the understanding of the people: but if they chance to
do it, (or be carried away in some high strains of language) they must
descend again, as the Angels ascended, and descended upon the ladder of Jacob.
If they do ascend to high thoughts and discourses of Divinity, they must
descend again, to meaner speeches: to those phrases, and terms that the
people may be capable of. For preaching and teaching, was made for a certain
commutation of minds, for the changing of minds. For by teaching, the
scholar is made the Master; and he puts upon himself the nature and person,
of the Master. As one said of another man's book that he read; he said he was
become the man himself, whose book he had read. Therefore as (St. Austin
says) all learning is nothing, Aug.
but a mingling and mixing of souls and spirits together. It is needful, and
necessary for him that teaches, to speak so, as that he may be understood.
For to what end is speech, if it be not perceived? If I be not understood, when
I have said all that I can, I have said nothing. If I be understood, when I
have said little, I have said sufficient; because another man knows that which
I know; and another is transformed into that which is inherent in me. The
Philosophers compare a teacher, and a master to the parents of a child; and
the scholar they liken to the child. As the child bears the image of his
father, so the scholar bears the image of his Master much more. It is much
more lively in Art, then in nature it can be expressed. Therefore this holy
Apostle St. Paul, Gal. 4.19.
he intends to bring forth children to Christ. My little children of whom I
travail again, till Christ be formed in you. He uses that plainness of
speech, and evidence of language, that thereby he may flow into their hearts
and senses and affections: that he may accommodate them to his intelligence;
and that he may do it the better, he uses this word here, Brethren.

This I say brethren. As if he would carry them along, and show them the thing
with his finger, in a familiar sweet speaking: not as a high Commander to his
Soldiers; nor as a great Prince to his Subjects; nor as the great God to
Israel, when he gave the Law, that they could not endure the voice, but said,
Let not the Lord speak any more, but Moses, lest we die: But he speaks in the
spirit of meekness and mildness; Brethren, fellow soldiers, fellow
scholars; you that are partakers of the same salvation, come along, and see
the doctrine, that I deliver to you. This is that, I say; herein I express my
self. When I said, the image of the earthly, and the image of the heavenly; my
meaning is this; that flesh and blood (which is corrupt) cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God, which is incorrupt.

Let us consider what he says, when he says, Flesh and blood shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God.

He means to expound himself: that corrupt flesh and blood shall not enter.
As St. Austin says, Lib. 6. Aug, de gen lit. Cap. 18.
de Genesis ad Literam, Cap. 18. he means that flesh and blood, that is thus
tainted and defiled with sin, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, the
Kingdom of heaven.

And why not?

Because it is a place of that purity, and of that perfection, that it cannot
endure sin, or any sinful neighbor. As soon as the devil sinned, he was
thrown from heaven: there was no place for him there. As soon as Adam
transgressed, he was thrown from Paradise, which was the Type of heaven:
there was no more remaining for him there. The blessed eyes of God are so pure,
that they cannot look upon a defiled thing: and because the Lord will have all
the world which is tainted with sin, to be clear and pure; the element of
water came once through it; and because that could not do it, the element of
fire shall come and purge it; and shall make all the goodly stately palaces,
all the goodly castles, and the fair groves, and pleasant meadows in the
world, it shall make them all dust and ashes: that the sin that lodges in
them, and the corruption which they have contracted unto them by the
transgression of Adam, may be wrought out of them. So pure is the Majesty of
God, that he cannot endure any evil thing to approach or come near unto him.
Therefore flesh and blood, because it is full of sin. For all the acts of
sin are done in the flesh, and the beginning and proceeding of the action,
begins in the blood.

There is a tainted blood about the heart of man, wherein all these evil
imaginations nestle and hide themselves: there is an impure blood that runs
through the veins of man, which fills him full of impiety. So that the blessed
God shall never suffer this corrupt blood to enter into his Kingdom, that can
endure no corruption. But he shall cleanse it, and purify it; he shall
annihilate it, and bring it to nothing, that it may be something for ever. But
here may be many things excepted against us. As first,

flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of then how are the Saints said
to be partakers of the Kingdom? and how have they the first fruits of the
Kingdom, in this life? and how are they called the children of the Kingdom?
Those that belong to the Kingdom, they are called heirs of the Kingdom, and
Co-heyres with Christ: and if they be heirs, and Co-heyres, and fellow-heyres
with Christ, and yet be flesh and blood; how is it true then, that flesh and
blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God?

Enoch and Elias, that they never saw death and corruption, (not that
corruption which falls upon our nature) and yet it is presumed that their
bodies are in heaven: So that flesh and blood enters into Gods Kingdom: For
Enoch and Elias were flesh and blood: that is, sinful creatures as well as
we; and yet they be in the Kingdom of God.

alive, at the coming of the Lord: they shall be flesh and blood as we are;
and they shall in a moment of time, be translated to the Kingdom of God:
therefore it seems that flesh and blood inherits the Kingdom of God.

Answers to the 3. Objections.
For the answer to these.

For the first, we must observe, that it is one kind of possession that a man
has spiritually by faith and apprehension: and it is another, to have it in
real entrance, and in a real investiture. The Saints of God are called in
this life, the sons and daughters of the Kingdom; and they are called heirs
of the Kingdom, and Co-heyres with Christ. But how? it is only in faith; it
is only in taste; in an earnest of that which shall be fully paid hereafter,
as the Apostle says, Heb. 6. Heb. 6.5.
It is impossible that such as have tasted of the heavenly joy, etc. So that
we do not deny, nor the Apostle does not say, that flesh and blood shall not
taste of heaven, nor corruption taste of incorruption; for we have it, the
children of God, they have the very pledge, and earnest of it, sealed unto
them. But how? It is in expectation: For the Lord Jesus tries his servants in
their expectation, by their waiting upon him.

In the world (it is true) it is one thing to be a Noble-mans, or a Gentleman's
heir, and it is another thing to come to the possession of the land: he is
sure of it by his birth, by his primogeniture; he is sure that it shall be his;
but he has it not yet. He may live like a poor gentleman, and his father may
curb him, and keep him in, before he come to enjoy it; he has it not for the
present. So the Lord, he suffers those that be his heirs to want, to be
troubled and afflicted in the world: he suffers them to have no better
pittance then this. As one says, I hope for things better hereafter, and
therefore I swallow those things that are present here.

And then for the second point objected concerning Enoch and Elyas. opinions of
Divines about it. Some think, that their bodies are not in heaven, but were
buried in some place unknown; as we see in Moses death; and that they shall
rise again at the Resurrection.

This (I confess) has many grounds, and good reasons to prove it, that it is
the prerogative of Christ alone, to be in heaven. For there is none that has
descended, but the same that has ascended, which is the son of man which is in
heaven. Ephesians. 4.9, 10.


But yet the common tenent of the Church is otherwise: whereunto I must yield,
and subscribe; namely that the bodies of Enoch and Elias, and those that rose
at the Resurrection of Christ, be actually with Christ, and keep him company in
heaven. And although the ascension of those be not manifest, yet it is
agreeable to the analogy of faith, to believe it. For to what purpose should
the Apostle insist so much upon this, Heb. 11.5.
By faith Enoch was translated, if he were not after another manner, dignified,
and honored, than ordinary men? And to what purpose is it said, that Elias was
carried to heaven in a whirlewind, and a fiery chariot, if the Lord would break
his neck upon a rock, and cast him down again to the earth? This had been no
honor, but a punishment. Therefore, as their raptures are noted in the
Scriptures, so the terms are notable, and such as no man can attain unto, in
the common Resurrection. For the blessed God (which is the God of the married
and of the single life) he took out of each estate one, to accompany him in
his heavenly Kingdom. Enoch was a married man, and figured those in that
estate, that should associate and keep Christ company in heaven. Elias was a
single man, and he took him to be a symbol, and type of the single life. To
teach us, that married and unmarried both, if they be in Christ, are accepted
of him, and shall reside, and keep him company in the Kingdom of heaven.

And for those that rose at the Resurrection of Christ, it is a constant
opinion, and followed of the best Divines, that those were never admitted to
return to their bodies again: for that had been to deprive them of a greater
benefit, which they had before.

Therefore, to answer the argument, If Enoch, and Elias, and those that rose
with Christ; I say if they be in heaven, they be flesh and blood: therefore,
flesh and blood does inherit heaven; and so by consequence, the Apostles speech
does not always stand firm, when he says, Flesh and blood shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God. Therefore it is possible for flesh and blood to inherit
heaven.

For the answer of this we must understand, that Enoch and Elias had a change;
and the changing of their bodies was equivalent unto our death. And although
they were rapt up in a strange manner, yet all that was mortal in them, all
that was corrupt, it was consumed by the strong hand of God. We see the Lord
can work as it pleases him, in natural things. You see how the lightning
(sometimes) so alters things that it falls on, that it draws out all the pith
of them, all the substance in a moment. We see gold that is cast into a hot
furnace, the fire licks it up, and melts it. So we see those earthen pipes that
are used too commonly in our mouths, how soon the fire alters them, and
refines them. We see these things in nature. Now we must imagine, that the
mighty power of God can do much more for the body: so that that which was
nothing but mud before, he can make a pure crystal glass of it. It is not
impossible for nature (almost) to work this: for we see men make glass of
sand; and therefore to the operative word of God, there is nothing impossible.
It is credible, and to be believed therefore, that the Lord changed their
bodies in their rapture: that whatsoever was corrupt, and base, and dreggie in
them, it was wrought out.

shall be alive at the coming of the Lord: the Lord shall so work upon those
bodies which they shall then bear, which shall be corrupt flesh and blood; the
Lord shall work them in an instant to purity, even as the furnace of metallers
does; the furnace of those that deal in fireworks. For as the furnace
changes the substance of the thing that is cast into it, upon the instant, and
licks it up, and devoures it, if it be combustible; or if it be not
combustible, (as gold or the like) then it turns, and melts it to better
purpose, to a better burnish, to a better hue: so the all-working-hand of God
shall do. Therefore although they be in heaven, yet they are not there without
some change of body, not without the destruction of the corrupt part, whereby
it was made sinful. And though the Saints that shall live at the coming of
Christ, shall be translated, (and it is true they shall be so) but how? by the
mighty power of Gods omnipotency, that shall work them thoroughly to
perfection, and shall take away the dross, and leave nothing but that which is
pure, and sit for the glory of God to dwell in, and make his residence there.
For it is impossible, that the slaves of misery should make their residence in
the Court of glory: because of the corruption of sin that is left in them:
which must be rooted out, that they may be capable of that blessed condition.
To the which the Lord bring us. Amen.

FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection.
1 COR. 15.51. Behold I show you a mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed: in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, by the last
trump.
THere is almost no part of our Christian faith so general, but it admits of
some particular exception. 1 Timothy 1.15.
Christ came into the world to save sinners; yet not all sinners; but those
that are penitent and converted. So the Rule is, that all men must once die;
Heb. 9.27.
and that all men that are dead shall rise again. And yet this is not true of
all particulars; for there are some exceptions against this truth: yea there be
many thousands of men and women, many millions, that shall neither die nor rise
again. Yea a whole world: the world that shall stand at the coming of Jesus
Christ, shall neither die, nor rise again. But these are but a handful in
respect of former ages: and therefore some particular exceptions do not
infringe a general rule: for if there be some then, that shall not taste of
death, yet there is no man doubts, but that the common law of death, is imposed
upon all men; and every man must suffer it in his time.

And although it be a true Article of our faith, that all flesh that is dead
shall rise again to judgment; yet there are a certain number which shall be
exempted, and which shall be translated after another manner: not by way of
Resurrection, but by way of change and mutation.

And the Apostle calls this a great mystery; for indeed, as all the whole
doctrine of the Resurrection is full of mysteries; so this above the rest: to
understand what kind of change this shall be; to understand how they that live
at Christ's coming, shall be privileged, more than us that lived before them.
For it is a great privilege for a man, never to go to his grave: and he that
sleeps least in the dust, we account him (in common sense and reason) the
happiest; we esteem him the happiest man, that stays the shortest time in
death. How, therefore, these things should be conceived, it is mystical, and
hidden from our senses. All this, notwithstanding, the Apostle resolves upon
it, and says, although it be a mystery to us, yet it was not a mystery to
him: for it was revealed by the Spirit of God to him, and he reveals it, and
tells it again unto us, that there is a remnant of men that shall survive, when
Christ shall come to judgment, which shall not go to heaven, by that common
path that we go; they shall not come to see death, as we do; nor to the
putrefaction and filth which is incident to our nature; but they shall be
translated by a kind of change, which shall be unto them, as our death is to
us; and they shall not have a resurrection as our bodies have: they shall not
go under ground to rise again; they shall not be dissolved to be renewed
again. And this is the wondrous mystery, which is of all most strange: For
suppose a child that is both newborn and newly interred, (as there shall be
many thousands that shall die two or three days before the Resurrection) these
must now rise very raw out of their graves: the change then that shall now be
made upon their bodies that were so newly interred, must needs be a very
wonderful one. It is past the reason of man to conceive, but it is enough that
it rests in the power of God; and that he has revealed it to his Apostles, and
Teachers of his Church, by an infallible determination: and that it shall be
truly, and really effected upon the persons of them that shall then live:
whatsoever we think, and deem to the contrary. So now the Apostle begins
(partly) to tell us of the great world, that shall be, when Christ shall come:
and partly to prove that which he had said before.

As concerning the state of the world, he would have us to consider, that in
the latter end the Lord shall come in a moment, and he shall take things as he
finds them: and those that are then living, he shall make his own hand glorious
upon them, (as he pleases) by a kind of change and mutation: although not
according to the common decree, and course of dying.

And for the other, that it is a proof of that he had said before; we are to
consider the words that formerly he had said; that corruption shall not inherit
incorruption, nor flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Now
for that a man may thus object, and say against it, What then shall become of
them that live when Christ comes to judgment? are not they flesh and blood as
well as we? for their blood shall be corrupted, as well as ours is; and
corrupt flesh as well as we: their flesh shall be tainted with sin, and with
all kind of transgression and disobedience, as ours is, and rather worse: for
the longer the world stands, the worse it grows: therefore if flesh and blood
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, and that corrupt flesh and blood shall
not come into incorruption, what shall become of them, that Christ shall find
at his coming?

The Apostle answers that. Nay (says he) God has provided another way for
them: and that is by mutation and change: So that though they shall be flesh
and blood as we are, and corrupt flesh and blood as we are, (and perhaps
worse corrupted than we, because the last times of the world shall be the
worst) yet the Lord shall so work by his omnipotent power, as that their
corruption shall be refined and wrought out: they shall be molded by the mighty
hand of God, and by that fire that shall go through the world. For as he has
a visible fire to purify the elements, and all this visible mass which we
see: so he has another kind of fire, (a spiritual fire) to purge the bodies
of men, from their original and actual transgressions which they have
contracted: the power of God shall so work, that they shall have some Analogy
with our death: which notwithstanding they shall not die, nor be put into their
graves: for that change, shall be unto them instead of our death. And do not
think your selves so much the worse, that God favors you the less, or that he
favors them more: because they go not to their graves as you do. For the
Lord makes you by patience, subject to his holy will; he gives you that
patience, that for his sake you can be content to be deposed, to lay down your
earthly Tabernacles. And you must not vex and grive at them; for they are
never the better for it. For their change is to them as a death: although it be
not with the same obsequies, and in the same outward shows; yet in effect it
shall be the same.

Therefore, that we are done to dust; and that they never see dust; this is no
disparagement to us, nor no great comfort to them: for it shall be all one in
effect: the Lord imbalmes the memory of his Saints, and he preserves their
dust, and tells the sands of their dust, and he keeps them in perpetual
record; so that whatsoever he poures out hereafter upon another generation, it
shall not be a prejudice to those that are now dead. For the Lord goes down
with those that sleep, to the grave: he descends with them, and preserves
them, and keeps them: he numbers their hairs, he numbers the members and parts
of their bodies. And this is that mystery, which the Apostle speaks of here,
Behold, I show you a mystery. It is a great mystery, that any man should
live, and not see death: yet the Apostle tells us, that there shall be millions
of men that shall live, and yet they shall have no death: many that shall have
a mortal, and corrupt and sinful life as we have; and yet they shall not have
any death. It is a great mystery, that all the Saints should not come to life
eternal, by the same means: that is, by way of putrefaction and of
resurrection; and yet there are millions, that shall not come to life that way;
but by another way of change and mutation. Behold, I tell you a mystery, we
shall not all die, but we shall all be changed. This is the sum of the words.

Division into, 1 The time. 2 The manner and means.
Now the Apostle expresses, and explaineth himself farther, by telling the
cause, and the means, how this shall be done; for he says, this shall be
done, as concerning the time, immediately, in an instant, in the twinkling of
an eye. And as concerning the manner and the means of it, by the virtue of the
last trump. The trump that shall blow. And so the substance of it is this. The
Lord shall sound forth his Trumpet, which shall have a power to change the
bodies; that as at the first he spoke the word, Let this be made, Genesis 1.
and it was made; Let there be light, and there was light; so there shall be
another power in the voice, for the renewing and re-creating of things: as
there was a power in the voice then, to create, and make the world, so there
shall, in the re-creating, and re making of the world: that shall make a change
of all things. And as in the beginning, things that were dark before, were made
light: Let there be light, and there was light, of that which was dark before;
and that which was confused before, was made orderly and distinct, (which is
the greatest extremities that can be, light and darkness, order and confusion)
so likewise there shall be a mighty voice of God, in that sounding silver
Trumpet, that shall then blow, to change the bodies of men, from dark to light
some bodies: and shall change their thoughts, from confusion and disorder, to
be regular, and orderly. The trumpet is the voice of God, the operation of the
Almighty, which as it wrought a strange change in the Creation, so it shall
work a stranger, in the recreation, and renovation of the world. These are the
parts and parcels of the Text. Now to proceed in order, as it shall please God
to give assistance.

The first thing to be considered, is that the Church of God in respect of
this mystery, which the Apostle speaks of, has been drawn to diverse readings
and expositions of this Text. For they could not see, how it should be true,
that the Apostle says, All shall be changed, because they thought it only
belonged to the godly. But it is certain, that the ungodly shall be changed
too; for their bodies that are now corrupt, shall be then incorrupt. But how?
to sustain misery, and torment; that they had better not to be, than to be
in such a case. All the pains of hell shall not so work upon them, to dead
them, not to consume them; but they shall be able to consist in the midst of
torment. Now, the least care and trouble in the world, kills a man's heart, and
works him off: but then, God shall so change the bodies of the reprobates, that
they shall be able to endure whatsoever torment shall be laid upon them. But
because those men understood not this, they thought the change was to be taken
in a good sense, to belong only to the godly. Therefore they read it two
several ways, differing from ours.

For our reading is this, (which is so in the Original according to the Greek
copy) We shall not all die, but we shall all be changed. And so it agrees
(properly) with that which went before. For he gives an answer to a question,
that might be made. Why do you say, that corruption shall not enter into
incorruption, nor flesh and blood into the kingdom of heaven? shall not they
be corrupt flesh, that shall live at the coming of Christ to judgment? To
this the Apostle says, Indeed they shall not die, but instead of that death,
they shall have a change. So that this is an inference upon the former: and an
answer for the removal of an objection. Now (as I said) diverse parts of the
Church, read it two other ways.

The first is this, We shall all certainly die, but we shall not all be
changed. For they were careful still, to appropriate, and bring the change
unto Gods people, and inheritance: as though it belonged not to the wicked.

Another Reading is this, We shall all rise again, but we shall not all be
changed: so that still they make the negative upon the change; because they
understood not how this thing might be conceived, to belong to the good and
bad, which is the change of the bodies. Now, indeed, in their several senses,
they be all true.

For the first, that says we shall not all sleep. It is true, of the common
mass of mankind: but not of every particular body, and of every particular
age. For I told you before, that the Lord shall exempt a whole world from the
common death which we suffer. Therefore it is not true in the particulars,
that we shall all sle^pe. For there shall be many thousands of men, that shall
not sleep: that is, they shall not die, after the common manner of death.

And then for the second opinion, the second sense that Reads it, We shall all
rise again. That is false, for there are none that shall rise, but those that
were dead: and because all shall not die, therefore all shall not rise, as I
said before in the opening of the Text. So that this is the proper and true
sense of the Text; and it is that also which is in all the Greek Copies,. The
other, is only in some old Latin Copies, and is diversely taken, and mistaken
by the Fathers. This, therefore, is the Apostles meaning, We shall not all
sleep; that is, we shall not all die, after this order, and manner of death:
but we shall all be changed. Those that be in their graves shall be changed
to incorruption, to immortality, and life: and they that never come to the
grave, shall be changed another way; which shall be semblable, and answerable
unto the death that we have. So that all shall be changed, yea not only the
godly, to glory, but the reprobate, and wicked shall be changed to a
dureability, to endure the torment, which the justice of God has allotted to
them for their deserts, from all eternity. This Reading, therefore, is that
that we must rest in, as being the most proper resolution of the Apostles mind:
who giving a reason of that he had said before, that flesh and blood shall not
inherit the kingdom of God: No (says he) they shall not inherit it, but by a
kind of change and mutation, not after the fashion as we do. God has reserved
for them, another kind of translation: by mutation, not by burial, and
putrefaction as our bodies do. Now I come to the words.

The first thing is this that he says, Behold, I show you a mystery.

Mystery, is a word derived from the Hebrew, Mister, or Mistar: and it
signifies, a hidden thing, or else from the Greek word (...), (as some would
have it) of shutting, or closing of the eye; because that all eyes are shut up,
and closed to the mysteries of God: and it lies not in the power of any eye, to
understand the secrets of the Almighty. Secret things belong unto God, Deuteronomy. 29
29.
but revealed things, belong unto us, and to our children, says Moses. The
Gospel is full of these mysteries: and there is nothing so mystical and hard
to be understood, as these things, concerning the renewing, and reparation of
the world. For the things that be done, in common experience, be nothing
mystical: but those that we look to by faith, those things that we apprehend
by hope, they are all full of mysteries. But the blessed God, has revealed
them to his Apostles, (to S. Paul, and to the rest) and to the Ministers of his
Word. By reading the Scriptures, he has revealed that, which is far remote
from the sense and understanding of any mortal, and carnal man. The mysteries
of the Kingdom, must be revealed. Behold I tell you a mystery. The Lord has
told it me, and I must tell it to you again: it is a thing that I am
acquainted with, by the Spirit of God, which has revealed it to me. It was
once as strange to me, as it is to you, but God has delivered it to me, that
by my ministry it may come unto you.

Behold, I show you a mystery. The word signifies three things in the
Scripture, as Chrysostom notes.

One is, when by an outward visible thing, some other invisible thing is
signified, and represented. So in the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, where the water in Baptism, signifies the precious blood of Christ:
and the wine, and bread in the Lords Supper, signifies the breaking of the
body, and the pouring forth of the blood of that emmaculate Lamb, that was
offered up for us. Thus the Sacraments be called holy mysteries, hidden, and
secret things, which the world cannot understand, because they deride them,
because they do not affect them: but they are only known unto the chosen
ones of God. In that sense, the word is not here used: for the Apostle speaks
not of a mystery here, by any outward thing, to signify some inward matter, as
in the Sacrament.

Another way, mystery is taken for a partial, or half esteem, or conceit of
any thing we speak of. So in 1 Cor. 13. the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 13.12.
We see in a dark mystery, we see in a cloud, we see in a riddle, in a
dream. We understand in part, we know in part. As if he should say, All that
we see in the providence, and guidance of God, here in this world, is full of
mystery; some part of it we know, and some part we know not: so that the
partial knowledge of man, because it attaines not to fullness; it is called
seeing in a mystery, seeing in a dark view. But neither in that sense, does
the Apostle use it here in this place.

The third sense is (says St. Chrysostom) when a man speaks something against
the common sense, and reason, which the wisdom of man cannot attain unto and
reach; nor would never have dreamed of. And this is it, which the Apostle
speaks of here, Behold, I show you a mystery; that is, I show you a matter
which you would hardly have conceived with your selves; or that you will
scarcely believe, when I tell it to you. I tell you, that there are many men
that shall never die, nor never rise again: and yet they shall have their part
of glory, and be accepted, and come to happiness, as well as you. This paradox
which is contrary to common opinion. contrary to common sense; and which is
above the common reach, and apprehension of man, the Apostle calls a mystery in
this place. And he has great reason to put an ecce before it, behold, I tell
you, etc.

mystical in the Gospel, and in the Scripture, we ought to double our files,
to double our attention, and to raise our spirits, to hearken to that which is
so secret. For it is all our desires, (and it is naturally ingraffed in us) to
hear of news, to hear news of State, news of the greatest importance. We
seek, we labor, we travail, and we sharpen one another, to know what
reports there are in the greatest importments. Much more should we be thus
affected in the matters of God, and of our own salvation. Therefore the
Apostle satisfies us, and says, I will tell you, you seek for it, and you
long to know this: you make many doubts, and scruples in your hearts, behold, I
will resolve you in one word. The condition of the world that shall be, when
Christ shall come, it shall be far different from this. It is a mystery to
tell you; but it is infallibly true. It has been revealed unto me, by the
Spirit of God, and I will open it to you, the people of God. And the matter of
this mystery follows.

We shall not all die, but we shall all be changed. The power and strength of
death, working unequally upon mankind, it seems a great wonder, and a
mystery indeed, how that some should be happier than their fellows, to be
exempted from this common law, (which is a Statute law, Heb. 9 27.
and It is appointed for all men once to die.) And how then are these become so
happy, to escape the common doom inflicted, for the sin of Adam upon all
mankind? surely to our common sense, they are the happiest of all men: even
those that shall live in those days. For we love our flesh so well, that we
are loath to commit it to the ground: we are loath that dust should go to
dust, and ashes to ashes; but still we would continue, and be the last men
upon the earth. And this great ambition, we have so truly, and so radically in
us, that a man would give all that he had in this world, not to be taken away,
till the world be taken away. It is the greatest comfort of a man's life, to be
snatched and hurried away, when the universality goes away. It is a great
comfort, to have abundance of company in misery.

But for this the holy Ghost has taught us, patience: the Lord has appointed
our several times. They are never a whit the more happy, because they shall
not die; nor we never the more unhappy, because we shall die; for life and
death are all one, to them that are planted in the Lord Jesus Christ. For it is
he that is our advantage, he is our hope in death, that we shall attain unto
everlasting life. And whether we shall come unto it, by the way of resting and
rottenness in the grave, or by a sudden and extemporarie change and mutation;
it ought to seem all one unto us.

It is true, if God should vouchsafe us that blessing, to stand the last men
upon the earth, and to be the last generation; it were a thing very plausible,
and that which we should desire: but we ought not too much to settle upon it:
for the Lord has made it a mystery. It is a mystery when any man dies; It is
a mystery in the general, and in the particular: it is a mystery when God
calls any man unto him: and we must not wish, contrary to the will of God; but
be content with that portion, that he has destinated unto us.

Our first parents, because they were the authors of sin and transgression,
(Adam and Eve) the Lord has given them the longest time of rotting; they lie
longest in their graves, and they dwell in the pavillions, and habitations of
death the longest: because they were the first authors of wrong to us. In the
later end of the world, the Lord will incline in mercy, because he has been
long in judgment, (in the judgment of death) he will incline in the latter
generations of the world, and give them a taste of his mercy.

All things grow less by continuance and use; as a raging plague and
pestilence, when it comes first into a City, it takes away a number of people,
three or four thousand in a week: afterward, the Lord allayes that rage, and
abates the disease, that there are not so many this week, as there were the
week before; nor so many the next week, as there were this. So in this common
calamity, as the world grows in years, nearer the end of her time; so her
children, (that is, the people of God which lie in their graves) they have
less time to lie.

The first authors of sin, when Gods anger was fierce and vehement, they are
condemned to lie longer in the dust, to inhabit and dwell there. At the last,
the plague of God shall begin to slacken and to abate it self: and the anger
of God shall be mitigated, and mollified: so that those that live in the last
age, they shall have the least time of sleeping in the dust. But in these
things, we ought to make no difference: for the patience that God indues his
children with, makes up this; whether a man sleep a thousand years, or five
thousand, it is all one; because God seasons their death with a meditation of
the Resurrection; and in the mean time, inricheth the soul with the
beatificall vision; with the presence of his Majesty, and with that joy, that
cannot be comprehended in the heart of man.

We shall not all sleep. Observe again, the Apostle speaks in the first
person, We; he says We shall not all sleep; and yet he is asleep, as well as
other men: how then does he say, We shall not all sleep?

His meaning is, to take upon him the person of the Church of God, in general;
and especially that part of the Church, that shall survive, when Christ shall
come. For St. Paul is done to dust, as we shall be: and there is no difference
in that part, that went to the grave. There is no difference, but only this,
that he sleeps in the Lord: he sleeps a glorious compass; and yet he says,
We shall not al sleep. Understand that he speaks still of the ^ommon state of
the Church, and for that part of the Church which he brings the argument for.
For now he brings his argument, to answer an accusation or conclusion which
might be made against his doctrine. Some might ask him, What shall become of
those, that shall be living at the coming of Christ? Oh (says he) I am of
them: although I die before that time, yet I am of that number. For the members
of Christ, are not distinguished by time, but are all one. Abel might have
said, We; and Adam might have said, We, of the last end of the world.

This teaches us, how great the communion of Saints is: that it is not broken
by the intercourse of years and time; but that it still continues. We shall
not all sleep. The blessing of God runs on still with perpetuity; and that
which is true to one generation, is firm to another; and that which belongs to
one, is common to all. This is that communion of Saints, in the strength of
which, the Apostle uttered this phrase, (We shall not all sleep) as he does often
times in his other Epistles: We shall not do this, and we shall not do that.
Although the Apostle be dead and rotten 15. hundred years ago; yet he says,
We shall not all sleep.

But we shall all be changed. Still We, as if he were one of the men.

Here he teaches us another lesson, that the Apostle was a man, that still
looked for the day of judgment. He says, We shall all be changed. It may be,
I shall be one of the men; I know not; it may be, the trumpet shall blow while
I live; for the Lord has reserved the time, only to himself; the day of
judgment is known to no man. Nay the son of man (as he is man) knows not
when Christ shall come to judgment. Therefore I prepare my self, I look for
my change, as well as another man. As Job Job 14.1.
says, All the days of my life will I look for my change. So the Apostle
says, every man must look for this; that he may be prepared. For (perhaps) I
may be the last man; perhaps the trumpet may sound to night before to morrow:
for there is no man knows when the day of doom shall be. It is reserved in
the bosom of God alone, and we are always to look for his coming, because we
know not when he will come; whether at midnight, Mark 13.5.
or at the dawning of the day. Therefore we should always be ready with our
lamps lighted, and our loins girded, that we may be prepared when the
Bridegroom comes to enter into the Kingdom. Mat. 25.
Thus the Apostle says, we shall be changed. He speaks as if he should be one
of them; although long since he were interred in the earth; yet because he
knew not his own dissolution, or the destruction of the world, when it should
be: therefore he had it in perpetual memory; We shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed.

And what is this change? (...): how death is called a sleep, I have told you
heretofore; and I will not repeat it now. We shall be changed: that is, in
quality; for so the word signifies, even an altering of the quality, not a
changing of the substance. For the same body that suffered death for sin, the
same body shall be glorified by the grace and favor of God. As sin came upon
it, to do it to death; so the grace of God shall overflow it, to bring it to
life. For where sin has abounded, grace shall super abound. Romans 14.20.
If therefore the sin of Adam were able to mortify all to their graves; much
more shall the grace of Christ, be able to quicken all his to life everlasting.
Therefore, I say, we shall be changed: meaning, as concerning the qualities,
not concerning the substance. For that body which was once the Temple of the
holy Ghost, shall never cease to be the Temples of the holy Ghost: and those
parts that felt misery by Adams sin, they shall feel sweetness of grace, by
the bounty that shall be revealed, through Christ Jesus our Lord.

We shall all be changed. This change, how it shall be made, and in what
degrees, I have partly spoken of it before. The Apostle delivers it unto us,
when he said, It is sown in weakness, it is raised in strength. It is sown
in corruption, it is raised in incorruption. It is sown a mortal, or natural
body, but it rises a spiritual body. It is sown in dishonor, it rises
again in honor. These are the manners of the change: which having heretofore
stood upon, I will not now repeat. The change, therefore, shall be in those
four noble qualities, which the Apostle formerly described unto us. And this
change shall be wrought by the omnipotency of God, upon a matter that we
would think could not endure such a strange operation as that is. But the Lord
is able to command light to come out of darkness, and has wrought by mean
things in the world, the great impressions of his power. He therefore, is able
to work upon this weak body, and to set upon it the stamp of incorruption, of
glory, of immortality, and of strength. He is able to do it, and his power
will do it, according to his gracious promise.

We shall all be changed. All we (says the Apostle) chiefly, this change shall
be upon the Saints of God; but yet it shall not be so restrained to them, but
that in part it shall extend to all men. I told you, in the opening of the
Text, that the Reprobates shall have their part in this change: for their
bodies shall be made incorrupt and immortal, but not to glory, and beauty; not
to comfort, and consolation, as the bodies of the Saints shall; but to
extremity and misery. Like as a brick which lies in the fire continually, and
is always burning, and yet never consumed; or as that Axbestam, which the
Philosopher speaks of, which is not consumed, but is able continually to abide
the fire: so the bodies of those that do ^ot fear the Lord, and worship him;
the earthly tabernacles of theirs, shall be made durable of pain, but not
capable of honor and glory. They shall be made capable of no comfort, and yet
they shall not be spoiled, and consumed, by any pain and sorrow that shall lie
upon them.

This change, therefore, Lord that it may be for the better, and not for the
worse. That seeing there shall, and must be a change of these bodies, that it
would please the Lord to change us from these frailties and miseries that we
now live in, to the blessed joy and hope, which he has called his children
unto. And that we may be capable of this, we must desire God to make a change
of us in this life; for the Lord shall change all things; he is the changer of
us; he is unchangeable himself; all things else, he shall change. Psalm. 102.
Thou shall change the heavens, and they shall be changed; but thou art the
same, and thy years never fail. So that the Lord being only immutable, and
the same for ever; it is he that works the change upon all things. We see in
the common course of our life, what changes he works in our ages: he changes
childhood to youth; and that, to manhood; and thence to old age. A strange and
various change! In our Climates, there is Winter, and Summer; there is day, and
night, there is stormy, and fair weather. Wondrous changes be also in matters
politic and civil: he turns war, into peace; he changes peace, into
war: it is he that suffers Nation to rise against Nation; all the changes in
the world, come from God. So we must imagine in our bodies that shall be
changed, that all shall be wrought by his own hand.

teach us, first to desire God to make a happy change in our souls, before he
make the change in our bodies. For there can never be a comfortable change in
any man's body, except first there be a precedent, and a president change in the
soul. For except the soul be changed from worse to better, from wickedness
to holiness of life; it is impossible for a man to look for a good change of
his body, where there is no precedent change in his soul. Therefore, while we
are in this life, we are to look for this change. If the Lord change thy
soul from sinfulness to holiness, thou may be sure thy body also shall
be changed to happiness, and immortality, and glory. If thy soul be not
changed, but thou art worse, and worse: verily thou shall have a change in the
Resurrection; but it shall be unto dismalnesse, to fearfulness, and to
distraction; so that a man had better never have been borne, than to be
brought to such a woeful change as that. Therefore, a Christian upon this must
consider, that as he looks for a change, at that day, in his body; so he must
labor for this change before hand, of his manners, and conditions: even to
change his pride into lowliness; to turn his filthiness, into holy
obedience. God expects such a change at our hands: and we should make our
prayer to Almighty God, that he that changes all things, would take the pains
to change us: that in the midst of other things, we might not continue the
same desperate men: but be renewed in the spirit of our minds, and be changed
into another man. Ephesians. 4.23.
To put off the old man, and his wickedness, and to put on the new man, Colos.
3.9, 10.
which is made according to the image of God, in righteousness and holiness:
to change our apparel, and to put on Christ. This is the true devotion of the
Saints, and that which they should spend the time of their life in.

Oh thou that changest all things! changest the bodies of men at the end of the
world, after a miraculous manner! I beseech thee change my fortunes; change my
state: bring me out of this wretchedness, and misery, to a competencie.
Especially change my vicious estate, that I may not rot, and corrupt in it; but
that I may be brought to holiness and righteousness. Change the hearts of
mine enemies, that they may turn to me: Alter their hearts, Prove. 21.1.
thou which haste the hearts of men in thy hand, and turnest them as the rivers
of waters; change the hearts of them. Change thine own countenance, which art
angry with me for my sins. Although thou change not in thy self, yet in
respect of me, thou seem sometimes to be pleased, and sometimes to be angry.
When I do well, thou art pleasant to my conscience: when I do ill, thou art
as a Lion to me. Psalm. 18.25, 26.
With the godly, thou will show thy self godly: with the righteous, thou will
be righteous; with the perverse, thou will show thy self perverse. Therefore,
I beseech thee, change this misery of mine, change it to happiness; change my
sinful state, to a holy and blessed estate; change my spirit, which is
addicted to the world, and worldly things, to spiritual and gracious
intentions; that it may intend only the things that belong to thy glory, and
to my own souls health. God is the God of changing; and though there be no
shadow of changing in him, yet it is he that makes all the changes that are in
us; James 1.17.
both in this little world, and in the great world about us.

Now I come to the last point, a word of it, because the time is past.

The time, And the means.

The time, In the twinkling of an eye.

And the means, The blowing of a trumpet.

Therefore as my Text is short, a moment of time: so I will endeavor to speak
of it, in a moment as it were.

The Apostle says, all this shall be done in a moment, in the twinkling of
an eye. This is the greatest wonder of all the rest: the mystery was never
great, till now: that there should be such a deal of work, done in so small
a time. A moment, is nothing. The word signifies an atome, a thing that cannot
be cut into quantity: a very punctum, a mo^e in the Sun, which no man can
cut, or divide it into pieces; it is a thing that cannot be distinguished. So
his meaning is to signify unto us, the shortest time that can be. For
certainly, we must needs imagine, that these great things must require some
time. For, first of all, when the Lord began to make the world, he took some
time; he took six days, to make a distinction, and division of the work.
Therefore also it is likely, that at the later end of the world, the Lord shall
take some time; although it shall not be so much, as that was.

Secondly, again it is needful, that there should be some time; because of
the observation that Gods children must make of these actions. For if all
things should be done in a moment, and hurried up in a confusion, the children
of God should want a great part of their instruction, and a great part of their
comfort. For this is one part of their delight, and comfort, to see how the
world shall be destroyed; to see how the dead shall be raised; and themselves
to see how their bodies shall be changed, to see how the Judge shall come.
This shall be a great part of their learning, to understand these things; and
without distinction of time, it is impossible, but there would be a confusion
wrought: Therefore it is needful, that there should be an interpose of time.
Therefore the Apostles meaning, is not to be thus taken: that there shall be
no time in the doing of these things. But his meaning is this; that the time
shall be so short, that it shall not be perceived, or conceived to be
agreeable, to so great an action: The Lord shall do it so speedily, as if it
were in the twinkling of an eye. For the Apostle speaks here, out of an
earnest desire, (as he does in other Epistles, when he would set forth a thing
to the full) he speaks in a kind of holy hyperbole, in a holy excess;
therefore he says, it shall be in the twinkling of an eye, to signify,
that the Lord shall do it in such a trice, with such quickness, as it is past
all the understanding of men or Angels; that such a great thing should be done
upon such a sudden. So I take the twinkling of an eye to be understood. So to
conclude the point.

God works upon a sudden when he begins to work. Therefore this should comfort
us, that no man should despair of his well-being with God. For God is able to
work upon the sudden; he requires no time to work in. He calls some men at one
hour, and some at an other. A man that has been a wicked liver all his life
time, (perhaps threescore, perhaps fourscore years) he grows desperate in
the sight of his sins: and thinks that all time is past for recovery. No, he
is deceived: the Lord can work without time, he requires none. Have thou so
much life in thee, as the twinkling of an eye? have thou so much time as a
moment will answer to? if there be so much, there is hope still. If there be
but so much breath, and life in a sinner, that a man may say he will not die,
till he have twinckled his eye once: if there be but so much, there is hope
of mercy, still, with God.

But let us not doat upon this, and think upon the twinkling of an eye, or a
moment: but let us take every moment to come unto God: For God works in a
moment, and which moment he works in, that we know not. Perhaps this is our
moment: God calls us now. Perhaps Gods eyes twinckle now, for our good. Perhaps
they will always stand hereafter, and never any more look upon us. Let it be
our wisdom therefore, to take our moment of time: we know not how our time,
is laid up in the hands of God: we know not whether God will give us another
moment, after this. Let us therefore, apprehend this, while we have it: and let
the grace of God work, while it appears to us; and while the motion of the
Spirit offers it, let us embrace it, because we know not our own time. Indeed
in ^he twinkling of an eye, the Lord receives a sinner, but whether we shall
have so much time, as the twinkling of an eye to repent in, we know not. Let
us therefore, take our moment, for there may be a moment of sudden destruction
come upon us: and there may be a time to plague us, before our eye can
twinckle. There may come a time to dazzle our eyes, to corrupt our
understandings, and to infatuate our senses, before we can twinckle our eye. As
a man that goes under a rotten house; the house falls, and destroys him,
before he have time to look. So the judgment of God, like a mighty mountain,
it may fall upon the head of a man, and crush his brains, and work his sudden
destruction, before he be sensible of himself.

Therefore, let us in the fear of God, take all time: and let us tell our
moments. The Lord tells our times; he observes our moments: let us take our
times; and seasons. And if we be thus prepared, the Lord can work upon us, in a
moment: for he requires no time to work his great works: but he brings them to
pass in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye.

FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection.
1 COR. 15.52. In the last trump: for the trump shall blow, and the dead shall
rise incorruptible, and we shall be changed; for this corruptible, must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.
IT was a true sentence of S. Ierom Jerome.
that God has kept the greatest doctrines unto the last times: and the
chiefest and most marvailous things, be reserved for the very last end of the
world.

How the dead bodies should be raised?

How they should be raised in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye?

How there should be such a mighty collection over all the world, by the sound
of a trumpet?

What the trumpet should be? whether one, or many?

Who should blow the trumpet? who should sound it?

What should be the sense and signification, which the sound of the trumpet
should give?

And what should be the effects and operations that should follow after?

These are those wonderful doctrines, and strange mysteries, which God has
reserved to the fullness of time, to the very consummation of all things. And
although every one of us must be raised by the power of that trumpet, yet until
the time that we hear it with our ears, we shall never be able to comprehend
it in our senses, it being one of those things that are hard of understanding;
and so hard, as perhaps the very Angel himself, that shall be set to blow the
trump, does not yet know what it should be, till he come to undertake his
office. Therefore, I pray you, (that I may give you some more light to
understand this dark and obscure Text,) let us consider some other places of
Scripture, which do illustrate this.

In Mat. 24.25, 26. Mat. 24.25, 26.
our Lord Jesus speaking of this same thing, says, The son of man shall send
forth his Angels with a trumpet, with a great sound, with a great noise, and
they shall gather all the elect from the four winds, from the one part of the
heaven to the other part of it. So that which the Apostle calls here the trumpet
that shall blow, and the last trump, our Lord calls it the Angels trumpet: for
the Angels shall come in the mighty voice of a trumpet, and shall make a
collection of Gods people.

There is another place also, that something sets forth this, 1 These. 4.16. 1
These. 4.16.
where the Apostle says, The Lord shall come in (...), in a great noise, in
the voice of the Arch-angell. (...), in the noise that seamen make, when they
are weighing anchor, or when they are doing any great matter about the ship;
they all give a noise together, that their work and labor might meet in one.
This is called (...), or like the noise that Soldiers make, when they go
forth with their Army against the enemy: they come with a mighty noise, to
terrify the enemy. In that noise the Lord shall come down. He shall come
down with the voice of the Arch-angell, and with the trumpet of God shall he
descend from heaven, and the dead in Christ shall be raised first.

So that out of these two places, we have some light added to this present
place. For Christ tells us, that the trumpet shall be sounded by the voice of
an Angel. St Paul says, there, by an Arch-angell. But the Scripture uses no
great difference of those, for the word is used promiscuously, often times in the
Scripture. St. Paul says, it is the last trump; to show the difference of
that, from some other. But that shall be the last, because there shall be no
more news: there shall be no more message from God to men any more. And the
Apostle says in 2 These. 4.16. 2 These 4 16.
he tells us it shall be in (...), in a certain general navall acclamation,
and crying one to another, to help forward the common work. The general
salvation must be helped forward by the sides of men. So the Lord expresses it.

Although, indeed, he can do it by himself, he can do it by his word, and
there is no difficulty, and hardness in the matter: yet because the Lord would
have us to conceive the mighty power, and work of his right hand, he sets it
down by this. As suppose a mighty army of men were setting forward, and
exhorting one another to break through the strong holds of the enemy: or as
those that are in a ship, when they are about their necessary affairs,
stirring up each other to show themselves men. In stopping of holes and leakes,
or in weighing of anchor, or in hoysing up the sails, which is not the work
of one man to do, but of all. Therefore the Apostle uses that word, (...).

Here now we begin to come to the manner, how the Resurrection of the dead
shall be made: and how the persons shall be summoned. And it shall be, by the
voice of a strange and wondrous trumpet, that shall sound over all the world.
That as the Roman Emperors used to call their soldiers to fight, by the sound
of a trumpet, and after by the drum, which succeeded the trumpet, and is
thought to be equal unto them: so the Lord shall then bring a mighty Armado
out of the bowels of the earth, which in the conceit of men were gone: they
were given as lost for ever. But the Lord shall then bring forth such an
infinite army, as does exceed the wit, and conceit of man to imagine. For our
thousands, we shall have millions, nay for our single persons, we shall have
millions at that day. And those that shall survive at the coming of the Lord,
they shall be but a handful, in respect of the mighty army which the Lord
shall raise and remount out of the earth, which shall then pay her tribute,
with which the Lord has entrusted her.

Here, therefore, he shows the manner, how this shall be done; and he shows
the great difference between the trumpet of God, and the trumpets of men. For
though they be both taken in a simile from war, yet there is infinite
difference in the^. The trumpet of man, summons and calls only those, that are
living soldiers; it calls the living to be at such an hour, present in the
battle, to follow their colors, and to keep their ranks. But the trumpet of
God, calls the dead themselves, by a strange sound. It shall penetrate the
bowels of the earth, and shall speak unto dust and ashes which is dissolved to
nothing, to rise, and come in presence before the Emperor, to come before God.

Again, there is another marvailous difference. When the trumpets of men
sound, then the armies gather together, and kill and murder each other: there
is nothing but death and murder, slaughter, vastation and destruction. But the
trumpet of God, it calls men to no death, but to life, and sense, and glory,
and abilities. So contrary is the Trumpet of the Lord, to the trvmpet of man!
and yet it has some similitude, and diverse conveniences with it: which that I
may in order observe.

Division into 6. parts.
We will first consider, what this trumpet is.

last trump, in respect

trumpet shall do, when it shall sound, for the trumpet shall sound. Origin
Origin.
translates it well, the trumpet shall trump: so the Greek words have it. That
is, it shall sound after one manner, after the music that God shall appoint to
sound out of such a hollow, long, musical instrument; and what shall be the
effect of it in the substance and the matter: for it shall be a voice
significant, that men may understand it.

Fourthly, the effect and operation of it: that so trumpet shall sound over the
whole world, presently the dead shall rise incorruptible. The very wicked
themselves, shall then be incorruptible, as concerning the integrity and
perfectness of their members: but not as concerning the happiness and joy,
which the children of God shall be possessed of.

Fifthly, the Apostle shows us the reason of all corrupt body, to enter into
incorruption, unchanged and because also, that congruity stands with divine
justice, that that body which had been before corrupt, should be invested with,
and put on incorruption, that every man might take, and receive his reward, or
punishment, according as he has done in this corrupt flesh.

Lastly, we are to consider the sweet metaphor in to put on. Where the Lord
shows us, that now we have the rags of corruption upon our backs; we have this
flesh: but instead of that, God will give us that blessed garment, that fine
linen spoken of Rev. 19. Rev. 19.8.
that fine silk, that is, the justification of Christ, which shall be unto us,
as the soul is to the body; a perpetual rich vesture, to keep us from the
wrath of God, and to preserve us in eternal happiness for ever. Of these
things briefly, and inorder, as it shall please God to give assistance. 1 Part.
What Trumpet this is?


First, concerning the word here used, a Trumpet.

That the word trumpet does signify either properly the instrument musical,
for the gathering of men together; or metaphorically, something else that does
the like office, every man easily understands. But in which of these senses it
is here to be used, it is not easily determined. For it is very likely, that
indeed the meaning of the holy Ghost is, that there shall be properly a
trumpet, that shall sound: a very material trumpet; although, perhaps, it
shall not be of the same matter and metal, that ours is of; yet
notwithstanding it shall be some kind of instrument, that God shall prepare to
make the like sound, as a trumpet does. And that this is likely to be true, the
letter will carry it. The letter must never be shunned, except there be some
kind of inconvenience, that will follow upon the literal exposition. For
where there is no absurdity or inconvenience, we are bound in conscience to
expound the Scriptures in a literal sense: and where it includes any absurdity
we are to leave the literal sense, and to take another which is analogicall.
But here, because the letter will carry it; and chiefly, because the Apostle
repeats it twice, it is a great argument, that it shall be a true material
trumpet. For first, the Apostle says in the verse going before, the last
trumpet: and then he shows the effect of this trumpet, it shall blow, or
sound. Our Lord Christ uses the same word in Mat. 24. Mat. 24.31.
and St. Paul expresses the same in 1 These. 4. 1 These 4.16.
Therefore it is an argument, that properly and truly it is to be understood a
trumpet, as we in our sense do apprehend it; although the matter, and effects,
and use of it, be higher then any trumpet in the world.

Again, another reason is this; When the Law was given in Exodus 19. Exodus
19.16.
there was a trumpet with a high shrill voice, which increased more and more. I
demand what that was? Surely it was not made of metal, or any artificial
composition, as those that we have; yet the Lord made it in the clouds, even
the sound of a trumpet: he made it more exact, and perfect by his power, than
any man can do by art and invention. Therefore, as then at the promulgation of
the Law, there was a true distinct noise of a trumpet sounding, that the people
perceived, and conceived it to be the voice of a trumpet: so likewise, when the
new law shall be given; that is, when the fullness of all things is come, at
the Resurrection of the dead, there shall be a created voice, which shall be
loud; and it is likely, that it shall be a true material trumpet.
Notwithstanding, perhaps, not after the common frame of men: yet it shall be so
ordered, as that a man may distinguish it, and say, it is the voice of no other
instrument, but of a trumpet.

Lastly, it appears by this, in that the great God is able to make one flash
of lightning to shine from the east to the west in a moment; and he is able to
make one thunder, to crack about in the air, and all the air to continue it
to the end of the hemisphere. Therefore it is also most probable, that the Lord
shall make the noise, and sound of a trumpet to be dispersed and diffused over
the face of all the earth; and not only over the one hemisphere, but over the
other also, where our Antipodes lie buried, and do look for the Resurrection,
as well as we.

But although I think this to be the better, and more sound interpretation,
because it agrees with the letter, and because also it agrees with other
Scriptures. As that the law was given in Mount Sinai, with the sound of a
trumpet; and that the gathering of the people also, Numb. 10.2.
the convocating of of them, was by the sound of the two silver trumpets.
Although these things lead me to imagine, that it shall be a true material
trumpet that God shall make; that is, of a matter of his: although not of the
same matter that men's trumpets are of, but shall be a trumpet made after the
wisdom and power of God: yet the Fathers (most of them) go another way. They
say, it is a metaphorical trumpet, a trumpet by way of allusion. Because great
Kings, and Lords, and Princes, have their trumpets go before them, to signify
their coming: so the Son of God, that shall come as a great King, he shall
send his Angels before him, that shall give notice of his coming: and the
Angels shall gather all together to the Judgment seat; and when they are
gathered together to the Throne of Judgment, then the Lord shall come down;
then the Judge shall come.

So they will have the sound of the trumpet to be, before Christ come down
from heaven. And they have thought, that from the top, from the heavens, unto
the place where Christ shall sit to judge, (which shall be near the earth) in
all that space, the elect shall be gathered from the four winds of the earth,
they shall be gathered into all that space of the air.

To understand this the better, we are to remember what trumpets we read of
in the Scripture, that hence we may see what shall be the use of this trumpet
we now speak of.

There was first a trumpet for counsel, as we may see in Numb. 10. Numb. 10.2.
The Lord bade Moses make two silver trumpets, wherewith they might call the
people together. And when one of them blowed, that was a token that the Elders
should sit in Counsel, Army and people of God: when one trumpet sounded
single, it was for matter of counsel.

There was another trumpet, which was the trumpet of danger. As when there was
any great mischief, any sedition, or uproare in the tents; or when the enemy
made an invasion; or when there was any plague, or sudden judgment, then both
the trumpets. The two silver trumpets, which Moses had made, were appointed to
be sounded; and then, not only the Elders, but also all the people were to
run together at that common calamity, to see what the matter was. As if there
were fire in any of the Tents, both the trumpets were to sound: and all the
people to assemble together.

The third trumpet, was the trumpet of banqueting, or of feasting. And that
was in the month of September especially: in which month, Ver. 10.
one of the feasts is called, the feast of Trumpets. There is also the feast of
Tabernacles, and the feast of Expiration, in the same month: yea and all the
feasts and banquets that they had, throughout the year; they were to celebrate
them, by the voice of the trumpet: the trumpet sounding now, in a plain tune,
or plain accent.

The fourth trumpet, was the trumpet of removeall, when they were to remove out
of their tents. For always when the tents were to remove, at the first sound of
the trumpet, Verses 5. and 6.
the quarter of Judah rose, and marched forward: At the second sound, the
quarter of Ephraim: At the third sound of the trumpet, the quarter of Dan
removed. And so these sounds of the trumpet were made, not with a plain tone,
with a common accent, but with a descant. For the word is (...) out of which
word, Tarantara, which is the proper voice of a trumpet, is derived. Therefore
the best and most learned Divines, turn those places Tantararizabitis,
according to the proper voice of the trumpet, For they were to use descant, and
division, and flexure, when they were to remove from place to place.

Matthew. 6.2.
The fifth trumpet, is the trumpet of Manifestation; of which Christ says,
Matthew. 6. When thou give thine alms, blow not a trumpet, that is, make it
not manifest to all the world, neither be arrogant, and vaineglorious of that
thou do: but do thine alms in secret, let not thy left hand know, what thy
right hand does. So that the trumpet of manifestation, is a metaphorical
acception; and according to that, the Fathers expound this word here, of a
trumpet.

Isay 58.1.
The sixth trumpet we read of, is the trumpet of the Gospel, of which it is
said, Isai. 58. Lift up thy voice like a trumpet; be not silent, but speak
aloud: Tell Jacob of his sins, and Judah of her transgressions. This is that
trumpet which has blown ever since the ascension of Christ, and shall blow
till his descension again from heaven to Judgment.

The seventh and last, is the trumpet of judgment; the last trump, as the
Apostle calls it. Now in all these trumpets, there is a reference to this one
trumpet, which we are to speak of. For it is certain, in this great
judgment, there is a trumpet of counsel; the Lord himself shall enter into
counsel with the blessed Persons in the Trinity: he shall (as it were) enter
into counsel about the destruction of the world, about the collection of his
Saints, about the eternal doom, what shall befall them, and how they shall
be. And although the things are counseled of him before, and he knows from
ever^^sting: yet it shall be then published, it shall be acted now. As the
counsel that a King gives for war, or other intendments, which way he may
best invade the enemy, and which way he may best work his own designs.

And so for the trumpet of danger, in war. Now the Army of God shall be
summoned every where, by his mighty command. He shall gather his chosen, and
they shall stand at his right hand; and he shall collect by his power the
reprobates to stand at his left hand: and accordingly he shall doom those his
enemies. Luke 19.27,
Bring those mine enemies before me, that would not suffer me to rule over
them, and slay them here before my face.

And it is the trumpet of feasting too. For there was never such a Supper as
that shall be; the Supper of the Lamb. Apoc. 19.9.
Blessed are they that are called to the marriage Supper of the Lamb. I say the
bidding to the supper of the Lamb, is nothing else, but the fullness of glory,
which the Lord shall invest his children with, at his coming to judgment.
This trumpet shall call us to that supper; to that banquet, which shall be a
continual feast, to last forever.

And for the trumpet of Tents, the trumpet of Removeall; it is manifest it
shall be so. For there is no such removing in the world, as that shall be. For
some men to remove to hell, and other some to remove to heaven: it shall be the
greatest kind of progression, that ever was taken. So that this last trumpet,
has an emblem or signification of that also.

And for the trumpet of manifestation, we know it is that. The Lord shall
manifest at that day who are his; and he shall manifest every thing, tha^ has
been wrought: were it never so close, and secret, it shall then be brought to
light. And as the face of man, or woman is known one of another, by their
aspect, now; so then, the thoughts and secrets of the hearts shall be mutually
known, and understood one by another. That is the light, that shall reveal
all things; it is that that shall manifest all things, that is the trumpet of
manifestation. As Christ says, Matthew. 6.2.
Blow not a trumpet before thine alms, do not manifest it. The manifestation
of things indeed, never comes, till the end of the world: and then, every thing
shall be manifested. Those things that are hidden from the eyes of men, now;
either by the policy of men, or by the connivence of God, (as there be many
things that are) though now they were never seen by any eye; then they shall
be manifest, and laid open.

And for the trumpet of the Gospel, this trumpet shall be truly that: for
this trumpet shall be the fulfilling of all the Gospel. When the Lord shall
gather by the last trump, those whom he has raised before, by the trumpet of
his doctrine; by the holy trumpet of the Scriptures; by preaching of the Word,
by the Sacraments; them that he has rowzed by baptism, and by his gracious
admonitions in this world, he shall then bring upon them another sound, which
shall tend to the like effect, to the same purpose, to put them into glory,
which his voice had raised before unto the holy war, against the devil, and
the flesh, and the world, in this life. So that this trumpet that we here
speak of, is the miracle of all miracles: it concludes all that was before it,
it comprehends all perfection that may be imagined. It is a voice magnificall,
a voice angelical, it is a voice terrible, it is a voice that has life in it,
a voice that shall give life. It shall be a voice so full of majesty, as that
all the world shall be taken with amazement, and astonishment: the best
children of God shall not be without fear, says St. Cyprian, Cyprian.
at that day. And says St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
Woe is me, when I think of that fearful day. For although we should be so
prepared for it, Romans 13.11.
as that we should lift up our heads because our salvation draws nigh, yet
says he, I would see any Saint of God, that dares look there, with a
confident countenance. For though our justification by Christ, shall give us
comfort, yet love and fear, shall be mixed, and mingled together, a filial
fear shall possess men, in the hearing of the silver trumpet. It must needs
therefore, be full of majesty, and terror. As St. Austin says, Aug.
You know, brethren, that a trumpet has not so much delight in it, as fear,
and trembling: having naturally a kind of music in it, which makes the body
to shake and shiver in the parts of it; and that most of all separates a man
from himself. So shall be the voice of this great and mighty thunder, which
God shall give, that it shall sound in the manner of this musical instrument:
of this special instrument, that gave the Law, and that set forth the
Prophesies; and that was used at the solemn feasts. It shall be full of
majesty, and full of comfort, and joy; and yet it shall be with fear, and
terror to the best of them that shall hear it. For as the voice of God was so
great, when the Law was given, that Gods own people could not endure it; Let
not God speak unto us, Exodus 20.19.
but let Moses speak: Let not God speak to us any more, for then we die for
fear, the chosen people of God, were feign thus to say. So at that day, those
that be the most sanctified; although they shall be full of joy in one
respect, that their redemption is consummate in Christ; yet that joy shall
consist in a mixture, and mingling of fear. For it is befitting Gods children,
as they love him, so to fear him: to fear him in love, and to love him in
fear: to yield unto him all submission, and reverence, that they may be
reconciled, and made one in those contrary passions, fear, and love; which is
a sweet union, and reconcilement in the contemplation of one, and the self
same God.

To conclude therefore, this point, concerning this trumpet, and what it is,
One says, That the trumpet, is properly a priestly instrument; a holy
instrument, for holy purposes. But he spoke this above his clement. Chrysostom.
St. Chrysostom says, The presence of the Lord Jesus Christ, is this trumpet;
this silver trumpet, which shall pass through the world. And St. Theophilact
his scholar and follower; Theophil.
he says, This trumpet is nothing else, but the will of God, the command of
God, which shall run through the world, as it is said in the Psalm, Psalm.
147.15.
the word of God runs swiftly, and fills all the world. And St. Augustine in
his Epistle to Honorius, Aug ad Honoriu^.
says he, In the name of a trumpet, the Lord would have us to understand some
most evident, and rare thing. And he says in his Epistle to Constantius, Aug.
ep. ad Constantium.
not knowing what to determine of it; In the last trump, that is, that sign
which God shall give last to the earth, whatsoever sign that shall be. St.
Ambrose Ambros.
thinks it is nothing but the coming of the Lord; signified by the noise of a
trumpet. As Princes, and great men, and noble men, when they come to a Town,
have it divulged, and manifested before they come, by the sound of a trumpet.
So this same sound of this trumpet, here spoken of, is nothing else, but the
manifestation of the presence of the Son of God. Genebrard Genebrard.
upon the Canticles says, The trumpets of God are of two sorts; the one, is
paginall, the trumpet of his word; which is written clearly in this life. The
trumpet here, is manifested by paginalls, by leaves; that is to say, the holy
Scriptures, contained in so many books. But the trumpet at the coming of
Christ, it shall not be in pagina, but in praesentia: In the presence of the
Son, with the voice of the Son himself. According as it is said, Ioh. 5.
Ioh. 5.25.
there are many that sleep in their graves, and monuments; that shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and shall rise again.

Thus the Fathers seem to incline to that opinion, that the voice of the
trumpet shall be metaphorical: that it is an allusi^n and a figurative speech.
But howsoever, this it is most certain, that it shall be a sensible voice
which shall be heard: that as St. Ierom Jerome.
says, they shall hear with their ears, and go along with their feet, unto
the tribunal seat of judgment. The best, therefore, that we can say and
conclude of it, is this, (according as we see but in part, 1 Cor. 13 9.
we understand but in part, in a dark riddle, while we live in this world,
the Lord shall then create a voice in the air, an audible voice in the air,
which shall run through all parts and passages of the world, and it shall be so
mighty, and so powerful, as that the dead bodies in the grave shall hear it.
Every thing hears, when God speaks. The waters heard the voice of Christ; the
winds heard the voice of Christ; the devils heard his voice, the rocks and
stones heard him. So there is an obedientiall power in every thing created: and
it cannot but hear, when God speaks. This is that trumpet: that is, a voice
that shall be modulate, and framed whether it shall be to descant, as it is
very likely; or to a plain tune. But howsoever, it shall be a voice, and a
voice like the sound of a Trumpet, which God shall frame in the body of the
air.

Who shall blow this Trumpet?
But who shall blow this trumpet? who shall sound it?

Here the curiosity of man, must lay the hand up. on the mouth, and surcease.
It is a damnable thing, for a man to enquire into that, which God has not
reveiled. Some of the Fathers have been inching and questioning about this
point, who it shall be? but it is certain, it shall be the voice of an
Arch-angell. Although the voice be properly the voice of the Son of God, yet it
is not meet, that the voice should come from him: it is not meet, that the
voice should be the immediate voice of the Son of God, that should blow in
the air; but as the voice of a Crier or Herald, when the King comes to a
place, is said to be the voice of the King, because he cries and proclaims not
his own matters, but the Kings: So the Angel that shall be employed in this
business, he is said to utter the voice of God, and the voice of Christ; from
whom that which he utters, receives all the efficacy and power. And though it
be the voice of an Angel, and by the ministry of an Angel, yet it shall be
by the ordinance, and power, and authority of the Son of God, that shall make
this voice. Therefore the Fathers resolve upon two, which they think shall
sound the trumpet: Michaell or Gabriell. They think Michaell shall sound it,
because he is the Prince of Angels: and in the Revelation, Michael and his
Angels, Rev. 12.7.
fought against the devil and his angels. But this is unlikely; for Michael
there, is to be understood of Christ the Son of God, that fought with the
power of satan upon the cross.

But I rather incline to the other, that it shall be Gabriell the Arch-angell:
who was he only that brought the news of Christ's first coming, in Luke 1.
Luke 1.
As he was used by God, to bring tidings of Christ's Incarnation, that he
should be borne of a virgin, in his first coming: so it is probable, that he
shall be employed by the same Majesty again, to bring news of the last
coming of the Lord, when he shall come to judgment. Concerning these things,
I will not be too inquisitive; neither would I have you to be too curious: for
an Angel, or an Arch-angell it must be, for the word is so.

2 Part. Why called the last trump.
I come now to the next thing, Why is it called the last trump? for if he call
it the last trump, it has reference to some others that were before it.

And so it is true: for those that were before, were figures of this last
trump: those seven kind of trumpets: Theoph. Oecumenius. Rev. 8. and 9.
and especially, as Theophilact and Oecumenius observe, St Paul has reference
to Rev. 8. there are seven trumpets, and they all sounded: and presently there
came vialls of wrath upon the world, presently upon the sound of those
trumpets. So St. Paul tells us, that there shall come trumpets between the
time that he wrote and spoke these things; and between the last trump that
shall sound, there shall be other trumpets then this. That is, those seven
before spoken of, which in the time of the Roman Empire, the Lord uttered
himself by expressing his will in them; and also in the time of the Christian
Empire.

And indeed, in the time of all Christian Kings, these trumpets have blown;
and indeed these silver trumpets blow daily, if we could understand what were
the right meaning of them, and what the news of them were. And if there do
not one of these trumpets blow now, a man cannot tell what to determine, when
there are such common combustions in the world; when there are such wars and
rumors of wars; and such risings of one Prince against another; when there is
such common effusion of christian blood. Certainly this is a rare shrill
trumpet, which should be wisely, by the cautelous and diligent hearing of every
christian soldier observed, to prepare them for the battle, to prepare them
for the day of the Lord, because it cannot be long, before the last trump blow.

These trumpets, indeed, go before, but they are signs that the last trump is
coming after; and perhaps it shall come at the heels, and overtake the
former, before we be aware. Aug.
For as St. Austin says well, the Trumpet uses not to sound at midnight, but
in the morning, and at the evening: so (says he) the Lords trumpet sounded in
the morning, when he gave the law, at the promulgation of the law, at the
building of the Tabernacle, at the dedication of the Temple, it sounded in the
morning of the world. And now it sounds at the evening, at the later end of the
world; it begins now to sound, if men will open their ears to entertain it.
But for the other trumpet, (says he) it may well be, that the last trump of
all shall sound at midnight, that when men are quiet and secure, and give
themselves to profound sleep, that then the Lord may take them napping: that
as they have been careless and negligent in his ways before, so God shall
take the advantage, and come upon them upon the Sabbath day, and upon the
Sabbath day at night, when men use quietest, and with greatest repose, to lay
themselves to rest. It is the last trump. And why is it called the last trump?

Because God will have no more messages to man. When the trumpet has sounded,
there shall be no more news, nor no more intercourse between God and man. Till
that trumpet sound, there is a daily intercourse between heaven and earth: the
Lord sends us news by his word, he sends us news by his Sacraments, by his
punishments and afflictions, by his blessings and fatherly preservations. The
world is full of his gracious trumpets, which are ever sounding, either to make
us better, and to bring us from sin; or else to discourage and harden us, if
we go on in our ill doings. Still there is an intercourse between God and
man; but when the last trump shall blow, all such intercourse shall cease:
Those that have done well shall go into life, Mat. 25.46.
and shall have the perfect vision of God, without any more news or message
from God to them: and those that have done ill shall go into everlasting fire,
and shall have a continual privation, and absence of God, without any hope of
seeing his face any more. This is called the last trump, because that after the
trumpet has blown, there shall be no more change, in the dealings and
affairs between heaven and earth. I see the time almost past.

3 Part. What sound the trumpet shall give?
I come therefore to the next thing, what the trumpet shall sound? For if the
voice shall be sensible, then it must needs have some signification, and must
utter something, that men must understand. For it is not enough to say, that it
is a voice of a trumpet, an inarticulate, and general sound, and no word: for
it cannnot be so. And though the trumpet of God shall sound, it shall not be so
dull, but it shall have a more sweet and significant impression; to teach men
what they have to do. Therefore the Fathers have gone so far, as to express
what words the Trumpet shall sound. St. Jerome, Jerome.
and some of the Fathers with him, say, the words that the trumpet shall sound,
shall be, Arise ye dead and come to judgment. Therefore, says he, I am so
possessed with this, I am so possessed with the assurance of this, that to what
place soever I go, if I go to my study, if I walk, if I eat, or drink, if
I lie down to sleep, whatsoever I incline my self to, me thinks I ever hear
in my ears, the voice of the trumpet sounding, Arise ye dead and come to
judgment. But the holy Father may seem to speak, rather out of a high
strain of fervent zeal by allusion, than of any certainty that the trumpet
shall so sound. Theophilact Theophilact.
says, the trumpet shall sound to this effect, Draw near, for the Judge is at
hand, the Judge is before the door, prepare your selves. As Isay says, The
voice of a crier, Esaias 40.3.
Prepare you the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. This indeed is more
agreeable to the Scriptures. John Baptist that prepared the way before Christ,
he was a type and figure of the Angel Gabriel, that shall found the trumpet to
prepare the way of the Lord: and shall give a sensible and significant note,
what he would have men to do. But this it is sufficient for us to point at,
because we know not the certainty of it. It shall be such a voice, as shall
give sufficient warning: it shall be a voice, that shall be sensibly perceived:
the intendment of it shall run over all reasonable ears: there is none shall
be so deaf, or so dull, but they shall hear and apprehend the meaning of it.
But what word it is, whether it shall be articulate or no, it is not left for
us to enquire after.

Howbeit we honor the invention of the holy Fathers, because they tend
something to the rectifying of manners, and for the stirring up of men's
affections for this purpose.

4 Part. The effect.
Now follows the effect and operation of it: when the trumpet shall blow The
dead shall rise incorruptible.

This is that wondrous effect that the trumpet of God has: this is the great
difference between the trumpet of God, and the trumpets of men. For they work
death and destruction when they blow, and sound to the wars: but this trumpet
of God shall sound to life and immortality. But this shall not be in the power
of the instrument, but it shall have this force by the power of God, and from
the power of Christ, unto whom God has given all judgment and power, to raise
and to change the quick and the dead.

But what is this that he says, The dead shall rise incorruptible?

Some think it is only meant of the Saints, because all this discourse of the
Resurrection, as Beza Beza.
and some other Divines observe, is restrained to the Saints. But the former
part of the Apostles discourse, is more large: and so also may this be taken;
that not only the bodies of the Saints shall be incorrupt, but also the bodies
of the wicked.

But how?

Says St. Austin, they shall be in the fullness of perfection, of the parts,
and members; they shall all rise incorruptible; they shall have bodies that
shall never be obnoxious to corruption and destruction, but shall last and
endure in the fire for ever. They shall have a brain, and a wit, that shall
never be dissolved; they shall have a memory, that shall never forget their
wickedness, and sins that they have done, and the blasphemies they have
committed against God, and the abominable actions they have done in the
tabernacle of this flesh. They shall have the proportion also of men and women,
in their true frame, and proper stature; and not as being lame, or blind, or
the like, as perhaps some of them died; But they shall be raised in the
fullness and perfection of their members, and parts: howbeit it shall be so, as
it may most dispose them to eternal torments, that they may be able to endure;
that is all the reason why God raises them uncorruptible, that they may be
able to endure the corrupting causes. For those causes that seem to corrupt
any thing in the world, as sorrow, and fear, and malice, and vexation, and
torture of the flesh, which a man would think in time, would bring any thing to
an end: yet they shall not be able to corrupt them. Therefore says St. Austin,
Aug.
though they shall be raised incorruptible, yet after a sort, they shall be
corrupted by the pain and torment which they shall endure. But how? Not to be
brought to a worstnesse or destruction, but they shall have an eternal life to
suffer misery.

Let us labor therefore, God Almighty, to work our incorruption, to be not an
incorruption to misery, but to glory: and that he would so work us to
himself, as that we may be in a continual fruition and possession of his
sweet and gracious presence, not to be molested and tormenled with the absence
of God, with the loss of heaven, and the joys thereof, which the damned
spirits think, if they had but a moment to live and repent them again, they
would regaine the things they have lost. And they cry out damnation to
themselves, that they were so foolish to lose the time which might have been so
employed, as that they might have been made masters of heaven, and possessors
thereof. The dead shall rise incorruptible.

And we shall be changed. That is, we, all those that belong unto Christ.
Where we may observe, the Apostle still uses the we: although the Apostle
himself were not changed, but after the manner of the common change, by death.
But the Apostle does this, partly, as I told you the last time, because of the
common communion of the Church of God: whereas every man may say we: every man
may take his neighbor with him: we have all one head, and we are all members
of one body. And chiefly the Apostle so speaks, because he thought the day was
near approaching, and he prepared himself every where. He thought that the
time, and the day wherein he wrote this, wherein he spoke this, he thought
that might have been the last day, and therefore that he might have been one
of the number; and therefore he says we.

Now this change (as I said before) is commonly taken for the better: but it is
true also of the Reprobate. After that manner of change we speak of, they
shall be changed from a state mutable, to immutability: that which they are
when they rise, they are for ever. They are not so now, for they follow the
change of nature; they are subject to mutability, and variety; seven years
make a great alteration in a man's life; and in the best life in the world, more
years makes a greater impression. But the Lord shall then raise them to a
settled state, to a state of incorruption; and whether they have glory, or
whether they have misery, it shall be without change, it shall be in a kind of
eternity, as the Lord himself is eternal. I should now come to the Reason
which includes all; and to the sweet metaphor, where the Apostle expresses
himself in these words, We must put on. But I must reserve it till the next
time.

FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection.
1 COR. 15.53. For this corruptible, must put on incorruption; and this
mortal, must put on immortality. When this corruptible, shall have put on
incorruption; and this mortal, shall have put on immortality: then shall be
fulfilled the speech, that is written, Death is swallowed up into victory.
5. Part. The Reason.
IN these words the Apostle renders a Reason of that former change and mutation,
which shall befall the Saints of God. For this whole doctrine of the
Resurrection, it must be so expounded of the Saints especially: howbeit it may
be also further extended, even to the wicked and the reprobates. For they shall
have a kind of change; as being made from mortal, immortal; and from
corrupt, to be incorrupt: although it shall be for their punishment, and for
their greater ignominy; yet it shall be true immortality, and a true
incorruption that they shall receive; But as Beza, and the later, and best
Divines hold, it is fittest for us to tie these things, and to understand them
of that sanctified company, to whom the Lord has promised, and will also
vouchsafe, a glorious Resurrection. They must, therefore, as it is said before,
be all changed: and they must be changed presently upon the sound of the
trumpet, by the power of Almighty God: of which things, I will now make no
repetition.

Now because it might be questioned, what need we be changed? we desire
rather to go to God. In this body, we desire super-vestiri, to be over-clad
rather with the glory of the Almighty, then to be naked, and to be stripped of
this flesh, that we have here. We would go to Christ, but we would not go
the same way to Christ, that Christ came to us: for he came to us by death, but
we would go to him still without death. Therefore this the Apostle resolves
us; and teaches us that which he said before in part, That flesh and blood
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: that is, corrupt flesh, and blood; by
reason of the corruption that is in it, by reason of the tainture of sin, it
is subject to change, and mutability. For it is impossible, till it be
reformed, till it be cast into the earth, and mouldered to dust; and that it be
prepared by the hand of God in the ground: until then, it is incapable of
heaven. So here he says in the affirmative, Oportet, it must needs be so; it
must needs be, that this mortal, must put on immortality, and this corruption,
must put on incorruption. So when he has given his resolution, that such a
thing must needs be; then he lifts them up to the expectation of the time, when
this glorious change shall be made. He tells them that it shall be, and
whenever it shall come to pass (as certainly it must be fulfilled) then
shall also be fulfilled that glorious saying in the Scriptures, (wherewith he
confirms himself and his authority, and is not content to speak, as an
Apostle only, out of his own Apostolical power, which he had received from
Christ: but he also fetches, some ground and help besides his testimony, from
the Prophets that were before him) then, says he, shall be fulfilled that
happy word, that glorious word, spoken of by Isay as the most, and best Divines
think, or by Hosea as some others think. And the word is this, Death is
swallowed up into victory, that there is nothing left now in the tents of
Christ's holy Church, but the voice of triumphs and trophies over death: and
consequently, over hell, over sin, over sickness, over all infirmities and
discontent whatsoever: For if Death be swallowed up in victory; the rest are
much more swallowed up. For that is the greatest, and the last enemy of all:
and if that be confounded, the rest must needs perish with it. There shall then
be such a complete victory, as that look whatsoever a man casts his eye on;
he shall see nothing but victory, and conquest, and glory, and life, and
righteousness, and holiness; in stead of this wickedness, and misery, and
distemper, and accidents whereto we are subject in this life.

Then shall be fulfilled. So he notes unto us the goodly, and glorious time, in
which the Saints shall have their full consummation and bliss. Then; then it
shall be fulfilled, which is now prophesied, and promised: It shall be made up
then, which is now but expected: It shall then be fulfilled in all, which is
now accomplished but in one: the Lord Jesus has it alone in one. Now it is in
the first fruits, then it shall be in the whole Harvest: then it shall be made
good to the whole Church, which is now only performed to the head of the
Church: that Death is swallowed up into victory. This I take to be the sense of
the words. To proceed in order,

First, we are to consider it as the words lie: and not as the logical rule
would carry us. For logically, we have,

A subject,

A predicate,

And a Vinculum or Copulate.

The subject, is corruption: This corruptible.

The predicate, is a certain change it must have: this corruptible must take,
and put on incorruption.

And the copulate, is the oportet, it must needs be so: and this mortal must
put on immortality.

And then after that, there is a blessed comfort that the Church of God shall
receive. In the mean time she receives it, as being certain that it shall
be: but then she shall receive it, as a full payment at that time. That
Scripture which said, Death is swallowed up into victory; It shall then be
utterly accomplished. Wherein we are to consider,

First, that the Apostle confirms and strengthens himself by Scripture: by
that which is written.

Secondly, where it is written.

Thirdly, the substance, and matter that is written: That Death is swallowed up
into victory. Where again we are to consider three terms.

First, what that is that is swallowed? Death, and all evil and mischief.

Secondly, the term to which it is swallowed or consumed? to victory.

Thirdly, the efficient cause, who swallows it, and what it is that swallows
Death? that must needs be understood the death of the Son of God: the death
of Christ swallows up the death of men, into an absolute victory.

And then the answer to that question, How is Death swallowed up in victory:
seeing it every day swallows us up, and consumes us; how then is Death
swallowed up himself? And that is to be answered in these words; because the
time is not yet come, When this corruption shall put on incorruption, and this
mortal shall put on immortality, then shall be fulfilled this saying. Every
thing is in its own time: when all things are done, that should be done; when
all things are accomplished, that the Lord shall send before: then that shall
come after. But we have it now, only in hope; we have it, only in the first
fruits: we have it in some part, we have it in the head: then, we shall have it
in all the members. We have it in some few, that were raised with Christ to be
witnesses of his Resurrection, and they are pawnes for all the rest. When this
corruption has put on incorruption, and this mortal, etc. Of these parts
briefly, and in order, as it shall please God to give assistance.

And first, to follow the order of the words. He says, this corruptible, and
this mortal: speaking of the bodies of men. For the soul of man, is neither
corruptible nor mortal: as heretofore we have touched; Therefore those that
understand these things of the Resurrection of the spirit; of the Resurrection
of the soul, from vice to newness of life; they are extremely mistaken: and
they abuse the word of grace which is here propounded unto us. For the Apostle
speaks of that part which is corrupt and mortal; that the glory of God shall
be showed upon it: and he says, this very body; this Identicall thing; this
Idem numero; not another body in stead of this; but this, which is now so
corrupt. The body shall remain the same, although the accidents, and
qualities, shall be rare, and glorious, which shall accrue unto it: yet it
shall be one, and the self same body. As S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom.
the self same it shall be, in the self same inches and quantity: although
the qualities shall be altered, and it shall have gracious indowments; yet they
shall be the same substance, they shall be the same bodies.

And again, it is to be observed that he uses two words together, he
repeates it: This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must
put on immortality. And this he does, not without very good reason. For it is
no vain repetition of the same thing twice over, it is not S. Paul's purpose
nor his custom, so to do: but he notes in us two certain infirmities, which
the Lord shall stay, and stanch at that day, by that glorious vesture and
garment of incorruption and immortality, which he shall put upon us. First
then, our body is corrupt: that is, changing from one form to another; it
cannot continue in the same stay. And secondly, it is mortal: that is, subject
to utter destruction, to be altogether without any form. The first is the
mutability which the matter, whereof we consist, cannot endure. You understand
that in all things that are made, there are two great principles: the matter,
and the form, besides the privation. The matter is so infinitely capable, and
desirous of new forms, that it cannot endure long to stay in one state; still
the matter desires a new form to come upon it; as being weary of that which it
has borne before. We see it in all things in nature. And though God work his
own will, and his gracious wonders by that; yet notwithstanding it shows the
variety, and disposition of the matter, which is still capable, and has an
appetite after a new form; and desires to be changed. In the fruits of the
earth; The seed would not continue so a seed; but when it is cast into the
ground, it comes to sprout and to spring; and from thence it comes to be a
little tree, and so a greater: and then it comes to grow backward, it comes
down again, and comes to be a dead thing. We see it in our selves. First,
there is the matter of our nature; then we do not so continue, but it becomes
an embrio, then it comes from that form, to be a child; and when it is weary
of that, it comes higher. So God brings things to perfection, and then back
again to imperfection. I speak only of the variety in the material cause:
which as the Philosopher speaks, is the devourer of forms: it is ever desiring
a new form to be set upon it. So God teaches us by this, that the very
appetite of the matter, shall carry us to the certainty of a new form; which
shall be set upon us in that blessed day: because that this corruptible matter
is ever changeable, and changing forms. It is certain, that God shall then
stop the appetite of the matter; and give it a form which shall never be
changed, and that it shall never desire to change. Here, nature never stays,
nor is never content with any form: but we come from our prime matter, to
childhood; from childhood we pass along to youth; and youth sends us to
middle age; middle age brings us to dotage; and dotage sends us to our graves.
And there we cease not neither: but still we seek for a new form; the
matter still would have a new coat. None of these content us; but we desire
of God a form that never may be changed. This corruption must put on
incorruption; and this mortal must put on immortality.

The other condition of our nature is, that as it cannot endure to be in the
same kind; but still seeks new fashions, and new forms: so at length it comes
to that form, that seems to extinguish it utterly, as if it had never been;
which brings matter, and form, and all, to nothing, as a man would think: the
goodliest temper; the stateliest comely body; the best and freshest
countenance; the best brued blood, and the sweetest color: these which are the
materials of man, it brings them all at length to a handful of dust; that a
man would think that now the matter had quite lost its form, and that it
should never desire a further form. For it is mortalized, it is brought to
nothing, it is brought to stench, and corruption: and it seems to be drowned
there, and there is no hope that ever it shall rise again. But yet still the
appetite works: for the matter works still to the God of nature; and desires of
him a new form, to give it a new garment. And the Apostle says, that God
shall hear that matter, and he shall regard the cries of it, and shall grant
the petition that this dust shall make unto him: and he shall give it a new
vestment; which shall be of such a fashion, as it shall never desire any more
to change, and put off again. For this corruption must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality.

6 ^art. The metaphor. Shall put on.
A sweet and blessed metaphor is this word put on. It must be put on, in stead
of the rags we put off: for mortality and corruption stick close to us, not
as a close-bodied garment sticks to the body; but as the skin and the flesh
cleaves to the bones. And we can never put them off, and be rid of them: but by
the common law, and necessity of dying, and rotting in the grave. There are
only some few that shall have the prerogative, which shall live at the coming
of Christ, they shall have a change, in stead of this death. But for us that
must go the common way of nature, we know our doom. Now then this ragged
garment, and vesture that we carry about us, by reason of Adams sin, and
our corruption which we have multiplied, and added to Adams transgression: it
must first be shaken off, by the omnipotent hand of God; it must be so purely,
and so fully removed, as that no threeds, nor no tagg of it remain: And then
when that is done, there is time and place for the new robe to be put upon us,
for that blessed garment which is to come in the place of this. But first,
these torn rags must be cast away; they must first be put off; and then this
blessed vestment which the Lord has prepared, even the vestment of
incorruption and immortality shall succeed in the place of this. So that from
hence we see the truth of the former doctrine again. Says S. Austin, the
garment is one thing, Aug.
and the thing garnished and decked is another; the garment is not the man, but
an accident to the man: and it may be that he may be here, and that may be
there; or it may be here, and he may be away: and yet notwithstanding the man
may be the same. So, likewise, the bodies that the Saints have in this world:
they shall be still the same bodies; the same in incorruption, that they were
in corruption: the same body that it was when it was mortal; the same shall it
be when it is immortal, the same in substance, but not the same in glory and
quality. Tertull.
For as Tertullian says, the Apostle disputes of the glory of the bodies, and
not of the substance of them. Therefore as a man that is of any state, and
account in this world, he has diverse suites of clothes; but he has but one
body: so it is true in this case, that the Lord upon one, and the self same
body, shall pour multiplicity of garments, and riches of the raiment, which
he shall give in that blessed day. The garment of beauty, the garment of
eternity, the garment of strength, of wisdom, of all kind of excellencies,
both of body and soul. The Lord shall sit them then with many changes of
apparel; but still it shall be one, and the self same body. For this mortal
must put on the glorious garment of immortality: and this corruptible, must put
on incorruption. So the Fathers in the Greek Church taught their men and women
in the Church to say, I believe the resurrection of This flesh. When we say the
Creed, we say, I believe the resurrection of the dead, and the life
everlasting. But still they, when they came to this article; they clapped their
hand upon their breast, and said, I believe the resurrection of This flesh;
punctually pointing at themselves, because the Apostle says, This corruptible
must put on incorruption; and this mortal must put on immortality, to show
that it belongs to the person properly, and peculiarly to this very subject
that he makes his proposition of.

And this glorious garment, what it is, but the garment which God himself has
worn from all eternity. He is incorruptible, that is, unchangeable, and he is
immortal; that is, it is impossible for him to grow worse. For God can never
change from better to worse: and he shall give that power to the bodies of his
Saints, that their perfection shall be so great, as that it shall not possibly
be made better* and they shall be so singular, that it is impossible they
should be made worse, or decline. For he shall set them in the highest pitch
of perfection; in the top of excellency: that they shall receive neither majus
nor minus; neither more nor less, neither better nor worse; they shall have no
kind of change. This is that glorious apparel, that God puts on. The Lord is
King, Psalm. 93.1.
he has put on his glorious apparel, he has girded himself with strength
and majesty. This is that apparel which the Apostle S. James speaks of, when
he says That the Lord is without any change, Iam. 1.16.
or shadow of changing. This garment which God has put upon himself from all
eternity, he will vouchsafe in a degree, and measure, to his Saints in time:
they shall be eternal from the time after, as he has been from worlds and
ages, to world without end himself, one, and the same for evermore.

Now whereas he says in the vinculum of this proposition, that Oportet, this
must needs be thus; Apostle adds for our comfort and consolation: both to
encourage us patiently to abide the stroke of death; beause it must needs be
so; for this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality: and to assure us of the necessity of the glory that shall be: it
cannot fail, but it must needs come so to pass, as the Lord has promised:
Oportet, it must be so. There are certain bonds that have passed from God to
man, by the promise of the Almighty; that binds him to it. For the word of a
King, is a King to a man: as Demosthenes says. Demost.
Therefore God has bound himself unto us by his word, and by the promises he
has made: and likewise we are again bound by the necessity of congruitie, by
the necessity of fitness; that these things should be so. For it is of
absolute necessity, in regard of the fall of Adam; and of our corruption, that
we have contracted thence: that we should not enter into that blessed
incorruption, till we have put off this corruption, which we have contracted.
There is no meddling for a sound man, to come to them that are in the
Pesthouse; nor there is no conversing for a man that is well in his wits, with
them that are in Bedlam: there is no mingling of Sheep and Goats together;
there is no blending of light and darkness, of Christ and Beliall; there can
be no communion and fellowship between corruption and incorruption. It is
impossible that the corrupt body of man should be able to entertain, and
receive that incorruptible crown of heaven: it will burst him in his feeble
abilities. As is said of Semele, that when Jupiter appeared unto ^^r in his
full glory, she was exhausted by means of his Majesty; she expired and
lost her life. So it is true and certain, this weak vessel cannot endure
heaven, this corrupt body cannot abide incorruption: no more than Gunpowder can
endure the approach of fire, for it will be swallowed up of it. Therefore the
Lord prepared a habitation* and tabernacle for it in the earth: that by the
earth he may bring it to be capacious of the glory they shall receive.
Therefore there is this necessity that the Apostle says, It must be thus. And
this necessity is in three respects.

soul, when it is separate from the body. The soul is a part of a man, and
the body is a part of a man as well as the soul; although it be not so great,
and so excellent a part as that: but seeing that God has appointed, that a
body and a soul shall always make a man; we cannot say therefore, that the body
is a man, or that the soul is a man, but only by way of eminency. But we
must needs take the soul, as long as it is separate from the body; to be a
thing imperfect, for it is not so much blessed as it shall be, when the body
shall be reunited unto it. It is blessed as much intensively, but not
extensively: not in respect of the society and company with the body, and with
the glory, and beauty, and that joy of the holy Ghost, which shall be extended
every where, as well to the body as to the soul. This the soul wants, and
therefore they lie continually lingering and thirsting in expectation: Apoc.
6.10.
How long Lord, holy, and true. They desire to be restored to their bodies,
they be naked now; the sword is out of his scabbard now, the Lord has drawn
them assunder, notwithstanding they are both in ^^e hand of God. But then the
Lord will again return the sword into his scabbard, when he has cleansed and
pollished it, that it shall never afterward be separated. In this regard it must
needs be, that corruption must put on incorruption. For the soul by the hand
of God, is made uncorruptible and immortal; but the body is made both
corruptible and mortal: therefore that the one may fit the other, the Lord
must make it by a strange and wondrous change, he must make this corruption put
on incorruption; that is, he shall so mold the body, by lying in the earth,
that he shall make it by the power of his hand, he shall make it capable of
that great incorruption which he shall give it; when the soul and the body
shall meet together in one.

The second reason of this necessity is this; because God has ordained in
justice to perform all things: and that according to that which a man has
done in this flesh, 2 Cor. 5.10.
for we mst receive according to the things that we have done in this flesh,
whether they be good or evil, as the holy Apostle says. Therefore the Lord
will have this corrupt body, which has suffered pain here on earth; this body
which has suffered for Gods cause; this body which has suffered death; this
body which has endured the flame, and persecution; this body which has
suffered hunger, and thirst, and nakedness; this body that has suffered
infamy, and ignominy, reviling, and opprobries, as the Lord Jesus did for our
sakes; this body which has bin so brought under, and made as it were a
laughing stock to the world; which has bin made a refuge of scorns; this body
which bears the prints and marks of the Lord Jesus Christ about with it; Gal.
6.17.
this body which has bin in martyrdom, (so ignominious to the sight of the
world, though it have been noble in the sight of God) this body that has born
all the brunt, and toil, and labor in affliction: this body must be glorified
again, for that it stands with Gods justice, that every man shall receive
according as he has done in this flesh, whether it be good or evil.
Therefore it must needs be, that this corruption must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality: this very body that has suffered, must be
honored: that as it has suffered many evil things for Gods cause; so it may
receive many good things, for its own cause, and for the mercy of God, which
shall be revealed upon it.

necessary it should be thus; Oportet, it must needs be that the body must go
to incorruption, Aquin.
by the way of corruption, as Aquinas well notes: because of the conformity of
the members to the head. Our Lord Jesus Christ went this way; therefore we that
are his servants, must not look to be above our Master, Luke 6.40.
it is enough that the servant be equal to his Master. Christ is our head, he
is our Master: and he could not come to immortality, but first he died; he was
mortal, before he was immortal: and though he were not corruptible, although
there was no change in his body, to corruption; yet he was mortal: there was a
change in the color, there was a change in his strength and life: these things
were in him, for he was dead; and these things cannot consist, but in him that
is dead. So much as he was corruptible, he had it for our sakes; he was
mortal, he was dead and buried; and he testified his mortality three days
together by lying in the grave. Therefore as Christ went this way, and could
not go to heaven until he had tasted of death, first he must suffer, and so
enter into glory. It follows therefore, Luke 24.26.
that all his members must second him, and subscribe to that course which their
Lord and head went, and be content to be like unto him; it must be with us, as
it was with him; therefore this corruption must put on incorruption. That is,
we cannot come to that glory, but by dying first: we must die, to live; first
we must be in our graves, in stink and filthiness, that we may be raised to
beauty, and strength, and perfection, according to the glorious promise which
God has made in Christ.

Now the next thing to be observed, is the triumph of the Church, when this is
done; when this corruption has put on incorruption, and this mortal has put
on immortality: when this blessed garment is once fitted, when this vestment
shall be once applied unto these bodies, as never to be put off again, Then
shall be fulfilled this saying.

This garment of incorruption and immortality, that is, this garment of glory
and beauty, wherein God shall invest his Saints, it shall not be like these
garments of ours, that are put upon our outsides, which cover only our outward
parts. They touch not our intrailes, they come not near the heart: but this
blessed garment of incorruption, it shall run through all the veins of man; it
shall possess him every where; it shall be as the life is in all the parts of
the body; in every part there is life, as well as in the rest. It shall be as
the health is; it is the breath of heaven, which runs through all the parts of
the body: if one part or member be sick, all the rest are so too for company.
It shall be as the soul is, in every part and substance of the body; the
soul is in all the parts of the body; it is as well in the little finger, as
in the brain of a man. And after this kind shall this garment be put on; not
as our clothes which we put on and off: not as our garments, which keep us
warm in our outward parts, and never touch our inward.

But this, as the Spirit of God, shall rule through the whole man; there shall
be no part, nor no blood, but it shall be incorrupt: there shall be no flesh in
man, but it shall be immortal. There is no part, but it shall be garnished and
adorned with this rare and singular quality, which shall run through the whole
man, and shall possess him wholly; and shall take that root in him, as it
shall be impossible for it to be extirpated: for it is the glorious hand of
God, that shall plant them there, and nothing therefore shall be able to
supplant them. We must put on incorruption. And it shall be so put on, as the
sun puts on his glory, never to put it off again: as the stars put on their
light, never to be eclipsed, never to have their light taken from them. We
must not put on the robe, and garment of immortality, as Kings and Princes put
on their gay clothes and apparel. Chrysostom.
As St. Chrysostom says, when Kings and Princes go to the bath on earth,
although they be never so gloriously apparelled, yet when they go into the
bath, they must put off their clothes as well as other men: and when they go
to their graves, they must divest themselves, and go after the order of other
men. But the Saints of God shall not put on the clothes of incorruption, as a
man that goes to the bath; but they shall put it on, as God has put on
eternity: they shall put it on, as the sun has put on his light, never to be
dark. They shall put it on, as the moon and stars, which have the same beauty
and figure continually. Although to us, it seem different, and the light of
the stars are not seen in the day time; yet there is no hindrance in them,
they have the same coat on them. The Saints shall have a garment, like the
coat, and habit of the lillies; of which our Savior says, that Solomon in
all his royalty, Luke 12.27.
was not clothed like one of them: their garments shall be so fit, and so
durable, and so sweet, and so natural; without any price, without any cost.
The Lord shall then, fit the garment to the party. Making of garments, requires
great skill, and much art: for it is no ordinary thing, for to fit a body
truly, with a garment or vesture. But the Lord will show that wondrous art, in
fitting this garment to our bodies, in such a wondrous aptness, in such a
fitness, and proportion, and compleatnesse, that in every part of man's body,
there shall appear this beauty, and this comeliness: this glorious
apprehension of these heavenly qualities, shall appear in every part of man.
The Lord shall so fit the body, that the garment shall gloss, and beautify,
and adorn the least part of the body.

Therefore, let us lift up our heads, Romans 13.11.
for our salvation draws nearer, then when we first believed: and let us
delight our selves, and labor to put on this new garment, this blessed
vesture, that we all seek so much after.

We are tired with these stinking clothes, feign to perfume them with sweet
odours, as the fashion of the times are now: we cannot endure the grain of
our own bodies, but we must perfume them with exotic, and strange smells. But
that garment shall be so perfumed, it shall be so amiable by the power of
God, that it shall need no other smell, or perfume. The curiosity of our
dispositions, cannot endure a garment, a year together. She is accounted a
sordid woman, that wears that garment this year, which she ware the last:
and she is neglected, and despised of her means, and friends. But the Lord
shall so fit this garment, that we shall still take delight, we shall have a
holy pride in wearing of it, and it shall still be the better for wearing, and
have continually more splendour, and beauty, then when we first put it on. For
this mortal must put on immortality, to all delight, and glory, to a lasting
glory, and a continual gloss, and beauty that shall never fade, but still
increase to the party that wears it. Now let our appetites appear, in
desiring of it. When? when shall it be? And so I come to the last point, that
I will trouble you with at this time.

When great promises are made, all delays are tedious. Prove. 13.12.
Hope that is deferred, kills the heart of man: therefore it is natural for
us, still to call, and urge for the time, When, Lord, when? why, when this
corruptible has put on incorruption, and this mortal has put on immortality:
when this is done, as it is certain it shall be done, (for we have Gods word
and promise for it, we have the appetite of the matter, which still calls, and
cries to God for a form: and we have the Lord engaged by example, and
president, and by the head, and first fruits, Christ Jesus, the head; when this
is done) Then shall be fulfilled, that which was spoken.

As if he should say, I speak not these things to you of my self; and out of
my own Apostolical authority, which I might stand upon: but I speak them out
of the writings of those men, that were illuminated by the same Spirit, from
the writing of the holy Prophets. Then shall be fulfilled that which was
spoken, or written. That word, that word of grace, that word of promise, that
word which is able to make the dead revive: and the word is this, that Death is
swallowed up into victory.

Where observe;

First, who wrote this.

And then, the substance of the words.

Concerning the first, the Apostle defends his authority, from ancient times:
to teach us what we are to do in like cases. But this is a common obvious
point, I will not insist upon it.

Concerning the Author, Isay, and Hosea, are alleged for it; some holding with
the one, some with the other. Certainly it is in Isay, in the true intimation
according to the word, Isay 25.8. Isay. 25.8.
where God promises the people a deliverance out of the Captivity of Babylon.
He says, God shall destroy death for ever, he has swallowed up death for
ever, or to victory, for (...) netsahh may signify both entrance into length
of time, or else victory. Because victory properly respects the time, and that
is true victory, which is not to be dashed nor daunted with any time: that is
the most perfect victory, that is not daunted in any time. So in this respect,
the word time, and victory is taken in the holy Tongue, for the same: and that
which the Septuagint here translates the one, the Apostle in the Text,
translates the other. Although indeed the Apostle follow the Septuagint, yet
they have another translation besides: which is, God shall swallow up death for
ever. So the Prophet Isays words I take to be the best and the fittest.

Hos. 13.14.
The other in Hosea, is in Hos. 13.14. where the verse following after my Text,
is repeated expressly; but the words of this verse of my Text, is not there to
be found. Therefore this I take to be the word of Isay.

Observe now what the word is, that he uses for it: it is full of life, it
brings men from temporal things, to the expectation of things eternal. The
Lord speaks to them of a great feast that they should make, after their
coming up out of the Land: the Apostle takes it to set forth the eternal
feast. For it is to no purpose, to have these temporal things, and to be
swallowed up of death, and hell.

The Apostle teaches us therefore, what construction we should make of the
blessings of God in this life: to extend them in a high sense. They are never
sweet, till then. The bread that we eat, should make us mindful of the bread
of heaven: that is, of the glorious presence of God, which shall for ever
delight us. And the honors, and preferments, that we have here, except they
signify to us those glorious and stately seats of glory hereafter, they are
rather plagues, and punishments then blessings.

By death there in the Prophet, is meant the general Captivity: but the
Apostle takes it for the death of the body. To victory is the term, and
manner, whereto it shall be swallowed: But I should be too troublesome to
enter upon them now.

FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection.
1 COR. 15.54. Then shall be fulfilled that word which is written, Death is
swallowed up into victory. Oh death where is thy sting? oh hell where is thy
victory?
WHat is so weak, and again, what is so strong, as a Christian man? says St.
Ambrose. Ambros.
He is exceedingly weak, because he is subject to any temptation: and
incomparably strong, because he can triumph over death it self, which is the
triumpher over all mankind. For what can he fear, that is fearelesse of death?
and what is able to insult over him, that can insult over that which is the
last of all terribles; which is the dissolution of nature? Thus the Lord has
tempered in the same vessel, great infirmity, and great valor, that he might
show his own strength: for in man's weakness, is Gods strength consummate. The
Apostle therefore, to prove those wonderful things which he had said before;
that this corruptible, must put on the garment of incorruption; this mortal
must put on the weed of immortality: he does now, as it were, bring into the
minds of the Corinthians, the present spectacle; he lifts up their hearts to
view it, as a thing acted and done before their eyes. As he says to the
Galathians, Gal. 3.1.
that Jesus Christ was crucified before their eyes, whom they never saw
crucified: but he was so lively described unto them by his Gospel, that he
says, they saw it acted, and saw him really crucified, and all the passages of
his death, and passion. So now, he would bring the hearts and minds of the
Corinthians, to such a kind of contemplation, as to see the Lord God raising up
the dead; and to see the dead putting on their new garments, their new coat of
immortality, and incorruption. He represents all to the eye: and when he has
so done, he brings in a kind of insultation, a verse that they were wont to
sing in victories, and triumphs. 1. Sam. 18.7.
As in the triumph of David over Goliath; the women sang, Saul has slain his
thousand, but David his ten thousand: so the Saints of God, as St. Chrysostom
says. Chrysostom.
Do thou see (says he) what a generous spirit is in the holy Apostle? how
he paints before the eyes of the people, this most noble and divine indowment;
this garment of incorruption, and immortality? and behold how he himself is
rapt! And in that most heavenly and strange rapture, as a man inspired from
heaven, he insults over death, lying under his feet; and treads upon the head
of him that treads down all things else, and cries over him, Oh death where is
thy sting? oh hell where is thy victory? This is the song of the Church, and
that song which the Saints of God desire with full contentment to sing; and it
is given to all them that are true hearted to the Lord, to sing this song with
a full resolution. But when the time is come that it should be sung, the
weakness of our nature, perhaps, will not suffice to it. For it is one thing,
for a man to be valiant, when he is in health, and it is another thing, when
the fit, and when the storm takes him: then to appear, that which he
professed himself to be before; there are but few, that can come in the hour
of death, to make this insultation. But all should aspire for it, and look
after it; and should desire God to enable them to do thus, as St. Paul
speaks; and as many Saints, and Martyrs, have in their martyrdom, insulted
over death, with these words. For this was often the motto in their mouths, Oh
death where is thy sting? oh hell where is thy victory?

Division, into five Parts.
Now that we may proceed in order.

word shall be fulfilled, which was written.

where it is written.

what it is that is written. Death is swallowed up into victory.

when this shall be performed; Then, then when our bodies are changed, and
this corruptible has put on incorruption, 1. Cor. 15.
and this mortal has put on immortality; then shall be fulfilled this saying.

use and ground of all: that is to take heart, and courage; for these things
are written for consolation. A man that can take no comfort against death,
shall never have any comfort any time of his life: if there were no joy in our
death, there could be none in our life. Therefore all this, is to renew the
spirits of Gods children, and to make them undaunted, when that great, and
common Adversary shall ceaze upon them.

The Insultation is in the 55. verse, 1. Part. The fulfilling of the prophecy.
which is taken out of Hosea 13.14. Oh death where is thy sting? oh hell where
is thy victory? Of these parts, briefly and in order: as it shall please God to
give assistance.

And first concerning the fulfilling of the Prophecy. The holy Apostle would
raise up the Saints of God to applaud, and to take delight, and to gratulate
one another, to see the fulfilling of Prophesies come to an end. For all
Prophesies must be fulfilled: Matthew. 24 35.
and though heaven and earth should pass away, yet no jote, and tittle of the
Law, and the Prophets can pass, till all be fulfilled, and accomplished. Now
the Apostle brings to their mind, those sweet prophesies of former time:
whereby he concludes the certainty of these things, which he now delivers to
them.

For there is no greater contentment to any man, that is a true judicious
Reader of the Scriptures then this; to see that the things promised in the
Gospel, are not yesterday matters; they be no new things, no late devises, but
they be almost as ancient as the world: they are drawn out of the treasures of
God in former ages, by the holy Prophets, that spoke in former times, what
should come to pass in the fullness of time.

And as St. Paul's manner is, still, he confirms his doctrine by the precedent
doctrine of the Prophets: so here in this, says St. Chrysostom, speaking many
infinite, incredible things; it was needful for him to set to a seal, and to
conclude all, with the authority of some Author that had gone before. And he
tells them, this is a word written; It is a book-case, it is no new thing which
he says, but that which God had inspired before, into the holy Prophet Isay,
and the Prophet Hosea, and diverse others, concerning the same doctrine that he
reveals unto them. Therefore, to conclude this point,

confirm our faith; to encourage our selves by the constancy of Gods word; the
constant truth, which has been from age to age. And that is it which must
settle, and stablish; if there were any thing which swerved from the common
custom, or any thing that were new: then we might doubt whether it were from
God or no. But because in all things it is so consonant to it self; and God is
the same God of the Old Testament, and of the New, it is a great confirmation
to us, to keep us from doubting, and from many scruples, which Satan the enemy
of mankind, suggests unto us.

2. Part. Whore this is written.
But where this word is written, or who is the Author of it, as I said, Divines
do diversely interpret. Some think it is from Isay; some think it is from
Hosea; and some, that it is a writing from them both: that it is two
testimonies. It is not unlikely, that his purpose was to cite both the
Prophets, two of them together: Matthew. 18.16.
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word might be established.
Therefore the first part of the sentence, is taken out of Isay, the second part
out of Hosea. That in Isay, is Isay, 25.8. Isay 25.8.
you shall see there, the Lord makes a banquet to his Church: and the
conclusion of that heavenly banquet is this, God shall destroy death for ever,
he shall swallow up death into victory, as it is here spoken. His meaning and
purpose is there, to speak of the deliverance from the captivity of Babylon:
but because there is no use in these temporal blessings, except we refer
them to spiritual, (for these outward things be but as earnests of greater
graces, which God has reposed for us in a better world) therefore the argument
follows: As the common Tenent of the Scriptures hold still, that from things
present, we may argue things to come; and from things temporal, we may prove
to our selves the assurance of things spiritual: So the deliverance out of the
captivity of Babylon, did signify to them, and was an assurance of the
deliverance from hell; of the deliverance, from the bondage of destruction; of
the deliverance, from the bondage of sin, and the bondage of death. Therefore
the Apostle translates that, according to the meaning of the Prophet: which
raises Gods people to understand, that they had greater enemies to encounter
with, then Babylon. And if God should have stayed his hand there, and have
given them a mere deliverance, out of Babylons country: they should be no
better then men of a few days continuance. For they must die, after that
deliverance, and they had greater enemies then Babylon was, from whom they must
desire to be delivered; and whom they stood in fear of; which would draw a
more dangerous consequence, then all their enemies else besides. For Babylon
could but inthrall their bodies, and that but for a time: but hell would
destroy both body, and soul for ever. Therefore God says, he would destroy
death, he would destroy the death of the body, and the death of the soul: the
first death, and the second death: and he would swallow both into victory. That
is, the death of Christ should get the mastery of them, that they should never
need to fear them afterward: they should be so couched in silence, that they
should have no power, nor strength remaining in them; but they shall be as
though they had never been, they shall be so obliterate.

Now for the other place, Hosea 13.14. Hosea 13.14.
where the Prophet discourses strangely, after a wondrous, and hidden manner.
For I think there was never any man, but out Savior Christ, was able to
understand Hosea; no nor shall do till the worlds end. To make a settled
discourse, and a plain exposition of him, it is almost impossible: for he
seems upon purpose to write in parables, and hard Enigmataes and riddles.
Therefore he concludes his Prophecy, Hosea 14.9.
He that has wisdom shall understand this. For indeed, he that has not
wisdom, cannot possibly attain the knowledge of it. But this that St. Paul
says, may be taken in diverse kind of speeches: that either I will be thy
death, oh death, (which is the best reading of all, and followed by the best
Divines) or, oh death, where is thy sting? as the Apostle reads it here.

The sum of the Prophet Hosea is this; to teach that God was purposed, and
was willing to deliver his people out of the captivity of Babylon; and to have
brought them quickly home again, and to have stablished them in their own
country: But because they were contumelious, and rebellious against him,
therefore their wickedness and obstinacy stayed his purpose: and therefore he
would be death to them, and would not spare them, as we see in the sequel of
the Text. But I will not trouble you with these thornie discourses. It is
certain that that which is there written, may be taken many ways: and for me
to show you the variety of Readings, were but to cast a stumbling block before
your most holy faith. Therefore I will resolve upon the authority of the
Apostle, which follows the Septuagint, and reads it thus, not I will be thy
death, but, Oh death, where is thy sting? oh grave, where is thy victory?
according to the Septuagint. For St. Paul follows the Greek copy; the
translation of the Septuagint, in all places almost where he cites Scripture.
Howbeit, to gather that conclusion and proposition, as Hosea says, by way of
supposall: If my people had been good, if they had been wise, death should not
have had power over them: but I would have been the death of death: the Apostle
brings it in the way of affirmation, oh death, where is thy sting?

Now the reason is this; where God propounds things by way of condition, there
the Saints of God keep the condition always: and so the matter is true to them,
which is propounded. As in Psalm. 81. If Israel would have kept my ways, Psalm.
81.13, 16.
I would have fed them with the finest flower of wheat: but because they did
not keep my ways, therefore they were famished, and perished. Out of this a
man may gather, that a child of God that keeps his ways, shall be fed with
the finest flower of wheat, with the best delicates that can be. So Hosea
speaks by way of supposition, in the potentiall mood: If my people had been
wise; if they had repented them of their sins, I would have done this great
miracle for them: the Lord would have freed them from their captivity, and
brought them to Israel out of Babylon, which he never did. Indeed, Judah
returned out of their captivity, but Israel did never return. If they had been
penitent, God would have done this; but because they were not, and repented not
of their rebellion; therefore God determined death against them.

promises of God are hindered by the malice of men, the Saints of God can gather
matter of comfort and consolation. For they keep the Covenant of the Lord,
they repent them of their sins, they are wise when God strikes them, and
their vexation gives them understanding. Therefore they conclude; if God would
have done this to them, if they had been better; certainly he will do it to
me, which desires to be better: if he would have delivered them, if they had
repented; he will deliver me, which do repent before him in sackcloth and
ashes. Those good things which the wicked cannot have, because they keep not
the condition; we shall have them, because we keep the condition.

You understand then, how these things are to be reconciled. Hosea speaks in
the potentiall mood, that God would do this: but St. Paul speaks it in the
indicative mood, by way of insultation: God has done it. He will do it,
because the Saints of God are found not truce breakers; but they keep covenant
with the Lord (as much as they can) by the help and assistance of his holy
Spirit. This is all the difference, for that which is in the moods, and is
uttered again in the tenses; it is of less moment. In that it is said in
Hosea, the Lord shall do it; and St. Paul says, he has done it; as speaking
of the time past.

This is the nature of faith, to expound the promises of the Gospel, as things
done actually, because they are as sure, being once signed with the privy
signet of God, as if they were performed; There being no difference with God,
between the things present, and the things to come. So in the hope of Gods
children, the promises of God are yea and amen. For in Christ Jesus, all the
promises of God are yea, 2. Cor. 1.2^.
and amen, 2 Cor. 1. So much concerning the Prophet, where it is written.
Wherein, because that is the greatest difficulty, I thought only to observe,
that the Apostle speaks in the confidence of faith; that it is now done, which
the Prophet says shall be done. And that which the Prophet Isay says, he
shall destroy death; the Apostle says, he has destroyed it: that is, then,
when these things shall be done. And Hosea says, I will be thy death; the
Apostle says, Where is thy sting, oh death. These matters (I say) must be
expounded, as belonging only to the faithful; of whose resurrection the
Apostle speaks in this Chapter, alone. For the faithful, do willingly keep
the condition with God: they break not peace with him, but keep their
covenant. Therefore that which the rebels should have had, if they had kept
their truce, and covenant; that the godly shall have, because they do keep
the condition of the covenant.

3. Part. What is written.
Now I come to that which is written; the sentence of Isay is, Death is
swallowed up into victory.

Here is first a strange, and wondrous position; that death should be
swallowed up; but of this I have spoken before, I will but touch it now.

And then for the manner of the phrase, swallowed.

And then the term, whereto, to victory.

And then the efficient cause whereby, what it is that swallows up death: the
death of Christ.

1. Swallowed.
Concerning the first, we must understand, that according to the common speech
of men; death is such a puissant, and powerful adversary, that there is no
Prince in the earth, that can confront him. He is indeed, able to meet him, but
he is foiled by him. Although indeed, death be nothing but the cessation of
nature: because a man's sight fails him, therefore he is blind; because the
power of hearing cease, therefore a man is deaf; because the power of life
and heat fails, therefore a man dies. Death is nothing but a privation; and by
consequent, it is nothing at all. As the Sun when it is set, there is
darkness, which is a matter of nothing, but the absence of the Sun. So death
is nothing but the absence of life; nothing but a cessation of the powers in
man. But because we conceive it after another manner, as a grievous enemy, as
a triumphant enemy over all the world: therefore the Scripture condiscends to
our capacity, speaks in our language, and makes it as an enemy; Christ and it,
as two enemies, encountering each other; and the one foyling the other, and so
foyling it, as that there is no relics, or remainders of the one left,
because of the great victory, and conquest of the other. The victory of Christ
shall be so absolute over death, that there shall be no occasion of fear,
because there shall be no step of death, that shall have being in the world.

And this is marvellously set down by a metaphor of swallowing: that that
monster which swallows all the world of men; that has swallowed our
forefathers, that has swallowed all. The ages, and generations before us, what
are they else but the morsels of death, which he has swallowed to glut his
stomach? and all cannot serve, but still he is craving. For death, and hell,
and the grave are unsatiable, they are never satisfied; although they have
abundance of income, and harvest, daily thrown into them.

The metaphor is taken from those kind of ravenous beasts, which use not to
chew, but to swallow their prey: and specially from fish, from Whales, and
Crokodiles, which altogether smallow, and choke it up without any mincing the
meat they receive. So the meaning is, that the death of Christ, swallows up
the death of nature, and the death of sin, (the second death) that they have
no more power over us. He shall swallow them, as the Whale swallowed Jonas: he
shall swallow them, that there shall be no more sight of them to live, and to
be, and to have power: he shall swallow them, as the red sea swallowed up the
Egyptians: he shall swallow them, as the fiery furnace swallows a little water
that is cast into it, a sprinkling of water. It shall swallow them, as the
mysts, and vapors are swallowed up by the beams of the Sun; that there shall
be no appearance of them afterward: It shall swallow them, as the dry, gaping,
thirsty land swallows a little shower of rain, after a long drought: It
swallows them up, as the weaker metalls that are cast into the fiery furnace;
that are so spent and consumed, as that there is no remainder, nor footsteps
left of them. So is this similitude contrived, that the devouring death, shall
be swallowed in the death of Christ.

And whereto shall it be swallowed?

To Victory.
To victory. This is the strange term, that there is nothing now in the Church
of God, but triumphs, trophies, and victory: there is nothing now but songs of
deliverance, there is nothing but well-springs of life, to water every tree in
the garden of God. The most strange, and complete deliverance that can be, is
to be brought from all the points of slavery, to all the points of liberty.
Such a victo^y is this, which is spoken of here: There shall be nothing but
victory, where there was nothing before, but captivity. Where there was nothing
but sickness, and after sickness death; and after death damnation, by means
of the sin of Adam: Now there shall be nothing else, but life, and joy, and
glory, and victory.

And this is the happy estate, and condition of the second coming of Christ,
and his presence, and possession of his children, at his coming. So we read
it, and so the best Translations hold it, to victory. Some others read it, to
contention: So St. Ierom, Tertullian, St. Ambrose, St. Ierom. Te^tull. Ambros.
Aug.
and St. Austin in many places, read it to contention. For says St. Ierom, it
is a kind of contestation, a kind of law, and pleading in the court of God;
between the death of Christ, on the one party; and the death of nature
inflicted for sin, on the other party: and they shall enter into plea, the
one against the other; and the power of the death of Christ, shall command, and
overwhelme the power of the death of nature, and of the second death, which is
of sin: by reason of the justice, and righteousness which is in Christ. For
thereupon it comes to pass, that death is swallowed up into victory: because
the death of Christ, has answered the justice of his Father, and has
satisfied the wrath, which we had contracted against us. And by that reason,
he shall cease the Commission of death, which is out for us, because of Adams
sin: Romans 6. last.
For the wages of sin is death: but because Christ was without sin,
therefore he had no cause, or reason to die, but only for our sins; and so
God is satisfied by his death, and is well-pleased in him, to give us life;
because the actions that proceed from Christ, are not humane actions, but the
actions of his person, the actions of God and man; and by consequent, able to
merit for an infinite company, and to be applied to many worlds, (if there were
any more then this) that is, to all believers to the end of the world, that
shall have participation in his blood. They shall have (as they have a promise)
forgiveness of sins, and sin being removed and forgiven, death has no
claim. But there was no sin in Christ, therefore death had no right to him,
nor shall have to those that are in him; therefore death shall make a surcease,
and be no more; but shall be utterly abandoned, and swallowed up into victory.
This is that plea, that the Lord Jesus in his death, makes against death; I
will be death, against death. Because thou have forfetted thy commission,
because thou wast appointed of God to lay hold upon sinners, and thou have laid
hold on him that is not a sinner: therefore thou shall lose thy place, and thou
shall be cashiered; thou shall have no more right over sinners, because the
justice and righteousness of the Son of God, is imputed unto them, to rid
them from thy hands, and from those dismal conclusions, which otherwise they
should have been drowned in: There is the contention on the one party.

Death of Nature.
The other party, is the death of nature. Death, which is the great master of
the world to this day; he shall have another plea. He shall say, For thy part
I acknowledge I was mistaken; I acknowledge I laid my hands amiss, when I
took thee: for there was no sin in thee. But for all other men, from the
beginning of the world, God gave me them as prisoners, and made me their
executioner. I have not done amiss in these; therefore I may justly hold them,
that are given me by Divine providence, by the will of God. It is true, thou
art alone, the only man, that has overcome me by thy justice and
righteousness. But this justice and righteousness is in thy self. Escape
therefore with thine own life, go with thine own privilege; trouble me not,
and that which belongs unto me; enter not into my possession: the Lord has
given me these sinners, as he gave thee to be no sinner. What is thy
holiness to them that are unholy? what is thy righteousness to them that are
ungodly, and sinners? what passage can there be between thee and them to bring
them out of my hands? Yes, the plea is to contention, as St. Ierom says: They
shall contend who shall have their spoils, and the Lord shall answer, that he
came not as a private man: and that his works were not done personally, for
himself, but they were public actions, for the redemption of mankind.
Therefore whatsoever he did, he communicates it to his followers: whatsoever
he did, it was for his subjects, and servants. If he overcame death in his own
person, he has done it not so much for himself, as for those that believe in
him, that they might partake of his victory; and that they might rejoice for
his victory, that he has had over the world, the flesh, and the devil. So
the contention, as St. Ierom says, comes upon Christ's side, by all reason:
because he has satisfied the justice of God the Father: because he was
offered a sacrifice of a sweet smell, which shall be ever in record before God:
because his suffering was of an infinite nature, being the second Person in the
Trinity; and the actions are always given to the subject, and to the principal:
the actions of Christ, are not attributed to his humane nature, but to his
person, and so also his merits: and although he suffered in his humane nature
properly, and not in his Divine, yet the merit, and the glory of that
suffering, reflexed upon the Divine nature. For not only the blood, but the
blood of God was spilt for the satisfaction of the wrath of God, and for the
reconciliation of the world. Therefore the Lord Jesus shall answer again in the
plea, that whatsoever he did, he did it for the good of all them that belong to
him.

I had never took flesh, but to make all flesh blessed, by my Incarnation. I
had never entered within the verge, and list of my mortal body, but to make all
their bodies immortal: so great is the benefit, that I avow to mankind, that
not only my friends, but also my enemies have that benefit by me, to have
their bodies immortal: and whatsoever I have done, either by way of suffering,
by way of merit, by my miracles, by my death and passion, by my Resurrection,
and ascension into heaven; I have done it not to reside only in my own
nature, but to communicate it, that it may reside in my followers: for I have
made all the world of believers, to partake of it. This shall be the
contestation, (as St. Jerome says) as if the Lord should hear the just plea
of Christ, and also the unjust wrangling of the death of nature, he shall hear
the cause, and judge the matter on the part of our blessed Savior, which has
deserved by his death and passion, to open the book, and to unloose the
seals, and to make good the promises, to indow himself and all his followers,
in eternal possessions, in that holy and heavenly city which is the Mother of
us all. Death is swallowed up into victory.

Now it follows concerning the time, when this must be expected; then shall be
fulfilled this saying; for these things be in order to be discussed. It is
true, these things are accomplished now in some degree; but the full
accomplishment shall be then, when we shall be consummate: then when Christ
shall be consummate. Christ is never full, till his body be full; he bears
such love to his Church, that he is said yet to have relics of passion,
(...). Col. 1.24.
the relics of the passions of Christ.

The glory that Christ possesses, and is capable of, which he is advanced unto
in the highest perfection, by his incarnation, which the Lord stands now in
possession of, and he shall have no more glory conferred upon him then he
has, and has had for these sixteen hundred years, been possessed of; but
for the infinite love that he bears to his children, to those that are of his
body, he is said then to be complete, not before, when all his members shall be
completed: then death shall be swallowed up into victory.

Death was swallowed up in victory, when Christ rose again, when he brought
the spoils of the grave away with him, when the Lord raised him, and when many
bodies of the Saints which slept, were carried up with him to his Kingdom;
where he has them now in heaven to converse with him, and keep him company;
then the Lord gave a gage and pawn of this that now shall be fulfilled: but
because those were but a few, and because the fullness of the Church is that
which Christ delights in; the Apostle refers us to the hope, and expectation of
that time, when we shall get the garment of immortality, when we shall have
that new coat of incorruption, then we shall see that fulfilled, and clearly
accomplished, which was spoken in former time, Death is swallowed up into
victory. Not only in the person, of Christ, but in thine, and mine, and all
that have interest in Christ; Death is swallowed up into victory: that great
swallower of all things in the world, that consumes not only the frail bodies
of men, but the mighty monuments of marble, and the greatest things that are
most unlikely to be dissolved, and shaken asunder in the world, the very earth
it self; the foundations of which we see often stand tre^bling, and cast the
firm continent into the great sea, as it has happened to diverse parts of the
world. Now this great swallower which was the destroyer and consumer of all
things before, and that never could meet with his match, now he himself shall
be swallowed up, into complete victory.

Therefore this must be our desire, as soldiers after the victory, we follow a
master which is a victorious Captain, that was never foiled by any enemy, but
wheresoever he goes, he carries the field before him. And soldiers (we know)
what great glory and glee they have; what noysing of trumpets, what erecting of
spirits, when they once come to be masters of their enemies: there is not such
a glorious sight under heaven, as a victorious army returning from the spoil.

The Lord would teach us by this, what we should do, to lift up our spirits,
to prepare us for the insultation over this grisly enemy, which is the devourer
of all; the voice of victory must be glorious, as it is said of Lepanto, when
news came to Venice, that the Christians had the victory over the Turks; for
three days together there was no other noise, nor voice rang among them, but
victory, victory: and though they lost many men that were slain, and heard
of the death of many of their friends, yet they were content to offer the lives
of their friends in that common sacrifice, so the victory might be pronounced
amongst them. So we read of Rome, and Athens, and especially of Carthage, for
the news of a victory that they had over the Romans, they did nothing for a
whole month together, but go with garlands on their heads, and celebrate
festivalls, as men with exceeding joy transported out of themselves. For this
purpose also the great Conquerours called many Cities after that name, by the
name of victory, as the City of Nice, where the first Counsel was kept, it
signifies victory: and Nicosia-Stratonica, and Verturia Thessalonica, and many
other Cities, had their names given them of their victories; and the great
Captains would call themselves Nicanors, and by the like names, victorious men.

And those that bore the victory, they still wore garlands, which were always
green, because they would have their names, and conquests never to wax old,
but be always green; therefore they had their garlands of Laurel. So we see
how the world use to be have themselves in victory; how they are never daunted
with any thing, nor grieved with any thing: if they may have the victory, they
are content to lose the life of their best friends.

This should teach us to apply these things in a spiritual sense, to be as
wise in our generation, as the world is in their generation; we were so
desirous of victory, and so desperate for it, that we would have given all
things to be made partakers of it: we would have given the first fruits of our
bodies, for the sins of our souls, thousands of rams, and ten thousand
rivers of oil, that we might be made victors of this grisly monster: but we
were not able to do it, nay rather then we would not have the victory, we were
content to lose the life of our Chieftaine Christ Jesus, who slept in death,
that we might ever wake unto life eternal; we were content that he should die
for us, and the hands of us all were in his blood: we were content that he
should die, that death by him might be swallowed up into victory.

Let us therefore entertain this glorious motion into our souls; let us lift
up our heads with melody to God; let us know that nothing can make against us
now, because we have the victory; a constant and perfect victory, where there
is no enemy resides or remains. The princes of this world have but half
victories, the enemy runs away from them, and comes and makes head again, and
comes the next year with a greater force. But God when he gets a victory, he
leads captivity captive; he leaves no possibility of rising again, but he
strikes to the maine, he strikes the adversary to the heart; he cuts off stub
and stock of all likelihood and probability, that there should not be any fear
of it afterward: he takes away the essence of the thing, and so he makes an
absolute victory.

The Insultatio^.
Now follows the Insultation, whereunto God would raise a christian man's heart.

Oh death where is thy sting? oh hell where is thy victory? These words that be
in the vocative case in the Apostles writing, in the Prophet are in the
accusative; I will be death unto death, and I will be destruction against hell.

Here the Apostle understanding the purpose of the holy Ghost, teaches us, not
too much to be tied to the letter of the Scripture, but to the sense and
meaning: he takes out these two, he singles them out, and sets them down in
the constancy of his spirit, as though they were two personated enemies, Death,
and Hell: that is, death, and the grave; for he speaks here of the
resurrection of the dead, of such as are dead in Christ; and they shall never
come to hell: therefore although the word be translated Sheol, hell; yet it is
here taken for the grave only, whereunto the godly go, as well as the
ungodly: to hell go not the godly, but the ungodly: they go to the grave
which is the common receptacle of all, and it is a degree of misery, and
mischief; that after a man has lost his ability, when he has lost his life
and power, when he has lost his color, and glory, and perfection, to be
thrust down as a brute beast into a pit, and to lie there, and rot, and
putrify; therefore because these two are the most shameful enemies, the one
to rid a man's body of the precious soul that is in it; and the other to bring
upon him the most foul, and beastly condition of rottenness; the Apostle
singles them both out, and insults upon them, as upon dead Captains, as upon
them that are not able any more to strike a stroke, but lie devoid of all
power; and upon their heads he brings forth this insulting sentence, Oh death
where is thy sting? oh hell where is thy victory?

Oh death where is thy sting? thou that have stung all the men in the world, as
we know death is painted with a dart in his hand, to sting and to strike to the
heart, to deprive men of their life, to take away the heart blood of men; thou
that stingest men with sickness, and take away their vital spirits: oh
death! now thy sting is dulled, it is broken in pieces, it has no edge, it
has no point, it can effect nothing further.

And thou grave, which wast wont to have the victory, which wast wont to be so
victorious, as to make the fairest faced dames, and the goodliest beauty in the
world, to bring to dust and ashes; to beat a man to powder, to bring a man to
dust, which is the greatest victory that can be, to drive a man to dust; thou
that wast so absolute a victor, where is now thy glory, and victory? as if he
should say, it is no where, it is altogether vanished away, there is no
appearance, nor any more power, nor life in thee, to work death; we are
secured from thee for ever, we are freed from thy sting, that thou shall no
more strike us to death with thy dart. And thou grave, thy victory to turn us
to dust is nothing: all these are taken out of thy hands for ever.

So this is the glorious triumphant song, which the Church of God has ever
sung over this Conqueror; there were two enemies that fought a strange duel,
(that was) the death of Christ, and the death of nature: the Leader of the
victorious army died, yet notwithstanding he lives for ever; the leader of the
conquered, and banished army killed him; and yet notwithstanding he dies for
ever; for so according to Heb. 2.14. Heb. 2.14.
the Lord appointed that by death, the Lord Christ should destroy him that had
the power of death, that is, the devil. For the devil by means of a
commission that he had from God, he cast all men into the prison of death; and
he keeps them there, and will keep them there by the common calamity of
sin; he keeps all men's bodies there to the time of the resurrection, which
the Lord shall cause in the fullness of time, but therefore, the Lord following
the way of justice, and not the way of power: for God was able to take us from
death, otherwise, by other means, then by the death of Christ; but then he
could not be just. Now God would teach us, that it is better to follow the way
of justice, then the way of power: for every man can be powerful, the devils
themselves have power, but they have no justice; therefore God then in justice
would have the death of his Son satisfy the wrath of God; and would have him
to die for them that should have died; that his death might be the life of many
thousands; that his death might be the destruction of the power of death, which
had a commission given for the time, that at the last might have an end.

To conclude, because I see the time past; let us also learn to frame our
selves to this high spirit of the Apostle, to insult over death, and then if
we can insult over death, much more may we insult over all the calamities of
this life: for what is so great a calamity as that? why should poverty oppress
us? why should infamy vex us, if sickness, diseases, and death it self
cannot oppress? why should trouble of conscience for sin oppress us, when
the grand enemy himself is conquered? and when we have a part of the conquest?
we are soldiers to that great Captain, and he communicates his victory unto
us all; John 16. ult. Aug.
Be of good comfort (says Christ) for I have overcome the world. Says St.
Austin, What do thou mean by this, Be of good comfort, I have overcome the
world? What have we to do, to be of good comfort? it belongs not to us; be
thou of good comfort; it pertaines to thee; what are we the better, because
thou have overcome the world? Yes, (says he) oh death, thou which have been
the devourer, now thou art devoured thy self; thou that have swallowed up men,
now thou art swallowed up thy self, by a more potent cause: oh death! he was
wounded for me, that made me; and he that through his death has swallowed up
thee, he has conquered thee for me: therefore I rejoice in him, which is
flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone: his victory, is my victory; therefore
he says, Be of good comfort, I have overcome the world. And this the Lord has
taught us in many passages of his holy Book, that he might prepare us once to
this courage, to this great valor. For in this a man is seen more, than in any
thing else; in the patient abiding of trouble and misery, in the patient
enduring of death in this present life. All worldly passions are separated as
chafe by the wind, from the godly; the wind blows away the chafe, but so it
cannot the good corn, that falls still on the floor; the chafe is blown away
with every wind of temptation, and persecution. Let us therefore take notice of
that singular comfort which God has given us, out of the Scripture, which all
resolves at last into this one point, Oh death where is thy sting? oh grave
where is thy victory?

In Iosuah, 10. Ioshuah 10.24.
we read that Iosuah there the Prince, and Captain; he brought out the five
Kings that were closed in a Cave, and a stone rolled to the mouth of it, till
he should come back: he brings them forth, and bade the Captains tread upon
the necks of the Kings, and not fear, for (says he) The Lord your God shall
fight for you. This was a figure of this glorious victory of the Son of God
over death. All the potentates of Hell, are like to the five Kings of Canaan,
which oppress all they meet; as Adonibezek they thumb them, he cut off the
thumbs and toes of men, and set them under his Table as dogs: The Lord
signified this victory of Christ, by the victory of Iosuah over those five
Kings, and Adonibezek, that he would give a spiritual conquest over death,
hell, sin, and all the adversaries that could oppose him; and he would tread
upon the necks of all his opposers. What is so base a part, what is so base a
thing, as the foot of a man? and what is so lofty a thing as the neck? and yet
the very foot of Gods children, the basest part, shall tread upon the necks of
their enemies, upon the necks of Kings themselves, which are compassed, and
surrounded with jewels, and ornaments, yet they shall be subjected to the
basest parts, even to the heels of godly men; so great is the comfort of Gods
children. And as it was done then in Iosuahs time, so also the comfort remains
now.

So we see again, the Lord bids the people look back when they were past the
Red Sea, look back upon the Egyptians; and the People and Miriam had a song,
Exodus 15.1.
when they looked back, and saw the Egyptians floating above the water. A
strange thing, but God would have it so, because he would have his people to
have Arms, to have the Arms of the Egyptians to fight against Amalek: It is
said, the people looked back, and saw them; those proud spirited people, those
braggadocioes, which thought to have swallowed them up quick, and followed them
with their chariots and Army; those which before could not be resisted, now
the Lord brings them to a calm; he so cooled the Nation, that the least boy
might insult over them. Israel looked, and saw them, and took off their
armor, took off their rings, and jewels, and their costly apparel, and
furnished themselves with it, when they went into the wilderness: So shall the
conquest of Gods children be over death; although it have been full of
threatening, full of terror, and blood before, yet the Lord will bring it into
the flood, into the Red sea; he will overwhelme it in the water of his
Omnipotency: and his children shall look back, and shall see him, and spoil
him that was the spoyler, and destroy him that was the destroyer: and they
shall take his weapons from him, and make use of them to their own purposes;
and they shall say as the people might have said to the Egyptians, Where is thy
bragging that thou usedst before? thou art enclosed now in thine own net.
Where is thy sting oh death? Oh hell where is thy victory? The Lord shall turn
the terms, the Lord shall make the field to go on his own side, and take
away the conquest from the adverse party.

It has been an ancient Proverb, That to pluck the beard of a dead Lion, even
for children themselves; it is an easy matter; a poor child that cannot
endure the noise, or the sight of a living Lion, Chrysostom.
(as St. Chrysostom says) the boys when they see a Bear, or a Lion, or a
Wolf dead in the street, they will pull off his hair, and insult over him,
and deal with them as they please: they will trample upon their bodies being
dead, which they durst not look upon when they were alive. Such a thing is
death, it is a furious Beast, a rampant Lion, a devouring Wolf which consumes
all the world. The Lord has laid him now at his length, he has laid him dead
that he is unable ever to have life again, and so the very children (says St.
Chrysostom) are able to insult over him. That we have had Martyrs (says he)
of 14. or 15. years old, which have offered themselves to the fire, and to the
sword, and to all the passions of this hungry beast; they have offered
themselves to the devourers with a willing embrace; and have played upon him
which is the common swallower of all mankind; as Theophylact says well, We do
still devour, and swallow up death by the faith that we have in the life of
Christ; for that faith makes us so constant, as that nothing can separate us
from the love of God in Christ Jesus, as the holy Apostle says, Romans 8. Romans
8.35.
What shall separate us from the love of God? shall tribulation, or
persecution, or sword, or hunger, or cold, or nakedness? shall Angels, or
life, or death, things present, or to come, life, or death? No, none of these
are able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord: But
these things are easily spoken, and as long as we be in Theories, so long as we
be in Contemplation, we may easily subscribe to them: but who is he that is
able to do thus when the time serves? That is in the hand of the great God, to
give the garland whenever it shall please him. It must be our ambition to
seek for it, to entreat the Lord to crown us with that victory, with that
heavenly valor which himself has promised to all that love him. Apoc. 2.17.
I will give him the crown of life, and blessed is he that continues to the
end; for he shall eat of that hidden Mannah: and shall flourish as a tree in
the Paradise of God. But it lies not in us to continue neither, therefore he
that gives the end must also give the means; and the same prayer that sues for
the one must also beg, and entreat for the other: all this comes from God, from
the true love that we have to Christ, from the hope that we have in him to
partake of his victory; from our believing, and confessing, that God has
raised up Christ from the dead: For if thou believe with thy heart, and
confess with thy mouth, that God has raised up Christ from the dead, thou
shall be saved. If we believe that this victory of Christ is for ever
accomplished, we shall be saved. If thou believe, although thou must do many
other things which are conditional to salvation, yet this is the maine point,
believe in the Conqueror, and the conquest is thine: he conquered not for
himself but for thee; to make the spirits of his Saints conquer in heaven, and
to make their bodies also to reign with him there, when he shall appear: Col.
3 4.
for when the Lord Jesus shall appear, we shall also appear with him in
glory. See the extent, and latitude of his conquest: When God takes a field,
he takes it for all the world; not for one country, as earthly Princes do:
but all comers from the East, and West, and North, and South, shall yield unto
the Lord, and rest under his shadow. Even all Nations, a tot quot. The Dinner
of the great King refuses no guests, and rather then they will want guests,
and the Feast shall be unfurnished, he will send to the hedges, and highwayes
to be searched, to come and fill his Table, whereunto he calls by the
Gospel, and whereunto he bring us for his Sons sake. Amen.

FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection.
1 COR. 15.56. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
Law; but God be thanked, that gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ.
TO brag before the victory begotten, before the field be won; it was ever
held a most vain presumption: as the King of Israel said to the King of Syria,
Let not him that buckleth on his armor, brag as he that puts it off. For
there is nothing more uncertain then the events of war; and often times, when
mighty men promise to themselves the assurance of the victory, they fail, and
come to be foiled. Yet notwithstanding, so great is the confidence of St. Paul's
spirit, and so great is the assurance that we have in Christ Jesus our Lord,
that we dare boldly insult over death, and proclaim the victory, although our
selves must be vanquished. For this most noble, and gracious Triumpher over
death, he lies in the grave, he lies in the dust, as well as we must do: and
there is no difference to the sight of flesh, and blood, between the ashes of
St. Paul, and the ashes of another common man; and yet notwithstanding, the
Spirit of God was so mighty, and potent in him, and the faith of the things to
come, did so represent unto him the things promised, that as though the matter
were now presently performed, he insults over death, and takes upon him the
person of a man new risen again from the dead. As St. Ierom well speaks, he
supposes that those times that be long to come, and God knows how long, he
supposes that they were come in his time; and as it were in the person of a
man newly risen, newly raised from death; he begins; Oh death where is thy
sting? oh hell where is thy victory? So the holy Father tells us that the words
should be then rise in every man's mouth, when God shall raise them out of
their graves, to that incorruption, and that immortality, which this
corruptible, and this mortal must put on. It shall be the speech in every man's
mouth then, as being triumphant over death; Oh death whre is thy sting? oh
grave where is thy victory? Thou have had victory over my poor bones, and body
a long time, but what is it now? thou have lost it for evermore.

In these victories in the world there is no certainty, because that which they
call fortune, is so changeable, as it seldom sets up one man, but anon it
raises another to pull him down again: So the victories are fading, and
passing away; and he that is a Conqueror, is conquered and made a slave to
those that formerly were his inferiors.

Ignarius (it is said) had a great victory over the Cimbri and Tutons, yet he
fell shortly after into the hands of Scilla, that conquered him: and Scilla
that was once the Sunne-rising, when Pompey once appears, he becomes the
Sunne-setting: And if Pompey were never so famous a Victor, as there was none
more glorious in his time, yet at last he shall fall, and be conquered by the
hand of Caesar, and by his prowess be outed both of his honors, and of his
life. And Caesar himself in the height of all that glory that can come upon a
man in this world; there was never any before him, or the like shall be after
him; yet he could not hold his state, but he falls into the hands of
Conspirators, a sort of bloody murderers, that shall kill him in his
Counsell-chamber; so uncertain are the smiles of this world, that there is no
victory constant; but still she flies, moves, and changes her tent, and
tabernacle from one side to another: therefore there can be no boasting, or
bragging in these earthly and worldly conquests, which has made the wisest
Emperors of the world, after they have had a good gale of fortune (as they
call it) after they have prospered a while, for fear of cross blows after,
they have left their honors, and betaken them to a solitary life, to live in
Monasteries, lest they should have a foul end after such goodly, and fair
proceedings. But in this case, in this victory that we now speak of, there is
no uncertainty, there is no inconstancy to be feared, Ianus Temple is shut for
ever.

They had a custom among the Romans, they worshipped a certain god, which
they thought was the Lord, and Tutor of their City, which they called Ianus;
which had in Rome a great Temple: the doors whereof stood open all the while
they were in wars, and shut in all the time of peace; and they were so
cumbred with war for 800. years together, that in all that time the doors
of Ianus Temple were but thrice shut; they were always open, to show that the
wars were open, and therefore they gave their god leave to go out and in to
succor them, or else they thought his arm could not reach, his power could
not extend to their aid. See the ridiculous and foolish vanities of the
Heathen; when the wars were ceased, they shut the doors to keep in their
god, there was no use of him then: Now this Temple (I say) for 800. years, was
in all that time but three times shut.

First, in the time of Numa Pompilius,

Secondly, in the time of Tytus Maneus, (as Tytus Livius says) after the
Carthaginian war.

And thirdly by Augustus Caesar.

But when the time shall come, when God shall give to this corruption,
incorruption; and to this mortal, immortality, then there shall be for ever a
cessation of war. The Temple of Ianus shall never more be opened, it shall be
shut for everlasting; there shall be no cause of war, but the people of God
shall be in perfect peace with the Lord, and shall live under the defense of
his protection, they shall live secure for ever.

Plutarch says, when Philip King of Macedon, had gotten a great victory at
Cheronia, he wrote to Archimedes, and he used lofty speeches in his letter;
as being proud, and puffed up with his late victory: Archimedes, replies to him
no more but this; Sir (says he) you write stately to me, in high terms, and
I partly know the reason of it: but if you will take the pains but to measure
your own shadow, you shall find that it is no more, that it is no greater, nor
no larger then it was before your victory. You were as great a man then, and as
many inches about as you are now.

And it is true in worldly things. Chance (as they call it) is so variable,
that no man can tell how he shall begin, or how he shall end; but in this
victory which the Lord vouchsafes us in Christ Jesus, it holds not; for the
victory that we shall have there, shall make our shadows greater, and it shall
make our persons more honorable, and fuller of power, and majesty. 1. Cor.
15.44.
For it is sown in dishonor, it rises again in honor. It is sown in
weakness, it rises again in power. The victory therefore that we have in
Christ, it is not like the victory that Philip the King of Macedon got; that
his shadow was no bigger then before: but this victory in Christ is a great
enlarger of man, and of all the parts, and faculties in him: that he is not
like himself as he was before, no more then an honorable thing is like a
dishonorable, or a strong thing is like unto a weak.

Now to come to the Order O^der.
of the words read unto you: here the holy Apostle explains that which he had
said before, when he insulted over death: A man might ask, what is the reason
thou take upon thee so much, seeing death shall conquer thee as well as other
men, and thou must die as well as the rest, that have gone before thee? To give
a reason therefore of it, he shows that it was no presumption, or idle
imagination of himself, but it was a thing conferred unto him by the power of
Christ and his Gospel. For (says he) I have good reason to insult as I did; I
know when that blessed time shall come, we shall have no enemies against us:
If there should be any enemy, it should be either death, or sin, or the law:
But there shall be none of these, and therefore there shall be no enemy, but a
perpetual end, and issue of man for ever.

There shall be no death, for why? because there shall be no sin; for the
sting of death is sin: and death cannot come upon man, but by the wrath of God,
which is conceived for sin, which being taken away, death must needs cease:
for the work ending, the wages must needs end, and the wages of sin is death.

But how will you prove that there shall be no sin?

Because there shall be no law, for the strength of sin is the Law, and the
Lord shall give that glory to the bodies that shall rise, that they shall not
need any Law, but they shall be a law to themselves; and every man shall love
God, and please God, not by constraint, not by the terrors of the Law, and
Commandment, but from the ducture of his own free-spirit, that shall lead
and conjoyne, and make him one spirit with the Lord. Therefore that which the
holy Apostle said before, is most constant and true; that because there shall
be no enemies then left: therefore we may boast in the Lord our God, which
has given us perfect victory over all our enemies, and there shall be no
enemy left; because there shall be neither sin, which is the grand cause, the
Arch-enemy of mankind; for that is taken away by the righteousness of Christ,
who knew no sin; he that knew no sin, God made him sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God. Mark it, (says the holy Apostle) that
we might be made the righteousness of God. When was Christ made sin for us?
In this miserable life: and when shall we be made the righteousness of God? In
that blessed life. Therefore as God has made him which knew not sin, to be
sin for us; that is, he has made him a sacrifice for sin; and he was
accounted a sinner, as he was made sin for us: so this is the effect of this
account and imputation of our sins upon him, it shall be the imputation of his
righteousness upon us; as the holy Apostle says, 2 Cor. 6. He was made sin
for us which knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God.

Now after this he has showed us the enemies, he begins to show us the use of
all this; he draws to a conclusion, and he says, God has given us victory.
Thanks be to God that has given us victory through Christ Jesus our Lord. As
if he should say, if we had indeed the remnants of sin in us still, we were
foolish to make any insultation over death; for death would triumph over us;
for as long as sin remains, death must needs ensue; and as long as the law
is put upon us to curb, and contradict us, sin will be; but now God be
thanked, that has given us victory through Jesus Christ our Lord: For he has
destroyed the one, and he has fulfilled the other; he has destroyed the one
by his gracious conversation, and he has fulfilled the law, he has appeased
the wrath of God, that now there remains no more enemy, but the field is
clear, and we are masters of the field for ever. Therefore God be thanked
which has given us victory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Wherein we are to
consider,

First, the gift that is given, It is victory, Division of the Text, into 5.
parts.
an absolute and complete victory over these fierce enemies.

Secondly, whence this victory comes, from Trinity.

Thirdly, the manner how it comes, by way gift, not by way of merit; blessed be
God that has given us the victory.

Fourthly, the means through whom it comes, Christ: Thanks be to God that has
given us victory through Christ Jesus our Lord. It is by the arm of Christ.

Fifthly, the end and use of all: Thanks be to God: blessings of God require
thankfulness; therefore the Apostle gives glory to him, that glorifieth us; he
gives conquest to him, that is a conqueror for us.

Thanks be to God that has given us victory, through Jesus Christ. The sting
of death is sin, the strength of sin is the Law.

This former part of the Text, describes the Adversaries extinct, and
vanquished; that which he speaks of a sting, is diversely translated by
Interpreters: some call it morsum, the biting; comparing it to a serpent, that
poysoneth, and infecteth, and kills by biting: so sin was represented to us
in the garden, by the serpent that gave the apple unto Eve.

Some take it for the sting of a waspe, the Hebrew word Kota in Hosea 13. Hosea
13.14.
signifies that which is sharp, as a stelletto; a thing that makes a present
impression; and by the puncture, it pierces into the inward parts, and brings
sudden death. So by diverse Translators it is thus read, I will be a plague unto
thee oh death: and I will be thy destruction oh hell. Many and sundry ways it
is translated, but it is sufficient for us to take that, which the last and
best translation affords: and so we call it the sting, because indeed death was
never, nor it could not be sharp unto us, except it come to be armed with
sin; nor there is no calamity in the world, no misery that a man suffers, but
he suffers it willingly, if he have a clear conscience; it being the only
rule of peace and quiet, to be free from the cause, and from deserving that
thing that is imputed, and cast upon a man. But when miseries come, not only
tedious of themselves, but they come armed with the condignity of sin, that
they have a certain correspondence in commutative justice; that he that has
done evil must suffer evil. Now it becomes of all calamities the extremest
and most miserable. Therefore it is said here, The sting of death is sin; as
though death it self were nothing unwelcome, and harsh to the flesh of man; but
that it is inflicted for sin, and as the wages of sin.

But here a man may very well make a stand, and ask how can this be? how
should sin be the sting of death, seeing it is rather contrary? death is the
sting of sin; for which is first? was not sin before death, says St.
Austin in his 7. Tom. in his 3. S. Aug. Tom. 7. lib. 3. d^ peceat. and remiss.
Book De peccatis, and remissione peccatorum, (says he) we sin not, because
we die; it is no sin to die, because it is the fulfilling of the judgment
of God upon sin. We sin not in dying, but we die for sinning, for from that
comes our death: therefore seeing sin was the cause of death, and that death
is a thing of nothing, a thing that follows afte^ sin; it seems therefore,
that sin being first, and sin being the cause of death, it follows that it
must use death as a sting unto it, and not on the contrary, that it should be a
sting unto death.

But for this, there is no great matter in the phrase; for as St. Austin, Aug.
and the rest of Divines accord with him: the Apostle calls sin the sting of
death; not that death made it, but that death is made with it, and it is made
by it; so it is called the sting of death, that is, a deadly sting that brings
death with it. As a cup of poison, we call it a cup of death; not as though
death made the cup, but because death is with it; that he that takes that cup,
shall die with it. So the tree of life, and the tree of knowledge; the meaning
is not as though life were made by the tree, or that knowledge were made by the
tree; but because the fruit of that tree would have brought life, and would
have brought the knowledge of good and evil.

This therefore is the meaning of the Apostles words, that sin by the just
permission of God, and by the deputation that God gave unto satan, to execute
judgment upon sinners: it comes upon every man armed, and it is armed with
death: the most desperate weapon that can be, that destroys the very nature of
man, and brings him to his very foundation, to a matter of nothing. This is
that sting that must prick us all at length, as (...) signifies.

Therefore let us learn, while we are now in this world, to prepare our
selves for this sting, that we do not kick against the pricks, as our Lord
says, Acts 9. Acts 9.5.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against the
pricks.

Let us therefore never grumble against the necessity of sickness, disease,
and miseries; for alas! these are nothing in comparison of death; we must
endure death it self; that prick must gall us to the heart; all the power of
Men or Angels cannot deliver us from it. Let us as well as we can entertain it,
therefore, and not kick against the pricks; for we double our wound if we do,
and plague our selves more: there is no resisting of those things that be of
necessity.

Let us take heed withal, seeing sin is called the prick of death, or the
death of death, which is all one; let us take heed (I say) that we multiply
not sin, forasmuch as that is nothing else, but to double, and re-double our
torment, to an infinite measure. If a man be slain with one stab of a goad, or
with a prick of a Stelletto; though they are no less mortal, yet they are
more sufferable: but if a man shall be cast upon a hurdle that is full of
nails, and be rolled up and down upon that, that is one of the terriblest
deaths that ever was found out: and such a death every sinful man casts
himself into; the more he sins, and gives way unto his head strong
affections, the more sharp nails, points, and pricks he casts himself upon.

Let us take heed, therefore, the sting of death is sin; the more we sin, the
more nails, and goads, and pricks we thrust into our own sides; for there is
no sinner, but as he sins more, so he offends God more; and so he brings
more vengeance upon himself in a fearful manner. The sting of death is sin.

But what sin is this? is it to be accounted the actual sin that men commit,
or the original sin in which they are borne?

Surely it is true of both; but the Apostles meaning is here, to speak of
Original sin; for we see this a true doctrine, upon chlidren too, that never
committed actual sin; therefore we must give the sense of the words, the most
large and utmost extent; because we see the doctrine of the place extends it
self so far; for children themselves are pricked to death, not by actual
transgression, according to the similitude of the sin of Adam, but by an
inbred corruption, which is drawn from the seed of their parents, there lying
a poison in the seed of man, which came from the first fall, and corruption of
man, in the materials of Adam, in the substance, and bodily part, there lies a
poison of corruption; and it is strange that sin which is an intellectual
thing, a matter of the understanding; for there is no beast can sin, because
it has not the intellectuals, it wants the understanding. It is strange (I
say) that it should rise unto a material thing, which has no understanding,
until the soul be added; but so the Lord has ordained, that in the
propagation of the corrupt seed of man, there should be infused a soul, which
lying in a fustie vessel, should contract the impurity it finds there in the
matter, and so should work in both together the damnation of the party in which
it is.

Behold therefore what that fearful state or condition is in which we are
conceived, and borne into the world; It is that which death uses for a sting;
it is that fearful weapon that wounds us, and pierces us, not only for one
death, but for two, for the second death, even everlasting destruction, if the
mercy of God interpose not. This is that law in our members, that captivates,
and makes us slaves, and carries us away from the law of God. This is that
prepuce or uncircumcision of the heart, that makes us Philistines, and Aliens,
and strangers from the Lord. This is that flint stone that will not be wrought
upon by the finger of God, but hardens it self against all the proceedings of
the Lord. This is that seminary of all mischief, the original of all kind of
corruption; whatsoever a man can think of, it is included in Original sin.
For Adam when he fell from God, he was a thief, a murderer, he was a
blasphemer, he was a man given to concupiscence, he was a false witness
against his neighbor, he was the breaker of every Commandment by that
action, and his children take it from him by original sin, which is the
Mother sin of all abominations that may be imagined; and as we begin it, so
we continue the cherishers, and nourishers of it; we feed it, we bring it up,
we suckle this brat of perdition and filthiness to our own destruction, that
every man must needs be forced when he understands himself, to cry out with
the Apostle, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death? It is a body of death; it is not a limb, it is not a superficies, it is
not a quality, it is not a small matter; but it is a body, it is a legion of
devils, it is a multitude of sins, it is a kingdom of hell. This is that
beastly corruption which we have all contracted.

Let us labor in prayer, and solicit God, that the power of this monster may
be removed: for although we had no actual transgression, but we could live as
pure, and sincere as the Angels in heaven, in respect of actual sins; yet as
long as we have this moisture in us, the fire is not out, though it seem to
be smothered; and though it break not forth, yet it is not quenched, it is not
quite slacked. So much of the first part, the proportion, the sting of death is
sin; that is, original sin; because if we should take it for actual
sin, then we could not take children into the definition; but they are stung
to death, they die, and yet they have no Actual sin; therefore it is spoken
of original sin properly.

But how comes death and sin to be thus potent and strong?

The Apostle tell us, by the law.
The strength of sin is the law.
Till the law came, the edge and point of sin was dull, it was blunt; when
the law came, it whetted it, and sharpened it again, and made it more piercing
than ever it was before. The strength of sin is the law.

And how is this?

God gave the Law for a good Law, for a holy, and just Law, how came it then to
be the strength of sin? It seems God machinated a mischief to mankind, to
give him that which should make him more sinful.

But you must understand it is one thing that a man does upon purpose, and for
good, and it is another thing when the man to whom it is done can receive it
so. God gave the Law indeed as a true direction for the reformation of life,
and manners, but the party that received it, did not take it thus: thus by
occasion not from the nature of it, but by the ill acceptance of the party, it
came to be thus, to be the strength of sin. As when a Physician that is
skillful in his profession, he does all that belongs to a skillful man; the
druggs that he gives, and the ingredients are able to work their effect, if
they fall into a good body: but if the Patient be froward and will not be
ruled, or his body be distempered, he is not the better by it. Now the fault
is not in the Physician, nor in the Physic, they be both very good, but the
fault is resident in the party, that was not prepared for it, or that would not
receive it, and convert it to that use, for which it was given him. So the Law
of God of it self, is a light unto our feet, Psalm. 119.105.
and a lantern to our paths, and the light of life it self, if we be able to
follow it: but because of our own indisposition, it comes to pass that the
Law which should pull down sin, gives strength unto it; the Law that was
made to kill sin, it gives life unto it, as the Apostle tells us at large, Romans
7. Romans 7.9.
(he says) That sin was dead until the Law came in. For where there is no
Law, there is no transgression, and sin was dead until such time as the Law
came in place; but when the Law came, then sin revived: then sin began to
hew, and hack, then it began to kill, and slay, and to lead into captivity,
which is a worthy point for our consideration, and therefore I must stand a
little longer upon it.

How should it be that the Law of God which is so pure, and so holy in it
self, that it should give any life, or any strength unto sin, which it
hates, and condemns?

I say, it comes to pass upon occasion of our weakness, and sinfulness;
which takes not the Law of God for that end which he gave it for; but to a
contrary end.

The first reason, why the Law by occasion becomes the strength of sin, is
this, Chrysostom.
(as Chrysostom says) that it makes our sins manifest; a man that is
detected grows the more desperate: as long as he can keep himself quiet, and
be secret, and unseene, he is more modest, but when he comes once to be
opened, when he comes to be discovered to the knowledge of Gods Law, and to the
knowledge of men; then he begins to ruffle with God, and with the Law; and he
will approve and make a defense for those things that are damnable: the Apostle
does insinuate the reason, Romans 8.9. Romans 8.9.
where he says, till the Law of God came, he did not know concupiscence,
except the Law had said, thou shall not lust. This you know by experience, that
there is great difference between a foolish and an understanding servant: (The
Lord Jesus says) the understanding servant that knows his masters will, and
does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes: As long as sin is not known
it lies hid, it is asleep, it works faintly; but when the Law comes, and
gives light to a man's understanding, that he knows himself; that he knows
God, and the promises of the Gospel, now sin multiplies, there is no such
sinner, as a wise sinner; there is no such sinful person, as the learned
person, because his knowledge makes his sin apparent, and makes him detected
of the world; and so inrageth him to maintain, and make that good which is
evil, and naught in it self. A simple ignorant man, although he carry the
Devil about him, yet he is not troubled so much: he sins more easily, he
has weak passions, he sins within compass; he sins as bruit beasts do,
which seldom or never transcend the limits of nature; and they exceed mankind
in many respects, in moderating their lusts and concupiscence: but when the Law
of God comes in place, it rouzeth a man from his ignorance, which would damn
him; and shows him the good will of God, it shows him the acceptable year of
the Lord, and what the hope is which he is called unto, and what are the
treasures of the Gospel: It shows himself to himself; and now the rage of
sin is more impetuous, and violent then before. For now he lives, he was
dead in those former times; when he was ignorant, he was quiet: When the strong
man keeps the house all is quiet, but when a stronger comes to thrust him out,
then there is an uproare, and tumult in the house.

S. Chrysostom.
Again, another reason is, (says St. Chrysostom) in this that God does stretch
forth his prohibition, the nature of man is always to desire, and long after
that which is forbidden: and there is nothing that inflames his affections, so
as the prohibition of the things he desires. Would you have a book sell well,
get it prohibited; the only way to make a woman to be a blabb, is to bid her
keep counsel: it is the nature of man still to affect things unlawful, and
interdicted; and so much the stronger the interdiction is, so much the more
they are inflamed in the desire they have to accomplish it.

To conclude this point, because we cannot endure that our free will should be
curbed and restrained; it comes to pass that the Law of God by occasion, is
the reviving and increasing of sin; for we cannot endure the liberty of our
will should be curbed and checked; but we would live as we list every body: and
this we see was in the first temptation of our first parents: Satan comes to
them; What, has God made you to live as slaves under government? does he
keep you under the rod? does he keep you within the pale? has he forbid
you one fruit of the garden? As if he should say, because he had forbidden
them one, it was as good as if he had forbid all: so our first Parents they
could not endure this, they could not abide to be kept under; to be made
boys and children; to be under a Pedagogue, to be under a Tutor, and
governor as it were: not to make choice of their own affections; if God had
made them to their own choice, well and good; but now the Lord has made them
under the government of others, he has made them under a Law; and they cannot
abide that. And so it continues in the mind of man still, he will have his own
mind, though it be contrary to the will of God; and though he hinder himself
he will have it, if it be to the damnation of his own soul; if he get hell
for his will, yet he will have his will. This poison being in our nature, makes
good the doctrine that we speak of, that sin revives; for the Law of God
beats upon our sins, and makes us say and confess, if we will follow the
guidance of it, Not my will, but thine be done. Let me not seek after mine own
will which is base and corrupt, but after thy will which is holy and just. The
Law of God would teach a man to say thus; but contrariwise, that which flows
from a man's self, it seeks it self; and seeing he cannot please God norman,
he will please his own soul: As the Poet says, Delight thy own soul; care
not what other men speak, or do, or think against thee. This is the woeful
calamity of our nature, over which we must desire God to give us the victory;
and behold it follows in the Text: But thanks be to God which has given us
victory through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Which words I can but enter into, of the gift or blessing which is vouchsafed,
victory.

Victory is always welcome; but especially when it is achieved against a
dangerous enemy; The child of God is borne to be a Conqueror, as (St. John
says,) 1 John 5.4. 1 John 5.4.
Every thing that is born of God overcommeth the world. Every thing that is
borne of God; where the Fathers observe, that the Apostle speaks in general;
he speaks in the neuter gender; to show that there is no man that is so mean,
or so vile and base, of whatsoever condition he be, that he may rather be
called a thing, than a man; yet that he has the spirit of grace, by that he
is able to encounter, and overcome the world: and this victory that we have,
it is over such powerful enemies, as that except God had promised it, except
God should work it, all the power in heaven, and earth, could not attain unto
it. A man that is borne a Conqueror over his own corruptions, and over
himself, he is greater than ever was the greatest conqueror: and it is better
to be made in this kind a Victor over his own passions, than to be the
universal Emperor of all the world. Says Seneca, there are many men that
have subdued Principalities, Kingdoms, Cities, Towns, and Countries, and
brought them under their own masterie; but there are few that have guided
themselves, but still there is a Tiger within them, that disgraceth and
obscureth their outward conquest, by reason of the foul seethings, and
corruption in their own flesh; therefore for a man to get the victory, and to
overcome himself, is to get the victory, and to overcome all the world: for
man is a microcosme, a little world, as St. Austin says; thou may obtain
the victory against thy self, for thy self.

After a certain wondrous manner God has ordained a christian soldier a
militant member of his Church, to fight against himself, for himself: For he
that will lose his life (says Christ) for my sake and the Gospels, shall save
it. He that will lose his delights, and his pleasures; he that will make
war with himself, and will have no peace with his affections; the Lord shall
give him that peace that passes all understanding; and although he kill his
body with chastizing it, yet it shall be saved in the day of the Lord, St. Bern.
(says St. Bernard.) The victory is thought, and reputed in the world to be
lost, rather by flying, than by dying; for there are many men slain in the
field, that are not accounted as cowards, and fugitives, or vanquished men,
because they died upon the place; but when they quit the place, when they fly,
and are not able to hold out in the field: he that remains accounts himself
the Victor, because the rest are fled, and vanished away.

So the spiritual victory in Christ, it is lost by flying; for we should
rather die for God, we should rather die in his zeal, and for his glory, and
keep our standing, than to yield and fly from the devil, and our own corrupt
affections, and stoop to them; then satan gets the victory, when we cast away
our weapons, and play the loose scouts in the field. There is no hope of
victory in those actions. He has given us victory.

Over what has he given us victory? victory must be over some enemy?

I showed you before the parties what they are; now I am to show you who they
are that God has given us the victory over; over death, over sin, over the
law: over death, that there is not so much as a relic of it remaining there;
there is no hope that ever he shall return, and make head again: that is a
famous victory, wherein the roots of future seditions are taken away, and
plucked up; when there is nothing left for any hope of future rebellion.

When the Romans had warred with the Carthagenians, and often times overcome
them; yet still within a while, within 8. or 10. years, or less, they made
head again, and stirred up new wars, and so they had successive combustion.
And so in all the Nations of the world, there are none that are so vanquished
now, but they may become conquerours hereafter. The same thing that the Lord
has made an underling now, may be the Head, and Chieftaine in time to come.
But in this victory that we have over death, it is without any hope or comfort
on deaths part, and without any fear of suffering on our part; for it is so
taken away, as though it had never been; and that which had the greatest
triumph, the mightiest trophies in the world, unto which all Kings and Princes
have bowed their heads, and laid down their scepters; for all the goodly
things in the world have been nothing else but the morsells of death. I say
this victorious enemy by the hand of Christ, it shall be turned to a thing of
nothing; it shall have no name nor notion; it shall be left without any hope of
recovery. It shall have no more strength to sting, for the sting is gone.

The second enemy we shall have victory over is sin, because the prince of this
world sifted Christ, to know whether he were pure wheat or no: and (the Text
says) he found nothing in him, but he was as the finest flower of wheat,
without all bran of corruption, without all inclination to sin, being
conceived, and borne in perfect purity, and living in the strength of that
purity; insomuch as he defies all his adversaries, he challenges them,
saying, Who can accuse me of sin? Because (I say) our blessed Savior in all
the parts of him, had nothing but the light of purity in his eyes, in his
understanding, in his tongue, in his gesture, in his words, in his actions, in
his perseverance, in all the parts of his doctrine, in all the passages of his
miracles, there was nothing else but a fountain and a world of purity;
therefore death incroaching (by the malice and violence of satan, and the envy
of the high priests) upon him that had no sin, it lost all the power, and
government that it had before; for taking away life from him that had no cause
of death in him; it follows therefore that it is justly exattorate, and put out
of place, and has lost his commission for ever: for Christ overcame sin, by
satisfying for it on his holy cross, and by his example in his holy life; by
giving a holy example to his Apostles, and Disciples, and all believers in the
world. He overcame sin, by drinking the cup of Gods wrath, which by our
sins was filled to him: and he overcame sin by his gracious example, by the
copy of his holy life; and much more by his holy Spirit, by which he diffuseth
his grace to thousands and millions in the world that believe in him; that
although there be sin now in our mortal bodies, yet it does not reign; it
commands us not to every thing; it finds us not as the Centurions servants, to
go when it says go: but it is in many things broken and dissipated, and the
Lord has beat satan under our feet, that is, the usual work of satan,
sin, and foul impressions in your souls and understandings.

Thus the Lord has given us victory over sin, in himself fully, in us it is
begun: but for that we shall have occasion afterward to discourse. The Lord
himself being free from all sin, he was therefore a Conqueror over that
pestilent viper, that poison of our nature; and he gave his people the infusion
of his Spirit to guide them, by the which Original sin is weakened, the sire
is abated and allayed, the edge of sin is lessened.

The last is, over the Law. That still is the greatest enemy; that still lays
before us the judgments of God, Do this and live: Do that and be damned.
Follow this course, and thou shall be damned for ever. If thou be a drunkard,
if thou be lustful, if thou be covetous and worldly, if thou be revengefull
and malicious, the sentence of damnation is passed upon thee: that is all the
comfort we have by the Law: but Christ has given us victory over this enemy,
which follows us at the heels, when we do amiss; and still puts us into
qualmes of conscience for our misdeeds, and curbes and bridles us by the checks
of conscience; that if a man could but see the end of these foul actions, as
he sees the beginning, he would never do them; because there is no equality
between the short time of sinning, and the eternity of punishment. But against
all this Christ has given us victory: for he has fulfilled the law of God, he
has stopped the crimination; he he has stayed all those slanders, and all
those accusations that the devil would make by the law, or that those that
have been curious observers of the law would make; and those accusations that
an evil conscience would make by the power of the Law of God, which has
enlightened it. He has silenced all these in this life; but the consummation
of this, we must understand is to come, when this corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality. They are now gone
before in the head, they shall then follow in the body. (Says St. Austin, Aug.
) Whatsoever Christ has done in his own body, it shall follow in our mortal
bodies; When he shall change them, 1 Cor. 15.
and make them like unto his own glorious body, according to his mighty power,
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.

This is that goodly victory, in the which the Lord has interested us all. To
conclude, and refer the rest till the next time.

I beseech you (beloved in the Lord) let us consider what part we have in this
victory: we ought not to insult and triumph in a vain presumption, in
blessings that pertain not to us: but if we think we have the victory, let us
labor to find it, and so enter into judgment with our own souls, who it is
that overcommeth. Apoc. 3.
To him that overcommeth will I give to eat of the tree of life in the midst
of the paradise of God: to him that overcommeth will I give a white stone, etc.

And what must he overcome?

He must overcome himself, and all his passions; he must overcome the fear of
death, the power of sin, and the terrors of the Law. A fearful encounter,
and a great troop of enemies is laid open; the Lord strengthen poor David,
that he may be able to encounter with this mighty Goliath; for it seems that
hell it self is open upon him: when therefore we do give our selves that
liberty as to do what our selves list, against the good will and command of
God; let us not think to have any part in this victory: we are rather as so
many conquered slaves, and vassals that lie at the command of death; that
whereas we should tread Satan under our feet, Satan tramples us under his, and
makes us the most base, and vile creatures in the world.

Thou that have enough in this world, and yet can not tell when thou have
enough, but still art distracted with envious desires, and make thy self
great by other men's falls; that raisest thy own fortunes by other men's ruins;
that usest any means, good, or bad; by hook, or by crook to advance thine
own estate, to make thy self rich, and set thy self only to the study
of the Idol Mammon; what kind of victory, or what hope of conquest can thou
have in that great and mighty victory, which we pretend the Lord Jesus has
given us? surely none. There is no such gallyslave in the world, as a man that
is given and addicted to his wealth, and riches in this present life: for it
pierces men through with many sorrows, as the Apostle says, They that will
be rich, 1 Timothy 6.
pierce themselves through with many sorrows. Behold the sting of death, is the
sting that pierces them, the sting of death is sin: and this sting, it
pierces through the heart, and stabbs the soul of every covetous man in the
world, that they cannot claim any part of that victory, which God communicates
to his children; but they are foiled base creatures that are made for slaughter
and destruction.

And so again, for them that live in their pleasures, in their voluptuous and
filthy courses; that will grow old in adultery, that will make no end of their
filthiness, and uncleanness, but with greediness seek when one prey is
enjoyed, how to obtain another, these that make their vessels that should be
Temples of God, the brothell-houses of the Devil; that are no sooner tempted
but they yield: these coming Creatures, how, or with what face, with what
confidence can they lay claim to the victory, that we have in God through
Jesus Christ our Lord, being nothing else but bruits, and are given over,
yielding themselves: they have taken the mark of the beast, and follow Satan's
direction and command, as if Christ had no power to be their Chieftaine, but
the Prince of darkness must rule.

The like may be said of all these malicious prowling spirits that be in the
world; that take delight to sting their brethren, to do mischief without
cause: to sow the seeds of dissension, that will wrangle out their lives to
trouble others, to bring upon them endless suits, and questions, that shall
never be decided, to vex the world with begging, or buying of new found
offfices, to make their hands full out of every thing, sacred and profane; to
play the very roaring Lions in their dens, that no man can tell how he
should live, or keep himself quiet with them: That these Creatures (I say)
should come, and claim any part in this victory, that we have in Christ, it
were a fanaticall madness, a ridiculous base delusion. Therefore let them that
are willing to comfort their own souls against the day of trouble, let them
think that there is no comfort to be had but in this victory: and there is no
comfort can be had in this victory, except they strive to be Victors, and
Conquerors in Christ: to have a part in him, and to fight as well as they may
under his banner; as long as they live in sin, that they seek it, and study
it, and mainetaine it, and defend it; let them delude their own souls, and
deceive themselves, which is the grossest, and most fearful deceit of all
others, for a man to deceive himsefe: they may think they are Conquerers, but
they are the Devils vanquished ones: they are his captives, they are held in
the Devils Irons: God be merciful to us, for there is none that lives in sin,
but the poor miserable thief that lies in the dungeon, is better then he.

But this victory notwithstanding is the Churches, and we are of the Church:
we are baptized, we are called to the knowledge of the mysteries of the
Gospel; and God does not call men for nothing, he does not make his mysteries
idle. It is true therefore, as long time as God has vouchsafed us, we have
still time to be victors, and though our souls cleave to the earth, though
they stick to the pavement, yet God can raise us out of the dust, and make us
equal with the Princes of his people, as the Prophet David says. Psalm. 113.


Therefore let us call to the Lord God, and though we find no strength in our
selves, nor no means, nor will: if there be not so much as a will, yet let
him that has the wills of men in his hand, that has the hearts of men in his
hand, and turns them as the rivers of waters, let him do as it pleases him;
let him work this for us, that can work nothing for our selves. To whom be
praise, and glory, obedience, and thanksgiving, both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection.
1 COR. 15.56, 57. But thanks be to God that has given us victory through
Christ our Lord: therefore (beloved Brethren) be steadfast and unmovable,
abounding in the work of the Lord always, because you know your labor is not
lost, nor in vain in the Lord.
THere is nothing more certain, Note.
then that it is the portion of a Christian soul to fight, and labor in this
life present; The Church is a militant Church, a People that are always at
combat, and conflict with the devil and with men; and if these fail, with
himself too. Says S. Austin, St. Aug.
we would feign be freed from this fight, from this continual perturbation;
but the comfort that God has given against it, is that as we are called to a
trial: so the Lord assists us too in the day of Trouble, and assures us of the
victory; that howsoever we cannot overcome all these enemies by any grace that
is inherent in us, but that we are often foiled and conquered, yet we have
another Mean to conquer them by; that is, by faith: and the apprehension of
the victory, that the Lord Jesus Christ has purchased for us, over the devil,
and all these Adversaries: and this victory can be given us but by one hand, it
lies only there to dispense; that is, in the hand of God: which is the Lord of
Hoasts, and Armies. It is he alone that enclines the battle, it is he that
weakneth the adversaries, and that strengthens those that follow his colors;
when they are foiled, he raises up them that are fallen; it is he that
beats down Satan under our feet; that was our conqueror. This spiritual
conquest is of all others the most excellent, for the rest (as Isay Isay 8.
says) They are gotten with tumult, and with tumbling of garments in blood.
But this conquest that we have in the Lord Jesus, it was like a Lamb-slaughter
in the day of Madian. You know in the day of Madian what kind of victory it
was, Gideon went out, he did nothing; the Lord did all for him: for still he
brought down his troops from thousands to hundreds, to three hundred, and when
they were to be set to work, they did nothing but only clash their broken
pitchers; and the Lord wrought a great slaughter in the Host of Madian. Such a
victory is the conquest we have in Jesus Christ our Lord: he is still the
victor, that got the conquest without all appearance of second Causes, without
all union of forces, and power in the world, that God may be all in all.

In other victories there be many sharers that may claim a part in the
conquest, there is something belongs to the General, some to the Colonels,
some to the Captains, some to the other Officers, some to the common
Soldiers. There is no man but he may claim a part in the common victory. But
in this victory that we have obtained, by the means of Christ Jesus our Lord,
there is nothing that belongs to any but to God; Therefore the Apostle says,
Thanks be to God: thanks be to no man, thanks be to no Angel, thanks be to no
power that can be supposed to help us: but the thanks and praise must rest in
God alone, which has wrought all this for us. As the Heathen Orator said to
Caesar when he had overcome his anger, and had pardoned his Enemy: In other
wars (says he) there is a communication of the praise of the wars: it
belongs to one as well as to another. But in this victory which thou have
gotten over thy self, Orat. pro Milone.
in giving, and forgiving; thou have gotten the glory The like may we much
more truly say of God, as the Apostle says here, Thanks be to God, and to none
but to him that has given us victory; for he alone with his own hand, and his
stretched out arm, Psalm. 94.
has gotten himself the victory, as the Psalmist says. So Tertullian Tertul.
speaking of this point, in his fifth book against Marcian, Chap. 10. The
Apostle (says he) being well advised how the conquest comes to a Christian,
he gives no thanks to any other God; but him alone that put the word of
triumph and insultation into his mouth. That God that gave him power, to say,
by way of triumph, Oh Death where is thy sting! Oh grave where is thy victory!
To that same God that gave him the word of triumph, he returns the word of
thanksgiving, and retribution of praise, because it belongs only to him. If
Marcians god, (as Marcian supposed he had another god than that which is the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,) can tell me such things as he has done; or
that he has published any such thing to the world as this: I will account him
the Father of mercy. But till then, I will account him Marcians Idol, a mere
Idol. And S. Jerome S. Jerome.
speaking of this argument, Thanks be to God that has given us victory through
Jesus Christ our Lord. For (says he) who was there to do it but God? Who was
there to encounter all these enemies, but Christ alone? His friends forsook
him, his Disciples left him; Isay 45.
(as the Prophet says) It was I, and none else that stood in the battle.
Therefore (says S. Jerome S Jerome.
) to him alone belongs all the praise of the victory. And S. Austin S. Aug.
most heavenly and graciously discourses of this point: When I consider the
victory of a Christian (says he) which is this, that his chief and deadly
enemy is swallowed up by Death; and by what death was he swallowed up? by the
death of life. That is a strange saying, that Death should be swallowed up by
the death of life. Why should I doubt to say that of God, which God has not
doubted to do for me? God has certainly performed this for me, therefore I
may speak, and affirm this of him. What is the matter therefore that the
Apostle says, we may insult thus over Death, and give thanks to God for the
victory? because (says he) that Life being dead, did kill Death, the fullness
of life, did swallow up the bitterness of death: and all death and misery is
dissolved, and consumed in the body of the Lord Jesus. So S. Chrysostom says,
In this great war (says he) the trophee was planted by the hand of the Lord
himself, he set down the standard; he set down the place; and note, and mark
where the enemy was discomfited, and left the field. But after that was done,
he cast out garlands as after the battle is won, after the field is won; the
Emperors devised Crowns, and Garlands for those that had been Conquerors
with them: But the Lord finding none there but he himself, he calls the
bystanders; we that had not sought a stroke; yet he vouchsafed to cast unto
us Crowns and Garlands: and has made us to communicate, and participate of
that noble and glorious victory, which himself has only attained.

But this point of Doctrine must be brought home more familiarly: for this is
true to those that be men of judgment, and understanding: they make no doubt
of it; but I must make it plain to babes and sucklings.

How is it possible therefore that the victory of Christ, which he got over
sin, and over death; that it should be ours? seeing both personal actions be
uncommunicable, that which is done by one person, is not communicated to
another person; because the act is confined in him that did the act.

And seeing also that the children of God as long as they live in this world,
that they cannot be called Conquerours of their temptations; for they are
conquered many times: and he that is the best man in the world, though he
sometime overcome, yet he is many times overcome too. Nay, almost the least
temptation, although it wound not a man to the heart, yet it draws blood of
him; as (S. John says) If we deny, and say that we have no sin, we deceive
our selves. If we say he speaks of himself, and the rest of his fellow
Apostles; 1 Ioh. 1.8.
If we say that there is not sin in us; that there does not sin remain in
us, we lie, and the truth of God is not in us, we deceive our selves. And the
Apostle says, That he was a miserable man himself under captivity, Romans
7.19. and 23.
and that good thing that I would do that do I not, and that evil thing that
I would not do, that I do. What a miserable kind of conquest is this? Can a
man be said to be a Conqueror in this miserable state, when he can do nothing
that he would do, and does all things that he would not do? How can this be
agreeable? Besides; we see in the examples of the Children of God, that they
have had no conquest; but have been foiled. What conquest had David over his
great and grievous temptations? We shall see almost nothing that was offered to
him, but he fell in it: When he comes to be a Iusticiarie, which is the easiest
matter in the world to do Justice; yet he failed in that, and gave to a false
servant half his Masters good. And when it came to a matter of revenge, he
failed in that too: when he made that rash vow, that he would cut off from
Naball, all that turned to the wall; besides, the foul fall that he had
afterward: so that what victory had this man? what victory had Manasses, that
afterward was saved by the miracle of mercy? What victory had he over those
murtherous attempts, and conceits that he had, whereby he put to death many
thousands of Gods children? What conquest had Solomon, when he was brought from
his high wisdom to that low ebb? when he was brought to serve whores, and
devils, and Idols? and yet he was a Type of Christ, and is a true Saint in
heaven.

The Thief on the Cross what conquest or victory had he? nothing in the world,
except we account that victory, to control his fellow thief: and to stand and
speak a word for Christ. To conclude this point: seeing there is calling at
the eleventh hour, and as long as a man has life; he has hope to be called
to the service of God: and many are not called until the last period of their
life. It seems therefore that a Christian has no conquest in this life, for he
is carried to do that which he would not do; and he cannot do that which he
would do: for all the examples in the Scriptures carry us in a contrary
stream. How then is it said we have the conquest and victory?

For the first, I answer thus, where it is said, that all actions personal are
incommunicable; It is true: except they be general persons. If the man be a
private peculiar person, the action rests in himself; but if he be a selected
uniuersall chosen person; the Action does not rest in himself: but it extends
it self to a great multitude, even to all that belong to him. Such an one is
Christ, his Actions are not personal to be limited to himself; but by way of
merit they are applied, and extended to all the world of Believers. We may
understand this by those things that God has given us, by the comparisons he
has made unto us in the Scriptures; as being figures and forerunners of his
blessed Son. In 1 Samuel 17.8, 9. 1 Samuel 17.8.9.
look there at that mighty president, the fight between Goliath and David:
which figured unto us the fight between the devil and the world, and all
adverse powers on the one side, and the Lord Jesus our Chieftaine on the other
side. Mark what the Captain of the Philistines says, Why (says he) should
we join our selves in battle the whole Army? let there be one man chosen out
on either part, and let us have a single combat, and let us end the quarrel
so; and if he overcome me, then we will be your servants; and if I overcome
him, then you shall be our servants. Behold, here are but two men that fight,
the action of fighting belongs but to two persons; but by the power of God,
David overcame; and the effect of that victory redounded to thousands; to Saul
which was the King, and to all his Courtiers, and to all Israel, to all the
people of God: the power of David's victory belonged to them all: and so the
action of David, it was not limited to his own person, because he was a
chosen man, a chosen vessel set forth by the Spirit of God to this victory.
Therefore the power of the victory was beneficial to all his Countrymen; much
more is the victory which Christ has obtained against the powers of darkness;
he fought alone, and he overcame alone. It is true, the personal act belongs
to him alone; and he deserves only all the glory for it: but the extent of
the act he communicates to his friends, to every true Christian. It is that
which is called our victory, because the Jew overcame the Philistin: Therefore
all the Jews overcame the Philistines, because our flesh and nature has
overcome in Christ, for he was flesh of our flesh and bone; therefore our
nature is advanced, and exalted by him, that is the Victor; and he being the
Conqueror; we that are his friends, and kinsmen, are Conquerours with him,
though we have not struck one stroke in the battle.

Again, observe in the like: Genesis 14.15, 16
when Abraham came to destroy those 5. Kings, and to rescue Lot; and the four
Kings that were defeated, that Text says, that Abraham alone, and his own
people got the victory: but when he had done, the glory of the victory was
given to all those that had lost in the battle, every man had his own as far
as might be restored; and Abraham would not gain so much as the latchet of a
shoe, lest they should say they had made Abraham rich; and so the power and
glory of his victory, was communicated to those that had any dealing in the
war. Therefore (I say) if this were possible in humane things, how shall we
doubt of it in the Omnipotency of the Almighty, that the victory of Christ is
made common to all that believe in him? and they have part in that victory that
can claim it, that can entreat it of him; they are made fellow conquerers,
although they had no hand in it, nor made no appearance in the doing of it.

Again, we see in 1 Samuel 30. 1 Samuel 30.
when the people were ready to stone David; and he receives an answer from the
Lord, that if he would follow those robbers, he should rescue the prey, and so
by the mercy of God he did; but there were two great rubs after he had got the
conquest: The one was when the soldiers came to divide the spoil, whether
they that had fought in the war, should have all or no? To which David says
no: there were 200 men which were not able to follow them being faint, and
therefore were feign to stay by a brook; they could go no further in regard of
their weakness; and the soldiers that got the battle, after they had the
victory, they would have had them to have had no part of the spoil, because
they went not forth with them. But David says no: 1 Samuel 30.24.
Who will trust you in this thing? who will believe you in this matter? they
that stay by the stuff, they shall have as good share as they that fought in
the battle, because although they went not with us, yet their good will was
with us, therefore they shall have as great share as we.

Again, when the spoil came to be divided, he sent of it to several Cities
and Towns thereabout; to them which never had any hope to have rescued their
own goods, he sent unto them, saying, Here is a blessing from the Lord to
such a town, and here is a blessing from the Lord to such a town. Behold! now
how is it possible for us not to believe, that we have part in the conquest of
Christ? We see David, which was a figure of Christ, he does thus; they that
were not able to follow, they that could not march along with them, they have
part of the prey; and they that never came out, they that did not dare to
rescue their goods, they have the prey sent home to them. Our Lord Jesus Christ
is far more rich in mercy, then any man can be imagined to be; he sent unto us
the spoils of hell, the spoil of death; and he made us partakers of his
victory, although we were so faint and so fearful, that we could not march
in the battle, nor stand with him, because he would have all the glory and
praise alone; yet he takes not the victory alone, but he gives us part and
possession; he gives us part of the spoils of his enemies, he makes us
Conquerers of all those that he has conquered. So then to conclude this point,
there are two ways, how Christ makes us partakers of this victory.

The one is by way of Application.

The other is by way of Corroboration.

The Application of faith is this; 1. Application.
That Christ does take unto himself all his followers, to receive their life,
and nourishment, and their being, and glory from him: and upon this promise,
faith does work, and says, Christ is mine, and all Christ belongs to me: He
was incarnate for me, he was borne for me, he lived for me, he died for me,
he rose again for me, he overcame for me, and whatsoever he did it is mine;
that is the power of faith, by way of application, which God has given as a
duty, or office to the holy Spirit; that the holy Spirit must apply the Son
of God, and his merits unto us; and by this means of application, we are made
Conquerers.

The second means is Corroboration. 2. Corroboration.
When faith has applied Christ, it receives comfort and power; and with that
strength that God has vouchsafed it, it works its best against the powers of
darkness. That it hates, and detests evil ways, that it shuns iniquity, it
labors to avoid all means of apostacy, and backsliding from God, and seeks
every thing that may please the Lord, with an upright, and perfect heart: and
though he cannot do it, yet he seeks to do it, and he wishes perfection when
he is in the lowest, and basest degrees of imperfection.

Therefore out of this we learn; that if we would have comfort to our selves
of the victory of Christ, to join these together; application, and
corroboration.

We are too forward to apply to our selves all the merits of Christ; every man
says, Christ is mine, but when it comes to the push, and when temptation the
enemy appears, we are then so base, and so cowardly, as that we flee almost
before we have seen the enemy: like men that rather desire to be overcome,
then to be conquerers; like those that have neither will, nor strength, to
stand in the battle.

Let us therefore call unto God that gives both, to give us application, and to
strengthen our spirits by his powerful inhabitation: that as we know wherein
our strength consists, so we may be able to exercise that strength we have
received, that our faith be not in vain, (for a dead faith is in vain, says
Bernard S Bern.
) for he that overcomes must be a live man, there is no dead man that can
overcome; and he must not only be a live man, but he must be quick, and
able; for a sick man cannot fight. Let us therefore labor that as God has
given us faith, that it may be a living faith, that it may be a working faith;
that it be not a dead faith, a vain imagination and fancy, but that it may be
vivere, valere, vigere; that we may be strong, and courageous, and quit our
selves like men, in the battle of the Lord, that we may stand in our
strength, that we may hold that tenent of victory, and glory, and conquest
which the Lord Christ has put over unto us. So much of the first point,
concerning the personality of the action.

Secondly, how can this be made good? when as the children of God by
experience find in themselves such weakness, that they are conquered almost by
every temptation. Show me that covetous man twenty years ago, that is a
liberal person now, and I will say it is a miracle: but he holds his old
course still as he begun, and grows rather worse every day. Let me see that
man that has been a drunkard heretofore, and is become a sober and temperate
man now, and we will sing a poena, a hymn to God for his deliverance. And so
for the lustful man, if he begin to follow that course once, he follows it,
and holds on to his dying day; except God work a strange and mavelous
deliverance. And seeing that every man in the world is tainted with this, that
according as he is given, and inclined by his corrupt nature; do what he can
he shall hold a tang of it to his death: And the Lord does not this for any
harm he wishes them, but to exercise their humility in the sight of their
frailty, that they might see their weakness, and to exercise their faith.
Therefore seeing that every man is thus inclined, as by nature, and corruption
he is bent; how can we be assured of the victory? how can we take any glory in
this that we are conquerers, when we are trod under foot, and foiled every
where? when any passion of anger can put the best, and the wisest man out of
himself, that there is no man that can rule himself in any passion, the least
matter of revenge makes a man forget himself, forget his Christian charity,
and he boyles in his blood till he have some recompense for the wrong done
him. The dearest child of God that ever was, cannot say, but that look what
temptation he has been given to by nature; still he has a sting of it to his
death, to his dying-day, and where is the victory then? what conquest is this?
When a man suffers the least wrong, presently to swear, or curse, or fall into
angry terms, as though there were no Spirit of God to rule him? when a man is
offered a matter of gain, and advantage, that he will set it upon the
tenters, and wrest his conscience to bring it in, although it be false, though
it be against the common good of his brethren. What victory can this be?

But for this we must understand, that the greatest comfort that we have is
this; that though we cannot overcome the work of the temptation, yet we
overcome the evil of that work. For our victory consists especially in our
faith. 1 John 5.14.
This is the victory whereby we overcome the world, even our faith, and in the
next verse after, who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes
that the Son of God is come in the flesh, and has reconciled the world to
God. So that although it be true indeed, that faith must be a living faith,
and we must prove it by works; yet notwithstanding when all comes to all, the
worth of the conquest, shall not rest in the work of the person of man, but in
the faith of the man, that apprehends the victory of Christ. This is the
conquest that Christ has imputed and imparted to us.

A man that has no good works, has no testimonial, and he that has no
letters testimonial, when he travels the Country, he is accounted a
runnagate, and vagabond, and is clapped up every whereas he goes. So it is with a
Christian man, that has no desire to please God by the testimony, and evidence
of a good life: And yet notwithstanding, when the Lord comes to deliver the
reward, to give the retribution, he does not so much examine the dignity of the
work, but the dignity and soundness of faith, whereby we lay hold on the
principal, whereby we lay hold of him that is the Captain of our nature, and
in him we overcome. For we must consider, that the victory is without us, and
though God give us grace many times within our selves to overcome temptations,
yet the maine victory is without us, in Christ Jesus, therefore we are to fly
to him, and to desire of him a perfect conquest, and that all our imperfections
may be shrouded under his glorious victory. This is that that makes us
conquerers.

To conclude this point, we see it in the Father of the faithful, in Abraham;
he is commended for his faith; but there is no great matter of any works, (as
the Apostle says concerning works) he had no great matter to glory before
God; he could not glory before God, before men he might.

But what was his righteousness then?

The righteousness of faith, and belief: Abraham believed God, Gal.. 3.6.
and it was imputed to him for righteousness. This was his conquest and
victory; that he believed God: he hoped against hope, that God was able to give
him a son, now he was an hundred years old: and that he was able to raise
the dead womb of Sarah, and give them the promised issue: that he would give
him the land of Canaan where he was, though not for his own possession, yet
to his posterity, and that this land of Canaan was a figure, and emblem of
heaven, that glorious Kingdom which is above. These things which were far
above reason, and common sense; that God should make them apparent to his
sense, that he should make him verily believe that they should come to pass;
this was his righteousness. Abraham believed God, Iam. 2.23.
and it was accounted to him for righteousness; he believed God that he was
omnipotent, and true of his promise, and that was accounted to him for
righteousness: So in us that are the children of Abraham, although we must
study holiness, Heb. 12.14.
without which no man shall see God: and we must abhor all the works of
darkness, and come into the light; yet we are so frail in this flesh, that we
cannot do the one, nor the other. But miserable wretches! we have two laws,
the law of our members, and the law of God: and so we must conclude with the
Apostle; Romans 7.25.
I serve the law of God in my mind and spirit, but the law of sin with my
members: and yet he concludes in this place; thanks be to God, that gives us
victory in Christ Jesus our Lord.

To conculde this point. It is the faith that a man holds in God, the faith he
has in Christ, that makes us Conquerers, and gives us the victory. It was this
that armed the thief upon the Cross: when he had done nothing all his life
time, but played the thief, and robbed, and oppressed, and played his
tragical part in the world; yet he showed himself to have one mite of faith
in the end of his life, and for that he was accepted: And Christ says unto
him, Luke 23.43.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: That whereas the Pharisees, and
Priests, and Scribes thought Christ to be justly executed, and put to death;
yet notwithstanding he put his faith in him, and believed that he was a King,
and that he had a great portion of glory reserved for him; and that he was
able to communicate it to his followers, therefore he desires to partake of
that glory; Luke 23.42.
Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom.

Now I come to the last point of the precedent verse; Thanks be to God since
we have the victory in Christ Jesus our Lord: that is, since we have both
received the fullness of the conquest imparted to us, and also the first fruits
of the Spirit, by which we are able to overcome, though not fully to overcome,
yet to overcome by the power of his victory, and to be accounted conquerers,
though we be but cowards. Thanks be to God for this great gift, and mercy of
imputation. The holy Apostle (says Theodoret Theodoret.
) has concluded all his discourse with a necessary line, with thanksgiving,
and praise to God. For indeed, as we are bound to thank God for every thing
that we receive, so much more for the chief and principal things that we
take from his hands. There is no thing so gracious as this, to be victors, to
be borne to be Conquerers; and to be conquerers over such enemies too, as have
conquered all the world this many thousand years together: that in sight, that
there was nothing that domineered, nor nothing got the victory but death, and
sin, and hell: and to conquer these miscreants, that had overrun all the
world; this is the hand of God which is to be rejoiced in; and if there be any
blessing for us to bless our souls in, it is this, that we are conquerers in
Christ, says St. Austin: Aug.
For (says he) If I must thank God for every petty benefit, what greater
reason can I have then to give thanks for chief and maine benefits?

The grace of God in Jesus Christ our Lord, is that which gives us this
victory. Thank God, (says St. Bernard) thank not thy self, St. Bern.
thank not Saints, thank not Angels, thank not preparatory works, thank not
foreseen merits, thank nothing else; but let the praise rest wholly, and
totally in God. It is he that did all, therefore to him be given all praise,
and glory for ever and ever.

FINIS.
SERMONS On 1 COR. 15. Of the Resurrection.
1 COR. 15. ult. Therefore beloved brethren be steadfast and unmovable,
abounding in the work of the Lord always, because you know your labor is not
in vain in the Lord.
WE are come now to the conclusion of this Chapter, which follows most
naturally, (as Chrysostom says) Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye
steadfast, etc.

It is a true conclusion, when a man has fully proved the premises: he that
concludes a thing before he has argued well, and proved the matter he
discourses of, he is either a fool or a falsarie; for it must needs argue it
is a lie, when a man will ground upon uncertain grounds. It argues also
weakness in him, when he thinks he has persuaded without sufficient ground:
for there is no wise man will be persuaded without due confirmation, and
demonstration of those things that are argued. Therefore now the Apostle comes
in as an excellent Orator, to conclude, not upon poor grounds, nor upon weak
evidences, but upon strong persuasion and demonstration, (says Tertullian.
Tertul.
) He uses all the strength of the holy Ghost to persuade to this powerful
article of the Resurrection: his meaning is with all the power of the holy
Ghost that he was capable of; for else the power of the holy Ghost is as
infinite, as God himself is infinite. But now when the Apostle had driven this
doctrine home, when he had so beat it into them, as that there was no scruple
left to any gainsayer or contradictor; when he had showed the cause of the
Resurrection; when he had showed the manner of it; when he had showed the
absurdities that would follow the contrary doctrine, if men did doubt of it;
when he had showed the effects and consequents of it, of that glorious
incorruption and immortality; when he had proved it by force of holy
Scriptures, Oh death, I will be thy death: oh hell, I will be thy destruction.
When he had set down all these firm and maine presidents: it is time for him
now to bring in his conclusion.

He is a foolish builder, that will set up the roof of his house, before the
walls be built; and he is an idle discourser that will offer to bring a thing
into his Auditory, upon any trivial reason; but the Spirit of God teaches us
first to settle the understandings, to persuade the minds of men, by strong and
puissant arguments; and then to draw forth conclusions: for he must first move
a man's senses and understanding, and then draw his will; for the will is always
pliable to the conclusion, but the understanding is attentive to the
demonstration.

All this while the Apostle had held the understanding, giving demonstrative
causes; and such reasons, as no man could contradict him in. Now that being
done, he closes with the will; and that is easily brought if he can persuade
the understanding: therefore he says, Therefore my beloved brethren: that is,
seeing these things are thus, seeing I have told you the will of God in this
point, that Christ is risen himself; and that he is risen so palpably, that he
was seen of more than five hundred brethren at once; and that he is the Head
of the body; and that therefore all the members must be raised up at one time
to come with their Head, and be joined unto him. Seeing that there is no
religion, without the faith and hope of the Resurrection; there is no religion
in the world, but all must be taken away. Seeing that the Lord is able to do
what it pleases him, and that he does it in the corn, in the grass; that he
makes variety of all things in the world, that there is one kind of light of
the Sun, 1 Cor. 15.
another of the moon, another of the stars; that there is one flesh of fish,
another of beasts, another of fowls: the Lord that is able to work this
strange variety in things of this nature, much more shall he in that second
refined nature, in that proportion of glory that he has ordained for us.
Seeing therefore that I have made this plain to you, that I have showed you
the manner how we shall rise; by the noise of a Trumpet, and by the voice of an
Angel. Seeing I have proved this by the Spirit of prophecy, out of the
Prophet Isay, and also out of Hosea, that death has lost his sting, and the
grave has lost his victory; seeing all these things are so plain, that there
is no man can take exceptions against them, Therefore my beloved brethren, be
ye steadfast and unmovable, etc.

This is that sweet Rhetoric which the Spirit uses in the book of God, and
which we find no where else.

If we read the writings of Heathen men, of Philosophers, they conclude before
they have given satisfaction to him, that they would draw to approbation: they
would draw him to probation, before they have proved it; they give a reason or
two of a frivolous thing, that a man may speak against them as well as for
them: and yet they will draw a man, and bring him to their faction, or else he
is accounted an adversary. This is the wisdom of men, to steal away the
hearts of men, to seek to be masters before they have gotten the masterie; but
let the truth of God come, and then I will yield. So the Book of God it brings
the truth, it brings the testimony of God which cannot lie; we see this in the
power of God in the creatures, in the daily use of them: we see it in our
fields, in our closes; we see it in our gardens, we see it in our selves, in
our own natures, God has made an experiment of it. Therefore upon this firm
argument, grounded upon experience, upon Scripture, upon nature, and upon all
these demonstrations, Beloved be ye steadfast and unmovable, etc.

Let us learn this excellency of the holy Ghost, that whatsoever we persuade
men to, to give sufficient, and good reasons of it, and not to bring in false
or idle conclusions, but to show good reasons for that we persuade unto.

And then observe, in that he says, beloved brethren. This is the way to
bring in his conclusion. Love me, and say what thou will, S. Aug.
(says St. Austin) therefore he calls them brethren, and beloved brethren, as
being willing to fasten the conclusion upon them: (as St. Jerome S. Jerome.
says) As the hair brings in the thread, and so the work is made, and fastened
not by the hair, but by the thread: So the words of amity and love bring in
the doctrine of Christ, that it may be a work of needle work: as it is in Psalm.
45. Psalm. 45.
The Church stands in a garment of needle work, wrought with diverse colors. He
calls them here by a worthy compellation: Brethren of the same mother, brethren
in the same faith, brethren as having their denomination of the same father;
brethren as having drunk of the same Spirit of God; brethren as those that
shall rise with my body in the common resurrection of bodies; brethren, as
those that are incorporated, and ingraft into Christ our elder brother:
brethren as those that keep a consort, in the tune in singing this song,
Thanks be God that has given us victory, brethren in all these things: and
brethren most beloved as in the bowels of Christ, beloved at the heart root.

I beseech you take this as the conclusion of all, and take it as a brotherly
exhortation; I speak nothing, but it comes from the affection of a brother;
take it as a brotherly word spoken with a brotherly mind and heart. I beseech
you beloved brethren, be steadfast and unmovable, etc. But I have often met
with this, therefore I will stand no longer upon it, to show the mildness and
sweetness of the Gospel, it does not terrify, and threaten men to believe
this or that; but only in the way of clemency, to persuade; he works not upon
them violently, but persuades a man to yield to reason, to hearken, to be
tractable, to be ruled, to be docible: I require no more. The precepts of men
are hard, and grievous, they will force men to obey, where they give no
satisfaction to the minds of men; but I deal not so, I come unto you as
beloved brethren. It is the sweetness of the Gospel, that it has this
influence into the hearts and affections of men; he deals not as if he were a
ruler over their faith; he deals not as the tyrants of the antichristian
Church, to make them under pain of Anathema, to believe this or that; the
Apostle might have done it, as well as any other man, in this special point,
and article of the Resurrection, who would not put Anathema upon him that would
not believe it. But the Apostle uses, and takes another course, Therefore
beloved Brethren. It is a word of a brother, it is a word that comes from God
our Savior, and it is the tenent of our common mother, the Church of God, the
Spouse of Christ; therefore take it as brethren.

And what is this word that he says, Be ye steadfast and unmovable?

The word signifies properly a man that sits fast upon his seat: So the
Apostle would give us to understand, that the devil and wicked carnal
temptations, do always labor to unsettle a man, to put him out of his place,
to set him beside his cushion, as we use to say; but the Lord would have him
still to hold his place, and to keep his seat, to be a man still resolved, and
not suffer himself to be displaced or disappointed, but to be like unto the
Square or Cube, that which way soever it turns, rests still upon its self;
and if it be of a greater bulk, than the party that moves it, it cannot be
moved, because it rests fully settled upon one side; or if it be removed it
still holds it self up, which way soever it goes; for every side is alike,
and one side will bear it all. So the Lord has set us upon a cube, upon a
square foundation, not to be removed: and therefore he would have us look to
that seat, that he has set us in, and we shall be safe; there is no body that
shall unsettle us, for the Lords own hand has planted us.

Let us keep our seat, which the devil seeks to thrust us out of, and we shall
be well enough; for we have Gods assistance to keep us in: that is the first
instruction.

Then secondly, be steadfast and unmovable: that is, in respect of outward
enemies, which come with great violence in your open profession, to displant
and dislodge you. Be not moved, that is, be not blown away with every blast of
doctrine, be not shaken with every earthquake, that satan moves unto us: be
not removed out of your seat, be not removed out of the point of that seat,
wherein you were set before: for so the words are, be not removed from the
point, including a mavelous perfection, that a man must keep him constant to
the very point of the place that he is in; the devil ofttimes seeks to remove
men, and although he cannot altogether remove them out of their place, out of
the seat of their holy faith and profession, yet he will remove them from the
very point of their place, he will make them dispute of some points, he will
make them doubt of some things, he will make them question somewhat.

No, says the Apostle, suffer not any motion to come upon you; not so much as
the shaking of the place wherein you are; the great mother the earth that
bears us all, when the wind which is in her bowels and concavities cannot
break forth, then the earth shakes: but the child of God must be stronger then
the earth; he must not be shaken: although he shake concerning his obedience,
yet not concerning his faith, which still is planted in the Lord, upon the Cube
Christ Jesus.

Behold, here is the duty of Gods child: those that are truly grounded upon
Christ, they must be like a house built upon a rock, that when winds or
weather come, they cannot prevail against it: so strongly it is built, that
all the waters are broken against it, but cannot down with it. (Says St.
Austin) While the waves of the sea threaten the ruin of the house, Aug.
they are turned into froth: so while they seek to ruinate the house of God,
which is like to the Mountains of Jerusalem, which stand fast for ever, and
cannot be removed. It it like the Army of God that keep their station. This is
the duty of every true Christian.

As for false hearts that will turn their religion upon every trouble, and
will suffer themselves by disputations to be brought from that to another way;
these have no part in the victory of Christ, but they are foiled, and tumbled
under by every temptation that Satan brings upon them, for there is not any
place for staggerers, and cowards, nor for any but those that apprehend truly
this victory, by a demonstrative faith in Christ. There is no other means
whereby they can lay claim to the victory of Christ besides this, for by faith
we stand, Romans 9.
and it is that only which lays hold on the conquest by Christ.

The next thing that he exhorts them to do, after they be settled in the
faith; is, that they be careful to extend themselves to good works, Iam. 2.
for faith without works is dead, therefore he says, always abounding in the
work of the Lord.

Where we are to consider; Division of the Text into 4. parts.
First, the object, the work of the Lord. Then the degree of it, abound in
that work. Then, the extent of it, always. And the reason follows after,
Because you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.
If your labor were in vain, I would not wish you to make any continuance in
that course; but because your labor is not lost, therefore beloved brethren,
be steadfast, and unmovable in the work of the Lord, etc.

In the work of the Lord. Every good thing may be termed the work of the
Lord: both in respect of the beginning from whence it comes; and in respect of
the reference, and end of it, to which it tends.

All good works are from God, there is no good thing in us, 2. Cor. 3.5.
that is, in our flesh. We are not sufficient to think a good thought, all is
from God. Therefore as there is no good thing naturally in us, so there is
nothing that is good that comes from us naturally, but it is from the Spirit of
God; so they are called good in respect of the Original from whence they come.
Every good gift (says St. James) and every perfect work also, Iam. 1.17.
is from him that is the Father of lights. That is one reason, why every good
work is called the work of the Lord.

Again, every good thing is called the work of the Lord, because it is
referred to the Lord, and is done for the Lord. Matthew. 25.
So, whatsoever good work is done to these, it is done to me. All is for him,
and for his glory: as it is he that gives the power of the work; so the
effect, and fruit of the work is to be returned to him, he that gave the
beginning of it, he also is to have the end of it: So the work of mercy is
the work of the Lord. This is true; but it is not that work of the Lord, that
the Apostle speaks of in this place. The work of the Lord is not every
general work, but some particular peculiar thing. The Fathers therefore are
in diverse opinions, but I will stand upon the choice and best of them.

Some think that the work of the Lord here, is the Gospel; Abound in the
work of the Lord, that is, in the Gospel, which Christ came to preach
himself, which he came to testify, and witness by his death and passion,
that is the work of the Lord, that glorious work, by the which we are all
saved. Be steadfast in the profession of that holy Gospel.

Another opinion of the work of the Lord here, is, that it is the work of
charity to the poor: which is true, it is the work of the Lord.

But I take it, the best and principal sense of the work of the Lord in this
place is, the Article of the Resurrection: Be steadfast in the work of the
Lord; that is, be steadfast concerning the Article of the Resurrection, for this
is the work of the Lord, and upon this all the rest depends: set up this, and
all the rest will follow; take away this, and all will fall down. If it were
not for this, our preaching were in vain, and your hearing were in vain, and
all your labor lost, as you heard before; but you have not lost your labor,
as he says in this verse; therefore when he says, Be steadfast in the work of
the Lord, his meaning is, in the profession of the Resurrection of the body;
that Christ shall raise them by virtue of his resurrection, be steadfast in
this work. And this work does not exclude the other works, but it draws
them in: Because I believe that there shall be a resurrection, therefore I
believe the Gospel preached; therefore I have faith in Christ; therefore I
assent to that which is written in the Gospel; and because I hope for a reward
at the resurrection, therefore I give alms to my brethren, I exercise works of
charity, and do good to my fellow members, because that one day I hope to be
proclaimed a member of the Son of God. Upon this work therefore follows all
the rest, this is that great work of the Lord, which is called, The work of
the Lord; by way of excellency. All good things be the works of God, It is
true: but, the work, the singular work of the Lord, is this, whereby he
raised his Son from the dead, the total of our faith, and resurrection, the
only thing that makes us assured of salvation. Romans 10.
If thou believe with thine heart, and confess with thy mouth, that God has
raised Christ from the dead thou shall be saved, (says the Apostle.) Behold,
the whole work of salvation runs upon this, and though there be other
things required; for he that believes must be conformed to the glory of God,
which has raised his Son, yet the maine, and chief point of a man's
salvation, is this; that he believe, and confess that God has raised his
Son Jesus from the dead; and that he shall give life unto those that are
dead, and those things that were conquered, he shall make them more then
conquerers: This is that that saves a man.

2. Part the degree. Abound.
Be abundant always in the work of the Lord. It is not only necessary for us
to work the work of the Lord, but we must be abundant in it; God does
require of us an eminency: for it is true, that unto him that works by the
grace of God that he has received, there is a commendation, and a testimony
due unto him: yet notwithstanding if he rest satisfied with his small measure,
he cannot aspire to this dignity, to partake of the conquest of Christ,
because he does not abound in the work of the Lord. Abound in the work of the
Lord, that is, be abundantly able to comfort thy self in this matter of the
resurrection, and to comfort others that shall come to take comfort of thee:
The child of God must abound, as a River that keeps not the water that is in
it for it self, but disperseth it to the dry ground: so the children of God
must abound in the work that they have by the Lord, in the work of charity,
in the work of belief, and apprehension of the Articles of their faith: In
every thing the Lord will have them abounding creatures.

In the first beginning it was the blessing of the Lord, increase and multiply:
Genesis 1.20.
we see of two creatures, he made a great world by that blessing upon it.

And as in natural things, much more in spiritual: a man must increase and
multiply, he must not stand at a stay, but abound, and go forward. He must
abound, not to supererogation (as the Papists would have it) a man cannot be so
abundant as to have enough for himself and others; God knows, he that has the
most has too little for himself; for it is the merit of Christ that must do
all. For this is the meaning of the Apostle, where he says, Be abundant in
the work of the Lord; that is, that they should not content themselves with
that measure that they had received, there is more before; forgetting that
which is behind, and pressing forward. So that if a man have done that which is
good, he must not think that he has done enough, but he must go forward in
well-doing, and not be weary. Whatsoever good work the Lord has in him, to
crown, and accomplish it with perseverance; it is that that makes up all the
graces of God, and that is it which he says here, 3. Part. The extent.
Always.

A grievous thing it is to be set to work, there is no man can endure labor,
and work; especially the work of the Lord is hard, and contrary to flesh and
blood, which is made easy by the grace of God, but when a man has begun, he
thinks he may safely with a good conscience leave off after a short time, and
so he falls to be cold in his profession of those good things, which formerly
he contented himself withal. He that has been in the service of God from
his youth, a long time, he thinks he may take some respite in his old age: he
thinks his earnestness, and fervor, and heat of zeal in his youth may admit
some kind of allay, and his former zeal may be a sufficient defense for it: A
man that has given to a poor man, he thinks he has been very beneficial
when he has given so much, and he bids him come no more at him; he has
done so much for him already. When a man prays, when he has done his
devotion in the morning, he thinks whatsoever occasion comes, he shall have no
occasion to pray till night. And so in the course of al holy matters, we grow
weary of the service of God; so the Apostle cuts this sluggishnesse away, and
tells them he would have them be as a fountain, he would have them abound;
never to be exhausted, never to be drawn dry; as the fountain runs always,
so the fountain of grace, in Gods children it runs continually. To what
purpose is it to give a poor man a penny to day, and see him starve to morrow?
he had as good give him nothing at all, he were as good have died to day, it
is but a days respite: the charity of Gods children must be perpetual, let
them give as they are able; but let them give continually, let them pray
continually, let them read continually, let them meditate on the works of God
continually, let them rejoice, let them give thanks continually, let them
approve the works of God continually, let them satisfy doubting consciences
continually; let their fountain be always running, let there be no stop in
the fountain of grace; when it has once begun, let it go on in a happy
stream, and flow unto all the inheritance of God. I beseech you beloved, be
always abundant in the work of the Lord.

This work of the Lord, the resurrection, be abundant in that, and in all the
rest of the works of the Lord: because the Lord is always plentiful to you in
mercy, so be you plentiful to him in good works, to draw this mercy of God
upon your own souls.

Now follows the reason of all, and it is indeed a sweet contentment to every
Christian man.

Knowing that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. There is no sign more
ridiculous, and frivolous then the labor in vain: for a man to wash an
Ethiopian, for a man to wash a brick^, for a man to take pains for that which
is not worth his labor if it be achieved, or which he cannot possibly
atchieve. If their labor had been such as this, then the Apostle should wish
them to their loss, to their great damage, and frustration. But the Spirit of
God does not mean to set men a work with a fools errand, to set men on work
without ensuing profit. The blessed God that cannot lie to any man, he has
promised, and assured that those that labor in him, they shall not lose their
reward.

The reason subdivided into 4. branches.
First then of the labor. Secondly, that it is not in vain. Your labor is not
in vain. Thirdly, why it is not in vain: Because it is in the Lord. Fourthly,
how we come to this: You know this is so; It is a thing that no man can make
question of.
1. The labor.
First of the labor. It is true, all the parts of religion are laborious, and
there is no man that takes such pains as a Christian does. When the great
Conquerers of the world have subdued whole Nations, yet the mastery was hard
for them to atchieve over themselves; that is the labor of the Lord: but the
labor that is spoken of here, is chiefly to be referred to three heads.

First, to the Ministers of Corinth, This labor is referred to 3. persons. 1.
Ministers.
you that preach the doctrine of the resurrection, your labor is not lost,
therefore have a good confidence. You preach that which is true, you preach not
lies, and fancies; but the doctrine that you preach, that all men shall be
raised again, it is as true as God is true: therefore you that are Preachers
hold on, be not dismayed, whatsoever those Heretics, and adversaries go
about to cast against you, and oppose you in your way. Keep the tenants of
your profession, hold on constantly, for your labor is not lost, the Lord
shall make it good. It is an idle thing for a man to stand in the Pulpit and
tell nothing but lies to the people, such a man deserves to be stoned to death
for it, to abuse the faith, and to abuse the understandings of men; to tell
them things that God never means to do: And the Ministers of Corinth were men
that were but Novices, and there were so many heretical fellows among them,
that they were not able to answer their sophismes: and so they began to leave
off their preaching of the doctrine of the resurrection, because that was full
of arguments, and difficulties, and they knew not how to evade out of it, and
answer their Opposers. Therefore they began to give over that, and take some
other points; but no, says the Apostle, go on with this doctrine; let all the
gates of hell open themselves, they shall not prevail against you. It is the
work of the Lord, and the Lords arm is higher and mightier then the powers of
hell, and that which you say, the Lord will make it true in the time of the
resurrection of the body; whatsoever the gates, and power of hell can make
against it; that is the first sense, which Saint Basil S. Basil.
follows; and indeed it is good and true.

Another sense is of the Brethren in Corinth, that were of the common faith
among them, which were exercised in the Agonies of a christian life; as if he
should say, (Brethren) I understand you are by reason of this doctrine of the
resurrection, scoft at, and laughed at; they think you are fools, they imagine
that such a thing as this, is a mere dream; they account you creatures of
another world, and such as have a vain belief; and persuade your selves of
these schisms, which these new teachers have put into your heads: and I see
you have great troubles in your life: and these troubles that you have by your
persecution, and troubles of conscience, (which are all sweetened by the
Resurrection) they are aggravated: so that as I beseech my brethren that teach,
so also I entreat you that hear, to abound in the work of the Lord; that as
they preach, and teach, so that you may perceive this doctrine to be true;
although the world resist it never so much; this is the agony of a christian
life, with Heretics, with Schismatiques, with himself, with the world. This
is the Agony which a Christian is born unto, which some of the Fathers take to
be the labor here spoken of; so St. Jerome, Epiphanius, S. Jerome. S. Epiphan.
and diverse others follow that.

But that which I take to be the best, is the sense which St. Austin and some
others give, S. Aug.
which is this; Your labor is not in vain; that is, your labor of love.
Mark, the Apostle there reciting all the Intellectual graces of the Spirit of
God, 1 These. 1.4.
he speaks there of the labor of love: for there is nothing that has so
much labor in it as love: although it be without pains, if we regard the
outward act and work, yet the employment is great; nothing is so laborious as
love; it is still doing good, comforting those that are distressed, bestowing
somewhat to the poor out of that little it has; to spare it out of its own
mouth; to give admonitions to the peevish, to deal wisely with froward
spirits. A man were as good go about to tame a wild Tigre, as to tell men that
are settled in evil courses of their faults; yet a Christian must do this: so
this is that labor of love, the love of that blessed day, the love to the time
when a man's body shall be raised; it makes him change his place, remove his
lodging; it makes him spend his means, it makes him do all the good he can in
this world, because he hopes for the blessed resurrection of his body: as the
Apostle speaks, Acts 20.
For the hope of the Resurrection I am bound with this chain.

This is that labor, for we do not labor for nothing, and endure all this
toil and trouble; but because we look for the resurrection of the dead.

This is that labor of love that we must strive to find in our selves; that
same unsatiable and unwearied labor, that is still working, still teaching
without any intermission: and although we be not called into the Vineyard of
the Lord all at one time, all at one hour, but some at the third, some at the
sixth, some at the ninth, and some at the eleventh hour; and though the work
of them be not all alike, but some bear the burden in the heat of the day,
and some are called at the evening; yet we see all wrought until the evening,
so long as they could work. So the labor of the Lord is never to be laid
aside: Luke 9.62.
No man that puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is meet: And (as our
Savior Christ says) Remember Lots wife: Luke 17.32.
But we must be constant, as the greek word here signifies, a chopping labor,
a labor that cuts a man in pieces; there is nothing that so divides between
the sinews, and the joints, and the marrow, as the labor that proceeds from
true love and friendship. And there is nothing that makes a man more settle
himself to work, then the labor of love which is always working, like the
soul in the body. The soul and life it is in every part of the body; and
where any part is out of temper, or sick, there is heat, and anguish; there
every member condoles with that member that is affected, and out of place.

So it is with the labor of love among Gods children; 2 Cor. 11.29.
Who is offended, and I burn not? who is weak, and I am not weak? The passion
of Gods Church is as combustible matter; when it once takes hold, it runs over
all; this labor of love is the work here spoken of.

Now he shows the reason; it is a comfortable and sweet speech, It is not in
vain. The word properly signifies a thing where there is nothing, where there
is a vacuum. They say in nature there is no vacuum, or void place, but still
there is something every where; and rather then there should not be something,
things would forget their own nature: the air will descend to fill up the
room.

If a man should dig to the Antipodes, the air which is a light thing, will
descend down like a heavy body, rather than it shall be empty: and the water
which is a heavy body will ascend up; if a man draw with his breath in a
conduit, or pipe, it will mount to the top of a house, rather than there shall
be a vacuum.

Now the Lord, as he fills all things with substance, so he shall fill your
labors also: he shall give it substance, and being; there is nothing vain in
his creation, much less shall there be any thing in vain, in the regeneration.

It is a great encouragement for a man to work, when he is sure of his wages
for it; not like that foolish saying among foolish men, that take up their
money before hand; and when they have drunk it out, and spent it, then they
say they work for nothing. But he that works for the Lord, he never works for
nothing, but he is ever sure of his recompense; Apoc. 22.12.
Behold, I come, and my reward is in my hand, and plentiful is your reward in
heaven: be glad, and rejoice, for copious and great is your reward in heaven.
Because therefore your labor has a reward, it is a great encouragement to you
to the work.

The children of God work not for a blind day, for a blind purpose, but they
are sure of the consequent, they are sure of a copious reward in heaven.

But what is this to a Christian? he should do it for Gods cause, although
there were no reward; a christian is bound to do good, although there were no
heaven nor no hell?

It is true, I cannot stand upon it at this time, but only to show the
principle of it: when the Apostle says, Be abundant, because you know your
labor is not in vain; This is not a prime argument, but a secondarie
argument: indeed it is a good encouragement.

It is true, we should love the Lord, it is due debt: we are his creatures, we
depend upon him, and he may conclude of us as it pleases him, to make us
vessels of wrath, or vessels of honor: and we should do good works for his
sake, without any reference to wages; God must be loved without any cause, and
without any measure: he must be loved above all things: with all our heart,
with all our soul, and with all our strength. Says Saint Austin, We work not
for God as a mean, but as the end, the maine and chief end of all things. If
we should love God for some other thing, then we should think some other thing
better than God, and then we should make God inferior to another: we should
make him inferior to our own desires, which we must not do.

Says Saint Austin, Aug.
It is a foolish thing for a man to use that which he should enjoy, and to
enjoy that which he should use: for the things of this world are but the things
that we use, and our own salvation is a thing that we use in comparison of
God: It is God that we enjoy, and nothing else: there is nothing else that can
be enjoyed: and we must not love our salvation it self in respect of God: he
is the price of all things; all things else are of no price, but dross and
dung in comparison.

The blessed Apostles meaning therefore is not that he would have us labor as
hirelings, to give a mercenarie love to God, but to love God for his own sake:
He disputes as a man, because it is a fit argument to stir men up to labor,
because they shall have a recompense for it: the greatest argument to encourage
a man to work, to work abundantly as the Apostle says here, is to set before
him the copiousnesse of the reward: it will make him work plentifully, not for
the rewards sake, but chiefly for the love of God, and in the second place for
the other.

Therefore it is unlawful, which the Popish Doctors say, for a man to work
simply upon the sight of divine wages, but a man must work first, and chiefly
for God; and then in the second respect for the reward.

And that a man may thus do for his encouragement, it is plain in the
Scriptures; The blessed man of God Moses, Heb. 11.26.
he rather desired to suffer affliction, and persecution with the children of
GOD, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Why? Because he had
respect to the recompense of reward. So Christ incourageth us in this, that he
says, Verily I say unto you, the more troubles you have in this life, the
greater shall be your reward in heaven.

And Saint Matthew speaking of the great blessings that are laid up for the
godly, he says, Those that have borne part with Christ in the doctrine of his
regeneration, they shall sit upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes
of Israel.

Aug.
The reward, says Saint Austin, is that that sets a man in spirit; and if we
would sustain our labors, and troubles, let us look to the recompense of
reward as Moses did.

And as St. Paul says, These momentany afflictions, they work unto us an
eternal weight of glory. And as Calvin Calvin.
says well, when the Apostle says, So run that ye may receive; 1 Cor. 9.24.
says he, If you take away the hope of the reward, all the hopefulnesse and
alacrity in running the race, it does not only wax cold, but it falls down,
and fails; for the hope of a reward from the Lord, it sets us up to make us
work chearefully, because we serve not a churlish Laban, but a cheerful
God: we serve not as Jacob did a long time to little purpose, for two wives,
and two maids, and a little flock; but we serve the blessed God, that gives an
infinite reward: for a cup of cold water, he gives a glorious Kingdom for
ever and ever.

Your labor is not in vain. Why? Because it is for the Lord; because it is to
him, and for his sake; or else if it were in the quality of the work, it were
in vain; for there is nothing in us that is good; therefore it is not any
thing that is inherent in that, but it is in the power of God that can do what
pleases him, and that will give liberally, even for the least thing that we
have done, he will give a great recompense; it is he that makes it fruitful,
and copious, and plentiful in the recompense: it is the Lord that rewards
all thus.

And he concludes it under scale, you know that this is true; you know your
labor is not in vain in the Lord. This is that great blessing of God, that
double grace, when he makes us know the thing that it is impregnable, that it
is a thing not to be resisted, that it is such a thing, as all the powers of
hell, and darkness, and contrary disputations cannot make you doubt of.

You know this: To know, is to know by reasons natural that never fail, that
this shall be thus; the promise of God is so; therefore you know it by that,
you know it by the practice of the Saints, you know it by the testimony of the
Spirit of God, you know it by the common tenent of the world: so that
whatsoever God has spoken, he is willing to perform, and it is done already,
as though it were acted at this present time.

It is the heavenly and blessed contentment of a Christian man, that he has
the privilege to know his happiness before he has it; that man that is
advanced to morrow, that is a poor man to day; he may hope well, and wish
well, but he knows nothing; a man that goes to the field to fight in the
battle, he knows not whether ever he shall come again; as Ahab said, He
that puts on his armor, let him not brag as he that puts it off. When a man
sets forth on a journey, he knows not whether ever he shall return home or
not. When a man enters into traffic for viands, and matters of life, he
knows not whether he shall gain, or lose; there is nothing that we can tell
in this world, that it shall be thus; for time will alter, and change it.

In all the works of Philosophy, there is no certainty of the time to come; but
in the book of God, there is a certain knowledge: blessed be God for that
knowledge. It is a thing without exception, it is a thing without all doubt.

John 4.
Our Lord Christ said to the woman of Samaria, Ye know not what ye worship, we
know what we worship. The knowledge therefore of true religion was among the
people of God; so the knowledge of the promises was among them too: we know
says the Apostle, 1. Cor 5.1.
when this earthly Tabernacle shall be abolished, we have a heavenly mansion.
So the Apostle says, I know whom I have believed, I know whom I have trusted.
And in 1 John 2.15. We know that we are translated from death to life, because
we love the brethren.

This therefore is that excellent privilege of a Christian, that he has above
all the scholars in the world, that as he is made to glory, so he knows it
before: he has a taste of the Spirit, the earnest of the Spirit before, which
makes him cry Abba, Father: that helps him to pray, that comforts him in
trouble, that stands by him, that leads him, and guides him on, that never
forsakes him in the state of grace, till it bring him to the state of glory. To
the which the Lord bring us, for Christ his sake. Amen.

FINIS.
CORINTHS COLLECTION, FOR THE SAINTS AT JERUSALEM.

Seven Sermons on 1 Corinthians. 16. the first 9. Verses.

BY That Worthy and Learned Preacher of Gods Word, MARTIN DAY, Chaplain in
Ordinary to his Majesty, and late Rector of S. FAITHS, London.

Heb. 13.16. To do good, and communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices
God is well pleased. LONDON, Printed by T.H. for Nathanael Butter, and are to
be sold at the sign of the Pide Bull near Saint Austins gate. 1636.

1. Cor. 16.1.2. Now concerning the collection for the Saints, as I have given
order to the Churches of Galatia, ^ven so do y^: upon the first of the Week,
Let every one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there
be no gatherings, when I come.
THis is the last head, or common place of this holy Epistle, which the Apostle
has therefore reserved to the last, because he would have it the better in
printed in the memory of his schoollars. For all the rest indeed have been
matters of great concernment, but this most of all; it being the common office
of Christianity; and a general duty that runs through the whole body; as
the life does: For the poor you shall have always with you, says our Lord
Christ, and therefore your mercy to the poor shall be always exacted; so (S.
Chrysostom. Chrysostom.
) The Apostle (now says he) goes forward to the head and principle of all
good things. He has touched upon it before in Chap. 13. Chap. 13.1.
speaking of charity, Though I had the tongue of men and Angels; yet if I had
not charity, I were nothing. But that charity is of another kind, for that
intends the use of spiritual gifts; that a man should forget himself for the
common good: that he should not labor so much to show himself a scholar, or
a Linguist, as to speak to common capacities; that is the charity meant in
that place. But now here he speaks of another kind of charity, not in the
collation of things spiritual; but of temporal: wherein a man is put to his
proof more then, then in the other: for the conferring of sprituall things
commonly as they come freely; so they come easily; without much pain or
trouble. There is no man almost, but he will communicate his learning, and
knowledge to another gratis; but for these temporal goods that we have in this
world, they can hardly be drawn from us; and a small quantity, a poor
despicable portion is exacted: when we are brought to the best: Therefore now
the Apostle comes to that point of charity, which does most of all discern a
Christian, whereby he is best known, the parting from his own goods; the
defrauding of his own genius: of his own belly, that he may be helpful to
others.

And so this is the ninth and last part of this Epistle, for as I told you
heretofore, Divines have diversely distinguished the Epistle; but the best, and
the most near, and likely division is into nine several points of doctrine:
whereof this is the last.

The first was of taking away the schisms and divisions which was in the
Church of Christ; One was of Paul, another of Apollo, another of Cephas,
another of Christ. In the first, second, third, and fourth Chapters, that is
the first common place of this Epistle.

The second was concerning the power of correction, which the Church has by
way of excommunication; to purge it self of those that be notorious and
scandalous livers, and that is in the fifth chapter, concerning him that lived
with his mother in law, his fathers wife, and made no matter of conscience of
it, no nor his neighbors neither, but they were ready to bear him out in it.

The third head is concerning going to law among brethren, and that under
infidels too; which is in the sixth chapter, where he limits the causes, and
bids the Christians take upon them that charge, for as much as it is a thing
belonging to any man that is indifferently wise to compound, and arbitrate
matters in question.

The fourth is concerning marriage, and virginity, and widdowhood in the
seventh chapter.

The fifth is concerning things offered to Idols, and things indifferent, that
they should abstain from things that else were lawful, for avoiding of
offense and scandal, and that is in the eight and ninth chapters.

The sixth is concerning the use of the Sacraments, in the tenth and eleventh
chapters.

The seventh is concerning the improvement of spiritual gifts, how the
spiritual gifts of Prophecy, of Revelation, and of tongues should be used in
the Church of God, to the profit and benefit of all the hearers: and that is in
three chapters, the 12.13. and 14. chapters.

The eighth common place is concerning the resurrection, which is handled most
nobly all through the fifth chapter.

The last member of all is this, concerning collections and gatherings in the
Church of God; which is the subject (for the most part) of this chapter:
whereunto he adds certain solicitations, after his manner, and so concludes
the Epistle.

Now it is true he has formerly spoken of this also, of charity in temporal
things, for in 1 Cor. 9. 1 Cor. 9.
we find, that those that minister spiritual things, must receive of them to
whom they minister temporal things: and it is no great matter for them to make
an exchange of the one for the other: but because the Apostle does but touch it
there by occasion, and because the necessity of the times, and the dignity of
the argument was great; therefore he now resumes, and takes it again to handle
more copiously.

Now the purpose of the Apostle is this, to speak for the Saints at Jerusalem;
for, for them chiefly is this whole matter addressed: that they should be
provided for that were in most need. The Saints at Jerusalem had undergone a
great measure of affliction and persecution from their brethren; more then any
part of the world: for there was knowledge, there was priesthood, there was
authority, and therefore there they had the greatest trouble; whereas among the
Gentiles, and those nations that had not heard of Christ before, there was
less trouble: and it was an easier matter to put upon them the truth and power
of the Gospel, then upon the others, which were a stifnecked people, so for
the Saints there he does intercede that there might be a collection made for
them, as he had done formerly also in the Epistle to the Romans, chap. 15. Romans
15.
and he says it was the first legacy that they had, Gal. 2. Gal. 2.2.
That he and Barnabas were set on work to go and preach the Gospel; and
especially to have mind on the poor, to have regard of the poor which were
at Jerusalem: for these I say he becomes a petitioner, and he tells the
Corinthians what he would have done in three principal heads.

The first is, how they should make the collection.

The second is, how they should keep it.

The third is, how they should send it.

For it must first be made, and then it must be preserved to be presented, and
when it was presented by the Church, it must be transmitted, and go from them
to the parties to whom it was destinated, that is, to the Church at Jerusalem.

So concerning the first, he says in these two first ver. That he would have
every man to lay up by himself something upon the first day of the week: that
so there might be a stock of treasure made against the time he should come.

And then secondly he would have it kept in the custody of them, lest there
should be some intervention; because there were no officers appointed in the
Church, for this purpose at that time.

And lastly, he would have it transmitted, and sent to Jerusalem by the
Brethren; and if need were, he would go himself to make the concord.

That we may keep our selves within the compass of these words, we are;

First, to consider the matter it self desired, a collection: what this
collection is.

Secondly, the object of it, for whom it is intended; a collection for the
Saints: and who these Saints are, chiefly them that be at Jerusalem.

Thirdly, the manner of this collection; which is noted to us partly by an
example, and partly also by a special direction. The example is this, as it is
in the Churches of Galatia; as I have appointed them there, even so do you:
you have heard what I have appointed other Churches; do you so too, follow
their example,

And the direction is in the second verse.

First, to the persons.

Secondly, of the action.

Thirdly, of the time.

The persons, every man; every man must be a benefactor to the poor, to the
poor Saints.

Then the action, what he must do; He must lay it up as a treasure: they must
lay it up in their own houses, by themselves, they must be Gods Deacons, they
must be Gods Overseers for the poor, they must be Church wardens to themselves.

And then the quantity, how much, whatsoever, shall seem good, or whatsoever
the Lord has prospered them in.

And lastly, the time, when this must be done, upon the first of the week:
after which is adjoined a reason: wherefore he will have this done on this
manner; Lest when I come, the collection be then to be made: lest it be making
then when it should be made before. So the sense of the words is this, that
concerning the general collection, which you know God and Nature has taught
us to be made for our brethren; as I by my Authority Apostolical have
appointed in other Churches: so I would have you follow their example, you are
not worse then they, you are not poorer then they, you are as well able as
they, therefore insist in their steps, do as they have done, therefore my
ordinance is this, that upon the first of the week, wherein you meet together
to praise the Lord, upon that day when your meetings are in the Church, for
divine service; every man shall upon the comfort that he has received in the
Church, and from the love he bears to God; whose word he has heard, and whose
Sacrament he has received, every man shall go home, and lay down something
what he can spare, if God have given him ability, so, if not, he is not bound,
but such as he can spare out of his trading, and negotiating in the world, out
of that he shall give something: and ye shall do it before my coming,
because I will not have the Macedonians that I shall bring with me, to see that
you are behind in this matter. For I have told them that you are forward, and
if I come, and they shall see that you are unprovided, it will be a shame to
you and me too, by reason of this, I would have it done before I come; that it
may appear, that in these things you are prepared, that you have outrun my
diligence, that I need not to spur you on, and instigate you unto works of
mercy, because of your selves you are forward enough. This I take to be the
sum and sense of the words read: To proceed in order.

First therefore concerning the maine thing, the collection; this word is never
used in the Scriptures, in this sense, but in this place: and Saint Paul, (as
Chrysostom says) he calls the election, S. Chrysostom*
the collection for the Saints; or the collection of the Saints. The first
original of the word comes of Lego, which in the Greek language has its
primary sense to gather the fruits of the earth; or to gather something that is
scattered: something that is beneficial for the life of man: and so likewise
in the Latin, the word Collecta comes from the same head; and so in the
book of our divine service, where you read of Collects, such Collects for
such days; the reason of the name is this, when the time of prayer, and the
time of reading was, the people came to offer up their gifts, to offer to the
poor men's box, of such means as God had enabled them, and that was called
the collection, and the prayer that was said, was to this end and purpose to
desire God Almighty to receive that collection that was offered there with a
gracious hand, with a favorable eye, and not to disdain it, but to take it in
good worth; and so the reason of the name of Collects came into the Church: It
is true indeed, the collection of the prayers that are made in the Collects, is
still a collectio^ of the things that are read in the Epistles and Gospels, a
collection of them, and of those things that did fit the times, but the Church
joined to the collection of them prayers, the collection of those things that
God has blessed them with: so they joined prayer and practice together, they
offered freely such things as came to hand, and withal desired the Lord to
accept of their collection. In other places of Scripture it is called commonly
a communion, so the Apostle, Romans 1. Romans 1.
That I might communicate with you, and in Gal. 6. Gal. 6.6.
Let him that is taught and instructed, communicate to him that instructs him
in all the good things that he has: for the Saints of God, had all things
common, Acts 4. Acts 4.
in the Primitive Church, all things were common, they thought nothing they had
was their own; and still there ought to be a communication: as there is the
communion of Saints: by the same spirit, so there should be also a
communicating of the good and comfortable things of this world: that no man
should separate from the body, but he should have a care of every member that
wants, and make a supply unto it, according as God has enabled him.

Now the reason of the metaphor is diverse.

For some take it from the gathering of a field, which is the most natural.

And some also from the gathering of a shot in a banquet or friendly meeting.

Concerning the first, which is the most common and natural intention of the
word; the holy Ghost would teach us that the Church of God, and the people of
God are a gracious field* the field of God, the vineyard of God, the garden of
God: it is no idle place, no barren ground; but a place that brings forth
flowers and fruit in abundance; in Ioh. 15. Joh. 15.
says Christ, My Father is the Husbandman, comparing the Church to a Vineyard,
in Genesis 32. Genesis 32.
says Isaac, the smell of my son, is like the smell of a field which the
Lord has blessed. Now therefore as the fields, and the gardens, and the
vineyards by the mercy and blessing of God, and by the benefit of the former
and latter rain, and the beams of the sun, do yield forth timely fruit in
due season, and not only timely fruit, but full and plentiful fruit, so the
Church of God ought much more to demean her self, that she be not sterile and
barren, and fruitless; not to bear a little fruit to no purpose: as the corn
that is in the house top, Psalm. 1.
whereof the Mower fills not his hand, nor he that binds sheaves his bosom:
but it must corn; that there may be some remainders for the poor. As it was
in Moses law, that in all the harvest of the Jews, they must leave some
gleanings remaining still for the poor; so there must be in this collection,
and gathering fruit: Gods people being his trees, being his corn fields, and
vineyards that bring forth fruit, fruit acceptable, and fruit seasonable: in
the gathering of these fruits, there must always be a remainder for the poor
ones that have nothing. So the Lord has determined and appointed, Deuteronomy.
and made the Law; Thou shall not shake thy olive tree: thou shall not shake
all off it, but thou shall leave some here and there, that the poor may get
something. And when thou reapest thy field, thou shall not rake up thy corn al
together to thy self, but thou shall leave some gleanings; as we see, Ruth
gleaned in the field of Boaz: and when thou take in thy vintage, thou shall
not gather every cluster, but thou shall leave some scattered clusters, for the
poor to come after, and take. Thus the blessed God will have still some
relics for the poor; and which is strange, once in seven years, the poor
had all the fruit of that year, being the year of Sabbath and rest.

So then out of this metaphor, or reference, we learn what kind of persons
we ought to be, as the Lord has tilled us, and manured us, and has spent much
time and labor, and pains, and cost about us; so let us labor to bring forth
fruit, and not to remain barren, and to bring forth such fruit, as that we may
have sufficient for our selves, and something also remaining unto others, that
we may have a kind of exuberancie; a kind of superfluity to the praise and
glory of God; and to the help and comfort of our brethren that are in need.
Therefore we conclude, that where there is either no fruit, or where the fruit
is all appropriate to a man's self, that there is nothing communicated to the
Church of God: where there is no collection, there is no Church of Christ: if
there can be a collection made. For the time, it is now so full of misery, and
danger, that there are many thousand places in this Land where there is a
Church, and yet there can be no collection: for the Landlords, the great
oppressors, and bloudsuckers of the whole Nation, they have so improved every
thing, and so racked, and wrung every thing to the very blood; that the poor
Tennant cannot tell how to keep, and maintain himself with bread, and other
common necessaries. Therefore it is not to be looked for at their hands, that
which is spoken of here, that there should be a superfluity, that there should
be any thing collected for the poor Saints at Jerusalem: for themselves
perish, and starve in scarsitie, but for these things, we may rather take
delight in complaining, then conceive any hope of the amending of it.

Another metaphor is taken (as others suppose) not so much from the field, and
from the fruit of the field; as from the casting in of the shot of a company
that are met together in the way of friendship, to eat, and drink together
upon every man's money. So Cicero uses the word in his second de Oratore.
Cicero ^. de Orator.
Cressus (says he) because thou dealest with me, as with young men when they
meet together; or as other men when they meet together to eat, and drink
upon their own money, and to pay the shot: therefore thou think I will be
one of that company; I will do it (says he) so Tully uses the word; and Beza
Beza.
allows of it, and it is very fit for the purpose; and the argument agrees
one way ^s well as another: and in this it must needs be that the second is
certain. For it is true, the people of God, when they be in the Church, they
must either understand themselves to be at a feast; or else they come without a
wedding garment: for he that comes not to the Church of God with the people of
God, with an heart full of joy, and delight in the holy Ghost; and with a
desire to hear the things in the Law, and the Gospel explained; and with a
hungring and thirsting after it, to lay it up in his heart, and bring it forth
in his life, as occasion shall serve; he that comes not thus provided, is as a
man without a wedding garment Now then seeing all must come, as to a feast, as
to the feast of the great King; though we be not able to set any great cheer
before you, yet if you bring good stomachs, and appetites, you will ^ccount it
good cheer. The prayers to God, the preaching of the word, the administration
of the Sacraments, you must account them a feast, or else you are no
Christians; and when you are at this feast, it is certain God requires no man
to pay for that which he has. Come buy milk, and honey, buy without money,
Isa 55.1.2.
or money worth: yet he is accounted a simple, and base fellow that being
invited to any place in the world, that will not give the servants some thing;
that will not give the door keeper some thing, and the watters at the table
some thing: a matter of nothing, and they do it out of charity, out of love to
the Inviter, and the love that they bear to the company; and for the grace
they owe to themselves: for their own credit. This the Apostle calls the shot,
that is to be paid when the Saints meet together in the Church at their common
festival: when they are assembled, there is a shot to be paid to the poor
servants; to the waiters. Therefore in your meetings, when there is any man
that is so hunshing, and so miserable, that he will not pay his share, that he
will not come off with his part, that he will not respect those that attend,
and wait, when he grumbles at it, and will not show himself as the rest of
his neighbors* you think such a one a h^rsh fellow, fit to be casheered out
of the company. So the great God, they that come to the pl^ce of oblat^on, they
that come to his sanctuary, to his Temple: except they come with a free ^inde
to do as much good as they are moved unto, the Lord thinks them unworthy of
the place; fit to be casheered: and put out because they use such dodging, that
they will not give any thing, as a testimony of their thankfulness to the
Inviter. Either of these ways the word may be accepted. I beseech you take it
which way it pleases you: if you be fields, bring forth fruit, bring forth
profit to God; that it may be seen there is some thing abounds: and remains
for the gleaning of the poor. And if you be banquetants, those that are
invited; then give something to the poor walters, to the poor attenders in
the Church, to the Ministers of the Gospel: especially to those that are
destitute, and miserable: that it may appear, that you are no such misers, as
have left their purses at home; that make forgetfulness go for payment: let it
not be thus among you, that are the free bred children of God; but as the Lord
has enabled you, so let your works be according to the evidence, and power of
the Spirit. So much of that concerning the collection. Now for the Object,
whereupon the collection must be conferred; that is, Upon the Saints.

2. Part. The object of the collection.
We must do good to all men, but especially to them of the household of faith.
The Saints ought to be the chief men in our estimation, as they be also in
Gods, Psalm. 16.2. Psalm. 16.2.
My goods are nothing to thee, but to the Saints that dwell in the earth; in
whom I delight: and to them I seek to abound, which although it be otherwise
expounded of other Interpreters, yet the common current of the Fathers leads
me, and persuades me that way. Therefore, I say, as your heavenly Father makes
his rain to fall, and his Sun to shine upon the bad, and upon the good, as
well upon the just as the unjust: so every Christian man is bound, in case of
necessity, to supply the wants of a wicked man; whom he knows to be Gods
enemy, and his own enemy. For so God does, and we must be merciful as our
Father which is in heaven is merciful. But yet there must be a special
regard, there must be a double hand reserved for them that be Saints; for them
of the household of faith: for them that belong to God. For from God we receive
all, and to him we must return praise, and thanks: and though indeed we must
cloathe our enemies, when they be naked, and feed them when they be hungry;
and the enemies of God too, when they be in necessity, that the Lords
largess may have a certain waste, as in a Kings Court, or Princes family:
they spend many times, waste as much as a Nobleman spends in all his house; so
God will have his mercy run over, he will have it run at waste to his
enemies; yet the principal checkroll, the goodly Court belongs to his friends;
to them that are enrolled, to them especially is the benevolence of the Saints
extended: the Saints to the Saints, fellow members, to fellow members; supply
the sap, and nourishment one to another; from their common head Christ Jesus.

And who be these Saints?

Surely the power of charity is such, by the sweetness of the Gospel that
persuades it to this; Who taken for Saints.
to think every man a Saint, that we know not certainly to be a devil. For
there be but two sorts of men in the world, and if a man know not certainly
that a neighbor, or a man known to him is in the state of damnation; he must
be taken, and judged to be in the state of sanctification, and account him a
Saint. For there be Saints diverse ways.

There are Saints by birth, 1. Cor. 7. Diversity of Saints.
Now are they holy. If it were not so, then were your children unholy, but now
they are holy. There is sanctification by the faith of the parents, wherein all
our children are borne, and for which cause they are to be called Saints:
because they are borne of believing parents.

Secondly, there are Saints by profession, that is, baptism, and the Sacrament
of the Lord Jesus Christ: that make an open profession of his name, those be
Saints also.

And thirdly, there be Saints by calling, when God has brought a man to a
change: for he is a true Saint, whom God has changed, and there is no man that
can challenge to himself any hope, or any comfort in the number of Saints, but
only he that is changed from himself, that does leave and forgo his former
vanities: and betake himself to the obedience of God in Christ. This is that
we call sanctity of calling, called Saints, Saints by calling, as it is in
the first Chapter of this Epistle. 1. Cor. 1.4.


Fourthly, and lastly, there are Saints by Conversation, and good works: which
are here principally spoken of. Saints of God that suffer for Christ: Saints of
God that live according to the power of the Gospel: Saints that profess
Christ in the midst of persecuters: these be chief chosen Saints, of which
the Lord makes that glorious army of Martyrs: The noble army of Martyrs praise
thee. Out of this number of those that are persecuted, and suffer for Christ,
the Lord chooses the most glorious number of Saints, so these are the Saints
that are spoken of, that were at Jerusalem.

Concerning the collection for the Saints. The Saints at Jerusalem were most
troubled of all others in the world, but because the name is not here
mentioned, I will but only speak it to you in a word. For there they had the
high Priesthood, there they had the Scribes, and Pharisees, that carried the
wisdom of the world (as they thought) in their lips; The Priests lips
should preserve knowledge, and the people should seek it at their mouth. They
had the Law of God, and his verity, the best law under heaven; but they set
themselves against the Gospel of Christ: therefore the poor Saints had no
such strong persecutors in any place as in that. And besides Agabus in Act. 11.
foretold that there should be a great famine, which seemed now to be raised
when the Apostle wrote these words, it seems the famine was then upon the land
of Iudaea; It is said that it came in the days of Claudius Caesar, but it was
spoken of in the days of Caligula, the event of it was in the third or fourth
year of Claudius Caesar. Suetonius and Tacitus that write of that Emperor, say
that search was made by the Romans for all strangers, and they were put forth
of the City, the famine was so great; and Claudius Caesar made a haven, which
is now out of use: but after that it was a famous haven, which he made by
digging a mouth out of the River Tiber, by which means he brought provision
into the City, and made a passage for all the world, at all times (as Dio the
Historian said.) This famine therefore which Agabus foretold, was the cause why
the Apostle wrote now, to make provision for the Saints at Jerusalem: for the
Lord had sent an heavy hand of scarsitie among them. Besides the persecution
they endured, and those two woeful events perplexed them wondrously: therefore
the Apostle desires that their charity might abound to them: as their misery
had abounded.

So out of this we learn.

First, that the Saints of God may want, Saints may want.
and stand in need to be maintained. The Apostle tells us, that he was a
petitioner for the Saints; therefore the Saints be men that may be in want. The
Saints of God are very needful here upon earth, and it is a thing that I need
not prove; all experience confirms it. The Lord God is able to give them of
the dew of heaven, and of the abundance of the earth, to make them lords of all
the soil; the Lord of heaven has promised them the blessings of this life,
and of another: a better (as the Apostle says) yet notwithstanding they want
many times, and stand in need of other men; and happily of worse men then
themselves are in the book of God: what is the reason of this?

Why the Saints are in want.
First, because God would show us that they be weaned from this world, that they
are greater then the world, as Saint Chrysostom says, speaking to a
Philosopher, Thou know not how to master thy affections, thou know not
how to be in poverty, and in disgrace: but I will show thee out of mine own
bringing up, how we are able to bear these things, and to contemn them. So
the Lord by this would show that his children are of another spirit, of an
higher spirit which the world cannot comprehend; but they can easily comprehend
the world: and cast it behind them. For they look for a City whose builder
and maker is God: they expect the treasures of heaven, which are reposed in the
bosom of Christ, therefore they scorn these things below, they do not mind
them, but for the present necessity. Only as Severus said of his soldiers,
that those were his best soldiers that were the poorest; and when they began
to grow rich, then they began to be naught: so in the school of Christ, the
Saints are trained up in poverty (as the Poet says) if you will bring up a
boy, a young man, to be a soldier; learn him first to endure poverty: learn
him to lie hard, to fare hard, to encounter all the hardages which nature it
self can hardly bear; and which these delicious fellows cannot endure to
think of: let them first master them, and then they shall be able to overcome
their enemies. And so in the field of Christ, the Lord suffers his Saints to
want; not because he cannot provide for them, nor because he does not intend to
help them; for those that he will give heaven to, will he not give them earth,
if it be for their good and comfort? but the reason is, to bring them up in the
discipline of war, to train them up for soldiers, to train them as weaned
children: lest they should be taken away with the pleasures of the world, and
drowned in the vanities of this life; and so forget God, and their own souls
health, which is most of all to be regarded.

Secondly, ^ Reason.
another reason why God suffers his Saints to want, is because he would show
the mystery of his providence, that great and wondrous mystery; that having
nothing, the Saints possess all things. That a man should be hungry, naked,
and thirsty, and yet never disappoynted, never starved; that he should be so
strangely preserved by the omnipotent providence of the Lord; that rather then
fail, the fowls of the air should bring him meat as the Raven did to Elias.
The Lord would show by this, that his eye has a regard unto his children, that
he will feed them in the midst of dearth, in the time of famine, and though
all things want, Psalm. 34.14.
though the Lions pine, and suffer hunger, yet the Lords servants suffer none.
The Lord trains them up in the want of these things, that he may fill them
with greater things, with those infinite blessings in the world to come.

And for this cause we do not only find in Scripture, that Jacob was
sometimes a poor man, but the children of Israel was a poor nation: in Deuteronomy.
Deuteronomy. 26.5.
26.5. I am a poor Syrian, and my father was a poor Syrian: when they were to
come with their basket to offer their first fruits, the first word a man was to
say to God, was this, that he and his forefathers were nothing but mere
beggars, poor things. And we see it afterward in David, for ten years, he
was a miserable poor man all the time of his persecution. We see it also in
Job, he was stated in great wealth, yet because God would make a declaration to
the world: what he was able to do in the midst of misery, he divested him of
all that he had before, that he might requite it with a double portion
afterward. And for Lazarus and the Apostles, and our Lord Jesus Christ
himself; we know that he was poor: the Foxes had holes, and the fowls of the
air had nests, but the son of man had not where to lay his head: he that was
the head of the Church, had not whereon to lay his own head.

Comfore.
Therefore this must be a comfort to Gods children here in this world, if they
be poor: The servant is not above his Master, it is enough that he be equal
with his master: the head has gone before, and sanctified the cup unto me.

2 Observe. Not to resp^ct men according to outward means.
Secondly, observe out of this, in that he says, toward the Saints of God,
toward the holy ones, that this word Saints, makes amends for that he said
before: this word makes amends for the other word, where he said Poor. For
though they want and stand in need of a collection, yet it is enough that they
are Saints, and so here we are taught, Not to respect men according to their
outward esteem, according to the outward means and place that they have in
this life; but rather to make that estimate of them that God makes of them, to
see how they be esteemed in Gods books: and so account of them.

The fashion is now in our times, away beggar, away bankrupt; every man scorns
a man that is behind hand; a man that is underfoot, that is not able to carry
his face out in the world, they cannot endure his company, they scorn to
receive any word, either of admonition, or of consultation from him: for every
man is esteemed now by that he has; that is, in the trash and treasure that
he has in these outward and temporal things: not by inward and spiritual
things, there is no account made of that. But (beloved) the holy Ghost tells us
that we should swallow all baseness in this greatness, the greatness of this
to be a Saint, to be a holy man; ought to countervaile all: and to cut down
all respect of baseness in the men we have to deal with: what if he be poor
and base? yet it may be he is holy, it may be he is a Saint, and it may be thou
art not so, and then there is infinite difference between him and thee; and
though thou account thy self as a great meteor above him, or as the sun in
the firmament, and him but as a clod of earth: yet understand it is Gods
esteem that shall carry it, it is Gods judgment that shall prevail, and man's
judgment shall be evacuate and annihilate; for he is not commendable that man
commends, but he that God commends; and he that is in the love and favor of
God, is greater than the most glorious Persian Prince in the world. There is no
such commendation as this, to be a Saint, to be a holy man, to be accepted with
the Lord.

Labor therefore to be that which he is, rather then that which thy self is,
and put no confidence in vain riches, which belong often times to devils; and
which make no difference between a child of God, and a child of darkness,
and which may soon be taken away: he that is now a rich man, may to morrow be
a poor man: but to proceed.

3 Part.
Now follows the manner: we see the collection what it must be, and for whom.
Now follows the manner how this must be done. Where first we will speak
(though it be a kind of inversion of order) of that that he implies by way of
a special precept.

And then of that he prescribes by way of example from other Churches.

Of the first he says, that the manner and order of the collection must be
this; That every man must lay up by him, he must put aside by himself
something; whatsoever God has given him, and enabled him to give, and it must
be done upon the first day of the week, where there is, First, the persons.
Secondly, the act. Thirdly, the measure. Fourthly, the time. The persons, Every
man. The act, Lay by him. The measure, as God has prospered him. The time,
Upon the first day of the week.


But I shall not be able to run through these discourses, therefore I will
briefly go on a little further, and incroach upon your patience, to show a
little the manner of this collection.

First for the persons. The persons.
It is said, Every one, Let every one lay by him: What? shall every one lay up?
poor as well as rich? shall the servant that has but wages he can scarce live
upon, lay up something for the use of the poor? Many of the Fathers, (and
Saint Chrysostom says) in direct terms, Ch^ysost.
that whether he be poor or rich; whether he be Master or Servant: he is bound
and tied to this precept, and commanded to lay up something for the poor; and
so it is according to the advice of the wise man, Give of that which thou have:
If thou have but little, do thy diligence to give of that little; and
notwithstanding the great authority of that most holy father, and the rest that
hold with him; I think there is no necessity of this consequence: for I take
it, that God binds no man to impossibilities, and I know this, that there are
many men whose means are so poor, as that they are fitter to be receivers to
take from others, then to be givers: and for servants it, is certain, many of
their means and wages are so slender, as that they have scarce enough to
maintain their own bodies. Therefore seeing the great God that sets men to
work, will never call them to a work that is impossible; he will not call men
to a necessity of inconvenience to their persons and states: but he would have
men to consider their place, to consider the state they are in. Certainly the
Lord does not call to such a general collection, as that all should give, but
according to their place and ability. Therefore I take it this universal
Term, Every man, is to be restrained to that which follows, according as God
has enabled him. Now God has not enabled every man, therefore every man is not
bound to make this collection. It is true, if you know him a man fit to be a
receiver: you ought to give somewhat; but because there be diverse sorts and
ranks of men; some God has made to be givers, and some to be receivers;
therefore I conclude that every man cannot be a giver: because then the
distinction of difference should be taken away. The second member of the
distinction should be taken away, and there could be no receivers: for one
beggar to help another, it is impossible, indeed by admonition and counsel,
one may do it to another; but by way of help, and worldly support, they
cannot do so; therefore I take it (...), is to be referred only to him, that
God has enabled out of that superfluity and abundance God has given him, to
give something to the poor Saints.

Now for the Act, 2 The act.
he says, they must lay up: they be words of exceeding comfort, that he must
lay it up as a thing never to be taken from him, and he must lay it up as a
treasure, he must lay it up as a thing that shall be of much advantage to him,
lay it up as in a treasure City, lay it up as a thing against to morrow, that
is against future time; because a man is still doubtful of the future, he has
for the present, but he knows not what he may need after, therefore a treasure
is laid up for a time he knows not of, for an evil time. So then the holy
Ghost would give us comfort in this, that man that lays up for the poor, he
lays up treasure, Matthew. 6. Lay not up treasure here on earth, but lay up your
treasure in heaven. And this treasure it must be made of the richest things,
either of jewels, or of gold or silver, because they be of most price, because
they are contained in the least room: a man makes no treasure of other fruits
of the earth, he makes not a treasure of corn or fruit, but of gold and
silver, that is a treasure where much wealth may lie in a little compass. So
the holy Ghost has taught this for our comfort, that that man that gives to
the poor, he has great wealth in a small room: although thou can give but
little, yet notwithstanding if thou give according to that which God has
enabled thee, it is not the quantity of the gift, but the quality and mind of
the giver that is accepted with the Lord.

He must lay up by himself: Why by himself? why should he not bring it to the
poor man's box? why should he not bring it to the Churchwardens? to the
Overseers for the poor? to the Collectors for the poor?

Because there were no such officers appointed then in the Church, the Church
was but young, it was but then in the cradle; and by reason that they were many
of them poor men, that could lay up but every week a little, they would have
been ashamed to have brought so little, therefore the Apostle bids them lay it
up, keep it by them, that many littles might make a mickle, as the Proverb
is, and that so many crumbs might come to be a whole loaf; and then to present
it, when it was an acceptable gift: when it might carry some show with it.

But here we may see what was the wonderful goodness and conscience of the
Church in those times; every man was his own Lord Almner: his own Treasurer,
he laid up for God, and for himself what he could well spare for the Saints of
God, he laid it up every week: If the men of our times were put to this
passage, they would abate from it for their own allowance, and when their
friends, and acquaintance should come to them, they would draw some thing from
the treasure that they had laid up for God.

Let us be ashamed of these base and vile exorbitances, and aspire as much as
we may to that sincere zeal, and affection, that was in Gods people in former
times; which were true accounters to the Lord God; and laid up every week what
they could spare for the honor of God, and for the good of his people; at the
command of the Apostles, that they should be masters of it, they laid it down
at their feet when they called for it, and they would never take any part from
it: for then the Apostles would not have trusted them with their own: for a
man may be good this week, and lay up somewhat for a good purpose; the next
week he may be a drunkard, and spend that he laid up before; but they were
still constant; that which they had laid up, and consecrated to the ways of
God, they were as careful in the keeping of it.

Let every man lay up by himself. Upon this Saint Chrysostom C^rysost.
worthily comments: I pray thee, good Christian, know thy honor; thy Church is
thy house; and thy house is made a Church by this means: for that that is
given to Saints, they are holy goods, they are holy gifts, and the Lord has
made thee a Deacon to thy self: behold thy great honor, the Lord has chosen
thee to be a Deacon, and a collector for the poor; to be a Treasurer for the
state of the Church.

Now then let us labor also for this perfection, that whatsoever we vow to
God, whatsoever we do to him, that we keep and hold it. When a man is to go
on a journey (he says) if God will send me well on my journey, I will give so
much to the poor; this vow stands upon record in heaven: the Lord takes notice
of it, when he comes home again he forgets his vow; and never looks after the
performance of it. A man goes by an Hospital, and says, he will give them
somewhat when he comes back again: and when he comes back he thinks not of
it; Imagine what you will, although you forget it, yet it stands on account in
Gods book, he will call you to a reckoning for it: and if you sneake away,
and will not pay the shot, the Lord will take it upon your bodies, and souls
in hell. For you must not think to pass a vow to the Lord in a good mood, for
a good purpose; but the Lord will take it: and exact it at your hands.
Therefore let every man lay down for himself, God intrusts every man's self,
he trusts every man's honesty: This should be a great comfort, and a means to
provoke us to be true to God.

Let every man lay by him in store. For if every man should have brought it
presently to the poor man's box, it might have been thought to have been done
out of a present passion; and that he would have taken it out again afterward:
after it was cast in, if he might have had leave. But for a man to be constant
in it, to let it stand by him a month, or two months, or a quarter of a
year; that he says, and resolves, this they shall have, whatsoever become
of me: I will not abate a penie of the stock of God, of the stock of
charity; when he says, Let every man lay up by him in store: his meaning is,
that God will call every man to account, if he be inconstant, and forgetful
of his vow, and promise, the Lord will not let such a one escape.

As whatsoever God has prospered him with. 3 The measure.
First, what is this that he must put apart, whatsoever God has prospered him
with? so we may turn it, (...). quod ei been successerit. s. placuerit.
but the word is a rare word, and therefore it is diversely expressed by
Interpreters: some say that which is fit, some say that which he thinks good,
and these are true: for there is no man herein compelled to do any thing but
what he does out of his own heart, of his own free will. The Lord loves a
free-giver, a cheerful giver; and he will have no constraint. Yet Expositors
come not near the glory of the word, for it is a metaphor taken from
Merchant-venturers; that cast their goods into a bottom: it may be half their
estate sometimes, it may be sometimes all: and if God give them a good voyage
they are made; if not, then they are down the wind; undone. So it signifies a
good journey, or a good voyage; you have the word twice over in the Scripture,
both before, and after this. In Romans 1.10. says the Apostle, I pray to God
continually, if God would give me a good journey to come to you, (...). The
same word is used here, hodos, a journey, heodos a good journey. As the Lord is
pleased to bless a man in his trade, and course of life; so the word is used
in 3. Ioh. 2. Beloved brother, I desire of God that thou may have a good
journey, that thou may prosper, and be well, and in good health; as thy
soul prospers: that thou should have a good journey in all things. So by
these two places you understand, what is the meaning of the word, that whereas
all the provision of the life present here is made upon casualties: there is no
man can tell, when he sets up how the Lord will bless him before the years
end: some run bankrupt: some again get by the mercy of God: the Lord sets
up one, and brings down another. Men in their trading here, be as Merchant
adventurers upon the Sea, there is as great adventure on the Land, as on the
Sea: and there is not greater danger there then here: so when it pleases God
that the ship comes well from the sea, that it brooks all, that it escapes all
rocks, and pirates, and comes home full fraught: then all the neighbors rejoice
about it, and show their joy by shooting off pieces of ordnance, for the great
benefit they have received: and give thanks to God by this merriment. So when a
Merchant man upon the Land drives out his Trade by his frugalitie, and good
husbandry: and by his just dealing keeps a good conscience to all men, and
the Lord raises him out of his 100. l. unto an hundred and twenty, or more:
the Lord requires some custom to be paid, some impost money, there is some
scot and allowance to be made. Therefore, I say, we must pay this tribute, it
belongs, it is due unto God: For this good journey, for this prosperous and
good voyage he has given thee; out of this thou must lay up somewhat for the
poor Saints. Thou must reserve that which is fit for thy person, what is fit
for thy children and family. God gives thee leave to do this, but thou must
leave a remnant still for the poor, according to the good journey that the
Lord has given thee: The Lord it may be has multiplied thy hundreds to
thousands, thou must therefore remember the Lord thy God, that has given thee
this great increase and abundance, above all that thou could hope or conceit
in former times: for what was every young beginner that now is grown rich? let
him say himself: thou would have been glad of the tenth part of that that
God has enriched thee with, and now the Lord has multiplied and increased
thee: oh let thy hand again be enlarged toward God, and abundant to him, that
has so abounded in grace and mercy to thee: and as the Lord has given a man a
good journey, a good way and passage; a good trade, and prospers him that he
thrives in his calling, so let him again do the works of mercy, for the God
of mercy. But these things that remain, are so full of matter and variety, and
I have been so troublesome to your patience already, that I must reserve the
rest that remains until the next time.

The second Sermon.
1 COR. 16.1.2.3. Now concerning the collection for the Saints, according as I
have ordained in the Churches of Galatia, even so do you. In the first day of
the Sabbath, or of the week, Let every one of you lay up by himself a
treasure of whatsoever God has prospered him, etc.
THere is no point in all divinity, that needs more clear propoundi^g, and
more earnest prosecuting, then this of Almsdeeds, and brotherly benevolence.
For men are wondrously, and by a strange motion of the spirit of God, brought
unto it, against the current of nature: every man thinking that that which is
given, is lost, that it is cast away; and there is scarce any man persuaded
that he that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, although it be a common
speech in every man's mouth. Therefore the Apostle being appointed by the Church
of God to have a special regard of this among the rest, to have a care of the
poor, Gal. 2. Gal. 2.
Wheresoever he came, he did found and settle this constitution as strongly as
any of the rest: as that of faith, so this of works; that those that had
believed and received the Lord Christ into their hearts by faith, that they
should extend their hands by good works; to feed him, and to minister to his
members which are wanting here upon earth.

We have thus far proceeded to show what kind of Gift or Present this was;
which the Apostle required: it is (...), their fruit, it is the corn they
yield; the harvest which Gods children (which be his fruitful field) yield
unto him. It is the shot they pay which are invited to the supper of the great
King. And it is not cast away upon such as are unworthy persons, but bestowed
upon the Saints themselves; that whereas God requires that we should help our
own flesh, whether good or bad: and we should imitate our heavenly Father
which makes his light to shine, and his rain to fall as well upon the unjust,
as the just: yet the Apostle recommends unto them, not the common refuse of
men, whereunto notwithstanding they were bound by nature: but a select company
of Saints, and such a company as were under persecution; and that the most hot
and sharp persecution and trouble, that was then to be found in the world: for
the Church of God never suffers so ill, as it suffers from it self* all civil
wars, and intestine discords being the greatest plagues that can he. The Church
of Jerusalem having received the law and the promises, and glorying in their
prerogative: they could not therefore endure, that a new religion should come
and confront theirs, and put that out of place: but they sought by all means
to beat it down again: and by consequent no man could lift up his head, but
presently there were letters from the high Priests and Elders to cast him into
prison, to thrust that light under a bushel, which God had set upon a
Candlestick, to give light to the whole house.

And again, there was another cause of it, by reason of the famine which
Agabus prophesied of in the end of Caligula his reign, for which cause the
Church of God made provision against that time of famine and scarcity.

Now the quantity that they should give, it is not set down, but it is left to
every man's disposition: for the Church of God will not make charity compulsive,
but leaves it to the free will in it self, that it may be the more gracious,
and the better accepted with God: but look whatsoever God had prospered them
withal, according as God had blessed them; according as he had given them a
good voyage in the affairs of the world: according to that, he should not
scant and balk the Lord, but he that had received much, should give much, and
he that had received little, should give of that little, according to the
quantity and proportion: so that was left to the conscience of every man.

And that this collection should be done in private, that every man should lay
up by himself; by himself, because there were no officers appointed as then
in the Church, or because he might be defeated of it by trusting of others: or
because some had so little, that they durst not bring it every week being so
small, but were to lay it up by them, that many littles might make a mickle:
therefore they were to keep it till it might be a convenient sum, that it
might carry some show with it; in regard of this, the Apostle bids them lay up
by themselves.

And they must lay it up as a Treasure, for as much as the Lord accounted of
that in heaven; he took account of that in heaven, which they laid forth in
earth: and it was a treasure to them, that when they should come to fail, to
fail of this life: when they should come to dye, when no friend should help
and rescue them from the hand of death; they may have some treasure in heaven;
that when they came into a strange country, they might find some treasure
there, they might have a bank there to give them refreshing. As when a man is
outed in England, when he is outlawed or banished, if he can make an escape,
and can have a bank at Venice, or at Amsterdam, and can go to his friends
there, and have somewhat laid up for him in trusty hands, he is as well there
almost as he is here. So the Lord compares the passages of this life, to those
of a better life: but we cannot deny, nor doubt, but that we shall be
infinitely far better there, then we are here: but yet we are loath to part
with this habitation, we would feign keep this tabernacle of the body, as long
as we could: although it be with hard conditions. Now the Lord tells us, to
encourage us in our journey, that all our good works, all our Almesdeeds are
sent before as a treasure: they are laid up as a stock of money in a faithful
hand, not in a mountebankes hand, but in the trusty hand of God, which will
repay us again, and will repay us with interest: he that gives to the poor,
lends to the Lord upon interest: so it is called in this place (...) of
Thesaurus a treasure, to lay up treasure; to lay up for to morrow, to lay up
for the time to come: thus far we proceeded.

Now we come to the next point in the Text, The time of the collection.
which is, what day; what time he chooses out for the setting apart of this
portion, of those that offered to the Lord, and to his poor Saints: and that
is noted here to be the first day of the week.

Secondly, we are to note the incentives reasons, and arguments to moove them
to this; because charity, and the works of charity are not easily persuaded;
men must be drawn to them by very attractive and forcible reasons and
arguments, such as may win, though not constrain and force their piety.

His first argument is this, the common example; for these things we must
propound them diversely, and otherwise then they lie in the Text, for order
sake, and for method of teaching. For those things that are first in the Text,
are not always first in order of time, nor in order of teaching; how will he
therefore win the Corinthians to give unto strange poor, when they had enough
of their own? he tells them there is an example for it, the Churches of
Galatia: As I have ordained in the Churches of Galatia, so do ye. As if he
should say, I bring no new matter among you; I put no burden upon you which is
not general and common in all the Churches: your brethren have gone before in
other Countries, which are poorer men, and weaker every way in their fortunes
then you: therefore that which they do, which are poorer and more unable, you
must do it much more, as being more blessed of God. As I have ordained in the
Churches of Galatia, so do ye: where we are to understand three things.

First, the antiquity of the Church of Galatia. Three things. 1 The antiquity


2 Apostolical author^ty.
Secondly, that the Apostle had ordained it, he commands it; he counsels
them not to do it, but by his power Apostolical he enjoynes them.

3 The power of the Church.
Thirdly and lastly, what is the force and power of this argument which is
drawn from the authority of the Church; what is the nature of it, and how
far it must prevail with all the followers of Christ? For thus he argues,
The Churches of Galatia do this; and if you do it not, you are in great
fault, and in danger of damnation: for you must follow the example of elder
Churches, but they have done thus, therefore you must do so much more, having
greater means, and better ability then they: that is one motive.

Another incentive is this, that he himself will come, and that he will see to
these things, and that he will receive it at their hands: and that he will
make a convoy for it to the place where it should be surely delivered, which is
a great argument: for a man is very willing to part with his money, if he be
sure that it shall not be interverted; that there shall be no falsehood, but
that it may come to the hands of those, for whom it is intended: upon these
terms it may be he will be reasonable willing to part with it. Therefore for
this he tells them that he will take an order, and that order that shall be best
liking to themselves; for when he comes, they shall appoint and choose certain
fit men, that they may trust with money; and indeed he that a man may trust
with money, he may trust him with any thing almost; therefore they shall choose
such men, not as may be their own carvers: not such as shall seek to make
themselves rich of other men's goods, much less out of the poor man's stock,
but such as shall be true, and faithful dispensers of that which is offered by
them; and these shall be chosen by themselves (because he was a stranger to
them, and they were strangers to him) and not only so, but they shall commend
them to the brethren at Jerusalem by their Epistle; and if need were, he
himself would help to convoy it: he would help to pass their blessing.

The last motive that he uses is this, that he says, they shall carry your
grace to Jerusalem, (...), calling that alms that they should give a grace, as
making them gracious before God, and men; as proceeding from the grace, and
good spirit of God; as coming from mere grace, not of constraint. Every man
desires to be gracious, and to be reputed gracious; the tithe of grace is the
most honorable, and the greatest thing that can be in the world, especially of
divine grace, and such a thing is this alms deeds; he calls it not alms, he
calls it not benevolence; or a collection: but he calls it grace. They shall
carry your grace to Jerusalem: that is, that gracious gift which the Spirit of
God shall work you to.

And the sum of all is this, that he would have this done before he come;
lest they should be found too tardy: if they should then fall a gathering, when
they should be a presenting, and offering their gift: for tardinesse and
unreadinesse is a base fault in any man, but most in Christians; and in
Christian duties most of all. It was the fault of the foolish virgins, which
were tardy, and lost the kingdom for it: things must be done in season, in due
time; so says the Apostle, lest it be to be made when I come: I pray make it
before, as he says in 2. Corinthians. 9. If the Macedonians that I shall bring
with me, when they come, shall find you making your collection; you and I
shall be both ashamed: to see your unreadinesse in this point of Religion, and
devotion; whereunto you should go with the foremost. I take this to be the sum
and substance of the words read: that upon the Lords day, every man should
repose, and lay by himself of that which it had pleased God to give him, and
that he is pleased to give again to the Church; to lay by that he can spare,
and to do it upon consideration, that other Churches have done it before him:
and that all the members of Christ are bound one to another, and also because
it was a precept, and command upon the Church left by Apostolical power; and
chiefly because the whole managing of the business was certain, to be
conveyed by men of most known fame, and experienced goodness and honesty;
Such as should be chosen by themselves, such as should be confirmed by their
letters commendatorie; and all this the Apostle instances, lest they themselves
should not be found so ready, and cheerful in the work: lest they should be
lagging in their gift, which should be ready and willing to keep their credit,
especially in so good an action. Of these things briefly, and in order; and but
a word, because I will not extend your patience beyond the time.

1 The time of the collection.
First for the day, the Apostle would have this done upon the first day of the
week: we may take it for granted, that it was the Lords day; we will prove it
afterward: we will have it granted now. The first day of the week, the first
of the Sabbath, for all the days of the week were among the Jews reckoned
for Sabbaths, so Sunday was the first; and Monday the second; and Tuesday the
third Sabbath: and so forth. And according to this reckoning they all computed
their time, their months, and their weeks among the Jews. In which sense the
Pharisee is to be understood when he says, I fast twice in the Sabbath, that
is, twice in the week: For the Sabbath being the great day, and the principal
of the seven, it gives the denomination to all the rest, and they be called the
first, and second, and third, according as they have their distance from that
day. So this first of the week, it was the Jews Monday, as it were, it is our
Lords day; which immediately succeeded the day of the Passover wherein our
Lord Jesus lay in the grave, and which was the first day of his resurrection:
and therefore is remembered throughout all Christian generations. This was the
time that the Apostle thought fittest for Christian men to lay aside their
charity, to lay it up for the common treasure; for the common stock of the
Saints: for the poor Saints at Jerusalem.

It teaches us, that as all the works of mercy become the Lords day; so
especially this of alms giving: it is a work proper to the Lords day. For
therein we have both rest from labor, representing unto us our eternal rest
in heaven; and when a man is not cumbred with the labors of the world, his
mind is better, and more easily induced to do good: a man that is puzzelled
about his work, he says he has other mattrrs to do then to attend a poor
man; he cannot be for him now, he puts him off till another time, and bids him
come to morrow, as the wise man says, Say not to thy neighbor, Come again to
morrow, Prove. 3.
if thou have it now by thee. A man being distracted with his business, he
takes his opportunity; and makes these excuses to answer God, and his own
conscience with these or the like, and says he cannot now intend it: he is
otherwise busied. But when he has a relaxation from his labor, which is the
proper fruit of the Sabbath, the mind of man is made more gentle, and more
easily persuaded to do any good work: because it knows that therefore a man is
lift up from the cares, and troubles of this life to the speculation of
heavenly things; therefore he is the more easily persuaded to do the works of
heavenly charity, and divine operation: which the Spirit of God acts in the
hearts and souls of all his children. So that is one reason why the Apostle
bids that this gathering should be on the first of the Sabbath, because then
men are at leisure, then they are not cumbred with the world: they are freed
from peevishness, and impatience which often times hinders a poor man of an
alms: which if he had come when the party was at quiet, and rest, he might
have obtained.

2 Reason. The benefits received on that day.
Another reason is, because of the benefits that we receive upon that day, the
commemoration of the blessings God has vouchsafed us upon that day; upon that
day the root of life rose, the Lord Jesus: who rising again from the dead,
has opened to us a certain gappe, and hope of life everlasting, the
meditation of the good creatures of God, the state of the Gospel calls us unto
the liberty of the sons of God; all the whole blessings of the Gospel be
represented, and accumulated unto us upon that day. Therefore that was the
fittest time to be thankful to God for his mercies, wherein God is most
abundant in mercy to us, that then we should return somewhat back again,
some small widows mite: some little portion to Gods children, for all those
infinite treasures we have received: for this is all that God requires, that we
should give but something of his own, of some but the thousand part, of some
but the hundredth part; this is all that he requires for that great store: those
mighty sums, and infinite riches, and treasures, and masses of wealth he has
given us. That we should make a little acknowledgement by giving some small
sprinkling for all this: That is another reason why the Apostle would have this
collection be upon the Sunday; wherein the memory of all the blessings of God
upon body, and soul, are the goodliest in every thing, therefore it makes men
more prone; and inclined to do some good for him: that has wrought so much
good for them.

The third reason is, The exercises of the day.
because upon that day the public meetings were made, where there was
prophecy, and preaching, and praying, and singing of Psalms, and holy
revelations, and instructions from heaven: all which were as fire to kindle the
zeal of a man to be for God; and for his brethren; and to join together the
members of the Lord Jesus in a firmer conjunction, then any other society in
the world. If a man love a man abroad in the market, he will love him ten times
better in the Church: if there be any piety, or any coals of love to kindle
his affections elsewhere, it will be much more in the Church: where every word
of God, every Sermon, every prayer, every thanksgiving, every Psalm that is
sung brings some fuel to that heavenly flame. Therefore for this cause the
Apostle chooses that time, as being the most select and choice opportunity for
the conferring of that which God had blessed them withal: upon the first day
of the week, that is, upon the Lords day.

4 Reason. The Sacrament was th n received.
And lastly, because that upon that day, the Church was always wont to receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; it was not with them then, as it is with us
now, men will receive it when they list: but every Sunday was with them a
Sacrament day, and often times every day in the week: but on the Lords day they
never failed. Therefore as a testimony of their thankfulness to God for the
benefit of the body, and blood of Christ, which was offered on the Cross as a
ransom, and propitiation for all their sins, they thought they were bound in
conscience, and they were easily induced, and persuaded upon the receiving of
the Sacrament, to give something to the sacred, and holy Saints that belong
unto the Lord. And so indeed after our Sacrament, we have still a collection in
remembrance of that; there it was according to the greatness of their spirits,
and the greatness of their means which were supereminent; ours are according
to our poor means, and measure: and according to the scantinesse of our
affections which is every day colder then other. For these reasons the Apostle
requires that these things should be done, and laid up upon the Sabbath day.
For then men are best affected of all times: if ever a man will give any thing,
he will give it then, when he is at rest for God, and when he is expressing his
thankfulness to God, for the great mercies that he has powered upon him; in
all the course of his life: then he hears the word, that stirs him up to
good actions; then he joins in prayer with the Church of God: then he
understands that God has not spared the precious blood of Christ, much less
therefore should he spare a penny, a small thing to give for his sake, that has
given his blood for his redemption.

Thus we see great reason why the Apostle appointed the collection to be made
at this time: It is true, the collection for the Saints is due and seasonable
at all times, but especially when there is the fairest, and goodliest
opportunity; and then it is likely to prove best, when there are the strongest
motives to work men unto it.

Upon the first of the week. But now we must launch into a great Sea, to prove
this doctrine; which I need not do for men that are settled; But because these
last times afford a number of monstrous doctrines, and this City especially
is plagued with those Jewish Sabbatarians, that would still retain the Jewish
Sabbath, and can very hardly be drawn from it; but in their conventicles they
draw away Gods children, and trouble them that are not able to give a reason of
their faith; let us therefore a little search into this point, for it the first
day of the week were the Lords day, when Sermons, and prayer, and
communicating in the Sacrament were made, and received: It follows, that the
Church had changed the Sabbath day, from the seventh day unto the eight; and so
we are to resolve our selves against these innovators how this might be done:
for assure your selves, although we be well resolved in the thing, and long
experience has taught us to be quiet, and to settle our selves in the
authority of the Church; yet there is nothing that is of weaker authority
then the change of the Sabbath; and if these new Heretics can prevail with us
in other things, it is no marvel if they prevail in this; for there is
nothing that is left upon so weak a foundation, that has so slender proof as
this: which makes them to get ground upon unstable souls, that are their
hearers, being a multitude of men, where there is variety of affections; and
imbecillitie of judgment: and every man is carried away with every blast of
doctrine, as children, to and fro, no marvel if they have sown such seeds of
pestilent schism, by these contrary blasts which are every where studied.

Therefore you shall understand, that the holy Apostles presently after our
Lords ascension into heaven; The Sabbath changed by the Apostles.
they did ordain that the meetings of Christians for the Sabbath, that those
exercises, should be upon the eight day of the week; I mean upon the eight
day from the creation, upon the Jews Monday; which now is called Sunday, or our
Lords day; and those feasts, that formerly were wont to fall upon any day of
the week; as Easter day, which was kept according to the course of the Moon;
and if it fell upon a Wednesday, or a Thursday, or the like, still it was
Easter day, the Passover day, the feast of sweet bread: when the paschall
Lamb was offered. But the Apostles changed it, that it should always be on
the Sunday; upon the day of our Lords resurrection: and Whitsuntide, which
follows after Easter, being a moveable Feast, and as Easter was still that was
to be referred to it: now the feast of Pentecost was referred by the Apostles,
to the Lords day: the day of our Lords resurrection, our Sunday. And this was
not the devise of Pius Pius.
the first Pope, or Dicta the first Pope, (as some have imagined) which was
many years after our Lords ascension; but it is certain, it was the ordinance
of the Apostles themselves, as we may see in two famous places: for we have but
two as Beza Beza.
says well, in Acts 20.10. Act. 20 10.
and in this place. In these two places, we observe that liberty that the Lord
gave to his Church, 1 Cor. 16.2.
to change the seventh day to the eighth.

And whereupon? upon what ground did they take this liberty? for we have no
direct word from the mouth of our Savior for it, but they did it only upon
the revelation of the spirit of God; and they had such firm arguments and
reasons, as might sway them against the common tenants of the Jewish slavery
and bondage whereby they were tied and bound to the observation of their
Sabbath.

The first maine reason that the Church had for the changing of the Sabbath; 1
To show the prerogative of Christ.
it was to show the prerogative of the Son of God, which says of himself:
The son of man is Lord of the Sabbath also; he is Lord even of the Sabbath,
Mark. 3. Mark. 3.
Now therefore if he were Lord of the Sabbath, then it lay in his power to
change the time of the Sabbath; the moral action he changed not, that always
continues, we must have a day to worship God in: we should worship God always,
but the public worship of God is the proper end and office of the Sabbath.

I but for the time why it should be upon the seventh day, or on the eight day,
this was left in the Lordship of Christ, being the Lord of the Sabbath, which
therefore could tell what he did, when he would rejourne the Sabbath to some
other time, where it might be a figure of some better signification, therefore
to show the glory of the son of man, the Church thought good to change the
time of the Sabbath to another time. 2 In remembrance of the work of redemption.


Secondly, there was another reason as Athanasius Athanasius.
observes upon those words of Christ; All things are given to me of my Father:
he extends it thus far, even to the change of the Ceremonies of Moses Law: now
says he, there are two great works of God which are to be considered in their
substance, and in their ceremony.

The first is the work of creation.

And the second is the work of redemption, wherein the world was recreated and
made anew.

For the first, the work of creation, the old Sabbath was instituted and
ordained of God in remembrance of his work: for God rested the seventh day
from all the work that he had wrought, and created in the six days before he
rested the seventh day, and blessed it, and hallowed it for man to remember the
works he had created in the six working days, and that man should also work
in six days as he had done, and rest upon the seventh day: for as the Lord
had wrought six days, so he says, six days shall thou labor: for all the
life of man must be conformed to the example of Almighty God: so now there
being these two great works, the one of creation, the other of redemption; we
are to consider whether of these two are the greater; and surely we shall find
the work of redemption is a greater matter then the work of creation. When
the Lord created the world by his omnipotent power, he did but speak the word,
and it was done. The Lord did but say let there be light, and there was light.
Let there be a firmament, and there was a firmament. Let there be sea and land,
and there was presently sea and land, and every thing else necessary. But when
he wrought redemption, it was not done by a word, but it cost the blood, it
drew the blood from the heart of his dear Son, for it could not be done by
way of omnipotency, because it must be done by way of justice: the justice of
God must be satisfied, which could not be satisfied, but the sinner must loose
his life which he had forfeited to God, and God himself must do it; the
person of God must take upon him the nature of man, to suffer death for sinful
man that had deserved death everlasting: this is the work of recreation, and
redemption. Now says Athanasius, these works had their several ages, the
work of the creation was to be remembered until Christ came to work the work
of redemption, and when he was come, then the age of that was to pass away, it
was determined and terminate in Christ. And now began another age, a more
blessed and glorious age, that of redemption that was now to flourish, and to
be esteemed in the world, and so it was necessary that there should be a
cessation of the former, that there must be an introduction of this.

But how then will some say, should before?

Lord has given that grace, and that light that we may remember them every
day, we may meditate of them as we are doing our works, for the Gospel is so
clear, and has laid open the treasures of heaven so plainly, that as we do
the works of our hands, we may remember the works of the Lord too, which the
Jews could not do in their work and labor, for it was so hidden from them,
that they knew not that which was done before their faces, as the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 3. 2 Cor. 3.


Therefore this is one reason, the gracious work of the redemption, and
recreation of the world being the greatest work that ever was, requires the
greatest memorial. Therefore it is necessary there should be a Sabbath day, a
time of rest for the contemplation and meditation of that rather then for the
lesser work, the work of the creation which may be meditated on, and
remembered every day as well as upon the Sabbath, but the work of redemption,
although it be to be thought upon, and remembered every day, and may be
meditated upon daily, yet then we must think of it more seriously, with a more
curious observation and meditation upon the Lords day, because then upon that
day was the resurrection of the Son of God, who is the first fruits of all
Christian believers.

3 The Jewish Sabbath was for distinction.
Again, another reason of the change of the Sabbath is, because the Sabbath was
made for a matter of distinction, to distinguish the Jewish nation from all
other people in the world, it was a matter of separation and privacy, but the
Lord Jesus came to be public, he would have none of those private signs
continue, he took down the partition wall which was made between Jews and
Gentiles; they were before shut up one from another, there was no agreement or
correspondency between them, and the symboll of this separation was the
Sabbath day: for the Gentiles scorned them and said, they spent the seventh
part of their time in idleness; meaning their Sabbath day. Now by this
separation, there grew enmity and hatred, and outward opposition, because the
one had a rest, and the other had not. Now the Lord Jesus came to take down
this separation to take away this wall of distinction which was between them,
and so he made the eighth day the day of rest, the Sabbath, not for a day of
separation, as the seventh day was, which separated them, and made them
strangers from all other men, but to unite them, so that now there is none
strange in Christ, but all are one, Gal.
Jews and Gentiles, male and female, bond and free; there is no nation, nor no
condition whatsoever, but all are welcome to Christ, the Savior of the world.
Therefore he made the Sabbath upon a new day, because the other was a day of
separation and division, but this is a day of common convocation and
collection, and gathering of all together, as the Hen gathers her chickens
under her wings, Mat. 23. Mat. 23.


Further, In memory of Christ's resurrection.
because the Lord would assure us that both himself was risen, and that we
also should rise by the virtue and power of his resurrection: this is the maine
head of our religion, and all our faith, therefore he would have us keep the
Sabbath upon the same day that he rose again from the dead. Therefore the
Church changed that day from the Jewish Sabbath, to rest, not upon that day,
but upon the first day of the week, which is our Lords day. I say because the
Lord would teach us the glorious article of his own resurrection, and would
assure us of the consequent of it, our resurrection by that power of his;
therefore he would have every Sabbath day to be a day of meditation upon that
benefit, that every Christian may say this is my resurrection day; this day my
Head rose again, which is the first fruits, and I am assured that by the power
of his resurrection, I shall rise also: therefore that Christ might make a way
to my resurrection, he has ordained a day, a Sabbath wherein I must
contemplate upon that benefit, and this I feed on, this is my Sabbath days
feast, wherein I rest, and quiet my soul; and if it were not for the certainty
of the resurrection of Christ, and the certain hope of my own resurrection, I
could keep no Sabbath, but now I keep a Sabbath by the appointment of the
Church, by the wise judgment of my Mother, as a symboll of my resurrection, as
a sign and symboll that my head is risen, and that his body also shall rise in
due time, as certainly as the head is risen already.

From the end of the Sabbath.
Again, the Sabbath, and the end of the Sabbath was a cessation from work; and
it signifies both a cessation from sin, and also the rest that our Lord and
Savior Christ was to have in the grave, to make a cessation from our sins,
and from all sin in his children. Observe the argument, ye shall see it in
Heb. 4.10. Heb. 4.10.
The Apostle there tells us, that one of the ends of the Sabbath was this, that
a man should rest from his work, even as God rested from his; what are men's
works? sin; what are Gods works? the glorious act of the creation; therefore
as God ceased from his work, and made a Sabbath to show that then he had
finished his work, and rested, so there remains a Sabbath to the people of
God, to show that there is a cessation from their work. Now this cessation of
Gods people, it must come to the members from the head, it must begin at our
head Christ; first he must cease from sin; but Christ had no sin, therefore
he could not cease from sin; but because he said consummatum est, the day
before the Sabbath, that is, the price of man's sin which was cast upon him it
was now paid, therefore there is a cessation from sin: and we must not live
any longer therein, but be dead to sin as Christ was in his grave, and rise
to holiness of life, which is the proper end of his resurrection. Mark how
the Church concludes upon this, the Sabbath was a type of Christ's resting, but
he never rested till he was in his grave; for says he, My Father works
hitherto, and I work, and I work to day and to morrow, and the third day I
shall be perfect: still in this frail life he was working, but upon the
Sabbath day, then he rested, to show that now he had given the Sabbath a
perfect rest for ever: that there should be no more ceremonial work, he had
then fulfilled all the ceremonies; the sin of man was paid for, and all the
troublesome ceremonies of the law were abrogate, and to show that the Sabbath
was ended, he celebrated it in his grave: and then upon the Monday, the Jews
Monday, the day of his resurrection; he rose again to show that ours must be
an active life, not in idle circumstances, to pass it away in ceremonies, as
in the law: but to remain as an eternal Sabbath for ever: we keep a public
Sabbath to God, though not in the same time, and in memory of the same thing,
yet in the remembrance of a far greater benefit.

6 From the apparitions of Christ.
To conclude the point, our Lord graced this constitution of the Church, by his
own presence: most of his apparitions were upon the eighth day, as we may see
in the Gospel, that day that he rose still he glorified it with his presence;
eight days after he rose, he came and showed himself to his Disciples, and
the next day to Thomas, and the rest of the Disciples: and so for the time of
40. days that he continued on earth, after his resurrection, look how many
Mundayes of the Jews there was which is our Lords day, so many apparitions he
made upon that day: whereby they gathered that it was the will of the Lord, and
that he meant to make that day glorious by his comfortable apparitions; for
still as I said, his apparitions were upon that day, he was absent all the
week before, he appeared to none, except it were to some few persons, as
Peter and John, but he made no public apparition, but only upon the Lords
day. And upon this the Church of God was induced to make this change, and we
see it acted, Acts 20.10. Acts 20.10. 1 Cor. 16.
and this chapter is a public testimony of it, and likewise in Rev. 1. Rev. 1.
Saint John says, I was in the spirit upon the Lords day, which is generally
taken by the fathers of the Church, and by the Interpreters of the Gospel, for
this, that we hold instead of the Sabbath day.

But because these kind of people will never be satisfied, except we can
answer their reasons, as well as they can hear ours: give me leave a little to
go forward in this point; and hear what they can object for this, Arguments
against the change of the Sa^b^th.
which think the Jewish Sabbath still to remain in force. I have spent the
time against my mind and purpose, therefore I will but name the chief heads
of their arguments, and refute them.

They conclude therefore that there is no certain warrant for the changing of
the Jewish Sabbath to ours: 1 There is no written word for it.
because there is no direct written Scripture to prove it; we have no Text of
Scripture to work it into us.

But for that we are to answer them, The Apostles in this guided by the spirit
of God.
whatsoever the Apostles did being guided by the spirit of God; their practice
is a sufficient direction to us,, it is warrant enough that they have done it
before us: For so we have in many other things, the practice of the Apostles to
be a rule of our faith, Christ not determining many particular things in the
Church, but leaving it to the discretion of the wise, those that should be well
furnished with knowledge for the directing of things in their places where they
were: therefore that which the Apostles did, it was the act of Christ; for they
did it not of themselves, but from a higher person, from him that sent them.

Another reason they have, and that is this; 2 It is a part of the decalogue.
the decalogue or ten Commandments, are a perpetual law: but this is a part
of the decalogue, therefore this is a perpetual law, and the precepts that be
in the ten Commandments are all moral; they are precepts that belong to all
men, to all times and places in the world.

Thirdly, God is pleased to call the Sabbath an everlasting covenant, God calls
the Sabbath an everlasting covenant Deuteronomy. 12.16.
I have made an everlasting covenant, says the Lord, Deuter. 12.16. and in
diverse other places he calls it a perpetual covenant between me, and my
people Israel: therefore it follows, it must last as long as the world lasts,
and consequently it cannot be changed, for then we alter the covenant of God.

4 It was aucienter then Moses.
A fourth objection is this, all the laws that are ancienter then Moses are
immutable, but this was more ancient then Moses law; for it was given to man in
paradise: the Lord there by resting upon the seventh day, did consecrate the
Sabbath to be kept; although some of the Fathers say (as Justin Martyr Justin.
Martyr.
) that they did not keep it before the Flood, but yet there was the
institution of it: therefore seeing it was a law given before Moses, and before
the fall of man; it follows it is immutable, and unchangeable: because if there
be any change, it must be for imperfection, and if there be any imperfection,
it must be for sin; and there was no sin before the fall. Therefore
whatsoever was commanded before the fall, was so perfect, that it could not be
altered, it had no respect of imperfection in it.

5 The cause of it is perpetual.
And lastly, the perpetual cause of a law makes the law continue: if the cause
of it remain; the law must also continue: and therefore there are many laws
that are made, and abrogate again, because there is no use of them; they were
made in such a time, for such things, and the cause failing, the law cease:
but where the law has a perpetual cause, there the law is in force to
continue always: but the cause of the Jewish Sabbath continues, the meditation
and contemplation upon the works of God; and the holy operation of his hands,
this is the cause of the Sabbath: and this always continues, therefore the
Jewish sabbath must continue. These are the prime and chief grounds of their
arguments, I will answer a word to these, and so conclude.

First, in that they say, the decalogue or ten Commandments, is a law
perpetual, Ans. to Ob. 2. The Jewish Sabbath partly ceremonial.
and binds the consciences of all men.

It is true, as far forth as it is moral it does, but those parts that be
ceremonial; as the Sabbath is partly moral, and partly ceremonial, and as it
is moral it binds, but as it is ceremonial, it does not. For the morality of
the Sabbath is this, to worship God in a public service, that we are bound
unto, that which is ceremonial, that we should serve him upon such a day, upon
the seventh day rather then any other, that does not bind, there is no part of
morality in that: that is but an appendix, but a reference, but a consequence:
and for that it is a limited ordinance, and is not to have a continual
succession, and perpetuity: no more then circumcision, and the rest of the
figures of the law.

And for that they say, Ans. to Ob. 3. The Sabbath not said to be everlasting
property.
that God made an everlasting covenant of the Sabbath, you must understand that
word there Legnolam, it signifies not that eternity that never cease, but a
diuturnitie, a long time; so it was for the law, it continued 2000. years,
which is said in Scripture to be eternal, and those things which exceed the
age of a man, which pass the conceit, and opinion of man; that no man's memory
can extend so far, they are called eternal, many times in Scripture. It is
said of the kingdom of David, that it should last unto eternity, and yet we
know it lasted but five hundred years, which is far short of eternity. So
for the land of Israel, it is said the people of Israel should inhabit it for
eternity, and yet in a thousand years they were outed, and expelled. But the
word signifies that which is of long enduring, of long continuance, such a
thing was the Sabbath: for the testimony and covenant of God in ceremonial
things, they were long, but they were not eternal.

Ans. to Ob. 4. All laws before Moses not immutable.
And then where it is said that those laws that were before Moses, those laws
that were in the state of paradise, they are unchangeable, and immutable,
because there is no imperfection in them.

First of al, I deny their ground that the law of the Sabbath was given in
Paradise. And secondly, that such laws as were before Moses, as only thus
far immutable, unless they may be otherwise better supplied; for it was Gods
will that those things that were before, should be types and figures, and
shadows of things that were to come after; Now when the perfect body was once
come in place, all those figures, and shadows were to be removed. So was
circumcision four hundred years before Moses, yet we see it is abrogate, and
cease by the coming of our Lord, and Savior Christ. So was the Sabbath, the
Lord Christ being the sum of circumcision, and also being the sum of the
Sabbath day, being our rest in God, and assuring us of our rest from all sin,
from all torment, from all fear, and all pain which our nature is subject
unto; it was needful therefore that he should come in the place of all these
shaddows, and that they should cease; and have no further intelligence or
operation.

And for the last, Ans to Ob. 5. Meditation of Gods works not tied to one day.
where they say the cause of the law continues, and therefore the law must
continue: but the cause of this law was the meditation of Gods works, and that
must be continual: therefore the Sabbath must be continual.

It is true, if the meditation of the works of God were of necessity put to one
day; then the argument were good and strong; but because it may be done upon
the eight; or first, or second as well as upon that, the argument concludes
not. Indeed where the cause of the law, and the end of it can be no otherwise
attained but by the direct word, and letter of the law: there the law must
continue as long as the end of it continues. But the end of the law of the
Sabbath, is the meditation of Gods creatures, which may be attained unto
another way; for we see in Christ better then they could in Moses: for we see
the fullness of God, the excellency of the creation, that clear light of
contemplation in the Son of God, which was not to be discerned in the old
Testament: The grace of God has appeared to all men: 2. Tit. 11.
and has removed the clouds of darkness that were before, that we might walk
in a new light; that we might walk from glory to glory, we see face to face, 2.
Cor. 3.
as the Apostle says.

I have been too troublesome to you in this point, to speak to them that are
well settled, but it is for this respect, to clear this point; to make it
appear what phanaticall spirits these be, that after so much, and so long
peace, and quiet of the Church: would begin to trouble the faith of Christians
again, by renewing the Jewish Sabbath. For they go in effect to prove that
there is no Christ come into the world: for seeing their Sabbath was a type of
Christ's resting in the grave, and that he should bury it in the grave with all
other ceremonies; they do in effect deny that Christ dyed, and that he is risen
again; they deny his resurrection by drowning the memory of that in remembering
their Sabbath: by obscuring our Lords day in keeping that Sabbath in which he
lay in the grave, and by keeping that, they put a cessation to this. But it is
good also that we should understand the tenants of our faith, upon firm and
strong arguments, that the powers of darkness, the gates of hell may have no
prevailing against us, in the time when they come to fight with us. It is true,
this argument does afford to wrangling spirits as much contradiction, as any
matter of Divinity; but we have the authority of the Church grounded upon
good reasons, and arguments why we do so: to commemorate the glorious work of
the resurrection of our head. To assure us that we which are his members shall
rise with him. Now follows to speak of the incentives, and motives concerning
this work of charity; but I am afraid too much to oppress your patience,
therefore I will conclude.

The third Sermon.
1. Cor. 16.1.2.3. Now concerning the collection for the Saints, as I have
ordained in the Churches of Galatia, even so do you. In the first of the
Sabbath, let every one of you lay up by himself treasure of whatsoever God
has prospered him, that there be no gathering when I come. And when I come,
those whom you shall appoint, and approve by your letters, those will I send to
carry your grace to Jerusalem.
THere are but two places in the Scripture that gives a powerful warrant to
the Church of God for the change of the Sabbath day, from the seventh to the
eighth day. And therefore I thought it fit (falling upon this Text) not to
leave that point negligently or slightly handled, but to regard it so far as
my weakness could attain unto.

The last time I showed the reasons of the change of it. It was a thing that
was partly ceremonial; and the Church of God is bound to it no further then it
is moral. It was a matter of distinction it made a separation between Jews
and Gentiles; Christ came to take down the wall of separation. It was a
memorial of the Resurrection of Christ, and the comfort of us all; in that the
root of life was raised: therefore there is a lively hope made over to all the
branches that they shall rise again with the root. It was graced by the
manifold apparitions of Christ, and confirmed unto us according as the Apostles
had received it from the will of Christ; to grace that day the eighth day with
his apparitions. It was confirmed unto us by the Apostle Saint John, who makes
mention of the Lords day, he was rapt in the Spirit upon the Lords day. And by
these two places, Act. 20.10. and this present place, 1. Cor. 16.2.

The time prevented me that I could not show you the authority from age to
age, and the concurrence of these two things which was the gathering of
collections upon that day: for the Apostle includes both these, both that the
day should be changed to the first of the Sabbath, that is, to the first day of
the week. And secondly, that upon this first day of the week, it should be a
particular appendix of the Sabbath days work, to lay up somewhat for the
Saints; because then there were no such officers appointed in the Church,
therefore every man wa^ his own Treasurer, every man was his own overseer for
the poor, to lay up by himself as ( Chrysostom says) this priesthood thy
charity, and thy love to thy brother has bestowed upon thee, that a man
should provide and ordain by his own hands, till such time as the Church
should provide overseers, and collectors for the poor, and Deacons that they
should be every where as they were then at Jerusalem.

Now it may seem a matter not worth the labor, to prove this point concerning
the time of the Sabbath, if it were not that some phanaticall spirits in these
latter days had raised such a mist and vapor, to cloud this truth; and to
bring back the Jews ceremonial Sabbath which (says Gregory) if any go about
to do, he must bring in the Jews sacrifice: and so he shall derogate and
destroy the blood, and sacrifice of Christ, which was offered once for all.
Give me leave therefore a little before I come to the residue of the Text (for
indeed it is full of matter) to show you how the Church of God in the first
beginning acknowledged this day for the true Sabbath of the Lord. And upon
these grounds out of Scripture, I need not do it, I know among you that are
fully persuaded, but there are some men that do infringe the glory, and purpose
of this Text, and contradict the Fathers, even some of our late Writers, that
are otherwise worthy Interpreters of the word of God, yet here they hold that
the Apostles meaning is, where he says, One of the Sabbath, that it is not to
be understood, upon the Lords day: but they think it may be any one day in the
week. Wherein it is a wonder that they should give such a scandal to the
Church of God, in weakening the arguments and the faith of the Fathers, that
were before us; and to make us uncertain what to adhere and cleave unto: I
spare their names, because they are worthy instruments of the Gospel. Only I
go about to refute, and cast down their opinion; which I will do briefly, and
by the liberty and license of the time, that I may make the shorter work. The
first of the Sabbath, the Lords day.


Therefore that this first of the Sabbath is the Lords day, it is manifest by
other places of Scripture: whose consent make an absolute verity every where:
for the rule of Scripture is to expound one place by another. In Matthew. 28.2.
The woman came to the grave upon the first of the Sabbath, when as it shined
up, when the light shined up upon the first of the Sabbath, then came the woman
to the grave; the same word is used there, as there is here; The first of the
Sabbath, which was the day of the Lords resurrection, and not every day in the
week, but the eight day from the creation. So again more clearly in Mark.
16.2. and verse. 9. it is said there verse 2. the women came very early in the
morning upon the first of the Sabbath, or of the week. And in the 9. verse it
is said, Jesus did rise upon the first of the Sabbath in the morning: that is,
upon the first day of the week. This phrase in Scripture alludeth to that in
Genesis 1.7. the morning and the evening were the one day, that is, the first day:
for one and first in the Hebrew tongue are promiscuously taken, which is, in
every one day of the Sabbath, that is, in every Sabbath, or upon the Lords day,
or in every first day of the week which is the Lords day. Then the authority
of the Acts of the Apostles; and this place, and that of Saint John, which
says, he was rapt in the spirit upon the Lords day. The judgment of the
Fathers for the ob^ervation of the Lords day.
All these things be firm, and true establishers of the point we have
declared. Now for the Fathers, that they were all also of the same mind, you
shall hear.

Justin Martyr Justin Martyr Apolog 1.2.
that lived an hundred years after Christ, within an hundred and four years
after, he says in the second of his Apollogeticks: In the day, says he, that
we call Sunday, the day which the Heathen men called Sunday, which is now our
Sabbath day: for the other day before was called Saturn day of Saturn, which
was the Jews Sabbath, in that day, says he, the congregation come together,
and there are prayers offered up to God, and after the Sacraments are received,
there is a collection made, every man lays up as much as his own good will is,
according to his own election, and it is given to the superintendent, or to the
chief Minister of the place, and he sees the poor provided for with it, he
sees it be bestowed upon them.

Tertullian which lived two hundred and four years after Christ, in his book
called, Tertull. in sold. Crown. Apolog. ca. 16.
The soldiers Crown, he says, Upon the Lords day we abhor fasting, for it
is a time of feasting with us. And in his Apolloget. Chap. 16. says he, If we
give one day in seven to merrinesse and joy, to joyfulnesse in the holy Ghost,
it is but all one as the Jews do which give yet superstitiously the day of
Saturn to idleness, and mere superstition, so says Tertullian, there is a
certain little chest in the Church, and every man puts into it what seems
good to him, if he can; and if he will: for there is no man constrained, and
this is done once in a month. For the place could not endure that it should be
done every Sabbath, (as the Apostle says) here upon every first of the
Sabbath, but because of the poverty of the country it was but once in a
month, that they brought their charity for the poor.

Clemens Alexandrinus in the fifth of his Stromata, Clem. Alexan. Strom. 5.
P^ato.
he brings a prophecy out of Plato, that God would change the seventh day to
the eighth; to signify thereby, that God would bring a rest to all the world:
so that our change of the Sabbath day, says he, it is not only of us, not
only manifested to us, but it was opened to the Gentiles themselves; they also
acknowledged it.

Cyprian Diacon. Epist 41.
Cyprian the Deacon says, he shall read the next Lords day, wherein the
Church must bring their accustomed sacrifice to God; that is, the sacrifice of
Almsdeeds, the treasure of life eternal: and in his 41. Epistle (says he)
in the station, that is, in the Church where we meet, and stand together before
God; let you alms be ready, and let no man appear empty before the Lord,
alluding to the law, speaking of the change of the Sabbath, and the collection
for the poor Saints named in this place, by the common state of the Church.

Basil. Hexamer. secund.
Basile in the second of his Hexameron, (says he) that the Lord might bring us
from this present life, to the thought of a better life, of the life to come,
he has appointed the first fruits of the Sabbath, wherein the first fruits of
the living rose again from the dead: the Lord Christ which was dead, did then
live, which was the beginner and continuer of light in his Church; I mean
(says he) the holy Sabbath day, glorified by the resurrection of Christ, and
commended to the Church to be always fulfilled and kept.

Nazianzinus orat. 43.
Nazianzen says he, there were two Lords days, the one for the Jews, the
other for the Gentiles; but ours that we have is more excellent than that: for
that was belonging to man's salvation, but this was the very nativity of
salvation, the birth of our Savior. The Jews Sabbath was the intermedium, the
passage between the burial of Christ and his resurrection, for Christ lay in
his grave upon their Sabbath day, and there he rested, and with him rested all
the ceremonies of the law, never any more to revive, but this of the
resurrection of Christ, is plainly and fully the day of the second generation,
and regeneration of all the Saints; and he gives a reason for it: For, says
he, even as the first creation of the world begun from the Sabbath day: so we
must imagine that God began to make the world upon the Monday as we call our
week, for in his eternal rest whereby he rested from all eternity, he began
then to work, although it were no work to God but a rest, even the creation,
it was a rest to him, he did not work then more then before, yet it is
signified to us by work in the Scripture, and that he began in the beginning
of the week to set himself to work, therefore as that work of the creation
began from the Sabbath, so the work of the recreation and redemption of man
must begin from the Sabbath. And although this be the eighth day, yet it is the
best day of all that were before it, and of all that shall come after it; being
more high, and glorious, then that glorious day that was before, and being more
wonderful and admirable then that wondrous time that preceded it.

Saint Jerome in the second Epistle of his book against Vigil. The Apostle
Paul says he, S. Hierom. contra Vigil. Epist. 3. Vigitantius I suppose.
commanded almost all Churches that there should be collections for the poor
made upon the Lords day, which is the first day of the week, that is, the
first of the Jewish week.

And in his fourth question to Hibibbia, How soon, says he, did the Apostles
of Christ turn, and change the Jewish Sabbath? to show the liberty of
Christians from the bondage of the law, how soon did they turn it to the
Lords day?

Aug. 10. Tom.
Saint Austin in the tenth Tome of his Sermon upon these words of the Apostle,
says he, When the seventh day was fulfilled which is the consummation of the
world, we must come back again to the first, and reckon from seven to seven,
and this first will be found the eight day: the seventh day is ended, and then
the Lord is buried, the eight day begins, and then the Lord is raised, for the
raising up of the Lord Jesus has promised unto us a day eternal, and has
consecrated to us the Lords day which is the sign, and note, and assurance
unto us of that eternal day of that everlasting Sabbath: for now the rock is
raised up again. Let all our hearts be circumcised (speaking of the manner of
circumcision which was done with a knife of stone,) with a piece of a stone
taken out of the rock, out of the rock which is Christ.

Chrysostom. on 1. Cor. 16.2.
Saint Chrysostom upon this place. In one of the Sabbaths, that is (says he)
upon the Lords day: for the time it self was of sufficient force (says he) to
bring a man to be liberal; to give alms plentifully.

Oecumenius.
Oecumenius says, the same (says he) it should rouse us up this time, the
Lords day, to do good to the Lords Saints.

Theophilact.
Theophilact, being the first day of the week, the time wherein we meet
together before God: they never (says he) went without love to God, and to the
Saints; upon the first day of the week, which is the Lords day.

Theodoret, Theodoret.
says he, the day, and the work are met together; a man should do the works
of the time in his own time: a work done in season is the more grateful, and
acceptable. Therefore, says he, the day of the Lord wherein the resurrection
of Christ is honored, is the fittest time to show our bountifulness to God;
which has been so bountiful to us in giving us the memorial of him, that
was Lord of his own, and of our resurrection.

Athanasius Athanasius.
upon that place: All things are delivered to me of my Father, which I stood on
the last day; and showed his reasons for the change of the Sabbath.

Cirill of Jerusalem in the fourteenth of his Catechism, says he, Yesterday,
Cirill of Ierus. Catech. 14.
upon the Lords day in the congregation of the Saints, and at the general
prayers of the people; you heard me speak and discourse of these things, where
we may see that in that country also the same manner was retained.

Epiphanius in his second book; Epiph. lib. 2.
The Sabbath of the Jews remained in the law till the presence, and coming of
Christ: but Christ dissolved the Sabbath, and gave a Sabbath of his own, which
is a type of that true rest of that sabbatism whereby the Saints rest from
ceremonies, and are come to the substance, the Son of God, as the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 4.7.

Cirill of Alexandria, in his seventh book to Palladius: We know, says he,
Cirill Alexand. l. 7. ad Pallad.
that the Lord Christ came to make us a perfect rest from sin, from death,
from misery, and to give us conquest over death: and he had power being Lord
of the Sabbath, to make a new day, to make a new consecration which the Church
of God has always followed.

Saint Ambrose Ambrose. 2. Cor. 16.2.
upon this place, says he, this one of the Sabbaths, or the first of the
Sabbath, is the Lords day, as it is written every where in the Gospel, that
Christ rose on the first day of the week.

Leo on the Collects, Leo on the Collects.
speaking to the Saints to give bountifully, now is the time, says he, now is
the Lords day, now show your thankfulness, and your love to God in Christ, by
your bounty to those that are the members of Christ.

Greg. Epist. 3.
Saint Gregory in his third Epistle, If any man (says he) say that the Jews
sabbath should be reduced, and brought back, let them reduce all the
ceremonies with it, and if the one be abominable, the other is abominable
also: therefore take heed you be not seduced, despise the words of fools,
weigh every thing in the balance of reason, and that revelation that you have
received the sabbath is made the day of the Lord, that look what errors we
commit the week before, we should make amends, by expiation, and confession,
and sorrow, and contrition upon the Lords day.

Dam^scene.
Damascene, We celebrate the Lords day, as the perfect rest of humane nature,
for the Jews sabbath was a carnal rest, a temporal, and figurative rest, of
that which was to come; but this is the perfect rest of nature, to have an
assured promise of our resurrection, which we could not have but by the
memorial of a resurrection; and that could not be done, but in the
resurrection of Christ: therefore we celebrate this day in memory of Christ's
resurrection, and in token of the assurance of our resurrection.

Beza, and Musculus, Beza and Muscu^us.
and other late writers, unless one or two, which I spoke of before, which
indeed are singular men in their place, and degree: I say these men dissent
from them, and they say, and acknowledge that these two places of Scripture
make it apparent, the authority of the change of the Sabbath. I have been too
long on this subject. Now I come to that which is more plain, and easy.

After he had told them on what time this should be done, and we see the time
was upon the Lords day; and we see the reasons why it was changed from the
seventh day from the creation to the eighth day. Now let us go to the next that
follows in the order of the words. By what reasons, The motives to charity.
by what arguments would the Apostle persuade them to this act? What arguments
does he use? It is a hard matter to bring a churles money out of his purse, and
even those that be generous, and excellent well minded; yet they cannot endure
to hear much of alms, for charity is soon weary; and being once weary;
there must needs come infinite danger to the soul. For the heart grows hard,
if charity be weary. And therefore to the intent it may hold out, good
arguments and reasons must be devised, to feed and encourage it: for charity
of it self will lagge, and fail, except it be well supported. Therefore the
Apostle gives such motives as that nothing could be found more opportune, and
fit to keep men in practice then this.

And first from the example of other Churches, As I have appointed in the
Churches of Galatia, so do ye: that which other Churches do, surely that you
will do, especially that which poorer Churches have done, that are not able to
come near you in state, and means, you will be ashamed to come behind them;
but the Churches of Galatia which are more ancient then you, and withal poorer
then you; they have done this. Therefore I pray do you so too, that is one
great incentive, wherein we are to consider what the Church of Galatia was, and
also what his authority was among them, I have appointed, I have commanded
(says he) says S. Chrysostom, he did not counsel them, he did not exhort
them, by fair words to do it, but he appointed them by his power Apostolical,
by his Apostolical authority: whereby it appears, that the Church has power
to dispose of men's goods in the general, though not in the special quantity;
that is one motive to draw them on.

fair carriage that should be in the business, a man will more easily be
entreated to do something, if he be persuaded that there shall be no false play
in it; but that every thing shall be done according to the Donors intention,
and that the parties appointed shall be sure to receive that which they have
given; without any fraud or deceit: for that the Apostle gives them
satisfaction, and tells them, that when he comes the money shall be sent, and
transmitted to Jerusalem, to the poor Saints of Jerusalem, for whom he begged,
as we heard before; it should be sent to them, and it should be sent by those
that they should choose themselves, and if need were he himself also would go
with them. So that here is a full certainty made, that it should not be
balked, that it should not be interverted, nor kept in private men's hands, or
be turned to the private good of a few, but it should redound to the benefit of
those for whom it was intended: and for that purpose he tells them there should
be certain men chosen, and chosen of the Corinthians themselves; men that
should be approved by their letters, and Epistles: and if there were further
necessity, he himself would go to be a witness, and testify of this their
great grace; which God had done by them: This is the second motive whereby he
incites them.

The third is, the glorious title he gives them: for charity, although it be
not proud, yet notwithstanding it looks that there should be some thankful
remembrance of it, it desires no glorious titles, nor no blazing, yet the Lord
God in mercy has appointed that if the poor woman shall pour upon the body
of Christ such a box of ointment, the Lord says, Verily I say unto you,
wheresoever the Gospel shall be preached, a memorial shall be made of her, of
this that she has done, her box shall go with her for a memorial of her. The
Lord will not have the good deeds of his Saints to be buried in oblivion; but
he will have them famous, he will have them carried through the world;
therefore the Apostle gives it a glorious name, a glorious title; and says,
your grace. They shall carry your benefit, or your grace, your benefit as the
word signifies at large; But the Apostle speaks here in another mind, as of
a thing that comes from the grace of God, that ruled and reigned in them, and
moved them to this gracious work.

And then the last is from the inconvenience, that have none to gather when he
came, because it would tend both to his, and to their shame, if they should be
found unready. Unreadiness is a fault in all the parts of Christianity, and
there was no man that ought to be so forward as they; therefore he prays them
to do it before hand. These are the parcels of this Text. Of these things
briefly, and in order; as it shall please God to give assistance.

2 Motive, from the Churches authority.
First, concerning the motive from the Church. It has always been a strong
argument that is taken from the Churches authority, He that hears you, hears
me: and he that scorns you, scorns me, says our Lord Christ: and tell it to
the Church, and if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as a
heathen, and a publicane, or sinner. He that will not do as the Church does,
he is out of the Church of God, he is a banished man from heaven: and a
castaway from all hope of salvation. This argument therefore must be of
special consideration with us; what the ancient Church has done before times,
we must follow their steps, if we mean to partake of the reward that they, and
we both look for. We see that antiquity is a great and a maine reason to
induce any good understanding: for if the Church of God have authority to
persuade all her children, and those that follow after, certainly then the
ancientest Churches are of the greatest authority. Now the Church of Galatia
was a more ancient Church then Corinth. Therefore the Apostle alleges the
authority of that Church, to bring this on. So we see also in persons, not only
in Churches, but in particular persons, Romans 16.6. Salute Andronicus, and Iunia
that were before me in the Lord they were Christians before Saint Paul,
therefore Saint Paul gave them honor as his predecessors, as his glorious, and
honorable Ancestors, that were in the Lord before him. Therefore he says,
honor them, and salute them much. So in this case Galatia was the more ancient
Church, therefore it was to be the rule of Churches afterward in all good
things, in all things belonging to the propagation of the Gospel; to the
maintenance of a good conscience. The authority of the Church is the greatest
argument one of them under heaven, and it is certain, if our mother Church
which was once, the Church of Rome; if it had not proved extremely cruel, and
tyrannous in her proceedings, there ought no Church to have fallen away from
her community: for by separation from her, if she had continued a true mother;
they had separated from their father too: the God of all comfort, the God of
heaven and earth: for a man cannot have his fathers blessing, if he go from his
mothers bosom, but now when all things were turned to pride, to worldly
covetousness, to ambition, and vain glory, and their own greatness without
the true aim, and without respect to the right end, when all was turned to
pride, and self-love, that they would depose Kings, and Princes out of their
seats and kingdoms, it grew then to be a monster, and ceased to be a mother,
and thence it is not lawful to have any communion with them, that are so
blasphemous. But else, I say, if they had continued in that modest humility,
which they were first bred in, Rome a true Church 500 years after Christ.
and continued in for the space of four or five hundred years, surely, the
authority of the Church had been a rule for the whole world; for where they
do well, the Apostle makes a law from their doings, As the Churches of Galatia
do, so do ye.

2 What the Church of Galatia was.
Secondly, here is to be observed, what this Church of Galatia was, it was a
famous, but yet it was but a poor Church: it was so famous in zeal, that the
Apostle protests that they would have given him their eyes to have done him
good, wherein he signified their infinite ardor, and fervencie to the Gospel
of Christ, at his first coming, although afterward by his absence, they were
seduced, and drawn away by circumcision, by some creeping Jews that stole in
among them. But as it was famous for the greatness of the graces of the
spirit, so it was but mean in condition. Therefore the Apostle might well draw
an argument from it: for the Corinthians could not object, and say, What do you
tell us of Galatia? Galatia is a potent kingdom, a rich kingdom full of
means, and full of glory above our City, but this they could not do: for it
appeared to all the world to be but a poor place, a place of no traffic,
except it were a little in the Euxine sea: for it is a middle-land place. And
although the countries of Asia-minor (whereof Galatia is one) can maintain
themselves, Galatia in Asia minor.
yet for any great superfluity, and abundance, to send to others, they cannot
do it, especially the City of Galatia which is excluded, and kept from the
Pamphilian Sea, by the border of the South which lies between it and
Pamphilia. So we see here, that according as God has given Churches means and
ability, so they should exceed those that are poorer: the richer sort must do
after a rich manner; and if the poor should at any time seek to transcend
them, it were a shame to them that are greater, and more able. The City of
Corinth, it was the Mart of all the world: Corinth the Mart of the world. Hom.
Iliad 2.
therefore Homer in his time which was one of the ancientest Writers that ever
was among the Heathen, there is none like him, in his second Iliad he says
three times over, Rich Corinth. The reason of it is because of the situation
which is between two seas, from whence all the traffic of the world flocked,
and flowed to it. Therefore it followed that seeing the Church of Galatia had
far less means then Corinth, and yet they had done thus. Therefore Corinth
must much more obey this precept.

And it is a lesson that I would that men of sense and reason would lay to
their own consciences both in the Church, and in their private persons: for we
have a great number of poor Churches even in this City, that are sessed often
times to pay far more then richer places do: and there are many poor persons
that are truer pay-masters, that pay scot, and lot better then many greater men
do, which the Apostle intimates here to be a shame, it is a shame that poor
Churches should go before rich: it is a shame that Galatia should go before
Corinth, and exceed them; it is a thing that God will have a saying for; and
these great ones that have their thousands, and their ten thousands about them,
and yet they will not pay that which belongs to their poor officers, to their
poor servants, such as belong to them, poor Churchmen, that will not pay
that which belongs to them of custom, and duty; these men shame themselves
infinitely, and disturb the order of nature: and perhaps lay up a curse for
their own souls.

The last thing that I observe hence is this: how will he make the Church of
Galatia to provoke them, how will he bring the Corinthians to this? how shall
it be brought about? The Corinthians might have objected and said, What do you
tell us of the Church of Galatia? Have not we poor enough of our own? as we use
to say now adays, we will give nothing abroad, because we have poor at home.
It is true, a poor man's neighbor that is near unto him, ought in the first
and principal place to be regarded; no question of it, yet there ought
something to be done to the poor at large. Now lest the Corinthians should say
they would be at their choice, and they would either do, or they would not do,
and the Church of Galatia was of no power to prescribe them, or their example
was of no force to move them by way of necessity. The Apostle therefore tells
them, I did appoint: So by this he shows, that he came with full authority, as
speaking more authentically, and more powerfully, not by persuasion and
counsel, but by his Apostolical authority, which he had received by Christ's
command.

As I have appointed. The Church has power to dispose of men's goods.
We learn by this that the Church has power to dispose of men's goods; and yet
this must be done in a gentle manner, with a reservation of their own will for
the quantity: for in the quantity it cannot say, says Saint Chrysostom,
thus much or thus much, but must leave it to a man's own conscience, according
as God has enriched him: but as I said before, whenever God has given a
prosperous voyage according as a man has had a good journey in his trade, so
he must prosper Gods Saints according as God has prospered him. But for the
maine point that he must give something, it lies in the Churches power to
command that almsdeeds, and works of charity should be done, that is as much
in the Churches power as that we should keep a Sabbath day, that men should
meet together, and hear the word, and administer Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, in the Church, we know these things the Church has power to ordain,
and constitute, and as much power has the Church to ordain the collection for
the poor: for all come from one authority. Therefore the Apostle says here,
As I have appointed. So then the Corinthians were bound not only by the
example of the Church of Galatia, but by that Apostolical power, by that
authority which the Apostles had received from Christ, Feed my sheep, feed
them with your prayers, feed them with your preaching, feed them with your
exhortations, feed them in giving them bread for the body, feed them by your
example, feed them every way that may be helpful, and commodious to them.

Howbeit out of this we must not gather that the Church has that fullness of
power to impose what they list, and to oppress by way of exaction, to thrust
in upon the members of Christ what it pleases them. No; the Apostle gives no
way here for annates, he gives no way for Peter Pence, nor for such kind of
collections: for those were exactions, and extortions against the good wills of
the parties, to the impoverishing of them that gave it, and to the exceeding
enriching of those that received it. Therefore in such a case we must take
notice how far the Churches authority does extend, that is, when it is to do
good to them of Jerusalem, for the Saints of Jerusalem, for the good of them
that want, of them that are disabled by age, or by nature, or by misfortune, to
do good to them, this is the will of God, and this the Church has power to
raise out of a man's substance; and there is nothing that is a man's own, there
is nothing that he can say, he takes comfort in, unless the poor man take
part of it; there is no pound that thou have except the poor man have a
quantity out of it, if it be but a farthing in a pound, except he have
something from it, there can be no rest nor quiet to thee of it, the Lord has
appointed unto men, that as he has blessed them, so they should return some
tribute, some acknowledgement to his poor members on earth. As I have
appointed in the Churches of Galatia. This is the first motive, I lay no new
thing upon your shoulders, no new burden upon you, but that which other
Churches bear as well as you; nay that which poorer Churches, as that of
Galatia, (which is not comparable to you) bears the same burden: therefore I
pray do you bear it. It is the common taxation of the Church of God, the
collection for the poor the taxing for the poor, it has been still a
follower, and a concomitant of the Gospel to have mind of the poor Saints, it
was the charge given to Paul and Barnabas, Gal. 2. as a chief part of their
office to be mindful of the poor.

2. Motive. The safe carriage of it.
The second motive is taken from the fair carriage that shall be in this
matter: for the Corinthians might fear, when they had made this collection,
and should send it, that it would miscarry; for Jerusalem was almost a thousand
miles off from Corinth, take the nearest way that might be, and there might
many casualties fall out before it came there, it might be taken by tyrants, or
they might be false among themselves, so that they knew not whether ever it
should come to the hands of them that should have it tendered them. Therefore
for that he says, he will see to it, they shall be sure it shall be carried
safe, and sent to Jerusalem. It is a great comfort, and a great argument to
stir up men's hearts to do good, when they know there shall be no fraud nor
deceit in the conveyance of it, it was that only incentive that moved our
forefathers to be so bountiful to the Church of God, as they were, that they
went from the giving of almsdeeds to the building of Cells, and Colleges, and
Monasteries, and great Churches, and goodly Palaces, a strange and wondrous
height there was of piety and devotion. Indeed there was much superstition
mingled with it, there was much vanity mixed with it: but yet we may well
think that if those men had ever thought of such sharkers as came after them,
to pull down all, and to make every thing equal with the ground, they would
have saved a labor, and would never have been so bountiful to the Church. If
they had thought that such a sort of intruders, and ravenners would have taken
the goods, and the stock of the Church, and the stock of the poor, and have
made such havocke of them, not caring for the honor, and respect of the
Church. But here for this, the Apostle tells the Corinthians, that they should
have no such fear; for, says he, whosoever you shall commend, such as shall
be fit men, they should be appointed for the carriage of this money. Indeed he
must be a fit man that may be trusted with money, as he says in the Comedy,
if thou find a man that is faithful in money, he may easily be believed on
in any word of counsel, for he that may be trusted with the one, may be
trusted with the other: and they are excellent men indeed that can be
faithful in those things that are committed to their charge, especially in
money, where the craft and subtlety may be easily hid, and can hardly be
boltted out. Therefore he says, there shall be fit men, chosen men of
conscience, men fearing God, and hating covetousness; as Moses father speaks
of officers, not such as were collectors afterward, men that were careless,
that will spend the whole year in outlaying, and will work all that while out
of the poor men's stock, they care not how much, men that will come here with
a Brief, and stay upon pleasure in the City, and spend out their time, that
they care not when they return to the poor men for whom they gather; much
less shall they be such men as those that shall barter their Briefes, and
sell their Patent, and take a certain sum of money beforehand of some
hide-bound fellows, of such wretches that will extort, and gather far more
then they could do, these must be no such companions; but they must be men fit,
faithful men chosen of the Corinthians themselves: for he says, those that
you shall approve by your letters, by them will I send the money.

So from hence we understand, first that there ought officers for the poor,
collectors for the poor, always to be chosen among the parties with whom
they live; indeed some officers cannot be chosen by the common people,
spiritual officers cannot be chosen by them: for the people cannot choose their
Bishop; they cannot choose their Minister: they must not, they cannot meddle
with it, because it belongs not to them to be judges of gifts, and abilities of
the spirit; wherein they have no insight. But for temporal things, the Lord
has given them power to elect and make Officers, and the Civil Law gives them
leave to choose their Pleaders, their Physicians, and their Schoolmasters, and
Officers of the like kind. So that in this the Church has authority, and
power, as we see by the Apostles words. And it is with great care and
conscience to be left to them, unless higher authority interpose, which must
be hearkened unto, or else, I say, it is left to them: therefore the Apostle
says, They shall choose, because they were known to them, they were not known
to the Apostle, except it were by revelation, he knew not by a man's face,
whether he were honest or no. Therefore the Corinthians were to make choice of
them, and them that they chose, he would not reject, and put by, but whom they
should nominate, he would allow, and confirm them in their election and choice.

By this we learn, that it is no small honor for a man to be chosen a
collector for the poor. It is thought of men to be a poor, and base office,
but it is that place that God puts a man into, and that God and the Church
trusts him withal. It is a place that is gotten by the grace of God that
shines in a man, and therefore it is not to be balked, and put off, and
rejected as a matter of baseness, but to be accounted a fair degree in the
Church of God, as the Apostle speaks of the Deacons office which is like unto
this of collection for the poor.

3. Motive. Letters of commendation.
But now how shall these men be commended? they must not only be chosen, but
they must be commended; by their letters, and Epistles. The Corinthians must
write letters testimonial to commend these as faithful brethren, to the
Saints at Jerusalem. The Church of God always had a great care of letters
testimonial, they would have no man go, or travel, without them; they would
have no man go into a strange place to receive the Sacrament, but he must have
a letter of testimony with him: Letters of commendation have been of ancient
use in the Church of God, which are still to be honored, and to be kept with
much care. Three sorts of letters.
These kind of letters were of three sorts.

1 Letters of peace.
They were either letters of peace, which were such as a man must needs have
with him if he came to the King, or to the Bishop, he had still a letter of
peace, that was to show that such a man was in the peace of the Church, that he
was a member of Christ, that he was a professor of the faith, that he received
the Sacrament duly, that he was in the communion of the body; if he had these
letters, he might come into the presence of the King, or of the Bishop, or else
he might not.

2 Letters of form.
And then there were letters of form, by which the Church used to commend a man
to the Presbyter, or to the people, to whom they must come with these, and by
no means without them. A man could not travel out of his country, but he
must have of these letters to commend him.

And then there were these letters testimonial, 3 Letters testimonial.
which the Apostle here speaks of, that these brethren that should be supposed
faithful, that should administer the portion that God had vouchsafed them,
that they should deliver it to the full, that they should not balke a penny, nor
spend of the Churches store, any more then needs must, nor stay by the way
longer then need required; but that they should in all parts be faithful
dispensers, those that made conscience, and those that would give an account,
and answer to God for the things they had been trusted withal. The Church had
this care of letters, because they would have no falsaries to go up and down,
no idle vagabonds, to pretend poverty, and to collogue and cozen the world, to
whom they were to send for those that wanted. And the Church was also careful
to see that undoubted seal from those whom the letters were sent, that it were
no counterfeit, lest there should be any deceit, any forged letters, and lest
there should be any cause of trouble in the Church by unnecessary letters, that
should be sent to no purpose, as many now adays that gad about upon their
pleasure, and men will send letters with a beggar to maintain his gadding, the
Church of God could not endure this, but had a special regard to the letters
of the Saints; and took them still as so many appendixes, as so many seals, as
writings applied to their faith; they received them with as great reverence as
an Angel from heaven: this was the antiquity of letters.

Now a days they are so common indulgences, and such like things which the
Pope has set forth for the pardon of sins, for the gathering of so much
money in such a country, for the preferment of such a novice in such a place,
in a strange land, they were so ordinary, Letters and Popes Bulls puc down by
H. 3.
as that our Land in the time of King Henry the third, quite casheered all of
them, we heard no more of them since: We have had a great Sabbath, a long rest
from them. It is good that these letters should be respected among friends,
that there should be regard had of them: for as they do not much good, so they
do much harm in the world; men should be careful what they write, what they
set their hands unto. It is the fashion now adays, when a friend says it, or
but send it in writing to his friend, for friendship sake he will set his hand
to it, that a man is a good competent scholar, when he knows nothing of
learning, one that never saluted learning from the threshold; that a man is
virtuous, when he is clean contrary. It is a thing that will be brought
against many at the day of the Lord, for writing of letters vain, and idle,
and false. The Church of God heretofore had them in great estimation: in the
beginning of the Church, they were taken as the word of God, not that they were
of the same authority with the word of God, but being spoken by the Church,
they were taken as an appendix of the word of God.

4. Motive. Alms called grace.
Again, he gives them another reason from himself, and tells them that if there
might be fair dealing, he would go with them himself, if need require. And he
gives their alms a glorious name here, They shall carry your grace to
Jerusalem, your benefit, or grace. It is true, the word signifies a benefit in
the common sense, at large; but the Apostle speaks in another phrase: for the
phrases of Scripture, and the phrases of the Heathen must not be confounded,
and mixed together: the Apostles meaning is this, that it was a grace indeed:
for it was wrought in them by the grace of God, there is no man that can give a
poor man a penny, but it proceeds from the grace of God. Although it may be
pride, or vanity, or custom, may bring a man to do something, yet there is
some spark of grace in any man that does any thing for Gods people, therefore
the Apostle calls it not a gift, that was not sufficient to express it, he calls
it a grace or blessing of God which could not be expressed, as he says in 2.
Cor. 9.

And it proceeds from the grace of God, 1 Because it proceeds from grace.
whatsoever Gods Saints do, it comes from the grace of God. Wicked men,
natural men, they many times do the works of God for ambition, for show, for
vainglory: but the child of God still, he works upon grace, the stock of
grace is the foundation of all that he does; and the grace of God in Christ is
that which moves him to do a grace to them that want, because God has been
gracious to me, and has redeemed my soul from death, and hell; in remembrance
of this grace, I am raised up to do some grace to a poor man, to redeem him
from his misery, and poverty, as I am redeemed by the blood of Christ, by the
grace of God from eternal misery.

Secondly, 2 It is graceful to Gods providence.
because it was a thing most graceful to God, there is nothing that graceth
Gods providence more then a good alms man: for God has left many poor people
without that grace in the world, they have no means, nothing to betake
themselves to, nothing but misery, and it is a scorn to a great man's house to
have many ragged beggars belonging to it, it is a disgraceful thing: so in
Gods house, we have a great number of poor, a great number of people that have
nothing to live on; therefore he that is helpful to these, he graceth Gods
providence, and the government of God, and he purchases everlasting grace to
his own soul.

3 Because it comes freely.
Lastly, he calls it grace, because it comes not by constraint, but of grace:
they gave it freely, and voluntarily, out of their own free heart, not of
compulsion: this therefore ought to be a reason, and a motive to stir up the
Corinthians to it, because it was a grace, a grace that made them acceptable to
God, because it graced the providence of the Lord, because the Lord respects a
cheerful giver, one that gives with a free consent, without inforcement: do it
therefore, it is your grace. There is nothing that will stand by you so
graciously as this will: you think you are gracious with fine apparel, that
there is a great grace in rich buildings, in estimation, and great place in the
world: no, your grace it stands in alms giving, that is the greatest grace in
the world. And when you have reckoned up all the monuments of honor, and put
them all together, they are not at all comparable to this grace of well doing.
As it is said of Vespasian, that other men set up monuments of brass, and
stone, but he set up greater monuments then all the rest, that was his good
doing: good deeds they are great monuments, they are more stable, and strong
then Hercules pillars, then the pillar that Absalom built. It is your grace to
do well, therefore says the Apostle, they shall carry your grace to Jerusalem,
that is, your alms whereby you become gracious both to God and man.

And the last reason of all, that the Apostle uses, 5. Motive. That they be
not found unready.
is this, lest when I come the collection be to be made: the Apostle would not
have them slack, he would have them to keep their credit, the credit of their
alacrity, and cheerfulness: for so he says in 2. Cor. 9. When the
Macedonians shall come, and find you tardie in the matter, that you have not
collected, but are then making the collection, we shall all be ashamed, both
you, and I, so the Apostle explaines himself in that place. And indeed to be
long in doing a good thing, is a disgrace to the action, as Senecae says, he
that is long a giving, that gives late, it is as if he did not give at all, and
as the Poet says, that office, and that good deed that is delayed, and sticks
long in a man's fingers, it has no grace in it, the grace of a thing is in the
quickness and expedition of it. Therefore the graces are painted forth ready
to run a race, that should be the nature of a benefit, of a grace, to be
quick. And therefore in the Latin all the conjugations are long, but dari,
and that is short, to show that a man should be quick in giving, and so datum
and all that come of it are short, to show that men should be ready, and
willing to run to do good things.

This does greatly condemn our backwardness, although I need not speak it
comparatively: for perhaps there is not any Church in the world comparatively,
that is, more famous in good deeds, and charitable alms then this is, yet
notwithstanding when men come to some special actions, they be mavelous
slack, and unready, and they are hardly drawn. It is said, in the Records of
the Church, that when the Statute for the poor came out first, when it was
first made a statute law, the devout men there blessed themselves, and smote
their breasts, and wondered that there should come such a coldness of charity,
that men which before times had been ready, and pliable, should be forced unto
it now by the law: but we see every day there is a necessity of a law for it,
and there shall be every day more need; we must be constrained to do that good,
that we should do out of the bowels of mercy which should be in us, we should
do it from the influence of the grace of God to us in Christ, we should do it
as fellow members, we should love our own flesh, we should do it as though we
our selves were pinched with the infirmities of other men; we should give poor
men that which we can spare, as freely as we give them our looks, as freely as
we give them the gesture of our bodies, and the like: and we know that words
and looks are not hunshingly drawn from us, but when we come to works of
mercy, then we dream, they come hardly off, it sticks with us: but the holy
Apostle tells us, there is a shame in this, when men are so backward, although
they do good deeds, yet when they do them not in the firstnesse of time, and
when they do not go through them with cheerfulness, they show themselves to be
fallen back in their love to Christ, and to his members. But I need not insist
much upon this in this Congregation, which has always been ready in these
matters, and in this City the bowels of the Saints, and their necessities
find such relief that it gives occasion to a company of wandering folk to put
them often times to great and transcendent, and excessive collections, whereof I
would have charity to be a little shie; but when these things come that are of
extraordinary consequence, as the undoing of our brethren, the overthrowing of
their estates by fire, and such like casualties as these, and are testified to
us under the hands and certificates of great men, men of place, and worth, and
credit, in these things we are not to make question, nor to be slack or
untoward, for it is the voice of God that rouzeth us. And as we should be
cautelous in those things that we know not; so we should be forward, and ready
in those things whereof there is a declaration made, whereof no doubt can be
made. Therefore I beseech you, as the Lord has enabled you, that every man
would labor to maintain in his heart the fire of charity, that it may still
burn as the fire was to burn continually upon Gods altar, that your zeal to
the members of Christ may still continue, that Christ may live in you by faith,
by apprehending the promises, and by love, and charity, which is the chief
demonstration of himself, and his abiding in you.

The fourth Sermon.
1 COR. 16.4.5. And if it shall be worthy of my journey that I shall go with
it, they shall go with me. But I will come to you when I shall pass through
Macedonia: for I do pass through Macedonia.
THis proposal of a collection for the poor Saints that were at Jerusalem,
was a matter of great moment, and that was it that made the Apostle to stand so
much, and so largely upon it: for the lives of the brethren that were there,
were much endangered both by want, and by extreme persecution, but especially
by reason of a famine, whereof Agabus prophesied, in Act. 11. which happened in
the third or fourth year of Claudius Caesar: and therefore as Pompey said once,
when Rome was in great lack, and scarsitie of victuals, and he was ready to
embarke in a tempestuous sea, in a dangerous weather, his friends counseled
him by all means to look to his life, and not to expose himself to the
peril of the sea at that time. He answered them very valorously again, that
he must needs sail, and set forward that expedition, and that he did contemn,
and scorn his own life, in respect of the common good, and the desire he had
of the safety of those lives that he had at Rome, which were to be sustained.
So the Apostle sets this forward with all his diligence, there must be a
collection made for the Saints at Jerusalem, and it must be done quickly with
great zeal and devotion. And therefore he offers himself to the action if
need so require. The way was long from Corinth to Jerusalem, they were about
nine hundred or a thousand miles distant, in which way many great
inconveniences, and incommodities might happen. The men also that were to bear
it might perhaps prove unskilful, or unfaithful, the treasure that was
gotten, and gathered in the Church of Corinth, was great, and therefore to be
so much the more regarded: these, and the like circumstances so troubled the
mind of the Apostle, that he could not in few words discharge himself, but he
uses a number of intimations to them; as being possessed with the thought and
great zeal that the business might be fairly carried, that it might have
good success, and because the blessing of God went with him wheresoever he
went; and he made no question, but his presence would secure the state of the
collection, that no thief or pyrate should seize upon it by the way, nor no
means should be used to intervert it; therefore he promises that if it be
worthy his labor, if it come to such a sum as may beseem the person of an
Apostle to be sent in embassage, and legacy about it, that then he will go,
and he will give a kind of security to it: for indeed as yet although it were
a great treasure, that was gathered at Corinth, yet the Apostle knew it not,
for he now writes but for the gathering of it: but afterward in his second
Epistle, he gives them thanks for it. He thanks God for that unspeakable gift,
that is, that sum of money which was such a mass as that he says, the gift
was merely unspeakable, their liberality was so free, that it was a very
munificence, a magnificent thing, as the word is: for this therefore because
the charge was great, he promises that if need require, that his person should
be there, he would go with them, and would see the whole business expedite:
for he was secure of this, that whatsoever he set his hand unto, the Lord would
give it protection by the way that it should safely arrive at Jerusalem, if he
should come to go with it.

And because they had written in their letter to him, desiring him to come, and
to reform certain abuses that were crept into their Church, as we may see by
that that follows: Therefore he now answers to that part of their letter, in
verse. 5. and tells them that he means to come, and to visit their Church, and
to redress those things that were disordered among them. But he tells them that
he cannot come yet, because he had a purpose to pass through Macedonia. The
occasion of which we may read Act. 19. when he was asleep in his bed one
night, the Lord appointed that in a dream or vision a certain man of the
Macedons, that had a Soldiers jacket like the phalanx of Macedonia, like their
ordinary military garments not used in those countries, and he stood in such a
vesture, as that any man that had seen the custom of the times, and the
manner of those Nations might have known him to be a Macedonian; and he
appeared to Paul when he was asleep in a dream, desiring him to come, and
help them. Come to Macedonia, and help us; which Saint Paul took as an
heavenly vision, and therefore he purposed and resolved the first thing he did
to obey that vision, to go to Macedonia. And though it were far by the bow,
because Corinth was as near or nearer to Ephesus, above half as near again
as Macedon was, yet he purposed to do that, to go thither first, because he
thought the Lord would have that quickly dispatched: so he tells them he will go
first thither, and then he will come back to Corinth, and so he might well, for
he might land at Thessalonica, or at Ephesus, and round all about the coasts of
Dalmatia, and Illyrium, and from thence come to Corinth which was very
opportune and fit, because it stood upon the neck of the Ionian sea, that he
might take shipping in any part of the country at the lower end of Tyrus, and
so sail for Corinth. He desires them therefore in the mean time to expect
him: for now he was to go about that business, and after he had performed this
journey he would remember them, and come, and order the things that were amiss
in their Church. This is the sum of the words read unto you.

Now to proceed in order with them.

We must first consider the Apostle supposes that the Churches collection, and
gathering at Corinth for the Saints at Jerusalem, it might come to a great
fumme, or perhaps that it might fail of that sum that it might come short of
his expectation, and according to this he pronounces, If it fall out so as I
would have it; then I will go: Parts of the Text 1.
so that here is a condition, and a resolution.

The condition 1. Conditio. 2. Resolutio.
in these words: If it be worthy. If it be a thing worthy my labor, that it
may beseem the person of an Apostle to attend it, and to guard it, I will go
with it, that is the resolution, if it be worthy, then he promises the
presence of his own person, that he will employ himself in that, although he
could hardly be spared: for he was to plant the Church of God, and not to
intend worldly things so much, and yet he was so touched with the weakness,
and with the frailty, and wants of his brethren at Jerusalem, that he would
dispense with that function for a while, to do the works of mercy.

And then after in the last part of the Text he comes to a private overture,
concerning their familiar state. Now he has done with the general,
concerning the Church abroad, he comes to the particular, what he would do for
them in the Church of Corinth. He says, he will come, and see them; he will
come, and visit them, and see their order, to congratulate with them; wherein
they had done well, and to visit them, and reprehend them, wherein they had
done otherwise then well.

And then the time when; not presently, but he would come to them after he had
gone to Macedonia, because it was a great way about; therefore they must stay
for him till that journey were finished. These are the branches of the Text. Of
these in order, as God shall give assistance, and the shortness of the time
will permit.

1 Part. The condition.
And first concerning the condition that he propounds, in that he says; If it
be worthy that I shall go.

The word is taken in two senses in the Scripture, sometime it is taken for
this, if it be needful, if you think it needful for me to go. But in this
place by the consent of all Interpreters, it has a greater, and higher sense,
and must be taken for a matter of dignity, that is, if there be so much worth
in your collection; as that it may well beseem the legacy and embassage of an
Apostle, then I will undertake it; where,

First, we are to observe a contrary passage to that which commonly falls out in
the liberality of the world, wherein men are not to look in the mouth of a
given animal, as they say, not to number and estimate men's benefits that are
given frankly and freely, but to take the gift as it pleases the giver to
bestow it: but Saint Paul seems to intimate another thing, that the Church of
God look to be respected in their suits, and Briefes, and supplications, not
with a nigardly hand, not with a perfunctory kind of service; but the thing
must be done in some state, according to a man's ability he should have a
dignity in the work: for those benefits that are small and slender, they have
no grace nor dignity in them. Although it be true indeed that sometimes the
poorest gift is as greatly rewarded, and respected of God, as the poor widows
mite, which she cast into the treasury: was more regarded then all that the
rich cast in, because she cast in all that she had, all her substance: But yet
when men part with it hunshingly, with a kind of contradiction, and he that is
worth thousands of pounds will give but a poor penny to a general, or common
good, or a small thing which is far inferior, and disproportionable to the
state which God has vouchsafed him, as it is now adays; this is a kind of
unworthy contribution, it is a collection which the Apostle thinks has no
worth in it, and there is no reason that S. Paul should go with such a
collection, but any vulgar man might go with such a vulgar sacrifice.

If it be worthy. That is, if it come to so great a sum, that it shall be fit
to maintain the poor, to serve their turn for some length of time in a good
measure; it shall then be a work of a sweet smell, most grateful, and
acceptable to the Church of God at Jerusalem: and it shall befit me also to
attend it. For otherwise the Apostle could ill be spared from that wondrous,
and unwearied peregrination which he made in the world; for he went from place
to place, and still was winning countries to the obedience and service of his
Lord, and master, he might therefore ill loose so much time as should be spent
in carrying the money from Corinth to Jerusalem, or from Ephesus: where it
seems he now was, because many countries in the world were not yet
discovered, there were many Nations that were not yet brought to the faith, and
obedience of Christ; and he was sent to be a Preacher to the Gentiles, and
therefore he was to preach to all the Gentiles; that he could extend himself
unto, being (as Chrysostom says) like unto the sun in the firmament, that
rises in the one part of the world, and in twenty four hours compasses all
the round: such an one was the Apostle, which was sent and instituted by our
Savior, and therefore it was much for him to lose so much time as this action
would require to carry it so far as to Jerusalem; but now that the love of
the brethren was so great, and their necessity was so important and exigent,
that he thought it not amiss for the time to lay aside the care of the greater
office, and to stoop to this which was the lesser: for it is true indeed, the
Apostle which way soever he went, he gained souls to his master, and it was
all one for him, howbeit there is great difference in this, in planting of a
new foundation where Christ was never heard of, and in confirming of those
places where Christ had been taught, and received, and embraced. Therefore
there was some odds, and disadvantage in this; that he should spend so much
time as to go back to Jerusalem: whereas all those places were now already
won to Christ, and he should have gone, and marched forward toward the North
parts of the world; where Christ had not as yet been heard of: and yet he sets
all the care of this aside, for the present, and urgent necessity that his
brethren were in at Jerusalem; and he thinks that the works of mercy that
belong to the Saints of God; are to possess and to take up the time of a man,
rather then some higher thing.

What, then the preaching of the Gospel? was not that the greatest part that
belonged to his function? Apostles themselves gave, Act. 6.2. where there was a
mutiny among the Greeks and the Hebrews, because there was a neglect of their
women in the common ministration: and the Apostles to prevent such a mischief
which was now growing among them, and to take away the viper of discention and
division which now troubled the Church, they made this general rule and
principle, that it was not fit that they should leave the Word of God to serve
tables. Behold this rule, it bound all men, it included all the Ministers of
the Church, and all the Apostles themselves; therefore the Min^sters or
Apostles should not leave the Word of God, their daily function Apostolical,
to serve tables. And yet we see the Apostle leaves the word of God, the
preaching of the Gospel, and other matters of great concernment, the calling
of the world to the faith of Christ, he leaves this to serve tables, that is,
to carry the money that was gathered at Corinth to Jerusalem, which in effect
was nothing else but to serve tables. This therefore has been a question
among Divines in all times, how far it should be extended, and whether Saint
Paul exceeded the limits or no; or whether that that he did were well or no:
for some have thought, that either he forgot that rule, or else that he was not
bound unto it.

Church of God suffers no detriment by a man's absence, no notable detriment,
and so long as it is otherwise well provided, and so long as the business
swallows up no great length of time, but that with convenient speed the party
may return to his former calling, so long the Apostles themselves were bound
to intend the works of mercy, and to serve tables. It is true, the Apostle was
not to leave the Gospel, and to serve tables, because the greater work must be
first intended: except there be present necessity; but in the second place, he
ought to intend that, and if so be they can be joined both together, the
preaching of the word, and the serving of tables, as Saint Paul did in this
action: for it is manifest they did concur together both. If a man can do
thus, it makes a more grateful smell in the nostrils of God. As Saint Austin
said, that he did not take accounts, and reckonings, because he bent his study
to answer Heretics; he carried no keys, nor rings, to seal daily matters,
and every commodity of victual in his house; which they used to seal with a
ring, he carried none of these, but he gave all the charge of them to his
Steward; but (says he) if God should give me a vacant time, I know that this
belongs to my charge too. And Synetius Bishop of Pentapolis, says he, I am
far from condemning those Bishops that take upon them the care of orphans,
and seculer poor, and of alms houses, and hospitals; I am so far from
condemning their holy actions, that I do admire at it, and much wish that my
self were fit for both; but I know mine own infirmity, they can pass
through them both without pollution: but if I should enter into these
reckonings and sums, to take care for these things, I should lack the whole
sea, the whole Ocean could not be sufficient to cleanse me from the pollution
I should contract thereby. And the Quinisex Council in Cannon 35. Council.
Quini sex. Can. 35.
they ordained that the Bishop should look to the provision for the poor,
either in his own person, either himself, or else by his Prelate or
Archdeacon, that was under him; these things are so manifest, as that no man of
sense can deny it, but those of the new fangled opinion of late, would draw
Ecclesiastical persons from meddling with temporal things; yet surely these
things are not merely temporal, but are ecclesiastical, for it is the
gathering, and collection of men that are spiritually minded, and it is
employed for a spiritual purpose, for the maintenance of the Church, which are
the sons and daughters of the Spirit of God. It is true, there was somewhat
more in Saint Paul, then in another man, because he was not tied to any place,
he had no fixed seat, but he might go through the world; therefore much more
might he pass such a journey, and back again: whereas our Bishops now have
their settled residence, and their little compass, therefore he might better do
it, then other men, ordinary Bishops in that oeconomicall Province which the
Lord put him in trust with. Church men may tend secular affairs.
But to conclude this point, the Apostle teaches us that it is lawful, for
Churchmen to intend these businesses which we call secular. In times past it
was so, although the Laws, and Canons, and Constitutions have obscured the
light of poor Ecclesiastical men, as that they should be no guardians of the
poor, of widows, and orphans, many have taken these to themselves to manage
their lands, and possessions; yet the common tenent of the Church has ever
been, that those things were most sure, and trusty which were put into the
Churches hands, and that they might do, it is manifest by the example of the
Apostle, who lays aside the care of his general function, in preaching to all
the world, and is content to negotiate for one Church, and for the poorest
thing in the Church, not so much for the administration of the Sacrament, or
the preaching of the Word, but to carry a little maintenance, to carry a little
victual which one would think might as well have been transported without his
presence, as with it.

But now observe the condition; The Churches sacrifice must be worthy.
for so he promises all upon a condition, If the collection shall be worthy, I
will go with it. So we learn out of this, that the Church of God is bound to
make all their sacrifices as worthy as they may, to have a worthiness in them.
A lean sacrifice is a shameful kind of sacrifice, it was an abomination to
God, the Lord would have the fattest, and the fairest. Therefore those that
present any thing to him, except it be out of a willing mind, and
proportionable to that which God has blessed them with, it rather draws a
curse, and indignation, and detriment, and loss upon them; then a benefit and
help to themselves: the Lord loves a cheerful giver; and the Lord would have
them that do good works either to be rich in good works, or else not to do them
at all, both in respect of the quantity, in giving so much, and to account
themselves so much the more rich, by how much they have been contributers to
the poor: for this is that great support whereby we live, and it is a mystery
which we cannot be persuaded of, yet it is most true. Which if we look into
it, will make any man amazed, that there is no man that thrives so well in the
world, nor shall thrive, as those that are open-hearted, and bountiful handed,
in good causes, and for good purposes: We see how the means of the Church from
time to time they have been imbezelled, and brought to nothing, and yet if we
look into the fortunes and states of those men that have done it, that have
thus wasted them, we shall see that hungry beggarly poverty has overtaken
them, that they are not able to do the tenth part of that which their fathers
did, that had no such benefit as they have incroached to themselves. Therefore
seeing the Lord is merciful, in blessing, and there is a secret bounty to
them that are bountifully minded; It should teach a Christian man to resolve
not to hearken to flesh, and blood, not to hearken to the contradictions of
nature, not to hearken to the probabilities of reason, for they will tell a man
it is good for him still to be hoording, it is good for him to save in private,
to keep all to himself, and by so doing, be thinks to gather a multitude of
wealth and riches together, although indeed it be contrary: for the Lord
scatters where men scrape; and where men scatter, and disperse abroad, the Lord
multiplyes, and increases. If it be in a good cause, and if it be cheerfully
with a willing mind: It is therefore a Christians glory, and his care to make
up the service of his God as fair as he may. It is a shameful thing when the
people of God shall have a stye for their Church, as they have in many poor
places in our Land, where there is not so much as a roof or covering to the
Church, but it lies open, exposed to wind, and weather; it is a shameful
thing that the service of God should be offered up in such a base place as
that. It is a shameful thing to have the Ministers of the Gospel poorly, and
basely, and beggarly respected, to have the sons of Ely forced to beg a
piece of bread, as it is 1. Sam. 3. 1. Sam 3. ult.
It is a shameful thing to see the means of the Church so cut down, as that
there is no hope for ever of reviving of it to the sight, and show of men,
neither is there any possibility that learning should thrive there, or that
ever there should grow or spring any kind of literature thence, and that any
honest manners should come to any purpose, these things are a shame to the
world, and the goods of our common Church, which should be fair, and goodly
in the view of all the world; now they are turned to Chapels of ease, to
corner Churches, to Gentlemen's chambers, to preaching by the fire side, to
conferences in bed rooms, and such base terms the whole Gospel is brought
unto, that there is almost no show or similitude of any true love and charity
in the poor distressed parts of this Nation. It is a common, thing (as we say)
in the Churches beyond the Seas, where all things are wasted, and spoiled, and
cast down, but I would it had not come over the Sea too; it has also invaded
us, as a great canker-worme, in the state of many places of this flourishing
kingdom: for although (God be thanked) there is a singular alacrity in the
spirits of many men, to beautify Churches, to make spacious and goodly
Colleges, and to keep the poor in Hospitals, and Almes-houses, these things
are yet in many places to the glory of God, and the commendation of the people
of God; yet in many other places, and far more in number, there is nothing
but misery, vastation, and mere desolation, and it is so desperate, as that it
is almost impossible, except an extraordinary hand of God from heaven work it,
that there should be any relief. That which we do for Gods cause, let us do it
with good will, let us do it with a cheerful mind, to make it as near as we
can, as the Apostle says here, (...), a worthy collection, a worthy sacrifice,
a worthy house of prayer, a worthy Scholar, a worthy Preacher of the Word of
God, a worthy maintenance for the poor, a worthy allowance for Hospitals:
whatsoever we do, let us labor as much as we can to make it worthy. God
cannot abide these hungry, base, beggarly things, which Saul himself in the
pursuit of the Amalekites killed, he destroyed the weary lean creatures which
were not worthy to be sacrificed, but he saved the best, and the fattest,
because he knew that God in his Law required the fattest to be offered to him
in sacrifice. And now also the Lord will have the flower, and the cream of
that which he has bestowed on men, when he calls for it: for a man to serve God
with branne, when he has bestowed flower upon him, it is an ungrateful
retribution, and unjust, and it brings a plague, and a curse upon the residue,
upon the stock that remains. So much for that point, that it was the Apostles
purpose upon condition, that their collection were fair, and worthy, that it
might be thought fit for his presence, he would go with it. Wherein we see, and
may gather from the general, that men's minds and affections are to be stirred
up with strong words, and motives, or else charity is so cold of it self,
that it will be brought to little or nothing. We see here the Apostle Saint
Paul he begges closely, but yet very strongly, and efficaciously, for the
Saints of God that were at Jerusalem: for he puts them in mind thus, that
whereas he was so willing to go, and to show himself in the cause, all the
fault was in them if he did not: and whereas the brethren would take it more
gratefully, and more acceptable, if he should come with it; the presence of the
Apostle Paul would be very acceptable to them. Therefore he says, if they
will look to this, that their collection shall be worthy, that it shall
beseem his presence, then he will do it, or else he would not. He would be
loath to loose his labor, to go about a small unworthy pittance that beseemed
him not; therefore he would have it something like himself, something
beseeming an Ambassador of Christ, that he might go as the common Provost for
the people of God, to give them not only their spiritual, but temporal food;
so herein he gives them a close exhortation, and stirs up their minds to put
their hands to their purses once again; that they might augment that which
before they had collected sparingly, that so it might be carried by the hand of
the Apostle, as a thing which was registered, and set down in heaven, as a
thing that God took notice of, and which he would reward every particular
giver for, and as it was a thing given for the sake of Christ; so it should be
carried, and delivered by Saint Paul, the Minister and messenger of Christ.

Now after this, he comes to a familiar promise, S. Paul's promise.
which he makes to them concerning his coming to Corinth; After he had
dispatched the matter of the Churches in general, he tells them now that
whereas there was a particular motion made that they would have him come to
Corinth, to redress certain abuses which were crept into that Church, he
answers them now, and tells them that he will come; yet because he had another
journey to pass, he must first go to Macedonia, yet in the mean time he was
coming to them, he came to them by his letters, and by his Epistles: for this
is the third time, says he, that I am coming to you, in the second Epistle,
which is meant of his Epistles: he came to them by his letters, as well as by
his person; but now he tells them that he will come in person, and satisfy
their desire: for the weak brethren in Corinth were daily laden with such a
number of Heretics, and Imposters, and those that were puffed up, because they
thought the Apostle would not come thither. I say, the weak brethren were
afraid they should be over-quelled with the number, and strength of these
their opposers, and therefore they desired the Apostle to interpose himself,
and his authority, that thereby things might be redressed, and reformed.

I will come unto you. Concerning this coming of the Apostle, you have two
conditions in this Epistle, the one as a matter of fear; the other a matter of
promise: the one of threatening, the other of comfort, in 1. Cor. 4.15.16. you
shall see there, that there were diverse seducers in Corinth, that were secure,
that the Apostle would not come among them. Therefore they dispersed their
seducing doctrine, upon that presumption that the Apostle would not come
thither; they thought either that he durst not because of the multitude of
opposites that were there, or else that he could not because of the multitude
of affairs that employed him, and upon this they grew impudent, and careless
in their seducing courses: therefore says the Apostle, Some are puffed up as
though I would not come, but I will come: and when I come I will not only know
the words of them that are puffed up, but the power: for the kingdom of God
consists not in speech, but in power, and might, and evidence, and efficacy of
the holy Spirit. And then again he says in the latter end of the Chapter,
What will you, that I shall come to you with a rod, or in the spirit of
meekness? Both these places, as we see, make his coming to be a matter of
threatening, and commination. As Saint Austin says, If thou will come unto us
with a rod, come not to us at all, except thou come otherwise then with a
rod, come not at all. But here now as Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Ep. 1.
ad Cor. c. 4. ver. ult. (...).
he speaks more gently, more calmly, and quietly, for he tells them then in an
holy passion, in anger, that he would come, and he would come to their cost,
to their shame, and reproof; but now having given them these gentle directions
in all things, he begins to return to the disposition of a cockering, and
indulgent father, and he tells them that he will come by way of promise, he
will come to their great comfort, to the reformation of the Church, but it
shall be in that modesty, and meekness as that no man shall take himself to
be offended.

I will come. This place with diverse other of like nature does confirm unto us
the necessity of Ecclesiastical visitation. It is needful, I say,
Ecclesiastical Visitati^n prove d.
that there should be some superior, some stranger, and those that be far
off, to come at some times to visit the state of every Church. And this is no
devise of man, but the ordinance of God himself, and it is not out of a kind
of domineering, as foolish men would persuade themselves, which think that the
Bishops visitation is like the visitation of God, in a plague, or pestilence,
they are not ashamed thus to open their mouths against all good order in the
Church: but, I say, it is for no such end, that men should domineere over the
flock of Christ, nor is it to maintain ambition, much less is it for
greediness, and lucre, for desire of gain or profit, there is no such thing
intended by it, but for this purpose that those things that be corrupt, and
sick in the body of Christ, should be cured, and healed, and there is manifold
necessity of this, whether we consider

Necessity of eccles. visitation.
The slownesse of the Churches building;

Or the sicklenesse and inconstancy of the affections of men;

Or the malice of Satan:

Or the craft of Heretics.

Or the common condition of humane things, which unless they be looked unto do
naturally contract those materials which make them tend to putrefaction, and
corruption.

1 In regard of the slownesse of the Churches building.
For in the first respect it is certain, that the Churches of God as they be
mighty massy bodies, so they are long building, long a raising, they cannot be
done with one hand, but there must be many hands set on work, before it can
be effected or brought to any good purpose, Ioh. 2. Forty six years was
this Temple a building, say the Jews to Christ, and will thou destroy it, and
raise it again in three days, speaking of the material Temple, whereas
Christ spoke of the temple of his body: and we know the reason why it was so
long, because it was hindered by Sanballet and Tobiah, and other adversaries,
and by reason of the Jews poverty: But, beloved, there is no Church longer
setting up then the spiritual flock, and company of Christ, to have a settled
Church well ordered, and instructed in the faith, free from all superstition,
and to have a true fountain of incorrupt doctrine, and infallible truth, to
bring a Church to such a state as this, it requires often times twice as many
years as that comes to, and more: for it is with the Church as it is with the
body of an Army, it being a great huge body, it moves but slowly: so the work
of the Lord in the Church it moves but slowly, there is no business goes
forward with less speed then that, and in this regard Saint Paul says to
Barnabas, Let us rise, let us go to visit the brethren, we have laid the
foundation of the Churches, now let us go, and set up the walls, let us make it
complete; at the least let us look that there be no undermyning of that
foundation that we have already laid. The Church of God is a tender plant, it
asks a great deal of watering, a great deal of fencing, a great deal of
pruning, and dressing, and therefore it had need be helped with visitations
for this purpose: for although men may say what need you bring strangers to
visit us? we have sufficient men of our own. The Corinthians might say, what
need you bring Paul himself to Corinth, we have Ministers of our own, what
need he come? he will but intrude into another man's place, and take another
man's calling out of his hands.

2 In regard of men's affections.
No: the work of visitation is most effectual when it is done by a stranger:
for although there be a sufficient Minister appointed for that place, yet men
are fickle and inconstant, and can love nothing long together, they grow weary
of their ordinary Minister, but a stranger, one that comes afar off, is
admired, men are easily induced to hearken to him, all things are great, and
excellent that are said from abroad, as for the gifts, and the light that men
have among themselves, they be dim after they have a while shined there. As
our Lord Jesus said of John Baptist, that he was once a bright candle, a bright
shining light, but after he came to be eclipsed, to fall into a dark smoke,
because of their dark, smokie, and fickle affections: for this therefore it is
necessary that there should be a visiter from abroad, as Saint Paul here was
to come from Ephesus to Corinth, because that which is among men, that which
they ordinarily enjoy, they account it a base and vile thing, which they are
daily conversant with; but things that are strange, and geason, are admired,
and men are sooner led by them.

3 In regard of the devils malice.
Again, it is needful that there should be a visitation by Saint Paul, that he
should say, Veniam, I come, because of the devils malice, because of his wiles,
and sleights in the Church, as the Apostle says, 2. Corinthians. 2. we know his
shifts well enough, we are not ignorant of his sleights where the word is
excellent: for says he, as the devil has wit in him to undermine, and
destroy, so the Apostle says, he has a countermyning wit whereby he is able
to deal with him, and to find him, and sift him out, and prevent him in all
his plots. Satan therefore uses in the absence of the Pastor always to raise
up mutinies, sects, seditions, and heresies, and new devises, as the woolfe
when he sees the shepherd, and his dog absent from the flock, then he
comes, and makes havocke, and destroys without danger or fear, and kills
pell-mell, the absence of the chief Pastor is that which gives the devil
occasion, and his presence is that which affrights him, and though the
Corinthians had Ministers of their own, yet notwithstanding their gifts were
nothing comparable to the excellencies, and rare perfections that were in Saint
Paul, which brought the world into admiration wheresoever he was: they had but
a little rivolet, in regard of that mighty swelling River, as Chrysostom calls
it, which ran over all the banks, and could not be comprehended in any
channel.

And generally it is the nature of all humane things, 4 From the condition of
humane things.
unless we look to them with much diligence, and care, to repair them, they
will grow presently to destruction. There is no house so clear, but in a short
time it will contract slutterie to it, unless it be kept with continual
dressing. There is no body that is so fair, and so strong, and able, but
except it be kept with exercise, and with physic, and such means, it will
fall by its own weight, to sickness, and diseases, and be consumed ere a man
be aware: there is nothing that can by nature consist long, without there be
much care, and diligence, and art used to it; and if every thing be so subject
to prolapses, and declining; much more is the Church of God: for the Church of
God has greater enemies then this body, it has greater enemies then these
houses of clay, or then these buildings that we have in the world, or then our
worldly stock that we carry about us, there is no such malice suggested, and
intended, and laid against them, as there is against the Church of God.
Therefore where the craft of the devil is most perpetual, there should the
watchfulness of the Pastor be equal, and answerable unto it, that according
to the devils great observant malice, there may be as much diligence used
against that serpent, to crush his head when he seeks to bruise their heel.

S. Paul would not go without the Co^inthians
But now to conclude the Text, he says, that he will come, but he says, they
shall go with him to Jerusalem when he comes; that is, those that they had
chosen as being fit men, to whose fidelity they would commit the money; They
should go with him, he would not go alone, and carry it himself. So we see by
this, that the Apostles purpose was, that although he went to Macedonia, yet
if news were carried to him, if there were any post sent to him, as indeed he
was but on the other side of the Sea in Asia; if news, I say, were brought him
that he must go with them, he would dispense with the other action, and intend
this.

We see here the Spirit of God it ties not a man to absolute necessities, but
it gives him liberty according to the circumstances, to use his own
discretion: for it seems that the collection which the Corinthians made,
although it were great, yet it seems that it was transported very quickly, and
finely, or otherwise that Saint Paul did take it with him from Ephesus after
the feast of Pentecost, and so carried it, for in these things no man can tell,
nor the particular place certainly from whence this Epistle was written. Only
this is plain, and that I will insist on, that when he should come to carry
it, he would not carry the money himself, but he says, that those whom they
should appoint, should go with him.

And so he puts from himself all suspicion of double dealing, S. Paul's care
to avoid suspicion.
he would not have them think that he would intervert the money, or that he
would give it to some other purpose, then they intended it, or make himself
rich of the poor men's stock, he is careful of this; this argued the
sweetness, and sincerity of the Apostles mind, and it makes a rule for all
that come to Apostolical place, that deal with Apostolical matters, to take
heed that the world have no ground to conceit that any thing in this kind
stick to their fingers, but that they may shake their hands, and their
garments, and quit themselves in all causes wherein the world shall think they
have too much interest, or that they have been unfaithful, and false
stewards. So Chrysostom, and Saint Austin, He does not say (says Austin) that
if the collection come to a great sum, I will carry it to Jerusalem my self:
for then some sycophants that were in Corinth, some Adversaries that he had
there would have objected, and said, that he meant to make himself the better
by it. No, says he, but those whom ye shall appoint, and put in authority,
they shall go with me. A man must wash his hands from all bribery, and
corruption, that will be in any place of God, that will be in the place of
Paul, or that has any commission from God, he must be like unto Samuel, that
he may say as he did, Whose ox have I taken, or whose ass have I taken, or
who have I wronged, or defrauded in judgment? or any way in any intention, let
him speak, And as Zacheus says, I will restore him four fold. Luke 19 9.
These men that meddle with holy things to make themselves somewhat the better,
or at the least to bear their charges upon Gods stock, and such a charge as
perhaps the poor would be loath it should come to, these are false brethren,
and no true Transporters of the heavenly treasure, they should be such as do
that which they do for the Lords sake, and if they can disburthen, and
discharge the poor of all charges, in the carriage, they should take it upon
themselves, and do it for Religions sake. Chrysostom it seems was troubled
with such kind of companions in his time; for (says he) the collection that
we make for the poor, and are always calling upon you, Give to the poor, give
to them that stand in need, which (says he) I will never leave off, but will
speak it as long as God gives me my voice. This calling, and crying for the
poor, it makes you think that we have a great stock of treasure, that we
feed our selves in private with, you think that the Priesthood lives upon
this: Nay, (says he) we defy all such cogitations: we give you the Gospel
freely without any charge. And although we work not as Saint Paul did, with
our hands, yet you know that we have indowments to live upon of our own. We
have so much Church Lands to maintain us, that we abound, and we seek not any
thing from you, for our own selves, but we seek it for the indigent poor
that are errant, and go about the streets; and for such as want upon casualtie,
by reason of fire, by robbery, or by drowning, or by miscarriage in their
trade; or being captivated by Infidels, or the like, we labor only to stir
up your bounty toward them. This was the noble state of the Church in Saint
Chrysostomes time. We are content, and satisfied with that which is our own,
what is the Churches own now adays? In those parts which I touched on before;
There is nothing left that the Church may call her own, except it be a poor
rotten wall, except it be an old Bible, except it be an handful of thatch
where that Bible lies to save it, that the rain come not upon it, and so put
them to new charges; as for other things, there is nothing that is her own,
but the wild Bore out of the forest has almost wasted, and desolated the
whole Congregation of God, and has made them as so many vagabonds in Israel,
that there is nothing but beggarly raggedness both in the temporal, and also
in the spiritual body. But it is to no purpose to complain in a desperate
condition. Saint Chrysostom says, Whosoever thinks that there is any such men
in the Church, that make themselves rich, or better themselves by the
collections that are given to the poor, let him come forth, and show it, let
him prove it, and we will confess it, and it shall appear if these things
can be proved, and the man be convinced of them, that such a man is not only
worthy to be brought to shame, but he is worthy that ten thousand thunderbolts
should be shot against him, he is not worthy to live, and breathe in this
common air which has attempted such a monstrous robbery, and invasion upon
the people of God.

To conclude all in a word, the Apostle says concerning all, for matter of
giving to the poor, for matter of doctrine, for matter of manners, he says,
for all I will come. And no doubt this word veniam it had a diverse tone, and
sound, a different tune to the Corinthians ears; for Saint Paul had a great
number of good friends in Corinth; he had also a great number of pestilent
enemies: to the one this word sounded in a gentle, and sweet harmonious tune,
it was certain he came to them as friends, he came as a Saint of God, he came
as an incomparable Jewel, he came as one that brought the blessing of God
where he came, he came as one whose feet were beautiful to bring the glad
tidings of the Gospel of peace, as one that came to the salvation of their
souls, as one that came to settle, and to rear up the broken towers of David,
he was most acceptable to them. To others he came as welcome as water into the
ship, nay they had a great hope that he would never come there, but that his
occasions would so entangle him, that he should never set foot that way. So we
see that Saint Paul's veniam, is expounded according to the contrary
dispositions, and qualities of men, and accordingly it occasioned matter of
joy, or sorrow in Corinth.

Now if Saint Paul's coming to visit were a matter of such emphasis, rejoice,
and to cause his enemies to repine, and murmr, what then shall be the veniam
of the Lord Jesus, the master of Saint Paul, and the master of us all; which
will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37.
which comes unto us every day, and visites us every hour, if we had but sense
to perceive it; whose footsteps are at our doors, who comes in mercy, giving
us long peace, from the broils and garboyles of war: he comes unto us in his
judgments in these unseasonable seasons, threatening us with this abundance of
rain, and deluges: he comes to us in the judgment of scarsitie, and want, and
many kind of defects, whereof every man complains, and whines, and is in
misery: and yet no man can tell the cause or reason why; certainly it is a
step of the coming of the Lord Jesus, he comes also in the rattling and
tumults of war, therein the Son of God seems to have girt his sword upon
his thigh, as the Prophet says, Psalm. 45. And he will make head, he will
march, and go forward, and never leave the field until his horse goes up to
the bridle in blood, as Saint John prophesies in the Revelation. Thus the Lord
comes, and draws near unto us, any man of wit or understanding may easily
see him, and may hear the noise of his horse heels, as the Prophet Isaiah
says, concerning the King of Babylon.

But suppose he do not come thus, or that men will be deaf that they will not
hear this, nor perceive it: yet there is another veniam, his coming to
judgment which shall certainly be, and we know not how soon it shall be, for
these things are forerunners, and presages of that dismal coming, and that
coming shall be as this veniam of Saint Paul, with acceptance to his friends,
but with terror to his enemies; the coming of Christ to them shall be more
terrible then all the Armadoes, and Invasions of the world: if they were all
joined together, they are nothing comparable to the coming of the Son of man
in the clouds. To those that are perfect and just men, that wait for his
coming, he says, Behold I come, and my reward is with me, Revel. 22. Hebr.
11.5. Behold he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, says Saint
Paul. And to this the Church in an earnest echo replies, Yea come, and come
quickly Lord Jesus: for they wait, and expect that great visitation of
mankind, when he shall come to root all the weeds out of his garden, and shall
make an everlasting spring of grace, and shall settle his plants so strongly,
that they shall no more be subject to extirpation.

On the other side, his enemies shall have a fearful sentence at that veniam,
the wicked men of this world, they would then give all to avoid that fearful
coming of the Lamb of God; and wish that he might never appear nor come to
judgment. As for the godly, they know that when their glory, When Christ which
is their glory shall appear, Col 3.4.
then they shall appear with him in glory. So the enemies of the Lord they
know that when he which is judge both of the quick, and dead shall come, that
he shall pass a sentence of judgment against them, Matthew. 25.
Go ye cursed into hellfire prepared for the devil and his angels.

Let therefore this sound be always in our ears, that whether it be men, as
Saint Paul that come to visit us, let that keep us in awe; if Saint Paul say
he will come, certainly it will make a man look to himself the better: for
there are many men that can endure no visitation, a man that lives, and goes on
in sin, and impiety, these sacrilegious patrons, these Lords, and Ladies,
that maintain the Priests with old shoes, as the Prophet speaks, that take all
his livelihood from him, these cannot endure to hear of a visitation, they are
afraid lest their sacrilegious acts should be called in question. Although they
be secure enough, and careless in these kind of acts; and there is no law
that can take hold of them for it, yet they do not love to have the memory of
them rubbed afresh; they do not love to have themselves proposed, and traduced,
they cannot endure to have other men to blaze it. There are many other
simonicall contracts that are come into the Church, not by the door, but they
come another way, they take down the tiles as the men did for the poor man,
that came to be healed of Christ; they took down the tyles of the house, and
so let him down: so there are a number of simonicall Priests that come not in
by the door, but are entered into the Church another way; they climb in at the
windows like thieves, and robbers, and these cannot endure to be visited; if
Saint Paul say he will come, it is likely they will flee; if Paul come, they
will go, they cannot consist together in one place; because they live in sin,
and in open profession of their impenitency. Therefore it is good whatsoever a
man do in this life, to think still that there will come a visitation upon
him, and he is an happy man that can endure the visitation, although it be but
the visitation of a mortal man. But when Christ shall come to visit, and to
visit all the world; when he shall come with his fan in his hand, he shall
purge his floor, and gather the corn into his garner: he shall come to pluck
the proud feathers of the potentates of this world, that could not be quiet and
peaceable, but were still disturbing each other, he shall then come and hear
the cries, and lamentations of the afflicted, he shall come to redress the
cause of the fatherless and widow, he shall come to remove all scandalous
doctrine from his Church, and to plant his own truth there to flourish for
evermore. This shall be the great and wondrous apparition, this is that
admirable marching, and procession, this is that coming that shall work
wonders; this coming shall be more terrible to the consciences of wicked men,
then the coming of all the power and glory in the world, if they should come
all together. Therefore let this sound in our ears, as Hierome says, that he
did always think he heard the trumpet sound in his ears, Surgite mortui,
Arise ye dead, and come to judgment. Certainly, beloved, we must look for a
visitation, either from men or from God, or from both; in the mean time we
have our conscience to serve instead of a visitor. Let it therefore do it for
good, for there will be a visitation; if we do not by timely repentance meet
the Lord in the way; and entreat for mercy, and pardon; if we do not follow
the counsel of Christ, that says, a man that goes forth against his enemy,
if he go forth with ten thousand, he will sit down, and reckon whether he be
able to go against him that has 20000, or else he will send Ambassadors to
entreat peace of him, if he be not able to match him. If we do not take the
like course we shall fall into the visitation of the Lord. The Lord strengthen
us, and support us, that whenever that day comes we may find him come with
comfort, as one that comes to reward us with abundant recompense.

SERMON. 5.
1 COR. 16.5, 6. But I will come unto you when I shall pass through Macedonia:
for I pass through Macedonia, and perhaps I will abide with you, or else will
winter with you, that you may have me along to any place whither I shall go,
for I will not see you now as I pass by.
A Man that reads these things, would presently imagine that all this were
true, and that all had an issue according as it is here spoken; but that is not
certain: for that which St. Paul wished, and desired, it did not always come to
pass, as he says Romans 15. Romans 15.
that he had a purpose to go to Spain, but yet St. Paul never came there: So
the Prophets were uncertain in these particulars, how God would dispose of
them: for we see in Acts 16. Acts 16.
that when they were come to Bythinia, and would have preached the Gospel, the
Holy Ghost would not suffer them to do it, and when they came unto Asia-Minor,
the same Spirit of God forbade them to preach the Gospel there: and if the
Spirit of God would interpose himself, to forbid the preaching of the Gospel,
you may then conclude for other matters of less importance: for this Town, or
that place, the Lord would much more disturb, and turn away their purpose:
For man purposes, but God disposes. But howsoever, although St. Paul did not
finish this journey according to his promise here, yet the efficacy, the
virtue, and power of it is all one: for he shows what he would have done, if
God had not turned his will by necessity in calling him another way.

Such things as these in the Scriptures we often times meet withal, and whether
a man should insist upon them or no, it may be a matter of disputation;
because the common people think, that nothing is fit to be spoken of, but that
which makes for morality, that which tends to manners, they call that only
edifying, which builds up in matter of life; whereas those that are seen in
learning, or that are men of sense, they know that edification is as well in
matters of knowledge; and there is no part of the Book of God that is written,
but it is written for our learning, to build us up, first out of our Ignorance,
and then secondly to build us from wickedness to newness, and holiness of
life; for the second can never be without the first. Therefore we must take
the Scripture as it lies, and although this Text afford no great matter for
manners, or conversation of life, yet the scholars of Christ, must hear his
Word preached wheresoever it is, and make profit by it, and as long as they do
understand that either they know something which they knew not before, or that
they know it better and more soundly, and perfectly then they did before, they
cannot but say, they are edified by it.

The first thing then that we are here to consider is this, Parts of the Text.
the maine bulk of the Text whether Macedonia.

Secondly, we are to come to the particulars of Text; What is Macedonia, What
Macedonia was.
and how he made his passage thereout, and how God furnished him, and where he
stayed him in his journey.

Thirdly, the purpose that he had in staying, and Wintring with the
Corinthians; His purpose.
wherein we are to consider, that though the Apostles were sent to preach the
Gospel of Christ, yet the Lord tied them not to any ill way, or to any ill
weather, but he gave them place of lodging when they had time, and how, and
upon whose cost the Apostle should lodge there.

The fourth thing to be considered, is the end of lodgi^^ there, The end.
that they might carry him along on his jo^^ney; where there is another act in
his journey which Christian common duty called them unto, to bring him along on
his way, both to defend him, and to show him the way, and also to carry him
with a kind of credit belonging to an Apostle.

And lastly, the form of all these things; that will of God, and says (...),
by chance, I will do thus, or by fortune, or (if the Lord permit) I will do
thus. Where he shows, what he would have done, what his affection did stand
to; but whether the consequence of it should be answerable or no, he leaves
it to the will of God; and indeed that which he here promises, by all
likelihood it never fell out: I know it is argued both ways, but I think they
are in the better opinion, that conclude that this purpose of the Apostle was
never effected.

1. Part. That the Apostle came not to Corinth.
Concerning the first part of the Text, that you may the better understand it,
look to 2 Cor. 1.16, 17, 18. And in this confidence I would have come unto you
before, that you might have had a second grace, or benefit; and I would have
gone by you, and passed into Macedonia; and again, would have come from
Macedonia to you, and by you have been led along, or sent along to Judea.

Mark what his purpose was, it was his intent to do thus, but he could not
do this; and therefore he answers the Corinthians again, which might have
said unto him: What? do thou tell us that thou will come, and do thou fail
of thy promise? art thou so inconstant? art thou so forgetful of thy self,
and of us? Therefore it follows in the next verse, where he answers for
himself: (says he) when I consulted of these things with my self; when I
purposed to do thus, did I use lightness? did I use inconstancy? or did I
make it so that those things that I counsel, did I counsel according to the
flesh, that with me there should be yea, yea, and nay, nay? that my yea
should be yea, and my nay, nay; observe the meaning of this, he answers them,
that when he purposed these things, he was not then the master of his own
guidance in the Action; but he was to be lead, and directed by a Spirit that
was higher then his own: by the Spirit of God. And he was not so resolute as
fleshly men are, as to say, I will do this, or I will do that. His yea was
not yea, and his nay, was not nay; as if he should say, I was not so peremptory
as to come unto you, till I knew the will of God: as St. James James 5.
says, Chap. 5. For this you ought to say, if God will, or if the Lord permit:
so the sense is this; That whereas I purposed to come unto you, and do not now
come, you must pardon me, for I am not lead by my self, but by a higher
Spirit, which hinders and intervents my purposes, as it pleases him; for I
depend not upon my own will, but upon the will of God: for if I had been
guided by my own will, I had been with you. Then as it follows in the Text;
The Lord is faithful, for our speech to you has not been yea, and nay: for
the Son of God Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, was not yea
and nay, but yea: for all the promises of God in him, are yea, and in him are
amen. As if he should have said; You must make a difference between my
Preaching of the Gospel, and the promises that I make as I am a man, as I am a
weak man, and know not the things that are to come, I know not the things that
are contingent: so I tell you this, and I tell you that, which it may be shall
not be performed, and made good, so that I will not say, that my yea, is yea,
or my nay, nay; but when I come to preach the Gospel, I am sure of those
things, I know what I say, I understand my self, I know the foundation of
truth is unmovable; I know that there it is not yea, and nay in Christ, but
all the promises of God in him, are yea, and in him, are Amen, for ever. Thus
you partly understand this: But that we may make it a little more open, the
sense of the Apostle is this; That whereas I promised you in my former Epistle
to come unto you, I was so in earnest affected to this journey, that whereas I
told you I would not pass by you, but would first go to Macedonia, and then
come back to you, yet my mind was so altered, and my bowels again were so
earnest, that I determined to be better then my word; I purposed to come to
you first, and so to pass from you to Macedonia, but all this was not in my
own government, but in the hand of God; I know not whether I shall go, I know
not how I shall be disposed of, I know not how the Lord has laid the way for
me, I know not where he will have me employed; I went to preach unto all
Nations the Gospel of Christ, but the Lord hindered me, and would not suffer
me to preach to many of them, but bade me hold my tongue: so I promise you
now to come to Corinth, but I know not whether ever I shall come, or that this
shall come to pass, therefore I would have you distinguish, and make a
difference between the word of my preaching, and the word of my Promise; the
word of my Preaching is always certain, it is yea and amen; but those words
that I promise as a man, they be yea and nay as God shall dispose of them; I
have not power of my self to order them; so this place is a plain argument of
that I said before, that St. Paul never performed this, which he thought, and
desired, that is, to come to Corinth.

Now look to another place that makes it a little more plain; 2. Cor. 2.1.
where he gives another reason for it; I determined (says he) I disposed
with my self that I would never come in sorrow to you: I would never come to
you in heaviness, but if I come, I will come in joy and cheerfulness: Now I
understand that ye are in heaviness, because of the letter that I wrote unto
you; I wrote a letter concerning the incestuous fellow, that used his fathers
wife, and lived with her; and I understand that you are in heaviness for this,
and I would not therefore come unto you for this cause, because you were in
sorrow, although I be glad for it that you are sorry: for it was a godly sorrow
which caused repentance; but yet I would not come unto you in that state, but
when you have made your peace with God, and with your selves, when you may
entertain me with cheerfulness, it is my purpose then to come. So both the
will of God, and my will wrought together in this, for Gods will it perfects my
will; it was Gods will that I should not come unto you, and my will is
agreeable to Gods will; the Lord told me that it was not fit for me to come,
and take you in sorrow; for the spirit of the Pastor and of his Scholars
should always meet in joy; they should rejoice continually as the Apostle
says: We see then it was not done.

Now let us see a little the cause why it was not done; The cause why he came
not.
how came it to pass that the Apostle Paul was thus disturbed, and
disappointed of his purpose? For that you shall see, Acts 20.3. Act. 20.3.
St. Paul went to Macedonia, and came through those parts, and exhorted the
brethren with much exhortation, from thence he came into Grecia; and staying
there three months, he heard say, that there was treason plotted against him;
that there was a conspiracy against him in Asia by the Jews; or else in some
part of Grecia, the Jews had laid wait for his life, to intercept and hinder
him: Therefore he was counseled by the company, by the body of the Apostles,
those that were then companions with him, to go back again to Macedonia, and
from thence he came to the port Town, to Philippi, and thence along, and never
touched at Ephesus (as we shall have occasion to show upon the next verse, if
God give permission) he never touched there, but went along upon the first day,
upon Easter Monday, (as we call it) and so passed on till Pentecost, and never
saw Ephesus nor Corinth more, but went to Jerusalem, and after he was carried
to Rome, and there he continued till the time of his Martyrdom.

So out of this we gather, that St. Paul was twice at Macedon, once when he
planted the Church, and another time when he came to visit the Church. The
planting of the Church we find, Act. 16.9. Acts 1^.9.
It is said there, that there was in the night time, a vision made to Paul, a
certain vision appeared to him: for there was a man of Macedon, that stood
there, and entreated him, and said unto him; Come over to Macedonia and help
us. And upon this, the Text says, that they went presently, as soon as they
saw the vision, they went forward to go to Macedon: knowing by certain
arguments that the Lord had called them, there to preach the Gospel. So from
Troas he went to Samothracia, and from thence he went the same day to
Neapolis, from thence he passed to Philippos, etc. Now in this first journey to
Macedon, the Apostle was intercepted and hindered that he could not go through
as he purposed to do, as we find in the story: from Philippos he passed to
Appolonia, which were a company of people that were strangers, carried and
planted in a strong place, in the confines between Thrace and Macedon. From
thence he came to Amphipolis, from thence to Thessalonica, where he stayed
three weeks until the Jews persecuted him thence for his life; and then he
came to Berea, which were most noble minded men, which examined the Scriptures,
and tried daily whether those things that Paul spoke were the Word of God, as
we see Acts 19. Act. 19.
From Berea the Jews hunted him, they came from Thessalonica with permission
to take him wheresoever they could find him; therefore the brethren conveyed
him from thence to Athens, and then he came to Corinth, where he stayed 18.
Months, that was the first time of his being at Corinth, where he conversed, I
say, a year and a half. At Macedon he was twice; for the second time he went,
he passed almost by Dalmatia, and Illiricum, as he speaks in the Epistle to the
Romans; and then he came back, and thought to have gone to Corinth, but
news was brought him, that the Jews would take away his life, therefore he
returned, and could not come; but he desired the money to be sent to him to
Philippi, by Titus, which they did, and so it was carried to Jerusalem, and
bestowed on the brethren.

But here is some difficulty: be that their benevolence should be put off for
so long a time? a poor man must have relief quickly, or else he perishes;
this money that was gathered at Corinth, either it must be conveyed upon the
sudden, or else the brethren at Jerusalem for whom it was destinate, are like
to lose life, and state, and all.

great, it was not so urgent, but that they could stay some time; and so it was
almost a year indeed before he dispatched his journey in going to Macedon, and
returning from Philippos, and if he receive their benevolence, and it be sent
from thence, there will be time sufficient for it to relieve them at Jerusalem
at the time of Pentecost. These things are needful to be known, although the
common people cannot brook them, because they think they edify not, yet it is
no great matter, as long as I follow the Text, I am careless of all censures.

2 Part. Macedonia, what.
Now I come to the particulars of the Text; he says, he will come to them
when he shall come from Macedonia. Macedonia it is a great and large country in
the North of Greece; it is now called Ronnelli, and Albania, in old time it was
called Emathia, and Emonia: it is that country which is intimated to us by the
name of Kittim, Macedonia, Kittim. Genesis 10.4.
or Kethim: Genesis 10.4. The sons of Iavan were Kethim and Dodanim: of Dodanim
came the inhabitants of Rhodes, or Rodanim; and of Kethim came the inhabitants
of the Isles, and especially the inhabitants of Macedonia. And though Macedonia
be no Isle, but a Continent, yet it is adjacent, and they were the mother of
it: and this word Kethim I stand upon the more, because the Scripture has many
ambiguities about it. In Dan. 11. Dan. 11.
The ships of Kethim shall come against them: that is, against the Assyrian
Kingdom, under the Antiochees. In Isay 23.1. Isay. 23.1.
Houle ye ships of Tarshish, for Kittim shall make good this word: that is,
Alexander the great King of Macedon shall make good this word: for that which
Nebuchadnezzar had done before him, he did in a short time after him again:
that is, to the Island of Tire, which was separate from the sea by the span of
two miles, or a mile and a half; both Nebuchadnezzar with the strong, and
indefatigable labor of his men, and Alexander after him by his infinite high
spirit, brought it of an Island to be a Continent, and made themselves Lords of
the place: so that where he says, Houle ye ships of Tarshish, for Kittim
shall make good this word: that is, that prophecy that I give of it. There
shall come a man out of Kittim, that is, Alexander Alexander.
the great, King of Macedon, he shall make good this that I have prophesied:
this is a plain demonstration, that Kittim is this Macedon. And in Ezekiel. 27.
Ezekiel. 27.
says he, speaking of the ships of Kittim, (although the Jews always understand
it of Ciprus, yet better judgments have, and do take it for Macedon, because
there was a city built there which was called Ketiem, or Ketium: for Livie
Livius.
says, that Perseus Perseus.
the last King of Macedon, he gathered his people together at Ketium; and it
is an easy translation of the word, (as Suidas Suidas.
a learned man notes) that from Kethim comes Macedon by appendix of the
syllable Ma; Makethim, Makedon, or Makethia; so the name is very natural and
agreeable with the first Original, Kethim.

This I note, only to show you the congruity of these words, which we meet
with often in the Scriptures. I know that Kethim is more than the City of
Macedon; I know that the Macedons possessed Italy; and built a city there, and
called it Kittie; but it was called Kittim of that city in Macedon; the
Macedons I say possessed great part of Italy, as all the parts about Apulea
and Brundis, Brundusinm.
which were for a long time after called Magna Grecia, Great Greece. This is
that Macedon (says Pliny. Lib. 5. Cap. 11.) that was once the mistress of
the world. This is that which overcame Egypt, Plin^ l. 5. c. 11.
that was Lord of Asia: this is that which wandered as far as India; namely, by
the prowess, and strength of Alexander the great King of Macedon: but (says
he) the same Macedon is fallen to a low ebb; and she that was the mistress
of the world, by one of our valiant men Paulus Aemilius, Paulus Aemilius.
was in one day sacked, and he did sell and mortgage 72. Cities of it. See
(says he) what great difference there is in the luck and fortunes of two men;
Alexander the Great, and Perseus the last King of Macedon: Alexander the Great
won and purchased all; Perseus the last King of Macedon, he lost all that was
won before. This is that country therefore that the Apostle purposed to go to;
it was fallen from the glory of the world, and now it was come to receive the
glory and Kingdom of Christ: it had lost something among the nations, but it
found place to be a most constant Church: For Paul needed nothing to do in
that Church, after he had once confirmed it, as we see in many passages of his
Epistles. It was the most glorious, constant, and pure Church in the world: the
Church of Macedon.

We come now to the promise that he makes to them at Corinth, they might say,
3 Part. St. Paul's promise to winter at Corinth.
If thou go to Macedon, when will thou come to us? for this was the great and
earnest desire of the Corinthians to see their Pastor; they were troubled with
seducers, they were troubled with a number of ravening wolves that were crept
into the flock, and they knew not how to keep the body of Christ unparted:
Some would be of Paul, some would hold with Apollo, some with Cephas, some with
Christ, some with their own fancy; therefore they desired that he would come
and rectify these disorders, which he was willing to do, if the Lord
permitted him. Now Paul promises them what he intended to do in Theory, in
contemplation, if God would give him leave he would come to them, and stay with
them, and perhaps winter with them. I pass to Macedon, but I will stay with
you. Macedon is a Church that needs no great reformation, it is enough that I
visit that, and pass by it; but I will stay longer with you, because you want
my presence to make somewhat good which is amiss.

And for this wintering of St. Paul, the holy Ghost gives us to understand,
that although of necessity the Minister of the Gospel be to apply himself to
the word of God, especially in the prime plantation of it; yet the Lord
vouchsafes unto them a kind of Sabbath, a kind of resting time. It is not for a
man to expose himself to danger at all times, and in all places; but that
liberty which the Lord has afforded to men in reason, and common nature, that
liberty the preachers of the Gospel may take to themselves.

There is some time indeed when a man must lay down his life when God calls
him to it; but otherwise except he have a special command for it, a man is not
to offer himself. The winter is an unfit time to travail in, therefore St.
Paul takes his opportunity to winter at Corinth. The snow in Thracia, the
dangerous weather by the sea, the frost and cold of those countries are extreme
for the time that they last; these things were sufficient motives to Paul to
make him take up his lodging, and his station at Corinth.

Liberty allowed to Preachers.
So it does give and afford liberty to all the Ministers of the Gospel, to take
those opportunities which the Lord reaches forth unto them; a man is not bound
to preach when he is sick, nor he is not bound to find a Preacher in his
sickness, but at the charge of the parish, and those that belong unto it: for
there is no reason for men to trouble a sick man with whole men's business; for
the seasons must be considered, the Lord bids the wind blow at one time, and
he bids it cease at another; he commands the rain to fall at one time, at
another time the doors of heaven are stopped up. So he says, Isay 5. Isay 5.
that the clouds shall not rain; so sometimes the Preacher of the Gospel, he
cannot rain, he cannot distill that which he has received, for want of
health, or by reason of discontent, or else by reason of opposition in the
world: and men must take these things well.

A man might have said to Paul, What, will you spend a whole winter at Corinth?
You should go about your masters business; the Lord has sent you to preach
the Gospel through the world, will you take up so much time at Corinth, to lie
there idle so long? Nay, (says he) the Lord has given me this liberty, I may
although not give indulgence to my flesh, yet I must spare my life till God
call for it; and then I must not when he calls for it, but till then I must
take the opportunities, as common sense and reason shall guide me.

But here behold what a wintering this was; What winterings S. Paul's wa^.
this wintering of the Apostle, it was not as other winterings be; the word is
borrowed from soldiers, and from shipping, when the soldiers cannot keep in
the field, by reason of the extremity of the weather; they then take up their
station in some good populous town, where they may have habitation and ability
against the summer, and then be brought forth into the field to do more
service It is also taken from ships, when the sea is shut up in the winter
times, the ship is pulled into the dock, till the spring come that it be
brought out again after reparation; from these things is this word taken: but
yet the wintering of St. Paul, it was not like that of soldiers, or the
wintering of ships, for they commonly be both unprofitable; but the wintering
of St. Paul was as profitable where he was, as his travailes could have been in
other places; for indeed, soldiers cannot sight in winter, they cannot bear
arms in the field, by reason of the extremity of the weather: and if they do
any thing at home, it is some small trivial thing to keep themselves in
action, to raise a rampire, or sconce, or some such thing, not like unto the
dangers that are abroad in the field: so the ships in the dock, they do
nothing but stand merely without any use; but the wintering of St. Paul was
not so, but it was full of action, full of profit: for in Corinth where he
wintered, if he had wintered there, and had come to effect his will and
purpose, he had been still in the Lords Vineyard, he had been still
preaching, and exhorting, and going from house to house (as the fashion was
then) to give comfort, and consolation to those that were afflicted, to
confirm them against the storms of persecution, to shine before them in the
example of holy and good living. In this regard St. Paul's wintering was a
glorious progress; when he rested, he ceased not; he ceased not from his
labor, but still he was full of life, and action, and as the sun in the
firmament, which cannot stand still, but is ever running his course like a
mighty giant, Psalm. 19. Psalm. 19.


So we see here a mighty difference between the word of God, and all other
actions; other men, whatsoever is their profession, and trade, they must of
necessity leave when their opportunity cease, they can work no longer; a man
cannot work by night, as our Lord Jesus says, The night comes when no man
can work. Although there be many that work by artificial light, yet there are
some kind of works that will not admit of any but day light: And when the
water is up, when the weather is extreme, when the water is frozen, there are
many trades that cannot work: and likewise the air may be so intolerable,
that no man can work in it; and the mist and damp may be so thick, that a man
cannot work in them; but the glorious Gospel of Christ is of a spiritual
nature, it works when all things do oppose it: when every thing is against it,
the Gospel works. As the Apostle says, Although I be bound, yet the Word of
God is not bound, 2 Timothy 2. 2 Timothy 2.
Although I be bound, yet the Gospel of Christ is free, and it judges the
judgers, and condemns the condemners, and stands against the opposers, and
refutes the adversaries; it is mighty and powerful, even in the chains of
darkness; there is nothing that can stop the light and glory of the passage of
the word of God: The Minister can work when no man can work, and he can do the
parts of his calling, when every man else is silent, and is not able to proceed
in that thing that he makes profession of; for the glorious Gospel of Christ,
it is the Midwife of the world: the Midwife must rise at all hours in the
night to attend and to bring forth babes into the world; and such a Midwife
spiritually is the preaching of the Gospel, which is ready at all times, and
upon all occasions, if God give strength, at all hours of the day, and all
times in the night, to bring forth new creatures unto Christ, and to feed them
with the spiritual and sincere milk of the Word.

I will harbor, or winter with you. I, but at whose cost will thou winter? At
whose charges St. Paul wintered.
upon thy own purse, or at the charge of the Corinthians? That is a great
matter nowadayes, a poor man's wintering it is a trouble to a whole city, they
can hardly bear his charges, although in old time in the Primitive Church,
they were so free spirited, that every man had a house for S. Paul, every man
had a bed, and a chamber for him, and for his followers; but now men are grown
so hide-bound, and so base, that S. Paul himself might lie in the streets
perhaps if he were here in person, before he should be entertained, unless he
brought some great and strange miracle with him, or some great demonstration of
the Spirit, he might lie upon the stalls, or the shop-boards, he should hardly
be entertained into their houses. Therefore it is a matter of great moment to
consider, in that he says, he will winter with them; who shall bear his
charges in his wintering? You may think this to be a simple conceit, but if you
mark the writings of the Apostle Paul, you shall see there is some consequence
in it: mark what he says, 1 Cor. 9. 1 Cor. 9.
says he there, I was never troublesome to you, I never took any thing of
you, nor was chargeable to you. And again he says more clearly, 1 Cor.
12.13. 1 Cor. 12.13.
I pray, says he, wherein did I baffle you, for so the word signifies,
wherein did I baffle you above other Churches? was it in this, because I was
not burdensome to you? forgive me this injury: It is an ironia, where the
Apostle says, he was never burdensome to them, or never took any thing of
their purses; and by way of ironia he desires them to forgive him that wrong,
he nevertroubled them, which he does account not a wrong, nor any man would
account it a wrong, for it was a singular courtesy, for a man to abstain from
his own right, to quit and disclaim that which was due to him, that which was
his maintenance: for God has appointed that those that wait on the Altar,
should live on the Altar; so those that preach the Gospel, should live on the
Gospel; but the Apostle says, he did not this, he took nothing from them.
Now then observe, seeing St. Paul was so careful to prove that he gave the
Corinthians a Gospel freely without charge, and now he says, he will lodge
with them all the winter: it argues that St. Paul lodged upon his own cost,
and not at their cost and charge, although perhaps there were many faithful
men in Corinth that would entreat him, yet he disbursed the charges his own
self.

But some will say,

He gives the reason in 2 Cor. 11. I robbed says he other Churches to do you
service. When I came to Macedon, I found such free, 2 Cor. 11.
such generous and high spirits, that they denied me nothing that I would
have, they furnished him with money in abundance, that he says, he robbed
them, he took so much of them. I robbed other Churches to do you service, he
had therefore a stock with him, whereby he was able to maintain himself at
Corinth, and not be chargeable to them.

So much of that point.

Now to make some Application of it. It is certain that the Messengers of
Christ ought to be maintained wheresoever they come, if they can prove, that
they come in a good cause, and upon necessity; he is no member of Christ that
will not receive them, but withal they must endeavor to come as Paul did, not
to trouble them, nor be chargeable to them. If they see the place cannot
brook it, if the disposition of men be churlish, they ought not to impose it
upon them, nor to work upon them too much, but to take that thankfully that
comes from them willingly, and if nothing come, they must sit down content
with nothing: As St. Bernard S. Bern.
speaks upon this place (says he) St. Paul's wintering was a small matter, he
had a small retinue, his company was few; a mean lodging would content him, a
poor thin diet would suffice him: but says he, if there should an Abbot go
to such a place, he would bring a famine after him, he goes with such great
equipage, and with such pompous company that men could not possible without a
great burden entertain such a creature. But St. Paul was of another mind,
he came with such a mediocrity that he is content with a small matter, a
little thing served his turn; he served the Lord with fasting often, with much
prayer, he preached often, he watched often, he was not one that sought varieties,
or dainties, but a small matter for his Wintering would do it; therefore he
says, considering that they knew his manner of fare, and diet, he was so
bold, and presumed that they were willing to entertain him, as being one that
was no devourer, but was content with whatsoever came to hand.

2. Part. The end of Paul's lodging at Corinth.
The next thing that follows in the Text, is the end, wherefore the Apostle
says, he would lodge with them, or winter with them; the end is because he
would be led by them wheresoever he should go, by their means he would be
conducted on the way. It is certain, this was not the prime cause that St.
Paul would winter at Corinth; the chief cause was to reform disorders, but he
like a gracious, and loving father conceales that, he means to do that with
a gentle hand, with a silent passage, he does not tell them that he will come
to correct things amiss, to reform them, to take the rod into his hand, to
domineere over their faith, as he says, 2 Cor. 1. ult. 2. Cor. 1. ult.
he will not come in such a style, in such a manner as that, but he will come
as one friend comes to another, as friends when they part from a place, the
common company ride so many miles with him that is to take a journey; so the
Apostle says, he will come for that purpose, to be guided and lead along the
way by them.

So we see the courtesy of conducting, Acco^panying Preachers in their
journey, ancient.
and guiding the Ministers of the Gospel in their way, it is an ancient and
honorable custom; and though these ill-favourd, deformed times, have brought
all things to nothing, yet notwithstanding where it may be conveniently, and
handsomely done, the thing is well-pleasing to God to accompany those that go
in the way of their calling, or in way of necessity; it is a thing that the
Lord looks for, and it is a thing that by this example here, he commands to the
Churches.

That you may guide me in my way. They might say; entertain you at Corinth,
and to keep you a long time there but we must go with you, we must spend
our times and means to go, and guide you along the way?

No, says the Apostle, Christ, that you will carry me along on my way, that
you will be my Convoy; and that for three reasons. 3. Reasons of it.


First, in respect of defense.

Secondly, in respect of knowledge, for the discerning of the way which he knew
not before.

And lastly, in respect of the honor belonging to an Ambassador of Christ.

1. For defense.
First, in respect of defense, the Apostle was a lone man, and he had many
enemies that beset him on every side: the wicked Jews laid wait for him, and
if those had wanted, suppose there had been none of them, yet there were a
number of peevish Grecians which lay in the streets, and in the passages by the
way, that would have made a booty of the poor Apostle; therefore as he says
after in the Chapter, that they shall conduct Timothy, that they should keep
him safe; so for himself he desires their conduct for his safety: by reason it
was not seemly, nor yet safe for a man to go alone.

Paul secure that he should not be hurt, as well as when he was in the
barbarous Country? and the Viper could not hurt him, as we see afterward, the
Viper fell off, and hurt him not: and if a Viper could not hurt him, what
should he fear a thief for?

second causes; we tempt the Lord if we neglect the means that may be used
for our defense: the Lord had appointed that the company and society of men
should daunt those kind of thieves, those hedge-creepers, those waiters of the
Jews, such traitors that lay in the way; the Lord appointed that they should
be disappointed by the company that should attend Paul, therefore the Lord
would have him take this course, and not go alone, and unprovided; for that
had been a tempting of God, to forsake the means which he had sanctified for
that purpose, therefore he says, you shall convoy me when I am to go
abroad, when the Spring shall open it self and the Winter be past, that I
shall take my journey, and pass through the world, which I must as long as the
Lord shall spinne out the thread of my life; then you shall convoy me to some
place that you know, where you shall commit me to some other convoyes, so
still men were to lead him along for matter of defense.

Secondly, for direction to show him the way: 2. To show him the way.
for the Apostle although he knew all spiritual things, yet he knew not
experimentally the things of the world, until such time as he had seen them,
therefore he would not dwell in those places that were unknown to him, except
he were put on it of necessity; and then it was necessary for him to have a
guide, how shall I do this without a guide, says the Eunuch to Philip, in a
matter spiritual; so in temporal things a man cannot know without experience,
and the Apostle had no time to lose, and he was careful to spend that time
he had in the best manner, and to be a wandering star, a wandering spirit, it
is a shameful thing; therefore he will have them to guide him, and to conduct
him on his way.

And lastly, for the pomp, 3. For honor.
and honor belonging to an Apostle, it is a shameful thing for an Ambassador
of Christ to be seen alone, to go without company: We see when there is any
Ambassador comes, we still send to meet him in the way, and to bring him along
with honor. And in the time of Popery when there came any Cardinal into
England, the fashion was for the great Lords, and Prelates to meet them at the
Seaside, and to send so many Mules, and sumpters, and such cost as would now
grieve the world to look upon, men are grown so penurious: but certainly in
former time there was never any man of worth came to any place, but there was
an honorable conduction of him: a company sent to bring him along, to show
that he was welcome to the place whither he was come. This is that which the
Apostle would have, he would have them bear him company, that he might not
go as a common vulgar fellow, but as an Apostle, and Ambassador of Christ, and
that he might be brought along by their Ministers.

We see therefore, how far we are out of order in our Church now adays,
we are grown so hungry, and so peevish, and so careless that we disdain,
and neglect those that we should respect; that as in the later times of Popery,
and I doubt it is not much better now, they made mockeries of them as they went
in the street, they cast Libells, they curtailed their animalls as they went,
and such like disgraces; perhaps it was because they were not like St. Paul,
but the Lord will be Judge between them: for it is not the conceit of men
that must carry it in these things, but the breast of God himself: and
certainly they are wretched and woeful persons, that will offer, although the
man that come be an Heretic, yet if he come in the Name of Christ, nay
although he come not for Christ but against him, yet the people of God are not
to attempt any outrage against him, they must not seek to disgrace, and defame
him or insult over him, but to perform the works of nature to every man: for
where there is no nature, there can be no grace: the work of nature is this,
to entertain strangers.

But suppose he be not for Christ, but against him? We may not say, God-speed
to his wicked actions when we know it, but so long as we do not know it, we
must not disgrace, or defame him, as the custom is now in these later times of
the world. Surely I make no question, but if St. Paul were here among us in
person, except he could well prove himself to be Paul, he should be torn
with the malicious speeches of men, and with mocks, and scoffs, with the
intemperate abusive behavior, and ill-manners of all envious natures, and
sausie manners in the world. And for conduct, it may be, he should have a
company of boys to follow him, and to cast stones at him, and to mock him as
the boys mocked Elisha, and called him Bald-pate, bald-pate; but he brought
two Bears forth of the Wood, and destroyed forty two of them.

Let us take heed in these cases what we do: let us strive to be as humane,
and courteous as we can in all the points of Christian duty: let us seek to
show our love even to our enemies, and as long as we do not know them to be
enemies of God, and of Christ, so long let us give them all kind of
furtherance, and approbation, and good countenance: let us entertain them at
our charge, and conduct them forth; especially when we know that a man is set
for the building up of the Kingdom of God, and for preaching of the name of
Christ.

5 Part. The form of speech.
Now to conclude all (because the time is past) with the form of speech that
the Apostle uses; that is, perhaps; or peradventure: Perhaps I will come and
winter with you. He that says perhaps, he does not speak certainly. It is a
wondrous thing that the Apostle should say, perhaps, or it may chance, or it
may fortune, or the like; when as he knew that there is no chance, nor no
fortune, but that all is ruled by the Divine providence. And if the ^postle say
so, then we may; but we are taught not to use it; Aug.
as Austin says, it repents me (says he) that ever I named fortune, seeing
therefore that all things are ruled by the providence of God, that not so much
as a sparrow can fall to the ground, nor so much as a hair of our head.

sight, and knowledge, and providence of God; how then can the Apostle name
fortune, and say perchance I will do this?

How the Apostle says perchance.
But you must understand that the Apostle speaks not this as a man that was
Atheistically minded, to doubt of Gods providence, but as one doubting of the
event of the thing; he knew his own will, but he did not know Gods will; he
speaks therefore certainly of himself, and says, I will come: (...): that
is, if the Lord give me leave: but because he knew not whether he would give
him leave or no, therefore he says, peradventure, or perhaps I will come. So
although there be no such thing as fortune, to speak the truth, that governes
any thing; the providence of God rules all; yet because we are ignorant what
God will do, as we say all, it is the ignorance of the cause that brought the
name of fortune, for of it self it is nothing; but because we know not what
there is to come hereafter, the hidden things are reserved to God: therefore
we so moderate our selves with this kind of speech, and say, perhaps this
shall be, with ifs, and ands, and conditions, because we can set nothing down
absolutely.

This was the goodly and glorious spirit of the Apostle, he still yields
himself to the direction of God, and he would do nothing till he saw Gods
command for it, and his approbation of it: for he was still ruled with this,
(...), perhaps I will do thus, or perhaps I shall not do thus; for I serve
not my own flesh, I am not my own servant, but I am the servant of God.

Thus far I have troubled you with this discourse, which the common people
take no affection, or liking to: but those that are understanding men in the
Church of Christ, they know that these things also must be stood upon as well
as others. The spirit of the Apostle is to be imitated of us, in that he
assures himself of all kindness, and comfort from his scholars the
Corinthians, and presumes that as he was willing to come to them, so he knows
that they were as willing to receive him. This spirit should be in all
christians, to surmise no bad thing in any man; and although a man see a cloud
in the face, and brow of a man, yet still to persuade himself the best of
gentleness and kindness in him; this is the true temper of the child of God.
St. Paul knows he may be bold to say he will come to Corinth, and he knows
that they will be as willing to receive him, and to convey him again: it is a
sweet harmony where these things agree together. Now in these latter times,
there is nothing but striving, and pushing about common, and mere necessary
things; If poor St. Paul were now to pass in England, he must spend a great
deal of his own means to get in his tithes, or else he could not have them;
there is such seeking every day to undermine, and to defraud by base contracts,
and secret leases, and one thing or other, that would suck the blood of St.
Paul, and make him that he should not be able to pay for his wintering. But the
children of God are of another mind, and those few that be among Gods people,
they be content to winter, and to summer the Preachers of the Gospel, to give
them all approbation and content, that the Gospel may proceed, and not be
hindered by the malice of men. This is the goodly disposition of the Saints;
and they that do thus, the peace of God, and the glory of Israel shall be with
them; and if they give but a cup of cold water in the name of a Prophet, they
shall not lose their reward, but shall receive the reward of a Prophet in the
day of reward, which the Lord grant us all.

FINIS.
SERMON. 6.
1. COR. 16.8, 9. But I will stay at Ephesus till Pentecost, for there is a
great door opened to me and a mighty, and there are many adversaries.
Says the Wise man in the Proverbs, Man may purpose, but it is in God to
dispose, and govern that purpose: for these purposes of S. Paul, as it seems
by all likelihood, they never came to take effect, and that made him in the
former verse to qualify his speech with (...), it may chance, or perhaps I
will come to you, and if the Lord permit, I will do thus, or thus: for as it
is the phrase of the faithful never to be peremptory in any of these
contingent things of this world, to say this I will do, and that I will do
without limitation: So S. Paul gives us here the same example in himself, that
he was not certain of his own actions; he was not sure how God would dispose
of him: and so being not the Lord and Master of his journeyes, and
intendiments: but resting still at the disposal of God, he seasons his speech
with this gracious qualification; and says, if God permit, if God will have it
so, I will do it, for the will of God is that unknown, and hidden cause of
causes which must be fulfilled. Whatsoever men imagine, or wish, or desire, yet
if it be not according to Gods will, it shall never stand: Iam. 4.
therefore as S. James says, Chap. 4. Woe be to you that say this year, and
the next year, we will go to such a City and dwell there, and traffic
there, and yet you know not whether ye shall live till to morrow: For this you
ought to say, If God will, and if the Lord permit, and if we live we will do
thus or thus; showing unto us how the life of a Christian man ought ever to
hang before him; still to be in anxiety in this world; because we have no
certain dwelling here, but we expect an abiding place hereafter. The Apostle
therefore has taught us by his gracious example, that all these things that
may be so, or so; we should not grow to any confidence in them, but we should
refer all to the will of God; that governes and guides us, and all the parts
of the world, according to his secret judgment, and counsel, and whose will
can never be sounded till it be effectuate in the world. For when we see
things come to pass, we understand that it was Gods will they should be so;
but till they come to pass in particular, we cannot dive into it. The will of
God it must be, that Cynosura, that load-starre that must guide the bark
amidst the sea of this world; It must be as the cloud about the Ark of God,
when the Arc was to remove that removed, and it never stirred till the cloud
removed before, and the moving of the cloud caused the moving of the Ark, and
the staying of the cloud caused the staying of the Ark: still as the cloud
carried it self, so was the Ark demeaned; so should our heart and life be,
which is the Ark of God, the temple of the holy Ghost; in which God
vouchsafes to dwell, we should not offer to presume upon any thing further
than the will of God is; but to yield our selves in all things, and to say as
our Lord and Savior teaches us, in that most holy Prayer, Thy will be done,
not mine, Math. 6.
but thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. It seems therefore that it
was not the will of God, although it were the will of Paul; though he had a will
to come to Corinth, to stay with them, and to winter there, as he had said
before, yet God had another purpose, which made the Apostle speak in these
doubtful terms; for by the relation of S. Luke, which he makes in Act. 20.
Acts 20.
and by likelihood of all circumstances in the Acts of the Apostles, the
Apostle Paul never came at Ephesus any more, but wrote this Epistle from
Philippi a City in the North of Macedonia. And he excuses himself in the
second Epistle, that he could not come to Corinth, as he intended; and he
gives the reasons of it.

Now that I may proceed in order, Parts of the text.
and so as your memories and understandings may go along in the parcells of
the Text; we will consider here,

First, a resolution and purpose that the Apostle had.

And then the reasons and arguments to confirm that.

The resolution that he had was this, to stay at Ephesus till Whitsontide,
till Pentecost.

The reason of it why? because a great door was open to him, that is, a large
and fair opportunity for the winning of souls to God. And besides, that there
were many adversaries, among whom he should get great glory to God by the
confusion of the adverse power, by the light and glory of the Gospel of Christ.

In the first part the resolution, we are to consider two things.

First, where the Apostle was, when he wrote this Epistle, because he says
he will stay at Ephesus; therefore it seems that he was now there, and that
he wrote from that place to the Corinthians.

Secondly, we are to consider also the time that he had in his resolution, and
purpose how long he would stay there, I will stay at Ephesus till the day of
Pentecost, till the feast of Pentecost, that is, till such time come that he
might sail from Ephesus to Jerusalem, and get thither by Pentecost: for so I
must needs understand these words: for the Apostles purpose was, not to be at
Ephesus at Pentecost: for so he should have lost his occasion and opportunity.
His occasion was then to be at Jerusalem, because of the great concourse and
assembly of people, that gathered together to keep the feast, and to offer up
their sacrifice, and there as Peter, he was to launch into the deep, where the
Sea was deep, and where there was abundance of fish, there to become a fisher
of men; so the sum of his resolution was this, I will stay at Ephesus till
Pentecost; that is, if the Lord further my desires, I will stay at that City,
till I shall have sufficient leisure to go to Jerusalem, and to be there at
Pentecost: that was his intention to be at Jerusalem, that was the place of his
great victory.

The second part of the text, is his reasons inducing him to stay at Ephesus;
till such time as he might get to Jerusalem by Pentecost: the reason is,
because a door is opened to me. Where we are,

First, to consider what is meant by this door.

Secondly, who opened it: he does not say, I have opened a door; but it is
opened to my hand, that is, God has opened a door.

Thirdly, the quality of this door, a great door, and effectual, and a
powerful one.

And lastly, the noble spirit that he had to undertake the battle, and
skirmish against the enemies; The adversaries are many; a man would think that
therefore he should not go, because there were many enemies: Who would thrust
himself into the hands of his enemies? but the spirit of God was most noble in
the Apostle, and he made that one motive or reason, that because there were
many adversaries, therefore he would go to confront them all, and to outface
the falsehood, and prevarication of the superstitious Jews; and to plant the
Gospel of Christ, the word of truth in the inheritance of Christ, which he
had bought with his own blood; maugre the devil, and all adverse powers
whatsoever. These are the reasons to stay him at Ephesus, because there was an
effectual door. Now whether the door were opened at Ephesus, or at
Jerusalem, it is a matter that I greatly make qu^stion of, which I shall come
in time to speak of; for as yet I think that all the Writers upon this place
are deceived: for they think that this door was at Ephesus, and that the
Apostle had a great and fair occasion there; but it cannot be that the Apostle
should settle his thoughts there: his aim was at the greatest and fairest; so
that the door must be at Jerusalem; as after we shall prove by some arguments,
such as God shall suggest; of these things briefly, and in order, as the
shortness of the time will permit.

Where S. Paul was when he wrote this Epistle.
Concerning the first point, where Saint Paul was when he wrote this Epistle:
for it seems to him that reads that he was now at Ephesus, and yet as I said
before, and according to the Story, it is certain that he was not there, now
when he wrote these things; but he was at Philippi, and so the subscription
it self seems to signify: But here me thinks I hear one of those
supersilious men; that will understand no more than they list themselves; that
will confine the Ministers in the preaching of the Gospel: Apostles being
where he was, and in what place when this Epistle was written? What is this to
duty? what is this to the building of us up in faith? so the speech runs
among such kind of people.

material to a wise Christian, to those that will understand any thing; then
to know the order of times, and the Chronology of Scripture, it is as deep,
and as profound, and (...) necessary, and as comfortable a matter as any things
in the world: next to the points of salvation and justification, there is
nothing that delights a man more than the order of time and place; which i^ i^
be not set down notably: there is no History so excellens, but it may seem a
fable, and a tale; if it have not constantly the time and place adjoined, and
these men must understand, that if they think it is to no purpose to discourse
of these things, that then the Church of God has been in a great, and a long
error: Is it no matter to know where S. Paul wrote this Epistle, whether at
Ephesus, or at Philippi, and is it so great a matter to know whether Peter were
at Rome? and yet we know what a strong foundation is laid upon that, what great
building there is upon it, the whole primacie of the Apostolic See, and the
priority of all Churches is built upon this, whether Peter were at Rome? And
the Church of God has been always inquisitive to know the passages of the
providence of God, and of his government in the world; in so much that
concerning the building of the Temple, there is an exact account of the years
set down. From the coming out of Egypt to the building of the Temple; there
is an exact number of the years set down, and diverse and sundry Records in
the Scriptures: there is nothing more common and familiar then this is.
Therefore for the answer to this question, I say, it may justly be doubted
whether Paul were at Ephesus, nay, we may rather conclude, that he was not
there when he wrote this Epistle; for although there be something that
persuades to it, as Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
and after him Calvin, Calvin.
and diverse of the later Interpreters hold it, because he says he will stay at
Ephesus, that therefore he was there.

And again there is another reason, in the salutation at the latterend, ver.
18. Ver. 18.
The Churches of Asia salute you: Now Ephesus is in Asia, and Philippi is in
Europe, in Macedonia; it seems therefore that he wrote the salutation from
the place where he was, and he tells them, the Churches of Asia salute them,
therefore he was in Asia, and by consequence at Ephesus; for either he must be
at Philippi, or at Ephesus: for there is no third place that can be imagined.

But for this, first it follows not, that, because he says he will stay at
Ephesus, that therefore he was there, for he had it only in resolution; he was
determined to go now, and he was now to embarke at Philippi, and so to sail
to Ephesus; but he understanding that there was treason laid for him in the
way, he durst not come there; he did not go by the way of Asia: but he came
another way.

And for that he says, the Churches of Asia salute you, that might be also
upon the remembrance of his late coming from Ephesus; or by the letters that
he received from them: he received a letter from Ephesus, wherein the
Churches of Asia saluted the Church of Corinth: so that neither of these do
prove that he was at Ephesus when he wrote this Epistle. It is likely
therefore that he was at Philippi a City in the North part of Macedonia, as it
might be in the North part of England; and so to come along the shore as far
as the great City: that this is so, and that this Epistle was written from
Philippi, the subscription makes it manifest, For, says he there, it was
written from Philippi, and sent by Stephanas and Fortunatus; and although
ind^ed these subscriptions be often times faulty, yet in this there was never
any that durst move or make any contradiction against it. Beza Beza.
whose judgment I esteem above all men in these cases, he holds for
certain, that it must needs be written from Philippi; so then the manner of
this journey that S. Paul purposed, it was hindered by the treachery of the
Jews: who hearing that Paul was in Grecia in Macedonia, they laid wait for him
in the chief parts of Asia; and as they heard that Demetrius and his fellows
had wrought him a mischief in Ephesus, when they had like to have slain him:
therefore they entered into Ephesus, and by treason lay in wait to kill him,
which when Paul understood, the brethren gave him counsel. After he had spent
three months in Grecia, that is, in the parts of Aeolia, and those parts
adjoining to Macedonia; they desired him that he would not go to Corinth from
Ephesus; but return back again by Philippi, and so to Macedon. In Act. 20.3.
Act. 20 3.
Luke does discourse plainly of it, the Apostles advice was to go back again
through Macedon, and so taking ship at Philippi, which is the uttermost City
of Macedon; and there having received the alms which was contributed in the
Church of Corinth in great abundance: he did address himself to Jerusalem,
not coming at Ephesus, but sailing by it: as we see Acts 20.17. Act. 20.17.
he purposed to sail into Asia, but not to come at Ephesus, but to sail by
it; and when he came to Miletus, which is about three or four leagues from
Ephesus, he stayed there, because it was a place that was more private: and
because the Jews could not so soon have intelligence that he was there. From
thence he sent a Boat to Ephesus, to entreat the Elders and Seniours to come
thither to him; and in Acts 20. we read of his conversing with them, they took
the Communion together, and he gave them notice and knowledge, that there were
Wolves crept into the Church of God: and he told them also what their duty was,
to watch as good Bishops, as good Pastors to the flock, over which Christ had
made them overseers: and he told them that they should never see his face any
more. So this was the last journey that ever S. Paul had in the world: for
going from Philippi he sailed by Ephesus, he came not at it, and from Ephesus,
that is, from the parts about Ephesus, he went along to Tire; and from thence
he came to Cesarea, and from Cesarea to Jerusalem. And when he came thither,
he entered into a vow according to the direction of the Apostle S. James, and
the rest of the Elders at Jerusalem; and then the Jews set upon him, and took
him in the Temple, and brought him to the bar: and there he made three or
four Apologies for himself, and when he saw that they were cruelly and
bloudily set to take away his life, he appealed from them to Caesar the
Emperor at Rome: being very near 2000. miles off, and by this means he saved
his life from the cruelty of the Jews, and gained many people in Rome, and in
Cesars house, to the doctrine of Christ. So that S. Paul was henceforth a
prisoner, but the word God was not bound, but that ran swiftly and won many
to the credit and faith of the Gospel: howbeit, he being in bonds, and being a
prisoner, he could not take his scope to see the Countries as before, but he
lay a prisoner in Rome until the last year of Nero, Paul beheaded in the l^st
year of Nero.
in which time he was beheaded in the latter end of the Emperor Nero; as all
Historians agree. So much of that point, I will stay at Ephesus, that is, if
God give me that I have purposed, that it may be effected; that I shall get to
Ephesus, and have liberty and scope peaceably to be there, I will stay there
till I can get a convenient opportunity, to go to Jerusalem to be there about
Pentecost, but because in the mean time he heard of another thing, that the
Jews had laid wait for him, that they had beset the Creeks and Ports about
Corinth, and other parts of Greece; and that they had entered into Ephesus, and
into diverse strong parts of Asia, where they thought that S. Paul would go by
land. Therefore the Apostle takes that means that God had set apart, and
defeats them, and comes not at Ephesus, but went away by Sea, and came safe to
Jerusalem, where he offered up his last service to God, I mean the service to
the Saints, which was the gift and contribution which the Church of Corinth
sent; and he stood a true professor of the faith before Felix, and before
Festus, and before the Presidents, and before Bernice, and before Herod, and
after that he was cast in prison, he was taken prisoner, and sent by a
Captain to Rome to the Emperor.

Now for the Place, where he says he will abide, we are a little to take
notice of that.

I will stay at Ephesus. This Ephesus which at this day is called Fesome,
Ephesus what.
a City in Turkey in Euonia, in the lesser Asia, which is watered with the
river Catristell; it was a famous and noble place in respect of the great
riches, and the great concourse of all Navigators and Merchants thither. It was
famous also for the Temple of Diana, which although it were burned before by
that wicked Impe Diostrotus; yet it was reedified again by the Kings of Asia,
and was made the goodliest place in the world, where there was also the shrine
of Jupiter, and the shrine of Diana, which came from heaven: as the vain
Inhabitants imagine. This place was famous for Witchcraft, and they had also
certain Letters, whereby they could bind, and loose, and he that had those
Letters about him, they thought him able to work wonders wheresoever he went.
In sum, this Ephesus was a place where the devil had set his throne by
Magic, and by all kind of licentiousness, and looseness, by most abominable
idolatry. Great is Diana of the Ephesians, great is Diana of the Ephesians. The
devil had not such a court again under heaven, as he had there: for near
unto it was the Oracle Branchyde, Branchyde.
which was the greatest wonder one of them in the world, that the devil should
foretell things to come, and that he should speak out of a stone, and
although that at Delphos Delphos.
in Grecia were more famous, because the Grecians were much inamoured of their
own land, yet the Oracle of Branchyde was more true, and infallible in the
prediction of events; then the other was; such a place was this, which the
Apostle Paul had a purpose to abide in: For indeed (as Chrysostom Chrysostom.
well observes,) there is no such footing for Christ, as where the devil has
made his stay before: for when the strong man keeps the house, all things are
in quiet, the devil is compared to the strong man, all things were in quiet at
Ephesus, and there was never any uprore till S. Paul came there, and when he
came once to conjure the Conjurer, and to overruled the devil, and to pull
down the Shrines and Images, and to make Diana, and the Silver-smiths that
wrought about her, to be of little account: then all the City is in a stir,
and in an uprore. So here we see the singular spirit of the Apostle, and that
spirit that should be in all the Ministers of the Gospel, to settle themselves
where the devil is most rampant, and raging, and not to fear danger, not to
fear his cloven foot, but to settle themselves in his habitation, that the
stronger man may cast out the strong man: for as Christ says, when the strong
man possesses the house, all things are quiet, but when a stronger then he
comes, he disrobes him, he puts him out of his harness, and he binds him, and
casts him out of his house, and so takes the house into his own possession. So
much of that, of the place.

Now for the time, how long he will stay; Part 2. The time.
that is, till Pentecost: that is, I will stay there that I may have days enough
to sail to, and arive at Jerusalem by them; what this Pentecost is, it seems
not greatly material to enquire, because every man thinks he has the
knowledge of it. But if you should see the diversity of Writers, and
Interpreters, you would wonder to see so much question about a thing that
seems so out of question. For Erasmus and some others think, that it signifies
nothing but fifty days, that S. Paul writ at a certain time of the year, not
alluding to this, that is, that he had no reference to this feast of
Pentecost, but only that he purposed to stay fifty days at Ephesus, and then
to journey to Jerusalem; But this cannot be: for the Article (...) (...).
plainly proves, that it was that feast, that Pentecost, that is, that famous
feast of the Jews. Others move the question whether it were the Christian
Pentecost, or the Jewish Pentecost, for they will have the Christian Pentecost
as soon as the holy Ghost came down, that it was kept ever after presently
upon that day, wherein I see many, and great Writers and Interpreters, do much
differ: and I suppose indeed it is true, that although the Apostles did keep
that Pentecost of the Jews, because that then the company met and assembled
together, and then it was the best time for them to work, yet I think the
Apostles meaning in this place, is not of any Jewish feast, but of the
Pentecost which the Christians used, because it was coinsident happily with the
Jewish Pentecost. I shall entreat your patience a little in this point, and
although it be somewhat troublesome, yet it is good to know it.

You know the Pentecost of the Jews was fifty days after the feast of Sweet
bread, or fifty days after the Passover, for the Passover was then to be
presented to God, at the feast of Sweet bread, when the corn was first ripe,
the first fruits of their corn. The Jews used to sprinkle their corn in the
fire before it was ripe, to broyle it in the fire, and so to make a kind of
bread meal of that, that was the beginning of their Harvest, the time of first
fruits was then come, and that was that the Apostle alludes unto when he says,
1 Cor. 15.
Our first fruits are raised from the dead, and become the first fruits of them
that sleep, because that he was offered then at the feast of the Passover:
now after that feast, after the Passover they were to number the feast of
weeks, that is, they were to number 7. weeks or 50. days, and then all their
Harvest was come to be inned among the Jews; so that whereas before they
offered sprinkled corn at Easter, now they bring whole loaves at Whitsontide,
being made of the new corn of that year, and so they presented it, and an
acknowledgement was made to God for the corn that he had given them that
year, and this was the reason of it; The word Pentecost signifies 50. days,
called the feast of weeks. Now it appears in Acts 20. Act. 20.
that the Apostle embarked at Philippi presently after the Passover; after the
day of Assum or the day of sweet bread, that then he took shipping at
Philippi, and sailed into Asia, and that he would not go to Ephesus then, for
the reason before mentioned, because of the treason of the Jews. This being a
Jewish feast, the feast of weeks, or Pentecost, which was 50. days after the
Passover, when they offered of their new corn to the Lord Christ glorified it
by sending down the Holy Ghost upon that day, as we see Acts 2. Act. 2.
when the Church was gathered together at the feast of Pentecost, when the 50.
days were ended after Easter, there came a mighty noise, a mighty wind with
cloven tongues, and fire, and sat upon the Apostles, and gave them such
evidence of the Spirit to speak in strange languages, in strange tongues, the
great and wondrous things of God. Now then I conclude, that the Jews
Pentecost, and the Christian Pentecost came altogether upon one day. The Lord
picking out that day that served most for his purpose, for when there was most
men gathered, and assembled together, a greater Harvest was like to be brought
in to God, when therefore they were met at the Jewish Pentecost which was now
ended, because the ceremonial Law was abrogated, yet the Lord so graced the
time, and the opportunity, to work at that time, as to send the holy Ghost upon
that day. Aug.
And Austin gives the reason, for says he, as the Law was given 50. days
after the Passover was eaten, so 50. days after Christ our Passover was
offered, the holy Ghost was given to write the Law of God in the hearts of all
the faithful people of God. And I make no doubt but the Christians were
possessed with this, that there was more glory in their Pentecost, then in the
Pentecost of the Jews, as being the sum of all things, the sending of the
holy Ghost: And if the remembrance of their corn were so great a blessing,
that the feast of weeks must be celebrated for it; the feast of Pentecost
being a thing too, which was given by Moses Law, which is a killing letter;
Much more glorious must this feast be, when God sent the holy Ghost into the
hearts of men, to inflame them well such heavenly qualities, and such rare
perfections as were never planted in the persons of any that were mere men; so
clearly as it was in them.

Jews Pentecost and the Christians Pentecost could come both together to be
observed upon one day?

Christ, concerning the keeping of Easter there was great thundering, and great
excommunication: Now observe; 190 Years after Christ, difference about keeping
Easter.
I will tell you in a word how this came: you know the feast of Whitsontide or
Pentecost it is ruled according to the feast of Easter; as Easter falls out, so
Pentecost falls out just 7. weeks after. Now Easter it self was moveable
also, and came upon the 14. day of the first Moon after the Equinox, after the
Sun has bin in the Equinox of Aries, the next full Moon of that new that
came after, was the day of the Passover; when the Passover was offered. As
suppose I say that we should join March and April into one month, as the
computation of the Jews is, suppose it should be the 24. of March. Now the
Jews, whenever it fell to be the 14th. day of the Moon, that is, when it
was full Moon, for the course of the Moon is 28 days, and it is full in 14.
whenever that day came, it was kept precisely whether it were upon Tuesday or
Wednesday after our calculation But now the Church of God thought fit to keep
it back till Sunday. The Jews and the Eastern Church that followed the Jews,
they kept it upon the week day, if so be that the 14. day fell upon the week
day: for so indeed God directly said Do it upon the 14. day of the first
month, etc. But the Western Churches, they thought that although the full
Moon fell upon the Monday or the Tuesday, yet they would not keep the feast of
Pentecost upon that day, but they would stay till the Lords day, till the
Sunday after: because at the first institution they fell both together, for the
same day that was the Pentecost of the Jews, the same day was the coming down
of the holy Ghost sent from the Son of God. Now therefore sometimes they met
together, although sometimes they varied, here was then the sum; Whenever
the 14. day lighted upon the Lords day, then the Jews and the Christians
celebrated their Pentecost both at one time, there was no difference between
the Eastern and Western Churches, th^^ did all accord; but when it fell out
that the day differed, the Churches of God in the West, did think it convenient
to reserve that honorable feast to an honorable time, that is, to the Lords
day, for they thought that God had truly cast all honor upon that day. So I
conclude this point, that Paul when he speaks here of Pentecost, he means the
Pentecost of the Christians, and I am not moved with any argument that they
bring to the contrary: for indeed they be childish and frivolous, as that which
neutaries and novalists have devised, as how there should come to be a falling
out between the Churches, if they certainly knew the day? I gave you the
reason before, that the Jews always kept it upon that day it fell and the
Eastern Churches, but the Western Churches reserved it to the glorious day,
the day of the Lord, the Lords day. I have troubled you too long in these
thorny discourses, but those that be of the best understanding, they know that
in these things also there is great profit, and very great necessity: the
Scripture is not written for us to understand by piece-meale, to take here a
patch and there another, as the common fashion of men now is; and as many of
the ancient Writers in former time have done, but if we read the Scriptures we
must understand all, or else we must account our selves exceeding falling: for
the whole book of God must be known, in the parcels of time and place, and in
all the circumstances, as well in the substance of it; that this is the true
meaning, that it was the Christian Pentecost, the Fathers make mention.

Justin Martyr.
Justin Martyr in his 105 question, he asks the reason, Why do we not kneel
says he at Pentecost, as we do at other times of the year? and he answers
again, Because says he of the glorious descending of the holy Ghost, wherein
we show forth the joy and comfort that the Comforter brought unto us, therefore
kneeling being an abasing of the body, and an argument of mourning and
humiliation (but we must at that time show forth joy and comfort) therefore we
kneel not, so that the feast of Pentecost was kept in his time, which was 104
years after Christ.

Tertullian Tertul.
says he, this noble feast of Pentecost, it is more noble then all the feasts
of the Gentiles.

And in the Writings of Ignatius Ignatius.
and Polycarpus Polycarpus.
it is mentioned. In the time of Victor Victor.
when it came to be a matter of controversy. In the time of Anicetus, Anycetus.
of Pius, Pius.
this feast of Pentecost was observed, and commanded to be observed: all the
Fathers that lived for three or four hundred years after they still made
Sermons of it, Nazienzen, Nazienzen.
Leo, Leo
Jerome, S. Jerome.
Austin, S. Aug.
Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
Ambrose; Ambrose.
there is nothing more obvious, we see still, their discourses and Sermons
upon the feast of Pentecost, which plainly proves that it is no new thing, but
that it was founded from the first, and that Christians have as great reason to
keep a feast in remembrance of the coming down of the holy Ghost, which is
the greatest blessing that ever was: as the Jews have for the offering up of
their corn, and when their loaves of bread were brought into the Sanctuary.

Now we come to the causes and inducements wherefore the Apostle determined to
be at Ephesus, Part 3. The inducements of Paul's stay at Ephesus.
if it be Gods will that he may be there, till he may have convenient time to
go to Jerusalem, and be there at the feast of Pentecost, for says he: A door
is opened to me.

This similitude of a door Door what.
is very frequent in the Scripture, it signifies a plain and easy way, an
easy path or opportunity, where a man may suffer no impediment, but go on his
way, as the Lord Jesus says, Ioh. 10. Ioh. 10.
I am the true Shepherd of the Sheep, he that comes in by the door comes in
the true way, he is a true Shepherd; but he that climbes up another way is a
thief; his meaning is, if he come in at the door it is an easy matter; no
man resists or hinders him, but he has the way made plain before his face.

many adversar^es? he says, there were many adversaries, and yet a door is
opened to him?

Lord opens a door to men through the midst of danger, and all the
adversaries in the world cannot shut that door which God has once opened. The
Lord bears the keys, he shuts and no man opens, he opens and no man shuts:
This door the Apostle speaks of to the Colossians; I beseech you, says he,
pray for us, that to me may be given a door of utterance, to speak as I
ought to speak. Now the opening of this door, he speaks of it in the
passive voice, It is opened to me, a door is opened to me, that is, an
occasion is ministered to me, he does not attribute it to himself, to say, I
have made my self a way, and by my preaching I have opened a door that was
shut to me before; but he referres it to God whose property alone it is. It is
opened to my hand by the mighty hand of the Almighty, which has the ruling of
men's hearts, and which flows into their affections, and guides and turns them
as it pleases him. There is a door opened to me, It is therefore God that
opens the door, as it is the devils malice still to shut the door, that there
may be no passage between God and man, and that Christ may knock at the door,
and never be admitted nor heard, as he says Rev. 3. Rev. 3.
Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man open unto me, I will come in
and dwell with him, etc. So I say we should still leave the praise where it is
due, and attribute the honor and glory of the fact to him that deserves it;
for it is neither in Paul that preaches, nor in Apollo that waters, nor in
any second cause to open the door of men's hearts, being barred up by the
malice of the devil, and become infatuate and insensible, that a man may beat
as well upon a flint stone, as upon the door of a man's heart, till it please
God to open it.

Therefore it must teach us to return all praise to God Almighty, and not to
second causes: And withal it teaches us to desire of God which has the key
of David, that opens when no man shuts, that it would please him to assist
the passage of the gospel, with the gracious assistance of his helping hand:
for indeed, the Word is preached in many places, where there is no door open:
and yet it seems that all the whole house is open. When a man comes to preach,
the Church is open, and the men present, and yet there is a certain occlusion,
a shutting up in the inward man, in the heart, that the Lord finds no
entertainment there.

It must be begged at the hand of God therefore, that as he has given his
Word, so to open the hearts of men to receive it, that the door of the heart
may be open, that Christ may be admitted. This is that we read of in Acts 16.
Acts 16.
When the Apostles preached, God opened the heart of Lidia. As if he should
say, it was never opened till that time; and then when the Lord opened her
heart, she opened her hand in all liberality to the Apostles: If you think me
Gods child, if you think me to be Gods own, I beseech you come unto me, do
me that honor, as to receive some benefit and favor for your maintenance from
me. And this is that which Moses says to the people of Israel, You had never
your eyes open till this day, nor you never had your ears open, nor your
hearts until this day: meaning that they were still in the midst of Gods
miracles, as men amazed or astonished, and were not sensible, they understood
not what God did for them. It is God that must open, it is God that bores the
ear, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 40. Psalm. 40.
Bore my ears oh Lord, says the Prophet. It is God that touches the heart,
It is God that moves the tongue, it is he that orders the invention, it is
he that must grace the elocution, it is he that works all in all. Opening it
comes not of man, it is not of the wit of man, or of the labor and toil of
man, but it is God that gives the increase. A door is opened.

A great door.
Now for the quality and condition of this door, he says briefly, that it is
a great one, and effectual. A great and mighty entrance makes room for a
great company. It is no wicket, it is no small posterne, it is no little
enterie, it is no rist or crevice, but it is a door, and that a great open
door; that is, the Lord has given me such an opportunity, meaning at
Jerusalem, (as after I shall prove) such a mighty door is opened to me at
Jerusalem, by reason of the concourse and assembly of the people there; as that
it seems the Gospel shall be received in at broad gates, all the gates and
windows shall be laid open, to receive the Lord of life; for where the great
company of men are, and where the great concourse of the world is to be seen,
there is also the best working for the Gospel of Christ: it loves no
paucities, it loves not handfulls of men; there is nothing more base to the
Gospel, than contemptible companies of people: a great door, a great assembly
gives encouragement to the speaker: when there is a mighty number, when there
is a great multitude, as three thousand men at Peter's Sermon converted; there
is then a mighty door opened: when Christ shall have seven thousand men
follow him up and down the wilderness, this is a mighty door: as for
handfulls of men, although God despise them not, but where two or three be met
together, he will be present; yet where there should be a door open, and there
is but a wicket, it is a matter of scorn and disgrace. Kings do not use to
come in at wickets, but at great gates; and the King of Kings bids us not open
a wicket, but Lift up your heads ye gates, Psalm. 24.
and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, that the King of glory may come in,
even the Lord of Hoasts, mighty and strong in battle, he is the King of glory.

Therefore it concerns us as much as we may, that we labor to make the
company of Christ fair and full; that we make the door large, and spacious,
and wide, that there may be room enough for the Lord to come in; Esaias 40.
Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight; not strait, or narrow,
but straight, that is, fair and even; and there is nothing more disgraceful
to the Church of God, then when we shall have the pues as many as the men and
women, and the walls for their auditors; and chiefly that base, and most
wicked, and ungodly fashion that is grown in Gentlemen's houses, they must have
Sermons in their chambers, at their fire sides, at their boords end, where a
man must look upon his auditors, and can scarcely call them in the plural
number, this is base, and unacceptable to the Lord; and these men seldom offer
to open to the Lord; these are they that make the course of the Gospel that it
can have no prosperity; that there can be no blessing upon it, but rather it is
turned to a shame, and a curse, and a mere frustration; and yet the fashion is
now to bring all our Churches into houses, and the Patron must command the
word, and have it attend upon him like a dog at the table.

A great door is opened. But it is no matter how great it be, if it be not
effectual; An effectual door.
therefore says he, it was so too (...): Beza Beza.
thinks it was (...), and so he says the meaning is, that the gate was set up
to the full; it was wide open, it stood not askance; but the word it self, and
the copies hold it as I have read it, an effectual door.

effectual?

they make no stay, and so it is no effectual way: so when men's ears and
hearts are open to receive Christ, if they have no delight to keep Christ when
he is there, but let him go out again as in a thorow-fare, here is no
efficacy, here is no power, here is no foyson, here is no profit comes of the
Word of God; it is without life, it is without efficacy, without the consequent
which of due belongs unto it. This also, as I said before, the great God must
work, to make that which is spacious and large of it self, to make it
effectual; that when the door has once admitted the King of glory, that we
may keep him there, that we may entertain him into our hearts, that we may
lodge him in our affections, that we may yield our selves unto him in all our
actions, and that we may bring forth fruit in our lives and conversations,
that our faith within us, and the Lord within us, may work effectually without
us. This is that mighty effectual door which God must open, and make it wide,
and large, and great, and effectual, and prosperous, that God may enter in,
and dwell there for ever.

I should come now to the last part of the Text, which is full of great, and
various matter; I should be too troublesome, if I should enter into it; namely,
concerning the Adversaries that were there, to show what were these
adversaries; They were Jews no doubt, and such as had skill in the law of
Moses, for they were the chief enemies of Paul; the heathen came in more
easily, because they thought it was a better religion that they taught, than
that they had already; but the Jews thought theirs to be the best religion;
therefore St. Paul found the most enmity, and hatred among them in all places.

And likewise concerning the place where these adversaries were, not at
Ephesus, as most Interpreters agree, but at Jerusalem; because there was the
great feast of Pentecost kept; there was no such number of men simply in the
world, there was no such number of men, as was gathered at Jerusalem at the
feast. Three times in the year, says God, you shall come and appear before
me; In the Passover, in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of Tabernacles.
And Josephus makes a true record, that there were nine millions at one
Passover in his time, which is a number sans number, not to be numbered; but
only that the Jewish Nation were scattered in the world, and wheresoever they
were scattered, they had the conscience to come at the feast to pay their vows
and sacrifice to God; therefore the sea being full of fish, it was time for St.
Paul now to cast in his net; and it could not fall amiss, but it would no
doubt prove an effectual door, and take that which came to hand; and sure it
was effectual, for he took so many that his net was almost broken with the
multitude of fish: but these things I will not trouble you with at this time, I
have been too offensive to you already.

FINIS.
SERMON. 7.
1 COR. 16.9, 10. A great door is opened, and there are many Adversaries.
THe sum of that I have said of the travells of St. Paul, concerning these
places of Corinth, and Ephesus, and Macedon, is this, that St. Paul was for the
space of three years at Ephesus, and from thence he was driven out by the
conspiracy of Demetrius the silver-smith, and his company: he went therefore
to Macedon, to visit the Churches that he had planted before; and being at
Ephesus almost three years, he disputed daily for the space of a year and
half, in the School of one Tyrannus a Philosopher; after that time he never
came to Ephesus more: for although he had a determination to be there, and to
stay there till he might have a convenient sail to go to Jerusalem by the
Feast of Pentecost; yet the Lord that disposes of all things, would not suffer
that to be so: but the Jews having laid wait for him in the way as he was to
return, so the brethren gave him counsel to go back again by Philippos into
Macedon, and to fetch a Northern course, that so their land-wait for him might
be disappointed, in which journey he wrote this Epistle to the Corinthians, as
one purposing to come to them, but he was hindered by the treason of the Jews:
for at Corinth he had been before, for the space of 18. Months; and the
reason why he was there so long was, because God told him in Acts 18. Acts 18.
that he had much people in that city, and afterward going to Ephesus, and
staying there the space almost of three years, and being driven out by the
conspiracy of Demetrius, he went to Macedon to visit the Churches, that he
had before planted there: for you heard before, that he had two journeys to
Macedon; the first by reason of the vision, in Acts 16. there appeared to him a
man of Macedon, and said, Come to Macedon and help us; And then he could go
no further then Berea, that noble City; because the Jews sent thither from
Thessalonica to take him, after he had been there three weeks discoursing of
the Kingdom of God. So his friends brought him along to Athens, and from
Athens to Corinth, and there he spent 18. Months, and from thence he went to
Ephesus, and stayed there three years, from Ephesus being driven by the
conspiracy of Demetrius, he went to Macedon, to view the Churches he had
planted there, and to go no further in the Country; then purposing to come to
Corinth, they told him of a treason, that was plotted against him, which both
hindered his purpose to come to Corinth, as also his going to Ephesus,
therefore he sailed by Ephesus, because as I said, there was treason, as that
he could not with a safe conscience cast himself into the danger without
tempting of God; and because he had a great desire to be at Jerusalem at
Pentecost. These things are plainly set down in the Acts of the Apostles,: You
shall see in Act. 20. Acts 20.
how these things agree: In the first verse, as soon as this tumult was
ceased, that is, that great tumult of the people, when they cried Great is
Diana of the Ephesians, great is Diana of the Ephesians, which Demetrius
raised; when the tumult was ceased, Paul called the Disciples together and
saluted them, and went to go forward to Macedon, and coming into those parts,
he entreated them, and exhorted them with much speech; and coming into
Greece, he stayed there three months, and hearing of a certain treason that
was laid for him by the Jews, as he was to go to Syria, therefore there was
a Decree made, that he should return back again by Macedon. Now three verses
after you have it, that we sailed after the day of Sweetbread, from Philippi,
and came to the brethren at Troas in five days, etc. where we stayed seven
days. Now about the 15. verse of that Chapter, St. Paul did sail besides
Ephesus, that he might not spend time in Asia, for he made have, if it were
possible for him, at the day of Pentecost to be at Jerusalem. So he sent from
Myletus to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church, and spoke to them
those rare, and fatherly speeches as it follows after in that Chapter.
Therefore of this we are certain, that though St. Paul purposed to stay at
Ephesus, and to make his abode there, yet the Lord would not suffer him so to
do, but he had purposed otherwise for him, and he was not at his own
disposing, but at the disposing of the will of God.

Now in these words read unto you, in that he says, there be diverse great,
and many enemies; though a door be open, yet the enemies are great; we are to
consider; Parts of the Text.


where these enemies were.

general deduction, that the Church of God can never want enemies, and those
that be the Preachers of the Gospel, they are evermore overwhelmed with
enemies, if the hand of the Lord interpose not.

enemies they were, the worst, and most to be feared, that is, those that are
most near in the profession of the faith, and the common religion; those are
the worst, and most grievous enemies.

alacrity of spirit, that moved the Apostle to go, although there were so many
enemies, although there was so great and numerous a company that would dismay
flesh, and blood, and would rather have made him have sought a corner, and a
cave to keep himself in a whole skin; but the spirit of the Apostle was
otherwise, he would go the rather because there was so many adversaries.

adversaries, yet they were not to be hated as direct enemies, but only they
were enemies for the time, for he says, (...), not (...).

1 Part. Where these adversaries were.
Concerning the first point, the place where these enemies were. I see it is the
common consent of all Interpreters for the most part, not one or two excepted,
that these enemies were at Ephesus, and it seems indeed most agreeable,
because he says, he would stay at Ephesus, and he gives the reason why,
because there is a great door opened, that is, there is a great facility, or
opportunity to gain souls, which is compared to a door, and besides there
be many adversaries to be resisted, whose mouths must be stopped, that is as
it seems, in the same place at Ephesus, therefore he would stay there,
because they needed his presence.

I am loath to contradict the current of so many great, and worthy learned men,
yet notwithstanding it is free in the Church of God, for any man to speak his
mind, as long as he speaks in terms of modesty. I say therefore, let them
enjoy their own exposition: I cannot imagine that the Apostle should think his
enemies should be at Ephesus, but at Jerusalem: and although he speak not
here of Jerusalem, but of Ephesus alone, yet presuming that Paul had a great,
and earnest purpose, to be at Jerusalem at the Feast of Pentecost, and in
regard that he did neglect his friends, and those places that he should have
gone unto; he sailed by Ephesus, he would not come there, beause he would go
to Jerusalem, and he takes the first hint of it, he goes from Philippi at the
day of Sweetbread, at Easter, and he would not come at Corinth, nor at
Ephesus; it follows by just consequence therefore, that all his intention was
to keep the Feast of Pentecost at Jerusalem, and that there was the door, and
there were the enemies: for a man that has his mind upon one thing
especially, upon one maine project, when he speaks of by-matters, he speaks often
times confusedly; but you must take him according to the great stream,
according to the current of his mind. His mind was still to be at Jerusalem,
to confound the adversaries of the Gospel. Now although he says he would stay
at Ephesus, his meaning is not, that there were the enemies, but he will stay a
while there, till such time as God would give him a just number of days, that
he might sail from thence to Jerusalem by Pentecost, to encounter with the
enemies that were there.

Reasons that the adversaries were at Jerusalem.
So the first reason I have for it is, the constant words of St. Luke. Luke
says, that he had still a mind, he had still a desire to be at Jerusalem,
at Feast of Pentecost, and therefore it was not his purpose to stay at Ephesus,
but only some few days; neither was it his purpose to decipher to the Church,
that his enemies were at Ephesus, but at some other place.

Ephesus were bruit beasts rather then men, they were not adversaries, but
beasts rather. If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men.
1. Cor. 15.
In the Chapter aforegoing, there was no dealing with Demetrius; there is no
dealing with worldlings, with a man that understands nothing: there is no glory
to be gotten in disputing with a simple fellow; all the credit, and glory
comes to the Gospel, by confounding of them that are wise: the Ephesians were
Idolaters, they were beasts rather then men, therefore his adversaries were not
there, so much as at Jerusalem.

tumult that was in the time of Demetrius, that he raised; but he sailed by
them, and would no more touch there, but sent for the chief of them; therefore
it seemed he reserved himself for enemies and adversaries in some other
place, greater than that.

Fourthly, the word (...) signifies those capital enemies of the Gospel, the
Jews; the Ephesians were Idolaters, and the Grecians; and although they were
adversaries too, yet they were nothing like to the Jews; for the Jews fought
with weapons; the Gentiles were like the Americans, like the west Indians,
which are bare people without any weapons, without any harness, it is an easy
matter to make a slaughter among them; but the Jews were armed at all points;
they had the Scriptures, they had the Word of God against Christ, they had the
Law, they had the promises, they had the covenant of grace from Abraham, they
were the peculiar people of God, there were no such adversaries as they;
therefore he sets them down by a peculiar name, (...), those adversaries; that
is, those grand adversaries, those adversaries that are sharp set against the
word, those dangerous men to be dealt with, those are they that I would
encounter with.

And lastly, it appears by the event: for the event adversaries that were at
Jerusalem: For whither went he? did he stay at Ephesus? did he go to Ephesus?
No, the Text says, that he sailed by it. And whither did he go but to
Jerusalem, there to struggle and strive with the power of darkness, and to
confound by his doctrine all the Jews and all his opposers? which although
they took him, and cast him into prison, yet his word, and power, and spirit
was stronger than they all, and convinced, and confuted them; that although
they seemed to themselves to be conquerers, yet they were vanquished; for so
the Word of God uses to do, to conquer the conquerers; and although they
thought they took him prisoner, yet he took them prisoners: for it is a
horrible victory that a man gets against the truth; a man were better to be
taken by the truth, than to overcome, and quell it.

These things I note, as not any way prejudicial to the authority or antiquity
of those great Fathers and Interpreters: but being as I think the more clear
exposition, and the truer meaning of the Text, that he purposed to go to
Jerusalem by the feast of Pentecost, and that was but seven weeks off now: and
although he purposed if matters had been in place, to have staid a while at
Ephesus, yet still his mind was at Jerusalem where the door was opened, because
of the abundance of people that flocked and came thither; and the adversaries
were so many, that it exceeded all faith to make relation of: for the Jews
were bound thrice in the year, all that were above 15. years old in the near
countries, and all that were above 20. years old in far countries, they were
all bound thrice in the year to present themselves before the Lord in
Jerusalem: and they were such an infinite multitude, that a man would wonder
that the Land was not overrunne with them like grasshoppers, and destroyed by
their being there. But we are too narrow, to consider the blessings of God
upon that Land; for besides this, that they were men of a very sparing, and
moderate diet, and cared not so much for soft beds, but were content to lie in
the fields, to lie in tents; nor they cared not for variety of fare, any thing
was sufficient for them. We see that faith and credit makes this good in the
History of Josephus, who (as I said) reports that there were nine millions at
one Passover.

We see the possibility of it also in King Iehosaphats time, that had eleven
hundred thousand men and upwards, that did always wait upon him, besides those
that were in his strong galleys that were men of war, as we see in 2 Chronicles.
17. 2 Chronicles. 17.
Now if he were able to maintain such a number of men, it may well be thought,
that when the general concourse of that people was, from all the parts and
kingdoms of the world, that there must be an infinite mass of people. If he
had above one million daily attending upon him, surely the several parts of
the world would furnish it to the number that Josephus speaks of.

And it is not to be disputed how the land could bear them, how it could
nourish them; these things we are not to question, but to understand that the
blessing of God was mightily poured forth upon that Nation. It is apparent I
say in 2 Chronicles. 17. that Iehosaphat had so many hundred thousand men always at
his command.

So then the Apostle says here, a door was opened; there were so many men,
and so many adversaries for the most part; therefore his mind was set, and his
spirit was inflamed so much the more, to throw himself into the danger, and to
cast himself into the front of the battle, because he knew he was secure of
the victory: and although he were overcome by the troublesome world, yet he
knew he should overcome in the quarrel of Christ; that the truth of God should
prevail against them, and chain the chainers. So much for the story.

2 Part. The Church of God cannot want adversaries.
Now for the common induction that we are to make out of this: we learn that
the Church of God, and the truth of God can never want enemies: we must look
still for a great number of adversaries; (...) says the Apostle, we are made
for this purpose. In 1 Cor. 4. 1 Cor. 4.
I am persuaded, says the Apostle, that God has set us the last Ministers of
the Gospel: he has set us out to be the offscouring of the world, the scorn
of the people, to be a theater, and stage for men and Angels to gaze upon. And
Simeon when he had the babe our Lord Jesus Christ in his arms, he says of
him, that he was borne to be a stumbling stone, to be a mark of
contradiction; he was borne to have adversaries. No sooner could the Gospel
peep out into the world, then it had a number of adversaries, and enemies, to
tread and trample it down again.

Those persecutions that were under the first Emperors after Christ, the ten
bloody persecutions, they witness what great adversaries the poor truth of
Christ had. And the Church of the Jews which the Apostle called before him
Acts 28. Acts 28.
when they were convented, and called together by the Apostle, they told him
that this new heresy, the doctrine of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, which they
accounted heresy, they knew for a certain that it was every where spoken
against, that it was every where gainsaid.

It is an easy matter for lies to prevail in the world, the sons of
darkness are predestined to be drowned in darkness, to vanish in their
own dreams; and so the lies of one Philosopher may pass upon another, and
they may join, and blend them together, and live in quiet, and peace, and yet
all be lies. But the pure truth of God, and the sincere light of the Gospel it
can endure no such Egyptian smoaks, but it will shine bright forth of it self,
and therefore it cannot be suffered; for the Devil the Prince of darkness,
he does always show himself against the Lord of light, and against the Gospel
of light still, either to extinguish it, if possibly he can, or at least to
eclipse, and dazzle the light of it, or to immure it in clouds, that it may not
appear to the sons of men.

It was the fortune of all truth, ever to be beaten down by liars, but yet the
Lord has given it this victory: It runs the same course with Christ: for he
died, and was buried three days, but he rose again; so the truth, which is
his daughter, the daughter of the Trinity, the sister of the Sun, the
brightness of the world, although it be for a time obscured, and damped by
the wickedness of the Devils instruments, and such miscreants; yet in time it
rises again it self, by the power of God it is raised from the dead, after
that never more to be outed, and undone, but still to shine and fill the
Hemisphere.

Therefore this should teach us, Ministry, because of the noise, and tumult of
the adversaries: he that is for Christ, he must fear no rumors; but in good
reports, and bad reports, and through prosperity, and mischief he must make a
way unto him that he seeks for, of whose Name he makes profession. Adversarii
multi, the adversaries be many, adversaries without any cause, adversaries to
them that be their friends; this is the case of the Gospel, as our Lord Christ
says, I am come to save you, I come to heal you, I come to redeem you from
all misery, and you seek to kill me a man that has done good to you. And St.
Paul says, Am I therefore your enemy, because I tell you the truth? Such
gross and senseless adversaries the Gospel must look for, absurd men, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
I beseech you brethren, pray to God for us, that we may be delivered from
absurd men, senseless men, that will not know their own good, men that know
not who comes to do them service, strange adversaries that will fight against
their benefactors: such are the adversaries of the Gospel. I paid that which I
never took, they rewarded me evil for good, says David, to the great
discomfort of my heart; but the servant is not above his Master; if our Lord
have been served thus, we must not think much to taste of the same cup, of
which he has drunk before us.

Again, this must teach all men that travail in the cause of Christ, to have
the world in no estimation, but to account it as an enraged beast; that speaks
and does, and kicks as a child that has no wit nor sense, that scratcheth the
Nurses duggs from which it receives milkc. We must think to be in the midst
of Lions, as our Lord Jesus says, in the midst of Wolves: Behold, I send you
forth as Lambs in the midst of Wolves, be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and
simple as Doves.

And here there are two sorts of men greatly to be blamed.

First, those of former times, that could not endure opposition, but when the
adversaries began to rise, they would fall into the Wilderness, and live like
Hermits: men of great gifts, and of excellent perfections, yet they could not
endure opposition; being tender hearted, and of weak spirits, they could not
bear the malice of the multitude, but would keep themselves away, and would
leave the places wherein they might have done great good: they left them to be
invaded by Foxes and Wolves, to destroy the vineyard of the Lord.

This I say was culpable in them, because they came short of the spirit of St.
Paul, that was not daunted with the multitude of adversaries, but he would go
so much the rather, by how much the adversaries were greater, and more in
number: for there be many things in the world, in the abundant company of the
adversaries, which are so far from affrighting, as that they give greater
encouragement. As the Poet says, the Shepherd speaking there of the cold
Winter, and of the Northwind, he says, that he feared them as little as the
Wolf fears a number of sheep; or as the Land-flood does fear the banks in a
river. So it was in the high and gracious spirit of the Apostle, and those that
were like unto him: for St. Paul was called comparatively the Wolf of
Benjamin, and in a good sense, because the sacrifices were offered in the Tribe
of Benjamin, the Temple being in the Tribe of Benjamin, it was called a
ravening Wolf, because it devoured the bodies of the beasts that were offered
in sacrifice. So St. Paul that was of the Tribe of Benjamin, was compared to a
Wolf, as Gregory, Gregory. Augustine.
and Austin give the reason, because he did eat up the sacrifices of the
Heathen people, as St. Peter in the vision, was bid to Arise, kill and eat:
this was the power that the Apostle had in the Church, to devour the
wickedness of the people, and to change and digest it into their own stomachs.

Now as the Wolf cares not how many sheep there be in a fold, for when he
comes to steal, if the shepherd and his dog be away, he takes more comfort in
a great many, then to see a handful of sheep; he knows that if their were
ten times so many they could do him no harm, being fearful creatures,
therefore he rejoices.

So the children of God are compared to Wolves, to Lions, to creatures that are
victorious, and conquering: they are so far from a sheepish and fearful,
and base, and cowardly disposition, for the faculties, and abilities of their
adversaries, that they take the more delight to see the adversaries many. And
as the great floods when the snow is melted upon the mountains, or when there
has been a great Land-flood, when it f^lls from the hills, it scorns to be
compassed in within banks, but it overflowes, and over-runnes all, and makes
new conduits, new sourses, and new channels, where there was never any before:
So the mighty stream of the Gospel, by the Apostles, it could not be
contained within the banks, and common limits that the Philosophers, and
natural men could afford; but it over-ranne all with a mighty current, and
flood upon the world; with the sacred influence of it, the hearts, and minds
of them were watered, that were never possessed of it before.

That kind of Monastical, Heremiticall life, it is nothing agreeable to the
profession of St. Paul in this place, that for fear of danger will convey
themselves into woods, into caves, and cells, and alienate themselves from
their work, and labor, because they are afraid of opposition; the spirit of
St. Paul rises the greater: As the Palm Tree, the more weight is laid upon
it, so much the more it strives, and heaves against it: so the Spirit of God in
this Apostle, and in all true Christians, it is never so frolic, nor they are
never so high-spirited, as when they see the malice of their adversaries most
pregnant, and most furious against them.

Secondly, it blames those men much more, 2 Sort blamed.
that in the time of prosperity, when there are many adversaries; yet they will
not show themselves, but lie on their pillowes of pleasure, and seek to be
quiet: they will have no man speak against them, they will incur no man's
hatred, or ill will, but they will hold the truth of God to themselves in the
bosom of their own conscience, and never open it, or stand for it. These men
are far worse then the former, for indeed the former had some good pretense,
because there was way-laying, lying in wait for their lives, and conspiracy
against them, to take them away from the earth; therefore they thought it
fittest to yield to the time, and to reserve themselves unto a better occasion.
But when men shall live in their prosperity, and have peace round about them,
and shall see the adversaries come, and creep in craftily, and sow false
doctrine, heretical doctrine, and things that savor of the old dregs, and
relics of Antichristianisme, and they themselves have excellent gifts, and
means to refute, and confound these things; and yet because they will not
abridge themselves of their pleasure, they will set some young novice in the
place, that is able to speak nothing to the purpose, especially nothing to the
combat, nothing to the duel, that ought to be between the adversaries, and
the champions of Christ, but leave all to such kind of fresh-water-souldiers,
and themselves in the mean time, taking their ease, because they think it is
not safe meddling; and perhaps, because they think they shall be discomfited,
and if they should chance to be overcome, there would be more shame to them by
their overthrow, then there could come glory by their conquest, if they should
offer to stand in the cause of Christ. These kind of men are exactly contrary
to the Apostles spirit.

Where there are many adversaries, there the Spirit of God should rise in men,
as it is said of Saul, when Nahash the King of the Ammonites put that base, and
deadly condition upon the Gileadites; that they should give him their
right-eyes by way of compact: The Text says, the Spirit of God came upon Saul
when he heard such a thing, that although the Ammonits were a great, and
terrible, and an infinite number, and the case grew desperate: for they were to
deliver the City within eight days, yet so much the more strong was the
Spirit of God in Saul, and he took a yoke of oxen, and cut them in pieces, and
sent them to the quarters of Israel, and told them that so their cattle should
be served whosoever would not follow him in this just quarrel. So St. Paul
although otherwise in Acts 17. Acts 17.
when he saw Athens full of Idols, full of Devils, that there was every where
Temples set up, the Text says, that his spirit was exasperated, so moved he
was in himself he was in a holy trance, he was without himself to see that
horrible blasphemy against God. So it is ever natural to true spirits, that
are guided by the Holy Ghost, not to be daunted with peril, nor to hang down
their heads for the opposition of the Devil, but to gather strength and
courage; for as much as it is a sign that God is with them, a sign that God
has sent them. It was the lot of Christ, to be beset about on every side, that
when he had done the most good, to sustain the greatest harm of those
ungrateful monsters.

The adversaries are many, therefore I will go; Adversarii multi
contrary to the course of flesh and blood, which because the adversaries are
many, and great, therefore I will not go, I will keep within doors, I will
lie safe, I cannot do any good; what can I do against so many, what can one
man do against so many thousands? No; but the Spirit of God persuaded him, that
he alone had the world in his breast, and that he was able to conquer as
Samson, who with the Iaw-bone of an Ass slew a thousand men, and he was
stronger by the hairs of his head, which were but an excrement, yet it made
him stronger then all the adversaries that were against him; so the least thing
in the child of God, which seems the excrement of the world, the hairs of their
head, are able to confront and confound all adverse powers.

Mat. 10.
As our Lord Jesus tells his Disciples in Mat. 10. They shall not be able to
resist the Spirit whereby you speak, Deuteronomy. 28.
one of you shall scatter ten of them, and an hundred of you shall scatter a
thousand of them. The enemies of God are set to be routed before the few
handfulls of Gods children, as in the Army of Gedeon, 300. men put to the
slaughter, and wrought the confusion of a thousand thousand Midianites.

Let us therefore have this confidence in our spirits, in the truth, and cause
of God, and not be unsettled or moved with the speech, or with the actions of
men, or with the disasters of the times, nor with the conceits that flesh and
blood will suggest unto us; for verily if we stand upon our own foundation, we
shall be able to undermine them, and to keep our standing against them: there
is no counsel, nor no power, nor no hand that can come against the will of
God; for he carries all abrest before him, and his legions are able to drive
the world into smoke, and to make the mountains to tremble at the approach of
him.

The adversaries are many.] Many, because they are gathered from many Nations;
Devout men of the Jews, from all quarters under heaven. Acts 2. Acts 2.
And wheresoever these Jews dwelt, they were still as it were the chief
Prelates; they would look to the state of the Church, and make that the
supreme object.

We see in Thessalonica a poor Colonie, they sent as if they were the chief
Magistrates after St. Paul to take him alive, and to bring him to his answer,
when he was at Berea. A strange spirit was in them to be adversaries to the
cause of Christ; they were great persecutors wheresoever they were; whereas our
Colonies, and our Churches in other places of the world, they take not half so
much upon them; a man may live as quietly and safe at Hamborough and such
places, in as much peace and quiet, and more too sometimes, than in his own
country; because there is not that fullness of authority there as there is
here. But the Jews were of that nature, that still they would be the chief
primates, and the great men of the world wheresoever they were; Therefore the
Apostle having such a confluence of them, from Greece, from Asia, from Scythia,
from India, from Egypt, from Cyrene, from Rome, and from all the parts of
Italy, from Germany, and from Spain it self, where the Jews were dispersed
and scattered, he finding them in all places, so exact, and so purposely set to
the maintaining of Moses law, and to oppose any new opinion that should come in
place, he must needs complain of adversaries.

There is a great number of adversaries from all parts of the world; and they
be all adversaries full of power, and full of terror; every man thought
himself a Prelate, every man took himself to be a ruler, and a governor,
therefore the match was so much the harder, the combat was so much the more
dangerous, because he was in the midst of all the power of his adversaries;
and yet this daunted him not.

But now the holy Ghost gives us here to consider, what kind of adversaries
these were; that is, they were the most potent, and powerful adversaries; not
only great in their number, but great also in their affections, great in their
strength, and great in their zeal; for there is no adversary so much to be
feared, as those that are nearest neighbors to us in the profession of the
common religion. In Micah 5. Micah 5.
Let no man trust his servant, nor his neighbor. A man's own household shall be
his greatest enemies: as the common proverb says, A man has no worse friends
than them he brings from home with him: so it was here; the Jews of all
others should have maintained Christ, they should have been the Preachers of
the glorious Kingdom, and doctrine of the Lord Jesus: yet these were they that
set themselves against it, and their opposition was the most dangerous of all
others, and the most whetted, and exasperated by extreme hatred; for there is
no hatred like the hatred of those that being nearest of religion, yet agree
not in religion; there is no such hatred, as the hatred of brethren when they
fall out, as we see in Cain and Abel, upon the part of Cain, for Abel was a
mere patient. So we see in other stories, as that of Antiochus and Polinesus,
etc. So in the point of religion, when nature is once disturbed, a man forgets
himself to be that that he is, and kindles his wrath against those that he
should love, and there is no wrath nor malice like unto that. So it is between
the Jews and Christians, compare all the world together, and you shall find
among the Turks and Mahometans, (them that worship the filthy Idols) no such
hatred between them and their company, although they differ in their sects; nor
you shall find no such hatred between them and us, as there is between Jews
and Christians. A man were better a great deal to dwell under the Turk, than
under a Jew, a man that is a Christian; and a Jew had better to dwell under the
Turk, than under a Christian. And why? because they are domestics, they are
men of one house; for they must be brought in one day, the Lord will make them
children, and bring the natural branches that are stricken off, and ingraft
them, and make the fullness of the Gentiles by them; in the mean time they be
of the same house with us; and because of that, their anger and malice is the
greater, so that their adverse power is more than that of the Turks or Sarazens.

And then again, if we look farther into the state of Christendom, to those
that profess Christ, we shall see no such hatred between Pagans and
Christians, as there is between Papists and Protestants, because they are
domestics, of one and the same house, professors of the same Lord in common,
they have the same faith in the most things, they agree in the same tenants;
but because they fall out, and cannot be reconciled in other points, therefore
their hatred and malice is extreme one against another, that a man had better
dwell with a Jew, than with a Papist; and a Papist had better dwell with a Jew,
than with a Protestant; because the nearer they come in religion, the greater
is the adversnesse between them.

And to go farther, among those that be Protestants, there is no such hatred
under heaven, as there is between the Formalists and the Puritans; there is no
man in the world that knows the course of the world, and has experience in
men, but he had rather live being a Formalist among the Papists, than with a
Puritanc; and the Puritans give out in plain terms, that they had as lieve be
subject to the Papists, or to the Jews, as to the Formalists. What is the
reason? because they are still domestici, men of one house, the Lords purpose
being to set men of one house together by the ears; so the Lord Christ
protests, Do you think that I am come to send peace into the world? I am not
come to send peace, but to set men at variance, to bring a sword: which comes
to pass accidentally by men's corruption; for otherwise, the Gospel is a
doctrine of peace, but by men's corrupt minds it comes to pass, that that
which was made for peace, it is turned to war; Says he, I come to turn, and
to estrange, and alienate, and alter the minds of men, the son shall fall
from the father, and the father shall forsake his son; and the mother in law
shall hate the daughter in law, and the daughter in law shall be against her
mother in law. A strange kind of opposition, and the reason of it is this,
because as we see in wars, those that are called civil, that are kindled in
the bowels of the Commonwealth, there is no hatred like unto that. Civil
war is the worst war that can be, for it feeds upon its self, it eats up
its own bowels; whereas in foreign wars there is some mercy, there is some
kind of moderation; there may be some truce or reconciliation; but civil war
is full of blood, full of revenge; there is no mean to stop that great stream
of hatred that runs there. So it is in religion, when men fall out, when
there is civil war among themselves, that the household of God war one against
another, there is no hatred to that. Therefore he says, (...), those enemies,
those that profess the same God, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob as we
do; those that have the same Covenant, those that look for the same Messiah,
those that have the promises of grace, and the better promises of the life to
come, these are they that are our adversaries. This is the strange strait and
pressure that the Apostle was brought unto, that he was not to fight with
beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men; he was not to encounter with them
that were of no learning, he had no promise, nor no assurance of that he took
to; but he waged war with them that were of one house, them that had claimed
the house of a long time, almost for the space of 2000. years, them that God
called his peculiar people: this was the great adverse power.

These things therefore should teach us to call unto the Lord God, that we may
be the same men, one mind, as we are of one house; To pray for unity.
that as he has given his Word to be a common direction to all, so it may be
the common guide, that it may be the sweet mistress unto us, to conduct us in
the way of life, to please us all, that we may be alike enamoured on it, and
that it may still seek to preserve its own purity, for religion is the great
mistress of the world; if we fall out about that, there will be more war about
it, than that of Troy for Hellene, (as Austin says, S. Aug.
) The Truth of Christ has far greater beauty, and is far more worth, and
deserves far more to be fought for then Hellene of Greece did.

In the body of man, there is no greater danger than when the like humors of
the body are striving one with another, when the blood and the choler are one
against another; for then there is an evidence, and open sign, and overture of
destruction, there being as it were all the banners of nature displayed to
destroy it self. So in the Church of Almighty God, when learned men set
themselves against learned men, and one great wit against another, and every
man seeks the destruction of his fellow, then fall the mighty men of Judah;
whereas if they would set themselves against the punies, against the common
sort, as Abner said to Ahazel that followed him as a nimble Roe, and thought to
have wearied him, and then to have surprised him. Abner bids him follow the
young men, and not the Captain himself, which he would not hear, and
therefore Abner thrust his spear into him. So if men would be content to spend
their wits, to spend their time, and their arguments against the common
adversaries, against the heretics, against the Pelagians, against the
Marcionites, and those that have been outed from the Church in former times,
the common adversaries of the faith, this were a sweet and gracious kind of
combat, and that the Church might take great comfort in; but when men will set
themselves one against another, as the fashion is grown now too gross, when
one Protestant Preacher is set to dispute that which another teaches; to pull
down that which another builds; this of all other is most dangerous, and a
forerunner of a great and fearful calamity that must befall the whole house.

But this will never be otherwise, although the reverend Prelates of the land
have gone about by all means to stop the course, yet it will not be, but still
there will be a heart burning, and breaking out, and some men will be catching,
and wresting other men's works and writings, that a man shall be driven to an
extacie, and almost to desperation in knowing the truth.

There are many adversaries. And never more than there are now, when the world
is grown to take a pride in being adversaries, and think themselves base and
idle, except they can contradict the common rules of religion. He that
preaches no other thing than was taught by the Fathers, he is accounted a
silly fellow: he that goes the ordinary tract, and high way, and has not some
fetches and revolts of his own; that has not a maze of his own devising, a
labyrinth of his own invention, he is no singular man. If he can contradict
Calvin, and Beza, and the Fathers of the Church, and his fellow Preachers, he
is a rare fellow now adays. These are the most terrible adversaries of all,
and there are none so dangerous as these; and these at the last they will make
the Word but a mockery, and all religion uncertain, that no man can ground
upon it, but as the ball of fortune that reeles and turns every where.

Therefore we ought to be wise concerning these kinds of mountebanks, to
understand where they be, to search them that we be not deceived by them* for
assuredly if any thing take away the light of the Gospel, and remove the
lantern, it will be this. The itching ears, and uncessant desires that men
have to broach novelties, to bring new things into the Church of God, these be
adversaries as well as the Jews, that would suffer no new thing to come in.

The Jews thought that their religion was the old religion, and that Christ's
religion was new, and therefore they would not keep it, they would not suffer
it to come in, howbeit there is not any thing in it that is a novelty: for from
the beginning of the world there has been the same faith.

The same faith that St. Paul preached, in the same faith Adam died. Abel died
in the same faith, and Noah, and Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
Patriarchs in former time, they died in the same profession of Christ, in the
same manner as the Apostle preached, but because they thought it was a new
thing, they thought it was new come up, therefore they opposed it as a novelty,
as a new and quaint device, obscuring thereby the glorious antiquity of the
Gospel, by which it is more strong then by any argument in the world: for it is
the prime truth, Prima veritas.
and therefore it shall stand for ever, as it has been ever since the
beginning of the world.

Last part.
The last thing to be considered in the words, is this, that he says, There
be many adversaries, Not enemies, but adversaries.
he does not call them by the name of enemies directly, such enemies as were
to be despaired of, but only adversaries, such as may be won in time, such as
may come in; this is a thing to be observed, we see it in Paul in another
place, in 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. 2 Thessalonians. 3.15.
when he speaks of them that were to be excommunicated, because they had
given themselves over to all unclean, and vile examples, says he, Do not
keep company with such a one, how be it, do not hate him, do not repute him
as an enemy, but instruct him as a brother. Whence the Apostle makes this
wonderful mitigation, belonging to the sweetness of Gods Spirit; still in
reproving men's faults, to have a love still to their persons; although we
detest their sins, though we are not to grace them with our company, being
persons excommunicate; yet we are to instruct them, to do the best we can to
save their souls; to win them as being brethren.

That place does illustrate, and set forth this. For the Apostle calls these
adversaries: he says, the adversaries are strong, and many, that are set
against me: they come as a mighty Army of men, they come as the Philistines
against Samson, yet he does acknowledge them to be such as were not directly
enemies, no desperate men, but such as the word may conquer, they may be
brought in, and become of adversaries, friends, and turn their hands, and give
a supply to the Gospel of Christ: Therefore he gives them a gentle Term, and
has a favorable conceit of them; he says, they be adversaries for the
present, it may be hereafter, they will become friends, and compliers to the
Gospel.

Not to judge peremptorily of adversaries.
This moderation of the Spirit, should keep us within our compass, we should
not judge peremptorily of any that seem adversaries to the faith, till we
have sought by all means to reclaim them, for there is no enemy but he that
is an enemy finally. It is the common course that God takes, to make friends of
enemies, for there is no man that can come to be Gods friend, but he is a
reconciled friend, he comes by way of reconciliation, for he was first an
enemy: every man is borne the enemy of God, and his own enemy; and it is the
grace of God that brings us into friendship, it is the grace of God that brings
men to comportment, that they lay aside their enmity, and take unto them bowels
of amity, and concord, that God should enlighten them to do this.

Therefore we do not pray as the Popish Church does; they pray against
Protestants, and against Turks, and against all that are not of their religion,
and with bell, book, and candle they excommunicate them, and send them down
to hell, to the Devil; this is not the course that God has sanctified, it is
not the course that the Apostle takes, but they must be accounted men
reclaimable: there is no man that is so opposite, but God can reclaim him.

This appears by many examples in the Scripture: Saul was a ravening Wolf
against the flock of Christ, he came afterward to be a gracious Pastor, and
feeder of the flock of Christ; Manasses caused the streets of Jerusalem to
run with blood, afterward he came in, and was a true convert to God.

These things are commonly known unto us; for if sinners had been desperate,
we had never been saved, being all sinners. We know by experience of our
selves that there is no man desperate, because the grace of God has abounded
to us, we know that the hand of God is not shortened, but the same grace that
enlightened us, it will enlighten them in due time, if it please him to call
them:

Therefore in the midst of all hostile opinion, we should still maintain
peace, and a good hope of those that are our very adversaries; God may call
them, and make them better, if they be enemies now: God may make them friends
if he see good; for the Lord can turn the hearts of men, The hearts of men are
in the hand of the Lord, he turns them as it pleases him. Though they be
professed enemies of religion, the Lord can turn them: there is no man so
wild, but the Lord can put a snaffle in his nose, and a hook in his jaws, and
bring him back again: there is no heart so stubborn, but the Lord is able to
make it yield: he can bring water out of the flint stone, and can make the
wilderness a standing well. There is nothing impossible to the Lord: the
mighty Cedars of Lebanon are at his command, although they stand so proudly, as
though they would stand there in despite of their Creator; yet the Lord can
dismount them, and bring them low as the bramble of the field. The mighty hand
of the Lord works all things according to his power, and according to his
blessed will.

We must not therefore think peremptorily of any man; we must indeed think him
for the present to be wicked, and ungodly, and a vagabond as long as he is
thus; but still reserve our thoughts with a condition of changeing, and hope
for it; for the Lord is able to change even the wild branches that are planted,
into the natural olive tree, that as they came in beyond all hope, so the
branches that are lopped off, that a man would think could never receive juice
or nourishment again, the arm of the Lord is able to plant them. Jews shall
be called.
The Jews that are the enemies of Christ, they shall be replanted again, and
set in their native stock, and bring forth fruit in such abundance and glory,
as no nation under heaven shall be compared with the Jews.

The sum of all is this, A Christian must know that he has to buckle in the
world with adversaries; he must not dream of peace, he must not promise
quietness to himself; but where he does best, there he must look for most
opposition; he must look for the devil in the midst of his auditory, in
the midst of the Church, where prayer and preaching is. Where Iehoiada the
High Priest stands at the Altar, there satan stands at his right hand; and
though the Angel say, The Lord rebuke thee, the Lord rebuke thee, yet he will
not leave his station for all that. Therefore a man must take up his
resolution, and say, This I will do though all the powers of hell resist it;
or else he lays his hand to the plough and looks back, and makes himself
unworthy of the Gospel.

Simile.
It is the nature of Camomile, the more men tread upon it, the more and the
better it grows; so the Word and the Gospel of Christ, it grows the better,
where there are more adversaries; it grows never so well, as when it is imbrued
in blood; The blood of the Martyrs being the seed of the Church. The Saints of
God are never so high in spirit, nor never so well affected to salvation, and
to heaven, as when they are most encumbered with stumbling blocks in the world;
happy is he that can leap over them, or else pass by them; for none shall be
so happy as not to meet with them. It was the condition of Christ, and the
Prophets before us, and it shall be the condition of all after us. Therefore we
must desire God to sanctify our adversities, and that which shall oppose us;
for we are sure to have them; only let us desire God to turn them to good, as
all things work to the best to those that love and fear the Lord: which the
Lord grant unto us for Jesus Christ his sake. To whom, etc.

FINIS.

