A NEW SPRING OF DIVINE POETRY.

1. Day philomusus composuit -- inest sua gratia parvis. HEB DDIUV HEB DDIM



Printed at London by T. C. for Humphry Blunden, at his shop near the Castle
Tavern, in Corne-hill. 1637

T ache heed, my Muse, what? patronized by none?
O ben't over bold; can infants stand alone?
M ache haste unto some sheltring place, or now
I nvoke the favor of some smiling brow,
S tirre not abroad, unless some gracious eye
T ache pity on thee in thy infancy.
R ather become a silvan Muse, and then
I nvolue thy self into some private den,
S uch times as these are not for vulgar notes,
B rought through a rusticke pipe, but quainter throtes,
R iper inventions, and the nimblest wits,
I ngenious faneies, such, these times befits,
D ar'st thou to stir abroad, upheld by none?
G oe, go and prattle at thy Helicon,
E ndeavour for to get Apolloes bays,
T ip thou thy rusticke tongue with silver Phrase,
R ipen thy shallow brain, then crouch and sing
V nder the shadow of some sheltring wing,
D raw near, but softly speak, but not to loud,
G et some protection else I often voude
E ver to keep thee in eternal night
Vo^um Auctoris.
MOst mighty God, thou that alone can save,
And raise a stinking Laz'rus from his grave,
That heal'st the sick, and let'st the tongue-tide speak,
That make the weakest strong, and strongest weak,
Into my fainting Soul, do thou infuse
Thy Spirit, make my tributary Muse,
Pay stipend at thy footestoole, let her be
No more Apolloes, only now for thee,
Open thou her sealed lips, that she may bring
Thee glory: teach, O teach her how to sing.
TO HIS FRIEND THE AUTHOR.
Feign would I speak, but yet my tongueti' de muse
In Rivers, thirstlesse; and when she has most use
Of speech, is stricken dumb: she is plenteous poor,
And knew she less to say, she could say more.
She does enjoy, and yet she cannot find
Beginning, too much light has struck her blind;
I could admire thee James, and though in truth
The downy Characters of blooming youth,
Searce write thee man, yet if we measure years
By virtue, thou a Nestor wilt appear.
For when most men do fill their greedy mawes
With Comicke laughter, and the sweaty plause
Of vulgar palms, others write wounding lines,
And will accuse (though they be worse) the times.
Thou steer'st another course, and spend'st thy oil
In sacred objects, and in holy toil,
No sinful eloquence thy verse defames,
No lustful sports, nor Cupidinean flames,
Thy Poesye does neither frown, nor smile,
There Is nor Satyricke, nor Venereous style,
And must these works be hid? and car'st thou less
To give them to the mothes, then to the Press?
Free them from darkness James, that they may be
A light to others, and a crown to thee;
For ere they shall be long obscured, I say
Like Phosphorus I Will usher in thee DAY.
H. G.

TO HIS ESTEEMED LOVING FRIEND JAMES DAY, in Commendation of his Book.
THy shining works (O DAY) do seem so bright,
Surely Thou Wilt have an ever lasting light;
If these thy radient beams break forth so soon,
How glorious will thy splendour be at noone:
It Is but thy morning, yet thy Sun displayes
His beauty, and sends down his golden rays,
Well (DAY) I Will tell thee this; though envy spite
And Critickes snarle, thou wilt never have a night.
T. I.

The Preface.
YOU wanton Lads, that spend your winged time,
And chant your ears, in reading lustful rhyme,
Who like transformed Acteon range about,
And beat the woods to find Diana out,
Is It this you would have? then hence: here is no content
For you, my Muse never knew what Venus meant;
But stay: I may subvert your rude conceit;
And every verse may prove a heavenly bait:
O that ye were such captives! then yould be
Thrice happy: such as these are only free,
Leave, leave your wanton toys; and let alone
Apollo sporting at his Helicon,
Let Vulcan deal with Venus, what is to thee
Although she dandle Cupids on her knee?
Be not enchanted with her wanton charms,
Let her not hug thee in her whorish arms,
But wisely do (as Neptune did) in spite
Of all, spue out the Lady Aphrodite,
Come, come fond lad, what? would thou feign espy,
A glorious object for thy wandering eye?
And glut thy sight with beauty? would behold
A visage that will make thy Venus cold?
If this be all, I Will give thy eye delight:
Come see that face that lendes the Sun his light,
Come see that face that makes the heavens to shine,
Come see that glorious face, that lends thee thine,
Come and behold that face which if thou see,
Aright, it will make the earth a heaven to thee,
Come see that glistring face from which arise
Such glorious beams that dazels Angels eyes,
What can have more; but do thou think that such
A comely visage will not let thee touch?
Or do thou think a Sun that shines so clear,
Will scorn to let a lesser Orb come near?
No thou mistak'st: say, do thou truly thirst,
For him? I dare avouch he loved thee first,
Be not dismayed, It needs no more dispute,
Come give this glorious face a kind salute.
THE WORLDS METAMORPHOSIS.
BEfore all time, when every thing did lie, The Chaos.

Wrapped in a Chaos of deformity,
When all things nothing were, and could present
No comely frame, no heaven, no element,
No earth, no water, fire or air alone
But all as twere compounded all in one,
Then with a word our Tri-une Jove did bring,
This nothing Chaos into every thing;
Yea then our great Jehovah did present
A several region to each element,
Then Time, his hours began to measure out,
And he most nimbly garrisoned about,
This new created Orb: he took his flight
And hurried restless on both day and night,
His motion was so quick, that scarce it was eyed,
He for ten thousand worlds will not squint aside,
Nor once turn back his head; by chance I viewd
His flight* his wings I thought were then renewd.
Yea his unwearied feathers did so soar
Swiftly, as if they never flew before,
As when the Thracians from their snaky bow
Did make there featherd darts so swiftly go,
That they out ran all sight, so time did fly,
As if he strove with winged Mercury;
No weapon all this while for his defense
He bore, he dealt with none but innocence,
And now those foggy mists that so did lie,
Cloistered together from eternity
Were all dispersd; yea now it was very bright
And darkness was unfettered from the light;
When this was done, our great Jehovah lent
The world (as yet scarce made) a firmament,
He separated waters wondrous well,
Then Seas with surging billows ganne to swell,
And tossed to and fro with every wave,
As if the fretfull region would out brave
Her own Creator; they were not content
With their but now appointed regiment,
Their watery mountains did so often aspire
To Heaven, as if they would be placed higher,
But now great Jove looked on they did not dare
Surpass their stations, nay, nor once impair
Their bounds, he quickly queld their lusty prankes,
And causd the waves to crouch within their banks,
When he had conquered this unruly stran,
Within two days he crowns Leviathan,
King of the liquid region, and does give
Ten thousand thousand more with him to live,
Then fruitful earth which is the Ocean bars
Appears, and heavens bespangled all with stars,
The Sun begins his beauty to present,
And proudly danceth up the Orient,
He nor his horses can no longer sleep,
But gallop from the oriental deep,
He rid so fast that in few hours was spide
All bravely wrapped in his meridian pride,
But when he clamber'd to the highest brinke,
He viewed the fabric, then began to sink,
And all the way as he did homewards go,
He laughed, to see so brave a frame below,
Still whipping on his Iades, until his head
Was safely laid into his Western bed.
Silver Lucina as yet did not enter,
But lay immured within the reeking center,
Whilst he had mounted on his flaming seat,
And viewd a glorious orb, wondrous, complete,
With that the purple Lady straight prepares,
Attended with ten thousand thousand stars,
She clambers up in this her rich array,
And viewes the goodly building all the way,
Sweet smiles she cast from her admiring eye,
Whilst all her little babes stood twinkling by,
Playing the wantons by their mothers side,
As if they were enamored with the pride
Of such a Fabric: to express their mirth,
Some shot from heaven, as though they would live on Earth,
This done, sweet Phoebe soon began to drop
Her borrowed beams into her brothers lap,
And ever since to see this glorious sight
One laughes at day; the other smiles at night.
And can you blame them? earth is spread with bowres,
And trees, and proudly decked with sundry flowers,
She that ere while in dunghill Chaos lay,
Is now with Vi'lets purp'ld every day,
And damaskt all with Roses, yea she is clad
With sweeter herbs then ever Ceres had,
Her fruitful womb brings forth most dainty cates,
And lovely fruits, these are her comely brattes,
No rusticke Plowman now does take the pains
To pierce her entrails, or to squeeze her veins,
But heaven and she unites, they scorn to see
A bastard weed, disgrace their pedigree,
She Is overspread with pinkes and Daffadillies,
Carnations, Roses, and the whitest Lilies,
Those fondlings lolling in her arms do lie,
Shaking their heads, and in her bosom dye;
These in their mothers sides do take their rest,
Till they do drop their leaves into her breast,
And now the little birds do every day,
Sit singing in the boughs, and chirpe, and play,
The Phesant and the Partridge slowly fly,
Undaunted even before the Faulcons eye,
Now comes Behemoth with his Lordly gate,
Gazing, as if he stood admiring at
So rich a frame, first having fixed his sight
On glorious earth, he always took delight
In viewing that; and would not look on high,
Nay all the glorious spangles of the sky
Could not entice him, ever from his birth
He spent his time in looking on the earth.
All other beasts their greedy eyes did fling
On lovely earth, as did their crowned King:
Yea now the Lion with the Lamb did go,
And knew not whether blood were sweet or no,
The little Kids to show their wanton pride,
Came dancing by the loving Tigers side,
The Hare being minded with the Hounds to play,
Would give a sporting touch, and so away,
And then return, being willing to be found,
And take his turn to chase the wanton Hound.
The busy Mice sat sporting all the day,
Mean while the Cat did smile to see them play.
The Fox stands still, to see the Geese asleep,
The harmless Wolf now grazeth with the Sheep,
Here was no raping, but all beasts did lie
As linked in one, O Heavenly Sympathy!
The goodly Pastures springing from the Clay,
Did woo their mouths to banquet, all the way
Was spread with dainty herbs, and as they found
Occasion, they would often salute the ground,
Those uncontrouled creatures then begun
To sport, and all lay basking in the Sun,
No creature was their Lord, gainesaid by none,
As if that Heaven and earth were all their own.
Thus when this mighty builder did inrobe
Himself with night, and Chaos to a globe
Convert, of this he took a serious view,
And did as twere create it all anew,
He made a little Orb, called man* the same,
Only compacted in a lesser frame,
For what is all this all, that man in one
Does not enjoy. A man that's only blown
With heavens breath, a man that does present
Life, Spirit, sense, and every element:
Yea in this little world great Jove did place
His glorious Image, and this miry face
Was heavens picture, it was this face alone
That still looked up to his Creators throne,
Then God did make (a place to be admired,
Surely it was heaven it self had then conspired,
To find it out,) a garden sweetly blown,
With pleasant fruit, and man's exempt from none,
Of all these plants, except a middle tree,
And what can one among a thousand be!
O glorious place, that God does now provide
For durty clay! the earth in all her pride,
He tramples on: and heaven that is so beset
With spangles and each glistring Chrysolet
Does give attendance, yea it serves to be
A covering for his head, his Canopie.
Thus man of heaven and earth is all possessed,
This span of dirt, is Lord of all the rest,
Me think's I see how all the Creatures bring
Their several Congies to their new made King,
Behemoth which ere while did range about
Unchecked, and tossing up his bony snowt,
Feared none: now having cast his rolling eyes
Upon his Lord, see how he crouching lies,
Behind a sheltring bush, he seems to be,
Imploring aid of every spreading tree,
The Lion which ere while was in his pride,
Squinting by chance his gogle-eyes aside,
Espies his King, he dares not stay for haste,
Spues out his meat half chaw'd, and will not taste
Of his intended food; but sneakes away,
Counting his life to be his chiefest prey,
It was but now the raven was espide,
Sporting her wings upon the Tigars hide,
But now, O how her feathered say les do soar,
As if she vowed to touch the earth no more!
See how the Goats do clamber to the top
Of highest mountains, and the Conies drop
Into their holes, see how the Roebucke flings
himself, almost exchanging legs for wings.
Why? what is the matter, that ye haste away,
Ye that ere while, were sporting all the day?
Tell me ye Creatures, say, what fearful sight
Has put you to this unexpected flight?
Speak, speak thou giddy lamb, were not thou spide
At play but now? why then do skip aside?
What? is it man that frights you? can his face
Stretch out your legs unto their swiftest pace?
Can one look daunt you all? what need this be?
Are ye not made of Clay, as well as he?
Have ye not one Creator? are ye not
His elder Brothers, and the first begot?
Why start ye then? is it not strange to see
One weake-one make ten thousand strong ones flee?
But ah I need not ask, I know it now,
You spied your makers image in his brow.
It Was even so indeed, no time to stay,
Your Lord was coming, fit, he should have way.
And thus these Creatures dares not come in sight;
Surely it was heavens Idea, causd the fright.
Now see how flattering earth does strive alone
To please this Lord; each tree presents a done,
See how the fruit hangs with a comely grace,
And wooes his hands to rent them from their place,
O how they bow, and would not have him bring
His hands to them, they bend unto their King,
But if by chance he will not pluck and taste,
They break the boughs, and so for grief they waste.
See how the little pinkes when they epsy
Their Lord, do Curtsy as he passes by,
The wanton Dazies shake their leavy heads,
The purple Vilets startle from their beds,
The Primrose sweet and every flower that grows,
Bestrowes his way with odours as he goes;
Thus did the herbs, the trees, the pleasant flowers
Welcome their Lord into his Eden bowres.
But all this while, the earth with all her pride,
She nor her store could not aford a bride
Fitting for man, no, no, to end the strife
The man himself must yield himself a wife,
It was not meet for him to be alone.
Then did our one-in-three our three-in-one
Cast him into a sleep, and did divide
His ribs, and brought a woman from his side.
When this was done, the devil did entice
The wife from Gods, unto his Paradise,
See how the lying serpent makes choice
Of the forbidden tree: a tacit voice
It has indeed most lovely to the eye,
Presents it to her, and she by and by
Forsooth must taste: and so must Adam too.
What cannot women by entreaties do!
God he intends a wife for man's relief,
But oftentimes she prooves the greatest grief.
Was there but one forbid? and must she be
So base a wretch to taste of such a tree?
Must Adam too? Ah see how she pluckes down
Her husbands glory, and kickes off his crown!
O see how angry God himself comes down,
To curse these wretches! heaven begins to frown,
Alas poor naked souls, me thinks I see
Transformed Adam crouch behind a tree,
It Is time to run when once God does reject him,
It Is not his leavy armor can protect him,
Heaven and hell with all the spite they can
Strive for revenge against this monster man.
O how the Creatures frown, and bend their brow,
As if they all conspired and took a vow
Against this caytive, hark how earth complains
That she by man is barrd of moderate raines,
She Is now become a strumpet, fruitful seeds,
And dainty flowers, are turned to bastard weeds,
Disrobed of all her glory, lost her pride,
The creatures now lie starving by her side,
O how she sighs, and sends up hideous cries,
To see poor cattle fall before her eyes,
For want of food: they rip their mothers womb
For meat, but finding none, do makt their tomb,
Hark how the bulls and angry Lions roar
To heaven, and tell how man decreast their store,
Hear how the little Lambs which yesterday
Did honor to their King, and gave him way,
O how they beg for vengeance to come down
On man, and dispossess him of his Crown,
See, see what raping and what cruel thrall
Is used: it is man alone that murders all,
The Lion mild ere while for want of food,
Does fill his paunch with unaccustomed blood,
The wolf which lately was more apt to keep
The tender lambs, now prosecutes the sheep,
Surely the ravenous beasts (did not they spy
The glimpse of heaven within man's purblind eye,)
Would straight devour him, did not mercy now
Come down and smooth her fathers wrinkled brow:
The earth would scorn to bear him, but divide
Her self, and make this Dathan sincke in pride;
The earth would not endure the plough to pass
Into her iron sides, the heavens as brass
Would soon become, and both do what they can
To starve up this deformed monster man.
See how this Caytife causes discontent,
And raises discord in each element,
How often have I seen the raging fire
Unto the top of highest Towers aspire,
And clamber mighty buildings? it is unbound,
Surely it would burn the fabric to the ground,
Did not our God look from his mercy seat,
And make the watery sister quell the heat.
How is the air poysned with misty fogges,
And churlish vapors; only such that clogs
The Corpse with deadly humors, such that brings
The Pestilence, yea such that quickly flings
Loathsome diseases always tipped with death,
Did not Jove fan it with his mighty breath.
Hark how the impatient seas begin to thunder,
As if they would rent their prison walls in sunder;
See how the mounting waves do swiftly fly
To heaven, as if they meant to tell the sky
How basely man has dealt: O how they roar,
Beating their foming waves against the shore,
Chiding their sister earth that dares to bear
So base a wretch; see how the waves do tear
Her bowels, and with all the spite they can
Strive for to drown this wretched Caytife man.
CHRIST'S BIRTH AND PASSION.
O Thou most Sacred Dove that I may write
Thy praises, drop thou from thy soaring flight
A quill: come aid my muse, for she intends
To sing such love no mortal comprehends,
Guide thou her stamring tongue, and let her be
Strongly protected in her infancy,
Then she will tell how the King of Kings by birth
Forsook his throne, to live on dunghill earth,
Then she will declare how great creating Jove,
Whose starre-bepaved palace is above
All whose attendance is a glorious troop,
Of glittering cherubs, unto whom do stoop
Each glorious Angel, flinging himself down,
Presenting at his feet his pearely crown,
To be his palace heaven it selfe's not meet,
And dunghill earth's too little for his feet;
Yet this great King-creating King did slide
To earth, and laid his Diadem aside,
Exchanging it for thorns, and did untire
His glorious self, and clad himself in mire;
At whose appearance singing Angels shot
Like stars from heaven (news nere to be forgot)
Yea winged Cherubs from the highest came
As Heavens Heralds to divulge his fame.
All heaven did obey sance but for earth
(Ungrateful soil unworthy of the birth
Of such a babe) it was readier to intombe
The dying Lord, then to afford a room,
Proud Salem was too high to entertain
Poor Mary's babe, it was kept for Herod's train,
And Rome that seavenhild City was too great
To lodge this Child, it is Caesar's royal seat,
It Is Bethlem, little Bethlem must suffice
To lighten Joseph's Consorts weary thighs,
And that's almost too proud to lodge him in,
No private house, but even a vulgar Inn,
And tha're not harbourd in the choicest rooms,
No, not so well as with the common grooms,
But this (ah most unworthy) worthy guests
Is thrust (and gladly too) among the beasts,
He that before was wont to take his rest,
All coverd in his fathers silken breast,
Is now constrained to lay his worthy head,
Upon an undeserved strawy bed,
He that was wont to hear the pleasant tones
Of sweete-voyc'd Angels, now the saddest groans
Of doleful Mary, mixed with brinish tears,
These only these are harbored in his ears,
The Babe is scarcely borne, but sought to dye,
As yet not learned to go, but forced to fly,
And to avoid the Tetrarchs furious Curse,
Hard hearted Egypt's now become a Nurse,
He that can make both Heaven and earth to dread,
Lo patiently takes all, and hides his head,
Yet he will return, no, not the bitter wrongs,
Nor spightfull usage, nor the smarting thongs,
Nor sharpest scourges, no nor blackest hell,
Can quench the boundless love, nor yet expel
His strong affections, let the traitors set
A thorny crown on's head, and also wet
His glorious face with spittle, and deride,
And scourge till blood falls trickling down his side,
Nay though he be constrained to leave his breath,
And's dying soul is heavy unto death,
He cannot but smile upon his bitter foe,
And love the traitors whe're they will or no,
Yet see how sordid man repayeth all
His kindness, with an undeserved thrall,
Whilst he (sad soul) lay prostrate all alone,
Fast fixing both his eyes at heavens throne,
And sending up such sighs, as though he would make
The weakened vaults of heaven and earth to shake,
His sweat dropped down like dew, and as he stood
He staind Mount Olives with his Crimson blood,
Whilst all his sad Disciples drowsy lie,
Scarce able to hold up a sluggish eye,
Now he is betrayed by Judas, he that bore
The bag, and was entrusted with the store,
He that did scorn the traitors name, and cry,
Who shall betray thee Lord? Lord speak? is it I?
Yet now an abject Christ becomes, to be,
And thirty pence is valued more then he,
The bloody steward with a treacherous kiss
Forsook his Master and eternal bliss,
And sold the body of a Lord so good
To soldiers, such as thirsted after blood,
And then for fear the Innocent should pass
Untouched, was straight accused by Caiaphas,
Condemned by Pontius Pilate, to expel
The guilt, he washed his hands, and all was well,
O see what force weak water had to quench
His sparkling Conscience, and his flaming sense!
Alas not Nilus, no nor Iordans flood
Can cleanse the stains of such a Crimson blood;
No it is the streams of a repenting eye
It Is only this takes out a scarlet dye,
Thus our Astrea stands arraigned to dye
And nothing's to be heard but Crucifye:
When this alarm sounded to the hight
And heaven and hell conspired both to fight
Against this Captain, then his daunted troop
Forsook their Lord, each soul began to droope;
Yet gracious he imparted his renown
He won the battle and gave them the Crown,
Yea he became a curse that knew no sin
He was inrob'd and disinrob'd ag'in,
His temples crowned with thorns, his glorious face
Was spit upon and beat with all disgrace
That abject slaves could use, and then they cry,
To blinded Christ who beat thee? prophecy.
Ah stupid souls as if that piercing sight
That viewes all secrets in the darkest night,
That tries the thoughts of every heart, and stares
Into each soul is now as blind as theirs;
Thus was he basely used, but all is not done
The hell-invented fury is to come,
By vulgar slaves the very Son of God
Is falsely scourged and forced to kiss the rod,
Yea he whose nostrils able are to cast
Out flame, and burn the world at every blast,
Whose mighty breath is able for to fan
Ten thousand worlds, and puff out every man
Like chafe, and make the flanting world to toss
Like waves, is now compeld to bear his cross;
Whereon his body in a vulgar street
Hung naked pierced with nails both hands and feet:
The well of water, he that gave the first
To all his creatures, now is himself a thirst,
Yea he to whom all thirsty creatures call
For drink, must now drink vinegar with gall,
They pierced his side from whence came watery blood,
More sovereign far then all Bethesda's flood,
These tyrants thus (though to themselves denide)
Did make a way to heaven through his side.
Alas my muse for sighs can scarce prolong
The fatal tuning of so dire a song,
To see heavens fair Idea seem so foul
Sobbing and sighing out his burdned soul,
Those eyes which now seem dim, were once so bright,
From hence it was that Phoebus begd his light,
Those arms which now hang weak did from their birth
Support the tottring vaults of heaven and earth,
That tongue that now lies speechless in his head,
A word of that would soon revive the dead,
One touch of those Pale fingers would suffice
To heal the sick and make the dead man rise:
Those legs which now are peircd by abject slaves
were kindly entertaind amongst the waves:
The coat whose warmth did give his sides relief
The hem, the very hem could cure a grief;
But now strength's weak, th'omnipotent's a crying
For aid, health's sick and life it selfe's a dying,
His head hangs drooping and his eyes are fixed,
His weakened arms grown pale, the sunne's eclipst
(O boundless love, thus thus thou did expose
Thy self to damned pains to save thy foes)
Hell fought against him, heaven began to frown
And justice soon sent vengeance posting down,
Who clad with fury, being angry shakes
Her ugly head whose hair does nurture snakes,
She lays about her greedy of her prey
Quenches her thirst with blood and so away,
And mercy now lies covered in a cloud
And will not hear although his sighs are loud
(Although his cries are such that cause a stone
To hear, yet sin makes heaven forget her own)
Heaven frowns as if she had her own forgot,
Mercy looks off as if she knew him not,
He suffered pains that hell it self devisd,
So much, that justice cride I am sufficed:
His tortures were so high, so great, so sore,
That hell cride out: I can inflict no more:
Which done the heavens closd up their lamping light
And turned the day into a dismal night;
Bright Phoebus vaild his face and would not see,
Worms actors of so bloody treachery:
And quivering earth her wonted rigor lackt
And straight stood trembling at so dire a fact:
The buried Saints arose to see betwixt
Two dusky clouds, their glorious Sun eclipst:
Thus heaven it self with the terrestrial Ball'
Does join to celebrate his funeral:
The Landlord of the globe who first did raise
Earths fabric, was a tenant for three days;
But when once Christ did cease to be turmoyld
Heaven and he was gladly reconciled,
Mercy came dancing from the angry den
Tossed off her cloudy mantle, smild again,
Pearch'd on her brightest throne, and makes a vow
To smooth the wrinckled furrows of her brow:
And grim faced vengeance she that's only fed
With poison, dares not show her snaky head
For fear: all angers banished clean away,
Stern justice now has not a word to say,
And now the Fathers anger being done
Double embraces entertain the Son:
As when a tender mother sometime beats
Her wanton boy for his unruly feats
She wipes his blubberd face and by and by
Presents a thousand gugoyes to his eye,
She angry with her self begins to seek
His former love tears trickling down her cheek,
Quickly forgetting what was done amiss,
Ending her anger in a lovely kiss,
Doubtless her fondling burns the rod and then
Come peace my babe kiss and be friends again.
Just so when God inflicted on his Son
His bittrest wrath, the anger being done
O then how soon he doubled his renown?
Adorned his Temple with a richer Crown?
Angry with those that would not hear his moan
Ready to fling grim vengeance from his throne,
And chide with mercy she that once did run
To hide her self from this his dying Son,
And for this fact would surely overthrow
The fabric, did not Justice hold the blow.
Thus heaven was friends again, but sordid man
Poor mortal dust whose days are but a span
Does strive against his God, like dogs that storm
And bark and brawle and foam at Phoebes horn:
Ah Lord, why are they so extreme to thee?
What is the cause thou madst their blindmen see?
Or why did thou their fury thus inrage?
Because thou did revive their dead men's age?
Me thinks it is strange good God thou should inflame
Their anger by restoring legs too lame.
How is it Lord thou sowedst glorious seeds
And lo a harvest all compact of weeds?
Thou gave them life, and spentst thy dearest breath
For them, and now thou art repaid with death:
What grief was ere like thine? would not thy moan
Quickly dissolve an adamantine stone?
Would not those sighs (which could not pierce their ears)
Have turned a rock into a sea of tears?
Would not those wrongs thou bor'st without relief,
Make every cave, to echo out thy grief?
For greedy Lions are more kind then men,
They entertaind thy limb within their den:
Forget their wonted humors and became
As careful shepherdes to thy tender Lamb,
The croking raven, she whose natures wild
Became a tender nurse unto thy Child,
And to obey thy voice the stony rock
Became a springing fountaiue to thy flock,
Yea rather then thy babes shall live in thrall,
The very sea it self provides a wall,
The flames forget their force, through thy constraint
Lose heat and know not how to burn a Saint,
Yea when thy soldiers wanted day to fight,
The Sun stood still and lent them longer light:
When boistrous seas did show their lusty prancks,
Scorning to be imprisoned in their banckes,
And with their billows vaulted up so high,
As if they meant to scale the starry sky,
And boundless Boreas from his frozen Cave
Rusht out and proudly challenged every wave,
One nod of thine did quell those seas again,
And sent proud Boreas to his sullen den:
Thus thou the senseless creatures often did check,
And made the proudest pliant to thy beck,
For devils trembled and that breath of thine
Made them seek shelter in a heard of swine,
They knew thy greatness and confessed thy name.
Hell sent forth Heralds to divulge thy fame
But man (Lord what is he made of?) stupid soul
Is now more greedy then the raping foul:
Harder then flint, his nature is so grimme,
That questionless the Lion changed with him:
Hotter then flame, more boystrous then the wind,
More fierce then waves, and hels not more unkind.
Yet thou (O matchless love) did undergo
An undeserved curse to save thy foe:
Yea guiltless thou because thou would suffice
For guilty man, becom'st a Sacrifice.
Thou Grand Physician for thy patients good
Did mix thy Physic with thy dearest blood:
Man from the sweetest flower did suck his grief
But thou from venom did extract relief,
From pleasures limbecke man distild his pain
Thou out of sorrow pleasure drawd again,
Sweet Eden was the garden where there grew
Such sugared flowers, yet there our poison blew,
Sad Gethseman the arbor where was plucked,
Though bitter herbs, yet thence was honey sucked:
So have I seen the busy Be to feed,
Extracting honey from the sowrest weed,
Whilst Spiders wandering through a pleasant bower
Suck deadly poison from the sweetest flower,
Thus, thus sweet Christ, thy sickness was our health,
Thy death, our life, thy poverty our wealth,
Thy grief our mirth, our freedom was thy thrall,
Thus thou by being conquered conquerest all.
CANT. 8. 7. Much water cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it.
O How my heart is ravished! thoughts aspire
To think on thee my Christ: my zeales on fire,
What shall I do my love? me thinks mine eyes
Behold thee still, yet still I Tantalize;
Ten thousand lets stand armed and all agree,
Conspiring how to part my love and me.
Presumption like Olympus scales the sky,
A mountain for to part my Love and I.
Despair presents a gulf, a greedy grave
Much like the jaws of the infernal Cave:
But what of this? though hills are nere so high
Whose sunne-confronting tops upbraide the sky
I Will trample over, and make them know it is meet
Their proudest heads should stoop and kiss my feet:
I Will stride over cares deeper then Neptunes well,
Whose threatening jaws do yawne as wide as hell:
Although the sea boyles in her angry tides
And watery mountains knock at Heavens sides,
Though every puff of Neptunes angry breath
Should raise a wave and every wave a death,
I Will scorn his threats should stop my course, or quell
My pace, though every death presents a hell:
Yea I Will adventure through those swelling storms
Whose billows seems to quench great Phoebes horns,
Mountains shall be as molehilles, every wave
Tossed in the fretfull region, shall outbrave
No more then streams that show their wanton pranckes,
Gliding along by Thames his petty banckes:
But grant that seas should swell, and tossing tides
With storms should crush my waving vessels sides:
Suppose for footmen mountains are too steep,
Each hill too high, and every cave too deep:
Suppose all earth conspire to stop: care I?
My faith will lend me wings and then I Will fly:
O how I Will laugh to see that mounting clay!
O how I Will smile at that that stopped my way!
O how I laugh to see the Ocean strain
Her banckes for to oppose and all in vain!
And can you blame me? when I Am once above
I Will care for none, for none but thou my Love.
Thou art my path: I shall not go awry:
My sight shall never fail: thou art my eye:
Thou art my clothing: I shall not naked be:
I am no bondsman: thou have made me free;
I am not pined with sickness: thou art health:
I am no whit impoverisht, thou art wealth.
Man's natural infirmity.
What means my God? why do present to me
Such glorious objects? can a blind man see?
Why do thou call? why do thou becken so?
Would have me come? Lord can a Cripple go?
Or why do thou expect that I should raise
Thy glory with my voice? the dumb cannot praise.
Vnscale my duskye eyes, then I Will express
Thy glorious objects strong attractivenesse:
Dip thou my limbs in thy Bethesdaes lake,
I Will scorn my earthly crutches, I Will forsake
My self: touch thou my tongue and then I Will sing
An Allelujah to my glorious King.
Raise me from this my grave, then I shall be
Alive, and I Will bestow my life on thee
Till thou Eliah-like do overspread
My limbs, l'me blind, l'me lame, I Am dumb, I Am dead:
The Melancholicke Souls comfort.
O That I had a sweet melodious voice!
O that I could obtain the chiefest choice
Of sweetest music! pre-thee David lend
Thy well-resounding harp, that I may send
Some praises to my God: I know not how
To pay by songs my heart-resolved vow:
How shall I sing good God? thou do afford
Ten thousand mercies, trebled songs O Lord
Cannot requite thee! O that I could pay
With lifetime songs the mercies of one day!
I often begin to sing, and then before
My songs half finished, God gives sense for more.
Alas poor soul art puzzeld? can not bring
Thy God some honor though thou strive to sing?
The Cause is this, thou art become his debtor
Heel make thee play-on music that is better.
I Cannot play, my sobs do stop my course,
My groans do make my music sound the worse.
What naught but groans? ah shall the Almighties ears
Be filled with sighs all vsherd in with tears?
I this is music: such a tune prolongs
Gods love, and makes him listen to thy songs:
It Is this that makes his ravished soul draw nigher,
It Is this outstrips the Thracian with his Lyre,
It Is this inchants thy God, it is this alone
That drags thy spouse from heaven to hear thy tone:
No better Music then thy sobs and cries,
If not a David's harp, get Peter's eyes.
The Soul in love with Christ.
What though my Love does neat appear?
And makes Aurora blush to see her?
Though nature paints her cheeks with red
And makes proud Venus hide her head?
What though her crimson lips so mute
Do always woo a new salute,
What though her wanton eyes do shine
Like glistring stars and dazell mine?
It Is Christ alone,
Shall be my own,
It Is him I will embrace,
It Is he shall be
A Spouse to me,
All beauty's in his face.
What though the earth for me prepares
A present from her golden Quarres,
And braggeth of her early gains,
Exhausted from her silver veins?
What though she show her painted brates
And bids me smell her Violates?
And deckes her self in spring attire,
To make my ravished soul admire?
Yet all this shant
My Soul inchant
I Will smile to see her pride
I know where lies
A better prize
For Christ has broch'd his side.
What though the world does me invite
And daily play the Parasite?
Or with her gilded tales entice
Me, to a seeming Paradise?
And paints her face and all day long
Sits breathing out a Sirens song?
And shows her pomp, and then in fine
Tells me, that she and hers are mine?
Yet none of this,
Shall be my bliss,
I Will scorn the painted whore
I will deride
Her and her pride
For Christ is this and more.
What though insinuating pleasure,
Preferres me to her chiefest treasure
And every day, and every night
Does feed me with a new delight
And slumbers me with lullaby
Dandling me on her whorish thigh?
What though with her sublime pretence^s
She strives t'imprison all my senses?
Yet she shant be
A trap to me
Her freedom is but thrall,
Her greatest coy
Will but annoy,
Till Christ does sweeten all.
Or what though profit with her Charms
Grasping the world within her arms
Vnlades her self? and bids me see
What pains she takes, and all for me;
And then invites me to her bower
Filling my coffers every hour?
What though she thus enlarge my store
With every day a thousand more?
Yet let her pack
And turn her back,
Her purest gold's but-drosse
Her greatest pains
Produce no gains
Till Christ come all is loss.
Or what though Fortune should present
Her high Olympicke regiment.
And never my Ambition check,
But still be pliant to my beck?
What though she lends me wings to fly
Unto the top of Dignity,
And make proud Monarchs with her wheel
Vncrowne their heads to Crown my heel,
I Will not depend
On such a friend,
It Is Christ is all my stay:
She can revoke
The highest spoke,
Her wheels turned every day.
Let none of these in me take place:
Fond Venus has a Vulcans face:
And so till heaven be pleased to smile
Poor earth sits barren all the while:
The world that's apt to win a fool
It is my burden, not my stool:
Nor pleasure shall enchant my mind,
She Is smooth before, but stings behind:
I will disdain
Their greatest gain,
And fortun's but a feather,
It Is none of these
Can give me ease,
But Christ's the same for ever.
Lord why hidest thou thy face from me.
What drowsy weather's this? the angry skies
Do threaten storms, and heaven it self denies
Her lovely visage, ah these darkened days
Do make my vitals drowsy, and decays
My souls delight: good God can I control
Or drive these pensive humors from my soul?
Ah no I cannot my lively spirits keep,
Such drowsy weather's fit for naught but sleep.
O thou eternal light that have the sway
In Jove's broad walls, thouscepter of the day,
Thou heavens bright torch, thouglistring worlds bright eye,
Why do thou hide and so obscurely lie?
Come wrap thy self in thy complete attire,
Show forth thy glory, make my soul admire
Thy splendour, come and do no longer stay
But with thy glorious beams bestrow my way,
Extirpe these foggy mists from out mine eyes,
That I may plainly see where heaven lies.
Then I Will awake, sweet Christ, do thou display
Thy glittering beams, send out a Summers day,
I Will rub my slumbring eyes, O then I Will roame
A lifetime journey from my native home:
The soul will sleep and cannot hold up her eyes
Until the sun of righteousness arise.
Christ's Resurrection.
COme Rise my heart, thy Master's risen,
Why slug'st thou in thy grave?
Do thou not know he broke the prison?
Thou art no more a slave.
He rolled of the sealed stone
That once so pondrous lay,
And left the watchmen all alone
And bravely escaped away.
When flesh, the world, and Satan too
Wont suffer thee to quatch,
Learn of thy Master what to do
And cozen all the watch.
Let not these clogging earthly things
Make thee (poor soul) forsake him,
Go, ask of Faith, she will lend thee wings,
Haste, fly, and overtake him.
But hark my soul, I Will tell thee where
Thy Master sits in state:
Go knock at heavens door, for there
He entered in of late.
If Peter now had kept the key
Thou might get in with ease,
But Justice only bears the sway
And lets in whom she please.
She Is wondrous stern and suffers not
A passenger to enter,
Without thy Masters ticket got
Thou may not touch her Center.
But come my soul, let me advise,
What needst thou to implore
The Saints for aid? I know where lies
For thee a private door.
Do not remember since the pride
Of base perfidious men
Did thrust thy Master through the side
(Were not thou wounded then.)
When Justice is so stern that thou
Unto a straight art driven,
(Come hark and I will tell thee now)
Creep through that wound to heaven.
Sanctificat.
O My head, alas my bones,
O my wounded joints do smart,
Flesh ere while as hard as stones,
Now it aches in every part:
Lord it is thy Art.
All thy Judgments could not scare
Me, nor make my soul to fly,
Now one angry look can rear
Me, and make me pensive lie
In misery.
Lord there where I took my rise,
There did I begin to reele,
Surfetted in Paradise,
And there I got a bruised heel,
Which now I feel.
Surely my disease was great,
Sick, and yet I felt no pain;
Hungry, yet I could not eat:
Sore, yet could I not complain:
Yet all was gain.
For, good God, thy care was such
That thou gave me much relief,
Yea thou lendedst me a Crutch,
And did make me know my grief:
Lord thou art chief.
Thou have made the rock to weep
And my stony heart to groan,
Thou have raised me from my sleep,
And do smile to hear my tone;
And love my moan.
But what need'st thou lend a Crutch,
Thou can make me perfect whole?
Thou can heal me with a touch,
By this thou know a woman stole,
Cure for her dole.
When leave I this halting pace?
When shall I most perfect be?
When thou shall my glistring face,
In the land of glory see.
Lord perfect me.
A Meditation on a Man's shadow.
WHen as the Sun flings down his richest rays,
And with his shining beams adornes my ways,
See how my shadow trackes me where I go,
I stop, that stops; I walk, and that does so:
I run with winged flight, and still I spy
My waiting shadow run as fast as I.
But when a sable cloud does disaray
The Sun, and robs me of my smiling day:
My shadow leaves me helpelesse all alone,
And when I most need comfort I have none:
Just so it is; let him that has the hight
Of outward pomp, expect a parasite:
If thou art great, thy honors will draw nigh:
These are the shadows to prosperity:
O how the worldlings make pursuit to thee,
With cap in hand and with a bended knee:
But if disastrous fate should come betwixt
Thee and thy Sun, thy splendor's all eclipst:
Thy friends forsake thee, and thy shadow's gone,
And thou (poor sunne-lesse thou) art left alone,
This is thy Souls estate, the worldly gain
And greatest pomp, in stormy times are vain:
They are but shadows when distress comes nigh,
They are as nothing to a faithful eye.
Yet here is my comfort Lord, if I can see
My shadow, I must needs a substance be.
O let me not with worldly shadows clogge
My self, grant me more wit then Esops dog.
A Meditation on Childrens rashness.
WHen Mothers are desirous for to play
The wantons with their babes, and show the way
To find their feet: to give their brats content,
They wagge their sporting fingers, and present
A penny in the forehead, or some pap,
To win the Children to the Mothers lap:
How soon will they their little grissels stretch,
And run apace, aspiring for to fetch
This petty object? never caring though
Their way be full of stumbling blocks below:
Thou art that Mother Lord, thou usest charms,
And still art dandling, Christ within thine arms
Presents most glorious objects to our eyes,
And shows us where thy choicest mercies lies;
Why then are we so backward? why so slow?
Or why so loath into thy arms to go?
Small molehils seem as mountains in our way,
And every light affliction makes us stay:
Why should we stop at petty strawes below?
Make us thy Children Lord we shant do so.
A Meditation on a good Father having a bad Son.
QVerkus of late was minded to dispute
Of this, A tree that's good brings forth good fruit.
Hence he concludes such parents that have bin
Converted, bring forth children void of sin.
Peace Querkus peace, and hold thy tongue for shame
Do not perceive that thy conclusion's lame?
May not a grain that's free from chafe and clear
Cast in the ground, bring forth a chaffy ear.
A Meditation on a Weathercocke.
SEe how the trembling Weathercocke can find
Noe settled place, but turns with every wind,
If blustering Zephyr blows and gives a check,
How soon's this cock made pliant to his beck,
If Boreas gets the day, twill change its side,
And turn inspite of bragging Zephyrs pride:
Thus temporizers turn at every puff,
And yet forsooth they think they are good enough,
If stand, they stand: if he that seems to be
The greatest turn, they turn as fast as he,
I wonder at such wavering feathers, did I
So often turn it would make me wondrous giddy.
Lord let that wind that blows upon thy flock,
Turn me, and make me Lord thy weather cock.
A Meditation on Cockfighting.
SEe how those angry creatures disagree,
Whilst the spectators sit and laugh to see.
Do not two neighbors often do the same,
Whilst that the Lawyers laugh to see the game?
A Meditation on an Echo and a Picture.
SEe how Apelles with his curious art,
Pourtraies the picture out in every part:
If he can give't a voice, no doubt he can
Completely make the shape a living man:
Surely his work would to his praise redound,
Could he but give the shape he made, a sound:
What wants the Echo of a living creature
But Shape? and what but voice this comely feature?
Yet both cannot meet together: God alone,
Will have this secret Art to be his own.
A Meditation on Noah's Dove.
When God the floods from lands did undivide
And made the sky aspiring mountains hide,
When heaven raind seas, and fountains were unbound,
And all mankind except eight souls were drowned;
Then did Jove's Pilot Noah make an Arc
And thrust this little world into a bark:
Yea then he sent a Dove to range about
The Floods, to answer his uncertain doubt:
O how she wanders up and down the Seas,
Fluttring her weary wings but finds no ease!
She sees no food, no resting place, no park,
But soon returns into her wished Arc.
Observe how tender Noah, full of Love,
Opens the window to this weary Dove.
Puts forth his hands to meet her, takes her in,
But by and by she flutters out agin:
She finds an Olive leaf, and that she brings
Between her bill, hovering her tired wings
Upon the Arc: still Noah is the same,
Lets in his wandering Dove that's now made tame
With restless flight; once more she gets away,
And now she spies the earth (that lately lay
Sok'd in the impartial deluge) in her pride,
Adornd with dainty herbs on every side;
When food is plenty, this ungrateful Dove
Forgets her Noah, and his former love:
Minds nothing but her self, she that before
Did crouch unto thee Arc, returns no more.
Thou art that Noah Lord, and Christ the boat,
Afflictions are the waters that do floate:
Man is that wandering Dove, that often flies
Unto his Christ for shelter, else he dies.
How apt are we good God to use our wings,
And fly to thee when all these outward things
With floods are drowned up, though we have bin
So vile, how apt art thou to catch us in?
O how our God when we have bin astray
Puts forth his arms to meet us in the way,
And take us home! we are no sooner in
But by and by we flutter out agin:
This time by chance like Noah's Dove we see,
The upper branches of some Olive tree,
I mean some petty shelter: still we fly
Unto our God for aid or else we dye.
How apt are we, when outward things forsake us,
To haste to God? how apt's our God to take us?
The third time we are gone, now floods are hushed
The Sun confronting mountains bravely washed,
The Seas give place, the lowest valleys seen,
Yea all the earth most sweetly decked in green:
Now we forget our God and post away,
And after make an everlasting stay:
When worldly wealth comes in, and we can rest
Upon the creature: O how we detest
Our former refuge! if we find a Park,
We never return unto our wonted Arc.
A Meditation on a Ship.
Mark how the floting vessel shows her pride
And is extold with every lofty tide;
But when it ebbes, and all the floods retire
See how the bragging bark is plungd in mire:
Just so good God, how apt are we to swim
When mercies fill our banckes unto the brim?
When worldly wealth appears, and we can see
Such outward blessings flow: then who but we?
But when it ebbes, and thou do once unlinke
These mercies from us: O how soon we sink;
Good God let not the great estate possess
Me with presumption, nor despair the less:
Let me not sink when such an ebb appears,
No, let me swim in true repentant tears:
A Meditation on a Windmill.
OBserve it always it is the makers skill
To place the windmill on the highest hill;
It stands unusefull till the potent winds
Puff up the lofty sails and then it grinds:
Just thus it is: the hypocrite's the mill,
His actions sails, ambition is the hill,
The wind that drives him is a blast of fame,
If blown with this he runs, if not he is tame:
He stirs not till a puff of praise does fill
His sails: but then, O how he turns the mill!
Lord drive me with thy Spirit, then I Will be
Thy windmill, and will grind a grist for thee.
A Meditation on Organs.
Hark how the Organist most sweetly plaie^s
His Psalms upon the tone-divided Kayes:
Each touch a sound, but if the hand don't come
And strike the kayes, how soon's the music dumbe^?
A moderate stroke does well, but if too hard
The Organ's broke, and all the raptures mard.
I am that Organ Lord, and thou alone
Can play, each prayer is a pleasant tone,
Affliction is the hand that strikes the kayes:
(O Lord from me the sweetest music raise;)
If thou don't strike at all how can I speak
Thy worthy praises, if too hard I break:
Strike mildly Lord, strike soft, and then I Will sing,
And charoll out the glory of my King.
A Meditation on an Apes love.
When once the foolish Ape has filled her nest
With little brats, there is one among the rest,
She most affects: to shelter this from harms,
She always hugges it in her wanton arms.
Until at length she squeezes out the breath,
Of this her fondling, Loves the cause of death:
The Worlds this wanton Ape, that still delights
In hugging some peculiar favorites,
Of those that are thus dandled by this Ape,
There does not one among a thousand escape.
On contempt of the World.
A Loft O Soul; soar up, do not turmoyle
Thy self by grabbling on a dunghill soil:
Toss up thy wings, and make thy soaring plumes
Outreach the loathsome stench and noisome fumes
That spring from sordid earth: come, come, and see
Thy birth, and learn to know thy pedigree:
What? wast thou made of Clay? or do thou owe
Homage to earth? say, is thy bliss below?
Do know thy beauty? do thou not excel?
Can the Creation yield a parallel?
The world cannot give a glass to represent
Thy shape, and shall a durty element
Bewitch thee? think, is not thy birth most high?
Blown from the mouth of all the trinity,
The breath of all-creating Jove, the best
Of all his works, yea thee of all the rest
He chose to be his Picture: where can I
But in thy self see Immortality
Among all his earthly creatures? Thou art chief
Of all his works: and shall the world turn thief
And steal away thy love? were not for thee
The heaven aspiring mountain should not be,
The heavens should have no glistring star, no light,
No Sun to rule the day, no Moon the night:
The Globe had bin ('it was not the makers will
To make it for it self) a Chaos still:
Thou art Jove's priestly Aaron to present
The creatures service, while they give assent
By serving thee, why then is the world thy rest?
It Is but thy servants servant at the best:
It gives attendance to refined mire,
That Jove has wrapped thee in as thy attire;
For what is the body but a lump of clay
Carved neatly out, in which the soul bears sway?
It Is servant to the soul: what limb can stir,
Nay dare to quatch, if once she make demurre?
See how the captived members trembling stand
Wondrous submissive to her dire command!
O how the legs do run with eager flight
To overtake the object of delight!
See how the arms do graspe as if they would rent
To hold the thing that gives the soul content.
Why what is the body when the soul's away?
Naught but a stinking carcass made of clay.
What Is heaven without a God? or what is the sky
If once bright Phoebus close his radiant eye?
The world was for our bodies, they for none
But for our souls, our souls for God alone:
What madness then for men of such a birth
To nuzell all their days on dunghill earth,
Still hunting after with an eager sent
An object which can never give content;
For what contentment in the world can lie,
That Is only constant in inconstancy?
It ebbes and flows each minuie: thou may brag
This day of thousands, and to morrow beg:
The greatest wealth is subject for to reele,
The globe is placed on Fortunes tottering wheel:
As when the gladding sun begins to show
And scatter all his golden beams below,
A churlish cloud soon meets him in the way,
And sads the beauty of the smiling day:
Or as a stately ship a while behaves
Herself most bravely on the slumbring waves,
And like a Swanne sails nimbly in her pride
The helpefull winds concording with the tide
To mend her pace: but by and by, the wind
The fretfull Seas, the heavens and all combined
Against this bragging bark, O how they fling
Her corkey sides to heaven, and then they bring
Her back: she that ere while did sail so brave
Cutting the floods, now is tossed with every wave:
Just so, the waving world gives joy and sorrow,
This day a Croesus, and a Job to morrow:
How often have I seen the miser bless
Himself in wealth, and count it for no less
Then his adored God: straight comes a frown
Flying from unhappy fate, and whirleth down
Him, and his heaps of gold, and all that prize
Is lost, which he but now did Idolize.
But grant the world (as never 'twill) to be
A thing most sure most full of constancy,
What is thy wealth unless thy God does bless
Thy store, and turn it to a happiness?
What though thy Table be completely spread
With farre-fetcht dainties, and the purest bread
That fruitful earth can yield? all this may be,
If thou no stomach have, what is all to thee?
What though thy habitation should excel
In beauty, and were Edens parallel?
Thou being pesterd with some dire disease,
How can thy stately dwelling give thee ease?
Thy joys will turn thy grief, thy freedom thrall,
Unless thy God above does sweeten all:
When thou (poor soul) lie ready to depart,
And hear'st thy Conscience snarling at thine heart,
Though heaps of gold should in thy coffers lie,
And all thy worthless friends stand whining by,
It Is none, it is none of these can give thee health,
But thou must languish in the midst of wealth.
Then cease thou mad man and pursue no more
The world, and know she is but a painted whore,
Thou catchest shadows, labourst in thy dreams,
And thirst's amongst the imaginary streams.
A Meditation on a mean.
LOrd in excess I see there often lies
Great dangers, and in wants great miseries:
Send me a mean, do thou my ways preserve,
For I may surfeit Lord, as well as starve.
On Satan's tempting Eve.
ARt thou turned Fencer Satan? prithee say?
Surely thou art not active at thy play.
Challenge a Woman? fie thou art to blame,
Suppo^e thou getst the day, thou getst no fame.
But prithee speak, have any cause to prate?
Thou bruised her heel, what though? she broke thy pate.
On a Sponge.
THe Sponge it self drinks water till it swell it,
But never empties till some strength expel it:
Lord, of our selves we are apt to soake in sin,
But thou art feign to squeeze it out agin.
On Cain and Abels offerings.
ARt angry Cain? what do thy thoughts repine?
Is Abels offering better took then thine?
Did not thou bring thy God a lovely prize
And crown his Altar with a sacrifice,
Art not thou elder? did not thy offering too
Come from thy God? what more could Abell do?
I Will tell thee Cain how Abel got the start,
He with his offering, offered up his heart.
On an Apprentices Box.
THe Prentise after all his yearly pains,
Fills his small mouthed box with Christmas gains,
Yet though he fill his box unto the brim
Unless he break it up, what is all to him?
A miser's such a Box, that's nothing worth,
Till death does break it up, then all comes forth:
Convert good God, or strike with some disease,
Break up such small mouthed boxes, Lord as these.
On Eves Apple.
EVE for thy fruit thou gav'st too dear a price,
What? for an Apple give a Paradise?
If now a days of fruit such gains were made
A Costermonger were a devilish trade.
On a fair house having ill passage to it.
A House to which the builders did impart
The full perfection of their curious art,
Most bravely furnished, in whose rooms did lie,
Footeclothes of Velvet, and of tapestry;
I wondered at (as who could not but do it)
To see so rough so hard a passage to it:
So Lord I know thy heaven's a glorious place,
Wherein the beauty of thy glistring face
Inlightens all: thou in the walls do fix,
The Jasper and the purest sardonyx,
Thy gates are pearls, and every door beset
With Saphires, Emeralds, and the Chrysolet:
Each Subject wears a crown, the which he brings
And flings it down to thee, the King of Kings.
But why's the way so thorny? it is great pity
The passage is no wider to thy City,
Poor Daniel through his den and Shadrake's driven
With his associates through the fire to Heaven,
But yet we cannot complain, we may recall
The time to mind when there was none at all,
It Was Christ that made this way, and shall we be
Who are his Servants, far more nice then he?
No, I Will adventure too, nay, I Will get in,
I Will tracke my Captain through thick and thin.
FINIS.

