THE REPLY OF THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS CARDINAL OF PERRON, TO THE ANSWER OF THE
MOST EXCELLENT KING OF GREAT BRITAIN THE FIRST TOME TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH

Imprinted at DOVAY; by MARTIN BOGART, under the sign of Paris. 1630.

TO THE MAJESTY OF HENRIETTA MARIA OF BO-VRBON QVEENE OF GREAT BRITAIN
YOUR MAJESTY,
MAY please to be informed, that I have in this dedication delivered you that
right, that I durst not withold from you: your challenge has so many just
titles, as had I given it to any others protection, I had done your Majesty a
palpable iniutie. You are a daughter of France, and therefore fittest to own
his work who was in his time, an Ornament of your country. You are the Queen
of England, and therefore fittest to patronize the making him an English man,
that, was before so famous a Frenchman. You are King James his Sonns wife, and
therefore, since the misfortune of our times, has made it a presumption, to
give the Inheritance of this work (that was sent to the Father in French) to
the Son in English, whose proper right it is, you are fittest to receive it
for him, who are such a part of him, as none can make you two, other then one.
And for the honor of my Sex, let me say it, you are a woeman, though far
above other women, therefore fittest to protect a woman's work, if a plain
translation wherein there is nothing aimed at, but rightly to express the
Authors intention may be called a work. And last (to crown your other
additions) you are a Catholic, and a zealous one, and therefore fittest to
receive the dedication of a Catholicke-worke. And besides all this which does
appropriate it to you for my particular, your Majesty is she, to whom I
profess my self.

A most faithful subject, and a most humble servant.

TO THE READER.
READER
THOU shall here receive a Translation welintended, wherein the Translator
could have noe other end, but to inform thee aright. To look for glory from
Translation, is beneath my intention, and if I had aimed at that, I would not
have chosen so late a writer, but here I saw stored up, as much of
antiquity, as would most fitly serve for this purpose. I desire to have noe
more guest at of me, but that I am a Catholic, and a Woman: the first serves
for mine honor, and the second, for my excuse, since if the work be but
meanly done, it is noe wonder, for my Sex can raise noe great expectation of
any thing that shall come from me: yet were it a great folly in me, if I
would expose to the view of the world, a work of this kind, except I judged
it, to want nothing fit, for a Translation. Therefore I will confess, I
think it well done, and so had I confessed sufficiently in printing it: if it
gain noe applause, he that writ it fair, has lost more labor then I have
done, for I dare avouch, it has been four times as long in transcribing, as
it was in translating. I will not make use of that worne-out form of saying, I
printed (...) against my will, moved by the importunity of Friends: I was
moved to it by my belief, that it might make those English that understand
not French, whereof there are maine, even in our universities, read Perron;
And when that is done, I have my End, therest I leave to Gods pleasure.

IN LAVDEM NOBILISSIMAE HEROINAE, QVAE HAS EMINENTISSIMI CARDINALIS
DISPVTATIONES ANGLICE REDDIDIT.
ESSE quid hoc dicam, quod in vno foemina mense
Tam varium, doctum, grande crearit opus?
Nonne hoc est ipsam cursu praeuertere lunam
Quae simili spatio circuit omne solum?
An vero Elixir, quod tactu protinus ipso
Maxima in auratas pondera mutat opes?
Sic est, illa sui fere Quintessentia sexus
Quod micat in reliquis omnibus, vna tonet.
The same in English.
ONE woman, in one Month, solarge a book,
In such a full emphatik style to turn:
Is It not all one, as when a spacious brook,
Flows in a moment from a little Burn?
Or is it not rather to exceed the (...)
In swift performance of so long a race,
To end so great and hard a work as soon,
As Cynthia does her various galliard trace?
Or is she not that miracle of Arts
The true Elixir, that by only touch
To any metals, worth of gold imparts?
For me, I think she valewes thrice as much.
A wondrous Quintessence of woman kind,
In whom alone, what else in'all, we find.
ANOTHER.
BELIEVE me reader, they are much deluded
Who think that learning's not for ladies fit;
For wisdom with their sex as well does sit,
As orient pearl in golden chase included.
It Will make their husbands; if they have true eyes,
Wise beauty, beauteous wisdom deerly prize.
Who does not praise the Empress Eudoxias fame,
That made old Homer tell our Ghospells story?
Or noble Proba Romes immortal glory,
That taught sweet Virgil sing our Saviors name?
Or gracious Elpis, sage Boethius love,
Whose sacred hymns holy Church does approve?
But will you see in one brave Ladies mind
These three great gracious Ladies full compri'zd,
Their worth, their wit, their virtue equaliz'd
Look on this work, and you shall plainly find
Eudoxia, Proba, Elpis yield in all
To this Translatresse of our Cardinal.
F. L. D. S. M.

(...) To the most noble Translatour.
I Would commend your labors and I find
That they were finis'd with such ease of mind
As in some sense the praise I give must fall
Under the title of Mechanical,
When those who read it come to understand,
The pains you took were only of your hand
Which though it did in swiftness ouergoe
All other thoughts yet to your own was slow.
As the Sun Beams no sooner do appear
But they make that which stands in their light clear
Your bright soul did but once reflect upon
This curious piece, and it was cleard', and done.
But that a Woemans hand alone should raise
So vast a monument in thirty days
Breeds envy and amazement in our sex
Of which the most ore weening wits might vex
Themselves thrice so much time and with far less
Grace to their Workmanshipp or true success.
Why should I not speak truth without offense?
Behold this Mirrhor of French Eloquence,
Which she before the English view does place
Filled with the whole Original truth and grace
That the most curious Author would auow
(...) were his own well pleased, if he lived now
And though you know this where to weack a frame
To raise up higher the greatness of your name
Which must from your own rich inventions grow,
As Rivers from the springs whence they first flow:
Yet be who truly knows your noblest will
To profitt others and your various skill
In choseing and in marking cut the ways
May thinck this might add something to your praise
As he who coppying a rare Picture, shall
Equal, if not exceed, the Original,
By many shall be held in as high fame
As was the first inuentour of the same.
Nor can your work be any whit disgraced
By those who think it done with too much (...);
For had it been in Michaell Angels power
To perfect his great judgment in one hour,
He who for that should value it the less,
His own weak judgment would therein express,
And though we in a common Proverb fay,
That Rome was not built all up in one day:
Yet could we see a City great as Rome
In all her (...) in one minute come
To such perfection, we might more express.
Our wonders, and not make the glory less.
So I conclude with modest truth, and dare
All their free Censures who can but compare
And whosoere shall try may spend his Age
Ere in your whole work he shall mend one Page.
A TABLE OF THE TITLES AND SVMMARIES OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THESE FOUR
FIRST BOOKS OF THE REPLY TO THE MOST EXCELLENT KING OF GREAT BRITAIN.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. OF the use of the word Catholic. fol. 13. II. Of the conditions of
the Catholic Church. 17 III. Of the proceeding of the fathers for the
preservation of the unity of the Church. 21 IV. Of the necessity of
communicating with the Catholic Church. 23 V. Of the marks of the Church. 25
VI From what places of the voice of the Shepherd the marks of the Church
ought to be taken. 32 VII. Of the examples which we have from the practice of
the Apostles. 35 VIII. Of the definition of the Church, and in what union it
consists. 36 IX. Of the union of the predestinate, and (by way of adiunction,
of the visibilitie or inuisibilitie of the Church. 39 X. Of the unity of
eternal faith. 48 XI. Of other invisible unions. 51 XII. Of the knowledge that
the Predestinate have of their predestination. 52 XIII. Of the inequality of
these two phrases, to communicate with the Catholic Church; and, to
communicate with some member of the Church departing from the rule of faith. 55
XIV. How to understand the words of S. Gregory NazianZene, there is a sacred
war. 57 XV. Of the pretended precepts to go forth from the visible communion
of the Church. 58 XVI. Of the consequence of the places alleged by the
Fathers, for the authority of the Catholic Church. 68 XUII. Of the
distinction of the heretics and schismatickes. 69 XVIII. Of the agreement of
the ancient Catholic Church with the modern. 70 XIX. Of the conformity or
inconformitie of the sense wherein the word, Catholic, has been common to the
ancient Catholic Church, and to the modern. 74 XX Of the comparison of the
Church with the city built upon a mountain. 76 XXI. Of the conformity or
inconformitie of the Donatists and Protestants in the question of the Church.
77 XXII. Of the extent of the ancient Catholic Church and the modern. 78 78
XXIII. Of the communion that the Bishops of the East had by letters with those
of the west. 79 XXIV. Of these words of the constitution of S. Clement, the
universal Episcopate is committed to Bishops. 80 XXV. Of the comparison of the
Pope with other Bishops. 81 XXVI. Of formed letters. 113 XXVII. Of pretended
excommunications attempted against the Pope. 116
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. OF Counsels. 125 II. Of the effect of Counsels for the visibilitie
of the Church. 127 III. Of the comparison of the Pope with the other
Patriarchs. 128 IV. Of the difficulties of Scripture, concerning the time of S.
Peter's (...) at Antioch, and at Rome. 137 V. Of the Canon of the Council of
Nicea, touching the government of the Patriarchs. 147 VI. Of the addition of
the word, Churches suburbicarie, made by Ruffinus in the Latin translation of
the Council of Nicea. 161 VII. Of the claim of the Bishops of Constantinople.
178 VIII. Of the order of sitting in the Council of Nicea. 204 IX. Of the
order of the sittings in the first Council of Ephesus. 217 X. Of the order of
the sittings in the second Council of Ephesus. 219 XI. Of the order of
sittings in the Council of Calcedon. 220 XII. Of the order of the sittings of
the fifth Council of Constantinople. 222 XIII. Of the order of sitting in the
sixth Council of Carthage. 229 XIV. Of the order of the sittings in the
Council of Aquilea. 231 XV. Of the calling of Counsels. 232
THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. OF Appeals. 244 II. Of the opposition of saint Ireneus to Pope
Uictor. 249 III. Of the opposition of S. Cyprian. 251 IV. Of the commission of
the Emperor Constantine the great for the judgment of Cecilianus Archbishop of
Carthage 264 V. Of the decree of the Mileuitan Council concerning the
beyond sea Appeals. 273 VI. Of the order and distinction of the Council of
Carthage. 281 VII. Of the African Council. 309 VIII. Whether the Latin
edition of the African Canons, be more faithful then the Greek rapsodie. 315
IX. Of the difficulty touching the Epistles that are at the end of the African
Council. 326 X. Of the question of Appeals treated off in the sixth Council
of Carthage. 329 XI. Of the Council of Sardica. 348
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. THE Estate of the Eastern Church. 376 II. What the division of the
Empire has wrought to the division of the Church. 378 III. Of the
interpretation of those words; Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, I will
build my Church. 379 IV. Of the indiuisibilitie of the Church. 398 U. Of the
effect that division brings to the Church. 399 VI. Of the pretended corruption
of the Church. 400 VII. Of the exclusio^ of heretics from the body of the
Catholic Church. 402 VIII. Of the quality wherein the Catholic Church
attributes to herself the name of whole. 410 IX. Of the sense where in the
Roman Church, is called Catholic. 411 X. Of the causes wherefore the Roman
Church has cut off the rest from her communion. 413 XI. Of the sense wherein
the Heretics belong not to the Catholic Church. ibid. XII. Of the proceeding
of other sects. 414 XIII. Of the persuasion that other sects pretend to have of
the truth of their Church by scriptures. ibid. XIV. Of the sense wherein
Heretics have disputed the word Catholic. 415 XV. Of the cases wherein the
communion in vow with the Catholic Church may be imputed as actual. 417 XVI.
Of the equivocation of terms diminutiues employed for negatiues. 419 XVII. Of
the authority of the work iutituled imperfect. 422 XVIII. Of the
understanding of these words of saint Augustine. To seek the Church in the
words of Christ. 423 XIX. Of the understanding of the words of saint
Chrysostom in the thirty third Homely upon the Acts. 427 XX. Of the rules to
judge admitted by saint Chrysostom and saint Augustine. 429 XXI. Of the
application of the Thesis of this observation to his Hipothesis. 430 XXII Of
the personal succession of the Bishops. 431 XXIII. Of the succession of
doctrine. 434 XXIV. Of the holding of a Council. 436 XXV. Of the reduction of
the disputation, to the state of the Question. 437 XXVI Of the invention of
order, in the justification of the reformation before the proof of the
deformation. 438 XXVII. Of the indefectibilitie of the Church. 439 XXVIII. Of
the sense wherein the Fathers have intended that their doctrine had been holden
from the beginning. 441 XXIX. Of the exceptions that the King produces to
show that he has not separated himself from the Church. 442 XXX. Of the
demannds made for Reformations since the five last ages; 443 XXXI. Of the
agreement of the English reformers, with the Donatists. 444 XXXII. Of the
authority of the rest of the Christian people, which denied to the Church the
title of Catholic, 446 XXXIII. Of the testimonies of our writers. 447 XXXIV.
Of the begging of the principle contained in this hypothesis, ibid. XXXU. Of
the temporal causes of the separation of England. 448 XXXVI. Of the comparison
of the English Church, with the Judicial. ibid. XXXVII. Of the comparison of
the Charity of the ancient African Church and the modern Roman Church. 462
XXXVIII, Of the innocence of the Church in the matter of conspiracies against
his majesty ibid: XXXIX, Of the writings of the illustrious Cardinal
Bellarmin. 463
An admonition to the Reader.
COurteous reader, (for so I will esteem of thee, whosoever out of a true
desire of understanding the truth, take this learned work into thy hands, to
peruse it with judgment, and yet without prejudice,) vouchsafe before thou
begin the perusal thereof, to take these few observations from me.

First, whereas the most eminent author thereof, had proiected to divide it
into twelve several books or partial treatises, and died before he could
make a complete end thereof being often diuerted from it, by manifold
employments which his high estate and calling was subject unto, and by some
more necessary dispute and writings, which the condition of France did then
afford: his frinds, either not marking this his project, or because all the
work was not ended, neglecting that division; set is forth reparted into six
books only, and those so unequally sorted, that the first book alone is in the
French edition far bigger then all the other ensuing five books taken
together. This unproportionable partition we have amended in this English
translation; as we might easily do by the citations, or quotations with which
the author himself bordered his margent: for in them, he sometimes referres
him self to such a chapter of the second, seventh, eleventh, twelft book,
whereby he sufficiently insinuates into how many books he intended to divide
this his excellent work, and at what matter every book should take its
beginning: which his intention we have observed in this that now we present to
thy view, that the fit division of matters therein handled, may make it more
intelligible and less tedious.

Secondly the humor of the French demanded for their satisfaction that the
many places which are cited out of learned, holy, and classical autours, hold
not only be faithfully translated in the text, but also placed at large in
their original languages in the margen: that the learned reader might without
recourse to the several volumes (which required a copious library, whereof few
are furnished) out of hand examine the faithfullnes of the tra^slatio^, and
co^seque^tly how fitly the alleged authority made for the purpose. But this
humor not yet (for ought I have seen) much reigning in our country, we have
thought it sufficient, to cite the places only in the margen, which are fully
expressed in the text; the rather because the excellent translatresse copy,
which we have faithfully expressed contained no more; and more beseemed not her
translation, as not desiring to make show of skill in greek, and other such
learned languages; but only of that which was sufficient, for her assumpt that
it is of a faithful translation according to the significant expressement of
the French.

Thirdly, we have not presumed to alter or change any one word of her
translation, but in some few places, where the French allusions could not be so
well understood, if they were expressed in English properly corresponding
thereunto: for every tongue has some peculiar graces and elegancies, which be
lost in the translation, if they be put word for word; And yet this have we
done (as we said) very seldom, and that especially in the word Church, which
we English men use derived from (...), as the house dedicated to our Lords
service, which tropically we use also to signify the congregation of the
faithful, most solemnly and usually made in the Church; The French express it
by the name of Eglise from (...) (...) vocatus ad professionem fidei, the
company of the faithful called by Christ to profess his law by which word
they secundarily, or tropically understand and call the Church or house of
prayer. So in the name of S. Peter, in French S. Pierre, which word also
signifies a rock or stone in French, as (...) in greek, and Cephas in Syriak
do; but in our English we have no such allusion. No other change, but in these
few, and such like have we made; neither was it needful, the translatresse
having so fittly, and significantly expressed the autours meaning, that it
would have been lost labor to strive to do it better, and rather marring, then
mending so perfect an expression.

Lastly, I desire thee (gentle reader) to bear with the faults of the press:
The printers being Wallons, and our English strange unto them it was incredible
to see how may faults they committed in setting: so that in ouerlooking the
proofs for the print, the margins had not room enough to hold our
corrections: and do what we could, yet the number of our corrections being so
many, a great many of them remained uncorrected by the fastidious fantasy of
our workman. Yet we judge there is no fault that may hinder, or change the
sense, but is amended; and for the rest we desire thee to pardon us,
considering how hard it is to make a stranger here to express our ortography.
Farewell in our Lord, and he of his goodness give thee grace to take profit by
reading these learned discourses.

Thy Wellwisher in Christ Jesus F. L. D. S. M.

APPROBATIO.
TRanslatio haec operis excellentissimi (quod eminentissimus Cardinalis
Perronius, pro fides catholicae doctrina ad potentissimum Regem ac Dominum
nostrum Jacobum totius Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Monarcham, summa
cum cruditione pariter and modestia conscripsit) facta a nobilissima quadam
Heroina prouinciae nostrae, and serenissimae, Reginae Dominae nostrae, Mariae
(...) Borboniae dicata: per omnia fideliter concordat cum ipsa autoris mente
verbis, and sententiis, Qua propter digna^ eam (...), quae typis tradatur, vtex
tanti Praeceptoris accuratissimis cloquentiaque incomparabili vestitis
disputationihus fructum copiosum capiatur Anglia nostra, qualem vniuersa Gallia
cum perpetua Magni autoris veneratione se percepisse protestatur.

2. December. 1631 F. Leander de S. Martino, sacrae Theologiae Doctor, Hebraeae
linguae in alma Academia Duacena professor Regius, Benedictinorum conuentus S.
Gregorij Angliae, Prior.

THE LETTER OF THE LORD CARDINAL OF PERRON, SENT TO MONSIEUR CASAVBON INTO
ENGLAND.
SIR. the letter that you delivered to Monsieur de la Bodery, was delivered to
me by him, even as I was upon my departure for a voyage into Normandy; and
since my return from thence, I have been almost perpetually sick, which
hindered me from answering with more speed. Now that my disease begins to be
at some truce with me, I will pay the arrerages of this delaie, and will first
thank you for the good office that you have done me, in showing the letter I
writ to you, to the most excellent king of great Britain, and in procuring
me an interest in his favor: I will strive so to husband it by my humble
service s, (and particularlye by celebrating his praises, which is the only
fruit that good and vertuons kings, such as he do gather from allthe
labors and thornie cares, that the burden of a kingdom loades them with,) as
his majesty shall have noe cause to be sorry, that it be declared to after
ages, how he has honored me with his well wishes, and how I have had his (...)
in reverence and admiration. As for the translation of the verses of Virgill,
whereof you writ to me that he desires a Copy, that which I sent you being
lost; I deferr yet for some days, to acquit myself of that duty, because I
have put it to the press, with the addition of a part of the fowrth, which I
have ended expresselie for his majesty; sake, to enlarge my prese^te to him.
As soon as those few Copies which are in doing, shall be finished, I will not
fail to address one of them to you, to offer up to him on my behalf The
third point of your letter yet remains; which is, that his Majesty was
astonished at those words in my letter; That, excepting the title of
Catholic, I knew nothing wanting in him, to express the figure of a perfect
and complete Prince: and that he pretendes, that since he believes all things
that the Ancientes have with an unanimous consent esteemed necessary to
salvation, the title of Catholic cannot be donied him. Now as on the one
side, I can not but greatly praise his majesty's piety and Christian
humility, in not disdayning to submitt his judgment, adorned with so many
lights natural and acquired, to that of those clear beams of antiquity;
(imitating therein the wisdom of that great Emperor Thodosius; who thought
there was noebetter means to agree the dissentions which disturbed the Church
of his time, then to exact from either part an answer; whither thy believed
that the Fathers which had flourished in the Church before the separation, had
been orthodoxall; and that being confessed, to summon them to submitt
themselves to whatsoever they should be found to have believed:) so on the
other side, there are many observations `to be made upon this Thesis, before
we pass to the hypothesis; which since I Cannot represent to his majesty, I
shall be gladd to inform you of them for your particular satisfaction.

The first is, that the name of Catholic, is not a name of belief simply,
but of Communion also; else antiquity would not have refused that title to
those Which were not separated from the belief, but from the Communion of the
Church: nor would they have protested, that out of the Catholic Church, the
Faith and Sacraments may be had, but not Salvation. Out of the Catholic
Church, says S. Augustine, in his treaty of Conference with Emeritus, a man
may have orders, he may have Sacraments, he may sing Alleluya, he may answer
A men, he may keep the Gospel, he may have and preach the faith in the name
of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, but he can no where find
Salvation, but in the Catholic Church. And in the Book, De vtilit, credendi,
There is a Church as all men grant, if you cast your eyes over the extent of
the whole world, more full in multitude, then all the rest; and as those, that
know themselves to be of it, affirm, more sincere in the doctrine of truth.
But of the truth, that is an other question: that will suffice for this search,
that there is one Catholic Church, upon which sever all heresies impose
several names; whereas they are all call called every one by his particular
name, which they dare not disauow; from whence it may appear to the judgment
of any arbiter (that is not prepossessed by favor,) to whom the name of
Catholic, where of all are ambitions, ought to be attributed. And in the
Book against the fundamental Epistle: Then to omit this wisdom which you
deny to be in the Catholic Church, there are many other things, which do
most justly retain me in her bosom: the consent of people and nations
retain me therein; the authority begu^n by miracles, nourished by hope,
increased by charity, confirmed by antiquity, retains me therein: the
succession of Prelates even from the very seat of Peter, to whom our Lord
delivered his sheep to be fedd after his Resurrection, even to the present
Bishops seat, retains me therein: and finally; the very name of Catholic
retains me therein, which not without cause this Church alone, amongst so
many heresies, has in such sort obtained, as though all heretics would be
called Catholics; nevertheless, when a stranger asks where the Catholic
Church does assemble, there is not one (...) that dares show his (...), or his
house. And in his treatise of Faith, and of the Creed: We believe the holy
Church and that Catholic; for heretics and schismatickes, call their
Congregations Churches: but heretics believing of God false things, violate
faith; and Schismatickes separate themselves from brotherly charity by unjust
divisions, allthough they believe the same things that we believe: and
therefore neither can the heretic belong to the Catholic Church, because
she loves God; nor the schismaticke, because she loves her neightour. And in
the Book, Of the unity of the Church: All those that believe, as has been
said that over Lord JESUS is come in the flesh, and is risen again in the same
flesh wherein he was borne, and has suffered, and that he is the son of god,
god with god, and one with the Father, and the only immovable word of the
Father, by which all things have been made; but yet dissent so from his body,
which is the Church, that their communion is not with the whole; or is spread
in deed, but yet is in some part found to be separate; it is manifest, they are
not in the Catholic Church. And Prosper, his scholar: He, says he, that
Communicates with this universal Church, is a Christian and a Catholic; but
he that communicates not therewith, is an heretic and Antichrist.

And for this cause we see, that the Fathers denied the title of Catholic to
the Donatists, because of the separation of Communion, and yet granted it to
those, from whom the Donatists had taken their doctrine, because of the unity
of Communion Cyprians people, says S. Pacian, has never been called otherwise
then Catholic. And Saint Vincentius Lerinensis: O admirable change! the
authors of one self same opinion, are adjudged Catholics; and the Contra
literas Petil. l 2. c 95
Sectaries heretics! And S. Augustine; Dissension and division, says he,
makes you heretics, and peace and unity makes Catholics. And that in the
fowrth Counsel of Carthage, this article was inserted into the trial of the
promotion of Bishops; whither they believe, that out of the Catholic Church
none ca^ be saved. And that in the Epistle of the Council of Cyrtha, it was
repeated by S. Augustine, who was Secretary thereto, in theses words:
Whosoever is separated from this Catholic Church, how praise-worthie soever
he conceive his life Epist. 1 52
to be, by this only crime, that he is separated from the unity of Christ,
he shall not have life, but the wrath of God shall remain upon him. And after
by Fulgentius in these words: Believe firmly and doubt it not at all, that
no heretic or Schismaticke baptized in the name of the Father, of the son,
and of the only Ghost, if he be not reconciled to the Catholic Church, what
alms soever he may give, yea though he should shed his blood for the name of
Christ; can in any sort be saved. That I say was De side ad Petr. c. 39.
against, or principally against the Donatists. And nevertheless, the
Donatists agreed in all the doctrine of the Creed, and of the Scripture with
the Catholics: Your are with us, says S. Augustine, in Baptism, in the
Creed, and Epist. 48.
in all the other Sacraments of our Lord; but in the spirit of unity, and in
the bond of peace, and finally in the Catholic Church, you are not with us
And yet they differed only in one point of unwritten tradition, which, as S.
Augustine himself (who principally triumphs over this heresy) confessed,
could not be demonstrated by Scripture. This, says he, in the Book of the
unity of the Cap. 29.
Church, neither thou, nor I, do evidently read. And in the first Book
against Cap. 33.
Cresconius; though for this there be noe example in the scriptures, yet even
in this we follow, the truth of the Scriptures, when we do that which has
pleased the universal Church, which the authority of the same scriptures does
recommend. And in the second Book of Baptism against the Donatists: And
ourselves, says he, durst Cap 4.
affirm no such thing, but that we are upheld by the unanimous authority of
the Church. And in the fifth. The Apostles have in this, prescribed us nothing;
but this custom which was opposite to Cyprian, ought to be believed to have
taken it is original Cap. 23.
from their tradition; as many other things, which the universal Church
observes, and for this cause are with good right believed to have been
commanded by the Apostles, although they have not been written. From whence
it appears, that to obtain the name of Catholic, it suffices not to hold,
or rather to suppose to hold the same belief that the Fathers held, unless
they communicate with the same Catholic Church, wherewith the Fathers did
communicate, and which by succession of persons, and, as we pretend, of
doctrine, is derived down to us: and if she have lost any thing of her extent
in our hemisphere, she recouers as much and more daily in the other hemisphere,
that these prophecies may be fulfilled: Genesis 12. 26.
In thy seed, shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. Gal 3.
In the last days, the mountain of the house of our Lord, shall be upon the
topp of mountains, and shall be exalted above all the high l sa. 2.
hills, and all nations shall come up to her. Matt 14.
This Gospel of the Kingdom must be preached over all the world, and then
the end shall come; and such like, in right De unit.
whereof the Church, as says S. Augustine, has obtained the title and the
Eccles. ca. 2. and 3. and alibi.
mark of Catholic.

The SECOND observation is upon the restriction in Cases necessary to
salvation: For besides points necessary to salvation, there are two other
degrees of things, the one sort profitable to salvation, as it is (according
to the opinion of your own ministers) to sell all our goods and give it to the
poor: to fast in affliction to appease the wrath of God: to pray our Brethren
in the faith to pray to God for us; and the other sort lawful, and not
repugnant to salvation, as to fly from persecution; to live by the Altar, since
we serve at the Altar, to putt away our wives for adultery, and other the
like for I allege these for examples, and not for instances. Now it is
needful to be comfortable to the integrity of the belief of the Fathers, to
believe all things that they have believed, according to that degree wherein
they have believed them: to wit, to believe for things necessary to
salvation those things that they have esteemed to be necessary for salvation:
and for things profitable to salvation: those things that they have esteemed
to be profitable to salvation: and for things lawful and not repugnant to
salvation, those things that they have holden to be lawful and not repugnant
to salvation: and not under color that the two last kinds, are not things
necessary to salvation, but only profitable or lawful, to condemn them, and
to separate ourselves for their occasion from the Church, which then had the^
in practice, and still practices the^ to this day.

The third observation is upon the ambiguitie of the word necessary to
salvation, which because of the diverse kinds of necessity which have place in
matters of religion, is capable of diverse senses: for there is an absolute
necessity, and a conditional necessity; a necessity of means, and a
necessity of precept; a necessity of special belief, and a necessity of
general belief; a necessity of act, and a necessity of approbatio, I call
an absolute necessity (not simply, but by virtue of Gods institution,) that
which receives no excuse of impossibility, nor any exception of place, time
or persons: as in regard of those that are of age, capable of knowledge, the
belief in Christ mediator between God and man: for neither the circumstance
of being in a place where we cannot be instructed in that article; nor the
prevention of time, in dying before we are informed thereof; nor the condition
of being an ignorant person, unlearned, dull not apt to comprehend; a sheep
and not a shepherd, can warrant those from damnation, that believe it not
actually, for as much as who believes not in the only Son of Gods, is
already judged: And in regard of little Children, baptism only according to
our doctrine, may supply the defect of Faith in Christ in their behalf,
agreeing with that sentence of S. Augustine: Do not believe, do not say, do
not teach if thou will be a Catholic, that little children which are (...) by
death, from being baptized, can come to the remission of original sin. And
of this kind of necessity the examples are in small number. I call that
conditional necessity which obliges not but in case of possibility, and
receives exception of place, time and persons: and that again has diverse
branches: For first in regard of Faith there are many points that are
necessary to be believed, if a man be in place where he may be instructed in
them, or who has time to be informed of them, which are not necessary for a
man that lives in a wilderness, or so pressed with the instant of death, as he
has noe leisure to receive instruction: as that Christ was borne of a virgin
that he was Crucified under Pontius Pilate, that he rose again the third
day. And many things are necessary to be believed and holden for points of
Faith, either by the body of the Church in general, or by the order of the
ministers and pastors, which are the eyes of the Church: which are not
necessary for every particular person to know, and hold to be points of Faith;
as that the persons of the Trinity, are the same in essence, and distinct in
subsistence; that the Father has begotten the son necessarily and not freely;
that they are the divine persons which produce, and are produced, and not the
essence which does neither produce, nor is produced: that the works of the
trinity without are undivided: that the only person of the son has been
incarnate, and not any of the others: that in Christ there are two substances
and one subsistence: that the divinity was not to him in the steed of a
soul, but that besides his Body and his divinity, he had a Soul sensible
and reasonable: that what he once took in hypostaticall union he has not
abandoned: that the devil was created good and made hinself evil by the
freedom of his will: and other such like. And in regard of action, there are
many things necessary in case of possibility, and according to the
opportunity of places, times and persons, which are not absolutely necessary,
when the commodity to accomplish them is wanting, as the assistance at Church
Service, the actual participation of the Eucharist. And many are necessary
to some, as mission and imposition of hands to the Pastors of the Church; and
marriage to those that will have issue which are not necessary to others. And
in brief, some things are necessary to obtain Salvation others some to
obtain it more easily for ones-selfe, and others to procure and mediate it
for other men: some for the constitution of the Church, and others for the
edification and more ample propagation of the Church some for the simple being
of Christian Religion; others for the better being, that is to say, for the
comlynesse, dignity, and splendor of Christian Religion. I call necessity of
means that, that is in behalf of the things them selves as that of
Sacraments to which god has granted power to Conferr some grace and real
operation to salvation, that of the Commandementes of the moral law, whose
necessity is imposed upon us by the law of nature, that of repenting sins,
which is a means necessary to obtain their remission. I call necessity of
precept, that which is only obligatorie in regard of the Commandment, as the
celebration of the first day of the week in memory of that wherein our lord
did rise again, which we for that cause, call our Lords day, and other such
like observations, the omission whereof, could be noe hindrance to Salvation,
but in respect of disobedience, and breach of the Commandment. I call
necessity of special belief, that of thoses points, which all Faithful, if
they be not prevented by death, are obliged to believe with faith express,
distinct and determinate, which the Schoolmen call explicit faith; as the
twelve articles, of the Creed. I call necessity of general belief, that of
those things which every particular man is not obliged to believe with a
distinct ad explicit faith: as the doctrine of original sin the article or
the two wills in Christ, the article that the holy Ghost proceeds from the
Father and from the Son; the belief that Baptism given forth of the Church
(provided it be in the form of the Church) is true Baptism, and that
heretics which have received Baptism, must not be rebaptised when they
return to the Church: and other such like, when the simple sort of faithful
people, are not obliged to believe, with a distinct and explicit faith, but it
suffices that they believe them generally in the Faith of the Church; that is
to say, that they adhere to the Church that believes them, by whose faith they
live whiles they remain in her Communion, as Children live by their mothers
nourishment whilst they are in her bowels. I call necessity of act, that of
those things which every particular person is obliged to execute actuallie,
as to Confess the name of Christ, to forgive offenses done to them, to restore
the Goods of an other man. I call necessity of approbation, that of those
things which every particular man is not bound to execute actuallie but only
not to contradict them, and not to condemn those that do them nor the church
that approoues the^, ad not to separate themselves from her upon this occasion,
upon pain of separating themselves from their own salvation as the choice to
live in virginity and single life, and other the like. Of all which kinds of
necessity, the Fathers have hold (...) many things (every one according to
it is degree) diversely necessary to salvation as we shall make manifest in
those occasions that will offer themselves wherein to examine them: it is not
to be conformable to the ancient belief and practice of the catholic church,
to hold the points of doctrine or actio^ that the Fathers have holden, to be
necessary to salvation, according to some of these kinds of necessity, and to
reject the others; but to conform our selves to the ancient belief and
catholic practice, we must hold for necessary to salvation, all those things
that the Fathers have holden to be necessary to salvation, in that degree, and
according to those kinds of necessity, as they have holden them.

The fowrth observation is upon the word FATHERS, which some, when it comes to
the effect of their promise, to submit themselves to the judgment of
antiquity, would restrain to the first or second age after the Apostles, not
that they hope to find in that space of time, any thing in their behalf: but
because the Church being then oppressed with persecutions, there remains to us
so few writings of that date, and those against persons, and about points,
for the most part so differing from the disputations of this present age, as
the face of the ancient doctrine and practice of the Church, cannot evidently
appear to be therein represented. Now equity would, that being to compare the
state of the Societies of this age, which pretend to the title of the Catholic
Church, with the state of the ancient Church; we should look to take such a
time, wherein not only our competitors might agree with us, that the Church of
the Fathers was still the true Church, the true Spouse of Christ, she in whom
resided the lawful authority to judge questions in Religion: but also those
monuments do sufficiently remain to us, to manifest thoroughly all her
doctrines and all her observations. Which can never be better chosen for both
parts, then in the time wherein the four first Counsels were holden; that is
to say, from the Emperor Constantine, who was the first Emperor that was
publicly a Christian, to the Emperor Marcian. And it seems to me, that his
Majesty has yielded to this, and also more liberally in some of his
writings, having extended this space, to the first five ages. For besides that
the delivery from the yoke and subjection of the Pagans, then gave the Church
means to speak louder, and to have more communication with all her parts,
situated in so many different regions of the earth, and to flourish in a
greater multitude of learned and excellent writers, which is the cause that
there remain to us without comparison more monuments of those ages, wherein to
view the entire form of the ancient Christian Religion, then of the former
ages: Besides this, I say, our adversaries cannot deny, but that church which
nursed up the first Christian Emperors, which rooted out the Temples and
services of the false Gods, which exercised the Soue reign Tribunal of
Spiritual authority upon earth, by the condemnation which she denounced upon
the four most famous heresies in the four first general Counsels, which
were the four first Parliaments and Estates general of Christ's Kingdom; must
be she of whom it has Isa. 60. 62. 54.
been foretold, that Kings should be her nursing Fathers: that the nations
should walk in her light, and Kings in the brightness of her rising: that,
every engine set up against her, should be destroyed: that she should judge
every tongue that should resist her in judgment: that God had set watchmen
upon her walls, which never should be silent by day or night: Matthew. 16. 18.
that the gates of hell should not prevail against her: that whosoever should
not obey her should be holden for a heathen and a publican: 1. (...). 3.
and in brief, that she was the Pillar and foundation of truth. Shall we
loubt, Says S. Augustine, who lived in the betweene-times of these first (...)
(...). (...). c (...)
four Counsels, to set our-selnes in the lapp of that Church, which by
succession of Bishops from the seat of the Apostles even to the confession of
all mankind, (the heretics in vain barking about her, and being condemned
partly by the judgment of the people themselves, part lie by the gravity of
Counsels, and partly by the majesty of Miracles) has obtained full
authority: to whom not to give the pre-eminence, must be an act of extreme
impiety or of a headie arrogancy? And again, De Symb. and Catec. l. 1, c. 5.
The Catholic Church fighting against all heresies, may be opposed, but she
cannot be overthrown: all heresies are come forth from her, as unprofitable
branches cut From their vine, but she remains in her root, in her vine in her
charity. Let that then be holden for truly ancient, and marked with the
character of the primitive Church, which shall be found to have been believed
and practiced universally by the Fathers, which lived in the time of the first
four Counsels; and principally when it shall appear to us, that the things
testified to us by the authors of those ages, were not holden by them for
doctrines, or observations sprung up in their time but for doctrines or
observations, which had been perpetually practiced in the Church from the age
of the Apostles: although perchance, there can not be found for every of them
in particular, so express testimonies in the former ages, as in those of the
first four Counsels, because of the few writings which the persecution of
those times, have suffered to come to our hands. For it suffices to assure us
of the perpetual use of such things that the Fathers of the first four
Counsels, who had more knowledge of the ages before them, then we can have,
do testify to us, to have believed and practiced them, not as things
instituted in their age, but as things that have always had place in the
Church, and had come to them by a succession of observation from the Apostles
down to their time; and that there is not to be found in former authors any
testimony against them, but contrariwise in all places, where there is occasion
to mention them, agreeable and favorable testimonies; that is to say in brief,
that, is to be holden ancient by us, which those whom we account ancient, have
themselves holden to be ancient.

The fifth observation is upon the consent of the belief of the Fathers, which
some contentious spirits would have to be, when one selfsame thing is
actuallie found in the writings of all the Fathers, which is an unjust and
impertinent pretense For to have a doctrine or observation to be truly holden
by the Fathers for universal and Catholic, it is not necessary it should be
in the writings of all the Fathers, who have not all written of the same
matters, and of whose writings, all have not come to our hands: but there are
two other lawful ways, to secure our selves of them: The one is, when the
most eminent Fathers of every country agree in the affirmation of the same
doctrine or practice, and that none of the others that have been without note
of dissension from the Church, have opposed it: As when S. Augustine has cited
against the Pelagians, the Contr. Iul. l. 5. and 2.
testimony of eleven eminent Fathers, all consenting in one and the same
doctrine; he supposes he has sufficiently produced against them, the Common
belief of the Catholic Church: and when the Council of Ephesus had produced
tenn Fathers of former ages, they conceived they had sufficiently expressed the
consent of the former Church against Nestorius Vincent.
his doctrine: Because none, says Vincentius Lerinensis, doubtetb but Lirin.
c. 42
that those tenn did truly hold the same with all their other brethren. The
other is, when the Fathers speak not as Doctors, but as witnesses of the
Customs and practice of the Curch of their times; and do not say, I believe
this should be so holden, or so understood, or so observed; but that the
Church from one end of the earth to the other, believes it so, or observes it
so: For then we noe longer hold what they say, for a thing said by them, but
as a thing said by the whole Church and principally when it is in points
whereof they could not be ignorant, either because of the Condition of the
things, as in matters of fact, or because of the sufficiency of the persons:
and in this case we argue noe more upon their words probably, as we do
when they speak in the quality of particular Doctors, but we argue thereupon
demonstratiuelie. That then shall remain truly universal and Catholic,
that the most eminent Fathers of the times of the four first Counsels, have
taught in several regions of the earth; and against which, none (except some
persons noted for dissension from the Church) has resisted; or that the
Fathers of those ages do testify to have bin believed, and practiced by the
whole Church in their times: And that shall remain truly ancient and
Apostolic, that the Fathers of those ages do testisie to have bin observed
by the whole Church, not as a thing sprung up in their time, but as a thing
derived down to them either from the immemorial succession of former ages, or
from the express tradition of the Apostles. For these things having bin
holden universally by the Catholic Church in the time of the first four
Counsels, they could have noe other original, but from an universal
authority; for as much as in the Catholic Church, which did then so
strictly observe the rule mentioned by Saint Vincentius Lirinensis, of
opposing universality to particularitie; a doctrine or observation from a
particular beginning could not be slipped in, and spread into an uniform and
universal belief and Custom, through all parts of the Earth; and
principally so as the Fathers that were next after these universal
innouations, could not perceive it: but it must needs be, that all that was
then universally observed in the Church, must have come from an universal
beginning. Now there were in those ages, according to the belief of your
ministers, but two beginnings of universal authority in the Church; to wit,
either the Apostles, or the general Counsels; for they Will not yield that
the Sea Apostolic had then any universal authority And therefore
whatsoever was universally and uniformly observed in the Church by all the
Provinces of the Earth in the time of the first four general Counsels, and
had not begun in that time, but had bin before practiced; that is to say;
before there had bin any general Council in the Church; must necessarily
have bin from the tradition of the Apostles, following these rules of S.
Augustine: Those things, said he which we observe, Epist. 118.
not by writeing, but by tradition, which are kept over all the extent of the
earth, must be understood to have bin retained from the appointeme^t and
institution, either of the Apostles themselves, or from the general Counsels,
whose authority is most wholesome in the Church. And elsewhere; what custom
soever, men looking upward can De Bapt. cont Don. l. 4. c. 6.
not discern to have been instituted by those of later times, is rightly
believed to have bin instituted by the Apostles: and there are many such,
which would be too long to repeat. And again; If any one herein seek for
divine authority, that which the universal (...) c. 24.
Church observes, and which has not bin instituted by the Counsels, but has
always bin held, is justly believed not to have bin given by tradition, but by
Apostolical authority, etc. Which Rules of S. Augustine, if they have place in
those things which the Fathers of the time of the first four Counsels
testify to have bin observed iu the Church before the four first Counsels,
how much more ought they to have it in those things, that the same Fathers
affirm not in terms equivalent, but expresslie to have bin instituted and
ordained by the Apostles?

These five observations then made upon the theses, I will say, to pass unto
the hypothesis, that your ministers to whose society his Majesty outwardly
adheres, are so far from holding all the same things that the Fathers have
believed and practiced as necessary to Salvation, that in the only Synaxis or
Church Lirurgie, which is the Seal of Ecclesiastical Communion, the four
principal things for which they have separated themselves from us, which are
the real presence of the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, the Oblation of the
Sacrifice of the Eucharist, prayer and oblation for the dead, and the prayers
of the Saints, the Fathers have all universally and uniformly believed,
holden and practiced as things necessary (but in different kinds of
necessity) unto salvation. By which means, if your ministers had been in the
time of the Fathers, as (...) have for these things renounced our Service and
our Communion; so must they for the same causes have renounced the Service and
Communion of the Fathers, and Consequently, the title and Society of the
Catholic Church. I have said the real presence of the Body of Christ in the
Sacrament, not but that I could have gone farther, and said, the Substantial
transition of the Sacrament into the Body of Christ which we call
transubstantiation but I have been content to say, the real presence, because
it is not precisely and particularly upon the transubstantiation, but upon the
real presence of the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, that we ground the
importance and necessity of this Sacrament to Salvation; to wit, the
Communion and Substantial union to the Body of Christ; which S. Cyrill In
Joan. lib. 11. cap. 27.
calls, the knott of our union with god. Nor is it particularly and precisely
upon transubstantiation, but upon the real presence that the two
inconveniences depend, for which your ministers, in this article, separate
themselves from our Lyturgies; which are, one, the adoration of the Body of
Christ in the Sacrament, which they will have to be only sought and adored in
heaven: and the other, the pretended distraction of the unity of the Body of
Christ, by existence in many places in the Sacrament. Neither have I spocken
of the prerogative of the Roman Church, which all the Fathers have holden for
the center and root of Episcopal unity, and of Ecclesiastical Communion;
because I will believe you are sufficiently read in antiquity, to know that
the first Fathers, Counsels, and Christian, Emperors, have perpetually
granted thereunto, the primacie and supereminent oversight, over all religions
and ecclesiastical things; which is all that the church exacts as a point of
Faith, from their confession that enter into her communion, to the end to
discern her society from that of the Greeks and other accomplices of their
Sect, which have divided themselves for some ages, from the visible and
ministerial head of the Church.

These four points then, which are the principal Springes of our dissension
and which being agreed upon, it would be easy for us to agree upon the rest; I
say, that the Fathers of the time of the four first Councels have all holden
and practiced as necessary to Salvation, though with diverse kinds of
necessity. The real Presence, of the Body of Christ; and the oblation of the
sacrifice, they have holden as necessary with necessity of means, for the
Body of the Church absolutely, and for every particular person
conditionnallie. Prayer and oblation for the dead they have holden as
necessary, by necessity of means for those for whom it is done that so
their deliuerace from temporal pains, which remain after this life for sin
committed, after baptism, and for which thy have not done such penances as it
has pleased God wholly to accept, may be hastened by the prayers and
sacrifices of the Church: and necessary with necessity of precept, and to
exercise christian charity and piety both to the Church that offers them, and
to the ministers and Pastors by whom she offers them. The prayer of the
Saints, they have holden as necessary to the body of the Church, and to the
ministers by who^ they are made, with necessity of precept, to exercise the
commerce between the Church Militant, and the Church Triumphant: and to
particular persons out of the offices of the Church, and in their private
devotions not neeessary with necessity of act, but only profitable, that they
may the more easily obtain pardon for their sins, by the concourse of their
prayers who are already in the per fect and assured possession of the grace of
God: but necessary to them and all others with nessitie of approbation; that is
to say, they are obliged not to contradict them, and not to condemn the
custom and doctrine of the Church in that article: and not to separate
themselves from her upon this occasion, under pain of falling into Anathema,
and to be holden for heretics. All which things I will not now stand to
prove, least I make a Book of a letter; but I do oblige myself to justify
them, when soever you shall desire it; and to make it appear both by the
unanimous consent of the Fathers, that have flourished in the time of the first
four councel's, and by the forms which remain to us in their writings of the
ancient Church Service, that all the Catholic Church of their times has
vninersallie and uniformly believed holden and practiced them, throughout all
the regions and provinces of the earth. I oblige myself I say, to make it
appear to you, that she has holden these four things in the same sense, and
in the same form and for the same end, as our Lyturgies are, and not as
observations that then sprung up, but as things that the same Fathers testified
to have been believed and practiced from all antiquity, and to be derived to
them by an uninterrupted continuance from the tradition or approbation of the
Apostles. So as they cannot renounce the Communion of our Church under
pretense of any of these four points, without renou^cing the Communion of the
ancient catholic Church and consequently the inheritance of salvation: and
that by authors and testimonies all able to abide the touch; as you know I am
curious to make use of noe other; and with clear and ingenuous answers to all
objections, collected out of the Fathers of the same ages, or of ages before
them. A thing that will be the more easy for me, because the proofs that we
will avouch out of the Fathers, are proofs which contain in express terms
the affirmative of what we say: whereas our adversaries cannot find one only
passage which contains in express term the negative, but only in terms from
whence they pretend to infer it by consequence; and which at a just tribunal,
would not merit so much as to be heard. For who knows not, that it is too
great an injustice, to allege consequences from passages, and even those
evil interpreted and misunderstood, and in whose illation, there is always
some paralogisme hidd against the express words, and the lively and actual
practice of the same fathers, from whom they are collected, and that may be
good to take the Fathers for Adversaries, and to accuse them for want of Sense
or memory; but not to take them for Judges, and to submitt themselves to the
observation of what they have believed and practiced? To this I will also add
whenever you shall desire it, the present Conformity of all the other
Patriarchall Churches in these four cases with the Roman and of all those
which have remained even to this day, under their jurisdiction; to wit, those
that are under the Patriarchall jurisdiction of the Patriarck of
Constantinople; as the Grecians, Russians, Muscouites, and Asians of
Asia-minor, separate from us near eight hundred years: Of those that are vnde
the Greek Patriarch of Antioch; as the Syrians, Mesopotamians, and others yet
more Eastern nations: (for those that obey the Syrian Patriarch, as the
Maronites, persevere in the Communion of the Roman Church; of those that rely
upon the Egiptian Patriarch of Alexandria, as the Egiptians whom they call
Cophtites, and the Ethiopians which have been divided both from us and from the
greeks more then eleven hundred years, even from the time of one of the four
first Counsels, to wit, of the Council of Chalcedon. For all these hold
these four points; yea, with more jealousy, if it be possible, then the
latin Churches, and particularly, the article of the Sacrament, where of they
do not only believe transubstantiation, which the greeks at this day call in
the very self same sense and phrase, (...), but also exercise the adoration
with external gesture, more full of humility then ours. A manifest proof that
these four points were uniformly holden and observed by the ancient
Cahtholicke Church, since all the parts, whereinto the ancient Catholic
Church is disme^bred, do retain them uniformly to this day; notwithstanding
so many distances, separations, and divisions, through all the regions of the
Earth.

These are in general, the causes that have moved me to use that exception in
my letter, that you object to me in yours: whereof if the Excellent King of
great Britain had as well leisure to hear the particularities, as he has
capacity to comprehend them, I assure myself he would not think it strange,
that I should desire in him the title of Catholic; but he would desire it
himsefe, and put himsefe in state to obtain it, and to cause it to be obtained
by those, that are deprived of it: that is to say, he would add yet to is
other Crowns, that of making himsefe a mediator of the peace of the Church;
which would be to him a more triumphant glory, then that of all the
Alexanders, and of all the Caesar's, and which would gain to his Isle, noe
less an honor in having bredd him, the^ to have bredd great Constantine, the
first deliverer and pacifier of the christian Church. I pray god that he will
one day Crown all the other graces wherewith he has endowed him, with that;
and hear to this effect the prayers of his late Queen Mother, whose tears
like those of S. Augustins Mother, do not only intercede for him in heaven,
but her blood also;

And likewise keep you Sr. in his safe and holy protection. From Paris, 15.
Iulij. 1611. AN ADMONITION TO THE READER.
This letter to Mons. Casaubon, occasiond the whole discourse ensuing. For the
letter being showed to his most excellent majesty our Souuerain Lord king James
of glorious memory: it pleased him not only to read it, but to take pains to
answer it, as he thought most convenient. To which answer of his majesty the
Cardinal replieth with that modesty and submission, which is due to the person
and worth of so high and mighty a Monarch. and with that learning, and
solidyty, that might be expected from so great a master of truth as that most
eminent Cardinal was, in behalf of so glorious a cause, as is the doctrine of
the catholic Church.



THE L. CARDIN. PERRONS REPLY TO HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER TO THE LETTER WRITTEN TO
MONS CASAVBON.
THE FIRST OBSERVATION Reduced into an abridgement by the King.
THE name of Catholic does not simply design Faith, but also Communion with
the Catholic Church; for this Cause the Fathers would not suffer that those
should be Called Catholics, which had separated themselves from the
communion of the Church, though they retained the Faith thereof: For there is
one only Catholic Church, out of the which, Faith and Sacraments may be had,
but not Salvation. To this end there are many places alleged out of S.
AVGTSTIN.

OF THE USE OF THE WORD CATHOLIQVE
THE ANSWER OF THE KING. CHAPITRE I.
TO believe the Catholicko Church, and to believe the Communion of Saints, are
put distinctly, as diverse things in the Creed; and it seems the first was
ptincipallie inserted to discern the Jewish Synagogue from the Christian
Church, which ought not to be, (as that was) enclosed within the lymittes of
one only nation, but to be spread in length and breadth, through all the
regions of the world. And therefore the reason is not manifest, enough why in
the beginning of this observation it is said, that the title of Catholic
designeth Communion. These two things are very near one an other, but
different notwithstanding, as we have showed.

THE REPLY.
WHEN the Philosopher FAVORINVS disputed against the Emperor ADRIAN, and that
his hearers were amazed, and reproached it to him that he suffered the Emperor
to confute him, and yielded to him; he answered them, should not I yield to a
man, tha commaundes twenty legions? So if there were noe question in this
work, but of humane philosophy and secular learning, it should be easy for
me to stop my self at FAVORINVS bounds, and to abstain to contest with his
majesty, or to resist him. But since here we treat of his interest, who
has, not legions of men, but of Angels, and which has for his title, THE
KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS; and from whom this excellent King
himself makes profession to hold in Fee his life and Crowns; that is to
say, the cause of JESUS CHRIST, and of his Kingdom, which is the Church: I
will promise myself from his Majesty's bounty, that he will not mislike,
where it shall be needful, that I resist and contradict him, with all the
respective liberty, that the laws of disputation yield me.

Then for the argument of the Creed, I will say, after I have kissed my
weapones, three things for my defense; FIRST that it is uncertain, whither
the cause of the Communion of Saints, be an article aparte, or an explication
of the precedinge cause, and a declaration that the Catholic Church consistes
not in the simple number of the faithful, every one considered a part; but in
the ioinct Communion of all the body of the faithful, in such sort as both
clauses make but one article as it seems saint IEROM, Hier. adu. Luciser.
RVFFINVS, Ruffin in Symbol.
and August. de fide and symbol and de Symb. ad Catec.
Saint AUGUSTINE, who have omitted the latter, have esteemed it. The SECOND,
that it is uncertain, whether it signify the Communion, that the faithful
living have one with an other, or the Commerce that the Saints of the
triumphant Church do exercise with the Saints of the militant Church, by the
prayers, that the Saints of the triumphant, offer for the Saints of the
militant; and the commemoration that the saints of the militant make of the
saints of the triumphant, which is that, that we in our Liturgy call, to
communicate with the memory of the Saints. And the THIRD, that whatsoever it
signify, it is most certain, that the word CATHOLIC was not added to that
of the Church, to distinguish the Christian Church from the Jewish Synagogue,
which had never borne the name of Church in quality of a title of a Religion
when the creed was Composed, and by consequence did not oblige the Christian
Church to take the Epithete of Catholic, to be discerned from that, from
which in all cases she had been suffieientlie distinguished by the title of
Christian; but it was added to discern the true Church from heretical, and
schismatic Societies, which usurp equiuocally, and by false marks, the
name of Church, for that our Lord was the first that affected and consecrated
the word ECCLESIA (which we usually translate in English Church) to signify a
society of Religion; whereas before, neither it, nor the Hebrewe word that
answers to it, had any other use, but that which profane authors give it,
which is to signify. Assemblies, conuocations, General Estates; as when
DEMOSTHENES said to ESCHINES, thou were dumb to the d Demost
assemblies where the greek word is Ecclesijs, the conuocations or general
meetings. And as when Aristotle Arist. polit 2.
called the conuocations of Creete ecclesias. And as when the Scholiast of
HOMER said, Jupiter gathered together Ecclesias the Assemblies of the Gods: It
appears first by the testimony of MOSES, who forbids bastardes to enter into
the Church of Israel; And Deuteron. 23.
of DAVID who singes, I hate the Church of the malignant; And of S. STEPHEN,
Psalm. 25.
who said MOSES was in the Church in the solitary place; that is to say, Act.
17.
with the multitude of the people in the desert. It appears secondly, by the
testimony of S. IEROM, and of S. CYRILLVS, who interpretinge this verse of
ESAIAS, Thou shall be called by a new name, that the mouth of our Lord shall
pronounce, Do affirm, that this new name, must be the name of Hieron. in Esai
c. 62.
Church It shall noe more (says S. IEROM) be called Jerusalem and Sion, but it
shall receive a new name, that the Lord shall impose upon it, saying to the
Apostle PETER, thou art PETER, and upon this PETRA or rock I will build my
Church. And S. CYRILL; It shall be noe more called Synagogue, but the Church of
the living Cyril. ibid.
God. And finally, it appears by the very testimony of our adversaries,
that not only in all the textes of the old Testament, where the Greek
translation of the Seventy, use the word Ecclesia; but also in all those of
the new, where that word has relation to any other multitude, beside the
Christian Church, they express it by Congregation or Assemblies. And if since
the coming of JESUS CHRIST, and the edition of the creed the Fathers have
sometimes called the Synagogue, by the name of Ecclesia or Church, it has been
by anticipation, to show the successiue unity of the one and other society;
but not that the Jewish Church while it lasted, has ever undertaken to
attribute to herself, the title of a Church, in the quality of a title of
Religion. Neither consequently, when the creed was composed, was there need
of an Epithete, to distinguish the Christian Church from her: for as the starr
that the authors call Lucifer, although it be the same with that, that is
called Vesper, yet when it goes before the Son, it bears one name; and when
it follows him, it has an other: so although the Jewish congregation has
been in some sort one same society with the Christian Congregation,
nevertheless, when this society has gone Before her SVNNE, which is CHRIST,
she has borne one name, to wit, the Synagogue and when she follows him, she
Matthew. 18.
bears an other, to wit; the Church. And therefore when our Lord said to S.
Peter Dic ecclesiae, tell it to the Church, and if he hear not he Church, let
him Act. 12.
be to thee, as an heathen or a publican; And when S. LVKE, relates, that HEROD
set himself to Persecute quosdam de ecclesia some of those of the Church; 1.
Cor. 4
1. Cor. 10.
and when saint Paul writes; I teach it so in all the Churches; And again, be
Jacob. 5.
without scandal to the Jews, and to the Gentiles, and to the Church of God:
And Iren. cont. Valen. lib. 4. c. 34.
when S. James proclaims; If any one be sick, let him call the priests of
the Church: And when S. Ireneus says, there have been sacrifices among the
people, there are sacrifices in the Church; they thought they had sufficiently
distinguished, Eusebius. histor. eod. l. 4. cap. 13.
without any other addition, the Christian Church from the Jewish Synagogue.
And contrariwise, when the Church of SMYRNA in an age neighbouringe upon that
of the Apostles intitles her Epistle, to the Church of PHILOMILION, and to all
the a Diocesses of the Catholic Church, that are throughout the world: And
when CLEMENT ALEXANDRINVS writes, There needs not many words to show that
the mocke-Councells of heretics, are Tertull. co^tra Marcion. lib. 4. c. 4.
after the Catholic Church. And Clem.
when TERTVLLIAN says; Marcion gave his money to the Catholic Alex: Stro^.
lib. 27.
Church, which rejected both it and him, when he strayed from our truth
Tertull. cont. Marc. lib. 4. cap. 4.
to heresy; And when saint CYPRIAN advertised the Bishops of Afric that
passed in to Italy, to acknowledge and hold fast the root and matrice of the
Catholic Church. And when Saint EPIPHANIVS reports that under the
persecution of DIOCLESIAN those that held the ancient Churches, called
themselves, Epiph. haer. 65.
the Catholic Church, and the Militians the Church of the martyrs; And when
the Emperor CONSTANTINE ordained, that all the Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 3.
Oratories of the Heretics should be taken from them, and presently after
delivered to the Catholic Church: they pretended not by the word Catholic,
to distinguish the Christian Church from the Jewish, but to distinguish the
great and the original body of the Church, from the particular and later
sects.

Yet we acknowledge, that the word, Catholic, in distinguishing by
hervniuersalitie the true Church from the heretical and schismatic sects,
distinguishes her also by accident from the Jewish Synagogue: as a special
difference in distinguishing her species from other species of the same
genders, does also distinguish it from that of other genders, though that be
not her proper office; for the word reasonable, discerninge men from birds,
fishes, serpents, and other beasts, leaves him not undiscerned accessarily
from plants, metalls, and stones. But we maintain, the express and direct
end for which the Surname of Catholic has been added to the Church, (I say to
the Church and not to the figures of the Church) has been to distinguish it
from heretical and Schismatic sects. If I should this day by chance enter
into a populous town (...) (...) Sympr. (...) 1 (...). (...). (...).
says S. PACIANVS, an author celebrated by saint Ierom, and find there
Marcionistes and Apolinarians (it must be read, Apellecians) Cataphrigians,
Nouatians, and other such like, which call themselves Christians; by what
surname should I know the Congregation of my people, if it were not entitled
Catholic: and again, Christian is my name, Catholic is my Surname; that
names me, this marks me out; by that I am manifested (prodor and non probor)
by this I am distinguished. And saint CYRILL of Jerusalem, an author the same
age, expoundinge the creed; For this cause (says he) thy faith has given
thee this article to hold undoubtedly, and in the holy Catholic Church, to
the end thou (...) fly the polluted (...) of heretics. And a little after:
And when (...). (...) (...). Cateches 15. (...).
thou comst into a town, inquire, not simply where the temple of our Lord is,
for the other heresies of impious persons, do likewise call their dens, the
temples of the Lord, neither ask simply where the Church is, but where is the
Catholic Church? for that Aug. de (...) and Symb c. 10.
name is the proper name of this holy Church. And saint AUGUSTINE in his
book of the Faith and the creed We believe (says he) the holy Church, and
that Catholic; for the heretics and Schismatickes name also their
Congregations, Churches; but heretics believing in God in a false manner,
violate the faith; and Schismatickes by their unjust Divisions, separate
themselves from brotherly Charity, although they believe the same things
that we believe; therefore the heretic appartaineth not to the Catholic
Church, because she loves God; nor the Schismaticke, because she loves her
neighbor. So that it amazeth me, that I have had so little industry to
explain myself, as to have given his Majesty occasion to answer, that the
reason for which I had said in the beginning of my first observation, that the
word Catholic was not a title of simple belief but of communion, was not
enough manifest. For having alleged these four places of saint AUGUSTINE;
Schismatickes appertain not to the Catholic Church, although they believe De
(...) (...) Symb c. 10 (...) (...) (...) (...) 4. De (...) (...). (...). (...).
the same things with us. Those that disagree so from the body of Christ
which is the Church, as their communion is not with all; or that it spread it
self, but is found separate in some part; it is manifest they are not in the
Catholic Church. There is a Church, if you cast your eyes over the extent of
the whole world more abundant in multitude; and also, as those that know
themselves to be of it affirm, more sincere in truth, then all the others; but
of the truth is an other disputation. Division and dissension (...). (...).
(...). (...). 2. c. (...).
makes you heretics; and peace and unity makes us Catholics. And having
accompanied them with these words of saint VINCENTIVS Vm. (...). (...). 9.
(...); O admirable conversion, (or change) the authors of one self opinion,
are called Catholics, and the followers of it beretickes! And with those of
saint Prosp. de (...) and (...). Dei (...). 4. (...).
PROSPER; (...) that communicates with the universal church, is a christian
and a (...) catholic; and he that communicates not therewith, is an heretic
and Antichrist. It seemed to me that I had sufficiently showed that the title
of Catholic is not a simple title of belief, but of communion also. It is
true, I expected not, that a question that had been anciently moved and adiuged
even with the interuention of the authority of Emperors, should again have
been contested against, and put into dispute. For in the controversy of
Catholics and Donatistes upon the word Catholic (before (...) (...) (...).
the decision whereof, as saint Austin says, the Church was never perfectly
treated of, no more then before the questions of the Arrians, the Trinity had
never been perfectly treated of) the thesis or tenet of the Catholics, was
that the word, Catholic, was a word of Communion, and not a word of Simple
belief. The Christian Africans are called says Saint AVGVSTIN, and not with
out good right, Catholics, protesting Ang. Collat. Carth. l 3
by their proper Communion the word (...): And again we show by the
testimony of our Communion, that we have the Catholic Church: and the
thesis of the Donatistes August. ibid.
contrariwise was, that the word Catholic, was not a word of Communion but of
belief and observation of precepts. The Donatistes (says Saint Aug. ib id.
AUSTIN) answered that the word Catholic was not derived from the
universality of nations, but from the fulness of the Sacraments; that is to
say, from the integrity of the doctrine. Aug. Epist 48.
And in the Epistle to VINCENTIVS Rogat. Thou think (said he) then to say
some subtle thing when thon interpretest the name of Catholic, not from the
Communion of the whole world, but from the observation of all the precepts and
divine Sacraments. And again: you are those that hold the Catholic faith,
not from the Communion of the whole world, hut from the observation of all the
precepts and divine Sacraments. And the judgment that was made g. Aug ibid
upon this difference, was that the word, Catholic, was a title, not of
simple belief, but of Communion also. After a contention of 40. days, (says
Optat. Mileuit. cont. Parm (...) 1.
OPTATVS Mileuit. speaking of the first disputation of the Donatistes, the
final sentence of the Bishops Eunomius and Olimpius, (whcih were the Bishops
deputed to judge the possession of the word, Catholic, between the
Catholics b. Aug. b reuin. col l. 3.
of Africa and the Donatistes) was that that was Catholic, that was spread
throughout the world. And Saint AVSTINE speaking of the Conference of Carthage;
The Commissarie, said he, answered, that he could not by (...), attribute the
name Catholic to any other then to those, to whom the Emperor c. In Joan.
ttact. 6.
(from whom he had his Commision) had attributed it. And in an other place,
citing the law of the Emperors, made upon this Conference: The Emperors, said
he, have forbidden, that those that usurp the name of Christians out of the
Communion of the Catholic Church, and will not in peace adore the author of
(...), should dare to possess any thing under the title of the Church. And
again, Aug. Psalm. 57.
The Emperors of our Communion have ordained laws against all heretics: now
they call heretics, those that are not of their Communion, amongst which you
are. e. Aug. de pastor. c. 13
And after, disputing with the same Donatists: Thou ask (said he) of a
stranger, whether he be a pagan or a Christian; he answers thee, a Christian;
thou ask him whether he be a catechumenus or one of the faithful, least he
should intrude himself unlawfully to the Sacraments; he answers thee, one of
the faithful; thou ask him of what Communion he is, he answers thee, a
Christian Catholic.

CHAP. II. Of the Conditions of the Catholic Church.
The pursuit of the kings answer.
NOw the King belieues simply, without color or fraud; that the Church o^f
God is one only by name and effect, Catholic and universal, spread over all
the world, out of which he affirms himself, there can be noe hope of
Salvation: he condemns and detestes those, which either heretofore, or since,
have departed from the faith of the Catholic Church, and are become
heretics, as the Man ichees: or from her Communion, and are become
schismatickes, as the Donatists. Against which two kinds of men principally
saint AUGUSTINE has written the things alleged in this observation.

THE REPLY.
TELESIVS a Stripling of Greece, having won the prize and victory of the
Combat in the Pythian games, when there was question of leadinge him in
triumph, there arose such a dispute between the diverse nations there present,
every one being earnest to have him for their own, as the one drawing him one
way, the other an other way, instead of receiving the honor which was
prepared for him, he was torn and dismembered even by those that strove who
should honor him most. So happenes it to the Church: All those that bear the
name of Christians auow that to her only appertains the victory over hell, and
that whosoever will have part in the prize and glory of this Triumph, must
serve under her ensign; But when they come to debate of the true body of this
society, then every sect desirous to draw her to themselves, they rent and
tear her in pieces; and in steed of embracing the Church which consistes in
unity, they embrace schism and division, which is the death and ruin of the
Church. The cause, or rather the pretext of this evil, comes from two faults,
that the adversaries of the Church commit in the distinction of the word
Ecclesia, or Church, which makes the possession uncertain and disputable: The
one is the fraudulent restriction of the term of the Church to the only
invisible number of the predestinate, by which (when they feel themselves
pressed to represent the succession of their Church) they save themselves like
Homers Aeneas, or Virgils Cacus, in obscurity and darkness. The other is the
equivocal and captious extension of the same word, Church, to all Sects,
which profess the name of Christ, by which (when they see themselves excluded
from the refuge of their inuissble Church) they have recourse from darkness to
confusion, and confess that there has been always a visible Church, but
sometimes pure in faith, and sometimes impure, that is to say now a Church,
and now noe Church. And therefore I attribute it to a singular care of the
providence of God, that his Majesty saying he believes the catholic Church,
has added as to prevent all theses shifts, without color or fraud. For to
believe the catholic church without color or fraud, is to believe her in
the sense that the Fathers have believed and understood her the Fathers I say
which have lest us these sentences pronunced sometimes, as in the hypothesis
against the Manichees and Donatists; but as in the thesis against all kinds of
heretics or schismatickes in general that out of the Catholic Church there
is noe salvation; that whosoever is separate from the Catholic Church cannot
have life, and other such like, which his Majesty protested to approve. Now
first by the word Catholic Church, these Fathers have believed and intended
such a Church, as these words of Esaias (...). In the last days, the Mountain
of the Lord, shall be on the topp of all the Mountains, Esai 2.
and all the hills shall flow to her. The people shall walk in thy light, and
the (...). 60.
(...). 61.
kings in the brightness of thy Orient. Their seed shall be known amongst the
Matthew. 5.
people, and their king in the midst of the nations. And these of our Lord;
The Matthew. 18.
City built upon the mountain cannot be hid. Tell it to the Church., and if
he hear (...). de (...). (...).
not the Church, let him be to thee as a heathen or publican: that is to say,
a Church visible, manifest, and eminent, and not a Church either perpetually
invisible, or (as if she had Giges ring) now visible and now invisible. The
Church (says Saint CYPRIAN) clothed with the light of our Lord, sheds her
beams through the whole world. And S. CRISOSTOME g It is more easy Chris in
Esai. hom. 4.
to extinguish the Sun, then to obscure the Church. And again; h The Sun
(...) not so manifest, nor the ligh thereof, as the actions of the Church. And
Saint idem in Esai c. 2.
AUGUSTINE. a The Church is not hidden, for she is not put under a bushel, but
in a Candlestick, that she may give light to all those which are in the house.
And Aug. de unit. Eccles c. 14.
of her our Lord has said, The City built upon the Mountain cannot be hidd.
And in an other place b It is a condition common to all heretics, not to Aug.
cont. Parm. l. 2. cap 3.
see the thing that is in the world the most manifest, and built in the light
of all the Nations, out of the unity whereof, all that they do (though they
seem to do it very exactly) can noe more warrant them against the wrath of
God, then the Spiders webb against the rigor of the cold. And again; he has
this most certain Cont. lit. Petil lib. 1. cap. 104.
mark, that she cannot be hidden; she is then known to all nations. The sect
of Donatus is unknown to many Nations, then that cannot be she. And in deed
how could it be that the Fathers had not had need to be purged with Hellebore,
who employed these sentences against the here tickes and Schismatickes of
their ages, to press them to return to the Church. That he shall never come
to the rewards of Jesus Christ, that has Cypr. de unit. Eccles.
abandoned the Church of Christ: d that he shall not have God sor his Father,
that Ibid.
has not the Church for his Mother: e That he cannot live, that withdrawes
himself Ibidem.
from the Church, and buildes to himself other seats and other dwellinges;
Ibidem.
Ibid. and Hier. cont.
f That Christ is not with those who assemble themselves out of the Church: g
That he who shall not be in the Arcke, shall perish at the coming of the
flood: h that Lucifer.
he which eats the lamb out of his house, is profane: i That out of the
Catholic Hler. cont. Lucif.
Church none can be saved: k whosoever is separate from the Catholic 1. (...).
Church cannot have life: l That the Catholic Church alone is the body Carth.
4. c. 1.
of Christ: m That out of this body, the holy Ghost quickens none: n That
whosoever Aug. ep. 152.
then will have the holy Ghost, should take heed of being separated from her,
and likewise take heed of entering into her fainedly, if they had believed that
Idem ep. 50
Ibidem.
the Catholic Church had been an invisible flock of predestinate Ibidem.
persons, known only to God, and into whose Roll as appointed from all
eternity none could enter or be added thereu nto?

SECONDLY by the word Catholic Church the Fathers did not intend the Chaos
and general Mass of all Christian Sects and Societies, as well pure as
impure, as well heretics as Schismatickes; as our adversaries do when they
feel themselves excluded from their refuge of an invisible Church: but by the
word Cacholicke Church the Fathers intended a Society, such both for doctrine
and Communion, as these prophetical Oracles painted her forth: o Thou art
wholly fair, and there is noe Cant. 4.
spott in thee. p Thou shall be called the city of Justice, the faithful
city. Esai. 1.
Esai. 52.
q Through thee shall noe more pass any that is uncircumcised or unclean.
Ose. 2.
r. I will espouse thee in faith, and thou shall know that I am the Lord.
Matthew. 16.
Tim 3.
And these Evangelical decrees; s The gates of Hell shall not prevail 2. Corinthians. 6.
against her. t The Church is the pillar and soundation of truth. u There is
noe communion of Christ with Belial, nor of light with darkness. x If any 2.
Joan.
one bring not this doctrine, say not to him so much, as well be it with thee;
for whosoever shall say to him, well be it with thee, communicates in his
wicked works: that is to say they understood by that term, socitie of
Christians, extracted and contracted by the just and sufficient means of
external vocation to salvation; and distinct and purified, from the impurity
and contagion of all the heretical and schismatical sects. y If thou hear
in any part Hier. cont. Lucifer,
(says saint IEROM) of men denominated from any but from Christ, as
Marcionites, (...), Montayners or Campites, know that it is not the Church of
Christ, but the Synagogue of Antichrist. and OPTATVS Mileuitanus z besides the
only, Church which is truly Catholic, the others amongst the heretics, are
(...). l. 1.
esteemed to be, but are not so indeed. And again, The Church is one, which
cannot Idem l. 2.
be amongst us, and amongst you; it remains then that it be in one only place;
And De (...). (...). c. 7.
Saint AUGUSTINE to Honoratus; Although there be many heresies of Christians,
and that all would be called Catholics, yet there is always one Church, if
you cast your eyes upon the extent of the whole world, more abundant in
multitude, and also as those that know themselves to be of it, more sincere in
truth, then all the rest: but of the truth, that is an other Dispute. That
which suffices for the question, is, that there is one Church, to which
different heresies impose different names, whereas they are all called by there
particular names that they dare not disauow; from whence it appears in the
indgment of any not preoccupate with favor, to whom the name of Catholic,
whereof they De vera relig. cap. 6.
are all ambitions, ought to be attributed. And in the book of the true
Religion: We must hold the Christian Religion, and the Communion of that
Church, that is called Catholic both by her own, and by strangers: for
whether heretics and Schismatickes will or will not, when they speak not
with theires, but with stranges they call the Catholics noe otherwise then
Catholics. And in the Comentary upon the 149. Psalm; The Church of the
Saints is the Catholic Church: The Church of the Saints is not the Church of
heretics; she has been marked out hefore she was seen, and she has been
exhibited to the end she should be seen. And De side and symb. c. 10.
in the book of Faith and of the Creed; We believe one Church, and that, the
Catholic; for the heretics and Schismatickes, call also their
congregations Churches; but the heretic beleeuinge of God false things
violate the Faith; And Schismatickes by unjust dissentions separate themselves
from brotherly Charity, although they believe the same things that we believe
and therefore neither the heretics do appertain to the Catholic Church
because she loves God; nor the Schismatickes because she loves her neighbor.
And certainly how could the Fathers without making themselves ridiculous te
their auditors; beat down the heretics and Schismatickes with these
sentences, Council. Carth 4. (...) 1.
That out of the Catholic Church there is noe Salvation; that Aug. ep. 15 2.
whosoever is not in the Catholic Church, cannot have life: De (...). ad
(...). (...) 4
that he shall not have God for his, father, who will not have the Church for
his mother: Cyp de (...) (...).
That Christ is not with those that assemble out of the Church: (...).
That although they should be slain for the confession of Christ, this spot is
not washed away even with blood: (...).
That he cannot be a martyr, that is not in the Church: Aug de gest. (...)
(...).
That out of the Catholic Church, one may have Faith, Sacraments, Orders, and
in sum, every thing, except salvation: Prosp promis. and (...).
That he that communicates not with the Catholic Church, is an heretic and
Antichrist: (...). de (...) (...). c. 19.
That noe heretic nor Schismaticke, that is not restored to the Catholic
church before the end of this life, can be saved: if they had believed, that
all the Sects that profess the name of Christ both heretics and
Schismatickes, had been in the Catholic Church. THIRDLY by the word
Catholic Church; they did not intend a Church interrupted and intermitting,
as that of the protestants, which is borne (...). 4. (...) 5
and dies by fittes, like the Tyndarides, but such a Church, as these words of
the prophet describe; (...). 54.
As in in the days of Noe, I swore that I would no more bring the waters of
the flood upon the earth; so have I sworn I will no more be angry against
thee: (...). 92
Thou shall noe more be called the forsaken: (...). 37
I will place my sanctification in the midst of them for ever. (...). 8.
I will noe more do to the rest of this people as in times past. And these of
our Lord: (...). 16.
The gates of hell shall not prevail against her. (...) (...).
I am with you until the consummation of all ages. (...). (...).
The Spirit of truth shall dwell with you eternally. (...). (...).
Let the one grow with the other, until the harvest; that is to say, a
Church permanent eternal, and not capeable of ruin. Alex. ep. ad Alex.
Theodoret (...).
We acknowledge (said that great ALEXANDER Bishop of Alexandria) one only
Catholic and Apostolic Church which E Eulex
as she can never be rooted out though all the world should undertake to
oppose her, so she outhrowes disperseth all the wicked assaulth of heretics.
And Saint ATHANASIVS; 1. cap. 4. l. Athan. orat.
The Church is invincible though hell it self should arise with all the power
thereof, against her. And THEOPHILUS; Theof. ad Epiph apud Hierom.
God in all times grants one self grace to his Church, to wit; that that
Body should be kept entire, and that the venom of the Doctrine of heretics
shall have noe power over her. And Saint AUGUSTINE. in the comentary upon the
47. psalm; Ep. 67.
God (says he) has founded her eternally, let not heretics divided into
factions boaste; let them not lift themselves up, that say here is Christ and
there is Christ. And again; But perchance this City, that has possessed the
whole world, shall be one day ruined; never may it happen: God has founded
her eternally: If then God has founded her eternally, wherefore fear thou
that Ang. Psalm. 101.
her foundation should fall? And in the Comentary upon the 101. psalm; But his
Church, which has been of all nations, is noe more, she is perished; so say
they that are not in her; O impudent voice! And a little after; this voice so
abominable, so detestable, so full of presumption and falsehood, which is
sustained with noe truth, illuminated with noe wisdom, seasoned with noe
salt, vain, rash, headie, pernicious, the holy Ghost has foreseen it. And in
the treaty of the Christian combat: They say the whole Church is perished,
and Ang. de ago^. Christ c. 29.
the relickes remain only on Donatus his side. O proud and impious tongue!
And in the work of Baptism against the Donatists: If the Church vere perished
in Cyprians time, from whence did Donatus appear? from what earth is he sprung
up? from what Sea is he come forth? from what heaven is he fallen? And in the
third book against Parmenian; How can they vaunt to have any Church, if she
have ceased from those times? And in the explication 1. De bap. cont Dol 3. c.
2.
of the Creed to the Cathecumenistes: The Catholic Church is she, that
sighting with all heresies may be opposed, but cannot be overthrown. Cont.
Parm. l. 3. capt. 3.
All heresies are come out from her, as unprofitable branches, cut from the
vine: but she stays in her vine, in her root, in her Charity; And the gates
of hell De Symbol. ad, Catech. l. (...). c. 5.
shall never overthrow her. Behold without color or fraud, what the Fathers
understood by the word Catholic Church to wit; a Church visible and eminent,
above all other Christian societies; A Church pure from all contagion of
schism and heresy; A Church perpetual, and which had never suffered nor
never could suffer any interruption, neither in her faith, in her Communion,
nor in her visibilitie; This Church if the most excellent King have, let hin
give her to us; if not, let him receive Anguso. de unit. Eul. c. 6.
her from us: Aut det, (as saint AVSTINE said, to the Donatists,) aut accipiat.

Of the proceeding of the Father, for the preservation of the unity of the
Church. CHAP. III.
The pursuit of the Kings Answer,
THe King commendes also the prudence of the religious Bishops, who in the 4
Council of Carthage, (as it is here truly observed,) added to the form of
the examination of Bishops, a particular interrogatory upon this point, And his
Majesty is not ignorant, that the Fathers of the ancient Church have
oftentimes done many things by form of accommodation for the good of peace,
and to the end to prevent the breach of unity and mutual Communion, whose
example he protests he is (...) to imitate, and to follow the steps of those
that procure peace even to the Altars, that is to say: as much as in the
present estate of the Church the integrity of his Conscience will permit him.
For he will give place to none; either in extreme grief, he suffers for the
separation of the members of the Churdh, which the good Fathers have so much
detested; or in his dosire, to communicate, if it were possible for him, with
all the members of the mystical body of our Lord Jesus Christ.

THE REPLY.
IT was not by way of prudence, as prudence signifies a human virtue, that the
Fathers pronounced this decree, that out of the Catholic Church salvation
could not be obtained; but by way of decision, and as an article of faith. For
this cause (says saint AUGUSTINE upon the Creed,) Aug. de Symb ad Cathech.
l. 4. c. 10.
The Conclusion of this Sacrament is determined by the holy Church, for as
much as if any one be found ont of it he shall be excluded from the number of
the Children: And he shall not have God for his Father, that will not have the
Church for his Mother; and it shall serve him for nothing to have believed or
done so many, and so many good works, without the true end or butte of the
souer aigne good. And saint FVLGENTIVS in his book of the Fulg. de sid ad
(...).
Faith, Hold this firmly, and doubt it not, that every heretic and
Schismaticke haptized in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
if before the end (...). c. 39.
of this life he be not reunited to the Church Catholic, whatsoever alms he
distribute, yea though he should shed his blood for the name of Christ, cannot
be saved And that which the Fathers have done to hinder the breach of peace,
and of mutual communion, has passed noe further then either to tolerate some
local and particular customs, which brought more burden then profit, as the
custom some Africans had, not to touch the ground with their naked feet in
the Octaues of their Baptism; or to endure the manners and conversation of
some vicious men, without applyinge the iron and corrosiue of excommunication,
for fear of diuidinge the Church, insteede of purginge it from wicked persons;
From whence proceeded that famous sentence of saint AUGUSTINE: They tolerate
for the good of A (...). (...). (...)
unity that, which they hate for the good of equity. As for that which they
have done for the reestablishme^t of peace, it has bee^ exte^ded to the
yeeldinge something, in the severity of discipline. For when Arrian or
Donatist Bishops came back to the Church, the Church in favor of the people
which followed them, received them by a form of general rehabilitatio^ with
faculty to exercise their Episcopal power; Now this was against the ordinary
rigor of the Canons. And therefore saint AUGUSTINE Aug (...). 50.
has from thence taken occasion to say, Thas as the trees, that are
inoculated, receive a wound in their bark, to give way to those branches that
should be graffed in; so the Church receives a wound in her discipline, to the
end to take in, and reincorporate heretical people which were converted, and
return together with their Bishops; but not that the love of peace, has ever
transported the Fathers so far, as to yield never so little in matters of
Faith. Contrariwise saint BASILE witnesses; a That they (...) (...). (...)
(...) (...) 4. (...).
have always rather chosen to suffer a thousand deaths then to b betraie one
syllable thereof. And saint EPIPHANIVS recited by saint IEROM says: c That
for one word, or two contrary to faith, many heresies have been cast forth of
the Church. And S. AUGUSTINE; (...). (...). (...).
That the things contrary unto faith and good manners, the Church does neither
approve them, conceal them, nor do (...) (...) (...) (...).
them. Therefore his Majesty ought not to have feared to imitate wholly the
zeal of the Fathers for the good of peace, and to do for the restoringe the
unity of the Church all things that the ancient Catholic church has
approved practiced, and taught. Neither ought he to have added to his offer the
exception of that proverb; even to the Altars; since our of the true Church
(such as was that of the Fathers to whose only Conditions we exact his
Majesty's communion with ours) there are noe true Altars, but only Altars
agaiust Altars; that is to say profane and Schismatic Altars, as those of
Jeroboam were, and the high places in the time of the law. Nor finally should
he limit the desire he has to communicate with all the true members of the
mystical body of Christ, within this Condition, if it were possible, for it
is so possible to communicate with all the actual members of the mystical
body of Christ, that con trariwise it is impossible, (except in case of error
of fact) to communicate with any one of them, but you must communicate either
immediately or mediatly with all the rest; for the Church is that Society
Psalm. 122.
whereof DAVID said; Jerusalem which is built as a City, whose participation
is in unity. And saint CYPRIAN; The Catholic Church, (...) epist ad Pupp.
which is one, is not dismembered nor divided, but keeps herself united, and
is glewed together by the cement of the Prelates adheringe the one to the
other. And saint AUGUSTINE; Those, whose Communion is not with all; or that
Aug de (...). (...). cap. 4.
do spread themselves but yet find themselves in some part divided; it is
manifest, they are not in the Catholic Church. And again; Whosoever
defends one (...) (...) p. 3 c. 101.
part separate from the rest, let him not usurp the title of Catholic. And
in an other place; It may be, will some one say, that there are other (...) of
De Pastor. c. 13.
God, I know not where, whereof God has care, but I know them not: But he is
too absurd, even in Common sense, that imagins such things.

Of the necessity of communicatinge with the Catholic Church. CHAP. IV.
The pursuit of the kings Answer.
THese things being so, the king nevertheless esteems that he has very
just cause to dissent from them who without any distinction and exception
(...) press this Communion.

THE REPLY.
Cont. Parm. l. 2 cap 11
THere is says saint AUGUSTINE noe just necessity to divide unity; Cont.
Parm. l 3. cap. 4.
and there is (says again the same Doctor) noe assurance of unity but in the
Church, which built according to Gods promise upon the mountain cannot be
hidden. For besides that the examination of the Church is so easy and so
certain as saint AUSTIN says: De unit. Eccl c. 10 c De unit. Eccl c. (...).
I have the most manifest voice of my pastor who expresses to me, and points
me out the Church without any ambiguitie: And again, Ibid. c 20
this is noe obscure question, wherein they may deceive you, of whom the lord
has foretold, that they shall come and say here is Christ: And that the
particular examination of Faith contrariwise is so dangerous and difficult as
yet most learned have deceived themselves in it; And as saint Ierom cries
out; There is great danger in Hieron. in ep. ad (...). l. 1.
speakinge in the Church, for fear least by a wrong interpretation, the
Gospel of Christ may be made the Gospel of a man, or which is worse, the
Gospel of the devil. There is further this difference, which is, that he who
has the Church, is sure to adhere to the true Faith though he know not
distinctly all the articles thereof, and that he is in the way of Salvation;
where he, that has Faith, and is not in the Church, has noe hope of
Salvation. If I have all Faith says Saint PAVLE and (...) 1. Cor. 13.
not Charity, I am nothing. And Saint AVGVSTIN, He that has Charity is
secure, a Aug in Psalm. 21.
and none can transporte charity out of the Catholic Church. And elsewhere De
sermon. Dom in mont. c. 5.
If Schismatickes had Charity, they would not rend the body of Christ, which
is the Church. By means whereof, as much as Charity is more excellent then
Faith, (followinge that oracle of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 13.
but the greater of the three is Charity,) so much the instance of the Church
is more necessary, then that of Faith. (...). 10.
Above all these things, says saint PAVLE, hold Charity, which is the bond
of perfection; and let the peace of Christ, whereby you have been called into
one body, hold the principal place in your hearts. And again, let us not
for sake our Congregation as some have accustomed to do. And saint Jude, Woe
be to those, that perish, in the Contradiction of Core. And a while after,
people that separate themselves, sensual men not having the Spirit. And it is
a thing so acknowledged by the Fathers, that they affirm, that faith it self
turns to increase of damnation to those, that possess it out of the Church;
yea they hold the crime of Schism to be worse then that of infidelity and
Idolatry. De bapt. cont Donat. l. 1. c. 8.
Those, says Saint AUSTIN, whom the Donatists do heal from the wound of
infidelity and Idolatry, they hurt them more greevously with the wound of
Schism. And for a proof of his saying, he alleges the example of Core,
Dathan, and Abiron, and other Schismatickes of the old Testament, who were all
sent quick into hell, and punished more greevouslie, then the Idolators. Ibid.
l 2. (...). 6.
Who doubts, says he, but that was committed most criminally that was punist
most severely? And therefore, as the ancient heretics have always against
the unity of the Church pressed and Cried out, the Faith, the Faith; so the
ancient Fathers against the divisions of heretics and Schismatickes, have
always pressed and cried out, the Church the Church. Iren. (...). (...). l. 4.
c. 62.
He shall judge, says S. IRENEVS those that make Schisms in the Church,
ambitions men, not having the honor of God before their eyes; but rather
embracing their own interests, then the unity of the Church, and for little
and light causes deuidinge the great and glorious body of Christ. And a little
after, For in the end they cannot make any so important a reformation, as the
evil of the Schism is pernicious. And saint DENIS of Alexandria, writing to
Nouatian Apud (...) (...). (...). (...). (...). l 6.
Certainly all things should rather be endured, then to consent to the
division of the Church of God; those martyrs being noe less glorious, that
expose themselves to hinder the dismembringe of the Church, then those that
suffer rather then they will offer Sacrifice to Idols. And saint CYPRIAN;
Cyp. de (...). Eccl.
Do those, that assemble themselves without the Church of Christ, suppose
Christ to be with them in their assembly? Allthough they should be dragged
to death, for the confession of the name of Christ, yet this spott is not washed
away from them with blood: the inexpiable and inexcusable crime of discord is
not purged vith death? t self; he cannot be a martyr that is not in the
Church. And saint PACIAN; Ad Sympr epist. (...).
Although (says he) Nouatian has been put to death, yet has he not been
crowned: Wherefore not? because it was out of the peace of the Church, out of
concord, out of this mother, whereof l (...) in cp. (...) Ephesians. hom. 11.
whosever will be a martyr must be a portion. And Saint CHRYSOSTOM; nothing
stirrs (says he) so sharply the wrath of god, as the division of the Church;
so as when we have done all other kinds of good works, we shall deserve no
less cruel punishment deuidinge the unity and fulness of the Church, then
those that pierced and divided his own blessed body. And S. AUGUSTINE: De
(...) (...) (...).
Out of the Catholic Church all things may be had except Salvation etc. They
may have and preach the faith in the name of the Father, the sonnne and the
holy ghost; but they can nowhere have Salvation, but in the Catholic
Church. And a little after: I say more, if a man Ibidem.
out of the Church suffer the enemy, of Christ, I say not his Catholic
brother that desires his Salvation, but the enemy of Christ; if he suffer him
without, and that he being out of the Church, the enemy of Christ say to him,
offer incense to Idolles, adore my Gods, and for not adoring them he be put to
death by the enemy of Christ; he may well shedd his blood, but he cannot
obtain the Crown. And in an other place: Aug. (...). 204.
Being constituted out of the Church, and separated from the heap of unity,
and the bond of Charity, thou should be punished with eternal death, though
thou should have been burnt alive for the name of Christ. And again: I go
not to worship In (...) 88
the devils, I serve not stocks and stones, but I am of Donatus his party.
What will it serve thy turn, that the Father is not offended, since he will
revenge the Mothers (...)? And in his work against the Adversary of the law,
and the Prophets: Contra aduers. leg. and proph. l. 1. c. 17.
If he hear not the Church, let him be to thee as a heathen or publican; which
is more grieuons, then if he were stricken by the sword, consumed with flames,
exposed to wild beasts. And in the book of Pastors: Lib. de past. c. 12.
The devil does not say, let them be Donatistes, and not Arrians; be they
here, be they there, they appartaine to him, that gathers without any
distinction. Let him, says the devil, adore Idols, he his mine; let him
remain in Jewish superstition, he is mine: let him abandon unity, and enter
into such or such an heresy, he is mine. And in the profession to be made by
the Donatistes returninge to the Church: Epist. 48
We thought it had not imported in which part we had held the Faith of Christ;
but thanckes be to our Lord, that has taken us in from the division, and
taught us, that it belonhgs to God who is one, to be served in unity. And
FVLGENTIVS the second Saint AUGUSTINE, and the Phoenix borne a new out of his
ashes: Fulg. de remiss. pec. c. 22.
Out of this Church neither does the title of Christian warrant any body,
nether does baptism conferr Salvation, nor can they offer a Sacrifice
acceptable to God, nor receive remission of Sins, nor obtain life eternal:
For there is one only Church, one only dove, one only well beloved, one only
sponse. And again De fide ad Petr. (...). c. 39.
Believe this steadfastly without doubting, that every heretic or schismaticke
baptized in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, if before
the end of his life, he be not reconciled to the Catholikke Church, what alms
so ever he gives, yea though he should shed his blood for the name of Christ,
he cannot obtain salvation. Fair, but fearful lessons for those, who
think, that in what communion soever they be, so they believe in Christ, they
may be saved.

Of the marks of the Church. CHAPTER V.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
AMongst the proper marks of the Church, the King confesses, that that is
greatly necessary; but his Majesty is not of opinion, that it is the true form
of the Church: and as the philosopher terms it, (...), that wherein it
consists.

THE REPLY.
Neither is it necessary, that a condition, for to be the mark of any thing,
should be the essential form of the thing: for then we should have noe mark
of any substantial thing. For we know not the essential form of any one of
them, except only of man, and for more then three thousand years, the true
essential form of man was unknown; witness the jest of Diogenes, upon the
definition of a man given by Plato. And therefore Saint BASILE reprocheth it to
Eunomius, Cont Eun. (...). 1.
(who had boasted that he knew the essence of the Father,) that he knew not so
much as the essence of the ground whereupon he walked every day; and that what
comes to the knowledge of men, are but accidents. Neither on the other side is
it necessary, that the essential form of a thing should be the mark of the
same thing. Nay contrariwise, to be the essential form of any thing, and to
be the mark of the same thing; are commonly repugnant, and incompatible
conditions. For the mark does demonstrate the thing to the sense; and the
essential form does show it to the understanding; the mark designs the
thing in the existence, the essential form designs it in the offense: The
mark teaches where the thing is; and the essential form teaches what it
is; the mark is sooner known, then the thing; and contrariwise the thing is
sooner known, then the essential form of the thing: for the thing defined
(as Aristotle says) 1. Phys. c. 1.
preceedes in knowledge the definition; that is to say; the whole is known
before the resolution of the thing into his essential parts. And therefore to
say, that the eminency of the Communion is not the essential form of the
Church, hinders it not from being a mark of the Church: and a mark likewise
not only greatly necessary, but absolutely necessary: Aug (...). (...). (...).
(...), (...). (...)
She has (says Saint AUGUSTINE) this most certain mark, that she cannot be
hidden; she is then known to all nations, the Sect of Donatus is unknown to
many nations, therefore that is not she. Again, on the other side, to say
that the doctrine is the essential form, or belongs to the essential form
of the Church, makes not, that (...) it should be a mark of the Church: for a
mark must have three conditions: The first is, to be more known then the
thing, since it is it that makes the thing known: the second; that the thing
never be found without it; And the third, as we have said elsewhere, In the
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
that it be never found, either alone, if it be a total mark, or with its
fellows, if it be a mark in part, without the thing. Now the truth of
doctrine in all instances thereof is much harder to be known, then the
society of the Church, I said in all instances thereof; because to know the
right of the cause of the Church in one particular question, with one or other
Sect, suffices not to know the Church by the doctrine, but it is necessary to
know the truth of the doctrine of the Church, in all her particularities,
contested by heresies, as well past as present; before we can (...) by virtue
of the examination of the doctrine, where the true Church is. For there needs
no more, but that she go wrong in any one controversy, to make her fall
from the title of the true Church. Now who is he that can vaunt to know the
integrity of the doctrine of the Church in all her instances, and to have made
the examination against every one of the other societies, by infallible and
insoluble proofs to all their answers, and by invincible and irrefutable
answers to all their objections? And if any could do this, who knows not,
that the simple people, and ignorant and rusticall persons, (of whose Salvation
nevertheless God has the same care, that he has of the learned, and to whom
the marks of the Church should be equally common, since they are equally
obliged to obey her;) are not capable of this examination? August cont. (...).
Fund. c. 4.
For the rest of the people (says Saint AUGUSTINE) it is not the quicknes of
understanding, but the simplicity of belief, that secures them. And by
consequent, who sees not, that they must have other marks to know the Church
by, then that of her doctrine; to wit, marks proportionable to their
capacity, that is to say, external and sensible marks, as (...),
antiquity, perpetuity, and such like; even as children and ignorant persons
must have external and sensible marks, and other then the essential form of
a man, to know and discern a man from other living creatures: August. cont
Faust, lib. 13 c. (...).
By what manifest mark (cries out Saint AUGUSTINE, speaking in the person of a
Catechumenist) by what demonstration shall I (that am yet little and weak, and
cannot discern the pure truth, from the many errors) know the Church of
Christ, to which I am constrained to believe by the event of so many things
heretofore presaged? for these causes (says he) the Prophet goes forward, and
as it were collecting methodically the motions of that spirit, says, that she
is foretold to be that Church, which is eminent and apparent to all. And a
little after; and also because of the motions of these little ones, who may be
seduced and diuerted by men from the brightness of of the Church, our Lord goes
before them saying; The City Matthew. 5.
built upon the Mountain cannot be hidd. And indeed how is it that Esaie
should prophecy, that Esai. 2.
In the last days the Mountain of the Lord should be on the topp of all the
Mountains, and that all the hills should flow to her, and that the Nations
should come and say; let us go up into the Mountain of our Lord, and into
the house of the God of Jacob, and he will (...) us his ways; if the only
mark to know assuredly the house of the Lord, that is to say, the Church,
were the especial knowledge of his ways? And how should Saint PAVL say
Ephesians. (...)
God has placed in the Church Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and
Doctors, etc. to the end we should be noe more little children, blown about
with every wind of doctrine; if he had not given us other marks to know the
Church, then the purity of doctrine.

Besides, suppose the doctrine to be the mark of the Church; it must be either
the doctrine contested between the parties that pretend the title of the
Church; or the doctrine not contested: now it cannot be the doctrine not
contested, because both sides have it; And less yet the doctrine contested;
for while the truth of the doctrine is contested, it remains undecided of
which side it is; and the certain and assured decision, cannot be made but by
the Church: by which means it is necessary, that, duringe the co^testation of
the doctrine, there must be other marks to know the Church by, which being
acknowledged, the question of the doctrine may be decided. And you cannot say,
that the contested doctrine can be decided by Scripture only, for besides, that
there are matters of Religion which are not any way touched by the Scripture,
(a^s that whereof Saint AUGUST speaks, Co^t. Do.
The Apostles in truth have prescribed nothing of that, but this custom (which
was opposite to Cyprian,) ought to be believed to have taken its original
(...). (...). (...). (...) 23.
from their tradition. Saint JEROME protests, Ier. cont. (...).
that the Scriptures consist not in the reading, but in the understanding; and,
(...) (...). (...) (...). (...). 3.
that by a wrong interpretation, the Gospel of God may be made the Gospel
of a man, nay (which is worse) the Gospel of the devil. Wherefore to judge
surely of the doctrine by the Scripture, it is necessary, to be first assured
of the interpretation of the Scripture; and that by an infallible means. For
all the conclusions of Faith, which are not found in terms express, and
incapable of ambiguitie, in the Scripture, but are drawn by interpretations to
make them conclusions of Faith and decisions infallible and equal to the
authority of their principles, must be drawn from it by an infallible mean.
Now there are but three ways whereby we may pretend to be assured, that a
conclusion drawn from the Scripture should be infallible, and necessarily
agreeable to its principle; to wit, either human discourse, or private
inspiration, or the authority of an external mean interposed from God,
between the Scripture and us; as the magistrate between the law of the Prince
and the people: to interpret to us the words, to gather the sense, and to
sorme and propound the conclusions. For to say that one passage of Scripture
should be interpreted by an other, (besides that there be diverse singular texts
wherein this pretention can have noe place;) this is still to return to the
same difficulty: because one will have the controuerted place interpreted by
one passage; and the other, will have it interpreted by an other; and the very
sense of the passage, which shall be brought to clear the controuerted places,
will again be brought into dispute, and cannot be infalliblie decided, but by
an infallible mean, which must necessarily be one of these three, to wit
either humane discourse, or private inspiration, or the authority of an
external Judge. And from this the verse of NEHEMIAS derogateth not, which is
according to the impression of Geneua, and they interpreted the law by the
Scripture: for it must be read with Saint JEROME, They whilst it was reading,
understood it the word Mikra never having been employed in the Scripture to
signify scripture; but only in the Rabines, (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...)
as Rabby Elias and (...) (...) (...) (...). and (...) (...) (...).
Munster, In the (...) (...) (...) the (...) (...) (...).
and we after them, have other where demonstrated. Now as for humane
discourse, if in the conclusions drawn from principles, which are known and
understood naturally, (as are the principles of natural Philosophy and
metaphisicke) it be subject to commit so many errors; what shall it do in
that, whose principles are not known and understood, but by a supernatural
light? DAVID said to God (...) 118.
Enlighten mine eyes, and I will consider the meruailes of thy law: And
thereupon Saint JEROME cries out, (...) (...) (...). (...) (...) (...) (...).
If so great a Prophet confess the darkness of his ignorance, what shall become
of us little babes? And the Scripture teaches us, that the principles of Faith
ought to be understood by the very same authority, either mediate or immediate,
of him that revealed them. (...) (...)
Jesus, (says saint Luke,) opened the sense of the scriptures to the
disciples. And saint JOHN, Apoc. (...)
the Lamb was found worthy to open the book sealed with seven seals. And
the Eunuche of the Queen of Ethiopia being demanded by S. PHILIP, whether he
understood what he read; Act. 8
how should I understand (said he) here being none to (...) it to me? And
Saint PEETER, (...) Pet. 1
The Scripture is not of private interpretation. And again (...) Pet. 3
There are in the Epistles of our brother Paul things hard to be understood,
that ignorant and light-minded men (...) as the rest of the Scriptures, (mark,
as the rest of the Scriptures) to their own perdition. And not only ignorant
and light-minded men too (glorious Peter) but even the learned and most
learned. For who where ever more learned then those, whose falls S. VINCENTIVS
Lyrinensis does propound for examples of the temptation of the faithful? What
Tertullian, of whom he says Vincent. Lyrin c. 24
as many words, so many Sentences; as many Sentence so many victories? What
Origens? of whom he writes Idem c. 23.
What Christian did not honor him as a Prophet? philosopher did not reverence
him as a Master? What Apollinarius? of whom he cries out: Idem c. 16.
What spirit did ever surmount him in subtilitie, exercise, and doctrine? If
so many great and admirable personages, eminent in piety; and incomparable
in all kind of Science, Tertulians, Origens, Appollinares as soon as they have
withdrawn the raynes of their Spirit from the guide of the Church, to put
them to the guidance of their particular discourse are fallen into so deep
and fearful precipices, and pitts of heresies; who shall dare to assure
himself upon his own particular sense concerning the true and infallible
under standing of the Scripture, and that in all the controversies of Faith; in
any one of which to (...), and make a Sect, is to fall from the title of the
Church, and to loose Salvation in all?

But why should we have recourse to arguments where experience speaks? for as
naturally all men agree in confessing the conclusions of the Mathematics,
because in that kind of Science, humane discourse is infallible; so if in the
consequences, which are drawn by interpretation from Scripture, humane
discourse were an infallible means, all men would naturally agree in the
conclusions of Scripture. Now how far they are from that, the only state of
the controversies of this age does manifest; wherein the Lutherans, the
Caluinistes, the Simple Ana baptists, the Seruetians or new Arrians, (which all
profess to tie themselves to the Scripture,) cannot by the Scripture, agree in
any one of their questions; and do noe more accord one with an other, then
if they had borne away the laurel from the tomb of Bibrias.

And as for the inspiration of the particular Spirit, (besides the danger of
those strong imaginations, that saint AUGUST calls Aug. de Doctore Christ. in
prol.
proud and perilous temptations, which may be mistaken for inspirations; And
besides that it is necessary, that the means, whereby the contentions about
the interpretation of scripture are to be decided, should be common, either in
deed, or in right to both parties contesting (where as the private
inspiration, that one of the parties pretendes is noe common means neither in
deed nor in right to the other) the Scripture aduertiseth us, that 2. Cor 11.
the angel of Satan transformes himself into the angel of light, and
commands us 1. Joan. 4.
to examine the Spirits and discern whether they be of God. Now by what shall
the Spirits be examined, to try whether they be of God? If by the Church; then
we must first know the Church: if by the Scripture; we must first be assured of
the true interpretation of the Scripture: for to examine them by the Scripture,
is to examine them by the true sense, and by the true interpretation of
Scripture; And therefore it is not from the particular inspiration of the
Spirit of God that we must learn what the true interpretation of te Scripture
is: since contrariwise it is from the Scripture truly interpreted, that we
ought to learn whether the Spirit that inspires us be the true Spirit of God.
And then these aduertisements of saint PETER: 2. Pet. 1.
The Scripture is not of private interpretation; t. August. confess. l. (...).
c. 25.
And of saint AVGVSRINE, Hold not priuates truths, least you be deprived of
the truth; exclude as well the refuge of particular inspirations, as the
certainty of humane discourse. Now if neither humane discourse, nor private
inspiration be infallible means to assure a particular man of the true
interpretation of Scripture in every point of Faith, but that he must have
recourse to an external means interposed from God between the Scripture and
us, as the authority of the magistrate between the law of the Prince, and the
people, to draw out, to form, and to propound the decisions for us: What can
this means be, but that where of God says by the mouth of Esaias: Esa. 54.
Thou shall judge every tongue that shall resist thee in judgment? And by his
own; Matthew. 18
The gates of Hell thall not prevail against her. And again Ibid.
Let him that hears not the Church be unto thee as a heathen or a publica. And
by that of S. PAVL: Ephesians. 4.
God has placed in the Church, Apostles, Prophets, Pastors and Doctors etc.
that we may noe longer (...) little Children, waueringe with every wind of
doctrine; And again, The Church y. 1. Tim. 2.
is the Pillar and foundation of trutb? does not Ruff. hist (...). l. 2. c. 9.
RVFFINVS write, that Saint Basile and Saint GREGORY Nazianzene took the
interpretacion of the Scriptures, not from their own sense, but from the
tradition of the Fathers? And does not Saint AUGUSTINE cry out; (...) Psalm. 57.
within the womb of the Church is the dwellinge of truth. And again; Ep. cb.
All the fullness of authority, and all the light of reason for reparation of
human kind, consistes in the only healthful name of Christ, and in his only
Church: And does not VINCENTIVS Lirinensis say, Vinc. Lir. c. (...).
because all understand not the holy Scripture, (by reason of the depth
thereof) in one sense; But one interprets it in one fashion, an other in an
other; so that it seems, there may be as many sever all opinions drawn out of
it, as there are sever all men, for Nouatia^ expounds it one way, Photinus
another way: Sabellius an other, Donatus an other, Arrius, Eunomius,
Macedonius an other, Apollinaris, Priscillianus an other, Iouinian, Pelagius,
Caelestius, and finally Nestorius an other: for these causes it is very
necessary, to avoid the peril as so many great Labyrinths of so diverse
errors, that the line of the prophetical and apostolical interpretation,
should be drawn according to the rule of the Ecclesiastical and Catholic
sense. And have not the ministers of Geneua themselves, noted this in the
margent of their last Bibles? In 2: Tim. c. 2.
The doctrine of Faith requires a domestical and particular instruction,
namely in those that are ordained to deliver it into the Church, least they
should take it in their own particular sense, under color of the Scripture.
And this is it, that was anciently called TRADITION in the Church. Now if the
certainty of the interpretation of the Church ought to be take, (according to
the exposition of the very Geneua Bibles) not from the sense of every
particular man, but from the tradition of the Church: how can it be that the
truth of the under standinge of the Scripture should be the only certain and
infallible mark to discern and know the Church?

But against these proofs, the adversaries of the Church propound objections
which we had best confute before we proceed to an other article. The first
objection is, that Saint AVSTINE in his writing against the Manichees, after
he has made a long list of the marks of the Church, adds this; Aug. co^t.
ep. fundam. cap. 4.
Among you, where no such thing is found as holds and ties me, there soundes
only a promise of the truth; which, if it be so manifestly demonstrated, as
none can call it in question, ought to be preferred before all those things,
whereby I am retained in the Catholic Church. And from hence they conclude,
that S. AUGUSTINE held not the other marks for necessary and infallible, but
only for probable and coniecturall: since he offered to depart from them if
they could demonstrate to him undoubtedly, that the truth was of the other side,

To this I make two answers, one that the truth, whereof Saint AUGUSTINE
speaks, makes nothing for their purpose that allege it. For Saint AUGUSTINE
speaks not there of the truth demonstrated by scripture, which is that
whereof the Protestants vaunt: but of the truth demonstrated by the light of
naturalle reason, which was that, that the Manichees promised: as it appears
by what he said three lines below; Ibid. c. 5.
I would not believe the Gospel, if the authority of the Catholic Church
did not move me to it. And a little after: ibid.
And therefore, if thou must yield me a reason set aside the Gospel; if thou will tie thy-self to the Gospel, I will tie myself to those, by whom I have
believed in the Gospel. And again; Ibid.
The authority of the Catholics being destroyed, I could not believe the
Gospel, because it is by them that I have believed it. And in an other place;
Cont. Faust. l. 13. c. 6.
That which remains for you, is, to say, that you will produce areason so
certain and invincible, as the truth thereof being manifested by it self, it
shall have noe need of the authority of any witness, nor of the verity,
(virtue you must read) of any miracle. The other answer is that Saint
AUGUSTINE did not propound this in the form of a possible condition, (for
contrariwise he disputes of deliberate purpose against the Manichees, that the
natural light of reason could not be the way to come to the knowledge of the
truth of salvation;) but in the form of an impossible condition: and which
consequently diminishes nothing from the efficacy of the marks of the
Church, as it appears by what he adds immediately after; Cont. ep fundam. c.
4.
But if it be only promised, and not exhibited, none shall separate me from
this Faith which by so many and so great bonds (so calls he the external and
sensible marks of the Church) binds my Spirit to the Christian Religion.

The second objection, that the adversaries of the Church oppose, is, that the
external and sensible marks, that the Fathers assign to the Church, as
antiquity, perpetuity, eminency and succession, belong not to the Church
only; for as much as many other things may claim antiquity, as the Sun,
the Sea, the mountains, and many other; succession, as the Springs, the
brooks, the rivers, and many other; universality, as the air the earth and
the other Elements: and even amougst Religions, that of the pagans, has
heretofore had eminency and universality; and that of the Jews, has still
antiquity and perpetuity. Certainly a childish and ridiculous objection; for
first the marks that God has given to his Church, have not been imposed upon
her, to distinguish her from all kinds of things, but to distinguish her only
from those things that are contained, though equiuocally, under the same next
kind, and may be supposed and taken for Churches, that is to say, from other
Christian societies; to wit, from heretical and Schismatic Sects, which
challenge and pretend by false marks the title of the Church: no more then the
marks that Golodmithes given to gold that it will not euaporate in the fire,
and that it will resist the coupelle and the water of separation, are not give
it, to discern it from all kind of bodies; for there are other bodies, to
which these conditions arc common, as glass and diamondes; but to discern it
from false gold, that is from metalls made and sophisticated, that may be
supposed and made to pass for gold. And this also Saint AUGUSTINE esteems
the Church would insinuate in the Canticle, where after she has demanded of
her spouse marks of the place, where he dwells; she says, Least I be as
hidden amougst the flocks of thy competitors, Aug. de unit. Eccl. c. 14.
that is to say (says saint AUGUSTINE) of those, that being in the beginning
with thee, would assemble without, not thy flock, but their stocks. For what
is this but to say, that the Church demaundes marks of her spouse, not to be
discerned from all kind of things, but to be discerned only from the society
of heretics, which bear by false marks the name of Christ, and the title of
Churches? And secondly, it is not necessary, that the marks in part, (that is
to say, those, that taken separatlie, have not the entire office of marks,)
may not be found every one a part, without the thing marked; but that the
thing may not be found without every one of them, nor they, taken jointly and
altogether, without the thing whose mark they are. And therefore the argument
of the marks in part separated, is good to argue negatiuely, and to say with
saint Austine against the Donatistes; Cont. lit. Pet l. 2. c. 104.
The Church has this most certain mark, that she cannot be hidden, she is
then known to all nations; the sect of Donatus is unknown to many nations;
then that is not she. Or with saint IEROM against the Luciferians, Hier. (...).
Lucif.
Hilarious being dead a deacon, he could ordain no Priest after him, now that
is noe Church that has noe Priests; or with the same saint AUGUSTINE against
all heresies in general; De Sym. (...) Cathech l. 4.
every heresy. that sitts in corners, is a concubine, and no matron. But the
argument of the marks in part, taken jointly is good to argue both negatiuely
and affirmatively; and to conclude with saint AUGUSTINE; Cont ep. fun. ^. c 4.
Suppose then, that I omit this wisdom, that you deny to be in the
Catholic Church, there are many other things, that retain me most justly
in her lap: The consent of people and nations retains me: The authority
begun by miracles, nourished by hope, increased by charity, confirmed by
antiquity, retains me: The Succession of Prelates since the sea of Peter (to
whom or Lord consigned the feeding of his sheep after his resurrection) to the
present Bishops Sea retains me: and finally the very name of Catholic
retains me, which not without cause this Church alone amongst so many and
so great heresies, has so maintained, as when a stranger asks where they
assemble to comunicate in the Catholic Church, there is no heretic, tha
dare show him his own temple, or his own house.

From what places of the voice of the sheepeheard the marks of the Church
ought to be taken. CHAPTER VI.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
The king has learnt from the reading of the holy Scripture (and all the
Fathers heretofore none excepted held noe otherwise) that the true and
essential form of the Church is; that the sheep of Christ do hear the
voice of their pastor:

THE REPLY.
To hear the voice of the Pastor, is the office of the sheep, but not the
essential form, either of the Church, or of the sheep. For the essential
form of the Church, (I mean essential form analogically, as that of the
supposts constituted by aggregation) is unity in the means of vocation to
salvation, and the essential form of the flock, is the communion and
participation to this unity. 1 Cor. hom. ^.
The name of Church (says saint CHRISOSTOM) is a name of agreement and union.
And saint AUGUSTINE: In Psalm. 100.
God is one, the Church is unity, nothing agrees with this one, 'but unity.
But if the essential form of the flock, were to hear the voice of the
Pastor, does not he hear the voice of the Pastor, that hears her voice, of
whom the Pastor said by the mouth of Esaias, Psa 14.
Thou shall judge every tongue that resists thee in Judgment; And by his
own mouth; Matthew. 16.
The gates of Hell shall not prevail against her? And, Matthew. 18
whosoever hears her not, shall be held as a heathen and a Publican? And by
the mouth of saint PAVL: 1 Ephe^. 4.
He has placed in the Church, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and
Doctors, etc. that we may no more be little children, fleeting and wavering
with every wind of Doctrine? And does not saint AUGUSTINE cry out; Conf.
(...). l. 1. c. (...).
The truth of Scripture is held by us, when we do that which pleases the
universal Church, whom the authority of the same scriptures recommends? And
again; De bapt. cont. Don. l. 5. c. 23.
There are many things that the universal Church observes, and which
therefore are lawfully believed to have been delivered by tradition of the
Apostles, although we find them not written? And then again, to hear the
voice of the Pastor, is it not to hear it according to true understanding? for
does not TERTVLLIAN pronounce Tert. de prese.
An adulterate gloss does as much outrage to the truth, as a false pen? And
does not Saint Hilarie say; Hill. de Trin. l. 2.
The heresy is in the understanding, and not in the Scripture; the sense, and
not the word becomes the crime? And does not saint Jerome write; In ep. ad
galat. c. 1.
The Gospel is not in the words but in the sense? And does not saint
AUGUSTINE cty out; Epist. 222.
All the heretics which receive the scriptures, think to follow them, when
they follow their own errors? And in an other place; De Genesis ad lit. l. 7. c.
9.
Heretics were no heretics, but that misunderstanding the Scripture they
defend obstinately their own false opinions against the truth thereof? And
again, De fid. and Sym. c. 9.
Many things are spoken by Christ in the Scriptures in such a manner, as the
impions Spirits of heretics, who will needs teach before they are taught, are
thereby lead into error? And upon saint John; In Joan. Tr. 18.
The heresies and perverse doctrines, which entangle Souls and cast them
headlong into hell, have their birth no where, but from good Scriptures euilly
understood? And so is not the question still, to whom it belongs to judge
infalliblie of the true sense of the Scripture? Moreover the first voice of the
shepherd, that the Fathers summond the sheep to hear, is it not that,
whereby he designs the marks of his Sheepefolde, that is of his Church? De.
unit. Eccl. c. 10.
I have (said saint AUGUSTINE) the most manifest voice of my pastor, who
recommends and expresses to me his Church without any ambigiutie. I must blame
myself, if for the words of men I straie from his floke, which is the Church,
since principally he admonishes me, saying, My sheep hear my voice. Now
which is this voice of the pastor, wherein Saint AUGUSTINE will have us seek
for the marks of the Church, but that which expresses, not the doctrine
contested between him and his adversaries, which was that of the truth of the
baptism, given by heretics; but the prerogatives of eminency, perpetuity,
universality, and other external and sensible marks, and conditions promised
to the Church? Ibid. c. 4
If the holy Scriptures (says saint AUGUSTINE) have designed the (...) only
in Africa, and in a little medly of men dwelling in the rocks and Mountains
near Rome, and in the house and territory of a spanish Lady: though
whatsoever other pamphlets may be produced; there are none but the Donatists
that have the Church; if the Scripture have bounded her to a little number of
Moors of the Cesarian province, then we must go to the Rogatists; if to a
little compaine of Tripolitans, Byzacenians, and prouincialls, the Maximianists
have gotten her. If only to those of the East, we must seek her amongst the
Arrians, Macedonians, Eunomians and others, if there be others to be found; for
who can number the particular heresies of every nation? But if by the divine
and most certain testimony of the holy Scriptures she is designed to be in
all Nations; whatsoever is alleged to us, or from whence soever it is
alleged, by those that say, here is Christ, there is Christ; if we be
sheep, let us rather hear the voice of our shepherd, who says, believe
them not: for these are not tobe found in many places where she is, and she
who is every where, is also wheresoever they are. And again, Ibid. c. 20
My sheep hear my voice and follow me. You have heard his most manifest voice
recommendinge his future Church, not only in the psalms, and in the prophets,
but by his own mouth also. And a little after, Ibidem.
This is no obscure question, and wherein they may deceive you, of whom our
Lord has foretold, that they should come and say, lo here is Christ, behold
he is tbere; lo he is in the desert, that is to say, out of the frequeneie of
the multitud; behold him here in the secret places; that is, in hidden
traditions and dark Doctrines. You hear that the Church must be spread over
all, and grow to the harvest; you have the city, of which himself; that built
it, said, the City built upon a hill cannot be hidden; it is then she that is
not in any single part of the earth, but is well known every where. Behold
the marks of the Church, that saint AUGUSTINE affirms to be designed by the
voice of the pastor; and so clearly designed, as they need noe interpreter,
to the end, that the Church being known by them, we may after by the Church
be informed of the sense of the other voices of the pastor, which need
interpretarion. (...). 16.
Produce to us (said he) something for your cause, which cannot be interpreted
more truly against you; nay which at all needs no interpreter; as these
words, In thy seed all nations shall be blessed, need no interpreter: (...).
26.
Luc. 22.
As these words, It behooved that Christ should suffer and rise again the
third day, and that in his name there should be preached penance and remission
of Sins through all nations, beginning from Jerusalem; have no need of an
interpreter, etc. Mat. 24.
As these words, And this Gospel of the kingdom shall, be preached through
the whole world in testimony to all people, and then the end shall come, have
noe Mat. 13.
need of an interpreter. As these words, Let both grow together till harvest,
have noe need of an interpretor: For when they had need of an interpretor,
our Lord himself ineerpreted them. for even as when a testator ordaines some
one to interpret the difficulties of his testament, and that the name o this
interpreter being common and equivocal to many, the testator assigns marks
in his (...) to make him, known; the clause, whereby he designs the marks to
know him must be so clear, as they shall need no interpreter, since it is by
them that he should be known, to whom it is necessary they should address
themselves, to make them understand those thing that shall need
interpretation: So God having promised in his testament, to give the
interpretation of his testament to the Church, the words, whereby the marks
of the Church are there designed, must be so clear, that they shall need noe
interpreter; so that by them the Church being known, we may after by the
Church learn the understanding of those things that need an interpreter. And
therefore the order and course of S. AUGUSTINE was, to verify by places of
Scripture, which had not need of an interpretor, the external and sensible
markes' of the Church; by the external and sensible marks of the Church, the
Church itself; and by the Church, the understanding of those places of
Scripture, which had need of interpretation. n This point, said he, we read it
not plainly (...). Ibid. (...). 16.
and evidently neither I nor thou: but if there were beer some man endued with
wisdom, to whom our Lord himself had given testimony; and that he were
consulted with by us about this question: I believe we would nothing doubt to
do as he would (...) us, for fear of being judged repugnant, not so much to
him, as to our Lord Jesus Christ by whom he was recommended. Now he gives
testimony to his Church: And elsewhere; Cont. Crest l. c (...)
Whosoever then fears to be deceived through the obscurity of this question
let him co^sult with that Church, which the holy Scripture bath designed
without (...) ambiguitie. But this was, when he disputed, with the Donatists,
who agreed with the Catholics concerning the truth of the Scripture: for when
he disputed with the Manichees, or with the Infidells which denied or
questioned it: then he changed his method, and did not prove to them the Church
by the Scripture, but the Scripture by the Church, and to that end he used two
kinds of proceedinge (...) (...). (...). and (...).
The one was, to put it for a ground, that if god have care of the Salvation of
man, (as without this principle all discourse of Religion is in vain;) there
can be noe doubt, but he has appointed a means, how they might attain it;
and that this means not consisting in things known by natural reason, for
as much as the^ naturally all men would agree in it: it is the^ of necessity
that it should consist in authority; and then, this ground benig laid, to
verify, that among all the Societies of Religion, that be in the world, the
only Catholic Church has the true marks of authority. Cont. Faust. l. 13.
and alib.
The other proceedinge was, to propose to them the accomplishment of profecies,
touching the extirpation of Idolles, and the ruin of the false Gods of the
paganes, and touching the abolishment of the Jewish Ceremonies, and the
dispersinge of the people of the Jews, and touching the comeinge of a new
law maker, and of a new Religion; and to represent to them, that these
prophecies were written before the birth of our Lord, and kept by the enemies
of the Church, and were couched in terms so clear, that it was a wonder,
that the Jews, which kept them, were not persuaded by them; but that within
the same books it was foretold, that theyshould be stricken with blindness,
and that in seeinge they should not see; And by this means to prove to them,
that these were sacred and inspired from God; and then this obtained, to show
them in the same prophecies the marks, whereby, amongst so many Societies
which should usurp the title of Christian Societies, she was to be discerned,
to whow appertained the right of being the true Common wealth of Christ. And
she being finally acknowledged, to address them to learn from her what the
true laws of the Christian Religion are, and what ought to be their true
sense and understanding.

Of the Examples which we have from the practice of the Apostles. CHAP. VII.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
And that the Sacraments are duly and lawfully administered, that is to say;
as the Apostles have showed the example, and those who have next succeeded them.

THE REPLY.
It is true: the due and lawful administration of the Sacraments, is, that
they be administered as the Apostles have showed the example, and those which
have next succeeded them; but that the examples, that the Apostles have tracked
to us for patterns and myrrors to imitate, are not all contained in their
Writings, Saint AUGUSTINE teaches us, when he says: There are many things,
which are believed by good right to have been recieued a. De bapt. cont. Donat.
l. 5. c. 32.
by tradition from the Apostles, though we find them not written. And Saint
CHRYSOSTOM when he proclaimed, Chrisost. 2 Thessalonians. hom. 4.
The Apostles have not given us all things by writing, (...)
but many things also unwritten. And Saint Basile when he protests. Basil. de
S. Spirit. c. 27.
We have somethinges in written doctrine, and other some we have received in
mystery, (that is to say, rituall, and unwritten observations) efrom the
tradition of the Apostles. And Saint Epiphanius when he faith: Epiph. haer, 61.
All things cannot be taken from the Scriptures, and therefore the holy
Apostles of God have given us somethings (...)
by writing, and other some by tradition. And his majesty himself, when he
answers, The answer to the 4. obseru.
that he is far from the opinion of those, that would shutt up all the
history of the primitive Church into the sacred indeed, but yet one only
book of the Acts of the Apostles.

And as for the Authors, which have followed next after the first persecution
of the pagan Emperors, under whom they lived, which gave them much less
leisure to write, then those had, that flourished after the tempest, and in the
time of the first peace of the Church; and then the very state of the most part
of the controversies of their ages employed either against the pagans, or
against the Jews, or against heresies, much differing from those, which are
since risen up; and thirdly the shipwreck of their works, which the flood of
the same persecution has so swallowed up, as the least part of them is come
to our hands: And finally the care, that the authors, which succeeded them,
have had, to reduce into writing the things, which they have received from
them, by unwritten tradition: And by succession of custom time out of mind;
witness enough how much we must want, of being able to perceive by the relics
of their writings, that followed next after the age of the Apostles, (...)
the tracts and lineaments of the face of the ancient Church.

And therefore equity wills, and the most excellent King, who is equity
it-selfe, consents to it, that not only the monuments, which remain to us from
the first or second age after the Apostles, shall be received as testimonies of
the state of the primitive Church; but also the writings of the Fathers of the
third and fourth age, after that of the Apostles; and principally, when they
speak of the customs of the Church of their times, not as of things of a new
institution, but as of things come to them from the universal and immemoriall
practice of fore-goeinge ages. For behold his Majesty's answer upon this
article; The (...) (...) to the 4. (...).
this demand will seem to (...) little equity, to those, that would that
all the history of the primitive Church should be contained within the divine
indeed but yet only one book, and that a little one, of the Acts of the
Apostles. From their opinion the most just and wise king is very far: who in
his monitory epistle has ingenuously declared, how much he esteems the
Fathers of the fowrth, nay even of the fifth age.

Of the definition of the Church, and in what union it consists.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
THe Churches, that are instituted in this manner, it is necessary, that they
should be united amongst them selves, (...) diverse kinds of communion.

THE REPLY.
THose that observe the proprieties ofliuing creatures affirm, that the (...).
(...) amor. (...).
nest of the Halcio^ is woue^, and built in such a symmetrie, that is to say,
the entry of it is so fitted and equald to the measure of the birds body,
that it can serve for no other bird either greater or less. A definition must
be justly so, it must comprehend exactly the thing thereby defined, without
stretching it self to any thing more, or restrayning it self to any thing
less, it must be fit, it must agree only with the subject thereof: And
therefore ARISTOTLE writes, that to frame a definition, is very difficult, and
to destroy one, is contrariwise very easy; for to establish a good
definition, all the conditions, that limitt and enclose the nature of the
subject, must meet together; and to confute it, it is sufficient that any one
be wanting. And for this cause Plato says that if he could have found a man,
that knew how to define, and divide well, he would have cast himself at his
feet to adore him. For definition is an Epitomie and abridgement of the entire
knowledge of every thing, which is reduced and epitomized from the more ample
consideracon of the (...), and accidents, which accompany it, to that which is
precisely of the essence there of: just in such sort, as in the constitution of
the numbers, (which the philosophers propound for types and patterns of
essential forms) every addition or substraction, (be it never so little)
varies the being, and the caracter, and destroys, the precise species or kind
of the number; so in the just turn of words, and in the lawful revolution of
language, whereby the essence of every thing should be bounded, as in an
horizon; or bourning line, all addition or omissio^ of words, ruineth and
destroys the definition. (...). dsal. c. 8.
For when the definition aboundes, (says DAMASCENF) in the excess of words;
it wants in the conception of things: and when it wants in sufficiency of
words, it is superfluous in the extent and co^prehension of things. Wherein,
as he adds, nature has invented a merueilous art, to wit, a plentiful
poverty, and an indigent and defective plenty. Now (as Aristotle notes) those
are the worst servants, that steal the corn, not out of the garner, but from
thence, where it is kept for seed, because this theft is measured, not by the
quantity of the thing stolen, but by the usury and multiplicatio^ of the
return or income depending thereon; so the errors, which are committed in
principles, (which are as the seed corn of co^clusios) are more pernicious
and hurtful, then those, that are committed in any other part of doctrine.
For in other parts the faults may be particular: but the vices in principles,
(amongst which the definition holds the Scepter and Empire,) are necessarily
communicated to all the body of the disputation. And therefore Cleme^s Strom.
l. 8.
Alex. cries out, that the ignorance of the definition is a spring of errors
and deceites.

Now if this be granted in other controversies, experience teaches us, it
must principally be granted in that of the Church: from the false definitions
of which are bred all the sophismes and paralogismes, which fall out in the
rest of the disputation. For from the too strict definition, that the
protestants give to the Church, when they restrain her to the only number of
the predestinate, proceed the illusions of the obscurity and inuisibilitie of
this society, by which all the marks, promises, and prerogatives, that God
has appropriated to his Church ( Esa. 54.
to have power to judge all tongues that shall resist her in judgment: Matt.
16.
not to be overthrown by the powers of hell: Matt. 18.
to be heard under pain of anathema: 1. Tim. 3
to be the pillar and (...) of truth:) are turned into smoke, for to have them
in this manner, that is invisibly, is to have them without use, or rather not
to have them at all. And from the definition too vaste and indeterminate, which
they give her, when they say, she is the multitude of those that live under the
profession of serving God in Christ, without adding, by lawful and sufficient
means, there arises in steed of the Church a medly and chaos of all kind of
heresies: Now this they do (as has been said) to delude the questions of the
perpetuity and succession of their Church: for when you demand of them,
where that Church has been these: 1000. or 1200. years, whereof God had said,
Psa. 47.
That he would build her for perpetuity; Ose. 1.
that he would espouse her for ever: Ierem. (...) and Amos 9.
that he would never root her out of the earth: Esa. 60.
that she should noe more be called the for sake^; Esa. 54.
that (...) engine addressed against her, should be without effect: Esa. 33.
that she should be a plentiful (...) atio^: a tabernacle that can never be
carried away, and whose nails (...) never be vnsastned, nor her cords broken
in any time to come: Matt. 16.
that the gates of hell shall never prevail against her: (...) (...)
that he would be with her to the and of the world. They fly to the obscurity
and darkness of the first definition and say, that the Church is the compagnie
of the predestinate, and consequently that they are not bound to prove her
succession, because she has been invisible. Then when they (...) themselves
excluded from this refuge, and that it is demonstrated to them, that the same
contracts of God, which promised perpetuity to the Christian Church, have also
promised her brightness and eminency, that it is declared, that in the days
of the new alliance, (...) (...).
the mountain of the Lord shall be upon the topp of all the mountainos, and
all the hills shall flow to her, and shall say; let us go up into the
mountain of the Lord, and into the house of the the God of Jacob, and he will
teach us his ways. That it is written: (...) (...)
That the (...) should walk in her light, and the people in the splendour of
her Orient: (...) (...).
That her seed should be known among the people, and her posterity in the
midst of the generations: That all that should see her, should know she was
the seed blessed by the Lord. And (...). 37.
that the nations should know, that God is the sanctifier of Israel, when his
sanctification should be in the midst of her for perpetuity. Then they have
recourse to the medly and confusion of the second, and answer, that the Church
is the multitude of those, that make profession to serve God in Jesus Chr. and
by consequence, that to maintain the perpetuity thereof, it suffices, that
there has always been a multitude of men making profession to serve God in
Christ, be it pure or impure

Now this shift is one of the shifts, that Saint AUGUST. witnesses (...). 80.
to be common, to foxes and heretics; For as foxes (says S. AVG.) have two
holes in their terriers, to save themselves by one, when they are driven from
the other: so heretics, (whom the Scripture figures out by foxes when the
spouse does sing: Let us take the young foxes that destroy (...). 2.
the vines) have a double issue in their solutions, to escape by one, when they
are pressed and assaulted in the other; so as who will catch them must set
their netts before both issues, and must besiege both their passages. To the
end then we may take them, and hinder the excellent king from being taken by
them, we will set the nets before both the breaches of this definition, and
will examine first, the 4. invisible unions, wherein his Majesty conceiues the
essential form of the Church may consist; and we will show, that that unity,
which constitutes the formal being of the Church, is that of external
vocation; and not that, either of predestination, or of internal faith, or of
the conjunction of spirits by the offices of charity and mutual prayer, or of
the participatio^ of one same hope: and seco^dlie, we will make it appear that
this vocation, in the unity of which, the essential form of the Church
consistes, is not the simple profession of the name of Christ, but it is the
vocation to salvation by just and sufficient, means, which are the profession
of the true faith, the sincere administration of the Sacraments, and the
adherence to lawful pastors. So as the definition of the Church shall be, the
Society of those, that God has called to salvation, by the prosession of the
true says, the sincere administration of Sacraments, and the (...) to lawful
pastors. Now of this definition, the first part, to wit that the (...) of the
Church co^sistes in the unity of external vocation, and not in the unity of
any invisible condition, we will treat of in the examination of the three
articles following, where his Majesty propoundes the internal unions, in the
which he pretendes that the essence of the Church may be co^serued. And the 2.
to wit, that the vocation wherein the essential form of the Church
consistes, is not the simple profession of the name of Chr. but it is the
vocation by just and sufficient means; we will reserve to the article of false
external unions (...) in the (...) of the (...) (...) (...)
where his Majesty esteems; that the heretical societies (as the Egyptia^s
and Ethiopia^s, which deny the distinction of two natures in Christ and by
this means destroy the foundation of the faith,) are nevertheless members and
parts of the Catholic Church.

Of the union of the predestinate, and (byway of adiunction) of the visibility
or inuisibilitie of the Church. CHAP. IX.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
THEY are united in Christ their head, who is the fountain of life; in the
which all those live, that the Father has elected, to redeem them by the
precious blood of his Son, and freely to give them life eternal.

THE REPLY.
THE union that the predestinate have in God, as they are only predestinate,
does not constitute any actual Church amongst them: but only the union they
have one with an other as they are called. For first, the word Ecclesia,
Church, is derived from a verb, which signifies, to call, and not to
predestinate: from whence S. Paul, (confirming the use of this 1. Cor. 1.
etymology) inscribes his first to the Corinthians, To the Saints called: And
in Ephesians. 4.
the epistle to the Ephesians. he says; One body and one Spirit, as you are
called in Coloss. 3.
one hope of your vocation. And in the epist. to the Coloss. Let the peace of
Christ rule in your hearts, by which you are called in one-selfe body.

And secondly, the Church is a Society, and there is this difference between
a simple multitude, and a society; that the society adds to the parts of the
multitude a condition, and a certain caracter as it were, in virtue whereof,
they may communicate together. Now predestination as it is simple
predestination, puts nothing into the persons of the predestinate, and is not
made in them, but in God only, and by consequent does not make them actually
parts of the Church. Our predestination (says S. In psa. 150.
AUGUST.) is not made in us, but in God; the three other things are made in us,
2. Tim. 2.
vocation, justification, and glorification. For that, that is alleged out of
saint Paul, that God knows those that are his, and has marked them with his
signet; must be understood, that he has marked the predestinate in himself,
that is to say in his eternal determination; and not in them: as an
Architect, who designs in his spirit certain stones, that he will employ in
his building, marks the^ not by this mental designation in them, but in
himself, and makes the^ not by this simple determination actual parts of his
building. I mean (to be brief) that the vnio^, that co^stitutes men in the
Church is in the^: now the union that the predestinate have in God, as they are
simply predestinate, is not in the^, but in God alone. And so it is not the
union of predestination, but that of vocation, that co^stitutes men in the
Church. Ephesians. 1.


Thirdly S. Paul teaches us, that the Church is the body of Christ, and that
by analogy to an organicall body. God (says he) constituted him head Coloss.
1.
over all the Church, which is his body. And again; I accomplish that, which
wa^tes of the passions of Christ, in my flesh, for his body, which is the
Church. Now it is of the essence of an organicall body, as it is organicall,
to be composed of 1. Cor. 12.
diverse offices, members, and parts. If all the members (says S. Paul) were
one member, where should the body be? And by this reason the schoolmen prove,
that the heavens are not animated or living bodies, because they are not
organicall bodies; and they prove they are not organicall bodies, because they
are not made up of heterogeneall and different parts in composition and
co^plexio^. And therefore it is of the essence of the Church to have
distinction of members organs, and offices is the Church, does not arise from
the hidden and eternal predestination; for then the not predestinate, could
not be ministers and pastors of the Church: but from external and te^porall
vocation, And by consequent, it is in the external, visible and temporal
vocation, and not in predestination (which is internal to God, hidden, and
eternal) that the being and essential form of the Church consists.

Fowrthly the same Saint Paul says that God has tempered the honor of the 1.
(...). (...).
members that there might be no schism in the body. Now the predestinate are
not capable of schism, as they are predestinat, but as they are called: so it
is not predestination, but vocation, that frames the body of the Church.

Fifthly he affirms the Church to be our mother; the superior Jerusalem says
(...). 4.
he, (that is (...) say, Jerusalem, taken not according to the lowlynes of
the legal (...) but according to the height of the Evangelical sense) is
free, (...) (...) 4.
which is our mother. And he adds; that it is of her that (...) writes Rejoice
thou barren woman that bringst not forth children. Now the Church does not
enge^der us by predestination; (for God alone is the author of predestination,
and not the Church;) but by vocation: and consequently it is vocation, and not
predestination, that co^stitutes the Church in the state of a Church and mother
of the faithful. Moreover the knowledge of being Children to the mother, is
before the knowledge of being Children to the father, by the August de (...)
(...). 12.
interposition of the mothers authority (says saint AVG) we are persuaded of
the true Father. For that that Aristotle writes, Polit. 2.
That in certain parts of the upper (...), where women were common they
discerned the children by the rese^blance they had to their fathers, was good
for those people, where that similitude had place; but we, in whose nature the
image of God is so defaced by the spott of original sin as we can noe more
be known to be his children by virtue of natural similitude only; there is
noe other means for us to pretend to this quality, but that we are regenerated
by him in our spiritual mother, which is the Church his only spouse And for
this cause the Ancientes are so careful to say, that Cyp. de unit. (...).
he shall not have God for his Father, that denies the Church for his mother.
(...) (...) ad (...) (...) 54 and (...).
and that if any be out of the Church, he shall be excluded out of the mumber
of the children, and to exhort the Christians to do like the (...) (...) (...)
(...)
Xanthians in taking the Surname of their mother, that is to say the title of
Catholic. In Ioann. (...). 32.
We receive the holy Ghost, says Saint AUGUSTINE, if we lo the Church, if we
be knitt in one body by charity, if we rejoice in the Catholic name and
faith. Now the certainty of being Children to the Church, cannot serve us for
a means and path way to come to the persuasion of being the children of God,
if the definition of the Church consist in the hidden and invisible secret of
predestination. For by this definition contrariwise we must be assured to be
Children of God, and comprehended in the Roll of the predestinate, before we
can be assured, that we are the Children of the Church. So the definition of
the Church ought to consist, not in the hidden and invisibly condition of
predestination, but in the external and visible condition of vocation.

Also we see that our Lord, who was the Godfather of this Society, and gave
it the name of the Church, in that sense that she ought to bear it, has never
used that name, neither he nor his Apostles, but to design a visible Society,
constituted by external and temporal vocation. Matthew. 16.
For when he says: Upon this rock I will build my Church and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against her. And I will give thee the keys of the the
kingdom of heaven: this word in the future tense, I will build, shows he
speaks of a Church constituted not by prestination, which was established from
all eternity, but by external and temporal vocation. And the word keys
which signifies the authority of the ministry confirms it. And when he says:
Tell it to the Church, and if he hear not the Church, let him be to thee as a
heathen, or a publican: And again, the Math. 18.
City set upon a mountain, cannot be hid: And in an other place; I will pray
Matt. 5.
not only for these here present, but for all those that by their word shall
believe in Ioann. 17.
me; that they may be all one, because the world may know, that thou have sent
me: Even a blind man may see, that he speaks of an external and visible
Church. And when he expresses the Church by the parable of the barn, where
the corn is mingled with the straw; and by the parable of the Matthew. 3.
field, where the corn and the tares should grow together till harvest;
Matt. 13.
Ibidem.
And by the parable of the nett cast into the Sea, where the evil fishes were
enclosed with the good: And by the parable of the wedding, where Matt. 22.
the hall was full of guests as well good as badd; and by the parable of the
wise and foolish virgins, which stayed for the Spouse in one house: Matt. 25.
there needs noe Oedipus, to understand, that he speaks of a visible Church,
constituted by external and temporal vocation. And when S. Paul says to
Timothee; I write these things to thee, that thou may know how thou ought
to converse in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, 1. Tim.
3.
the pillar and foundation of truth: And again: In a great house, there are
not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and earth. This word
(to converse) which cannot have relation to an invisible Society; and this
word foundation, which is not relative to truth, which has no need of
foundation; but to men, to whom the Church serves for a foundation of truth:
And these words, of wood and earth; do visibly show, that he speaks of an
external and visible Church. And when he says in the 6. Chapter of the first
to she Corinthians; What have I to do to judge 1. Cor. 11
those that are without? And in the 11. We have not this custom, neither the
Church of God. And in the 12. God had placed in the Church, first Apostles,
secondly Prophets, thirdly Doctors; And in the Epistle to the Ephesians: The
truth Ephesians. 3.
of the wisdom of God, is manifested to the principalities and powers in the
heavenly places by the Church: And again, Christ cleanses his Church by the
waching of Act. 2.
water in the word. And in the exhortation of the Priests of Ephesus; Take
heed to your selves and to all the flock over which the holy Ghost has made
you Bishops, to rule the Church of God: And when Saint James says is his
Catholic Jacob. 5.
epistle, If any one of you be sick, let him call the Priests of the Church,
and let them anointe him with oil: It is more clear then the sun, that they
spoke of an external and visible (...).

And in truth how could it be, that these prophesies already so often
repeated: Esa. 2.
(In the last days the mountain of the Lord shall be above all the
mountains: The Nations shall come to her, and say, let us go up to the
Mountain of the Lord, and into the house of the God of Jacob, and he will
teach us his ways: Esa. 60.
The people shall walk in her light, and kings in the brightness of her Orie^t:
Esa. 33.
Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a plentiful habitation and a tabernacle, that
cannot be removed: Esa. 61.
Their seed shall be known among the people, and thire posterity amongst
the generations: All those that shall see them, shall know that they are the
seed blessed by the Lord; Ezec. 37.
the nations shall know that I am the holy one of Israel, when my
sanctification shall be in the middle of them for ever,) had not been iliusions
and oracles of the Spirit of lies; if the Church should have consisted only in
the hidden and invisible number of the predestinate, into whose knowledge,
neither men nor angels can penetrate? And our Lord himself (who is the
eternal wisdom of the Father) had not he been the most imprudent of all
lawemakers, to have left his law exposed to so many suppositions,
deprauations, and false expositions, whereto the malice of the heretics of
all ages has subjected it, without leaving a depositary to keep it, and a
judge to interpret it; or to have left it an invisible depositary, and an
invisible interpreter?

But against this invincible truth there do arise five principal obiectio^s.
The first is that our Lord said: The gates of hell shall not prevail against
my (...). 16.
Church; from whence it seems to follow; that the reprobate are noe parts of
the Church because the gates of hell do prevail against them. The Second,
that saint PAVL writheth; you are arrived to the heavenly Jerusalem; (...).
(...).
to the Church of the primitiues (or first borne) which are enrolled in heaven;
from whence it seems to follow, that the Church is only of the predestinate
The third, that we protest in the Creed, I believe the Church; from whence it
is inferred; that the Church is invisible, because faith is of invisible
things. The fourth that Saint AUGUSTINE says in some place, that De (...).
(...).
only predestinat Catholics are true parts of the Church, and the true
members of (...) (...). cont. Don. and (...).
the body of Christ; and puts a distinction between those, which are in the
house, and those that are of the house, and between the people known in the
eyes of God, and the people known in the eyes of men: And the fifth That Saint
JEROME writes, He that is a Sinner, and soiled with any spott, (...). (...).
(...)
cannot be said to be of the Church of Christ.

To the first then of these objections, which is that the gates of hell shall
not be victorious over the Church, we say; That the victories which the gates
of hell obtain against particular persons by the vices of their manners,
prevail but against those particular persons that are spotted there with; and
not against the body of the Church: for as much as the vices of manners are
but iu the persons that commit or approve them, and not in the Communion of the
Church. Those, (says saint AUGUST.) whom the wicked please in their unity,
communicate with the wicked; but those that are therewith Epist. 162.
displeased, communicate not with the wicked, in their actions, but with the
altar of Christ. For the Church exacts from none of her members, the condition
of being vicious, to receive him into her Communion; as she exacts from them,
the profession of the Faith, and of the universal ceremonies that she
prescribes to them, the participation of her Sacraments, and the adherence to
her pastors. By means whereof, there is nothing but heresy and profession of
error, or infidelity, that can be pretended to make the gates of hell
victorious over the body of the Church; because those only cortupt the
conditions, under which the congregation is contracted or gathered, and infect
the body and mass of the society; for none can enter into any heretical
society, without obliging himself to the doctrine, whereof it makes
profession. And therefore saint EPIPHAN. interpretes iudicially these gates of
hell, that shall not prevail against (...). (...) (...).
the Church, to be heresies: the gates of hell (said he) are heresies, and
heresieMasters.

To the second, which is, that saint PAVL writes; you are arrived to heavenly
(...) 12.
Jerusalem, to the Church, of the firstborn, which are enrolled in heaven,
We answer, he speaks of the Church triumphant, to which he writes that we
are arrived, in the same sort, as he writes, our conuerfation is in heaven;
that is (...). (...)
to say, in hope; as when a shipp has cast his ankor on land, which is (says
saint AUGUSTINE,) the symbol of hope, it is said to be arrived to (...) (...)
(...)
land, though it be yet in the sea; and let us add, that the word firstborn
signifies there even by Caluins own confession, the holy Fathers and (...)
(...) (...) (...). (...). 2
of the old testament: Or, if saint PAVL speak there of the Church militant,
and that by the firstborn he intends the predestinate, we (...), he calls it
the Church of the firstborn, not because it contains only the elect, but
because the elect are no where else; I mean the elect invested in the temporal
grace of their election, as we call the parliament of Paris, the Court of the
Peers, not because it contains none but Peers, but because there is noe
place else, wherein the Peers are invested in their quality of Peers.

To the third, which is taken from this article of the Creed, I believe in the
Catholic Church, we say, it suffices, that faith be either of invisible
things, or of things apprehended under invisible conditions; as those are,
under which we consider the Church, when we believe her to be the spouse of
Christ, the temple of God, the mansion of the holy Ghost, the gate of heaven,
the treasuresse of spiritual graces. Otherwise to believe in Christ, had not
been an article of faith, while our lord was in this world: And nevertheless
he says, Who believes not in the son, is already Ioann. 3.
judged. And when the Council of Constantinople puts this confession of Faith
amongst the articles of the Creed of the Church, I believe one baptism in
remission of sins, they must conclude baptism to be invisible, against the
universal condition of Sacraments, which is, to be visible signs of invisible
graces.

To the fourth objection, to wit that saint AVGVSTINF writes, that only
predestinate Catholics are true parts of the Church, and true members of the
body of Christ: and distinguishes between them which are in the house, and
them which are of the house; and between the people known in the eyes of God,
and known in the eyes of man: we have three solutions. The first solution is,
that saint AUGUSTINE intended not, that only Catholics predestinate were true
parts of the Church, according to the formal being of the Church, which is
common to all that are called; but according to the final being of the Church,
that is, to the end, and in the fruits, for which the Church is instituted. I
mean, saint AUGUSTINE did not intend in those places to define the Church
formally, and by what she is in this world, but finally, and by what she shall
be in the other. Even as he that says, only good Citizens are true parts of a
common wealth, does not define a common wealth formally, and by what it is in
it self; but finally, and by what it is in the intention of the lawmakers: And
he that says, a true harvest is only the corn, that is gathered from the
straw, and not the straw wherewth it is mingled; defines not a harvest
formally, and by what it is in the field, or in the barn: but finally, and by
what it will be in the garner. We confess In Ioann. tract. 6.
(says saint AUGUST.) that whicked men are together with the good in the
Catholic Church, but as Corn and straw. And again, Wicked men may be In
psa. 119.
with us in the barn, but they cannot be with us in the garner. For, that
saint AUGUST. does not esteem, that the formal and precise condition that
constitutes men in the Church, is that of predestination internal to God, and
eternal; but that of external and temporal vocation; he shows it, In Ioann.
tract. 45.
when he says upon saint JOHN; None can enter by the gates, that is by Christ,
to life eternal, which is in vision, if by the same gate, that is to say, by
the same Christ, he be not first entered into his Church, which is his
sheepefolde to the temporal life which is in faith: And in the place already
alleged upon the In psa. 150.
psalms; Our predestination is made, not in us, but in God: the other three
things are wrought in us, vocation, justification, and glorification: And in
his writings Co^t. Faust. l. 19. c. 12.
against Faustus: Men can be inserted into noe name of Religion, whether true
or false, but they must be tied by the common participation of some signs or
visible Sacraments. Contrariwise the very same saint AUGUST. which
distinguishes between those in the house, and those of the house; teaches
us, that all Catholics, both predestinate and reprobate, are in the house,
that is to say, in the Church, Those (says he) we cannot deny but De bapt.
cont. Don. l. 7. c. 51.
that they are likewise in the house; and then that the formal condition which
(...) the Church is vocation and not predestination; but that there are none
but the predestinate Catholics which are of the house, that is to (...), that
are final pieces inalienable and inseparable from the house; or to speak in
terms of law, that are goods, that the father of the family vouchsafes to
put into the Inuentory of his house, the other being there but for a time and
as by way of loan and not to dwell there (...) ever. For when the Church
shall pass from earth to heaven, and from the state of mortality to
immortality, only predestinate Catholics, shall remain there and not the
others. The Church (says he) is the (...) in (...).
(...) the servant is the Sinner; now many sinners enter into the Church? and
therefore (...). (...).
our Lord did not say, the Servant enters not into the house, but, he dwelles
not for ever in the house. And again; None can blott from heaven the
constitution (...). 162.
of God; nor can any blott from the earth the Church of God etc. She contains
good and evil, but she loses none on earth but the evil, and admitts none
into heaven but the good.

The second solution is, that this distinction of parts of the Church true and
not true, and of vessels which are in the house, and not of the house, and of
people known in the eyes of God, and known in the eyes of men; is not a
distinction of Religion, but a simple distinction of manners, which puts
difference between the one and the other, in regard of the formal being of
the Church, and of the external means of vocation which are the profession of
the true faith, the sincere administration of the Sacraments, and the
adherence to lawful Pastors; but only in regard of internal and final
correspondencie to these external conditions; that is to say, in regard of
the conformity of manners, with the (...). (...), (...). (...). l. 7. (...).
52.
vocation, and of the perseverance in his conformity of manners: They are
(says Saint Au:) so in the house by the Communion of the Sacraments as they
are out of it by the diversity of manners. And Fulgent. after him: The good
ought not (...) ad (...). (...). (...).
to be separated from the wicked in the Catholic Church, but by the
dissimilitude of manners. From whence it follows, that when there is question
of representing the perpetuity of the Church for matter, of Religion, that is,
for matter of doctrine and Sacrament, and of the Communion of Pastors, it is
an unprofitable refuge to have recourse to this distinction of (...), and of
people known in the eyes of God, and in the eyes of men, and of (...) which
are in the house, and are not of the house, since this distinction puts noe
bar between the one and the other people, for what concerns Religion, but
only for what concerns manners. For although the list of the chosen is
unknown to us in respect of the secret (...), and the certainty of election:
nevertheless, for what concerns protestation of faith, participation of
Sacraments, and adherence to lawful Pastors, it is always visible; if not
distinctly yet at least jointly with the rest of the called, with which in
these three cases it constitutes always, one and the same Church; it not being
possible for the elect to be installed in the temporal effect of thiere
election, and in the estate of salvation, unless they make profession to
communicate, and to be (...) united in all these things with the visible body
of the Chnrch. (...). 10 (...). (...).
For our Lord cries out: He that shall confess me before men, I will confess
him before God my father: And Saint Paul; Were believe in our hearts to
justice, but (...). and (...) (...). (...).
(...) (...) (...) with our mouths to Salvation: And Saint August. We cannot
be saved unless (laboring also for the Salvation of others,) we protest with
our mouths the same faith we bear in our hearts. by which means so far is
it of, that the Church should be less visible in regard of Religion in the
persons of the predestinate, then in the persons of others; as contrary wise,
(...) it could be either by error, or by infirmity, and fear of persecution,
that the external and visible profession of the true faith, the Sincere
administration of the Sacraments, and the adherence to lawful pastors, should
fail in the person of all others, it would be conserved in those of the
predestinat, following Saint Paul's maxim; There must be heresies, that the
approved 1. Cor. 11.
may be made manifest: And this testimony of Saint AVGTSTIN The Epist. 46.
Church is sometimes obscured, and as it were dimmed by the multitude of
scandal: (that is to say, of persecutions) but yet even then she is eminent
in her steadfast Champions. Only there is this difference, that as the
vocation, which is the condition that settes men in the Church, may be
possessed in two sorts; the one worthily when it is answered by conformity of
manners, and inward devotion: from whence it is, that Saint Paul prays for the
2 Thessalonians. 1.
Thessalonians, that God would make them worthy of his holy wocation; that is
to say, make them answer and persevere to answer by their inward disposition
the external vocation, wherewith he has honored them: The other unworthily;
which is, when it is not answered by conformity of manners and life; so there
are two ways of being in the Church; the one worthy and meritorious, when
their manners answer their vocation; and the other unworthy and without
merit, when they correspond not. Which has given ground to the school
distintion of being in the Church in mumber, and not in merit; and therefore in
the place where Saint AVGVSTIN introduces more expressly the distinction of
those that are in the house, but are not of the house, nor are the house, which
is in the 7. book of Baptism against the Donatistes, even there to take away
all occasion of suspicion, that this house could be invisible, he adds the
keys and the power of binding and loosing are given to her, that is the
propriety and practice of the ministry; and that all are commanded to hear
her, and consequently to hold her visible upon pain of being reputed
heathens and publicans. This house (said he) has received De bapt. cont.
the keys and the power to bind and loose; and from thence when she censures
or Donat. l. 7. c. 51.
correctes; if any one despise her, it is said that he should be to thee, as a
heathen or a publican. And in the book of the unity of the Church, where he
repeates De unit. Eccles. c. 14.
in every period the same distinction: The Church (says he) is not hidden,
because she is not under the bushel, but upon the candlestick, that she may
give light to all that are in the house; and of her it was said: the City
set on the Montaine De Cathechis. true c. 7.
cannot be hidd. And in the book of the way to Cathecise; We must (said he)
instrust and encourage the infirmity of man against temptations and scandal,
whether without or within the Church itself; without against Gentiles or
Jews, Ibid c. 26.
or heretics, and within against the chafe of the barn of the Lord. And
again, Let not the enemy seduce thee not only by those that are out of the
Church, be they pagans, Jews, or heretics; but also by those that thou shall
see in the Church, evil livers. And in the Comentarie upon the Epistle of
Saint John, How can I In 1. Iouun tract. 2.
call those other then blind, that see not so great a Mountain, and shutt
their eyes against the lamp set upon the Candlestick? And not only in those
places, but in all his other works, he declares, that the Church is
perpetually visible; yea he pronounces that it is an heretical position or
rather the common foundation of all heretics, to suppose, that she is
invisible. The In Psalm. 147,
Church of the Saints (says he) is the Catholic Church: the Church of the
Saints is not the Church of heretics: the Church of the Saints, is that
which God has predesigned, Cont. Parm. l. 2. c. 3.
before she was seen, and exhibited that she might be seen. And in an other
place; It is a common condition of all heretics, not to see the thing in the
world that is most clear, contituted in the light of all nations, out of the
unity whereof all that they do, can noe more warrant them from the wrath of
God, then the Spiders, Cont. Petil. l. 2. c. 104.
webb from the extremity of cold. And again; She has this most certain
mark, that she cannot be hid, she is then known to all nations: the sect of
Donatus is unknown to many nations, then that cannot be she.

The third solution is, that besides, even the use of the final definition of
the Church, is a forced use, and where with Saint AVG. was constrained in the
beginning to serve his turn, to withstand the fraud of the Donatists: but
afterward he so corrected, or explained it both in the conference, that he had
with them in Carthage, and in his retractations, as there remains noe more
color to abuse it. For Saint AUGUSTINE in his first disputatio^s against the
Donatistes, finding himself pressed with the arguments, that they brought, to
prove that baptism could not be given by heretics, because heretics were
out of the Church; advised himself, and particularly in the work of the
seven books of baptism (from whence this distinction of people known in the
eyes of God, and in the eyes of men, is principally taken) to help himself
against them, not with the formal definition of the Church, by which only
infidells, and heretical and Schismatic Christians are excluded; but by the
final definition of the Church, that is to say, by the definition of the
Church considered according to the final and future number of those, of whom
she should be constituted in the other world, from which wicked Catholics are
also excluded; to the end to infer from thence against the Donatistes, that as
evil Catholics, though they were out of the Church defined according to her
future permanent and principal being, did truly baptize: so heretics and
Schismatickes, though they were out of the Church defined according to her
present and passant being, yet might administer true baptism. And for a
foundation of his definition he made use of Epithetes of Solomon, and S. Paul,
having noe spott nor wrinkle, and (...). 4.
(...) her such like elogies of the Church, which appertained either to the
(...). (...).
state of the other world, or to the purity of doctrine. But after that the
Donatistes abused both this definition and the testimonies from whence it was
taken, to infer from thence, that the Catholic Communion, which was mingled
with wicked men, was not the Church; he changed his proceeding in the conference
that he had with them at Carthage, and declared that this definition belonged
not to the Church, considered according to the present and formal being, which
she has in this world, but according to the future and final being, which
she shall have in the (...). (...) (...). 3.
next. The Catholics (says he) made it appear by many testimonies and
examples of holy Scriptures that wicked me^ are now so mingled in the Church,
that although Ecclesiastical discipline ought to be watchful to correct them
both in words and by excommunications, and degradations; nevertheless not
only being hidden, they are unknown, but even being known, they are often
tolerated for the unity of peace; and showed that the testimonies of
scriptures did in that manner well agree together: to wit, that the places
whereby the Church is represented with the medly of the wicked, signisie the
present time of the Church, as she is in this world; and the places whereby she
is designed to have no wicked persons mixed with her, signify the future state
of the Church, such as she shall eternally have in the world to come. And a
little after: so the Catholics refuted the calumny of the two Churches,
declaring expressly and instantly, what they intended to say, to wit, that
they had not pretended, that that Church which is now mingled with wicked men,
should be an other Church then the kingdom of God, that shall have no wicked
pesons in it; but that the same one and holy Church, is now in one sort, and
shall be then in an other; now she is compounded of good and wicked men, and
the^ she shall not be so. And in the work of the City (...) (...). (...).
20. c. 9.
of God, made by him after the Conference of Carthage; there, where the one and
other kind are found, (that is good and evil,) there the Church is as (...)
is at this present; but where the one only shall be, there is the Church such as
she is to (...), when there shall be no wicked men in her. And in the answer to
the second (...) (...) (...) (...).
Epistle of Gaudentias, written also after the said Conference: You see that
the Church according to Cyprian is called Catholic, by the name of all, and
it is not without manifestly-wicked men. And in the second book of his
retractations, (...) l. (...) ca. 18.
I wrote (said he) 7. books of Baptism against the Donatistes, attempting to
defend themselves by the authority of the most happy Bishop and Martyr (...);
in all those books, where I have described the Church without wrinckle or
spott, it must not be taken, of the Church, as she in her present being but as
being (...) to (...) such, when she shall appear in glory. And again: In my
writings to an unknown Donatist, Ibid. (...). (...).
speaking of the multitude of cockle, I said; by which are understood all
heretics; there wantes a Conjunction, which is necessary; for I should have
said, by which are also understood all beretickes etc. whereas I spoke, as if
there were only cockle out of the Church, and none in the Church: And
nevertheless, the Church is the Kingdom of Christ, from whence the Angels in
the harvest time will pluck up all Scandalls; which caused the Martyr Cyprian
to say; Although we see tares in the Church, yet ought neither our faith nor
our charity to be so diuerted, as because we see tares in the Church, we
should therefore separate our-selues from the Church: Which sense we have also
followed else where, and principally against the (...) (...) present in the act
of the Conference. From whence it appears, how much it is to abuse Saint
AUGUSTINES words against the sense, whereto himself intendes they should be
either corrected, or explained; to transferr, as the protestants do, that
that he spoke of the Church, considered according to her future and final
being in the other world, and apply it to the Church considered according to
her actual being here; and to infer from thence, that she may consist in
this world formally in the only mumber of the predestinate, and remain hidden
and visible.

To the fifth objection, which is that Saint Ierom writes upon the Epistle to
the Ephesians: The Church is glorions wthout spott or wrinkle, or any such In
Ep. ap Ephesians. c. 5.
like thing: he then, which is a sinner, and soyled with any spott, cannot be
called of the Church of Christ, neither subject to Christ, We answer, that he
means not to say, that wicked men are not of the Church which is the body, of
Christ, which fightes here below; but that they are not of the number of the
Church which is the body of Christ, which shall reign in heaven. For so far
of is it from Saint IEROM to believe, that the promise, to be without wrinkle
or spott of manners, appertains to the Church, considered as she is in this
world: that he cries out quite contrarily against the Pelagians, That what the
Apostle writes, that our Lord will make his Church Cont. Pelag. l. 3.
holy and without spott or wrinkle, shall be accomplished at the end of the
world and in the consummation of virtues. And again. True perfection, and
without soil is reserved for heaven, when the bridegroom shall say to the
bride; Thou art wholly saire, In ler c. 31
my love, and there is noe spott in thee. And in the exposition of Jeremy; Thou
see how many places the Church has, and that this sentence of the Apostle,
that she maiebe without spott or wrinkle, is reserved for the time to come,
and for the celestial places. And in the same Commentary upon the Epistle to
the Ephesians; Our Lord Jesus accountethe for his members all that are
assembled in the Church both Saints and Sinners; but the Saints are his (...)
voluntarily, and the Sinners by necessity. And therefore to the consequence,
that the Protctestates gather from this place of Saint IEROM. when they infer
from hence, that the Church consistes only in the mumber of the good: we oppose
these express words of the fame Saint IEROM; As in the Arc of Cont. (...).
(...).
Noe there were living creatures of all kinds: so in the Church there are men
of all nations and of all manners: as there where together the Leopard, and the
Goats, the wolf and the lambs: so here are together the just and Sinner, to
wit the vessels of gold, and the vessels of wood and earth, And again, if
the Church be already purified, what do we reserve for our Lord? And to the
consequence, that they Ibid.
gather thence, that the Church is invisible; we oppose these followinge; That
is no Church which has noe priests And again; I could dry up all the rivers
(...). (...).
of thy arguments, with the only Sunshine of the Church. And a little after,
We must remain in that Church which, having been founded by the Apostles,
indureth till this present. And in an other place, I am joined in communion
with thy blessedness, (...) (...). (...) 1.
that is to say, with the Chair of Peeter, I know the Cburch it built upon
that rock, whosoever eats the lamb out of that house, is profane

Of the unity of internal faith. CHAPT. X.
The continuance of the Kings Answer.
THey are united in unity of Faith, at least in those points, which are
necessary for salvation.

THE REPLY.
THere are seven batailles to be given upon this article, but against a King
that will glory in suffering himself to be overcome by truth, and in saying
with Darius his Chamberlaines, (...). (...). (...).
that kings are very strong, but truth is yet more strong; And therefore I
fear not to incurr Homers sentence: When a great king is angry with his
servant.

The first bataile is, that an unity in things necessary for the Salvation of
every particular man, is not sufficient for the constitution of the Church For
there are points of faith, which are necessary, even with an inevitable
necessity, for the body of the Church which are not necessary with the like
necessity in regard of every particular man; as we have showed in our sirst
Epistle: and those, which are sufficient for a man (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...). (...). 3.
by death, and in case of impossibility of better instruction; are not
sufficient for him, that can have commodity to be more thoroughly (...): and
those that may suffice for a simple handy crafts man, or a labourer, cannot
suftize for the body of the Pastors, and the universal Society of the Church.

The second bataile is, that besides the things, which particular men are
bound to believe with a distinct and explicit faith, there are many other,
which they are obliged to believe with a faith of adherencie and non-(...),
which Schoolmen call implicit faith. As, all the articles, that Counsels
ordain to be believed, or forbidd to be believed; upon pain of anathema. A
vine dresser, a laborer, an artificer, is not bound to believe them by retaile,
and with a distinct and explicit faith: but it suffizeth that they believe the^
in the faith of the Church, to wit that they adhere and consent with the
Church which believes, them. For making profession to believe all that the
Church, (where-into they are in corporared believes: faith embraces in
general by the meritt of their obedience, all that the same Church believes
distinctlie, though their knowledge (...) it not. And therefore even as while
children are in their mothers womb, or sucking at her breasts, they live by
the food and nourishment of their mother; but when they are parted from her,
they can no longer live with that communicated nourishment, or that infused
food: so while simple persons remain within the bosom and Communion of the
Church, they live, in those things, which are above their capacity, by the
faith of the Church, which is imputed ahd applied to them by the adherence that
they have with her. Such, says Saint AUGUSTINE, Epist 57.
if before they arrive to the spiritual age of the Soul (where they shall noe
more be nourisht with milk, but with solid meat;) the last day of their
life surprise them: he that dwells in them shall supply what they want in
their (...), because they have not separated themselves from the unity of the
body of Christ, which bad been made the way to us, and have not withdrawn
themselves from the society of the Temple of God. And therefore it is
necessary, that the Church, to whom they ought to adhere to obtain this
supply, should be first known, and visible to them; and more over that she
not only live with the doctrine, which is answerable to milk, (as is the
profession of the articles, which simple persons are bound to believe with a
distinct and Ibidem.
explicit faith, which Saint AUGUSTINE calls the rule of Faith, common to
little and great;) but with that, which is answerable to solid meat.

The third battle is, that it is not sufficient to say in form of an (...)
proposition; they are united in points necessary for salvation; but it must be
said in form of an universal proposition, They are united in all points
necessary for salvation. For as it will not serve a man to live, that he has
all his other parts sound, if he be deadly wounded in any member necessary
to life; so it will nothing avail to these societies we talk of to be united
in other things necessary to salvation, if they be wanting in De Bapt: cont.
Donat. l. 1. c. 8.
any one. If a man be brought, says saint AUGUSTINE, to a Physician
grieuonsly wounded in some necessary part of his body, and the Physician
say, if he be not dressed, he will dye; I think, they which present him, will
not be so senseless, as to answer the Physician, after they have considered
and reckoned his other sound parts; what, shall not so many sound parts have
power to (...) him alive? and shall one wounded part have power to bring him
to his death? Now amongst things necessary to salvation, the principal and
most necessary, Ibid.
is the knowledge and acknowledgement of the Catholic Church. What profitts
it a man, (says saint AUGUSTINE) either sound faith, or it may be the only
Sacrament of sound faith; when the soundnes of Charity is wounded with the
wound of schism, the only destruction whereof, drawhes all the other parts to
death? And in an other place: We had both one baptism, in that they were with
me; we both read the Scriptures, in that they were with me; we both celebrated
the martyrs feasts, in that they were with me; we both frequented the
solemnity of Easter, in that they were with me; but they were not with me in
all things; in schism they were divided from me, in heresy they were divided
from me: in many things with me, and in few divided from me; but because of
these few things, wherein they were divided from me, the many things, wherein
they were with me, profited them nothing. And so it is unprofitable to those
societies, whereof his Majesty speaks, to obtain the name of Churches, that
they be united in most points necessary for salvation; if they be not united
in all: and particularly in the knowledge and acknowledgement of the true
Catholic Church; and consequently, not supposing her to be visible.

The fowrth battle is, that the universal distinction of things necessary
or not necessary to salvation, cannot be assuredly made by the judgment of
every particular person; but it dependes of the judgment of the Church. For
there is noe Sect, but belieues, that those things which they hold, De piece.
orig cont. Pel. l. 2. c. 22.
are only necessary to salvation; and that all which others hold over and
above, are either pernicious, or superfluous. Pelagius and Celestius, (says
Saint AVG.) desiring fraudulently to avoid the hateful name of De (...).
orig. (...). (...). l. 2. c. 22.
heresies, affirm that the question of original sin may be disputed without
danger of says; And Saint AUGUSTINE contrariwise cries out, that it belongs to
the foundation of faith: We may, (said he) endure a disputant which (...) in
other questions, not yet diligently examined, not yet established by the whole
authority of the Church, their errors may be borne with: but it must not
pass so far, as to attempt to shake the foundation of the Church. And
Luther, Luther tp. 7. in defen. verb. (...).
speakinge of the controversies of the Real presence under both kinds, and of
the orall manducation of the body of Christ in the Eucharist: Zuinglius and
Oecolampadius, said he, allege, that the question between them and us, is a
light matter, and a little difference, not worthy, that by occasion thereof
Ibid. paulo (...).
Christian charity should be broken. But LVTHER contrariwise cries out;
Eternally cursed be this concord and this charity, because it does not only
miserably Ibid. paulo (...).
rend the Church, but after the devils fashion, mockes her. And again; I take
to witness God and man, that I agree not with the Sacramentaries; that is,
with the Zuinglians and Caluinists; nor ever did agree with them; nor, by the
help of God, (...) will agree with them; and that I desire my hands may be
clean from the blood, of all those, whose souls by this poison they have
turned from Christ, and Ibid. paulo (...).
slain. And a little after; We will avoid them, we will resist, and condemn
them, to the last breath, as Idolators, corrupters of Gods word, blasphemers,
and seducers. So that before we can be assured of entire unity in things
necessary to salvation, we must hear the judgment of the Church, and
consequently, suppose her to be visible.

The fifth battle is, that it is not euough for the constitution of a Church,
that the persons, where of it consistes, should be united among themselves in
matters necessary to salvation; if they be not also divided from the external
communion of all other societies, which hold things repugnant to salvation.
For it suffices that we be united with any Congregation, which belieueth any
one point repugnant to Salvation, although we be well persuaded in all the
rest, nay, and even in that also; to be excluded from the participation of the
Church; for whosoever communicates in matter of Religion with any Society, is
answerable for all the points, under the obligation whereof he receives men
to his communion. From whence it arises, that a multitude of men of diverse
external communions, such as his Majesty hereafter propounds, (as, a number
of men of the Roman Communion, a number of men of the Greek communion, and a
number of men of the Ethiopian Communion;) cannot constitute a common Church:
for as much as, though they are united in the belief of most things necessary
to salvation; nevertheless there are things repugnant to salvation, wherein
some of them are united by the bond of their external Communions with the
body of their Sects; which external union, though the internal went not with
it, is sufficient to deprive them from the participation of the Church.

The sixth battle is, that the unity of faith, which enters into the
essential definition of the Church, is not simply the unity of internal
faith; but the unity of external faith. For the unity of faith, which
concurrs to the formal constitution of the Church, is that, which serves for a
foundation to the commerce of Ecclesiastical Charity, that is to say, by
means whereof the members of the mystical body of Christ, may acknowledge
and embrace one an other as brothers and members of one and the same body. Now
this is the unity of exteruall and professed faith, and not that of hidden and
internal, which serves for nothing, neither for (...), nor for salvation, if
it be not made manifest and external. For our Lord cries out: He that will
confess me before men, I will confess him Matt. 10.
before God my Father. And saint PAVL; We make confession with our mouths to
Romans 10
salvation. And saint AGVST. We cannot be saved, unless laboring also for De
fide and. Symb. c. 1.
the salvation of others, we profess with our mouths the same faith which we
be are in our harte^s. And again, Peradventure, (said he) some one may say,
there are Deo uib. c 1.
other sheep, (...) (...) (...) (...) which I am not acquainted with, but God
has care of them; But he is too absurd in human sense, that can imagine such
things.

And finally the seventh battle is, that the unity of faith, even external
and professed, (...) not for the constitution of the Church, if the unity of
the visible and Sacramental Communion with the original body of the Church,
and the universal society of the true pastors, be not added to it. You are
with us ((...) Saint AUGUSTINE to the Donatists) Epist. 48.
in baptism, in (...) Creed in the other Sacraments of our Lord but in the
spirit of unity, in the bond of peace, and finally in the Catholic Church,
you are not with us. Inepist. ad Tit. c. 3.
And Saint IEROM; There is this difference between schism and heresy, that
heresy holds a false doctrine; and schism, for Episcopal dissension,
equally separates men from the Church.

Of other invisible unions. CHAP. XI.
The continuance of the Kings answer
THey are united by the conjunction of spirits, and by the offices of true
Charity, and above all by that of mutual prayers. They are finally joined by
the communion of one selfsame hope, and by the expectation of one promised
inheritance.

THE REPLY.
NEITHER can there be a true Communion of Spirits, where the visible and
sacramental Communion of bodies is excluded; that is to (...), where the
parties do noe admit one an other to the Communion and participation os the
same Sacraments; If we be in unity (says S. AUGUSTINE) what have two altars
to do in this City? In ep. (...). tract. 3.


Neither can the office of mutual prayers, that is to say, prayers made one
for an other, constitute an Ecclesiastical unity and Communion; Prosp ad
calcem. ep. Caeles.
For Catholics, namely upon good friday, pray for heretics, and heretics
for Catholics; although indeed the exercise of prayers, either made jointly,
or exacted one from the other, be an office of communion, though an imperfect
one. And therefore the Council of Laodicea, forbiddes Catholics to pray with
heretics. And the first (...). Laod. can. 33.
Council of Nicea ordaines, that those penitentes, that had in peril of death
received the Eucharist, their health being recovered should Conc. Nic.
remain with those, that communicate by prayer only. And the 1. can. 13.
Council of Ancyra admittes a Communion without Obligation. And Co^munio.
Council.
the religious of Egypt, driven away by Theophilius, being come to Ancyr.
Constantinople, were not deprived by Saint CHRISOSTOM of the Communion of
prayer. He thurst them not, (says Socrates) out of the Soc. (...). call. l. 6.
c. 9.
participation of prayer; but he judged it not convenient to admit them to the
Communion of the Sacraments, before the knowledge of the cause.

Neither is true Charity to be found out of the Church; but only an humane
affection, which can noe otherwise be called charity but equiuocally. None
(says saint AUGUST.) can transport charity forth of the Catholic In Psam.
21 (...) (...). cum (...).
Church. And again, Thou have proved to me that thou have faith; prove to me
like wise that thou have charity; Keep unity.

Neither can the simple conjunction of hope, constitute any Ecclesiastical
communion; for all heretics and Schismatickes agree in this point, that they
hope eternal life, and the promised inheritance. We (says Petilian the
Donatist) having nothing, yet possessinge all things, believe that our Aug.
cont. (...). l. 2. c. 99.
souls are our reuenewe, and with out labor and blood, we purohasse the
eternal riches of heaven.

Neither finally, can the conjunction in one just hope, have any place, but
amongst those, that are called and inserted into the body of the Catholic
Ephesians. 4.
Church: followinge this sentence of saint Paul, One body and one spirit, as
you are called in one hope of your vocation.

Of the knowledge, that the predestinate have, of their predestination. CHAP.
XII.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
KNowing, (I speak of the elect,) that they are predestinate from before the
foundation of the world to be coheires, united in body, and copartners of the
promises of God in the Gospel, a; the divine Apostle says.

THE REPLY.
Here the most excellent King behaues himself like Hippomanes, who runninge
with Atalanta for masterie, cast out golden apples in her way, to delaie her
with taking them up: so his Majesty putts rubbes in this discourse, to stay
the course of my pen, and to stop me to examine them. But I hope to remove
them so quickly, that I shall be time enough at the end of my carrere.

To this then I will succinctly say four things. The first that philosophers
teach us that the moral passion, which we call hope from whence theological
hope has by analogy borrowed her name is always mingled and tempred with
fear: By means whereof, those things, that fall under the object of hope, as
are the goods of future life in respect of every particular man, cannot be
apprehended with a certainty of Theological faith (that is to say,
infaillible, and not to be doubted of) otherwise hope should noe more be a
virtue distinct from faith, against this oracle of saint PAVL, now remains,
faith, hope, and Charity; and these things are three: but ought to be embraced
with an expectation mingled and tempered with fear, as David exhortes us in
these words: ferue the Lordin fear, and rejoice in him with tremblinge. And
S. PAVL in these, Thou subsistest by faith be not pussed up, but fear. He that
thinks he stands, let him take heed least he (...). And again, work your
salvation with fear and tremblinge. And speaking of himself, I chastize my
body and bring it under, least when I have preached to others, myself become
a reprobate.

The second, that faith cannot be but of things revealed by the word of God:
for faith (says saint PAVL) is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Now
it is not revealed to any one in the word, which God has consigned to his
Church, either by writing or tradition; that he is absolutely of the number
of the predestinate, and therefore if he have not express and particular
revelation from God, as Saint Paul had, (who upon this occasion speaks
sometimes of himself, according to his common condition as simply one of the
faithful; and sometimes according to his extraordinary revelation of a
predestinate person;) he can not have any certainty of Faith in this respect.
For to say that it is revealed to us in scripture that whosoever trustes in
our Lord, shall not be confounded: And that Psa. 124.
our Lord himself says who believes in me has life eternal; all these pro
Ioann. 6.
mises, (not to speak of other modifications, which the scripture puts to
them,) ought to be understood with the condition, wherewith our Lord will have
them understood, when he says; who perseuers to the end, shall be Matt. 24.
saved And Saint Paul when he writes, See the goodness of God in thee, if
thou Romans 11.
persevere in goodness, otherwise thou shall be also cut of. Now where is it
that this final perseverance is particularly promised to any one in the word
of Marc. 11.
God? for if you answer that our Lord says, all that you ask for when you
pray, believe you shall receive it, and it shall be done to you: And
consequently if we demand perseverance, we shall obtain it: I answer that
he means, all that you demand, as you should demand it. Now the principal
condition required to demand perseverance as you should demand it, is to
persevere in demaundinge it, and not to content our selves with demaundinge it
once, but to demand it petpetually, followinge this preeept os Saint Paul;
Pray without ceasinge. And again 1 Thessalonians. 5.
watch and pray with all perseverance. Far Solomon demanded wisdom and
Ephesians. 6.
begged it in faith without staggeringe, which is the condition wherewith
Jacob. 1.
saint JAMES says we should beg it, but because he did not persevere to ask
it, he lost it. Now this perseverance to ask perseverance, where is it
promised to any one in the scripture?

The third, that this belief is pernicious, both to religion as an enemy to
humility and good works, and to States and commonwealths, as an enemy to
good manners. For imprinting in the spirit of every particular man, yea which
is worse, as well of those that are wicked and reprobate as of others, (because
what is proposed in a Religion for a doctrine necessary to salvation, all do
think themselves obliged to hold it;) that he is assuredly predestinate, and
that whatsoever sins he commit, he shall infallibly have leisure and grace to
repent him before his death, this I say does puff up men with arrogance and
presumption above their fellows of whose predestination they have not the like
certainty, and makes them less diligent to stand upon their guarde and to
practice this commandment of our Lord; watch and pray, for fear least Matt.
26. and Luc. 21:
you enter into temptation. And therefore as the prince of the Roman harp
sings,

God by his wisdom, from wans nature frail Horat. car min l. 3. ad 29.

The whole success of future things does veil.
The fowrth, that S. AUGUST. (the greatest doctor in the point of
predestination, that has been since the Apostles, yea the organ and the voice
13.
of the primitive Church, in this questiom,) teaches us, that this belief is
(...). De il. 11. c. 12
full of presumption and prejudicial to salvation. Although, (says he) that
the just are assured of thereward os (...) perseverance, yet they are
incertaine of their perseverance; for who is he (...) men, that knows he shall
persevere in the works and progress of justice to the end, if he be not made
certain thereof by some revelation from him, who by a just and secret
judgment instructs not all, De correpi and great. 13
but deceiues none? And in an other place, Who is he among the faithful, that
will presume during this mortal life, to be of the number of the predestinate?
for it is needful that that be concealed in this world. And a little after,
Many like things are said for the profit of this secret, least peradventure
some might be puffed up: and that even those that runn well might fear, while it
is uncertain, whither they shall arrive. And again, Such presumption is not
profitable in this place of temptations, where the infirmity is so great, as
assurance might begett pride. And thus much is said in regard of (...).

It restes now to solue the objections of the places of Scripture, that the
adversaries of the Church allege against this doctrine; They say the^ Romans 8.
that Saint Paul, writes; the spirit of God gives testimony to our Spirit (or
according to the greeks, helps our Spirit to testify to us) that we are the
children of God: and if children, heirs. It is true, but they tell us not,
that he adds presently after, this conditional clause; if we go forward in
our sufferings.

They say he writes, I am certain (or according to the greek, I am
persuaded) (...).
that neither death nor life etc. can separate us from the charity of Christ.
It is true; but they tell us not, that he speaks there of all the predestinate
in general, into whose number he putts himself, and those to whom he writes,
by a figure which the gra^marians call syllepsis; and according to the rule,
not of Faith, but of Charity, which wills, that in all things concealed from
us, we should judge in the better part.

They say, he writes, The vocation, and the guiftes of God are without
repentance. (...) (...).
It is true, but there he speaks of the general calling of the people of the
Jews, made in the old Testament, were of he says; God has not (...),
because yet one day he will recall their nation into the bosom of the Church.
And even those, that stretch this passage by analogy to the calling of
particular persons, either explicate it of vocation according to
predestination, which is as much unknown, as predestination it self; or they
intend, that the gifts and vocation of god, are without tepentance on his
part, that is to say, that God never withdrawes himself from us, unless we
withdraw ourselves from him: And therefore, as Saint Paul says 2. (...). 1.
the vocation and the guists of god are without repentance; so Saint Peter
says take pains to secure your vocation and election by good works. (...)
(...). 1.


They say he writes, we have the pledge of the holy Ghost in our hearts; It
is true; but it is not sufficient for our assurance to obtain the inheritance
of life eternal that we have this pledge, if we be not as well assured not to
loose it; a thing that Saint Paul is so far from assuringe us that
contrarily he cries out, quench not the spirit.

They say, Saint John writes: perfect charity drives awaieseare. It is true,
2. Thest. 1.
1. (...) 4.
but, besides that Saint John speaks there of perfect Charity, which every
particular man ought to desire but not presume he has it for fear of (...).
loosinge it, in loosinge humility;) the fear that saint John pretendes (...).
to be excluded by this excellent Charity, is (as Sanit AUGUSTINE (...) 9.
says) (...) fear; that is the fear of loosinge the grace of God, for fear
of the pain of eternal fire; and not the filial fear which is the fear of
looseinge the grace of God for the love of God himself, and for fear of being
deprived and separated from his presence. And therefore as S. Apoc. 2.
John says in the place cited by them; perfect charity castes out fear: So
he says in an other place, Thou have lost thy first charity, remember from
whence (...) art salien, and do thy first works. And again. Hold that thou
have least thy (...) be taken from thee.

And from this is nothing derogatory, that which they object, that the (...)
of this certainty, makes men despair of their salvation: For between the
certainty of salvation, and despair, there is a middle way, which is hope
that, while it lastes, (as it ought always to last in a Christian man,) is
incompatible with despair, and sussizeth to comfort us, and hinder us, if we
persevere in it, from being confounded; And although it imprint not in us an
infallible certainty of our salvation, (for then it were theological says,
and noe more hope;) yet it causes in us moral faith which we call confidence,
by the means of likelyhoodes and conjectures that the good motions, wherewith
god inspires us, give us of our De don. perseu. l. 2. c. 22.
predestination. Learn in part, says Saint AUGUSTINE (condiscite as S. PAVL
(...)) from the goodness and straightnes of your course, that you belong Ibid.
to the predestination of divine grace. And again, you the^ also ought to
hope from the father of lights (from whom descendes every excellent gift,
and every perfect present,) the perseverance to obaie, and ask it of him with
daily prayers, and doing so, confide not to be excluded from the
predestination of his people, since it Ibid.
is himself that gives us grace to do it. And a little after: Of life
eternal (says he) which God, who is noe liar, has (...) before all times to
the Children of promise, none can be assured till this life be finished, but he
will make us persevere in him, to whom we say every day, lead us not into
temptation, that is to say, as it arises from the protestation, of the
preceding period) but we ought to hope that he will make us persevere in him, to
whom we say every day: lead us not into temptation.

Of the inequality of these two phrases, to communicate with the Catholic
Church, and to communicate with some member of the Church, departing from the
rule of faith. CHAP. XIII.
The continuance of the Kings answer
BUT the king adds, that this very Church. if any of her members depart from
the rule of faith, will prefer the love of truth, before the love of unity.
She knows that the supreme 1. Tim. 3.
law in the house of God, is the sincerity of heauelie doctrine, which if
any one forsake, 1. Cor. 6.
he forsakes Christ, who is truth it self, he forsakes the Church which is the
(...) and foundation of truth. With such separatistes, a man truly Catholic,
neither will, nor maic communicate: Far what agreement is there between Christ
and (...).

THE REPLY.
HERE his Majesty must give me leave to say, that he changes the way of his
disputation, and goes out of the lists, quite from the state of the question.
For the question is not whether, to obtain the name of Catholic, and to
attain to salvation, it be necessary to be united with any one of the members
of the Church, when it comes to be separated from truth; but whether to obtain
the name of Catholic, and attain to salvation, it be necessatie to be united
with the whole mass and universal Body of this Church, which the Fathers
have called Catholic. Neither is it the question, whether there may be any
external and visible society, wherewith it is unlawful to commuuicate: but
whether such a time can be wherein there is noe external and visible Society,
wherewith it is necessary to communicate. For to saic, that all Communion are
not to be desired, and that there are Congregations wherewith it is not lawful
to Communicate, whieh, of us ever doubted it? Nay contrarily, do we not daily
pronounce anathema against those that Communicate with heretics or
Schismatickes? and, in that we (...) his majesty, to return to the Communion,
of the Catholic Church from that of the Caluinists; does it not prove
sufficiently, that we hold not, that there should be Co^m union held with all
kind of sects? The state the^ of the question to overthrow our Thesis and
conclude some thing against us, requires not to prove, that there may be
Societies, wherewith we ought to have noe Communion: for who denies that? but
to prove, that there may come a time, wherein there can be found noe external
and visible Society, wherewith it is lawful to communicate and that this time
being come, (as Luther supposed it to be, when he began to pitch his ensigns
in the field:) it is necessary to go forth from all the Religions, that are
then to be found visible in the world, and to make a new Communion, and a
congregation a part. See here what is needful to be proved; and in steed
of this, the excellent king aleageth, that if any member of the Church
depart from the rule of Faith, the Church must preserr the love of verity
before the love of unity.

To this answer of his (...) we will answer two things: the first that there
is noe incompatibilitie beweene this thesis; we must be united with the
universal body of the Catholic Church; And this antithesis, if any member
depart from the rule of faith we must not be united with it. For the one
speaks of the body of the Church; and the other speaks of some one of the
members of the Church; and the special mention os some one of the Church
departing from the true faith supposes the stay and perseuera^ce of the rest
of the body of the Church in the faith. Now it is with that body from whence
that part that forsakes the faith, deuides it self; that we say we must have
Communion and unity: and not with the part, that separates it self from the
body; for it is not a means to maintain unity to have unity with those
that divide themselves from unity.

The second that there is great difference between the rightes and (...) of
the Catholic Church; and the preuiledges of particular Churches. For the
infallible assistance of the holy Ghost was never promised to every particular
Church but to the body of the Catholic Church. And therefore as the elements
are corruptible in their parts but incorruptible in their all; so the Church
is corruptible in her parts, but incorruptible in her all; in such sort that
though some particular Churches may err in faith and consequently cease from
being Churches, nevertheless, there always remains one mass of a Church
exempt (...) corruption so great and eminent, that she representes, and
conserues in herself, the being, rightes and prerogatives of all the whole.
And so the obligation that we have to Communicate with the Catholic Church,
is one thing; and an other the obligation that we have to Communicate with
particular Churches. For with her we are bound to Communicate necessarily and
absolutely under pain of anathema and damnation, because out of her Communion,
none can be saved: and with others only whiles they Communicate with her.

And the pretense of truth cannot be alleged to make this obligation (...).
conditional, since Saint Paul says the Church is the fouudation of truth.
(...) (...). (...).
And Saint AUGUSTINE within the womb of the Church, truth has her dwellinge.
Nor can it be objected, that the supreme law in the house of God is the
sincerity of heavenly Doctrine. For, besides that this law 2 Thessalonians. 2
has her Statutes written, and unwritten: (following this precept of S. PAVL:
follow the traditions that you have received from us, whether by words, or by
Epistles And this testimony of Eusebius: The Apostles have given some
Dedemo^st. l. 1. c 8.
things by writing, and others by unwritten laws? And this observation of
saint CHRYSOSTOM From whence it appears, that the Apostles have not In 1 Thessalonians. 2.
delivered all things by writings, but many things also without writing:) it
is not Sup. c. 5.
only necessary in matters contested, to have a law, but it is needful
besides the law, to have a judge (with authority able to oblige, and subdue
the sense of particular persons) to interpret the words of the law; which
Judge, as we have already demonstrated; ca^ be noe other but the Church.

How to understand these words of saint Gregory Nazianzene; There is a sacred
war, CHAP. XIV.
The continuance of the Kings Answer.
THE Church then must fly the communion of those, and say with saint Gregory
Nazianzene, De pac. ar. 1. Orand.
that, a (...) for (...), is better, then an infected unity? And will not
doubt to pronounce with the same blessed Father: that there is a sacred wary.
150. Episc.


THE REPLY.
THERE is noe doubt of proving, that there may be some society, whose
communion must be avoided; for none denies it; but of proving that there may
come such a time, wherein there is noe external and visible society,
wherewith we are bound to communicate. Now the places, that his Majesty
cites out of S. GREGORY NAZIANZENE, are so far from insinuatinge any such
thing; as they affirm the quite contrary. For S. GREGORY says not these
Depac. or. 1.
words, against the external and visible Communion of the Church of his time:
but against the crafty practices of the Arrians, which demanded, under
pretense of peace, to be received into the communion of the Church with
Confessions of the faith ambiguous and deceiptfull; that is to say, he spoke
not this language, to show, that, when he writ it, there was then noe
external and visible Church, which must be communicated with under pain of
anathema: but contrariwise, to show, that they must continue to conserve the
external and visible communion of that Church impolluted and undefiled, from
the contagion of the Arrians.

And therefore in the second place alleged by his Majesty he representes
Orat. ad 150. Episc.
two Combats, that the good Catholic Pastors had in their charges, some
within the Church against the jealousy, and emulation of evil Catholics:
others without the Church, against heretics and Schismatickes: And which
heretics, and not against the Church entitled Catholic, he calls the
war, sacred war, in imitation of the Phocensian war which was called
sacred.

Of the pretended precepts, to go forth from the visible communion of the
Church. CHAP. XV.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
NOW, that in the Church it was once necessary to make such a separation, we
lerrne it clearly, as well out of other places of the Scripture, as from that,
which is ope^lie declared to us, by this admonition of the holy Ghost, made to
the Church, certainly, not without cause, Go out of Babylon my people, least
you communicate in her sins. Now what this Babylon (...). 18.
is, from whence the people of God are commanded to go forth: the king
searches not into it nor decides nothing in that respect. This certainly at
least the thing it self shows manifestly, that (whether in that place by the
word Babylon be meant a particular Church, or the greater part of the
universal Church,) it must be she has heertofore been a lawful Church,
wherewith Religious men communicated (...): and then from whom, after her
deprauation had yet past further, the faithful received commandment to go
forth and to break the communion they had with her: So as it is easy to be
understood from thence, that the faithful ought not to desire all kind of
communion with those which are called under the title of Christ, but only that,
which is made retaining still the (...) of the doctrine revealed from heaven.

THE REPLY.
IT was not without cause the first Grecians called their allegorical sense
(...); be it that this word intend hidden and conealed (...) de and poet.
senses, or whether it intend suspicions. For all senses, purelie allegorical
are but suspitio^s and conjectures, and have noe firm and solid fou^datio^.
And it is not without cause, that the hebrew Doctors call the literal sense of
the scripture, the little word, and the allegorical sense the great word: For
the literal sense is restrained by the square and straight measure of that,
which is contained in the text: where as the allegorical sense has noe bound
but is multiplied infinitely, and goes as far as humane imaginatio can be
stretched. And therefore this axiom is past for a proverb in divinity, that
allegories prove nothing. Now if there be a book in the world And Paulin
written in an allegorical style, what one ca^ be equalled in that kind to
the Revelation? which, as Saint IEROM says, contains as many Sacraments
Aug. cp. 48
that is to say sacred riddles, as words? And if Saint AUGUSTINE cried out
against the Donatists, who would have found a prediction of their Church in an
allegorical verse of the Canticles, and said to them, who is it that dares,
without a most unbridled license, produce for himself that, that is (...) in
an allegory: if he have not places more clear by whose light to illustrate
that which is obscure? What would he say in this age, not against his Majesty
but against the proceedinges of those, that have built the vocation of their
Church, upon these alegoricall words of the Revelation, go forth of Babylon
my people?? who knows not, that it is a solution sufficient for arguments
drawn out of allegorical expositions, to answer, I deny it, and
principally, when there may be an other sense given to the allegorical words,
then that, according to which they are alleged? If I could not (says Saint
AUGUSTINE, answering an allegorical objection,) prove this sense, by any more
certain argument, yet it ought to satisfy every judicious bearer that I have
found an issue for these words; by means whereof it appears that they have
alleged nothi^ge for themselves that is certain, but what may de doubted of
And not only may there be found an other way of understanding this passage,
then that which his Majesty supposes: but antiquity has found two others,
and both celebrated by excellent and authentical Authors; and those which have
come after, have yet added a third.

The first way of understanding it, is to interpret Babylon described by the
Revelation, to be the Society of all the wicked in general, as S. AUGUSTINE
and many others often expound it in that sense; and to expound Jerusalem,
described in the same book, to be the Society of all the Good; which are the
two Cities whereof Saint AUGUSTINE has composed a work, of the City of the
devil which began in Cain, and the City of God, which began in Abell. For as
there is the same reason in things contrary and opposite: so must the
interpretatio of that Jerusalem painted out in the Revelation; and that of that
Babylon, which is opposed to it, be a like. Mark, said Saint AUGUSTINE, the
names of these two Cities, Babylon In Psalm. 64.
and Jerusalem. Babylon signifies confusion, and Jerusalem the view of peace
etc. They are mingled from the beginning of humane kind, and shall continue
so to the end of the world. Jerusalem took her beginning from Abell, and
Babylon from Cain. And a little after; From whence can we now show them, that
is, discern them? Our Lord will show to us, when he places them, the one on
his right hand, the other on his left. Jerusalem shall hear, come you blessed
of my father, take possession of the kingdom which is prepared for you from
the beginminge of the world; and Babylon shall hear; go you cursed into
eternal fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels. Yet we may
also bring some mark according to the capacity that it pleases God to give
us, by which the faithful and godly Citizens of Jerusalem may be
distinguished from the Citizens of Babylon. Two loves, make these two Cities,
the love of God makes Jerusalem, the love of the world, makes Babylon: let
every one then examine himself what he loves, and he shall find of which he
is a Citizen. And in an In psalm. 86.
other place; all the wicked belong to Babylon; as all the Saints do to
Jerusalem. And in the volume of the City of God: And what shall we gather
from this, De cinit. Deil. 18. c. 18.
but that we must fly out of the middle of Babylon? which prophetical precept
ought spirituallie to be understood in this sense: that out of the City of
this world, which is without doubt the society of evil Angels, and wicked
men, we should fly with the steps of faith, which works by love, and
aduauncinge toward the living God. And In Psalm. 61.
in the volume upon the psalms; all those who perferr earthly felicity
before God all those which seek themselves, and not Jesus Christ, belong to
that only City, which is mystically called Babylon, and has the devil for
her king. And to this it is noe impediment, that she is described to be clad
in purple; fore there, purple, signifies not the color of purple; but
temperall powers dignities, and authority, which are for the most part in the
hands of the wicked, rather then of the good: the white and shining linen,
wherewith the bride is clothed, signifies not the stuff and color of linen,
but the justification Apoc. 19.
of the saints. As little is it repugnant to this, that she is described to be
set upon 7. Mountains; for that which follows imediately after, and those
are 7. kings; shows that the word Mountains, ought not in that place to be
literally taken, but allegorically; whether for the seven sins, that we call
mortal, or for any other septenary mumber ruling over the society of the
wicked.

The second interpretation celebrated by the Fathers, is, to expound the
destruction of Babylon, described in the Revelation, to be destruction of
Paganism, and of the honor of the false Gods: and the descent of heavenly
Jerusalem, to be the propagation of Christian Religion; for as much as in the
time of the prophets, from whose words this verse of the Revelation, go out
of Babylon my people is taken, Babylon was as it were, the head of Pagan
superstition, and also that the word Babylon signifyinge Confusion, is more
proper then any other, to design the Religion of the Pagans, which was a
Confusion of Religions; because Rome, which in the age of the Apostles was
become the head of Paganism, had received into her Commonwealth and Religion,
the worship and Religion of all the Provinces that she had overcome. From
whence it is that Saint AUGUSTINE attributes by a particular title the word
confusion to the Religion of the Pagans, when he says; We must seek for
Religion, neither De vera Religione c. 5.
in the confusion of the pagans, nor in the refuse of heretics, nor in the
la^guishing of Schismatickes, nor in the blindenes of the Jews. And it is noe
contradiction to this, that the Angel cries, go out of Babylon my people. And
a little after, Apoc. 18.
and recompense her double for what she has done to you. For this cry is
addressed to the elect, which were not yet the people of God in act and
vocation, but in power and in predestination, whom God so calls, to draw them
from paganism, and to make them actually his people, and Commands them to
repay or return what she has done to them; that is, not what she has done in
their persons, for they could not be persecuted by her for the faith, if they
were not yet separated from her in faith; but in the persons of their
predecessors. And therefore Saint AVGVSVINE says; Mark how the people of
Babylon are put to death, the double of what she (...) (...). 149
has done, is rendered unto her: for so it is written of her; recompense her
the double of what she has done, etc. And how is the double recompensed upon
her? when she might persecute the christians, she slew their bodies, but she
brake not their God: Now she is recompensed double, for we root out the
pagans, and break their Idols. And how, say thou, are the pagans put to
death? how else but in being made Christians?

For if some ancient Fathers have interpreted the word Babylon, to be the
City of Rome, because of this epithet, drunck with the blood of the Apoc. 17.
Saints, and the martires of Jesus; whose sufferinges were so; frequent at
Rome in the first ages of the Church, that it has been justly said, that Rome
was not so much a city of men, as a Churchyard of martires; It was the pagan
Rome that they intended, as the Capital Seat of the heathen Religion, and of
the Empire of the Gentiles; and not of any Church, neither particular, nor
universal; as it appears by these words of Saint JEROME: I address my
speech to thee, o most puissant town, which have wiped out (...). (...) l. 2.
the blasphemies written in thy forehead, by the confession of Christ: Which
shows us, that whilst Rome was pagan, she was the same to the Christians, as
Babylon was in the time of the old Testament, to the Jews; but that,
becomeinge Christian, she had ceased to be so, and was transformed from
Babylon into Jerusalem. If any reply, that in his epistle to Marcella, the
same Saint IEROM has gone so far, as to apply the name of Babylon to Ad
(...) ep. 17.
Rome, after she was Christian: it was not to Rome, as the Seat of Religion,
but to Rome as the seat of the Empire; not to the Ecclesiastical communion of
Rome, but to the politic State of Rome; not to the Church of Rome, but to the
Imperial Court, to the Senate, to the Palace, and to the troop of Courtiers,
Solicitors and Negotiators of Rome, and not in matter of Faith but in matter of
manners; and not in regard of Secular Christians, but in regard of the monks
to whom Rome was a kind of Babylon, because of the diuersions, that the noise,
the confusion, the tumult of men and affairs in so great a City brought to
monastical devotion as it appears by what (...).
he adds presently after: It is true that in that City there is the holy
Church; it is true that there are the trophies of the Apostles and of the
martyrs: it is true there is the true confession of Christ, it is true there
is the faith celebrated by the Apostle, and the Christian name every day
exalted by the depression of paganism trodden under foot: but the ambition,
the power, and greatness of this City, to visitt and to be visited, to
salute and to be saluted, to flatter and detract, to hear, and speak, nay to
see, though unwillingly, so great a multitude of men, are things far from the
purpose and quiet of those, that would follow a monastical life. And again,
notinge Ad Paulin de instit. Monach. ep 13.
the same discomodities in the dwelling in Jerusalem; If (said he) the places
of the Cross and Resurrection were not in a famous town, where there is a
Court, where there is is a garrison of Soldiers, where there are common
women, players, ieasters, and all things which use to be in other Cities,
etc. it would certainly be a dwellinge much to be desired by Monks. Now if
sometimes he have chanced to make use of this word in his writings, against
certain Priests and Deacons of the Clergy of Rome, who, iealious of his
favor with Pope Damasus, persecuted him with slanders, reproching to him,
Praefat. in Didim. de
that he had translated the treaties of Didymus an heretical author; Ad Asell.
ep. 99.
that he had conuersed too familiarly with the devout ladies of Rome, and
persuaded them to quit their country, children, and kindred, that is, the
confusion and tumulte of the world, to go as recluses into the Monasteries of
Palestina: These were all complaints, which still remained within the limits
of their manners; and neither touched the faith of the Roman Church; nor the
succession of saint Peter; nor the communion of the Apostolical Sea; nor the
very person of the Pope. And indeed, how could saint JEROME apply these
words of the Revelation, Go out of Babylon, to the City of Rome, for any
thing concerning faith and Religion? He that cries out in his apology
against RVFFINVS: Apol. aduer Ruffin. l. 1
Which faith is it, that he calls his? that, that the Roman Church holds? or
that, that is contained in Origens books? if he answer that that the Roman
Church holds, then we are Catholics. And in the Epistle to THEOPHILUS
Patriarche Epist. 68.
of Alexandria. Know that we have nothing in greater recommendation, then to
conserve the statutes of Christ, and not to transgress the bounds of our
fathers, and always to remember the Roman faith praised by the mouth of the
Apostle, whereof the Alexandrian Church does glory to partake. And in the
Epistle to DEMETRIAS. When thou were little, and that the Bishop Anastasius of
Epist. 8.
(...) and happy memory, gouuerned the Roman Church, a cruel tempest of
(...) risen out of the Eastern parts, attempted to pollute and corrupt the
(...) of that faith, which had been commended by the mouth of the Apostle: but
this (...) (Pope Anastasius) rich in a most plentiful poverty, and iu an
Apostolical care, brake the pestilent head, and stopped the hissinge mouths
of (...) Hydra. And because I fear, yea I have heard say, that the budds of
this venomous plant do still live, and spring up in some, I thought it my
(...) to admonish thee in a devout zeal of charity, that thou keep fast the
faith of Saint INNOCENT his son and Successor in the Apostolical Chair. And
in the Epistle to Pope DAMASVS, I am chayned in communion with Ad Damos. epist.
57.
thy blessedness; that is with Peter's Chair; I know the Church is built upon
that rock, if any eat the lamb out of that house, he is profane. And a
little after; I know not Vitalis, I reject Meletius, I am ignorant of Paulinus;
whosoever gathers not with thee scatters; that is to say, whosoever is not of
Christ, is of Antichrist. Far then was he from holdinge the Church of Rome for
Babylon, and the Pope for Antichrist: since he held, whosoever did not
communicate with the Pope for Antichrist.

The third exposition is of them, who interpret the allegorical Babylon, to be
the Monarchy of the Turks, who with its false Prophet Mahomet, have possessed
all the cities, and particularly those of the seven Churches of Asia, to which
S. John addressed his revelation, and which has given up her soul to the
perished beast; that is to say, has again taken the office and rank of the
pagan Emperors, blasphmers and persecutors of the name of Christ; and has
usurped the Seat, whither their succession had been transferd; to wit
Constantinople; and who is clothed with purple, that is, has the Imperial
power and authority, whose simbole in Saint John's time was purple; and which is
seated, be it literally, upon seven Mountains for Constantinople has seven
Mountains as old Rome had, (for modern Rome has nine;) Or be it according
to the allegorical interpretation of Saint John, upon seven kings, that is to
say, upon the seven Empires, that follow the impiety of Mahomett. And in
brief which has so many other affinities with the Babylon in the Revelation,
as OECOLAMP. and BVLLINGER, are constrained to give her two seats, and
con^^^^u^e two Antichrists, one in the weste and an other in the East Now
(...). (...) (...).
which of these expositio^s answers the precise inte^tion of the Author; or
(...) (...) (...)
whether the perfect acco^plishment of these things be yet to come, (and
should be understood of a Society, which shall not arise, till after the
Gospel have been actually preached to all the nations of the world, as all
ancient writers are agreed, that the Monarchy of Antichrist, which the
Protestants esteene to be one thing with the Babylon of the Revelation, shall
not come till after that time,) it is not here our purpose to examine.

But in sum, that that Babylon where of the revelation speaks, can be
seriously taken for the city of Rome, the antithesis that saint JOHN makes
of Babylon and Jerusalem (which teaches us, that as the Jerusalem described by
the same Revelation, is not a local city; so Babylon described by the same
Revelation, is not a local and corporal city;) takes from us all color to
believe it. And therefore ARETHAS (who being a grecian, Areth in Apo^. ^. 18.
and a schismaticke, as he is held to be, had had more interest, to interpret
this passage of Rome;) resolves in the end, that it cannot be understood,
neither of Rome nor of Constantinople, but of the state of this corruptible
world. It appears (says he) vndoubtlie by this place, that the things which
are here foretold, should neither be understood of Babylon, nor of old nor
new Rome, that is Constantinople, nor of any other city, but of all this
corruptible world.

And that she may be taken for a Church, which in the beginning was a true
Church of Christ, and since grown false and adulterate, bearinge nevertheless
still the title of a Church; the figure of Babylon, (which was from the
beginning founded by Nimrod a pagan, and infidel, and after always
perseuered in paganism, and in the open profession of infidelity, till the
fall of her Empire;) cannot bear it. Contrariwise, that which saint JOHN
says, Apo^. 13
that, all those whose names are not written in the book of life, have
worshipped the beast, upon which the harlott sitts; seems to insinuate, that
he speaks of the society of all the reprobate, of what soever Sect, Religion,
and profession they have been; as well Jews, Gentiles, Heretics
Schismatickes: as evil Catholics, and not of any determinate Communion.

Yet we avowe nevertheless, that the Fathers have some-tymes turned the words
of Isay and Jeremy (from whence those words of the Revelation are taken,) to
make use of them against the particular Sect of the Arrians: Epist (...) (...)
(...) (...).
As when OSIVS, and after him S. ATHANAS. say, the Scripture cries out, depart,
depart; go out from her, and touch not her uncleanness: Withdraw you from the
midst of them; separate your-selues from the^, you that carry the vessels of
our Lord. But besides, that they have never pretended, that this precept should
be exte^ded to all the multitude of Christians; and, that there might come a
time, wherein there were noe external Communion visible and eminent, out of
which it should be unlawful to go forth; (which is that which is in
question;) There is great difference between the conceits, and allusions,
that the Fathers made upon the allegorical expositions of the passages of the
Scripture: and the proper and direct understanding of the same passages, which
is that only, from whence we may argue seriously. And therefore when the
Donatists in the conference of Carthage, would have made use of the same
words, against the Catholic Church: Saint AUGUST. and the other Bishops of
Africa, answered them, that the separation intended by that passage, was the
moral separation of faith and breach of Communion. It was (says S. AUGUST.)
represented, what ought to be the In breuic. coll. coll. 3.
separation of the good from the bad in this world; that they might not
communicate in their sins; to wit, separation of heart, by dissimilitude of
life and manners: and that otherwise ought not to be understood, that which is
written, go out from the middle of them, and withdraw from them, and touch
not their uncle annesse; that is to say, be distinguished in living in an
other sort, and consent not to their uncleanness.

But the excellent king says, that there are other places of scripture,
whereby is proved, that which he pretendes to gather from the allegorical
words of the revelation; to wit, that the visible Church should become so
corrupt, as the faithful should be obliged to leave her communion. Now the
objections that his Majesty reserues for us in this regard, are either taken
from this interrogatory of our Lord, In your opinion the Luc. 18. Matt. 24.
Aug. ep 80 2 Thessalonians. 2. Apoc. 12.
son of man, when he comes, shall he find faith upon the earth? or from
these words; the moon shall not give us her light: Which S. AUGUST.
interpretes of the Church; or from this prophecy of Saint Paul; the Son of
perdition shall be seated in the temple of God. Or out of these words of the
same book of the revelation; two wings of a great Eagle were given to the
woeman, that she might fly into the wilderness; Or from the examples of the
pretended ecclipses In the chap of the comparison of the Christian Church with
the Jews.
and sincopes of the Jewish Church. And therefore, (settinge aside the
objection of the symptoms of the Jewish Church, which we remitt to treat of
hereafter;) it is fit, that we solue all the rest presently.

To the first objection then, which is to the interrogatory, that our Lord made
to his disciples, when he asks them; In your opinion, when the Son of man
comes, shall he find faith on the earth? We say saint IEROM and S. AVG. have
answered it long ago; the one against the Luciferians, and the other against
the Donatists: And have showed, that this passage is intended, not of confessed
and doctrinall faith; but of iustifiynge faith, workinge by charity; and yet
not of the extinction, but of the diminution of this iustifiynge faith. The
Donatists (says saint AVG.) allege, that this, De unit. Eccl. c. 13.
that our Lord asks, in your opinion the Son of man vhen he comes, shall he
find faith upon the earth? is to be expounded of the reuolte of all the earth:
which we understand to be said, either in regard of the perfection of faith,
which is so oifficult to men, that in the very Saints who where to be
admired, as in Moses, there was found some thing wherein they have staggered
or might stagger; or for the abundance of the wicked, and the small number of
the good. And saint IEROM, speakinge Ieron. cont. Lucifer.
of the Luciferians; If they flatter themselves, (said he,) with this sentence
written in the Gospel; in your opinion when the Son of man comes, shall he
find faith upon the earth? let them know, that the faith there mentioned, is
that, whereof the same Lord said; Thy faith has saved thee: And agaiue of the
Centurion: I have not found so great faith in Israel. And a little after: it
is this faith, that our Lord has foretoulde shall be rarely found: it is this
faith that even in those that believe well, is hardly found perfect: Let it be
done to thee (said he) according to thy faith. I would not have that word
pronounced to me; for if it be done to me according to my faith, I shall
perish: and yet I believe in God the father; I believe in God the Son; and I
believe in God the holy Ghost.

To the second objection, which is, that saint AUGUSTINE interpretes
allegorically these other words of the Gospel: then the moon Matt. 24.
shall (...) more give her light; to be meant of the Church, which in time of
persecutions, whereof he speaks, shall not appear; we answer saint AVGVSTIN
means, that she should not appear in her carnal and weak members; but not
that she shall not appear in her strong and spiritual Champions; that she
shall not appear, or less appear, in her (...) part, in her straw, in her
dross; because that part will yield to persecutions; but not that she shall
not appear in her more excellent part, in her corn, in her gold; which
contrariwise will then shine more then before. This appears by what he writes
in his Epistle to (...) (...). 48.
(...): It is she (said he) that is sometimes obscured, and as it were
shadowed with (...), by the multitude of scandalls, that is to say
persecutions: when the Sinners (...) their bow, to wound it the obscurity of
the moon, the laws of their heart: but even then she is eminent in her most
firm champions. And a little after; It is not in vain that it was said of the
seed of Abraham, that is should be as the stars of heaven; and as the sand
upon the Seashore; that by the stars of heaven might be meant the faithful,
less in number, more steddie, and more clear; and by the sand which is on the
Seashore, the multitude of weak and carnal men, who sometimes in calm
weather appear free and quiet, and sometimes are covered and troubled with the
waves of tribulations and temptations. And therefore after he has said, she
shall not appear, he adds; for as much as many, which seemed to shine in
Epist. 80.
grace, shall yeilde to persecutions, and fall away; and some faithful
persons very firm, shall be troubled. And again; persecution shall so
precede, as that defection of some shall follow: that he might show that he
means not to say, that the Church shall not appear in her whole body;
(otherwise how could he (...). (...). l. 2. (...). (...). (...)
cry out in an other place: she has this most certain mark, that she cannot
be hidden) but that she shall not appear in some of those that had been her
parts. Which nevertheless in matter of application of allegories, where it is
permitted to bow the sense of the words, to accommodate it to the grace of the
application: and where interpretors content themselves, if the thing
signified, answer in any part to that signifiyinge; it suffices to make him
say. to the end to appropriate the (...) of the moon to the Church, that the
Church then shall not appear, that is; shall not appear in some of her parts.

The third objection follows, which is, that saint Paul writes, that the day
(...). (...). 2.
of the Lord shall not come, till the reuolte be first made, and till the man
of sin be revealed, and the son of perdition, who shall oppose and exalte
himself above all that is called God, or esteemed an object worthy of
whorship, even to sit in the temple of God, shewinge himself as if he where
God. Now I will not here stand to dispute, what saint Paul means, by this
reuolte or apostasy, to wit, whether he mean the reuolte of the people from
the Roman Empire, or the reuolte of (...) Christians from the Religion of
Christ to that of Mahomet; or the reuolte of the Jews, from under all the
temporal principalities, within whose estates they are dispersed, to reunite
themselves in a new monarchy under their pretended Messiah, that is to say;
under Antichrist. As little will I stand to examine, whether this temple of
God, wherein the son of perdition shall sit, be to be understood by the
material temple of Jerusalem, when Antichrist shall have caused it to be
reedified (as Saint IRENEVS cont. haeres. lib. 5. cap. 30. protestes in these
words: When Antichrist shall have laid desolate all things here in this
world, and shall have reigned three years and a half, and shall be set in the
temple at Jerusalem, then the Lord shall come from Heaven: And as it seems to
be gathered from the relation of the speech of Saint PAVLE to those words of
DANIEL spoken of the Jewish temple and cited by our Lord upon the speech of
the local temple of Jerusalem; the abomination Matthew. 24
of desolation shall be in the temple; from whence it is that ancient writers
Greg. (...) in (...). (...). (...).
note, that Julian the Apostata, one of the figures of Antichrist, would have
attempted to reedifie it;) Or whether it be to be understood by the Jewish
nation, whom God had first chosen for his living temple, in which (...). 2
Antichrist shall place his throne, followinge this prophecy of our Lord to
Ioann 15.
the Jews; I am come in the name of my father, and you have not received me;
if an other come in his own name, you will receive him. Or whether it be to be
understood of nations heretofore Christian, in who temples now turned into
mosqueas, now there Mahomet the forerunner of Antichrist sitts, and that one
day shall join with the Jews to receive Antichrist. It is suffici^et that
all the fathers are agreed upon two things; the one that Antichrist In (...).
(...). (...).
shall be the pretended Christ and Messiah of the Jews. Antichrist (says
Saint HILLARIE) shall be received by the Jews. And Saint CYRILL of Catech 15.
Jerusalem says: he shall deceive the Jews, as being the Christ expected by
them. And Saint IEROM, We know that Antichrist shall be the Christ of the
Jews. And S. In (...). (...). 16.
CHRYSOSTOM: Christ argues the imposture of the Jews, by the expectation of
Antichrist, in that they not received him that qualified himself, as sent from
God: In (...). hom. 44.
and him that shall not acknowledge God, but glorify himself to be the
sovereign God, they will adore. And Saint AUGUSTINE; Christ by these words, if
an In Ioann. tract 29.
other come in his own name, you will receive him; signifies, that the Jews
shall receive In (...). (...). 105.
Antichrist. And again: The Jews shall fall into his nett, of whom our Lord
has said; I am come in my fathers name, and you have not received me; an other
shall come in his own name, and you shall receive him; And of whom the Apostle
writes; that the man of sin and the Son of perdition shall be revealed, who
shall Cyrill. Alex. in Ioann l. 3.
oppose and exalte himself above all that shall be called God. And S. CYRILL
of Alexandria, speakinge to the Jews in the person of our Lord: you shall
receive (for as God, I know all things,) him that shall come under a self
Theod. in in ep. diu. decret. c. de Antich.
title. And THEODORET: The Jews which have crucified our Lord because he
called himself the Son of God, shall give creditt to Antichrist, that shall
call himself, h the great God. From whence it appears, that neither
Antichrist shall take the title of a Christian; nor his faction the title of a
Church; although they possess many peoples and nations, which have before
possessed the name of a Church: since all the Fathers agree, that he shall be
receined by the Jews. The other thing wherein the Fathers agree is, that this
apostacy shall bring noe interruption to the course and visible succession,
of the Catholic Church; that is to say: it shall not hinder, but that there
shall be always a Christian Society illustrious and eminent above all false
and pretended Churches, from In psalm. 70.
whose communion it shall be forbidden to depart; as Saint AUGUSTINE declares
in these words: If the Church should not be here till the end of the world:
why did Christ say, I am with you to the end of the world? And in an other
place, speakeinge of the very comeinge of Antichrist, whose reign he deemed
should be but three years and a half: Let none imagine, (says he) that that
little while that the Devil De ciuit. dei l. 20. c. 8.
shall be unbound, there shall be noe Church upon the earth. And shortly
after, disputinge whether, while that short space of time lasted, the devil
should be so unbound, as that he should hinder any from entringe into the
Church, either Children by baptism, or men by Conversion, but Ibidem.
said he: We should rather believe, that even then there will not want people,
both to go out of the Church, and to come into the Church; for certainly both
fathers will be so courageous as to give baptism to their children; and
those that then beginn first to believe, will be so constant, as they will
co^quer this strong one, even although he be vnbou^d. Whereby he shows
plainly, that he speaks not of a Church hidden and unknown, but of a Church
visible, and exposed to the eyes and knowledge of men.

The sowrth objection is, that the woeman, that had brought forth him, that
ought to rule the nations, fledd into the wilderness. And again, that two
wings of a Apoc. 12.
great Eagle, were given to the woeman to fly into the wilderness. For these
two retreates into the wilderness, are but one retreat, repeated by two
several descriptions; between the which is inserted the fall of the devil,
to show the the cause of the revenge, that he would have exercised upon the
woeman. From this retreat then they conclude, that the Church shall then be
invisible. But besides, that the same answers already propounded against the
arguments, which are drawn from the allegorical expositions of the
revelation, are also of force against this allegation; what shall hinder us
from interpretinge this passage with Saint AVGV. De (...). (...) (...). (...).
4.
of the blessed virgin, who brought forth him, that ought to rule the nations;
and who is described crowned with stars, because she was descended Genes. 37.
from the race of the twelve Patriarchs, who in Joseph's dream were sigured by
ste stars: and who is represented environed by the Sun; because according to
the translation of the seventy, (which is that the Apostles have followed) the
Psalmist sings; He has pitched his tabernacle Psalm. 18.
in the Sunn? And who shall hinder us from saying the wilderness, wither she
flew, was heaven, into which she was assumed after her death, which the
Grecians call wilderness; because it is exempt from all generation, wherefore
Pindarus calls the heaven a desert or wilderness, in these verses:

If thou of combats honor mean to singe,
Seek not, when day on the horizon stays,
A light more splendid then the Sunn, whose rays
From the ethereall desert, first do spring.
And that the rest of the seed of the woman were those, of whom our Lord said,
showing his disciples; See here my mother and my brethren? For Matt. 13.
though Saint John make mention of the pains of childbirth; nevertheless
those words may be understood to be spoken according to the ordinary custom
of the childbirth of women, as it is written, that the days Luc. 3.
of the purification of the childbirth of the virgin, were accomplished, and
that she Ibid.
presented our Lord in the temple to observe the law, that commanded that
every male that opens the womb shall be holy to the Lord. Now if the mention
of the pains of childbirth keep us from expoundinge this passage of the
virgin, and obliges us to transferr it to the Church; what shall hinder us
from interpretinge still the wilderness to be heaven? and from saying, that
the wilderness whither the woman fled, was heaven, into which the first of the
faithful persecuted and martyred fled every day by their death; and the
Church in their persons; from before the face of the serpent, and were
delivered from his Snares, persecutions, and temptations, followeinge this
exclamation of Saint JOHN; Blessed are those that dye for the Apoc. 14:
cause for the Lord, for they shall rest from thence forward from their
labors? Or, if we will not by the word Wilderness, understand heaven; who
shall hinder us from saying, that this woman was the Church? who haueinge been
once amongst the Jews, after she had brought forth Christ by the preachinge of
the Gospel; was persecuted by the Jews, that is to say, the people of the
Gentiles, which is often understood by the wilderness from whence In Psalm. 67
it is, that S. AVG. interpretinge these words of the Psalmist, When I passed
through the wilderness, the earth tre^bled, writes, the wilderness were the
nations, that (...) ignorant of God, the wilderness was there, where there was
noe law given from God, where noe Prophets had dwelt, which had foretold,
that the Lord should come. And who can hinder us, from Supposeinge, that the
relics of the seed of the woman were the Jews, who were conuerred to the
Christian Religion, and whose general reunion with the Church shall be made
before the end of the world? or who can forbidd us to interpret this
wilderness to be the exclusion from civil and politic charges, from which
the Church was so banished under the pagan Emperors, that the Christians were
not admitted to any part of the administration of the Common wealth? For our
adversaries will not have, that the number of three years and a half, to
which this flight is limited, should be taken according to the ordinary and
literal account. Or finally (if it permitted to the last comers, to hope to
find the divination of the passages of the Revelation in their conjectures,
as the cupp of prophecy in Beniamins Sack;) Who shall hinder us from
applyinge this allegory to the Conversion of the Countries newly discovered,
and to in terpret the wilderness to be the Indias, and the other hemispheare,
which had been so long time left waste and desert from the knowledge of the
true God? and from saying, that the two wings are the two navigations of the
East and west, by which the Church (that the devil under the ensigns of
Mahomet strives to drive from our hemispheare) is gone to visit those regions,
conformable to the style of the Grecians, which call the sails of ships
wings, and say winge a ship in steed of settinge to the sails? and who
shall hinder us from interpretinge the Eagle from whence these two wings
preceede, to be the western part of the Roman Empire, whereof these two
nauigations are parts? and from expoundinge the relickes of the woman to be
the Catholics, that remain under the tyranny of Mahomet? For to expound the
woman, to be the secret mumber of the predestinate: and the wilderness to be
inuisibilitie and obscurity, how can it agree with that, that our Lord Cries:
If they tell you here is Christ, behold him in the desert, Matthew. 24.
go not forth: behold him in the secret places, believe them not. And S.
AUGUSTINE De unit eules. ca. 20
after him: It is not an obscure question, and wherein they can deceive you. of
whom our Lord foretold, that they should come and say; see here is Christ,
behold he is there: see here he is in the wilderness, that is out of the
frequency of the multitude: And a while after, that is then the Church that is
not in any one part of the earth, but which is well known over all? And how
can it be, that, the woman being retired into the wilderness, that is to
say, the Society of the predestinate, being shadowed, hidden and obscured
from before the face of the Dragon, shall quit the pursuit of the woman, to
go make war with the relickes of the seed of the woman? for if the woman be
invisible, how can the relickes of the woman be visible? And if from that, that
is said, that the woman flied into the desert, it be permitted to conclude,
that the Church shall be invisible: wherefore shall we not by the same reason
conclude, that the Babylon of the Revelation shall be invisible? seeinge Saint
JOHN writes, And he carried me in the spirit into the desert, Apoc. 17.
and I saw the woman sit upon the beast? And this we say, not that we
pretend to warrant this interpretation more then the rest, but to show, how
weak foundation such allegorical allegations are, to build a revolt, and an
alteration of Religion upon, and to overthrow so many evident and literal
promises of perpetual being, visibilitie eminency, and purity, as God has
made to his Church.

Of the consequence of the places alleged by the fathers, for the authority
of the Catholic Church. CHAPT XVI.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
NOw to come nearer the point, the king denies that this exact collection of
places out of Saint AUGUSTINE, does in any sort touch him.

THE REPLY.
IN truth, if the most excellent King, can prove, that the Church, to which he
adheares, has been perpetually visible, and eminent above all other Christian
Societies; (as Saint AUGUSTINE puts this condition Cont (...). (...). (...) 4.
for one of the necessary marks of the Church, when he says: she has this
most certain mark, that she cannot be hidden, she is then known to all
nations: the sect of Donatus is unknown to many nation, then that cannot be
she:) And if he can show, that she has been not only perpetually visible and
eminent, but also perpetually pure from all contagion of Schism and heresy,
(as Saint AUGUSTINE protestes, that to be of the essence De (...) and Sym.
of the Catholic Church, when he writes, noe heretic belonges to the
Catholic Church, because she loves God; nor noe Schismaticke, because she
loves her neighbor. And again, The Church of the Saints, is the Catholic
Church; the Church of the Saints, is not the Church of the heretic; she was
predesigned, that she might be discerned, and has been exbibited, that she
might be seen. And if he can prove, that she never went forth from the
Communion of any other, but that all other went forth from her, and she
always remained in her root, visible, eminent, perpetual, immutable, and
exempt from all interruption, which is a mark which Saint AUGUSTINE testifies
to be inseparable (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
from the Church, when he writes: The Catholic Church, fightinge with all
heresies, may be opposed, but she cannot be overthrown; All heresies are come
out from her, as unprofitable branches out from the vine, but she remains in
her vine, in her root in her Charity. In truth I say, if the excellent king
can show Cont. Cor. (...).
these 3. things, I confess freely that this Collection of passages (that out
of the Catholic Church none can be saved; that whosoever is separate from the
Catholic Aug. cp. 152
Cburch, how laudable soever he presumes his life to be: for this only Crime,
that he is separated from the unity of Christ, he shall not have life, but the
wrath of God shall remain upon him; that he shall not have God for his Father,
that will not have Aug. (...) (...) (...). l. c.
the Church for his mother; and that it shall nothing avail him to have (...)
or done such and so many good works, without the end of the sovereign good;
that out of the Catholic Church all things may be had but salvation; that he
that Communicates (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
with the the general Church, is a Christian and a Catholic, and he that
communicates not therewith is an heretic and Antichriste; that it must be
(...) and undoubtedly held, that every heretic or Schismaticke baptized, in
the name of the father, the Son and the holy Ghost, if before the end of his
life he do not (...) himself to the Catholic Church, what almesdeedes
soever he do yea though he should (...) his blood for the name of Christ, can
in noe sort be saved,) makes not against his Majesty. But if contrarily the
excellent king cannot prove, that the Church, to which he adheres, has taken
the original of her visible Communion, continued, and not interrupted, from
above 60. or 80. years; and that between the time of the Fathers, from whom
that collection of passages has been extracted, and the time of Caluins
pretended reformation. there has never been any Church any communion, any
Society, any person, that has held jointly, universally those things, for
which England has divided herself from the visible Communion of that Church
wherein she was before; then I had need be instructed to apprehend how these
passages make not against his majesty.

Of the distinction of heretics, and Schis. matickes. CHAPT. XVI.
The continuance of the kings answer.
FOr from all these testimonies there follows only this consequently, that
there remains noe hope of salvation, for those, who are separated from the
faith of the Catholic Church, or from the Communion of the same Catholic
Church, which the king (as we have said before) grauntes himself.

THE REPLY.
THe Collection of the passages, that I have produced, do not put this
alternatiuely, that amongst those, that are separated, either from the faith of
the Catholic Church, or from her Communion; there is noe salvation. Otherwise
in a thing that the Fathers would should be clear and manifest, they had a
perpetual ambiguitie, to wit; what it were to be separated from the faith of
the Catholic Church. For there would remain always this question, whether
the points of separation were points of Faith; and the separation might be
made upon such a point, as the one side would say; it were a point of Faith,
and the other; that it were not: As the Pellagians disputinge against the
Catholics, said their difference was not in a point of Faith: And the
Catholics said the contrary; and as Sus. c. 10.
yet to this day the Zuinglians and the Caluinistes disputinge against the
Ibid.
Lutherans, their contestation is not about a point of faith, and the
Lutheranes say the contrary. But the Fathers absolutely set Down this
Maxim, that out of the Communion of the Catholic Church, there is no^e
salvation; reducinge all the certainly and evidence of this proposition, that
out of the Church there is noe salvation, to the separation of Communion. It is
true that the separation of Communion, may proceed from either of these two
causes, to wit; either from an error in faith, in which case those that
forsake the Church are called heretics: or from defect in Charity, in which
case they are called Scismaticks. But because those, that sin either in the
one or in the other, cannot be so easily convinced, either of the one, or of
the other, as of the separation of the Communion of this visible Church eminent
above all heretical and Schismatic sects, whom God would be exposed to the
view of all Nations and called Catholic; and to whom he has affected the
promises and prerogatives of the perpetual assistance of his holy Spirit; For
this cause, the Fathers and the Counsels of Africa, (Saint AVGVSEINE being
Conc.
(...). 4.
their Secretary,) have pronounced this sentence, (so often before
particularized (...) (...) (...) Aug. (...). 152.
by the penns of the precedinge authors,) that out of the Catholic Church
there is noe salvation; without making distinction between those that
separate (...) from the faith of the Church, and those that separate themselves
from her communion; for as much as all those, that separate themselves visiblie
from the faith of the Church, separate themselves also from her Communion. For
there are noe declared heretics, but they are withal Schismatickes also:
Only there is this difference, that heretics separate themselves from the
Faith and Communion of the Church both together; and the Schismatickes only
separate themselves from her communion: although there are few Schismatickes,
who to the separation of communion, add not the separation of some point of
faith. For as Sea-crabbs when they see oysters open, cast in little stones
within their shells, to keep them from shuttinge again, that they may have
time to deuowre them; so when Schismatickes see a breach made in the Church,
to hinder it from closeinge again, they cast points of heresy into their
Schism, and from Schismatics become accessorily (...) ad (...) (...) 3.
heretics. We esteem (said Saint IEROM) the difference between heresy and
Schism to be, that heresy holds a perverse doctrine, and Schism for Episcop
all dissension seperates men equally from the Church; which difference may
well have place a while in the beginning, but in tract of time, there is noe
Schism that does not forge to it-selfe some heresy, to seem to have the
iuster cause to separate it self from the Church. And therefore, when the
Emperors speak of the Donatists, who are those principally, (for whom his
Majesty added this clause,) or have separated themselves from her communion,
they tax them accessorilie of heresy. From thence, says the law, it is
happened, that from Schism heresy is bred (...).
Theod. l. (...). (...). 6. l. 4.
And when Saint AUGUSTINE disputes against them, he proves to the^, that they
are not only Schismatickes, but also heretics: Thou art (said he to
Gaudentius) both a Schismaticke by sacriligious dissension, and an heretic
Cont. (...) l. 3.
by sacriligious doctrine. But the principal difference that we observe is,
that all call those, that have begun with dissension in faith, and to whom
Schism has but the place of an accessory, heretics; and those that have
begun with schism, and to whom heresy is come accessorily after the
schism, (as the fever after the wound,) Schismatickes.

Of the agreement of the ancient Catholic Church, with the modern. CHAP.
XVIII.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
ANd here, most Illustrious Cardinal, his Majesty requires from you, that
you will represent to your self, how great Difference there is between Saint
AVGVSTINS time, and this of ours: how the sace, and all the exterior form of
the Church, (to say nothing of the interior,) is changed.

THE REPLY.
THis is the request, that I would myself most humbly make to his Majesty;
to wit, to set before his eyes the estate of the Catholic Church in the
time of Saint AUGUSTINE and of the four first Counsels: c. 10. and those
following.
A Church that believed a the true and real presence, and the orall
manducation of the Body of Christ in the Sacrament under the kinds and within
the Sacramental kinds, as Zuinglius the principal Patriarch of the
Sacramentaries acknowledges himself, in these words, (...). (...). 2. l. de
uer. and sals. relig cap. de Euch.
From the time of Saint AUGUSTINE (that is, 1200. years ago) the opinion of
corporal flesh had already gotten the masterie. A church that in this
quality (...). Cyrill. There. ca tech. mist. 5.
adored the Eucharist, not only with thought, and inward devotions, but with
outward gestures and adorations actually reallie and substantiallie, the true
and proper body of Christ. For I will not speak now of (...). in 1. (...).
hom. 24.
Transubstantiation, for which I reserve a treatise apart. A Church that
believed the body of Christ, to be in the Sacrament Cyrill. Alex. ep. ad
(...). Patric. and others see (...). l. 7 c. 9.
even besides the use; (...) in Psalm. 96. Theod. (...). 2. and other see here
after. l. 7. c 8.
and for this cause kept it after Consecration (...). (...). l. 2. Cyp. (...)
(...).
for domestical communions Eusebius. (...) l 7.
to give to sick persons; (...). de obit. (...).
to carry upon the Sea, (...). hist. eccl. l 5
to send into far provinces. A Church that believed See below l. 12. in the
chapter of the comunion under one kind.
that the communion under both kinds, was not necessary for the integrity of
participation, but that all the Body and all the blood was taken in either
kind: and for this cause See the places above alleged.
in domestical communions, in communions for Children, in communions for sick
persons in communions by Sea, in communions of penitentes at the hour of
Death, in communions sent into far provinces, they distributed it under one
kind. A Church that believed that the Eucharist was Cyp. (...) (...). ep. 63.
a true, full, and entire Sacrifice, Aug. de (...). l. 7. c. (...).
it alone succeedinge all the Sacrifice of the law; (...). c. 4. l. 32.
the new Oblation of the new Testament, Aug. co^t. Faust l. 20. c. 21.
the external worshipp of latria of the Christians, and not only an
Eucharistiall Sacrifice, but also a Eusebius. de vit Co^. l. 4. Cyrill. (...)
(...) and other under. l. 8.
Sacrifice propitiatory, by application of that of the Cross; and in this
quality offered it, as well for the absent as for the present, as well for the
communicantes, as for the non-communicantes; as well for the living Chrysostom. in
1. Cor. ho^. 41.
as for the dead. A Church that for the oblation of this sacrifice used Altars
both of wood and Greg. Nyss. de baptis.
stone, Aug. vbi sup.
erected and Dedicated to God in memory of the martyrs; and consecrated them by
certain forms of words and ceremonies, and amongst others by the in
shriuinge their relickes. A church wherein the faithful made voyages and
pilgrimages, Basil. in 40. martyr.
to the bodies of the said Martirs, to be Aug. supra.
associated to their merits, and helped by their intercessions: prayed the
holy martyrs Ambr. de vid. Greg. (...) in Cyp. and other under l. 10.
to pray to God for them; Aug. psalm. 63. and 88.
celebrated their Feasts, Ier. ad Marcell. ep. 17.
reverenced their relickes, Idem. cont Vigil.
made use of them to exorcise evil spirits, (...).
kissed them, Aug. de ciuit. l. 22. c. 8.
caused them to be touched with flowers, Ier. cont. Vigil.
carried them in clothes of silk and in vessels of gold, Ruff. de hist. Eccl.
l. 2. c. 33. Chrysostom. 2 Cor. hom. 26
prostrated themselves before their shrines, (...). cont. Vigil.
offered sacrifices to God upon their tombs, Ruff hist Eccl. 2. c. 33. Chrysostom.
2. Cor. hom. 26.
touched the grates of the places where their relickes were kept, Hier. con.
Vigil.
took and esteemed the dust from under their relickaryes, and went to pray to
the martires, not only for spiritual health, Aug. (...) (...).
but for the health and temporal prosperity of their families, (...). (...).
in Theod.
carried their Children, yea their sick cattle to be healed. And when they
had received some help from God by the intercession of the said martyrs,
Theod. de Graec. aff. l. 8. Paul. Nol. in Foel. not. 6. Theod. super.
hunge up in the temples, and upon the Altars erected to their memory, for
tribute and memorial of the obtayninge of their vow, images of gold and
silver of those parts of their body, that had been healed: And, when the
godly and learned Bishops of the ancient time report these things, they
celebrate and exalt them, v. Basil. de S. (...). and others vndet lib. 6.
as so many beams, flashes, and triumphs of the glory of Christ. A Church
which held (...). de S (...). and others under (...). 6.
the apostolical traditions not written, but co^signed viua voce, and by the
visible, and ocular practice of the Apostles to their successors, to be equal
to the Apostolical writings: and held for apostolical tradions all the self
same things that we acknowledge and embrace in the quality of apostolical
traditions. A Church that offered prayers both private and public (...). de
Mon. Aug. de verb. Apost and others under l. 9.
for the Dead, to the end to game ease and rest for them, and to obtain that
God would use them more mercifully, then their sins deserved; and held this
custom for a thing Aug de (...)
necessary for the refreshinge of their souls, Chrysostom. (...) hom. 3
and for a doctrine of apostolical tradition, and placed (...). her (...).
(...) (...). 53
those, that observed it not, in the Cataloge of heretics. A Church that held
the fast of the 40. days of Lent for a Custom (...). ad Marcel. (...). 54
not free and voluntary, but necessary, and of Apostolical tradition, (...).
in compend. and in Anaceph.
and reckoned amongst heretics those that observed it not, and duringe the
time of Lent, as in a general mourninge of Christians Conc. l. cod. c. 52.
forbadd the Celebration of weddinges, and the solemnisations of marriages. A
Church that out of Pentecost held the fast of all the Fridaies in the years,
in memory, of the Death of Christ, except Christmasse day fell upon one, Epiph
in compend.
which she excepted namely as an apostolical tradition. For I speak not of
wednesdaies supplied in the west by satturdaies. A Church that held the (...)
(...). (...) (...) de demon. (...). l. (...) c 9 (...) (...) 2. (...) Epiph.
(...) (...). 59. and others.
interdiction made to Bishops, Priests, and Deacons to marry after their
promotion, for a thing necessary, and of apostolical tradition. A Church that
held Epiph. cont. Apostol (...). 61.
marriage after the vow of virginity a sin, and that by apostolical
tradition, Chrysostom. ad Theod or 2. Ambr ad (...) (...) (...). cont. (...). 1
and reputed religious men and religious weemen that married after the solemn
vow of single life, not only for adulterers, but for incestuous persons. A
Church that held the l minglinge of water with wine in the Sacrifice of the
Eucharist for a thing necessary, and of divine and Apostolical tradition. A
Church that held the Aug de (...) (...). c. 40
exorcismes exsufflations and renunciations, which are made in baptism, for
sacred Ceremonies, and of Apostolical tradition. A Church that besides
baptism and the Eucharist, which were the two initiatinge-Sacramentes of
Christian Religion, held Aug. co^t. (...). l. 3. c 4.
Confirmation made with the Chrisme and the sign of the Cross, (...) (...).
(...).
and allowed only to Bishops the power to conferr it, Aug (...) (...). and
(...) (...).
Marriage for a true and proper Sacrament, Amb de (...). 7. Aug. de (...) l.
(...) (...)
Penance for a true and proper Sacrament, (...). (...) and others. (...)
below. (...)
and vocal Confession to the Pastors of the Church, for one of the Conditions
(...). (...) (...). 63. (...) (...) (...). 24.
necessary to this Sacrament, Aug. (...). (...) l. 2 (...). (...) (...) Decent
(...) 8
Order for a true and proper Sacrament: and Extreme Onction for a true and
proper Sacrament; which are the seven Sacraments that the Roman Church
acknowledges, and Censur. Orient Eccl. c. 7.
the Greek Communion also makes profession to embrace with us. A Church which
in the Ceremonies of baptism, used Cyp. ep. 70.
oil, Co^c. Carth. 3. c. 5.
salt, Greg. Naz. de bapt.
wax, lights, Aug. cp. 101
exorcismes, Aug con. Iul l 6. c. 8.
the sign of the Crose, Amb de Sacr l. 1
the word Epheta and other things that accompany it; to testify by oil,
that in baptism we are made Christians, that is, partakers of the unction of
Christ; by salt, that God contracted with us in baptism an alliance for ever,
followinge the style of the Scripture, which calls eternal alliances,
alliances of salt; by the light, that Christ is the light, that enlightens all
men commeinge into the world; Aug. cp. 205.
by exorcismes, that baptism puts us out of the Devils possession; Aug. in
Ioa^n tract. 1 8
by the sign of the Cross, that it is the Death of Christ that gives strength
to all Sacraments; Amb. de Sacr. l. 1.
by the word Epheta, that God accomplisheth spiritually in us by baptism, what
he wrought corporally in the deaf and dumb man. A Church that esteemed
baptism for persons of full age necessary, with a conditional necessity;
Aug. de an. and eius orig. l. 3. c. 15.
and for children necessary with an absolute necessity: and for this cause
permitted Tert. de bapt.
lay men to baptize in danger of death. A Church that used holy water,
consecrated by certain words and ceremonies, and made use of it Basil. de S.
Sp c 27.
both for baptism, Epiph. haer. 30
and against enchantments, Theod. hist eccl l. 5. c. 23.
and to make exorcismes and coniurations against evil spirits. From whence it
is that Theod. hist eccl l 9. ep. 71.
S. Gregory the great, (who, though he were after the first four Counsels,
yet not to be excepted against by English men, who took the original of their
mission from him.) ordained when Englad returned back from paganism to
Christian Religion, that the temples should not be demolished, but expiated by
the sprinkling of holy water. A Church, that in the economy of Ecclesiastical
ministry held diverse degrees, Co^c. I ao c 24. Co^c. Carth. 4. c. 2. C. l.
tit. 3. l. 6. Hier. ep. ad Tit. l. 3.
the Bishop, the Priest, the Deaco^, the Acolite, the Exorcist, the Reader, and
the Porter, and consecrated and blessed them with diverse forms and ceremonies;
And in the order Episcopal acknowledged diverse seats of iurisdicti^o of
positive right, to wit, Archbishops, Primates, Patriarckes, Hier. ad Damas.
ep. 77. Aug de duab. ep. Pel. l. 1 c. 1. Co^c. Chalc ep. ad Leo^.
and one supereminent by divine law, which was the Pope, without whom nothing
could be decided appertayning to the universal Church; and the want of whose
presence, either by himself or by his legates, t Socr. hist. eccl. l. 2. c. 10.
Soz l. 3 c. 10
or his confirmation, made all Counsels pretended to be universal, unlawful.
A Church which held a Cyp ad Magn. ep. 76. Chryso. ad Epiph. ho. 11.
succession of Bishops not interrupted since the first mission of the Apostles,
for an essential condition of her; and reputed those, who had it not, or that
communicated with those that had it not for Schismatiks, and cul pable of the
same Curse, with Core, Dathan, and (...). A Church that held the distinction of
Bishop and Priest, and namely in the act of ordinatio^, for a thing of divine
law. Hier. ad Euag. ep 85. in fine.
and Apostolical tradition; Epiph. haere. 75. Aug. de haer c. 53.
and condemned as heretics those, that held it not, A Church Aug de great. and
lib. arb. c. 2. and ep 46.
that held free will, for a doctrine of faith, and revealed in the holy
scripture; Aug. de great. and lib. arb. c. 8 and l. 83 quaest. q 76.
that held that faith only without Eua^gelicall works, is not sufficient for
salvation; Prosp. ad artic. sibi impos.
that wicked men perseuering to the end, were reprobates, but not predestinate
to evil; Aug. de cor. and great. c. 13.
that the certainty that particular men presumed to have of their
predestination, was a rash bouldnes. A Church wherein their service was said
throughout the East, in Greek, and through the west, as well in Africa as in
Europe, Under in cap. of the service in the (...).
in Latin; although that in none of the provinces neither of Europe nor Africa
(except in Italy, and in the cities where the Roman colonyes resided) the
latin, were understood by the simple people, but only by the learned. In
brief a Church that used either in gender, or in species, either inform or in
analogy, the very same ceremonies, which are the words well known the all
men, which the Catholic uses universally at this (...); Aug ep. 118. Idem
psalm. 63 and 88.
observed the distincti^o of the Feasts and ordinary days; the distinction
Co^c. I. 20. c 22 and 23. (...) ad Helio. ep 3. Theod. hist ecc. l. 2. c 27
of Ecclesiastical and lay habits; Hie (...) in ep. Theo Optat. l 1.
the reverence of sacred vessels; the custom Theod. hist l. 5. cap 8. Isid.
de diu. off. l 2 c. 4.
of shauing Greg Naz. de pac. or. 1.
and unction for the collation of orders, the ceremony of Cyrill Hier. cat.
myrt. 5.
washing their hands at the Altar before the consecration of the mysteries;
Conc. Laod c. 19.
the kiss of peace before the (...), Conc Laod ibid.
pronounced a part of the service at the Altar with a lovv voice, and vvheard:
Aug. de ciuit. l. 22 c. 8.
made processions with the relickes of the martyrs, accompained the dead to
their (...) with Gregor Naz. in Iul. orat 2.
wax tapers in sign of joy and future certainty of their resurrection, had
the pictures of Christ and his Saints both Eusebius de vit cont. l 3.
out of Churches and Paulin. ep. 12. Basil. in martyr. Barlaam. Greg. Niss in
S. Theod
in Churches, and Prudent. in S. Cassian
upon the very altars of martyrs, not to adore them, as adoration signifies di
nine worship, but to reverence by them the soldiers and champions of Christ:
Tert de cor. milit.
used the sign of the cross in all their conuersations, Aug. de symb. ad
catec l. 2.
imprinted it on the forehead of their catechumenists, Cyril. cont Iul. l. 6.
painted it on the portall of all the houses of the faithful, Hier. in vit.
Hill.
gave the blessing to the people with their hand by the sign of the Cross,
(...). (...) (...).
employed it to drive away evil spirits, (...) p. 11.
proposed in Jerusalem the very Cross to be adored on good friday, (...). in
(...) (...) (...)
used incense in their Synaxes, not particularly ince^se of Arabia, but
indifferently odoriferous gummes; for they held not incense for sacrifice as in
the time of the law, but for a simple ceremony designed to represent the
effect of prayers described by these words of David; Let my prayer arise, even
as incense, into thy presence: And (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
by these of the Revelation; The smoke of the incense of the prayers of the
Saints, ascended from the hand of the Angel before God. And finally a Church
which held, that the Catholic Church had the infallible promise, that she
should be (...). c (...).
perpetually visible and eminent in her communion, perpetually pure and
uncorrupted in her doctrine, and in her Sacraments, and perpetually bound and
continued in the succession of her ministry, and that (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) 4. (...) (...). and (...) (...) (...) (...) l. 6.
to her only belonges the keeping of the Apostolical traditions, the
authority of the interpretation of scripture, and the decision of controversies
of Faith; and that out of the succession (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) 4.
c. 1. (...) (...) (...). (...) (...) l. 4 and others (...) c. 2 (...) 16.
of her Communion, (...) (...) (...) (...) Aug. psalm. (...) Idem (...) (...)
(...) c. 8. Idem (...) (...). l. 1. c. 38
of her doctrine, Cypr. ad (...) (...). 69 and (...) (...) cp. 76. (...) ad
Epiph (...) (...). (...). (...) (...). c 3. and others under c. 37.
and of her ministry, there was neither Church nor salvation. Behold, what
the excellent King, when it shall please him to consider it at sufficient
leisure, shall find the Catholic Church to have been in the time of saint
AVG. and of the 4, first Councelles. Let his Majesty see, whether by these
features he can know, the face of Caluines Church, or of ours.

Of the conformity or inconformitie of the sense wherein the word Catholic
has been common to the ancient Catholic Church, and to the modern. CHAP.
XIX.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
IN how differing sense the Church is now called Catholic from what it was
then.

THE REPLY.
I have drawn out this clause, from between the two that precede it, because
I would frame an answer by itself: for as much as I believed the intention of
the excellent King was, (as it is of other protestants) to say, that the
Church bears the name, of Catholic now, in an other sense, then she bare it
in S. AVST. time; because then she possessed all nations, and now she possesses
them not.

To this then I answer, that S. AVG. never pretended, that the Catholic
Church in his time did absolutely possess all nations, but only by (...),
that is to say, by application of the name of all, to the greater part; and in
comparison of other Christian sects and societies, in regard of which the
Catholic Church was so large, as it was called for eminency; the Church of
all the nations. Contrariwise where the Donatistes set this error on soote,
that the Church hadceased, and was perished; the principal In psalm. 101
reason that S. AUGUST. opposed to them, was, that she was not yet spread over
all the nations, and that she must last without interruptio^, from the first
preaching in Jerusalem, till the Gospel had been preached throughout the
earth, and then should be the end of the world. So as it were to give the lie,
to all the promises and prophesies of God, to suppose she were perished; since
there were yet many nations, to which she had not yet extended herself. And
therefore the Church bore the title of Catholic then, in noe other sense,
then she does now: For so far was she from being called Catholic from the
atiuall possession of all Nations; that not only heresies, whose numbers were
very great were excluded; but there were likewise an infinite Company of pagan
Nations, to which she was not yet arrived. There are (says Saint AUGUSTINE
amongst us, that is in Africa, innumerable Ep. 80.
barbarous nations, to whom the Gospel has not yet been preached. Which was
so confessed amongst the Catholics and Donatistes, as the Donatistes made
use of it against the Catholic Church, to question her Catholic title. If
you pretend (says Petilian the Donatist) that you hold the Catholic Aug
cont. (...). l. (...) (...)
Church behold you are not inpossession of all, for you are past into a part,
And Saint AUGUSTINE confuting the words of Cresconius, Thou arguest vainly
(says he) against the evident truth, that all the world communicates Co^t
(...). l 3. c. 63
not with us, because there are yet many barbarous nations, which have not
(...) iued in Christ. And again: how is the world (say thou) full of your
communion, Ibid. ca. 66
where there are so many heresies, whereof there is noe one that communicates
with Aug. cp. 48
you? And again, reporting these words of Vincentius: Thou say, that as for
the parts of the earth, that wherein the Christian faith is named, is but a
little portion in comparison of the world. And the Catholics on the other
side, made use of it against the Donatistes, to prove that the Church had never
In psalm. 101.
received interruption; But that Church (said the donatistes) is noe more, she
is perished; so say they (said Saint AVG:) that are not in her; o impudent
voice, etc. This abominable and detestable voice full of presu^ption and
falsehood, which is under propt with noe truth, illuminated with noe wisdom,
seasoned with noe salt, vain, rash, headie, pernicious, the spirit of God
has foreseen it. And a little after; this Gospel shall be preached: where?
In all the world: to whom? in testimome to all nations: and what after? and
then the end shall come. See thou not, that there are still nations to whom
the Gospel has not been preached? etc. and so how is it that thou say
that the Church is already perished from all nations, since it is therefore
that the Gospel is preached, to wit; that it might be in all nations? The
Church the^ in S. AVS. time was not called Catholic for her actual extent
into all nations; but she was called Catholic for two other causes; the one,
that as more abundant; and the other, that as radical and original Church,
she held the place of all, in regard of other Christian Societies. For in all
the diuisio^s which were made from the first beginning of the Christian name,
not only she remained so full in regard of every sect, that came out from
her, that she held the place of the whole, and the separated sect the place of
a part; but also in the act of separation, she still remained immovable; I
mean to say, that the change for which the separation happened, was made not
in her, but in the heretical sect; So as it was the heretical sect that was
separated from her, and not she from the heretical sect: And by co^seque^ce to
her, as perseuering in the same profession, and in the same Estate (wherein the
whole Church was before the seperatio^) apertained the right, to hold the
place of the whole, and to inherit the being, and advantages of the whole; And
to the other, to be reduced into the condition of a part, and to be cut of,
and (...) from the appellation and (...) of the whole: noe more nor less, then
in the deuisio^ of a tree, that part, wherein the trunk, the stock, and the
root remain, keeps the name of the whole, and the part which is cut of,
the name of a branche, and of a part separated from Co^t. Tra^st. l. 13. c. 12.
the whole. They understand not (says S. AVST:) speakeing generally of
heretics) that there is one certain, true, and wholesome, and as I may say,
germinall and radical society, from whence they are separated, and in an
other place; Whosoever is separated from the whole, and defe^ds a part cut off
from the mass, or body it self, let De Sym. ad. cat. l. 1. c. 5.
him not usurp the name of Catholic: And again: The Catholic Church
fighting with all heresies, may be opposed, but she cannot be overthrown: All
heresies are come forth from her, as unprofitable branches cut off from their
vine; but she remains in her vine, in her root, in her charity, and the
gates of hell shall not conquer Opt. con. Parm. l. 1.
her. And as OPTATVS Mileuit before him; We must consider who stays in the
root with the whole world, and who is gone forth. For these causes the^, and
also that the Catholic Church was so eminent, both for perpetuity and
extent above all others, as it was easy to judge, that it was to her only,
and to noe other that the promise had been made, that in her seed all nations
should be blessed; and that in her should be denounced the remission of sins
through all nations, beginning from Jerusalem for these causes I say S. AVG.
affirmed that to her only belonged the title of Catholic. (...) (...) l 3.
c. 65.
Thou (...) (says he against Crescomius the Donatist) the rest of the nations
that the Church has not yet possessed; and take noe heed, how many she
has (...), from whence she daily spreades to finish the possession of the
rest. For how do not thou deny the future perfection of these prophecies,
thou that fear not to deny so great in (...), to which the perfection is
due? And in an other place; (...) (...). (...). 7.
Although there are many kinds of heresies amongst Christians and that all
would (...) to be Catholics, and call the rest except themselue., heretics;
there is (...) (...) Church if you cast your eyes over the whole world) more
abundant in multitude and, (as those that know themselves to be of it
affirm,) more sincere in truth, then all the rest; but of the truth, that is
an other question That which suffices for this dispute is, that there is one
Catholic Church, to which different heresies impose different names; they
being nevertheless all called by their particular (...) that they dare not
disauowe; from whence it appears in the judgment of arbiters not possessed
with favor, to whom the name of Catholic, (whereof they are all ambitious)
ought to be attributed. By which words S. AVG. elegantly declares, that the
Church was not called Catholic because she was actually, and at one self
same time over all Nations; but for this cause amongst, others, that in
multitude of people and in extent of nations, she exceeded each one of other
Christian societies.

Of the comparison of the Church with the City builte upon a Mountain. CHAP.
XX.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
FOr heretofore the Catholic Church (like the City built upon a Mountain,
which could not (...) (...)) was not way subject to be called in question, but
was evident and certain to all, in such (...) (...) noe body of an
vndistracted spirit, could doubt of it.

THE REPLY.
IT seems that the excellent King holds this word (that cannot be hidden) to
have reference only to the City built upon a Mountain, and will not have it
belong to the Church but by accident that is; when she rese^bles the (...)
builte upon a Mountain: That is to say, it seems that his Majesty
understands not, that this condition, to be like a city built upon a
Mountain, and by consequent not to be hidden, belongs perpetually to the
Church: but will have it, that the Church sometimes enioyes this condition, as
when Saint AUGUSTINE writ; and sometimes is deprived of it, as afterward.
Neuertelesse Saint AUGUSTINE who is the Cont. Pet. (...) 104. D (...) (...). 14.
best interpreter that can be of his own words, says that the Church has
this most certain mark, that she cannot be hidd. And again that of her it is
said: The city built upon the Mountain, cannot be hidd. From whence it
appears, that this Epithete of being vnconcealeable, belongs not by accide^t
to the Church when she shall be found like the city built upon a hill; but
appartaines to her properly, directly and perpetually. For where his Majesty
adds, that the Church was then so manifest, as noe man in his right wits
could doubt of her; that was true; and so is she still at this day in regard
of all those, that agree upon the true marks of the Church; that is to say,
in regard of those, that, according to Gods promises, design the Catholic
Church by the perpetuity of her continuance; and by the eminency of multitude
and extent over nations above all other Christian Sects. But to all heretics
and schismatickes, who rejected those marks, and would receive noe sign for a
note of the Church, but only purity of manners, or trial of doctrine, of
which they attributed to themselves the judgment, by interpretation of
Scripture made according to their sense; the Church was not only doubtful,
but altogether hidden. It is (says S. AVG. (a condition common to all
heretics, Co^t. Parm. l. 2. c. 3.
not to see that thing which is in the world the most apparent, ant built in
the light of all nations: out of whose unity all that they do, though they
seem to do it with great care, cannoe more warrant them from the wrath of
God, then the spiders webbs against the extremity of cold.

Of the conformity or inconformitie of the Donatists and Protestants in the
question of the Church. CHAPT XXI.
The continuance of the kings answer.
FOR she was not shutt up in any corner of the world, liyng I know not
where, in the South, as the foolish Donatistes affirmed, but she was spread
in leught and breadth, over all the space of the Earth.

THE REPLY.
THE Donatistes held not, that their Church was enclosed by right, and for
ever into Africa; but only in fact and for a certain time; noe more then the
Caluinistes, who have pretended, that the true visible Church had been reduced
for many ages into the Province of Albigeois, and other bounds, and afterward
in some valleys of Dolphiny. And yet the Donatistes did not make this
confession with their good will, but in their own defense by constraint:
Contrariwise they attempted with all their power, to show, that their Church
was not restrained only into Africa. For this cause they kept a Bishop at
Rome, whom they had sent to Optat. l. 2.
a few African Donatistes that dwelt there; They had plented a pretended
Church in Spanie, in the territory of a Lady called Lucilla that favored
August. de unit. Eccl. c. 3
them; They had made the false Acts of the mock Council of the Arrians holden
at Philipopolis near Sardica to pass current insteede of the true Council of
Sardica; because in the letters of those Bishops, amongst the Idem ep. 163.
names of the Bishops, to whom they were addressed, their was the name of
Donatus the false Bishop of Carthage, one of the Bishops of the Donatistes
party; thereby to make it credible, that the Council of Sardica had
communicated with them; yea when they entered into conference with the
Catholics, they grew to be so impudent, (but that it was confounded at the
instant,) as to maintain that their communion was spread over all the earth.
Here first (says Saint AUGUSTINE speaking Aug. ep. 163.
of the conference that he had with Fortunius the Donatist) did he attemps to
(...), that his Communion was over the extent of the earth: I asked him there
(...), whether he could address co^municatorie letters, which we call formal,
whither I (...) appoint; and I affirmed, (as it was manifest to all,) that by
this means the (...) might be easily determined, etc. but because the thing
was evidently false, (...) out of this discourse by confusion of (...). And
finally, when they (...) (...) from the visible (...) of the Church, they had
recourse to the (...) universality, and said they communicated inuisibly with
all (...) (...) and hidden members of Christ, which were spread over all the
world; for it is against them, that saint AVG. disputes, when he writes; It
(...) (...) 16.
(...), (...) (...) (...) (...), that God has other sheep which I know not,
but God (...) care of them: he is too absurd in humane sense, that imagins
such things. By (...) whereof their cause, who have separated themselves from
us in (...) (...) ages, can be noe way distinguished in the point of the
Church, from that of the: Donatistes.

Of the extent of the ancient Catholic Church, and the modern. CHAP. XXII.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
Flourishinge under the Emperors, whose dominion was extended from the East
to the West, and (...) the North to the South.

THE REPLY.
THE Church was spread much beyond the bounds of the Roman Empire, for it was
extended in Africa, besides the Roman provinces, under many barbarous Kings;
to the (...) of Arabia under Mauuia Queen of the (...): in Persia under the
King of Persia: in Gothland, (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
under the Kings of the Goths, where she was cruelly (...) in saint AUGUST.
(...); and the unity of the Empire was not always an (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...)
on to make her more flourishinge and distinct; but oftentimes caused her to be
the more oppressed. For under the Emperors, that were (...), (...) as was
Julian, all kind of heresies took heart to assail her; and under the
heretical Emperors, that heresy, which they professed, (...) to (...) her, as
Arrianisme under Constantius, whose Sectaries did (...) (...), as the
Catholic Church was reduced into narrower (...), then she was when the
separation of these last ages began: And to (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
prove that it was so, Socrates and Sozomenus do note, that the Catholic
prosession remained almost shutt up within the bounds of the Patriarckshipp of
the Latin Church; and on this side the mountain of Tusc is (...) (...) and
Illyria; the greater part of the Bishops of the Eastern Empire being either
Arrians, or banished from their Seats. In such sort as the Catholic
Communion was then far from beeinge so (...), as she was when the last
divisions were raised. For besides that at (...) comeinge, all the Regio^s of
Europe, except some parts of Greece, (...) (...) in the Catholic communion;
and that in Asia, not only since the expulsion of the Successors of Godfry
king of Palestina, and of Boemond prince of Antioch, the guarde of the holy
Sepulcher of Jerusalem, did always remain to the Latins; and that yet to
this day the Patriark of the Maronites, which is one of the branches of the
division of the Patriarkeshipp of Antioch, with all the Bishops of his
jurisdiction, has always lived and perseuered to live in the Communion of the
Latin Church; and that in Armenia the greater, under the King of Persia,
before he was driven thence by the Turks, there were, and yet are many
Christians of that communion, which is Called the Latin, and many Monasteries
of Saint Dominicke; And that in the Isles of Cypres, Candia, Zante, Chios,
Naxos, And other grecian and Asian Islandes the Roman communion had place, and
has yet at this day for the most part: and that in Africa the Kingdom of
Congo, whose Ambassador came, and dyed a few years agone in Rome, made
profession of the Catholic Religion from before Luthers, time Besides that, I
say, the Christians, that inhabited in all the borders of Africa, under the
conquest of the king of Portugale; and in those of Asia at ^rmus, at Calicut,
at Goa, at Cochin, and in all the east Indias; and those which live at this day
under the king of Spain, in whose Estate all is reunited, in the Acores, in
the fortunate Islandes, in the Islandes of Hispaniola and Cuba, in the
Continent of America, in the, Phillippinas, in the Molucas, and in other
places; suffice to supply the fall of the Roman Communion in the East.
Together with this, that all that the ancient Emperors possessed, was not
peopled only with the Catholic communion: but there were infinite other
Sects, which although, every one taken aparte none of them did equal her;
nevertheless all joined together, would have surmounted her, witness the
Donatistes words above recited by Saint Con. Cresc l. 3 c. 66.
AUGUSTINE how can you say that the whole world is replenished with your
communion, wherein there are so many heresies, whereof noe one communicates
with you? So as it may be seen, that the Church in Saint AVGVSTINS time, for
being under the Roman Emperors, was noe more distinct, nor easier to be
discerned from heretical Sects, by external notes, then she was when the
last divisions were formed; but contrariwise much less, principally in the
west; for as much as the watch fullnes of the western princes in publishinge
te^porall laws against heretics, has caused the Catholic Church to
remain alonge time alone in Europe without the concurrence of any other Sect;
whereas before, there was scarce any city, that was not infected with diverse
kinds of heresies, and of which Cont.
we might not say with Saint PACIAN; Entringe in these days into a populous
Sympr. (...) 1.
city, and findinge there Marcionites, Valentinians, Appllecians, and other
such like plagues, which call themselue Christians, how should J know the
Society of my people, if she were not entitled Catholic?

Of the communion that the Bishops of the East had by letters with those of the
west. CHAPT. XXIII.
The continuance of the kings answer.
THen there might be seen the Bishops of the East and the West communicatinge
by their letters, and by their Messengers every day, and when need
required, lendinge help, the one to the others.

THE REPLY.
IT is true; but of those letters the principal were the consultations of the
Synodes with the Popes, and the answers of the Popes to the Synodes: (...)
(...). ep. 11.
whereof Saint IEROM speaks, when he says, that he had served Pope (...) for
a Secretary to answer the Synodicall consultations of the East and the West:
And whereof Pope INNOCENT writes to Saint AVGVSTIN, (...). (...). Aug (...). 93.
and to the other Bishops of the Mileuitan Council; Through all the provinces,
there run alwais the answers from the Apostolical spring, to those that
(...) (...). 106.
them. And Saint AUGUSTINE himself in his Epistle to SIXTVS Of this there was
also sent the relation of the two Counsels of Carthage and Mileuis to the
Apostolical Sea. And in the Epistle to OPTATVS We have bad care (...). 157.
to convey to you the letters which have been sent from the Apostolical Sea
upon this subject, either especially to the Africans, or universally to all
the Bishops, for fear least (...) they be not yet come to your Holiness. And
Pope JULIUS recited Athan. Apol. 2.
by Saint ATHANASIVS; Are you ignorant (said he to the Arrians) that the
custom is first to write to us, and so from hence may proceed the just
decision of things?

Of these words of the constitutions of Saint Clemen the universal Episcopat
is Committed to Bishops. CHAP. XXIII.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
FOR that, that is read in the Constitntions of (...), that the universal
(...) is committed to Bishops: and by consequence that they are all in some
sort (...), now amazed we read it, and believe it not.

THE REPLY.
NEither is the book, that bears the title of Cleme^ts Constitutions of such
creditt, as it can have aucthority to decide in matters of Religion. For be it,
that it was from the beginning supposed under Clements name or that it were
since altered and falsified by heretics; it is certain, that (...). (...)
(...). (...).
the authority, thereof is suspected. Saint EPIPHANIVS makes mention of a book
so entitled, and says, that many called it in question, yet as for him
(...). (...). (...). 2
(...) rejected it not; The Council of Constantinople surnamed (...), held
long after, condemned it: And Photius the Patriarch of Constantinople yet
(...). in (...) c. 113.
later, says, It can hardly be justified from Arrianisme; which makes it to be
(...) that it is not the same writing, which bore that name in Saint
Epiphanius (...); or that it has since been salsified by the Arrians. Neither
does that book (...), either expressly, or equiualently; that all Bishops are
in a sort oecumenicall. (...). (...). l. (...) c 14.
He says no more, but this, speakeinge collectiuely to all Bishops, and not
distributiuely to every Bishop; We write these things, for confirmation (...)
(...). (...). (...). l. (...).
(...) (...); of you to whom the episcopat is committed over all. But if the
had said it, what could follow of that? does not Saint AUGUSTINE say, that the
(...) all charge is common to all Bishops? and for all that, does he forbear
to protest in the same place, that the Pope is supereminent in a more high
(...): As (...) (says he) cease not to rore about the pastures of our Lords
(...), and to seek every side for in-letts to snatch away the sheep bought
at so high a (...), and that to us all which exercise the office of Bishops,
the pastor all charge is common, although thou art (...) in a higher degree:
And in an other place, that Epist. 162
in the Roman Church there has always flourisht the (...) of the Apostolical
chair.

Of the comparison of the Pope with other Bishops. CHAPT. XXV.
The continuance of the kings answer.
But then the ordinary (...) showed, that it was very true, and a thousand
examples of history may yet easily demonstrate it.

THE REPLY.
ANd wherefore then, (that we may begin this information in the Ad hanc enim
(...) propter (...) (...) (...) est (...) (...) (...) (...) cont. Val. l. 3. c.
3.
age of Saint (...), which was the first age after that of the Apostle:, and
end it in that of Saint (...) the great, whom Calvin will have to be the (...)
true and lawful Bishop of Rome;) when Saint IRENEVS disputes against the
Valentinians, does he cry: with the Roman Church, because of a more powerful
principality; (that is because of the principality of the apostolical Sea)
it is necessary that (...) (...) should agree? for that by this more powerful
principality Saint IRENEVS meant not the (...) principality of the City of
Rome, but an other more powerful principality, to (...); the Spiritual
principality of the Apostolical Sea; we have (...) both from the same Saint
IRENEVS, who in the (...) (...) period called the Roman Church, the greatest
and (...) (...) (...) (...) Rome, (...) the two most glorious Apostles (...)
and Paul: And from Saint AUGUSTINE, who says; In the Roman (...) has (...)
ep. (...).
always flourisht the (...) (...) of the Apostolical seat: And from Saint
PROSPER Saint (...) second soul, who writ, (...) (...) (...) (...) gent. l 2.
c 6.
of the apostolical (...) has added more greatenesse to Rome, by the
Tribunal of Religion, then by that of the Empire. And why then (when VICTOR
had excommunicated the Churches of Asia the lesser, upon the question of Easter
day, which they observed not according to the universal tradition of the
Apostles, but according to a local and particular tradition, which had been
instituted for a time in their Provinces;) did not the same Saint IRENEVS
reproach to him, that he could not do it, and that he had noe more power to
cast them out of the Church, then the other Bishops; only admonish him as it
shall appear hereafter, that he should not for so small a matter cut of so
many, and so great under chap 42.
Churches? He exhorted him (said EVSEBIVS) not to cut of all the Churches of
God which held the tradition of this ancient custom: And RVFFINVS translatinge
(...) (...). (...). l 5 c. 26. (...). ibid.
EVSEBIVS, He reprehended him (said he) to have done (...) to cut from the
unity of the body, so many, and so great Churches. For as for the
slanders, wherewith EVSEBIVS and RVFFINVS heretical. Authors, the one an
Arrian, and the other an Origenist, both enemies to the Roman under chap 42.
Church, do poison this history, they shall be answered hereafter; and it
shall be showed, that the censure of VICTOR was so just; that it was after
followed by the Oecumenicall counsels of Nicea, and Ephesus. And why then when
TERTVLLIAN priest of Carthage in Africa, was fallen into the heresy, or rather
frenzy of Montanus does he write, that Praxeas (...). con. (...).
had enforced the Bishop of Rome, who did before acknowledge the prophesies of
Montanus, Prisca, and Maximilla, and by this acknowledgement brought peace to
the Churches of Asia and Phrigia, to revoke his letters of peace already
published, and cease to (...) the spiritual guiftes, persuadinge him to
believe false things of these prophets and of their Churches, and opposing to
him the authority, of his predecessors? For the Montanists of Asia and Phrigia
haueing been excommunicated by the Catholic Bishops and Metropolitans of
their Provinces; what (...). (...). (...) apud (...). (...). eccl. l. 5. c. 16
right could the Pope have to receive them into his communion, and to grante
them peace, if he were not head and superintendent of the whole Church? and
principally according to the ancient Ecclesiastical discipline, which held,
that noe Bishop, except he were superior, could receive to his communion those,
that had been execmmunicated, by their (...). Nic. (...) and (...) and (...)
(...) (...) (...).
own Catholic Bishops? And why then when the same TERTVLLIAN declaimes
against the decree of Pope Zepherinus, (which ordained that Adulterers having
done penance, (...) be received into the communion of the Church;) does he call
him (though whith a (...) and heretical scorn,) the great high priest, and
the Bishop of Bishops, and the good (...), and the blessed Pope? I hear (says
he) that an Edict has been propounded, (...) (...). c. 1.
and certainly peremptorily, to wit; that the great high priest, and the
Bishop of Bishops says, I pardon the crimes of adultery and (...), to those
that have performed their penance. And again; thou do sweeten thy sermons
with Ibid. c. 15.
all the allurements of mercy that thou can, good shepherd and blessed
Pope, and in the parable of the sheep, thou seek thy Goats. And why then,
when the blessed Ad Anton. (...). 52.
Martyr CORNELIUS had been created Pope did Saint CYPRIAN say, that the Emperor
Decius bare with more patience to see a competitor arise in the (...), then to
see an high priest of God constituted at Rome; or according to (...). (...) and
(...). Pamel.
the oldest and best Copies, the^ to see an high Priest constituted his rival
in Rome; alluding to the two titles that the pagan Emperors assumed, the one of
Emperor, and the other of high Priest; and comparing the concurrence that the
Emperor received in the quality of Emperor, hy the creation of a rival in his
Empire, with the concurrence that he received in the quality of high priest,
by the creation of a Bishop of Rome: And wherefore does he call the (...)
Church the Chair of Peter, and the principal Church, Ad Cornel ep. 55.
and the original of the (...) all unity? They durst (says he) sail to
Rome, and carry letters from profane and Schismatic persons, to the chair
of Peter, and to the principal Church from whence the sacerdot all unity is
derived. And in virtue of what power did he solicit Pope STEPHEN, to write
letters to the Gauls whereby he should depose Martian Bishop of Arles? Thou Ad
Steph. ep. 67 under chap. 43.
should (says he) write letters into the province and to the people
inhibiting in Arles, by which Martian being deposed, an other might be
substituted in his place. And why then when the same Saint CYPRIAN and the
council of Africa had embraced the error of rebaptising heretics, which
since the (...). (...). c. 9.
Donatistes have converted into an heresy, did Saint VINCENTIVS (...) say;
then Pope Stephen of happy memory prelate of the Apostolic Sea, with, (...)
before his other colleagues resisted it, esteeming it a thing worthy of him to
surpass all others as well in devotion of faith, as he surmounted them by
authority of place. For as for the angry words that Saint CYPRIAN let slip
against Pope STEPHEN (which Saint AUSTIN judges unworthy to be reported) under
chap 42.
they shall be spoken of hereafter. And why then, the same Pope STEPHEN had
deprived of his communion Firmilianus Archbishop of Cappadocia, and the other
Bishops: of the Religions of Cappadocia, Cilicia Di. Allex. apud (...). hist.
Eccl. l. 7. c. 5.
and Galatia, for the same error of S. CYPRIAN, but more obstinately defended,
did Firmilianus, amongst his other words of fury, (which bare with them their
own confutation) that he spued up against the Pope, reproach to him that he was
so senseless; (he that boasted so much of the place of his Bishops Sea, and
gloried that he had the succession of Peter, upon which the foundation of the
Church had been established) as to introduce many other Peter's, and to
co^stitute a plurality of Churches? Firmil. ad Cyp. inter. ep. Cyp. ep. 75.
I am angry (said he) not without cause, with so manifest and evident a
folly in Stephen, that he that glorifies himself so much for the place of
his Bishops Sea, and maintains that he has the succession of Peter, upon
which the foundation of the Church has been set; has introduced many other
Peter's, and constituted new buildings of many Churches, in sustaining by his
authority that baptism is amongst heretics. And why then when DIONISIVS
Patriarch of Alexandria had seen, that Pope STEPHEN had shut the gate of his
communion from Firmilianus, and the other Bishops of Cappadocia, Cilicia,
Galatia, and the other neighboring nations, did he write to him letters of
intercession Di Allex. ep. Eu. list. eccl. l. 7. c. 5.
and of entreaty upon this subject? I writ to him (said he) beseeching him
for them all, or praying him concerning all these things. For as for that, that
Saint BASIL Archbishop of (...) in Cappadocia omitted not to reckon
Firmilianus amongst his Catholic Predecessors, notwithstanding his stain; it
was, because he repented afterward, as Saint Aug. cont (...). l. 3. c. 3
Hier. cont. Lucif.
AUGUSTINE witnesses in these words: Those of the East, that had held the
opinion of Ciprian corrected their judgment. And Saint IEROM in these; Finally
the Bishops themselves, that had conceived with Cyprian, that heretics should
be rebaptised, returning to their ancient custom published a new decree,
saying; what do we? so to them and to us their Elders and ours have given it
by tradition. And why then when the same DIONISIVS Patriark of Alexandria was
fallen into suspicion of heresy, did the Catholics of Alexandria, in steed
of having recourse to the Synodes of their provinces, Ath. de (...). Dion.
come to accuse him at Rome, before DIONISIVS Bishop of Rome; They went up
(said saint ATHANASIVS) to Rome, to accuse him before the Bishop of Rome, being
of his own name. And a while after, And the Bishop of Rome Ibid.
(the translator has falsely reported the surname to that of Alexandria) sent
to Dionisius that he should clear himself from those things whereof they had
accused him, and suddenly he answered and sent his books of defense and
apology. And in an other place, Some having accused the Bishop of Alexandria
before Id desyn. At. and Sell.
the Bishop of Rome, to hold the Son for a creature, and not consubstantiall
with the Father; The Synod of Rome, (that is to say, the consistory of Rome,
compounded of the Bishops neighboring upon the (...) of Rome without whom the
Pope judged nothing of importance, and of the principal Church men of Rome)
was offended with him; and the Bishop of Rome writ to him the opinion of all
the assistants; and he justifying himself, addressed to him Eusebius. hist eccl
l. 7 c. 29. and 30.
a book of defense and apology. And why then when the council of ANTIOCHE
twice called from the provinces of Pontus, Capadocia, Cyria, Cilicia, Lycaonia,
Palestina, Arabia, and from all the other Provinces of the East, had deposed
Paulus Samosatenus, Patriarch of Antioche, and substituted Domnus in his
steed; And that Paulus, would not quitt the possession of the Church, did the
Emperor Aurelian, though a Pagan ordain And that (says EVSEBIVS very fitly,
that it should be delivered to him whom the Bishops of Italy and of Rome,
that is, the Bishops of Italy assembled with the Pope should direct it to by
writing? For for what cause should EVSEBIVS, who was one of the Bishops of the
Patriarkship of Antioche, and besides, as an (...) not well affected to the
Roman Church, and this word very (...); but to show, that the Emperor had in
this action, followed the order of the church; and that it was a thing fit for
the Ecclesiastical laws, that the (...) of Rome should judge the affairs of
the East, even after the (...) of the East, and synodes compounded of a far
greater mumber of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
Bishops and Provinces? When Paul (says EVSEBIVS) would not quit the (...) of
the Church; the Emperor Aurelian, being called to this business, ordained
(...) (...), that it should be delivered to him, to whom the Bishops of Italy
and of Rome, of the same law, should write back. And the Greek manuscript of
the (...) of the counsels, kept in the private library of the most Christian
king; The Emperor Aurelian, although, a Pagan, sent back the question of Paul
(...). (...) (...) (...) (...).
to the Bishop of Rome, and to those that were by him, that when they had
examined whether he were justly deposed, he might be dispossessed of the
Church. And Zonaras and after him Balsomon, not only Grecians, but
schismatickes: The Emperor Aurelian enjoined the Bishop of Rome and the Bishops
that were with Zon pret. (...) (...) (...).
him to examine those things wherewith `Paul was charged, and if he were justly
deposed, to cast him out of the Church of the Christians. Which also since,
the (...) council of Ephesus did imitate when it reserved, (as shall under in
(...) (...) chap and in chap 29. below in the same Chapters. below there also.
appear hereafter) the judgment of John Patriarck of Antioche to the Pope;
and that Iuuenall, Bishop of Jerusalem said, that the ancient custom, and the
(...) tradition bare, that the Church of Antioche, was always to be ruled by
the Roman: And after the council of Ephesus, the sixth oecumenicall council
of Constantinople, when they sent back the cause of Macarius Patriarck of
Antioch to the Pope. And why then, when the Arrians held their false council
at Antioch 1270. years agone, did Socrates an Socrat. (...) (...). l. 2. c. 8.
ancient Greek author of 1200, years standing, write; JULIUS Bishop of Great
Rome, was not there, nor sent he any in his steed, although the
Ecclesiastical Canon forbidds to rule the Churches, without the sentence of
the Bishop of Rome: Soc. (...). (...) l (...) c. 8.
And likewise Zozomenus a greek author also, and of the same time with
Socrates:: JULIUS (said he) reprehended them, that they had secretly and
privily (...). (...). (...). l. (...). (...). 9
altered the faith of the Council of Nicea, and for that against the laws of
the Church, they had not called him to the Synod; for there was a Sacerdot all
law, which imported, that all things which were done without the advice of the
Bishop of Rome, should be inualid. And why then, when Eusebius of Nicomedia,
usurper of the Bishopric of Constantinople, and firebrand of the Arrian
faction, and the other Arrians his accomplices saw that the deposition of Saint
ATHANASIVS, that they had packed in the council of Antioche, was argued of
nullitie, because the Popes authority did not appear therein; Did they advise
themselves, to repair this defect to prevent the Pope, and to pray him to
call the (...) 2. (...). 11.
cause to his tribunal? EVSEBIVS (says Socrates) haueing done in the council
of Antioche what he listed sent an Ambassador to JVLIVS Bishop of Rome,
requiring him to be judge in the affair of ATHANAS, and to call the cause
before him. And this not after the voyage of S. ATHANAS. to Rome as Socrates
and Sozomene and the Protestants with them pretend; but before; as JULIUS
recited by S. ATHANASIVS, and saint ATHANASIVS himself, and THEODORET do
writness. ATHANASIVS (said JULIUS) is Athan. (...) (...).
not come to Rome of his own motion, but haueing been called, and having
received (...). (...) (...).
(...) from us. And saint ATHANASIVS, EVSEBIVS and his party writ to Rome,
that is to (...), to the Pope; they writ also to the Emperors CONSTANTINE and
CONSTANT andC. that is to say to CONSTANTINE Emperor of the Gauls, whose
residence was at Treuers, and to CONSTANT Emperor of Itali and Africa, whose
residence was at Millen; but the Emperors rejected them; and as for the Bishop
of Rome, he answered, that we should keep a Council where we would. And
Athan. pol. 2.
in an other place; The Eusebians writ to JULIUS, and thinkinge to terrify
us, demanded of him that he would call a Council, and that himself, if he
would should be the judge thereof: That is to say, they demanded, either that
the Pope would keep a Council out of Rome, in which the cause might be judged
in the presence of his Legates; or that he should judge it himself Athan.
apol. 2.
at Rome, if he pleased; And a while after; But when they heard the news of
our arriuvll at Rome, they were troubled, not expecting our comeing thither:
And THEODORET; As Soon as ATHANASIVS received the citatior from Theod. (...)
eccl. l. (...) c. 4.
JULIUS, he transported himself in diligence to Rome.

And why then, when the same JULIUS objected to the Arrians the enterprise of
the Council of Antioch, did he reproach them, that against the custom of the
Church, they had deposed saint ATHANASIVS in the Council of Antioch, without
attending first for a decision from Rome? Are you ignorant (said Pope JULIUS in
the second answer to the Arrians, Athan. apol. 2.
recited by saint ATHANASIVS) that the custom is, that we should be first
written to, and that from hence the just decisions of things should proceed?
And therefore if there were any suspicion conceived against your Bishop there,
you must have written to this Church. A manifest argument, that the request,
that the Arrians a while after the Council of Antioch had made to the Pope, to
Fragm.
call the cause of ATHANASIVS before him, and to call a Council to Hill. de
(...) (...). p. 36.
judge it, or to judge it himself if he would; was noe new attribution of
jurisdiction to the Pope, (as the adversaries of the Church imagine) but a
truce of their rebellion to the Popes jurisdiction. For how could the Pope,
have reproached to the Arrians, that the Council of Antioch, against the
ancient custom of the Church, had deposed saint Athanasius without stayinge
for a decision from Rome, if the Pope had not had right to judge the cause of
saint Athanasius, but since the Council of Antioch? And how could the Arrians
themselves have inserted 15. years after, these words in the false letter,
that they enforced Pope Liberius to write against saint Athanasius: I have
following the traditions of the ancients, sent on my behalf Lucius, Paul, and
Aehanus, Priests of the Roman Church, into Alexandria to Athanasius, to cause
him to come to Rome, that we might ordain (himself being present) upon his
person what the discipline of the Church exactes: if this right had been from
the new attribution of the Arrians, and not from the ancient tradition of the
Church, and even from that that JULIUS newly came from speaking of: For the
things which we have received from the blessed Peeter, I do signify them to
you? But let us again go forward with our interrogatories.

And why then, when the articles of the Eusebians against S. Athanasius were
brought to Rome, did the Pope upon the accusation of one of the parties, as the
common judge, adiourne or give them both a day, and that following Theod. hist.
(...). l. 2. c. 4.
the Ecclesiastical Canon? Julius (says Theodoret) following the
Ecclesiastical law commannded the Eusebians, to present themselves at Rome;
and gave assignation to the divine Athanasius, to appear in judgment. And why
then when those great Prelates; Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, Paul
Bishop of Constantinople MARCELLVS primate of (...) in Galatia; ASCLEPAS,
Bishop of Gaza in Palestina; LUCIUS Bishop of Andrinopolis in Thrace; who had
been accused of diverse crimes, some Secular; As Athanasius of the crimes of
manslanghter and Rape; and other Ecclesiastical, as the same Athanasius to
have caused a Chalice to be broken: And Asclepas to have overthrown an Altar;
and had been, deposed from their seats by diverse counsels of Thrace and of
Asia; and had been heard at Rome; did the Soc. hist. eccl. l. 2. c. 15.
authors of the Ecclesiastical histories say; that the bishop of Rome restored
them, forasmuch as to him (because of the dignity of his sea) the care a Ibid.
of all things appartained; JULIUS Bishop of Rome (said Socrates) because
(...). hist. (...). l. 2. c. 15
of the privilege of his Church, armed them with courageous letters, and sent
them back into the East, and restored to each of them his place; (...).
rebukeinge those that had (...) deposed them. And Sozomene, the Bishop of
Rome, haueing examined their (...). hist. (...). l. 3. c. 8.
complaints, and found that they agreed touching the decree of the Council of
(...) received them into his communion as conformable, and of the same belief;
And because that to him (for the dignity of his Sea) the care of all things
belonged, he restered to every one of them his Church. For as for the out
ragious letters, that those Under cha 50.
of the East (that is to say, as it shall appear hereafter; the Bishops of
the Patriarckship of Antioch and their accomplices who were Arrians) writ
against JULIUS in hate, because he had broken their Council, and restored
saint Athanasius: I mean to confute them particularly in an other place. It
shall suffice now, that I say two things; one, that these Ibid.
letters, having been written by heretical authors, to wit, the Arrians; and
reported by an heretical historian, from whom Socrates and Sozoment Socr.
hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. graec. ed. t. 17.
took them; to wit by Sabinus a macedonian heretic, who took part with the
Council of Antioch against the Pope, and against the Counceil of Nicea, and
was a sworn Enemy to the Trinity, to saint Athanasius, Ibid. etc. 15 Idem.
l. 2. c. 7.
and to the Council of Nicea; they carried their confutation on their
foreheade, and are of as little weight, as those that the Lutherans or other
Protestants should now write against the Pope. For who knows not that the
Pope has always proved that concerning Religion, that Cicero said of
himself, concerning the common wealth; to wit, that none ever declared
himself Enemy to the Church, but he took him (the Pope) for his adverse
(...) at the same time? And the other, that notwithstanding the boldness, or (to
Soz. hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 9.
speak with Sozomene,) the impudency of these heretical and Arrian letters,
the restitution, that the Pope had made of these great persons, and amongst
others Athanasius Patriarcke of Alexandria, and of Paul Archbishop of
Constantinople, was nevertheless executed and embraced, as just, both in
form, and matter, by the universal consent of all the Catholics in the
world. Athanasius and Paul (says Sozomene) recovered each one Soz. hist.
Eccl. l. 3. cap. 7.
his seat: And in an other place, speaking of the 300. Orthodoxall Bishops of
the Council of Sardica, who represented all the Catholic Bishops upon the
Earth; They answered (said he) that they could not separate themselves from the
communion of Athanasius and Paul; and principally, for as much as Julius
Bishop of Rome, having examined their cause, had not condemned them.

And why then when the same Council of Sardica (where assisted according to
the calculation of saint Athanasius, Socrates and Sozomene) more Athan apo 2.
Hist. (...) l. 2. c. 20. Soz. l. 3. c. 12.
then 300. Bishops: and which JUSTINIAN Justin. in (...). (...) (...) (...).
cont. (...). l. 5. Inchap 50.
calls an Oecumenicall Council; And which Vigilius the ancient Bishop of
Trent, says to have been assembled from all the provinces of the Earth: And
where saint Athanasius, and the greater part of the same Fathers that had been
at the Council of Nicea assisted, proceeded not to institute the appeals, as
it shall appear hereafter; but to rule or to reduce into writing the customs
of the appeals; did they ordain, that when a Bishop should appeal to the
Pope, it should be in the Popes choice either to give him judges out of the
neighbor provinces, or to grant him legates, which should be transported into
those places? If a Bishop (said the Council) having been deposed by the
assembly of Bishops of his province, has recourse in form of an appeal to
the most blessed Bishop of Rome, and desires to be heard a new; and that the
Bishop of Rome holds it just, that his cause should be re-examined; let him
vouchsafe to write to the Bishops, neighbbours to that province. And a little
after; and if (...) think it fit to send priests from about his person, which
may together with the Bishops decide the business having his authority from
whom they are sent, that also ought to be allowed. For as for what past
afterward in Africa about the matter of Appeals in lesser causes, that shall
be spoken of hereafter, in a chapter by it self.

And why then when the Fathers of the same council of Sardica, yielded an
account of their Acts to the Pope, did they write to him according Hill. in
fragm. (...) Arim. ex Bib. P. Pithoei.
to the copy which is inserted in the fragment of saint HILARIE, and cited
tacitly by Pope Int. ep. Aug. ep. 91. Ep. ad (...). Galhar.
INNOCENT the first, and expressly by Pope NICHOLAS the first; It were very
Good ad convenient, if from all the princes, the Prelates of God would send
relations to their Head; that is to say to the Sea of the Apostle Peter.

And why then when Valens Bishop of Murses in Mysia; and Vrsatius Bishop of
Singidon in Hungaria, two of the chiese Whirle-windes in the Arrian tempest,
would depart from the heresy of Arius and from the Sulp. Seu. lust. (...) l. 2.
slanders that they had invented against saint ATHANASIVS, did they come to
Rome to ask the Popes pardon, and to protest obedience to him? To the
absolution of Athanasius (said Sulpitius Seuerns) there was yet added, that
Vrsatius and Valens chief of the Arrians, after the council of sardica seeing
themselves excluded from the communion, came in person to crave pardon of
Julius Bishop of Rome, for haueing condemned an innocent. And saint ATHANASIVS;
Vrsatius and Valens, seeing these things, were touched with remorse, and goeing
up to Rome confessed their fault, and repenting craved pardon. And themselves
Idem.
in the act of their penance given by writing to the Pope and inserted in the
Relations of saint ATHANASIVS and Sozomene; We confess (said they) to your
blessedness in presence of all your priests our brethren, that all those
things that are come hither to your ears against ATHANASIVS are false and
fained, and far from being his actions; and for this cause we earnestly desire
to have communion with him; and principally because, your pictie, out Athan.
Apol 2.
of your natural goodness, has vouchsaffed to pardon our Error: And we farther
promise, that if for this occasion either those of the East, or Athanasius
himself, do Soz. hist. eccl. l. 3. c. 22.
maliciously call us to judgment, we will not depart from what you shall
ordain.

And why then when the Emperor constantius would set the last hand to the
persecution of saint Athanasius, did Amianus Marcellinus, though a Pagan author
report that he solicited Pope Liberius to condemn him not contenting himself,
that he had been deposed by a council cmpounded of 300. Bishops of the East
and West, unless the Pope himself confirmed Amianus Marcellinus. l. 15.
this deposition? Although (said he) that the Emperor know this was done;
nevertheless he procured with an earnest desire, that it might be comfirmed by
the authority, where of the Bishops of the eternal City, are superiors. For
whereas afterward Pope LIBERIVS, overcome by the persecutions of Constantius
the Arrian Emperor, gave himself up to sign the condemnation of saint
Athanasius, it was after he had been cast out of his seat by the Emperor at
the instance of the Arrians, and confined into Thracia; And after he had
suffered an exile of two years, and a long continuance of imprisonments,
threats of death, and corporal afflictions, and vexatio^s. Now we make a
great difference, between those sentences, that Popes pronounce de Cathedra,
that is to say, set in their Ecclesiastical Tribunal, and in the form of
public and judiciary acts, and with solemn and canonical preparation; and
those things, that they do in the form of particular and personal acts, and
not as constituted in the state and liberty of ludges, but as reduced into the
condition of captives and prisoners; and constrained by the violence of humane
fear, such as may Be in a spirit morally constant. And yet here meet three
miraculous circumstances, and worthy of Gods providence toward the Apostolicks
Sea in this history: The first, that as in the solemnity of the Pythian
games, wherein the Grecians celebrated the Feast of Apollo, when one of the
strings of Eunomius lire was broken, the greek fables say, that (...). (...)
a grasshopper came and set herself upon the lire, and supplied with her song
the defect of the string that wanted; so when LIBERIVS, banished and cast out of
his seat by the Arrians, began to be wanting to the consorte and (...) of the
Church; Felix, one of the Deacons of Rome, that the Arrians had caused to be
substituted in his place, supplied against their expectation, the defect of
LIBERIVS, and so lifted up his voice Hier. chron in (...). (...) (...). (...)
(...).
sor the innocence of ATHANASIVS, and the faith of the Council of (...), that
he was for this cause driven out of Rome by the Arrians, and (if we will
believe the ancient inscriptions) martyred. The second, that when the Emperor
had drawn by force from LIBERIVS what he would, he sent him back to Rome, to
exercise ioinctly with FELIX the gouuerment of the Church; LIBERIVS in steed
of persistinge in the conditions, that the Arrians had wrested from him, took
up again such a zeal for the protection of the cause of saint ATHANASIVS, and
for the defense of the faith, that he despised from thence forward, all the
threatninges and persecutions of the Emperor, and did noe less imitate saint
Peter in repairing the offense of his fall, then he did before in committinge
it. And the third, that when LIBERIVS was arrived at Rome, (...), (if we will
believe Sozomene,) dyed; which was (says the same (...). hist. eccl. l. 4. c.
15.
Sozomene) a notable care of the divine providence in the behalf of S. Peeters
Sea. A while after (says Sozomene) FELIX deceased and Liberius alone ruled the
Church, which was disposed by the providence of God, least the seat of Peeter
should be dishonored, being governed, by two Rulers.

But let us return to our interrogatories. And why then when the Arriars had
caused LIBERIVS to be removed from Rome, does saint (...). (...) (...). (...).
AIHANASIVS cry, they have not had a reverent memory that Rome was the
Apostolic Sea, and Metropolitan of Romania: that is to say of the Roman
Empire? For first that saint ATHANASIVS by the word Romania, meant all the
Roman Empire, we learn from saint EPIPHANIVS, who says Manes passed out of
Persia into Romania. And in an other place; The fire of (...). 46.
Arius took possession of almost all Romania. And again; Constantine sent
letters (...) (...). 49.
against Arius throughout all Romania. And from POSSIDIVS, who calls the
Vandalls that sacked Africa, the destroyers of Romania. And secondly, (...).
that by the word Metropolita^, he means a spiritual and Ecclesiastical
(...) (...) Aug. c. 30
Metropolitan, and not simply a secular and temporal Metropolitan; a
Metropolitan of Religion, and not simply a Metropolitan of state and policy:
we learn it from the allusion to the Epistle to the Arrians, that he cues in
the same place; in which the Arrians, though scornefully, and ironically had
called the Catholic Church, the School of the Apostles, and (...) hist.
(...) (...).
Metropolitan of Religion: And from the Epistle of saint IEROM against John By
hop of Jerusalem in which he said, that the Council of Nicea ordained (...). 61
that (...) should be the Metropolitan of all the East: that is to say, the
spiritual and Ecclesiastical Metropolitan of all the East.

And why then, when the Macedonians in the Council of Lampsacus in (...)
resolved to reunite themselves to the Catholic Church, did they send
EVSTATHIVS Bishop of Sebaste in Armenia; THEOPHIL. and (...), and other Asian
Bishops to Rome, who after their confession of faith, subscribed with their
hands, added these words to Pope (...) hist. Eccl. l 2.
(...) (...) any one after this confession of faith expounded by us, will
attempt any accusation against us, or against these that sent us, let him
come with letters from thy Holiness before such orthodoxall Bishops, as thy
Holiness shall please to appoint and contest with us in judgment; and if
there do a crime appear, let the authors thereof be punished.

And why then, when the same Eustathius who had bin; deposed from the
Bishopric of Sebaste in Armenia by the Council of Militine in Armenia and
showed to the Council of Tyana in Cappadocia the letters of restitution, that
he obtained from Pope Liberius, was restablished in his Bishopric?
Eustathius, (writes S. Basile to those of the West,) (...) Basil. ep. 74.
been cast out of his Bishopric, because he had been deposed in the synod of
Militiue, advised himself to find means to be restored, to travail to you.
Now of the things that where propounded to him by the most blessed Bishop
LIBERIVS, and to what he submitted himself, we are ignorant; only he brought
a letter which restored him; which being showed to the Council of Tyana, he
was reestablished in his Bishops seat.

And why then, when the abrogation of the Council of Arimini was in question,
did saint BASILE write to S. ATHANASIVS; It seemed to Basil. cp. 52.
us, to be to good purpose, to write to the Bishop of Rome, to be watchful
over these parts and give his judgment to the end that since there is
difficulty in sending from thence persons in behalf of a common and
synodicall decree, he may use his authority in the business, and choose men
capable of the labor of the way etc. and having with them the acts of
Arimini, that they may disannull those things that have been done by force? For
whereas in an other place, the same saint BASILE, stunge with the intermission,
that the Bishops of the west had made, in communicatinge by Ecclesiastical
letters with him, upon an aduertisment Ad Eusebius. ep. 8.
that had been given at Rome, that he communicated with heretics, cries
against the pride of those of the west; and says, that they knew not Ep. 10.
the truth, (that is to say, the truth of the Eastern affairs;) neither had
prtience to learn it: And again, that they should not by affliction add pain
Ep. 77.
to those that were oppressed and humbled, nor esteem that dignity consisted
in disdain: It was not to tax those of the west, that they stretched their
jurisdiction to far, that he spoke this langage; but contrariwise to tax
them, that they took not sufficient notice of the Asian affairs, as it
appears by the letter he writ to them in the name of himself, and all the
Bishops of Cappadocia, whose Metropolitan he was; which Ep. 77.
contained these words; We are ready to be judged by you, provided that
those, which slander us, may appear face to face with us in the presence of
your Reverence. And again; Comfort us with your peaceable letters, and with
your charitable communications, easinge, as by a sweet somentation, the wound
which your former negligence has made in our hearts. And that which he Epist.
10.
adds to the first complaint, that those of the west prevented with false
suspicions, did the same things in his behalf, as they had done in the cause
of Marcellus, to wit, that they took them for adversaries, that reported the
truth to them, and established heresy in trustinge too much in their own
opinions; not that he pretended the Pope had ever approved the heresy of
Marcellus: Only he meant to say, that those of the west, not having been
informed that Marcellus taught Athan. Ad solit. vit. agent.
an other doctrine in Asia, then that he had professed at Rome, which was
Catholic. The restitution that the Pope had made of his person Soc. l. 2. c.
15.
to the primacie of the lesser Galatia, was an accidental cause; that in the
East they adhered to his heresy. Soz. l. 3. c. 7


But let us go on with our demaundes. And why then, when the Synod of the
west, holden under Pope DAMASVS, did disannull and abolish the Council of
Arimini, does he say that the number of Bishops assembled at Arimini, how
great soever it were, could be of noe weight, because neither the Pope
LIBERIVS, whose judgment should first of all be attended; nor VINCENTIVS
Bishop of Capua, who had been Pope SYLVESTERS Legate in the Council of Nicea,
whose confirmation or information, was treated of in that of Arimini, and who
came then from being the legate of Pope LIBERIVS for the same effect to the
Emperor (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
CONSTANTIVS; nor many other had ever consented to it? The multitude of the
Bishops, said the Council, assembled at Arimini, ought to make noe
preiudication; since this confession was composed without the consent of the
Bishop of Rome, whose sentence should be attended before all others; or that of
VINCFNTIVS, who had for so many years administered the Bishops seat (...)
Theodor. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 22.
or that of many others.

And why then, when the Emperor Valeus had caused PETER the Patriarch of
Alexandria, to be driven from his Patriarkeship, and had placed (...) in his
(...); did PETER obtain letters of confirmation from Pope DAMASVS, which
restored him, and approved the faith of MOSES Soc. hist. Eccl. l. 4. (...)
(...).
new Bishop of the Arabians? PETER (says Socrates) being returned from Rome
into Alexandria, with letters from DAMASVS Bishop of Rome which confirmed the
says of Moses, and the creation of Peter; the people encouraged drove away
Lucius, and restored PETER in his place.

And why the^, when the Emperor GRATIAN became an administrator of all the
Empire, was the first thing he had care of, to ordain that the Churches, that
had been possessed by heretics, might be delivered to the Theodor. hist. Eccl.
l. (...). 2.
Bishops, that were of the Popes communion? He ordained (says THEODORET) that
the sacred howses might be delivered to those, that communicated with Damasus;
which was, as he further says, executed throughout the world.

And why then when Sapores to whom the execution of this Edict had been
committed in the East, arrived at Antioch, did he find three Competitors in
the Patriarckship of Antioch, Paulinus, Miletius, and Apollinarius, which
reported themselves all three to be in the communion of DAMASVS because each
of them would have had the possession of the Patriarkship of Antioch to be
adjudged to himself? Sapores coming to Antioch, (says THEODORET) and shewinge
the law of Gratian; Paulinus affirmed that he Theod. ibi. c. 3.
was of DAMASVS his party; the same Apollinarius affirmed, hyding the venom
of his error. And (...) writing afterward to Pope DAMASVS; Miletius (...) ep.
58
and (...) (so was the successor of Apollinarius called) and Paulinus say,
that they communicate with (...); I would believe them, if but one said so;
now either two lie, or all three.

And why then, when the Emperor Theodosius the great was associated to the
Emperor Gratian did they make this famous law, which marches (...) (...). l. 1.
in the front of the Code of Justinian: We will, that all the people ruled by
the Empire of our clemency, shall live in the same religion which the divine
Apostle Peter gave to the Romans, as the religion insinuated by him until this
present witnesses, and which it is manifest that the High Priest Damasus
follows, and Peter of Alexandria, a man of Apostolic sanctity: that is to
say; this Peter Patriark of Alexandria, Soct. vbi supra
that Socrates said, that Pope Damasus had newly confirmed and restored.

And why then, when S. IEROM priest of Antioch, and resident in the (...)
(...). her.
Patriarkship of Antioch, and created by Paulinus the Bishop of Antioch, (...).
(...). (...) 61.
whom he calls an admirable man, and high Priest of Christ; addressed his first
letters to Pope DAMASVS upon the business of the division (...) (...) (...). cp
27.
of the Church of Antioch why I say did he write to DAMASVS: I am (...) in
communion with thy blessedness, that is to say; with Peter's chair; I know the
Ad Damas. (...) (...)
Church is built upon that rock; whosoever eats the lamb out of this house
is (...) etc. I know not Vitalis; I reject Miletius; I am ignorant of Paulinus;
whosoever gathers not with thee, scatters; that is, whosoever is not of Christ,
is of Antichirst? For whereas the Protestants object, that saint IEROM says
in the preludium of this passage, that he follows no chief but Christ; it is
a Corruption of the copies of Bosle, and other the late Copies which read
nullum primum nisi Christum sequens, that is to say, following no chief but
Christ; where it should be read nullum praemium nisi Christum sequens, that is
to say; following noe reward but Christ; as it appears, both by the aim of S.
IEROM, which is to protest, that he had not recourse to the greatness of the
Pope, for the desire he had to obtain any temporal reward, but for the only
ambition he had to obtain the reward of souls, which is Christ; and by the
Cause. 24. q. c.
copies of saint IEROM, which passed current five hundred years ago, and
which the author of the decree has followed, which read proemium, and not
primum, that is; reward and not chief, conformably to the style of the Church
which singsin the hymn of the Martyrs;

O God thy Soldiers only guard, Gregor.

Their lot, their crown and their reward.
And why then when the perfidiousness of Vitalis was discovered, did saint
GREGORY NAZIANZENE write, that Pope DAMASVS, who in the beginning had received
him into his communion under a profession of a captious faith cast himout of
the Church, and from the Priesthood, by a sentence of interdiction and
anathema? Let them not accuse us, (said Greg. Hat. ad Cledon. ap. 2.
saint GREGORY Bishop of Nazianza in Capadocia) for haueing first approved the
faith of Vitalis, which at the instance of blessed DAMASVS bishop of Rome he
gave him set down in writing, and now disallowing it etc. for that profession,
if it be well understood, is accompained with piety, if evil with impiety.
And a little after: Whereof DAMASVS himself having afterward been otherwise
infor med, and hauingle arnt that they persisted in their first exposition,
interdicted the^, and blotted out their profession of faith by anathema.

And why then when the council of the one hundred and fifty Fathers assembled
at Constantinople entitled the second oecumenicall council; where assisted all
the Patriarchs, metropolitans, and principal Bishops of the Eastern Empire,
had been celebrated; did they demand the confirmation of their decisions of
Faith from the Pope; and namely that of the Theod. hist. eccl. l. 5. c. 9.
deposition of Timothy, one of the Bishops: of the East, deposed for matters
of Faith? Whereas your Charity my dear children, (says Pope DAMASVS, Ibid.
in his answer to the council) yeildes due reverence to the Apostolic sea,
it shall turn you to great honor? And a while after; But what need was there
to exact from me the deposition of Timothy, since he was long since deposed
here, with his Master Apollinarius, by the judgment of the Apostolic sea,
and in the presence of Peter Bishop of Alexandria! For whereas the demand of
this confirmation is not to be found in the Epistle of the council of
Constantinople, reported by THEODORET; it is, because that Epistle is not the
letter of the counsel of the one hundred and fifty Fathers, but of an other
council celebrated the year following at Constantinople by some of the same
Fathers, either called back again, as THEODORET pretends; or remaining of the
former council as it appears by the tenor of that letter.

And why then (when the same council had confirmed the election that the
Syrians had made of Flauianus insteede of Miletius competitor of Paulinus to
the Patriarkshipp of Antioch, and had reunited in Flauianus person both their
Rightes) did the Pope call the cause to Rome, before a council that he
assembled there, and by his letters, accompained with those of the Emperor
GRATIAN sent for the council of Constantinople which had confirmed this
election to cause them to come and put it again to trial at Rome, and gave
assignation to both parties to appear there, whereof one, to wit, Paulinus
appeared, but Flauianus distrusting the equity of his cause, had recourse to
excuses and delays? The Ecclestasticall Ad (...) (...). (...). (...).
necessity (says saint IEROM) drew me to Rome with the holy Bishops,
PAVLINVS and EPIPHANIVS, whereof the one governed the Church of Antioch in
Syria, and the other the Church of Salamina in Cypres. And again When the
Imperial letters had drawn to Rome the Bishops of the East and west Ad
Eustoc. cp 17.
Paul saw there the admirable men and Bishops of Christ, Paulinus Bishop of
Antioch, Soz hist. eccl. 7. c. 11.
and Epiphanius Bishop of Salamina in Cypres. And Sozomene: the Bishop of Rome
(said he) and all the western Praelates bare the ordination of Flauianus very
impatiently. And a little after: And therefore, because it should be (...),
Ibid.
they together with the Emperor (...) writ and called the Bishops of the
Theod. hist eccl. l. 5. c. 9. Theod hist. eccl. l. 5 c. 9.
East into the west: And the same Fathers of the council of Constantinople
excusing themselves to the Pope, and the council of Rome that they could not
come to Rome moved, (said they) with brotherly charity, you have called us as
your members, by the letters of the most religious Emperor etc. But besides
that, our Churches but a while before beginning to be restored if we should
have done this, had been (...) abandoned; it was a thing which many of us could
noe way put in execution, for as much as we traveled to Constantinople upon the
letters of Ibid.
your Reverence sent the last year after the council of Aquilea to the most
religious Emperor Theodosius, having prepared us for none, but that only
yourney of Constantinople, and having gotten the consent of the Bishops
remaining in the Provinces for none but that. And toward the end of the
Epistle speaking of PAVLINVS, whom they believed Pope DAMASVS favored, as
having been Russ. hist. l. (...). (...). (...).
created Patriarcke of Antioch by Lucifer Legate to the Pope LIBERIVS, his
predecessor: we (...) you not to prefer the favor or friendship to one
particular Ibid.
man, before the edification of the Churches, that by this means the Doctrine
of says and Christian Charity being confirmed amongst us, (that is to say:
of those of the East amongst themselves) we may cease to have in our mouths
these words condemned by the Apostle I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of
(...): that is to say, we should cease from saying, I am a Miletian, I am a
Paulinist. I am an Appolinarist. For that it is which those signify, I am of
Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of Cephas, which do not design (as our adversaries
pretend,) the Pope and the Bishops of the Empire of the have, but the three
factions whereinto the Churches of the Eastern Asia had been divided and rent
under Paulinus, Miletius and Appollinarius. And indeed how could those of the
East, mean by those words. amongst (...) the Pope, and themselves; they that
were so tied in communion to the Pope as they had not been restored to their
seats (as Theodoret said Theod. hist eccl l. 5. c. 2
but even now) but under condition to communicate with the pope? but that is
so clear as it needs noe proof; let us go on.

And why then, when the euasions of Flauianus (who withdrew himself because he
knew he had been ordered against the oath made Soc hist. eccl. l. 5. c. (...).
between Miletius his predecessor and Paulinus, that the longest liver of them
two should remain the sole Patriarck) had been discovered, and (...) hist eccl
l. 7. c. 11. Theod. hist eccl. l. 5. c 23.
that the complaints thereof were arrived to the Emperor THEODOSIUS, then only
Emperor, who resided at Constantinople; did the Emperor make him come from
Antioch to Constantinople, and pressed him to go to Rome, even after the
departure of the council of Rome? The Emperor (said THEODORET) often called
upon, made Flauianus come to Constantinople, Ibid.
and commanded him to travail to Rome, but Flauianus answering, it was winter
and promisinge to perform his command in the return of the Spring, returned
into his country. And a while after, the Emperor having again made him come
to him, again commanded him to transport himself to Rome. For that
THEODORET, Suffragan of the Patriarkship of Antioch, and creature to one of
Flauianus successors. adds that the Emperor touched with the second answer of
Flauianus, sent him back to his province, and took upon him protection of his
cause, is a testimony, that has more relation to favor then to truth; as it
appears by these words of saint AMBROSE, written after the council of Capua.
which was holden under Pope SIRICIVS Successor to DAMASVS; Flauianus has cause
to fear, Amb. ep. 78.
and therefore he flies a trial. And again, one only Flauianus not subject
to laws as it seems to him, appears not, when we are all assembled. And a
while after; Flauianus only is exempted, as he pretendes, from the conditions
of the Sacerdotall College, who will neither exhibit his presence to the
Sacerdotall assembly, nor to the imperial decrees.

And why then when Paulinus was dead, and that Euagrius was substituted in his
steed, did the same council of Capua (which the third Council of Carthage
calls an universal council, and that S. AMBROSE (...) Carth 3. c. 38.
describes, as assembled from an infinite mumber of Provinces) continue the
first proceeding of the Pope; and seeing that Euagrius had appeared, and that
Flauianus perseuered in his contempt delegated THEOPHILUS Bishop of Alexandria,
whose Patriarkship bordered upon that of Amb. ep. 78.
Antioch to examine it: The sacred Synod (says saint AMBROSE in his Epistle to
Theophilus) having committed the right of examining this affair to your
unanimity and to our other colleagues of Egypt, it is necessary that you cite
again our brother Flauianus. And why then when the council of Capua had given
this commission to THEOPHILUS Patriarch of Alexandria, Amb. Ibid
did saint AMBROSE write to him, that he should, after he had judged it
procure his judgment to be confirmed by the Pope? Certainly, (said he) we
conceive, that you should relate the affair, to our holy brother, the Bishop
of the Roman Church, for we presume that you will make noe judgment that can
displease him. And a little after; To the end that we having received the tenor
of your acts, when we shall see that you have judged so as the Roman Church
will undoubtedly approve it, we may reap with joy the fruit of your
examination. And why then (when it appeared that EVAGRIVS Successor to PAVLINVS
had been evil ordained, for as much as Paulinus only had imposed his hands
upon him, and that Flauianus by this occasion remained without a competitor)
did Theophilus send a legation to Rome to put Flauianus again into the Popes
grace; and Flauianus an other, to obtain the Soc. hist. eccl. l. 5. c. 15.
restitution of communion with the Pope? THEOPHILUS (says Socrates) having
sent the priest I sidorus appeased Damasus (you must read Anastasius) that was
offended, and represented to him, that it was profitable for the concord of the
people, to forgett the fault of Flauianus; and so the communion being restored
to Flauianus, the factions of the people of Antioch, a while after (that is to
say, under Pope Innocent the first) were reconciled And Sozomene speakinge of
saint JOHN CHSOSTOME Archbishop of Constantinople, who had a little before been
a priest of Flauianus, and for that cause affected him: JOHN (says Soz. hist.
eccl. 8. c. 3.
he) prayed Theophilus to labor with him, and to help him, to make the Bishop
os of Rome to be propitious to Flauianus; and to this end there were deputed
Acacius Bishop of Beroe and Isidorus. And THEODORET, although for his
partiality, he be not altogether to be credited in this cause, speaking of the
Emperor THEODOSIUS his voyage to Rome: The Emperor (said he) exhorted Theod.
hist eccl. l 5. c. 23
them to extinguish this unprofitable contention (for you must read (...) and
not (...) and represented to them that Paulinus was already dead, Sec
Nicephorus l. 12. c. 24.
and that Euagrius came not by lawful means to the Prelacye. And a little
after: Then upon the exhortation of the Emperor, those of the west promised to
lay aside all Theod. hist eccl. l 5. c. 23.
bitterness and to receive the Ambassadors that Flauianus should send: which
the divine Flauianus having learnt, he sent to Rome a legation of most famous
Bishops, and priests, and Deacons of Antioch; for all which the chief was
Acacius Bishop of (...) in Syria, renowned through all parts of Sea and land.
But here is too much of this history: let us pass on to the rest.

And why then when Saint AMBROSE, Archbishop of Milan (a city where the
Emperors of the west, made their residence, speaks of his brother Satyrus,
does he say, that when he had escaped Shipwreck, and was cast upon the Isle
of Sardinia, he inquired of the Bishop of that (...). Or. (...) (...). (...).
place, whether he agreed with the Catholic Bishops, that is to say (as
himself adds) with the Roman Church? And why then when he excuses the custom
of washing of feet which was practiced in the Church of Milan although it was
not used in the Church of Rome, does he cry; We follow in (...) (...). (...).
all things, the type and the form of the Roman Church: And again The same
Peter is our warrant for this observation, who has been Bishop of the Roman
Church? And why then when he, or the author (that was of his time) of the
come^tary, that is attributed to him upon the first Fpistle to Timothy,
explaines these words of the Apostle, to converse in the house of God, Does he
write (...). (...) (...).
that Pope DAMASVS was the Rector of the Church? Although (says he) the whole
world belonges to God, nevertheless, the Church is called the house of God, of
which at this day Damasus is the Tector?

And why then, when OPTATVS Mileuitanus, that is Bishop of (...) in Africa,
whom saint AUSTIN calls a Bishop of reverend memory, and whom Fulgentius honors
with the title of a Saint disputes. Thou against the Donatists, does he say to
Parmenian a Donatist Bishop; (...). (...). (...). l. 2.
can not deny, but that thou know that the Episcopal chair was first
set up in Rome for Peter, in which seat wassett the head of all the Apostles,
Peter; whereof also he has been called Cephas: (so says he, to allude to the
greek word (...), which signifies he head; and ressembles the Hebrow, Cephas;
that is to say, a stone, from whence this Apostle was named) to the end, that
in this only chair, unity should be preserved to all; least the other
Apostles might attribute to themselves, each one his particular chair, but
that he should be a Schismaticke and a Sinner, that would against the only
chair, set up an other? And for what cause after he had cited the catalogue of
Popes from saint PETER even to his time, does he infer from thence, the
Donatists could have noe chair, and consequently noe Church, since they had
noe communion with the Bishop of Rome? Give us (said he) an account of the
original of (...) ibid.
your chair, you that will attribute to your selves the holy Church? But you
(...), (quoth he) that you have also some part at Rome; but this is a
branch of your Error, sprunge out of a lie, and not from the root of truth:
for in the end if Macrobius be inquired of (so was the name of the false
Bishop that the Donatists kept at Rome) where he sitts there, can he answer in
the chair of Peter, which (...) he knows not so much as by sight? And a
while after; From whence is it then, that you attempt to usurp to yourselues
the keys of the Kingdom, you that fight against the chair of Peter by your
bold and sacrilegious presumptions? And why then when saint AUSTIN an African
as well as he, pressed the same Donatistes, did he say to them; In the Roman
Church there has always Aug. cp. 162.
flourished the principality of the Apostolic Sea. And again, Reckon the
(...), (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
even since the seat of Peter, and in this order of the Fathers, see who has
succeeded one an other; this is the Rock, that the proud gates of Hell shall
never overcome. And in an other place, considering the Popes as successors of
(...). 65.
saint PETER according to the other interpretation; to wit; according (...).
(...). (...).
to that of the figure of the Church; In this order of Fathers (said he) that
is to say from Saint Peter to Pope Athanasius, there is not one Donatist: And
in his disputations against the Manichees, In the Catholic Church I am
detained by the Successiion of Prelates from the Seat of Peter to whom our
Lord gave his sheep to feed after his resurrection, unto the present Bishops
seat?

And why then when the Empress Eudoxia, wife to Arcadius Emperor of the East,
seeing her husband would cause Theophilus to be degraded from the Patriarkship
of Alexandria, (but delaied, because, says the Emperor Leo Imp. in vit.
LEO the Learned, that the legates of Rome and of the western Church stayed
long ere they came) had cast upon saint Chrisostom Archbishop of
Constantinople Chrysostom.
the tragedy, that was begun for Theophilus, and had caused him to be deposed
by a council of Bishops assembled at Constantinople under Theophilus Patriark
of Alexandria; did this divine Prelate have recourse by Chrysostom. ap Innoc. cp. 1
letters of Appeal to the Pope? Vouchsafe (says this sacred goulden pen,
writing to Pope Innocent the first) to command that these things so wickedly
done, and we absent and not refusing judgment, may be of noe value, as in
truth they are not; and that they, that have carried themselves so (...), may
be submitted to the punishment of the Ecclesiastical laws. For to think to
avoid these words, by saying, faint Chrysostom speaks in plural terms, in
his letter as writing to many: Who knows not that it was a common custom
with the Eastern authors, and communicated by deriuation to those of the west,
when they would honor or gratify him, to whom they write to speak in the
plural number, to signify, that they consider him, as having in him the
authority of many? And this in imitation of the Syrians, who Rab: (...) Rabbi.
to express master or Lord, called it Rabbi, which signifies many, that is to
say, containing in him, the authority of many? God (says EVSEBIVS Rabbuni.
Inter ep. Leon. 1. post. ep. 50. Co^c. (...). sub. Men. act. 1.
Archbishop of Milan in his Epistle addressed only to Pope LEO) has
constituted ye Prelates of the Apostolic sea, worthy protectors of his
worship: And the Bishops of Siria writing only to the Emperor Justinian; The
Lord preserve ye devout zealous and guardians of the faith; And the bishops of
the council of Mopsuestia, a city of Asia in an Epistle to Pope Vigilius
alone; It was very reasonable, o ye most holy, since ye hold the first
dignity of priesthood, that those things which concern the state of the holy
Curches, should be represented to Conc.
your deuinely honored, Blessedness: And the Pope saint GREGORY in the Constable.
Epistle addressed to Cyriacus Patriarch of Constantinople alone, to
congratulate Oocum. 2. Act. 5.
with him for his promotion; In this most blessed Brethren, ye are strong,
that mistrusting your own strength, ye trust in the power of God. Jointly,
that although the acts of the Popes were often dispatched in their name Greg.
l. 6. ep. 4.
alone, nevertheless they were framed with the consent of the neighbor
Bishops which were at their Synodes and consistories; As Pope Julius testifies
to the Arrians in these words: Although it be I alone that have written, Iul.
apud Ath. in apol 2.
yet I have not only written mine own opinion, but that of all the Bishops of
Italy and of these parts. And therefore not only the inscription of saint
Chrysostomes Epistle is singular and directed to the Pope alone, but also Pal.
in. vit. Chrysostom.
Palladius and Photius cite it, as addressed to the Pope alone. And to hope
also to avoid these words by saying, that in the end, not of the copy Phot.
bibl. c. 86.
which is in saint Chrisostomes works, but in that which is recited by
Palladius, saint Chrysostom adds that he has written the same things to
Venerius Bishop of Milan, and to Chromatius Bishop of Aquilea, it is a vain
and frivolous hope. For he intendes the same things in regard of the report
Chrysostom. ad Innoc. ep. 2.
of the history, but not that in any of his other letters, he uses any of
those forms of Appeal: Vouchsafe to command, that these things done against
us, may be inualid and that those which have done them, may be submitted to the
punishment of the Ecclesiastical Canons. And again; Of one thing I beseech
your Chrysostom. ad Innoc. cp. 2.
watchful mind, that although those that have filled all with trouhles, be
sick of an impenitent and incurable disease, if yet they will remedy these
things, that then they may not be punished nor interdicted. More vain were it
to hope to avoid them by saying, that saint CHRISOSTOM before he was condemned
had appealed to a general council, and that then after his condemnation, he
could not appeal to the Pope. For what inconvenience were it, that saint (...)
before his condemnation, to stay the fury of those (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...)
that were to be his Judges, and his adversaries together, appealed to a
general council, which he knew could not be held without the assistance of
the Pope, or his Legates? and that after his condemnation, seeing this refuge
had failed him, and that all hope of a general council was taken (...),
because the Emperor and Empress of the East, (against whose wills it could not
be celebrated,) had declared themselves his (...); (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
he appealed to the Pope? And to add that the Pope also strove to cause a
general council to be held, and then the appeal had not (...) to him; wat
incompatibilitie was there, that the appeal should deuolue to the Pope, and
that the Pope should judge of the validity of the appeal, and should ordain,
that the first judgment should be disannulled, and things by provision set in
the same estate they were before: and that to search it to the bottom to clear
it, with the satisfaction of all the Provinces, and to hinder a schism
between the two Empires, he desired it night be judged definitiuely in a
general council? The rule of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
the (...) of Sardica upon the matter of Appeals, (which is that that (...)
and Zozomene teach us, Pope INNOCENT followed in this case) did it not cast,
two things upon the Pope after the interiected (...) the one to judge whether
the reason of the appeal seemed to him lawful, and in case he found it
lawful, to annull the sentence, and to remitt by way of entire restitution,
the parties in such estate, as they were before: The other, after he had (...)
the first sentence, to ordain a new judgment should be proceeded to, and to
name judges to that effect either taken from the neighboring Provinces, or
sent from Rome to judge the cause with the Bishops of the neighbour-prouinces?
Now does not Palladius (that Photius calls a worthy and a diligent writer of
the history of saint CHRISOSEOME) witness that the Pope did, when he (...).
(...).
says; INNOCENT haueing received both parties to his communion, determined
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
that the judgment of Theophilus should be abrogated and annulled, saying,
they should hold another Synod unreprovable of the Prelates of the west and
east? And does not the success of the history teach us, that saint CHRISOSTOM
remained absolved upon the Popes single sentence, without any (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...).
council to follow it? And Pope GELASIVS an author of the same age, does not
he confirm this when he writes, a Synod of prelates yea (...) having condemned
John of Constantinople even the sea Apostolic alone, (...) it consented not
to it, absolved him: And why then when saint CHRYSOSTOM was dead, did George
Patriarch of Alexandria, an author of one thousand years antiquity, and cited
by saint DAMASCENE and (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
(...) Patriarch of Constantinople, and printed in Greek in England, with
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
the greek words of saint CHRYSOSTOM and followed by Cedrenus, (...), (...)
Harmenopolus, And other Greeks) write, that Pope INNOCENT, advertised of his
death, excommunicated the Emperor (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) and the Empress Eudoxia in these words: And therefore I, the (...) and
a sinner as depositary (or Keeper) of the Throne of the great (...) (...) (...)
off thee and her from the participation of the immaculate mysteries of Christ
our God, and ordain that whtasoeuer Bishop or Clarke, of the holy, Church of
God, which shall presume to administer them to you, after he has read this
(...), shall be deposed? For whereas Socrates, and after him Prosper, and (...)
Comes, reckon the Death of the Empress Eudoxia to be many (...) before the
death of saint CHRYSOSTOM, which is peradventure the cause that moved Photius
to say, that this George mistakes himself in some places of the history: this
is an Error in Socrates a Nouatian author, and an Enemy to saint CHRYSOSTOMES
memory, who in steed of saying (as Cedrenus, Zonarus, Nicephorus, and all the
later grecians say) that Eudoxia dyed three months after the death of saint
Chrysostom, and under the seventh consulship of Honorius, and the second of
Theodosius, has said, that she died three months after the exile of S.
Chrysostom, and under the consulship of Honorius and Aristenetus; perchance
deceived by the ambiguity of the greek word (...), which signifies sometimes
death, and sometimes goeinge out; whereof it is credible, they from whom he
took his history, had made use. The proof of the error is, that Sozimus a
pagan author, who writ above 30. year before Socratcs, and was eye witness
of this history, which Socrates was not; extendes the life of Eudoxia many
years beyond the banishment of S. Chrysostom. For he says plainly, that the
revolt of the Isaureans was after the banishment of John, and that upon the
news that came to Constantinople of their revolt, the Emperor sent Arzabacius
with an army into Pamphilia to suppress them, who having had many victories
and prosperous successes against them, might have wholly rooted the^ out, had
not Arzabacius degenerated from his first vigor, and given himself up to
pleasures and covetousness; for Zosim. hist. l 5.
which cause he was called back to Constantinople, to undergo a capital
judgment; but being returned to the Court, he gave part of his spoils to the
Empress, who saved him. Now, besides that it was impossible, that all these
things should happen in three months, (and moreover that S. Chrysostom
testifies, that during his stay in Cucusus, where he spent the Marcel. Com. in
Chronic.
first year of his exile, the Isaurians had not yet been suppressed by the
Romans:) Marcellinus Comes setts down precisely the departure of Arzabacius
against the Isaurians, to be the year after the co^sulship of Honorius and
Aristenetus; to wit, under the co^sulship of Stilicon and Anthemius, a thing
wholly incompatible with what Socrates and himself say; that the Empress dyed
the year of the consulship of Honorius and Aristenetus. For how could the
Empress save Arzabacius after his return from the Isaurians war, begun under
the consulship of Stilicon and Anthemius, if she were dead in the consulship of
Honorius and Aristenetus, which was before that of Stilico^ and Anthemius? And
why did not S. Chrysostom himself, in so many letters as he writ in his
four years banishment, make mention of the death of Eudoxia, that was the
cause of it; if she were dead 3. months after his departure into banishment?
And how could Palladius, (who although he exte^des not his history to the time
of Arcadius his excommunication, nevertheless he goes on with it to S.
Chrysostoms death) have forgotten to put Eudoxia's death, amongst the examples
of the persons that dyed, for having persecuted S. Chrysostom, if she had been
dead, when he writ his history? and therefore also the Emperor Leo, surnamed
the learned, Leo Imp. in vit.
and Cedrenus, and Zonarus, and Nicephorus, and Glicas, and all the other later
Greeks, Chrysostom.
have rather chosen to follow Zozimus and George of Alexandria, and their
Cedr. Zonar. and caete ri in Arcadio.
co^putation in Eudoxia's death, then that of Socrates; but this observation
deserves a discourse of more leisure: let us get ground.

And why then when the tempest was appeased, would the same Innocent never
receive Alexander Patriark of Antioch, and Atticus Bishop of Innoc. ad Alexep.
17
Constantinople into his communion, till they had restored the name of saint
Chrysostom into the records of their Churches? I have diligently inquired,
(says Pope Innocent writing to Alexander Patriark of Antioch,) whether the
cause of the blessed Bishop John has been fully satisfied in all conditions;
and being informed by those of your legation, that all things have been fully
performed according to our desire, I have (giving God thanks) admitted the
communion of your Church. And a little after, As for the letters of the Bishop
Atticus, because they were joined with yours, I have received them, least the
refusal of a man long ago suspended by us, might be an injury to you; and
yet we have sussiciently, and more then sussiciently ordained in the acts,
what ought to be observed in his person. And why does THEODORET say, John being
dead, those of the west Theod. hist. eccl. l. 5. c. 34.
would never admit the communion neither of the Egiptians, nor of those of the
East, nor of the Bishops of Bosphorus and Thrace, that is to say, of the
jurisdiction of Constantinople, till they had inscribed the name of this
admirable personage into the roll of the Bishops his predecessors, and they
esteemed Arsacius that succeeded him, not worthy of a bare salutation? And as
for Atticus successor of Arsatius after Ibid.
many legations and treaties for peace, they finally received him, but not
until he had first added the name of John to the other Bishops. For that
Theodoret says this of those of the West, and that saint Innocent recites it
of himself, are not things repugnant, forasmuch, that as the Greeks by the
word Eastern meant the Patriark of Antioch, and the Bishops of his
Patriarkship; and by the word Egiptians, the Patriark of Alexandria, and the
Bishops of his Patriarkship: so by the word Western, they understood, the
Pope and the Bishops of his patriarkship, because the Pope never decided
matters of moment without some assembly either general or particular of the
Bishops of his patriarkship; from whence it is, that in Innoc. ad (...). cp. 16.
the same letter of Innocent to Alexander, it is added at the end; that twenty
(...) Bishops of Italy have subscribed to it.

And why then when the cause of Pelagius and Celestius had been judged both in
the East, where Pelagius was, by the Synod of Palestine, and in Africa where
Celestius had been, by the Counsels of Carthage and Mileuis, did the Council
of Carthage write this to Pope Innocent; This proceeding Aug. ep 90.
then our holy Lord and brother, we conceived we ought to represent to your
charity, that to the statutes of our mediocritie, there might be also
applied, the authority of the Apostolic Sea: And again, We doubt not but
your Reverence, when you shall have seen the decrees of the Bishops, which are
said to be made upon this occasion in the East, will frame such a judgment
where at we shall all rejoice in the (...) of God? And why does the Mileuitan
Council, to which S. AUSTIN was secretary, write these words to Pope
INNOCENT: For as much as Aug cp. 92.
God by the gift of his principal grace, has placed you in the Apostolic
Sea, and has granted you to be such in our days, as we ought rather to
fear that it should be imputed to us for a crime of negligence, if we should
conceal from your Reverence those things, which for the Church ought to be
represented to you; then to imagine that you can receive them disdainefully or
negligentlie; we beseech you to apply your pastoral diligence to the great
perils of the weak members of Christ: And toward the end; But we believe
with the help of the mercy of our God JESUS CHRIST (who vouchsafe to direct
you consulting with him, and to heart you praying to him) that those that hold
these opinions so perverse and pernicious, will more casilie yeilde to the
authority of your Holiness drawn from the authority of the holy
Scriptures? And why then when the same Pope INNOCENT answered both the
Counsels, did he testify to them, that they had behaved Int. ep. Aug. ep. 71.
Aug cont. (...) (...) (...) l. 2. c. 4.
themselves toward him in the same manner as all the other provinces had done
to his predecessors? It was not by human sentence, but divine (said that great
Pope in the answer to the Mileuitans Council inserted amongst saint Austins
Epistles, and cited by saint Austine himself in his writings against the
Pelagians) that the Fathers have ordained, that all things that are treated in
provinces distant and far of, should not be determined, till first they were
come to the knowledge of the Apostolic Sea; to the end that the sentence that
should be found to be just, might the confirmed by the entire authority of the
same Sea; and that from thence, the other Churches as Springes, all proceeding
from their mother source, and running with the purity of their original,
through the diverse Regions of the whole world might take what they ought to
ordain? And in the answer to the Mileuitan Council, which is also inserted
amongst saint AVSTINS Epistles: You provide (said he) diligently Inter epist.
Aug. ep. 93
and worthily for the Apostolic honor, for the honor I say of him, that
besides assaults from without, sustaines the care of all the Churches,
following in the consultation of difficult things, the form of the ancient
rule which you know has always been practiced by all the world with me: And a
while after, and princippally as often as there is question in points of
faith; I conceive all our brethren and Colleagues in the Bishops Sea, ought
not to referr what may profitt in common to all the Churches, to any but to
Peter, that is to say, to the author of their name and dignity. And why then
to take away all occasion from replying, that he spoke in his own cause, does
saint AUSTIN, so highly Aug. epist. 106.
praise both these answers? Upon this affair (says saint AVSTINE) were sent
the relations of the two Counsels of Carthage and Mileuis, to the Apostobick
Sea, etc. to all these things Pope INNOCENT answered us as was convenient, and
as the Prelate of the Apostolic Sea should answer us. And in the epistle to
Optatus; Of this new heresy, Pelagius and Celestius having been authors Epist.
(...).
or most violent and famous promoters, they also by the means of the
vigilancie of two Episcopal Counsels, with the help of God, who undertakes
the protection of his Church, have also been condemned in the extent of the
whole Christian world, by the Reverend Prelates of the Catholic Sea; yea even
by the number of two of them, Pope INNOCENT and Pope ZOZIMVS, if they correct
not themselves, and besides do not penance. And why then when the Africans had
held their last Council against Celestius, did Prosper write: under the
twelfth co^sulship of Prosp. in Chron.
Honorius and Theodosius; The decrees of the Council of Carthage of
214-Bishops were carried to Pope ZOZIMVS, which having been approved, the
Pelagian heresy was condemned throughout the world? And again Pope ZOZIMVS of
happy Idem. (...) Collat.
memory added the power of his sentence to the decrees of the African
Counsels, and to cut of the wicked, armed the right hands of all the Bishops
with Peter's sword: And in an other place, speaking of the Roman Church in
general: The Id. de voc. Gent. l 2. c. 6.
principallitie of the Apostolical priesthood, has made Rome greater by the
tribunal of Religion, then by that of the Empire? And why then when the
Bishops of Africa were assembled at Cesarea in Mauritania, does saint AUSTIN
Aug. epist. 157.
say: The necessities of the Church enjoined to us by the Reverend Pope
ZOZIMVS Bishop of the Apostolic Sea had drawn us to (...).

And why then when BRIXIVS Bishop of Tours, had been cast out of his Seat, and
JUSTINIAN created Bishop in his steed, and Armenius after him, had BRIXIVS
recourse to Rome to the same Pope Zozimus, that gave him letters of
re-establishment, upon which he was received and restored? BRIXIVS (says saint
GCEGORIE of Tours) transporting himself to Rome, related to the Pope all his
sufferinges. And a little after, Returning Greg. Tur. hist. l. 2.
then from Rome the seventh (...) with the authority of the Pope of the
cittis, he disposed his way to Tours.

And why then when Socrates, a Greek author of the same age with Zozimus,
produced examples of the translations of Bishops, did he allege in the head of
all the other examples, the translation of Perigenes Bishop of Patras, one of
the cities of Peloponesus, that the Pope commanded to be made Archbishop of
Corinth; And who also in his quality assisted at the Council of Ephesus?
Perigenes (says Socrates) had been ordained Bishop of Patras, but because the
citizens of Patras had not received him, the Bishop of Rome commanded Soc.
hist. eccl. l. 7. c. 36.
that he should be Bishop of the Metropolita^ Church of Corinth the Bishop of
that place being dead, in which Church also he governed all the days of his
life.

And why then when Pope Boniface successor to Zozimus was raised to the
Popedom, did S. AUSTIN write to him; Thou disdainest not to be a Aug. cont.
(...) (...) (...). c. (...)
(...) (...) the humble, though thou rulest more highly. And again; The
pastoral watch is common to us all that exercise the office of Bishops,
although thou art (...) in a more high degree.

And why then when Pope CELESTINE had succeeded in the Pontifical dignity to
Pope BONIFACE, did Prosper report, that he sent Prosp. in (...).
GERMAN the Bishop of Auxerra into Great Brittanie and made him his legate
there, and instituted Palladius first Bishop of Scotland? Pope Celestine (said
Prosper) at the instance of Palladius, sent German Bishop of Auxerra in his
(...), that casting out the heretics, he might address the Britains to the
(...) says: And again; Palladius was ordered and sent first Bishop by Pope
Celestine to the Scotts believing in Christ. And why then when Nestorius,
Archbishop of Constantinople, began to trouble the Faith of the Eastern
Church, did the same Pope Celestine make S. Cyrill Patriark of Alexandria his
Vicar in the East, to judge the cause of Nestorius, and appointed him to
excommunicate Nestorius, if within ten days after the receipt of the letters
from the Apostolic Sea, he did not anathematize his error? The authority of
our Sea (said he) being added to thee, and using with power the representation
of our (...) (...) (...). (...). (...). (...).
place, thou shall execute exactly and severely this sentence; to wit, that if
within ten (...) told, aster signification made to him of this admonition,
Nestorius (...) not his naughty doctrines, etc. thy Holiness providing
without delaie for that (...), shall declare him wholly cut of from our body.
And Prosper touching the Prosp. (...). (...).
same history; Celestine to cut of the Nestorian impiety, aided Cyrill the
Bishop of Alexandria, most glorious defendor of the faith, with the Apostolic
sword. And why then, when S. Cyrill had received the Popes admonition, did he
send to signify it to Nestorius, and to the Constantinopolitans in these
words: (...) are constrained to signify to him by Synodic all letters, that
if very speedily, and (...) (...) p. 1. c. 17.
within the time set down by the most holy Bishop of the Roman Church
Celestine, he renounce not his novelties and anathematize them by writing etc.
he shall no more have any part amongst the ministers of God. And for what
cause when Pope (...) was come in the age following to Constantinople, did the
Religious men of Syria pray him to do the same to Anthimus, Archbishop of
(...) We pray you (said they) to do to Anthimus, as Celestine did to
Nestorius, (...). Cost. sub Men.
assigning him a (...) as Celestine did to Nestorius.

And why then, when the Council of Ephesus proceeded to the condemnation of
Nestorius, did they couch it in these terms, Constrained necessarily (...).
(...) p. 2. act. 1.
by the (...) of the Canons, and by the letters of our most holy Father and
fellow minister (...), we are come not without many tears, to pronounce this
sad sentence against him? And why then when the Legates of the Pope were
arrived to the same Council of Ephesus did they thank the Bishops of the
Council, for having showed themselves true and holy members of the Pope. We
give thanks (said they) to this reverent Synod, that the letters of our Ibid.
act. 2
most holy and hlessed Pope, having been recited to you, you have by your
holy and religious voices showed your-selues holy members, to your holy
head: for your (...) is not ignorant, that saint Peter was the head of all the
faith, and of all the Ibid.
Apostles: And again, none doubts for it has been notorious in all ages,
that the holy and most blessed Peter, Prince and head of the Apostles, pillar
of the faith, foundation of the Catholic Church, did receive from our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, the (...) of the heavenly Kingdom, and the power to bind and
loose sins, and that (...) (...) and decides causes yet unto this day, and
for all eternity by his Successors: of (...) then the holy Successor and
ordinary Vicar, and most blessed Pope and Bishop Celestine has sent us for
him as his Lieutenant to this holy (...). And why then when there was a
question to pass from the cause of Nestorius, to that of John Patriark of
Antioch did IVVENALL Bishop of (...) say in presence of the whole Council,
that the ancient custom, and the Apostolic tradition have been, that the
Church of (...) was to be judged by the Roman? It is fit (said he) that the
Right (...) Ibid. part. act. 4.
Bishop of Antioch, John, honoring this great holy and (...) all Council,
should have recourse hither to justify himself of what is objected against
him, and that he should obey and honor the Apostolic Throne of great Rome
(sittinge with us and with the Apostolic Throne of Jerusalem) before which
principally it is accustomed by Apostolic tradition and practice, that the
Seat of Antioch is to be ruled and judged. For that we must referr the last
clause of the period of IVVENALL to the Sea of Rome, as (...) has done,
(deceauing himself with this that the word to obey gouernes the dative, and
not considering In chap. 29
that the verb to honor which is there added, changes the Rule) it shall be
showed hereafter by seaue^ necessary and undoubted proofs. And why then,
when the Council proceeded indeed to the cause of JOHN Patriark of Antioch,
did they reserve the decision to the Pope? Ibid. act. 5.
Being moved (writes the Council to the Pope) with the indignity of the thing
we would pronounce against him and the rest the same sentence that he had
unlawfully pronounced against those, which were convinced of noe crime: but to
the end to conquerr his rashness with meekness; although he had most justly
deserved to suffer such a sentence, yet we have reserved him to the judgment
of thy piety. Which afterward the third oecumenicall Council of
Constantinople did imitate in the cause of Macarius Patriark of Antioch, as the
Emperor Constantine Pogonat Co^t. Constable 6. act. 18.
reports in these words: Macarius Bishop of Antioch and his adherents have
been deposed by the consent of the whole Council, and remitted to the
discretion of the most holy Pope?

And why then when HILARIE Bishop of Arles undertook to ordain Prelates in
the province of Vienna, without the Popes leave, did the Emperor Valentinian
the third make a law, which afterward the Emperor Theodosius the second
inserted into his new constitutions, under the title of the law of Theodosius
and Valentinian; by which he forbadd that any invocation should be made in the
Church without the Popes license? Constit. Nou.
Whereas (says the law) the merit of Peter who is the Prince of the
Episcopal society, and the dignity of the city of Rome, and the authority
of the sacred Synod, Theod. and Valent. (...) 24.
have so established the primacie of the Apostolic Sea; as presumption should
attempt nothing unlawful against the authority thereof; for so the peace of
Churches shall be maintained by all, if the universality acknowledge her
Rector: And a little after, We decree by a perpetual ordinance, that it shall
not be lawful, either for the Bishops of the Gauls, or those of other
provinces, to attempt any thing against the ancient custom, without the
authority of the Reverend Pope of the eternal city: but to them and to all,
those things shall be laws which have been ordained, or shall be ordained by
the authority of the Apostolic Sea; in such sort, as whatsoever Bishop,
being called to the judgment of the Pope of Rome, shall neglect to present
himself, he shall be constrained by the Governor of the province, to appear.
For to object, that Prosper for all this attempt, did call HILARIE Bishop of
Arles a Saint, it had been somewhat, if between HILARIES attempt and his
death, there had been noe penance interposed: but so far was HILARIE from
persisting in this crime to the end of his days, that he went himself to make
personal satisfaction to the Pope: He undertook Author (...) (...) (...)
(...) apud (...) (...). l. 15 c. 38.
(says the author of his life reported by Cuias) a journey to `Rome on foot,
and entered into the Town without a horse or any beast of carriage, and
presented himself to Pope Leo, reverently offering him obedience, and
requiring with humility that he might ordain of the estate of the (...),
after the accustomed manner, etc. nevertheless, if it were not his will, he
would not importune him: And again; He applied himself wholly, to appease the
spirit of Leo, with a prostrate humility.

And why then, when Eutyches who lived in the time of the same Emperors,
pretended that he had appealed from Flauianus Archbishop of Constantinople to
Pope Leo, did not Flauianus dispute that he could not appeal, but that he had
not appealed? Eutyches (says Pope Leo, writing to (...) ep. 8.
(...)) affirms, that in full judgment he pretended you a request of appeal,
and it was not received; by which means he was constrained to make acts of
protestation in the city of Constantinople. And Flauianus answering Leo;
Eutyches In epist. (...) (...). (...)
(said he) has informed you, that in the time of judgment, he pretended to
us, and to the holy Council here assembled, libells of appeal, and that he
appealed to your (...), which was never done by him. And again; Moved then
most holy Father with all these attempts of his, and with those which have
been done, and are done against us, and against the holy Church, do you work
confidently according to your wonted courage, as it belongs to the priesthood,
and making the common cause, and the discipline of the holy Churches, your
own; vouchsafe to confirm by your writings, the condemnation which has been
regularlie made against him. And for what (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
cause did the Council of Chalcedon embrace the judgment that the Pope had
given against Eutyches after the sentence of Flauianus his own Bishop, as
given by a competent judge, and attributed the final deposition of Eutyches to
the Popes judgment? By the decrees of his tyranny (said the Council of
Chalcedon, writing to the Pope, and speaking pf the attemptes that Dioscorus
had made in the false Council of Ephesus) he has (...) (...) innocent, and
bath restored to him the dignity, whereof he was deprived by your Holiness.
And why then when Peter Chrissologus Bishop of (...) writ to the same
Eutyches, the Epistle which is annexed to the front of all the Greek and Latin
acts of the Council of Chalcedon, did In epist. (...). (...). (...)
he say; We exhort thee in these things Reverend Brother, to lend an obedient
attention, to the letters of the most holy Pope of the city of Rome, for
as much as the blessed Peter, who lives and rules in his own Seat, exhibits
the true faith, to those that seek it; for we for the desire we have of peace
and faith, cannot hear matters of faith, without the consent of the Bishop of
Rome?

And why then, when Theodoret Bishop of Tire a town near Persia, and subject
to the Patriark of Antioch, had been deposed in the false Council of Ephesus,
did he appeal to the Pope? I attend (said Theodoret in his letter Theod. ep.
ad Leon.
to Pope Leo) the sentence of your Apostolic Throne, and beseech your
Holiness to succor me, appealing to your right and just judgment, and
command that I transport myself to you, and verify that my doctrine follows
the Apostolic stepps. And for what cause did Flauianus Bishop of
Constantinople, having been deposed by the same Council, appeal to the same
Pope? We ought (said the Emperor Valentinian the third writing to Theodosius
the second Emperor of the East) to preserve inviolable in our days, the
dignity of particular Reverence to the blessed Apostle Peter, that the holy
Bishop of Rome, to whom antiquity (...). (...) (...) (...)
has attributed the priesthood above all, may have place to judge in matters
of says, and of the Bishops, etc. for therefore, according to the custom of
Counsels, the Bishop of Constantinople, had appealed to him, in the contention
which is risers (...) (...). c. 12.
about points of Faith: and Liberatus Archdeacon of Carthage: Flauianus (says
he, the sentence having been pronounced against him) appealed to the
Apostolic Sea, by petition presented to his Legates? For to say as the Popes
adversaries do, that the acts of the falfe Council of Ephesus, which were
read again in the Council of Chalcedon, only bare, that Flauianus said to
Dioscorus, I appeal from thee, without saying; I appeal from thee, to the
Pope; Who knows not, that those acts, as it was represented to the Council
of Chalcedon, had been all falsified by Dioscorus, who had put in and put out
(...) (...) (...).
what he listed, making the Bishops sign by force to blanckes? They have (...)
us violence with wounds (said the Bishops of the East, to the Council of
Chalcedon) we have signed blanckes? And Eusebius Bishop of Dorilaus reporting
Eusebius. Doryl. in Conc.
the same history, to the council of Cbalcedon; Dioscorus (said he) inserted
in the acts, things that were never spoken, and constrained the Bishops to
sign to blanckes. Chalc. act. 3.


And besides the exhibition that Flauianus made of his Petition of apppeale
Leo. ep 23. and Liberat. c. 12.
to the Popes Legates, and the opposition that the Popes Legates made for him
against Dioscorus, and against all the Council, as soon as Act. pseudo sinod.
he had appealed; and the appeal that Theodoret the neighboring bishop to
Persia, and companion in Flauianus condemnation putin from the same Ephesians.
(...). in Co^c Chalc. act. 1.
council to the Pope, resisting and making his appeal be judged of before
the Pope; does it not sufficiently manifest, that it was to the Pope, that
Flauianus appealed. Thedor. ep ad Leon. and Co^c. Chalc act. 1.


Moreoner, how had Flauianus in saying simply I appeal from thee, made it
understood, that it was to an oecumenicall council, that he apealed; since,
the council wherein Dioscorus condemned him, took also in condemning Conc.
Ephesians. 2 relect: in Co^c. Chalc act 1.
him, the little of oecumenicall, and had been assembled by the Emperor
THEODOSIUS the second in the quality of oecumenicall and after confirmed as
oecumenicall; and that to be truly oecumenicall, there Lex Theodos. Conc. Chalc
part 3 c. 19.
wanted nothing of the number and plenitude of Bishops, but the only authority
of the Pope, which was distracted from it, by the separation of his Legates,
whereof some were fledd, and the rest remained out of their rank, and amongst
the press? Contrariwise, that all the Patriarchs of the earth, and all the
principal metropolitans, and Bishops of their Patriarkshipps, were there, and
that there wanted of the Patriarchs none but the Pope alone; is it not a
sufficient proof, that Flauianus saying, I appeal and presenting his libell
of appeal to the Popes Legates, and the Popes Legates, protesting at the same
tymt, an opposition against the sentence from which he appealed, that it was to
the Pope that he appealed, though the Emperor VALENTINIAN had not also said
these express words; The Bishop of Constantinople, according to the custom
of counsels, has appealed to the Pope: and Liberatus these; Flauianus
sentence having been pronounced against Idem.
him, appealed to the Sea Apostolic? For to object, that the Pope did not
retain the judgment of the cause entirely, but desired, it might be judged in
a page 118. 19.
general council; have we not already said, that the Popes custom after
appeals, was to do two things; one to judge of the validity or inualidity of
the appeal: and in case of validity, to annull the first judgment, and
restore by provision, the Appellant to his former Estate. The other, after he
had annulled the first sentence, to ordain to proceed to a second judgment;
and in case that the Pope would not take the pains to examine it himself, then
not to vex parties, to give them judges, either sent from Rome, or taken by
commission from Rome out of those parts; or in case of danger of schism
between the two Empires, to decree that the cause should be judged, his legates
being present in an oecumenicall council? Now did not Pope Leo do this in the
cause of Flauianus? for first did he not declare the appeal to be lawful,
abrogating and annulling the judgment of Dioscorus, and the false council of
Ephesus, against Flauianus, and setting things in the same estate they where
before, that is to say, restoring Flauianus even after his title of Bishop of
Constantinople, and excommunicating all those that did not communicate to his
memory, and that without staying till the Council of Chalcedon was holden?

And secondly, did he not ordain that to pass to a new judgment (where all
the proceedings of Dioscorus, and of the false council of Ephesus against
Flauianus, might again be put to the trial, and when Dioscorus, if he
persisted in his contumacy might be used according to his deserte) the holding
a general council should be procured, that the matter might be judged under
the eye of the Legates, with the knowledge and satisfaction of all the world;
for that the Pope and the Council of Rome, prayed (...). 23.
the Emperor of the East, to command, that all things might be set in the
same state, wherein they were before judgment, till a greater number of
Bishops might be called together from all parts of the world; was In chap. 37.
in regard of the temporal laws; for as much as a little while before, the
Emperor of the East, a Prince that signed as shall appear hereafter
Dispatches without reading them, and whose favor Chrisaphius the Eutychian The
law of the Emp. Theod. 2. reported at the end of the acts of the council of
Chalecedon part. 3.
abused had made a law in his Empire, by which he confirmed the false council
of Ephesus, which he believed to be oecumenicke, and the deposition of
Flauianus; and ordained that all those that in the East should hold the
doctrine of Flauianus, that is to say doctrine contrary to Eutyches heresy,
should be either excluded, or dispossessed from their Bishoprics, and their
books publicly burnt, and their adherents punished with confiscation of goods,
and perpetual banishment.

For these causes then, the Pope and the council of Rome, prayed the Emperor
of the East, to revoke this law, and to command, that all things in regard of
temporal jurisdiction, might be set in the same state as they were before; but
not that in regard of spiritual and Ecclesiastical authority, the false
council of Ephesus was already disannulled by the decree of the Council of
Rome, and so disannulled as Anatolius, that had been made Bishop of
Constantinople in the false Council of Ephesus, was feign to renounce the
Doctrine of Eutyches, and of the same Council of Ephesus, and the communion of
Dioscorus, and to restore the memory of Flauiannus into the records of his
Church, and the rest of the East that ^p. Paleb. Imp^^. ^^d (...) Chal^
would return to the communion of the Pope, were feign to do the same, and
this before the Council of Chalcedon. Anatolius (says the Emperesse Pulcheria
writing to Pope Leo, long before the Council of Chalcedon) has embraced the
Apostolic confession of your letters, rejecting the error that was lately
advanced by some, as your Holiness may see by his answer. And Pope LEO
himself in the first Epistle to Anatholius Bishop of Constantinople written
six months before the Council of Chalcedon, Your charity (...) ^p. 38
must (said he) observe in regard of silencing the names of Dioscorus,
Iuuenall, and ^^^^athius at the holy altar, that which our Legates in those
places told you, ought to be done, and which shall not be repugnant to the
honorable memory of saint Flauianus. And in the second Epistle to the same
Anatolius written four months before the Council of Chalcedon, Remember
(said he) to keep this (...) (...) (...) (...) 44.
rule, that all those that in the Synod of Ephesus, which neither could obtain
nor deserve the name of a Synod, and wherein Dioscorus showed his corrupted
will, and Iuu^nall his ignorance, etc: are grieved for having been overcome
with fear, and for suffering themselves to be forced to consent to that most
abominable judgment; and desire to be received to the Catholic communion,
let brotherly peace be restored to them after competent satisfaction; provided
that they condemn and anathematize by an undoubted able Eutiches with his
doctrine and his Sect. But as for those that have more grievously offended, in
this case etc. (he means Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, and Juuenall
Bishop of Jerusalem and their accomplices) if they perchance come to an
acknowledgment, and abandonning their own defense, convert themselves to
condemn their own error, and that their satisfaction shall be such, as it
shall not seem fit to be rejected, let that be reserved to the more mature
deliberation of the (...) Apostolic.

And indeed that it was not by virtue of any appeal of Flauianus to the
Council, that the Council of Chalcedon, which likewise had never been held
but for the Pope, judged of Flauianus cause but in virtue of Flauianus appeal
to the Pope, and the Popes commission to the council, for the complete reuiew
of the cause, three things show it,

First, the Canon upon which, Pope Leo grounded his procuring a Council after
an appeal, was a Canon of the Council of Sardica, concerning appeals to the
Pope; The decrees (said he, writing to the Emperor Leo ad Theodos. ep. 23.
Theodosius) of the canons made at Nicea, which have been decreed by the
Prolates of the universal world, and whose copies are heereunto annexed,
witness that after the putting in of an appeal, the seeking a Synod is
necessary. For the Canon annexed to that letter in the greek acts of the
Council of Chalcedon, is Ca^. annex. ep. Leo. ad Theod in act grec. Co^c.
Chalc and in manuser. grec. libl regle Lupar. Co^c. Chalc act. 3 and Euang. l.
2. c. 4.
a Canon of the Council of Sardica, though incorrectly transcribed by those
that copied it; which Canon Pope Leo calls a Canon of the Counsel of Nicea for
as much as the Council of Sardica had been as a Seal and an Appendix, to the
Council of Nicea.

The second, that when the Popes legates in the Council of Chalcedon,
pronounced their judgment upon the punishment that Dioscorus should incurr,
they pronounced it in these words: And therefore the most holy and blessed
Archbishop of the great and ancient Rome, Leo, has by us, and by this present
synod, together with the thrice blessed and worthy of all praise, the Apostle
Peter, who is the rock and pillar of the Catholic Church, and the foundation
of the right faith, deposed Dioscorus from all dignity, as well Episcopal as
Sacerdotall.

And the third that when the Emperors confirmed in the secular tribunal, the
same Council of Chalcedon, to make it temporally executory, they testified
that it was by the Popes authority that it had judged the cause of Flauianus:
The synod of Chalcedon (said the law) by the authority of (...). Marc. in
Cono. Chalc. part 3. c. 11.
the most blessed Bishop of the City eternal in glory, Rome; examining
exactly matters of Faith, and strengthening the foundation of Religion,
attributed to Flauianus the reward of his past life, and the palm of a
Glorious death. Now how is this any other thing, but to say that which Pope
Gelasius writ forty years after in these words: The sea Apostolic
delegated the Council of Chalcedon Gelas. de Anath. Vin cull.
to be made for the common faith, and the Catholic and Apostolic truth. And
again, Flauianus having been condemned by the Congregation of the Greek
Bishops, the sea Apostolic alone, because he had not consented thereunto,
absolved him; and contrary wise by his authority condemned Dioscorus Prelate
of the second sea, who had there been approved, and alone annulled the wicked
synod, in not consenting to it; and alone by his authority ordained, that the
Council of Chalcedon should be kept? But things incident, carry us away, let
us again return to our careere.

And why then when the Council of Chalcedon was open, was the first complaint
that was made against Dioscorus patriark of Alexandria that he had presumed to
undertake to keep a general Council, and to be President there without
commission from the Pope: Upon which complaint also Dioscorus came down from
this Patriarkall seat, wherein he was Conc.
first set, and stood in the midst of the place, as an accused party, and
Chalc. act. 1.
not as judge? We have in our hands (said Paschasinus Bishop of Lylibea in
Sicilia, and Legate from the Pope, speaking to the Council) the commaundments
of the blessed and Apostolic Prelate of the City of Rome, who is the head
of all Churches: whereby he vouchsaffed to ordain prouisionallie, that
Dioscorus sit not in the council, and that if he attempt it, that he should be
cast out. And Lucentius Ibid.
Bishop of (...) also the Popes Legate; Dioscorus (said he) must yield an
account of judgment, for as much as having noe right to do the office of a
judge, be attempted it, and presumed to hold a Synod without the authority of
the sea Apostolic, which never has been lawful, nor never was done; And
Euagrius, in the narration of the history of the Council; The senate (says he)
having (...) of the legates from Leo, what charge there was against Dioscorus;
they (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...), that he must yield an account of his own judgment, because against
might, (...) had usurped the person of a Judge, without the Bishop of Romes
permission After which answer, ` Dioscorus by the senats judgment, stood in
the (...) of the place.

And why then when Theodoret Bishop of Cyre a city as, has been said, in the
confines of Persia had been restored by Pope Leo from the Deposition of the
Council of Ephesus from whence he had appealed to him, did the Emperors
Officers (who assisted in the Council of Chalcedon to cause (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...)
order to be observed) proclayme. Let the Right Reverend Bishop (...) come in,
that he may have part in the Synod; because the most holy Archbishop (...) bath
(...) him to his `Bishopricke, and that (supplied upon this restitution) the
most sacred and religious Emperor has ordained, that he shall assist in the
holy (...) For that the Emperor had made himself the Executor of the Popes
authority in this Council, it appears by the protestations he had made of it
a little before in these words: We conceived that we ought first to (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)
address ourselves to thy Holiness, who have the superintendance and
principality of Faith: And again Our desire is, that peace should be restored
to the Churches by this Council celebrated under thy authority.

And why then when the Priests and deacons of Alexandria, presented their
Petitions against Dioscorus in the Council of Chalcedon, did they couch them
in these terms; all the Council seeing and approving it, and ordayning that
they should be registered in the Acts: To the most holy, and most blessed
Archbishop and Universal Patriarcke Leo, and to the most holy and (...)
Council? For as for the instance that the Bishop of Constantinople made
afterward, to participate in this title under the Pope, and in second place
after the Pope, as Constantinople being a second Rome it shall be spoken of
hereafter.

And why then when Paschasinus the Popes Legate, gave his voice upon In chap.
14.
the deposition of Dioscorus did he say; That the Pope had pardoned all those,
who in the false Council of Ephesus, had by force consented to Dioscorus, that
is to (...), to almost all the Metropolitans and Patriarchs of the Eastern
Empire? The (...) Apostolic (says he) graunts them pardon for those things,
that they committed (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
there against their wills for as much as they have remained unto this time,
adhering to the most holy Archbishop Leo, and to the holy and universal
Council.

And why then when the acts of the false Council of Ephesus, were in the
Council of Chalcedon annulled, did Anatolius. Bishop of Constantinople
pronounce, that of all that had been done in the Council of Ephesus, nothing
ought to remain entire, but the election of Maximus Bishop of Antioch, for as
much as that had been confirmed by the Pope? My voice (said he) is, that (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)
none of the things ordained by the pretended Council of Ephesus shall remain
firm, concept that which was done for Maximus Bishop of great Antioch, for as
much as the most holy Archbishop of Rome Leo, receiving him into his communion,
has judged that he ought to rule the Church of Antioch. From whence it is
also, that the same (...), who had been created Archbishop of Constantinople in
the false Council of Ephesus, held not his Archbishopricke from the false
Council of Ephesus, but from the confirmation of the sea (...), as Pope Leo
writing to the Emperor Marcian puts him in mind (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
in these Words: It should have sufficed him, that by the consent of my
favor, (...) (...) (...) the Bishopric of so great a City.

And why then when the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon framed that famous
relation to Pope Leo (which is not only inserted in all the (...) and latin
Acts of the Western and Eastern libraries, but also is cited by the Greek
Schismatickes and amongst others by Nilus Arch Nil. de primat. l. (...).
bishop of Tessalonica in his Book against the Pope) did they write to him,
that he had ruled in the Council as the head to the members, and that the
Emperors had presided there, to cause order to be observed, that is to avoid
such murders and tumultes, as happened in the false Council of Ephesus: And
put a like difference between the Popes Presidencie, and the Emperors; as
between the Presidencie of Jesus the high priest of the Sinagogue, and that of
Zorobabel prince of the Jewish people in the building Co^c. Chalc relat. ad
Leon.
of the Temple: You presided (the Council writ to the Pope) in 'this
assembly, as the head does to the members, contributing your good pleasure by
those that (...) your place; and the faithful Emperor presided, to cause order
to be observed; striving jointly with you, as Zorobabel with Jesus, to renew in
the doctrine, the building of the Ecclesiastical Jerusalem.

And why then when they came to touch in their relation, the fact of Dioscorus
Patriarch of Alexandria, did they call the Presidencie which he had usurped in
the false Council of Ephesus without the Popes commission TYRANNY: and accused
him, to have attempted even against him, to whom the guard of the vine had been
committed, that is, against the Ibid.
Pope? By the decrees of his tyranny (says the relation of the Council to the
Pope) he has declared Eutiches innocent, and that dignity which had been taken
from him by your Holiness, as from a man unworthy of such grace, he has
restored it to him: And again; And after all these things he has extended his
felony even against him to whom the guard of the vine has been committed by
our Savior, to wit, against your Holiness?

And why then when they prayed the Pope to approve the decree, by which they
gave the second rank, to the Archbishop of Constantinople did they beseech
him, that as they had corresponded with him that was their head when there was
question of Faith, so his sovereignty would gratify them in what concerned
discipline, using to express the spiritual sovereignty of the Pope by the
same word (...) which had been used to express the temporal sovereignty of
the Emperors? We have also (said In Conc. Chalc. act. 1. ep. 14.
they) confirmed the canon of the 150. Fathers assembled at Constantinople
under the great Theodosius of Religious memory, which ordaines that after your
most holy and Apostolical Throne, that of Constantinople should have the order
of honor, moved with this, that the Apostolic beam reigning amongst you, you
according Co^c. Chalc relat. ad Leon.
to your ordinary government do often spread it toward the Church of
Constantinople, because you have accustomed to enrich without envy your
posterity (that is to say, the Church of Constantinople, which was extracted
from the blood and lineage of that of Rome) with the participation of your
goods: And again; We beseech you, then to honor our judgment with your
decrees, and that as in what concerns the weal, we have brought
correspondencie to our head, so your Sovereignty will perform Ibid.
in the behalf of your children, that which concerns comeliness.

And why then when Pope Leo refused to approve this decree, were the Emperor
Marcian and Anatolius Patriarch Constantinople in whose favor it had been
propounded, constrained to forbear it, and to leave the business then without
effect, as it appears by these words of Pope Leo ad Aha^t. ep. 96.
Leo to Anatolius: This thy fault, which to augment thy power thou have
committed, as thou say by the exhortation of others, thy charity had blotted
out better and more sincerely, if thou (...) not imputed to the only Council
of thy Clergy, that which could not be attempted, without thy goodwill, etc.
But I am gladd, dear brother, that thy charity protests, thou art now
displeased with that which even then ought not to have pleased thee: It
suffices to re-enter into common grace, the profession of thy love, and the
testimony of the Christian Prince, and let not his correction seem slow,
that has gotten so reverent a surety? And why then when Anastasius Bishop of
Thessalonica and the Popes Vicar in Macedanico, Achaia, and other Greek
Provinces near Constantinople, had abused the authority of his Vicarship
against Atticus Bishop of Nicopolis and Metropolitan of the aunciet Fpirus, did
Pope Leo write to him; We have in such sort committed our Leo ad. Anatt cp. 82.
vicarship to thy charity, as thou art called to a part of the care, and not
to the fullness of the power: And toward the end: It has been `prouided by a
grand Order, that all should not attribute to themselves all things; but that
in every province there should be some, whose sentence might hold first rank;
and again, that some others constituted in the greater Cities, might use the
more diligence, that by them the care of the universal Church might flow to
the only seat of Peter?

And why then when Ceretius and the other French-Bishops, congratulated Pope
Leo for the instruction of the Faith, that he had sent into the Int ep. Leo^
post cp. 49.
East, did they write to him; By good right, the principality of the sea
Apostolic has been constituted in the place from whence there spring forth
still the oracles of the Apostolical Spirit?

And why then when the Emperors Leo and Maioranus, had succeeded the Emperor
Marcian, under whom the Council of Chalcedon was kept, did the Emperor
Maioranus residing amongst the Gauls, decree by an express law, that every
Bishop that should ordain a clerk against his (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
will, should be called before the Pope? If any Bishop (says the law) (...)
dispense with himself in this respect, let him be called before the Prelate of
the Sea Apostolic, that in that reverent Seat, he may incur the note of
his lawless presumption.

And why then (when the Emperor Zeno, Leo's successor, had caused John surnamed
Talaia to be cast out from the Alexandrian, Sea, and set Peter surnamed Mongus
in his place) did John appeal to the Pope, who deposed Peter his adversary,
and Acacius Patriarch of Constantinople that adhered to him? John (says
Liberatus an Affrican author, and of near eleven (...). in (...). c. 16.
hundred years antiquity) addressed bimselfe to Calandion Patriarch of
Antioch, and having taken from him Synodicall letters of intercession, appealed
to the Vict. Tun. in Zen.
Pope of Rome Simplicius. And Victor of Tunes, an author of the same time, and
Country: after the consulship of the most noble Longinus, (...) Bishop of
Constantinople Peter Bishop of Alexandria, and Peter Bishop of Antioch, enemies
to the Council of Chalcedon, were condemned by Felix (...) (...). (...).
(...). (...). 18.
Prelate of the Roman Church; and by a Synod held in Italy, and the
condemnation sent to Constantinople to Acacius. And Euagrius a greek author
somewhat later; John having taken his flight, and being come to Rome
represented to Felix the successor of Simplicius, the things that Peter had
done, and persuaded Felix to send a sentence of deposition to Acacius, for the
Communion he had with Peter. For though Zachary an Eutychian author write,
that Acacius who was supported by the Emperor Zeno a complice of his heresy,
despised Vict. Tun. in Zen.
this deposition. From whence it is, that Victor of Tunes says, that Peter and
Acacius died in condemnation; nevertheless, the Popes Sentence had in the end
such effect, as both their names, to wit, Peter Patriark of Alexandria and
Acacius Bishop of Constantinople, they being already dead were raced out of
the Records of their Churches, and out of the catalogue of the Patriarchs of
Alexandria, and Constantinople, and excluded from recital in the mysteries.

And why then when Hunericus, King of the Vandalls, would needs press
Eugenius Archbishop of Carthage to enter into conference with the Arrians, did
Eugenius (reported by Victor of Vtica) answer him, that (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...)
he might not enter into those listes, without the consent of other Churches,
and namely of the Roman Church, which is the head of all Churches? Let the King
(said Eugenius) write to his friends, and I will written my (...) that our
colleagues may come, who with us may show you our common faith, and principally
the Roman Church, which is the head of all Churches.

And why then when Fulgentius an African Bishop of the same time, and the other
Bishop, of Africa assembled with him made their answer to Peter a deacon and
deputy of the East, did they say to him; The Roman Church which is the topp of
the world, enlightened with two great lights Peter and Fulg. de incarn. and
great. c. (...).
Paul, (...) it is so? And why then when the Emperor Anast asius, Zeno's
successor, solicited Macedonius Patriark of Constantinople to suppress in the
service of his Church, the memory of the Council of Chalcedon, did Macedonius
answer him, that he could not do it without a general Counsel Theod. Anagn.
ad calc. hist. eccl. Theo. in edit. Robert. Steph
presided by the Pope? The Fmperor Anast asius (says Theodorus Anagnostes)
pressed Macedonius to abrogate the Council of Chalcedon, but Macedonius
answered him he could not do it, without a general Council, wherein the
Bishop of Rome must be President.

And why the^ when the Bishops of the Eastern Church banded themselves against
the preuarication of their Patriark Acacius did they write to Ep. Orient, ad
Sym int Orthodoxogr. impr. Basil. to. 2.
Pope Symachus; Thou art every day taught by thy sacred Doctor Peter, to feed
the sheep of Christ, which are committed to thee throughout the habit able
earth, not constrained by force but willingly, thou that with the most learned
Paul cryest out to all thy subjects, we do not rule over you in faith, but
cooperate with you in joy.

And why then when Vitalianus a Scithia^ had rebelled against the Emperor
Anastasius because he persecuted the Catholics, and had borne arms at the
gates of Constantinople, did Victor of Tunes say, He would never promise Vict.
Tun. in Anest.
peace to the Emperor, but upon condition, that he should restore to their
Seats, those that had been banished for defending the Council of Chalcedon,
and should unite all the Churches of the East with the Roman Church. And why
then when Justin a Catholic Prince had succeeded the Emperor Anastasius, did
he cause Pope Felix sentence to be executed against Peter Patriark of
Alexandria, and Acacius Patriark of Constantinople, and made their names be
razed even after their deaths, out of the records of their Churches, and Joan.
Patr. Constable. ep. ad Hormis.
from the recital in the mysteries? We anathematize (says John Patriark of
Constantinople in an epistle to Pope Hormisdas) Timothy the parricide surnamed
Aelurus, and we condemn likewise Peter of Alexandria his disciple, and
partaker in all things; and we also anathematize Acacius sometimes Bishop of
this city of Constantinople, etc. and we promise here after not to recite in
the sacred mysteries, the names of those that are excluded from the communion
of the Catholic Church; that is to say, that consent not fully with the Sea
Apostolic. And the Emperor Just. ep. ad Hormisd.
Justin in his epistle to the same Pope; We have given order, that the reverend
Church of Constantinople, and many others, should accomplish your desire, not
only in other things, but also in razing the names that you have required to be
taken away from the sacred records. And a while after praying the Pope, that
he would be content, that the names of those only, which had been condemned by
name by the Sea Apostolic, should be blotted out, without exacting the racing
of those that had communicated with the^, for the difficulty that there would
be in razing the names of so many Bishops to be taken away out of the records
of their churches; We ask noe grace (said he) for the names of Acacius, nor
for either the one Peter, or the other (that is to say, Peter Patriark of
Antioch, and Peter Patriark of Alexandria) nor for Dioscorus, nor Timothy of
whom your Holiness letters addressed to us, made special mention; but of
those that the Episcopal reucrence has celebrated in other cities. And
Victor of Tunes; The Vict. Tun. Chron, in Just.
Emperor Justin (says he) reunited those of the East under worthy
satisfaction to the Prelates of the West, except the evil Bishops (for it must
be read prauos, and not paruos) which died blinded with their ancient error, to
wit, Acacius late Bishop of Constantinople, Peter Bishop of Antioch, and Peter
Bishop of Alexandria; and caused the decrees of the Council of Chalcedon to be
revived, that had been banished by the Emperors Zeno and Anastasius.

And why then when the Emperor Justinian, nephew and successor to Justine was
come to the Empire near eleven hundred years ago, did he make profession to
acknowledge the Pope for he head of all the Churches? We preserve, (said he in
the law to Epiphanius Patriarch of Constantinople,) Paris. (...) and (...).
(...). 1. l. 7.
the Estate of the unity of the most holy Churches in all things, with the
moct holy Pope of the ancient Rome, to whom we have written the like; because
we will not suffer any thing to pass concerning the affairs of the Church,
which shall not be also referred to his Blessedness, for as much as he is the
head of all the holy Prelates of God: And in the law, Inter claras, where the
Epistle of the same Emperor to the Pope, and the expedition of Hipatius and
Demetrius his Legates to the Pope against Cirus, and Eulogius Legates for the
Acaemites, so were certain Religious men of Constantinople called because of
their long watches; is inserted; We will not suffer (said he) that any thing
shall be treated of belonging to the state of the Churches, Cod. tit. 1. l. 8.
though (...) and manifest, which shall not also be referred to your
Holiness, who are the head of all the Churches. For as for the shifts of
those that not being able to avoid the law, Inter claras, strive to make it
suspected for false, I will not stay to confute them. It suffices that the
defense of those two great Oracles of Themis, Alciat and Cuias have, made of
this law; and (...). (...). l. 4. c. 23.
the authentical copy which is to be found in the Greek Basiliques,
beginning with these words, (...): And the (...) (...). l. 12. c. 16.
history that Liberatus an African author of the same time reports of it when
he says; Hypatius Bishop of Ephesus, and Demetrius Bishop of (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...). 20.
Philippi, were sent by the Emperor Justinian to Pope John surnamed Mercury, to
consult with the Sea Apostolic against Cyrus and Eulogius deputed by the
Acaemites, etc. but Pope John, (we being then present at Rome) confirmed the
Imperial confession by an Epistle of his, and addressed it to the Emperor, And
the testimony that Justinian himself gives it in the Cod. tit. 1. l. 7.
law to Epiphanius, and in the Epistle to Pope Agapet and the old greek Int.
epist. A gap. tom. 1. cp. Romans
paratitles translated and published by Leunclauius a protestant lawyer, which
reckon for the eight law of the Code, the Emperor Justinians Epistle (...).
to the Pope, and the Popes answer to him, stopp their mouths that (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...).
think to call it in question. And yet less will I stand to solue this, that
Justinian, in the law Constautinopolitana writes, that the Church of
Constantinople is the head of all the other Churches. For it shall be showed
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
hereafter, that he speaks of the other Churches of the jurisdiction of
Constantinople which are treaetd of in the law; and not of the other
Patriarkall Churches, amongst which Justinian never attributed but the second
rank to the Church of Constantinople, as it appears by the Nouel. (...).
where he says; We ordain (following the definitions of the four first
Counsels) that the holy Pope of the ancient Rome, is to be first of all
Prelates; and that the most Blessed Archbishop of Constantinople, or new Rome,
shall have the second place after the holy Sea Apostolic of old Rome, and
shall be preferred before all the other Seas.

And why then when Epiphanius was dead, and that Anthymus Bishop of Trebisond
had been made Patriark of Constantinople in his steed, did Anthymus oblige
himself by protestation written to all the other Patriarchs, (...) Cost (...)
Men. act 4.
to obey the Pope? Anthymus (says the Council of Constantinople held under
Menas) promises to do all that the Archbishop of the great Sea Apostolic
should ordain; and writ to the most holy Patriarchs, that he would in all
things follow the Sea Apostolic.

And why the^ when Pope Agapet was a while after arrived at Constantinople, did
he depose the same Anthymus Patriark of Constantinople, and then even in
Constantinople, and in the sight of the Emperor Justinian that favored him,
and excommunicated the Empress Theodora his wife, who did obstinately
maintain him; and ordained Menas priest of Constantinople Patriarch in his
steed? Agapet (says Marcellinus Comes an author of the same In Chron
time) being come from Rome to Constantinople, drove away Anthymus soon after
his arrival, from the Church, saying; that according, to the (...) rule he was
an adulterer, because he had left his Church, and had unlawfully procured
another; and ordained the priest Menas Bishop in his room: And Liberatus one
(...) in (...). c. 12.
likewise of the same time with Marcellinus Comes, says; The Empress in
secret promising great presents to the Pope, if he would leave Anthymus in his
(...); and on the other side proouing him with threats, the Pope persisted not
to (...) to her demand: And Anthymus seeing he was cast out of his Seat, gave
up his Mantle to the Emperor, and retired himself where the Empress took him
into her protection, and then the Pope for the Emperors sake, ordained Menas
Bishop in his steed, consecrating him with his own hands: And Victor of Tunes
of the same Vict. Tun. in (...). edit per los. (...). (...) calc Cnron. Eus
time with Liberatus published by Joseph Scaliger; Agapet (says he) Archbishop
of Rome, came to Constantinople, and deposed Anthymus `Bishop of Constantinople
usurper of the Church (for it must be read peruasorem and not (...) uersorem)
and enemy to the Council of Chalcedon, and excommunicated the Empress
Theodora his Patroness, and made at the same time Menas Bishop of the Church
of Constantinople: And the Emperor Justinian himself: We know (says he)
Just. (...) 42.
that the like thing has been done in the case of Anthymus, who was deposed
from the Seat of this royal city, by the most holy Bishop of the Ancient
Rome Agapet, of sacred and glorious memory. For those that from these ensuing
words of Justinians; but he has been also deposed and condemned first by the
sentence of this Prelate of holy memory, and after of the sacred Synod here
celebrated do inserre, that the final deposition of Anthymus was not made by
the Pope, but by the Council of Constantinople: do not consider that the
first clause of Justinian speaks (as shall appear hereafter) of the
deposition of Anthymus from In chap 39
the Patriarkall Seat of Constantinople, which was done and perfected by the
Pope; And the second speaks of the deposition of Anthymus from the
Archbishopricke of Trebisond, which was begun by the Pope, but having been tied
to certain conditions, which the continuance of Ibid.
the Popes life did not permit him to clear, it was finished after his death
by the Synod of Constantinople. But time presses us, let us hasten.

And why then when Menas Patriark of Constantinople, gave his voice in the
Council of Constantinople upon the second deposition of Anthymus, Conc Co^st
sub Men. act. 2.
that is to say, upon his deposition from the archbishopricke of Trebisond, did
he say, we follow as you know the Sea Apostolic, and obey him, and have his
communicants for ours, and condemn those that are condemned by him?

And why then when the body of the Council formed a sentence against the same
Anthymus, is it couched in these terms: We ordain (following things well
examined by the holy and blessed Pope, etc.) that he shall be cut of from the
body of the holy Churches of God, and cast out of the Archbishops Seat of
Trebisond; and deprived from all dignity and Sacerdotall action, and according
to the sentence of the same holy Father, stripped from the title of Catholic.

And why then (when the Emperor Justinian would at the instance of the Empress
Theodora his wise, who was an Eutychian persecute Pope Siluerius, Agapits
Successor) does Liberatus Archdeaco^ of Carthage an Africa^ author, and of the
same time, and that Hinemarus an ancient Archbishop of Rhemes cites under the
title of a Saint, say, that the Bishop of Patara in (...) one of the provinces
of Asia, dissuaded him from it, by the remonstrance that he made him, that
there was noe temporal monarchy which was equal in extent, to the spiritual
authority of the Pope? He represented to him (said Liberatus) the judgment of
God upon the expulsion of the Bishop (...). in (...). (...) (...). and (...).
c. 22
of so great a Sea, admonishing him, that there were many kings in the world,
but there was not one of them as the Pope, who was over the Church of the whole
world, who had been dispossessed of his seat.

And why then when the same Emperor Justinian would erect the first Justinianea
of Bulgaria, the city where he was borne into the form of a supernumerarie
Patriarkship, did he ground his ordinance upon the Just. Non. 131.
Vicarship and concession of the Pope? We ordain (said he) that the Bishop
of the first Justinianea, shall always have under his jurisdiction the Bishops
of the Provinces of the Mediterranean Dacia, of Dacia Ripensis of Triballea, of
(...), of the upper Misia, and of Pannonia, etc. and that in all provinces
subject to him, he shall hold the place of the sea Apostolic of Rome,
according as things were defined by the most holy Pope Vigilius.

And why then when Rusticus deacon of Rome, of the same time with (...) (...).
cont.
Justinian, writ his book against the Ascephales; did he make this grave
(...). impress.
exhortation to himself; Remember that thou art a Christian, and a Deacon, and
that of the most sovereign Church of all the world? And why then when the
(...). Council. (...). 2. c. 21.
Bishops of France, celebrated the second Council of Tours, 1048. years ago,
did they say, our Fathers have always observed, what the authority of the
Prelates of the sea Apostolic has commanded.

And why then when saint GREGORY the Great (to whom I have brought down this
information, as well because the English men derive from him the original of
their Mission Ecclesiastical, as because Calume propoundes him for true and
lawful model of the jurisdiction of Popes) reprehended 1027. years agone
Natalis Bishop of Salona in Dalmatia for the fault that he had committed, for
which he after did penance in deposing Honoratus Archdeacon of Salona
notwithstanding Pope Pelagius letters) did he write to him, that such a
disobedience had been intolerable, even in one of the four Patriarchs? If one
of the four Patriarchs (said Greg. ep. l. 2. cp. 37.
he) had committed such an act, so great disobedience, could not have escaped
without a grievous scandal.

And why then (when Clementius Primat of Bysacia in Africa had been accused
before the Emperor, and sent back by the Emperor to the Sea Id. l. 7. ep. 64.
Apostolic,) does the same S. GREGORY say; If there be any fault in the
Bishops, I know not what Bishop is not subject, to the Sea Apostolic, if a
fault require it not, according to the reason of humility, we are all equal.

And why then when John Archbishop of Larissa in Thessalia, had unjustly and
unworthily condemned Adrian Bishop of Thebes, one of the Bishops of his
jurisdiction, and that the Bishop of Thebes had appealed to Rome from him, did
S. Gregory eclipse the Bishop and Bishopric of Thebes from the jurisdiction
of the Archbishop of Larissa his Metropolitan, and declared the Archbishop of
Larissa, if ever he attempted more to exercise any act of Metropolitan over
him, interdicted from the sacraments, so as they could not be restored to him,
except at the hour of death. but with the leave of the Bishop of Rome? We
ordain (said he) that Greg. cp. l. 2. cp. 46.
thy brotherhood abstain from all the jurisdiction which you have formerly had
over him, and over his Church? And a while after, that if in any time, or for
(...) occasion whatsoever, thou shall attempt to contradict this our statute,
know that we declare thee deprived from the sacred communion, so as it may
not be restored to thee, except in the article of death, but with the leave of
the Bishop of Rome.

And why then finally, when the Patriarch of Constantinople had gotten the
upper hand of the other Patriarchs, did he continue to suffer appeals of causes
from his jurisdiction to the Popes tribunal, and to acknowledge himself
subject and inferior to the Pope? John priest of Chalcedon Id. l. 4. ep 82.
(says S. GREGORY, in the cause that he had against our Brother colleague
John Bishop of Constantinople) has had recourse according to the Canons to the
Sea Apostolic, and the cause has been determined by our sentence: and again
pronouncing the restitution of Athanasius a priest, and a Religious man of
Lycaonia, who had been deposed and cast out of his monastery by the same John
Patriarch of Constantinople, and had appeald to him: We declare thee (said
he) to be free from all spott of heresy, and a Catholic Id. l. 5. ep. 64.
etc. and give thee free leave to return into thy Monastery, and to hold
there the same rank as thou did before. And again, who doubts but the
Church of Constantinople Id. l. 7. ep. 63.
is subject to the Sea Apostolic, which the most Religious Emperor, and our
brother Bishop of the same town do continually protest? For as for the word
universal Bishop, wherein the Bishop of Constantinople desired to participate
See chap. 34.
with the Pope, but under the Pope, and in the Empire of the East, forasmuch as
Constantinople had been erected into the title of the second Rome, it shall be
answered in a chapter by it self: and for the resusall that S. GREGORY made,
to use the title of universal Bishop, though it had In chap 34
been given to his Predecessors in the Council of Chalcedon, it shall be
satisfied in the same place, and showed that it was because of the evil sense
the word universal Bishop might receive, which was to signify (only Bishop,)
and so exclude the other Prelates from the title of Bishops in chief, and of
ministers and officers of God, and to hold them but for committees, and
deputies of the universal Bishop, as the same S. GREGORY Greg ep l. 7. ep 37.
and lib.
protestes when he faith; If there be one that is universal Bishop, all the
rest are noe more Bishops: and not to deprive himself from the
superintendencie and jurisdiction over all other Bishops of which he cries
clean contrary: If there be any crime in the Bishops, I know noe Bishop but
is subject to the Sea Apostolic: if noe crime require it, according to the
reason of bumilitie, we are all equal.

Of formed letters. CHAPT XXVI.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
THEN were also in frequent use, formed letters: by the commerce and
contexture where of, the communion was admirably exercised, amongst all the
members of the Church, how far soever they were distant one from an other in
place.

THE REPLY.
IT is true, but the center of this communion and of this Ecclesiastical
unity, which was exercised and entertained by the commerce of formed letters,
was the Sea Apostolic and the Roman Church. This appears Iren. cout. Valent.
l. 3. c. 3.
by S. Ireneus who cries to the Roman Church because of a principality (that is
to say, as it has been above manifested, because of the principality of the
Sea Apostolic) it is necessary that every Church should agree. This appears
Cypr. ad Corn. ep. 55.
by S. Cyprian, who calls the Roman Church, the chair of PETER, and the
principal Church, and the original of Sacerdotall unity. This appears by
the law of the Emperor Gratian, which ordained, that the Churches should be
delivered to those that were in the Popes communion: He ordained (says
Theodoret) that the sacred howses should be restored to those that communicated
Theod. lust. eccl. l. 5. c. 2. Ibid. c. 3. Amb. de ob. (...).
with Damasus: And a while after; and this law was indefinitely executed in
all nations. This appears by S. Ambrose, who writes, speaking of his Brothers
comeing into one of the cities of the Isle of Sardinia: He asked the Bishop of
that place whether he agreed with the Catholic Bishops, that is to (...) Dam
ep 57.
say, (added he) with the Roman Church. This appears by S. JEROME, who writes
to Pope Damasus; I am joined in communion with thy Blessedness, that is to
say, with Peter's chair: I know the Church is built upon that Rock;
whosoever is not in the Arc, he shall perish at the coming of the flood; he
that eats the lamb out os this house, is profane: And a while after,
Whosoever gathers not with thee, scatters, that is to say; whosoever is not of
Christ, is of Antichrist: And again; Send me word with whom I ought to
communicate in Antioch, for the heretics of Camps with those of Tharses have
noe other ambition but that they might under the authority of your communion,
preach the three hypostosies according to the ancient understanding: Ierom. ad
Dam. ep. 58.
And in an other place, The while I cry, if any of you be joined to Peter's
chair he is mine; Miletius, Vitalis, Paulinus, (so were the 3. Patriarchs of
Antioch called,) say that they communicate with thee; if hut one of them had
said so, I had believed it, but now either two, or all three do lie and
therefore I couiure thy Blessedness by the Cross of our Lord, by the
necessary ornament of our faith, by the passion of Christ, etc. that thou
signify to me by thy letters with whom in Syria I ought to communicate. This
appears by Optatus Bishop af Mileuis in Africa, Opt. Mileu. (...). (...). lib.
2.
who says; At Rome has been settled for Peter first the Episcopal chair, in
which the head of all the Apoctles Peter has sat, etc. to the end that in
that only chair, unity might be observed by all, least the other Apostles
should attribute to themselves each one his sever all chair, but that be might
be a sinner and a schismatic, that against that only chair, should erect an
other. And a little after; To Peter then succeeded Linus, to Linus Clement, to
Clement Anacletus, to Anacletus Euaristus etc. to Damasus Syricius who is at
this day our Colleague, by which means all the world communicates with us by
the commerce of formed letters. This appears by Chrysostom. ad Innocent. cp. 1.
saint CHRYSOSTOM who writes to Pope Innocent; Let us enjoy the continuance of
your letters, and of your charity, and those of all the rest which we enjoyed
before. This appears by saint AUSTIN who says, Cecilianus might well despise
Aug. ep. 162
the conspiring multitude of his enemies, seeing himself united by
communicatorie letters with the Roman Church, in which the principality of the
Sea Apostolic has always sllorisht, and with other Countries from whence
the Gospel came into Asrica. This appears by Eulalius Bishop of Syracusa who
a while after S. Austins death dissuaded Fulgentius an Asrican afterward Bishop
of Ruspa in Asrica from goeing to inhabit with the monks of Egypt in the
deserts of Thebaidis, Auth. (...) (...). (...) (...) (...) (...), (...) (...)
Constable. ep ad (...). com. 2. (...).
because they were not in the communion of saint Peter: The country, (said
he) whither thou desire to travail a perfidious dissension has separated
them from the communion of the blessed Peter: All those Religious men whose
admirable abstinence is celebrated, shall not have the Sacraments of the altar
in common with thee. This appears by John Patriark of Constantinople, who
writ to Pope (...), in abiuration of Acacius memory: Following (said he) in
all things the Apostolic chair; we declare all that has been thereby
decreed and therefore hope to be in one communion with you declared by the Sea
Apostolic, in which there is the integrity of Christian Religion and perfect
soliditie, promising hereafter not to (...) amidst the sacred mysteries their
names, that have separated themselves from the communion of the Catholic
Church; that is to say, that consent not in all things with the Sea Apostolic.

This appears by the Emperor Iustinia^, who writes in the law addressed to
Epiphanius Patriark of Constantinople; We preserve in all things the estate of
the Cod. Paris Antwerp. and Geneu. tit. 1. l. 7.
unity of the holy Churches, with the holy Pope of old Rome. And in the law
addressed to the Pope; We have had care to unite and submitt all the Bishops of
the East to the Sea of your Holiness, (...) who are the head of all the holy
Churches. Cod tit. 1. l. 8. see above. Con. Co^st. sub. Men. act 4.
This apperes by Menas Patriarch of Constantinople, who said in the Council of
Constantinople; We follow the Sea Apostolic and obey it, and communicate
with those that communicate therewith, and condemn those that it condemns.
This appears by the form that saint GREGORY left us of the abiuration, that
the Bishopes returning from Schism, to the communion of Greg. ep. l. 10. ep.
31.
the Church, made into the hands of the Apostolic Procurators, which have
these words: I Bishop of such a City, having discerned the trapp of division
wherein I was caught, after a long and mature deliberation, I am returned by
Gods grace with my pure and free will, to the unity of the Sea Apostolic, and
that I may not be esteemed to return maliciously or sainedly, I vow and
promise under pain of falling from mine Order, and under obligation of (...)
to thee, and by thee, to the holy Prince of Apostles, Peter, and to his Vicar
the most Blessed GREGORY, or to his Successors, that by any persuasion
whatsoever, or in any other manner, I will never return to Schism, from
whence by our Redeemers mercy I have been delivered, but that I will always
remain in the unity of the Catholic Church, and in the Communion of the
Bishop of Rome:

And this finally appears by the extract of the Council of (...) which is to
be read at the end of the latin edition of the Council of Chalcedon under the
name of the extract of the Council of Nicea for the composition Manuse.
of formed letters made by Atticus Bishop of Constantinople; but some Conc.
manuscripts of the sixth Council of Carthage testify they were sent into
Carth. 6. D. Praesidis de Champigny.
the west by the same Atticus, with the other decrees of the Council of Nicea,
when the Asrican Bishops requested them of him. For this extract ordained, that
they should take the number of the first Greek letters of Attic. episc.
qnaliter formata epistolafiat. In fin. editionis latin Conc. Chalc.
the names Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the number of the first letter of the
Apostle Peter's name, and of the author that writ, and of him to whom he writ,
and of the bearer of the letter, and of the place from whence it was written,
and the day of Paske, and adding them to the number of the indiction which then
was current, they should thereof make a sum, whose cipher should be added to
the Epistle, to serve it for a form and character. By means whereof when
there was noe more occasion to doubt, who was either in communion with the
Roman Church or saint Peter's sea, or out of it, as the diligence of the
Catholic Emperors, and Kings have in the West left noe subject of that doubt
this many ages, the necessity of these kind of letters has ceased. And
therefore so far off is it, that the use of the letters formed or
co^municatory whereof antiquity made use, was a mark to show, that the Church
was then more manifest then now, as contrariwise it was a testimony, that she
was much harder to be discerned then she is at this present. For that which
constrained them to use this means, was the multitude, and confusion of
heresies which were then in so great number and so mingled in aboade, and
habitation amidst the Catholic Church, as there was almost noe Town, where
there was not to be found, besides the true Church, a dozen Sects, and
heresies, and the most of them agreeing in form, and outward worship with the
Catholic Church; Arians, Donatistes, Pelagians Nouatians Macedonians,
Appolinaristes, and other such like plagues.

Of the pretended excommunications attempted against the Pope. CHAP. XXVII.
But against this thesis, to wit that the Sea Apostolic was the Center and
beginning of all the formed and communicatory letters, the Popes adversaries
object three instances; first, that Stephen Patriarch of Antioch, in the false,
Council of Sardica excommunicated (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
Pope Julius because he had admitted saint ATHANASIVS into his communion. The
second, that saint HILARY proclaimed anathema against Pope Liberius, because he
had received the Arians into his communion. And the third, Dioscorus Patriarch
of Alexandria in the false Council of Ephesus, excommunicated the Pope saint
Leo the first, because he had condemned the heresy of Eutyches. And from hence
they (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
conclude, that the Pope was not then the center, and original of
Ecclesiastical communion, since that, as the Pope excommunicated the other
Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops; so the others reciprocally
excommunicated him: And therefore it is best to block up their objections
before we pass further.

To the first then of these objections, which is that Stephen Patriarch of
Antioch, excommunicated, Pope Julius, because he had received saint ATHANASIVS
into his communication, we bring three answers: The first answer is, that it
was not Stephen Patriarch of Antioch that made this excommunication, but it was
all the Bishops assembled at the false Council of Sardica, which pretended to
be the true and whole oecumenicall (...). Syn. (...). and (...) (...) (...).
(...). lust. ec. (...). l. 2. (...). 16.
Council of Sardica, forasmuch as they said, the three hundred Catholic
Bishops which constituted the true Council of Sardica, were fallen into the
communion of Marcellus whom they held an heretic of the heresies of Sabellius
and of Paulus Samosatenus, and thefore imagined, that the true and intier
authority of the oecumenicall Council of Sardica, was deuolued to them. Now
there is greatdifference between saying, that a Council that pretendes to be
oecumenicall, and conceaues it self to represent the universal Body of ihe
Church should undertake to excommunicate a Pope, that they suppose to have
fallen into heresy, and that a particular Bishop Archbishop or Patriarch
should undertake it.

The second that the false Council of Sardica, which committed this (...).
Apol. 2. Aug ep. (...).
presumption, was an Arian Council, and whose entreprise consequently cannot
be drawn into example, nor make any president against the discipline (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)
of the Church. For what marvel is it that the Arians who trod under foot,
the divinity of Christ, who is the invisible head of the Church, should
likewise tread under foot, the authority of his principal lieuetenant, that
is to say, the Pope, who is the visible head of the Church?

And the third, that in the same time, that the false Council of Sardica spitt
in the face of heaven, and excommunicated not only the Pope but (...)
SVS-CHRIST himself, and all his Church in rejecting the communion (...) (...).
(...) (...) 2. c. 16.
of them, that held him to be consubstantiall with the Father; the true
Council of Sardica, compounded of more then three hundred Catholic Bishops,
acknowledged the Pope for head of the Church, and writ Ep. Conc. Sard. ad Iul.
Pap in (...). in (...) (...). and (...) a (...). 1. in ep. ad Episcop. (...).
Hilar. in fragm. de Syn. Arim. p. 48.
to him; It seems very good and convenient that the Prelates of all the
Provinces should refer the affairs to their head, that is to say, to the
Sea Apostolic of Peter.

To the second objection, which is, that after that Liberius being cast out
from the Sea of Rome by the Arians, and overcome with the enduring a far
banishment, and many corporal persecutions and vexations sorgott himself so
far, as to subscribe the condemnation of saint ATHANASIVS, and to receive the
Arrians into his communion; saint HILLARIE reciting the Epistles of the same
Liberius insertes these clauses; This is the Arrian treachery, this I have
noted I that am noe Apostata: And again; Anathema for my part, to thee o
Liberius, and to thy Accomplices; And a while after; Anathema to thee the second,
and third time, o wicked Liberius, we bring four answers.

The first answer is, that though it be certain, and not to be doubted, that
this is written by an ancient author, and of saint HILLARIES time, as besides
the antiquity of the manuscriptes, which are to be sound in sundry libraries,
it appears both by the manner of that style, which fully agrees with that of
saint HILLARIES age, and by many things which are there recited, which could
not have been known but by the authors of saint HILLARIES age; nevertheless,
it is not equally certain, that it is S HILLARIES. Contrariwise there are
four co^iectures, which seem to intimate, that either it should be Hillaries
the Luciserian deacon, of the same time with saint HILLARIE, or some other
authors of the same Sect, and age, which have supposed it, and made it pass
under the name of saint HILLARIE; or that the Parentheses which are inserted
into Liberius his Epistles that he cites, which also are inserted in form of
notes, and marked with signs of a cross at the head, and enuirond with
semye-circles, and written in an other character, are not saint HILLARIES, but
some exemplaristes of that age.

The first conjecture is, that these Parentheses condemn the Faith of the
Council of Sirmium which Demophilus caused Liberius to sign; that is, the
Faith of the first Council of Sirmium, which did not err but in the omission
of the word Homousion (for Demophilus as the Illustrious Cardinal Anual 16. 3.
ad an 357.
Baronius has observed, abhorred the Faith of the Second, which denied both
Homousion and Homoeusion) and calls it, an Arrians treachery, Hilar de Syn.
where saint HILLARY contrariwise to spare and husband the demi- Arrians, which
held the first confession, and to oblige them to bandie against Hilar. Ibid
the complete Arrians, which held the second, styled in his works of the
Synodes; The faith of the first Council of Sirmium, or rather, the first faith
of the Council of Sirmium orthodoxall and Catholic. And says speaking of
the Bishop Eleusius, Bishop of Cyrica, and of the other demi; Arrians which
embraced it, except the Bishop Eleusius, and a few others with him; the ten
Asian provinces wherein I dwell, for the more part do not know God truly.

And it will not serve for an antidote for this that Monsieur de Feure, who
Nic. Fab. in (...). (...) Hilar.
published that work, says that the Arrians yet made another profession of
Faith composed at Sirmium in the presence of the Emperor, in the year Soc.
hist. ec cl. l. 2. c. 29. (...). hist. (...) l. 4 c. 10. and 14. etc. 18. Am.
Marc. hist. l. 15. Sul Seu. hist Sacr. l. 2.
of the Council of Arimini, where they abolished the word. Substance For this
last confession of Faith was made after Liberius his fall, and not before, as
some have thought, not considering that Liberius suffered two banishements
confounded by Socrates, but distinguished by Sozomene: The one when he was
confined into Beroe in Thrace, which began according to Amianus Marcellinus
account, and that of Sulpitius Seuerus, the year wherein Arbitio and Lollianus
were consulls; that is, four year before the Consulate of Eusebius and
Hypatius under which the Council of (...) (...) So (...).
was held, and lasted according to saint ATHANASIVS and (...), (...) (...)
(...) (...) 17.
two years. And the other by which he was simply cast out of Rome, which sell
out after the Council of Arimini, because Liberius refused to consent to it.
They report (says Sozomene, speaking of those who described more truly the
history of the Council of Arimini) that the Arrians constained (...) hist.
(...). 4 c. 18.
the Bishops to sign their confession, and cast out of the Church many which
resisted it, and in the first place Liberius Bishop of Rome. Now Liberius fall
was in the end of his first banishement as saint HILLARY insinuats, when he
(...). de Syn.
reproacheth to the Emperor Co^stantius, that he had plucked Liberius out of
(...), and that he was uncertain whether he had showed more impiety in his
banishement, or in his repeal: And as saint IEROM affirms when (...) (...).
he says, Liberius overcome with the weariness of his banishment, and having
subscribed to the Arrian impiety, was entered into Rome in manner of a
conqueror. And thefore the faith of Sirmium which Liberius had signed before
his fall, which happened at the end of his first exile; that is to say, two
year before (...) hist. (...). l. 4. c. 14.
the Council of Arimini, could not be that which was forged at (...) the year
of the Council of Arimini, but it was the first of Sirmium; which (...) also
ratifies when he says, that, Those of the East brought a form of Faith, that
they had drawn from Liberius, by which he condemned those that did not
affirm, that the Son was like to the Father in substance, and in all things.
For that was the first Creed poposed to the Council of Sirmium, and embraced
by the Demi- Arrians, which concealed the word (...), and insteede thereof,
substituted, like in substance.

The second conjecture is, that the Latin translation of the faith of the
false Council of Sardica, which is inserted into the Appendix of the Epistles,
which is annexed to the end of this writing, which Monsieur le Append ep (...)
Calcem. (...). (...) p. 27.
Feure will have to be gathered by the same Author, is so differing not in
sense, but in words, from that which is found in the work of the Synodes of
saint HILLARY, that it seems, they could not both come from one pen; and
besides, it is noted with this Title; The decree of the Arrians; whereas saint
HILLARY in his book of the Synodes, to spare the Demy-Arrians, which held the
Simbole of the false Council of Sardica, and to oblige them to bandy against
the complete Arrians, whose impiety was proceeded much farther in their
latter professions; reckons the Faith of the false Council of Sardica, amongst
the orthodoxall beleifes, supplied by interpretation; that it might receive, an
orthodoxall interpretation, and was not heretical by expression, but by
omission.

The third conjectures is, that in the time this writing entitled from saint
HILLARY, was composed; that is to say, after the Council of Arimini, neither
saint HILLARIE, not any other Catholic, could say (...) to Liberius
whosefault and repentance were both arrived before the Council of Arimini; but
only the Luciferians, who withdrew themselves from the communion of Liberius
and of the Catholic Church after the death of Constantius because that when
Constantius was dead, Liberius, and the other Bishops, and Catholics,
received into the communion of the Church, and to the exercise of the
Episcopal order, those Bishops which having been induced by fraud or force,
to sign the council of Arimini protested to repent it. For when this writing
was made; that is to say, after the Council of Arimini, Liberius was
acknowledged for a Catholic, by all the Catholic Bishops of the Earth, and
was so, ever after the Council of Arimini, even to the end of his life, as it
appears both by the testimony of the Council of the West, celebrated under
Damasus, imediate successor to Liberius, which disanulling the acts of the
Council of Arimini, alleged amongst other nullities, that the Theod. hist.
(...). l. 2. c. 22.
Bishop of Rome whose sentence should be attended before all others, never
consented to it. And by the testimony of saint BASILE, who solicites saint
ATHANASIVS, to write to the Bishop of Rome, to be watchful over the affairs
of the East, Bas. ep. ad. Athan.
and send some to disannull the Council of Arimini: and testifies that the
Catholics of the East, and namely the Counsels of Militina and Tyana,
communicated with Liberius; and himself calls him the blessed Bishop Liberius:
And by the testimonies of saint EPIPHANIVS, who writes; (...) Id. ep. ad
Occident. Epiph. co^t. Aer. her. 75.
Bishop of Sebaste in Armenia the less, seemed to do the office of a Legate
with many other Bishops, to the blessed Liberius of Rome; and subscribed to the
proposition of the council of Nicea, and to the profession of the orthodoxall
Faith. And by the testimony of saint AMBROSE, who intitles Liberius after his
Death, Amb. de Verg. l. 3. Syrie. ad Himer.
Liberius of happy memory. And finally, by the testimony of Siricius imediate
Successor to Damasus, who says; The general decrees of my Predecessor
Liberius of Reverend memory, sent through all the provinces after the
disannulling the (...).
Council of Arimini, forbad to rebaptise the Arrians when they returned to the
Church. By means whereof either this writing which anathematizeth Liberius
after the Council of Arimini, is not saint HILLARIES, but of some Luciferian
author of the same age, or these parenthesises inserted by form of notes, in
the Epistles of Liberius, inuironned with Semycircles, and written in other
caracters: this is the Arrian treachery, this I have noted, I that am noe
Apostata: And a while after; I for my part, say anathema to thee Liberius,
and to thy accomplices: And again; Anathema to thee for the second and third
time, o wicked Liberius; have been interlaced by the Luciferians; or saint
HILLARIE inserted the parenthesis into the Epistle of Liberius, before he made
this writing; and having in this writing left the places, void, to put iu the
Epistles which he cited, whose Collection was a part in his papers; those that
caused them to be published after his death, set into the void blancke places
which he had left, the copies of the Epistles which were amongst his papers, as
they were there found.

And the fowrth conjecture finally is; that this writing is not a complete,
and entire writing of saint HILLARIES, but a collection of diverse fragments of
the intier work of saint HILLARIES, put together in a heap, and without
order; as may appear by the transposition of the Fragm. (...) p 35. and. 36
Epistles there inserted; and particularly of one of Liberius Epistles, which
is set in the place, where the Epistle of the Council of (...), to
Constantius should have been. By occasion whereof it remains uncertain,
whether these parenthesis be of the author or of the collector; that is, either
of saint HILLARIE, or of some Luciferian compiler, who to favor the (...) of
the Luciferians, and to make the memory of Liberius odious, and adhominable,
has thrust in these parenthesis. And this is spoken of the first answer.

The second answer against saint HILLARIES pretended anathema against
Liberius, is that there is great difference, between an excommunication, and
an anathema; for as much as every formal excommunication importes jurisdiction;
and every anathema does not so. For there are two kinds of anathema, the one
iudiciarie the other executory, applicatorie, and adiuratory. Judiciary
anathema's are those which are pronounced by persons constituted in the
Ecclesiastical Tribunal, and which have power to judge of matters of
Religion, and who decree what kinds of things, or persons ought to be
anathematized; and these anathema's import jurisdiction, as when the Council
of Nicea pronounced anathema against the Sac. hist (...) (...). (...) l. c. 5.
Arrians in these words: they that say there was a time wherein the son was
not, the Catholic Church anathematizeth them; that is to say, decideth that
their Communion ought to be renounced and abhorred, and held sor anathema. The
anathema's executory, applicatory, and abiuratory, are those by which every
particular person does protest, and declare, that he will practice the
sentence of the Church decreed against those persons, or doctrines which have
been by her iudiciarily anathematized, and to abiute, and hold them for
anathema. And for this cause, judiciary anathema's, cannot (...).
be pronounced but by persons grounded upon jurisdiction: but executory, (...).
(...). 2. act. 6.
and abiuratory Anathema's; may be made not only by persons destitute of
jurisdiction, but by mere lay men: As in the Council of Ephesus, when
Cordanepius a lay man returned from the Sect of the (...) to the Church, he
anathematized all those that followed the Sect of the (...); I anathematize
(says he) all heresy, and namely that of the quartodecumans. And to this day
when any one returns from (...) heresy into the Catholic Church, he is
caused to anathematize that heresy from whence he departs. But these
anathema's, are but simple abiuratory anathema's; that is to say, they are but
bare executions, and applications, of judiciary anathema's; and the word to
Anathematize, in such a case, signifies noe other thing, but to abjure, abhor,
and hold them for anathematized.

Now it was in this second sort that saint HILLARIE anathematized Liberius,
for having signed and subscribed the communion of the (...); to wit, not with a
judiciary, but with an abiuratory anathema. For the iudiciarie anathema had
been already pronounced by the counsels of Nicea, and of Sardica, against the
Arrians into whose coummunion Liberius was entered, so as there was noe more
question to decree the Soc. hist. (...). 2. c. 5. Theod. (...). (...). l. 4. c.
6.
sentence of anathema against him, but to execute it in abiuring and abhorring
him, as fallen into the sentence of anathema pronounced against the Arrians in
the Counsels of Nicea and Sardica; and therefore saint HILLARY adds to his
anathema this word, for my part, and says, for my part anathema to thee o
Liberius; to show that he spoke not with a judiciary anathema, but with an
anathema abiuratory, and abnegatory whereby he did not separate Liberius from
the communion of the Church, who had already separated himself, in departing
from her to the (...), but whereby he separated himself from the communion of
Liberius.

The third answer contains two branches; the one is, that this anathema
(...). hist. (...). l. 4. c. 14
was not pronounced by saint HILLARIVS, in the time of unity and agreement of
Popes, but in time of Schism and duplicitie of Popes; to wit, when Liberius
and Felix sat concurrently in the Pontifical chair of Rome. Now there is
great difference between pronouncing anathema against a doubtful Pope, and
sitting in Schism with another Pope; and pronouncing anathema against one only
certain and peaceble Pope: for in the first case; to wit, in case of Schism
between two Popes, it is an ordinary thing, that those that take part with
the one, do pronounce abiuration and anathema against the other; as during the
Schism of John 23th. and of Gregory the twelfth and of Bennet the 13th. for
whose extinction the Council of Constance was kept; those that took part
with any one of these three Popes pronounced abiuration, and anathema against
the other two; without pretending notwithstanding to depart from the
reverence, and obedience due to the Sea Apostolic. And therefore during the
Schism of Liberius and Felix, saint HILLARY might pronounce anathema against
Liberius and separate himself from his communion and enter into the communion
of the other Pope, without seperating himself ever the more from the communion
of the Sea Apostolic.

The other is, that this anathema was not pronounced by S. HILLARY in the time
that the Roman Church acknowledged him for Pope, but in the time that Liberius
was fallen from the Papacy, and that even the Roman Church abiured, renounced,
and disauowed him for Pope, and had withdrawn herself from his communion, and
from his obedience, and had ranged herself with Felix his competitor. For the
understanding whereof, we must distinguish the time of Pope Liberius Popedom
into thee parts; the first before his fall, the second during his fall, the
third after his fall. Now during the first part, to wit, before his fall; he
was so firm a defender of the Faith of the Council of Nicea, and of saint
ATHANASIVS innocence, and so great an enemy to the heresy, and communion of
the Arrians, as the Emperor Constantius Theod. hist eccl. l. 2. c. 16.
for that cause made him be tiranously carried away, and transported by way of
banishment into the city of Beroe, in the borders of Thrace; and at the
instance of the Arrians, caused Felix the deacon of Rome to be ordained in his
steed. During the second part, which began at his banishment, he overcome
with the length of two years exile, and other corporal vexations and
persecutions, he suffered himself to be drawn to sign the condemnation of S.
Athanasius, and to admit the communion of the Arrians, and entered into Rome
with a promise, to continue in that resolution; Hier in. (...).
and then the Roman Church ceased to acknowledge him for Pope. For Popes that
fall visiblie, and by their own coufession, or not contested signature into
an heresy notorious, and condemned by a precedent sentence of the Church, or
into communion with an heretical society, as was that of the Arrians fall
from the Papacy, from that time cease from their right of being Popes. And
Felix on the other side, who was entered by the pack of the Arrians into his
place, made himself so firm a protector An. Bar to. 3 ad an. 357. Martirol.
Romans ad quart. Call. Aug. Martirol. tribut. Bed. e in eodem Die. Anast. Bib. in
lib. de vic Pontific. Onuph. in notis. ad. platin. and alij.
of the Catholic Faith and Communion, and so constant an adversary of the
Arrians as the Roman Church (if we believe the ancient inscriptions, and the
ancient martirologes, where Felix is entitled Pope and Martyr, and the ancient
Catalogues of the Popes, where he is put into the rank of the Popes, by the
name of Felix the second) making valid by a new election, or an acceptance
equivalent to a new election the ordination of Felix, received him for Pope in
Liberius steed, I have said, if we believe the ancient inscriptions, and
martyrologes, and the ancient Catalogues of the Popes. For many modern
authors, and Onuphrius amongst the rest, hold that Felix was never true Pope,
and that Liberius never fell from the Papacy, nor ever received the Arrians
into his communion; And they believe, that all that saint ATHANASIVS, saint
HILARY, and other ancient writers have written, was grounded upon a false
rumor, that the Arrians had spread; And they allege for this Ruff. hist.
eccl. l. 1. c. 27.
purpose Ruffinus; that says, he could never discover the truth of it; I
cannot discover (says Ruffinus) certainly, whether the Emperor Constantius
sent back Liberius to Rome, because he had yielded to his will, or because he
was pressed to it by the Romans. And Sozomene who reports that the Arrians Soz
hist. eccl. l. 4. c. 14.
spread the rumor, that Liberius had condemned Consubstantialitie; The Arrians
(said he) spread the rumor, that Liberius had condemned the word
consubstantiall. Nevertheless for as much as saint IEROM, speakeing of
Liberius his exile, writes, Liberius Bishop of the Roman Church Hier. in Chr
on.
having been sent into exile for the Faith, all the Clerks swore they would
receive noe other but Felix, having been substituted in the priest hood by the
Arrians; many perjured themselves, and at the end of the year were cast
forth, because Liberius overcome with the weariness of his banishement, and
signing the heretical impictie, entered into Rome in the form of a Conqueror.
And in an other place; Fortunatianus Bishop of Aquilea, is in (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...)
this reputed detestable, that he first solicited Liberius who was gone into
banishment for the faith, and inclined him, and induced him. to sign the
heresy. We follow the opinion of those that hold, that during the time
interposed between the return of Liberius, and the death of Felix, Liberius
remained fallen from the Popedom, and that Felix was then true Pope. For there
is noe doubt, but that the Clerks which were cast forth with Felix, because
(says saint IEROM) Liberius having signed the heretical impiety, was (...)
into Rome like a Conqueror, were the orthodoxall and Catholic Clerks of the
Roman Church, who did materially periure themselves because they abandoned
Liberius, but not formally because Liberius first abandoned himself.

And in the third time which began after the death of Felix, which if (...)
hist. (...). l, 4. c. (...).
we believe Sozomene, followed soon after the return of Liberius: Liberius
not only abiured that which the Arrians had constrained him to do, but made
himself so constant a protector of the Catholic Faith, and cause, and so
despised all the persecutions of the Emperor, as the Roman Church after the
death of Felix, and all the other Churches of the Catholic communion with
her, did receive and acknowledge him with an acknowledgement equivalent to
rehabilitation, for Pope. In which appeared two acts of the providence of God,
with had appeared in saint Peter's fall: One, that as saint Peter in the rising
from his fall, confirmed his Brethren; so Liberius in rising from his,
confirmed all the Bishops of the Catholic Church, showing them the way rather
to suffer a thousand persecutions, then to sign the Council of Arimini: And
the other, that as the Fathers noted, that God permitted saint Peter to fall,
that he might learn by his own example to use mercy to those that should
fall, and not to use that rigor to them, that the Nouatians would afterward
have introduced: so God permitted that Liberius should fall into the communion
of heretics, to the end that being restored, he might learn by his own
example, and serve himself for an example to others, not to shutt the gates of
Episcopal communion from those Bishops that should fall into the same fault,
when they should come to repentance, and not to use that rigor toward them,
that afterward the Luciferians would have introduced. Now it was in this mean
while, to wit, when the Roman Church, abiured Liberius, because he had
received the Arrians into his communion, and ceased to acknowledge him for
Pope, and had reduced themselves into the obedience of Felix, that saint (...)
((...) as is abouesaid, these parenthesis be his) adhering to the Roman Church,
abiured him also, and anathematized him, not with a judiciary, but with an
applicatory and abiuratory anathema: and by consequence, the objection which is
drawn from it, is not only unprofitable, but impertinent. For what marvel
is it, if in this mean while, to wit; when the Roman Church herself, abiured
Liberius, and withdrew herself from his obedience, and ceased to acknowledge
him for Pope, and took Felix his part; saint HILARY adhering to the Roman
Church, did abjure him, and anathematize him also, not with a judiciary
anathema, but with an executory and abnegatory (...), and took likewise the
part of Felix, to whom the orthodoxall Clerks and inhabitants of the city
of Rome, had ranged themselves? The great and admirable DAMASVS, who was after
successor to Liberius in the Popedom, and whom the Greeks, called the diamond
of Faith, had not he been one of those that had withdrawn themselves from the
communion of Liberius, and had transferred themselves to that of Felix? and so
what wonder is it, if Liberius Marcel. in lib. deschis (...). and Vrcic. apud
Baron. Annal. tom. 3. and 4. ad an. 357 and 367 and Biblioth Sereniss. Reip.
Venet.
own successor, and all the true Roman Church with him, having ceased to
acknowledge Liberius for Pope, and having abandoned and anathematized him, that
is to say, with an executory and abiuratory anathema, and having acknowledged
Felix his Competitor for true, and law full Pope; S. HILARY also in their
imitation ceased to account Liberius for Pope, and anathematized him, not with
a judiciary, but with an executory and abiuratory anathema, in withdrawing
himself from his communion, and passing to that of Felix.

And finally the fowrth and last answer, is, that as in time offchisme and
duplicity of Popes, S. HILARY following the orthodoxall and Catholic part of
the Clergy of Rome, adhered to Felix, and anathematized Liberius; so in the
time of the unity of Popes, the same S. HILARY testifies, that all Catholics
acknowledged the Pope for head of the Church. For he reports the epistle of
the Council of Sardica, wherein (...). (...). Sard. ad (...). in frag. (...).
p. 15.
the Bishops of the Council writ these words to Pope Julius, Liberius
predecessor; It shall be esteemed very good and convenient, if from all
provinces the Bishops should referr the affairs to their head, that is to
say, to the Sea Apostolic of Peter; And thus much of the second objection,
there remains third.

To the third objection then, which is, that Dioscorus in the false Council of
Ephesus, did not content himself to excommunicate (...) the Archbishop of
Constantinople, but went so far as to excommunicate Pope Leo who vpeld him,
We answer three things; first, that it was not under his own name that
Dioscorus Patriark of Alexandria, decreed this excommunication Co^c. Chalc act.
1.
but under the name of all the false Council of Ephesus, which had been called
in the quality of an Oecumenicall Council, and which entitled it self an
Oecumenicall Council. By means whereof, this instance touches not the
question, whether another Bishop, Archbishop, or Patriark may excommunicate the
Pope, but whether a Council Oecumenicall, prete^ding that the Pope is fallen
into heresy, may excommunicate him.

The second, that Dioscorus was deposed for this presumption in the Id. act. 3.
and in relat. ad Leon. Pap.
Council of Chalcedon, and deprived for all eternity, not only of the title
of Patriark, but also of the title of Christian and Catbolicke, in such sort,
as this example is so far from making against the Pope, as it falls upon their
heads that allege it.

And the third, that there was so great difference between the enterprise of
exco^municating the other Bishops, Archbishops, and Patriarchs, and presumption
of excommunicating the Pope, as although Dioscorus Patriark of Alexandria was
an Arch-hereticke, and that he had approved in a full Council the heresy of
Eutiches, and condemned the orthodoxall doctrine, and had excommunicated, and
not only excommunicated, but put to death Flauianus Archbishop of
Constantinople, who maintained the true faith: Nevertheless, these things were
not set amongst the principal causes of his deposition, but the presumption
that he had committed in undertaking He and his false Council to excommunicate
the Pope; and the contempt that he had added to it, in not comeing to yield
reason for this presumption to the Council of (...). Euag. hist. eccl. l. 2.
c. 18.
Dioscorus (says Anatolius Archbishop of Constantinople, speaking to the
Council of Chalcedon) has not been deposed for the faith, but because Co^c.
Chalc (...). 5.
he had excommunicated my Lord the Archbishop Leo, and that having been thrice
cited, he would not appear: And the Council of Chalcedon in the Co^c. Chalc
part. 3. in relat. ad Leon.
epistle to Pope Leo, says; After all these things he has extended his (...)
even against him, to whom the guarde of the Vine is committed by your Savior,
that is to say, against thy Holiness, and has mediated an excommunication
against him, that strives to unite the body of the Church; or according to the
other (...); against thee, who make haste to unite the body of the Church,
that is to say, against thee that hold the body of the Church in unity.
For with the Greeks it is a common phrase to say, to haste themselves to do
some thing, in steed of saying, to do some thing; As when the Emperor
JUSTINIAN (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
writ to Pope John, surnamed Mercury; We have made haste to submitt and (...)
all the Prelates of the east countries to your Sea: insteede of saying; (...)
(...) (...) all the Prelates of the East, to your Sea. And as when the Council
of (...) said; Anthymus made haste, to cast us into a worse tempest, insteede
of saying; Anthymus has cast us into a worse tempest.

CARD. PERRONS REPLY. TO THE KING OF GREAT BRITANIE. THE SECOND BOOK
CHAP. I. Of Counsels.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
TO this were added always, and as often as they were needful, Counsels
truly Oecumenicall, and not as we see, they have been often since Oecumenicall
by name, but indeed assembled only out of some provinces of Europe.

THE REPLY.
AND even this also very often when there was noe need of the^, as the
Council of Arimini compounded of more then 400. Sulp. Seu. l 2. and Soz. l 4.
c. 17. Liberat in breuiar. c. 12.
Bishops; the second Council of Ephefus, called from all the Regions of the
world, but assembled by heretical Emperors, or governed by the abettors of
heretics; and from the unlawful celebration whereof; the one held without
the Popes authority, and the other against Theod. hist eccl. l. 2. c. 22.
it; the success teaches us, that as much as Counsels are profitable, when
the temporal authority seconds the Ecclesiastical: as much are they
pernicious, Libera., c. 13. and Co^c. Chalc. act. 1.
when temporal authority undertakes to perform the office of Ecclesiastical
authority. Jointly that as in human bodies, the multitude of medicines is not
a sign of health; so in the Ecclesiastical body, the multitude of
Counsels, is not a sign of well being; witness the complaints of S.
Gregory Nazianz. upon the multitude of Counsels holden Greg. Naz. ep. 42.
after that of Nicea; of which he says that he never saw good come of them,
that is to wit, as much because when the heretical Emperors meddled with the
affairs of the Church, the ambition to please them, which was crept in among
the Bishops, thwarted the judgments of the Synod, as because the holding
subsequent Counsels upon the same matter of those preceding them, was to wound
and to weaken the authority of the preceding Counsels. And then how could the
celebration of Counsels have been a means, to make men assured of the
communion of the true Church, if general Cou^cells lawfully assembled that is,
according to the external solemn and usual ways, might err in faith, as
the Protestants pretend, and had not the infallible assistance of the holy
Ghost, but that a particular man, esteeming his opinion agreeable to the sense
of Scripture, and that of the Council differing from it; might, yea ought to
prefer his judgment, before that of the Council.

For whereas his Majesty says, that the Counsels holden in the last ages,
have been Oecumenicall in name, but in effect assembled only from some
provinces of Europe, he may observe if he please, that there are two sorts of
Oecumenicall Counsels; the one Oecumenicall indeed, the other Oecumenicall in
right. I call those Counsels Oecumenicall in deed, which have been assembled
from all parts, wherein the succession of the Episcopal character is
preserved, whether those parts have remained within the Body of the Church, or
whether they have been cut of from it. I call those Counsels Oecumenicall in
right, which are compounded only of those parts which have remained within
the body and Society of the Church, and to whom only, as such, belongs the
right to judge (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
in matters of Faith: as the Council of Sardica, at the which there assisted
not the Bishops of the Patriarkeshipp of Antioch, because they were Arrians.
And the second Council of Nicea, at which the Cophtes (that is, the natural
Egiptians and Ethiopians) assisted not, because they were Eutychians. Now both
these kinds of Counsels, are of equal authority, as concerning certainty in
decisions of Religion; for all the body of the true Church being there
representatively, both in the one and the other, the assistance of the holy
Ghost is there equally infallible.

But in regard of evidence, the authority of Oecumenicall Counsels in deed,
is more powerful and eminent, in the behalf of those men which are divided
from the Church, then that of Oecumenicall Counsels in right. For in Counsels
Oecumenicall in right, there are none but Catholics, that are assured, that
all the body of the Church is there assembled: whereas in Counsels
Oecumenicall in deed, each of the parties co^testing, is of agreement, that
all the Body of the Church is there represented. And the medley of heretical
or Schismatic Bishops, that is provided with the only, succession of the
Episcopal character, but cut of from the communion of the Body of the Church
hinders not, but that in such counsels, the holy Ghost may work by the common
note of the Assembly; because, the true Church receiving those Bishops there
(for the effect then present) into her charity, and into her communion, while
they are joined with her, to the end to seek means to assemblish unity; she
re-enables and restores to them for the time of the assembly, the authority
of the exercise, and of the Jurisdiction of their order whereof before, there
remained to them nothing but the character.

To say then that some of the Counsels of the latter age, have not been
Oecumenicall, because the Greeks or Ethiopians did not assist there, is not a
valuable exception, unless it first appear that the Greeks or Ethiopians are
true and lawful parts of the Church, and have not been justly cut off and
divided from the Catholic communion. For it suffices to make a Counsel
general and universal in right, that all the parts that remain actual
within the Body and communion of the true Catholic church, do concur to it:
and it is not requisite, that those that are lawfully separated from her either
for Schism or herefie, as are the Greeks who err in the Faith of the
procession of the holy Ghost, which his Majesty himself holds to be an
article of Faith; and the natural Egiptians and Ethiopians who (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...).
err in the Faith of the hipostaticall union, and in the quality of
Eutichians, and Monophysites, are excluded from the Body of the Church from
before the fifth Council, should assist to it. And notwithstanding yet even in
these last ages, there have been Counsels Oecumenicall indeed, and in the
sense whereto his Majesty imployes this term; when the parts separated
frothe Body of the Church whould have conspired to some re-unio^: As that of
Lateran under Pope Innocent the third where there where with the Pope, the
Patriarckes of Constantinople and Jerusalem, and the legates of those of
Alexandria and Antioch, and more then 400. Bishops and 70. Archbishops, from
all the parts of the Church, as well Greek as Latin: And that of Florence
under Eugenius the fourth where assisted the Act. (...). Flore^t. Chalcoco.
dyl. de reb. Tur. Platin. Damia^ Goes, and (...).
Greeks with their Emperor and their Patriarch, and the Legates of three other
Patriarchs, and the Armenians, and the deputies also of the Ethiopians; and in
both these they were agreed of all the points of Faith which in these days are
again put to question. From whence it appears, that the want of General
Counsels, could not make the Church to be less acknowledgeable, in the last
days, then she was in the first.

Of the effect of Counsels for the visibilitie of the Church. CHAPT II.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
AND in the ancient times, it was a firm bond by which all the members of the
Catholic Church were bound in the frame of one self Body, which body for
this cause was meruailously noble and eminent, being so constituted in the view
and knowledge of all, that none thought they would, could have been ignorant of
her. One Faith, one policy, one Body of the Catholic Church, a frequent
visitation of the parts amongst themselves, a marvelous consent of all the
members, an admirable sim pathie.

THE REPLY.
RAther some time these were the means, which heretics, or those Emperors
that favored them made use of to shake and dissolve the mass and frame of the
Body of the Church, from whence proceeded the complaints of the Fathers, that
after things had been once resolved of in the Church, they should noe more
hold other new Counsels; that after the Council of Nicea, every other
Council was superfluous, and that they never saw any good effect of all those
Counsels, as is by S. GREGORY Nazianzene above said. And therefore these rich
and magnificent amplifications of eloquence were noe impediments, but that the
Church when Luther began might have been not only as much, but more visible,
illustrious, and eminent, then she was many times in those ages; witness the
objections that the Donatists Aug. cont. Vinc. cp. 48.
made to saint AUSTIN of the estate of the Church principally in the East, in
saint HILLARYS time, Such was, (said saint AVS;) the time whereof Hillary has
written, from whence thou think to set ambushes for so many divine
witnesses, as if the Church were the^ perished from the Globe of the Earth. And
Hier. ad Da^. cp 57.
saint IEROM because the East striking against herself by the ancient fury of
her people, tore in little pieces the unseamed coat of our Lord, wouen from
above; and that the foxes destroyed the Vine of Christ, in such sort, as it is
difficult amongst the dry pondes and which have noe water, to discern the
sealed fountain, and the enclosed garden; therefore I thought, I ought to
consult with the Chair of Peter and the Faith praised by the mouth of the
Apostles. For whereas his Majesty adds that the Body of the Church was then
set in such an eminence of view and knowledge, that she could not be unknown,
noe not by those that would have been ignorant of her, this was very true, if
you took all Catholic provinces together, and compared them with every
particular Sect, and it had place in regard of those that were within the
bosom of the Church, which neither then nor since could have been ignorant of
the Body and Society of the true Church, for as much as they all agreed in
the hypothesis, that the Church ought to be discerned by inimitable and
indisputable marks, and that those that had them not, could not feign to have
them; as the communion (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
with the Sea of saint PETER; the continued and not interrupted Succession of
ministry, and Doctrine; the eminency, and universality above all other
Christian Sects taken every one a part, and other such like.

But in regard of those that were separated from it, as heretics, and
Schismatickes who would discern the Church by marks more obscure then the
thing itself, and such as all Sects persuade themselves to have, to wit; by
the conformity of Doctrine with the scripture, interpreted according to the
sentence of every particular man; there was nothing less evident. For to
those, the Church how eminent soever she had been, has always been obscure,
and hidden; not for the want of her light and eminency, but because of their
darkness and blindness. This, says saint AVS. is common to all heretics to be
unable to see the thing, that in the world is (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
most manifest, and constituted in the light of all nations, out of whose
unity, whatsoever they work, although they seem to do it with great care
and diligence, can noe more profitt them against the wrath of God, then the
spider webb against the extremity of cold. And again The Church is not
hidden, for she is not under a (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
bushel, but upon a Candlestick, to give light to all that are in the House.
And of her it is said; The City built upon a Mountain cannot be hidd, but
she is as hidden to the Donatistes, who hear so clear and manifest
testimonies which demonstrate her to be spread over the whole world, and yet
had rather blindfold strike against the mountain, then ascend it. And other
where; how can I call those but blind Id. in ep. (...). (...) 2.
that see not so great a mountain, and shutt their eyes against the lamp,
set upon the candlestick.

Of the comparison of the Pope, with the other Patriarchs. CHAP. III.
The continuance of the kings answer.
IF anio one were fallen for heresy or Schism from the communion of one of
the Churches (I say not one of the first, which were the Seats of the four
Patriarckes, but of any other of those, which were much less) as soon as
it was known, he was reputed excluded, from the communion of all the
Catholic Church.

THE REPLY.
IN the time of saint AVSTINE, there was yet but three true (...) Seats in the
Church; I mean, invested with patriarchall Jurisdiction; to wit, Rome,
Alexandria, and Antioch; Jerusalem having obtained noe patriarchall division,
till the Council of Chalcedon. For before it was but a simple Bishopric,
subject itself in the first instance, to the Archbishop of Cesarea, and by
appeal, to the Patriarck of Antioch: and not bearing the title of a Patiarcke,
but only as a name of honor to have place in the Counsels after the true
Patriarckes, but not to exercise Jurisdiction over any other diocese.

This appears both by the Council of Nicea which perserues the title Conc.
Hic c. 7.
of honor to the Bishop of Elia, that is, to the Bishop of Jerusalem, always
saving the dignity of his own Metropolitan, meaning the Archbishop of
Cesarea. And by saint IEROM, who asks John Bishop of Jerusalem why he had
recourse to the Sea of Alexandria, since the judge of the Hiero. ad Damas. con
err. Ioahn. Hie rosol.
Bishop of Jerusalem in the first instance, was the Archbishop of Cesarea, and
in the second, he of Antioch. Thou (says he) which searchest out
Ecclesiastical rules and make use of the Canons of the Council of Nicea
etc. answer me, wherein does Palestina belong to the Bishop of Alexandria? it
is ordained, if I be not deceived, that Cesarea should be metropolitan of
Palestina; and Antioch of all the East: then either thou ought to have
referred they cause to the Bishop of Cesarea etc. or if there were cause to
seek a judgment farther, thou should rather have written to Antioch: And a
while after; but thou have rather chosen to importune ears already possessed,
then to yield due honor to thy Metropolitan.

And finally this appear by the Council of Chalcedon which assigns to Co^c.
Chalc act. 7.
Iuuenall Patriarck of Jerusalem for his first Patriarchall territory, the
three Palestina's. For that Jerusalem in the Council of Constantinople, was
called the mother of all the Churches; it was mother in antiquity, and not
mother Theod hist eccl. l. 5. c. 9.
in authority: And that in the Council of Ephesus, Iuuenall Bishop of
Jerusalem says, according to the Latin translation of Rome, that the ancient
custom, and the Apostolical tradition was, that the Church of Antioch was to
be directed by the Church of Jerusalem, it is a mistaking of the translator of
Rome, who insteede of saying the Roman as Peltanus has Conc. Ep. part. 2. act.
4.
it, has said the Ierosolomitan. For that the last clause of the period, is
to have reference to the Roman Sea, as was done by Peltanus, and not to that of
Jerusalem as the interpreter of Rome has done, abusing himself with this that
the word to obey gouernes the dative, and not considering that the word, to
honor, which is there added alters the rule, is verified by seven undoubted
profes.

First it is verified by this, that the greek text shoud also have no
construction, there being no verb within the period to govern this
accusative, the throne Apostolic of great Rome, but the verb to honor. It is
secondly proved, because always the Bishops of Rome, and not those of
Jerusalem have judged of the Counsels of Antioch, as it has been above
specified in the cause of Paul Samosatenus, and of of saint ATHANASIVS. It is
thirdly verified, because the nullitie propounded against the Council of
Antioch in saint ATHANASIVS time, was grounded not upon the absence of the
Bishop of Jerusalem who yet was no more there, then the Bishop of Rome, as
Socrates notes, but upon the absence of the Soc. hist. eccl l. 2. c. 8.
Pope or his legates It is verified in the fowrth place, because the Bishop of
Antioch was so far from being subject to him of Jerusalem, that contrariwise
Co^c. Nice^. c 7.
the Bishop of Jerusalem, as has lately been showed both by the testimony of
the Council of Nicea, and by that of saint IEROM. Hier. cont. error.
was subject in the first instance to the Bishop of Cesarea and by appeal,
Ioann. episc Hierosol.
to him of Antioch. It is verified in the fifth place, because the same
Council of Ephesus, and in the presence of the same Iuuenall, sent back the
Conc. Ep. p. 2. cp. 5 in relat. ad celest.
cause of John Patriarcke of Antioch, to the Pope. It is verified in the sixth
place, because in the Council of Chalcedon, where Iuuenall was also present,
the sentence of Anatholius, Bishop of Constantinople was, that Maximus Co^c.
Chalc act. 10.
Bishop of Antioch should remain, for as much as Pope Leo having received him
into his Communion, had judged that he should rule the Church of Antioch. And
finally it is verified, because in the general Council of Constantinople
against the Monothelites, the cause of Macarius Patriarch of Antioch who had
been deposed by the Council, was sent back not to the Bishop of Jerusalem but
to the Pope. Macarius and Imp. Co^st. Pop in (...) Constable 6. (...). 18.
his adherents (says the Emperor Constantine Pogonat,) have been deposed by
the consent of the whole Council and remitted to the discretion of the most
(...) Pope.

The same may be also said of the Archbishopricke of Constantinople; for as
much as although that the Council of Constantinople, holden under Nectarius,
had desired to erect it into a Patriarckship, nevertheless this desire had no
place till after the Council of Chalcedon. By means whereof, the Church did
not acknowledge in the time of saint AUSTIN any more then the three
Patriarchall Chaires, which had been acknowledged by the Council of Nicea, to
wit Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch. Soc. hist. ec (...). l. 5. c. 8.
For whereas Socrates putts amongst the Patriarchips of the Eastern Empire,
the primacie of Pontus, and that of Asia-minor; from whence some infer, that
it is an impertinent thing, to go about to restrain the number of the ancient
Patriarckes, to the only Seas mentioned by the Canons of the Nicean Council,
they show their own impertinencie, not to see, that Socrates there extendes by
confusion of language the word (...). ep. (...) (...). (...). 5. (...) Tu.
(...) hist. Franc. l 5. c. 20. (...). (...) in lib. (...) (...). Titul de
Sacrosanct. (...).
Patriarchs, to all kind of Primates, and imployes it not vniuocallie, and in
the same sense whereto we employ it when we speak of Patriarchs properly
taken; no more then when Cassiodorus calls the primates, and Metropolitans of
Italy, Patriarcks, or when Gregory of Tours calls Nicetius (...) of Lion,
Patriarcke; they intend not to speak of Patriarckes properly and strictly
taken, but of Patriarckes taken largely and generally.

Now these things were manifestly distinct as Cuias has plainly noted in
these terms, the imperial law separates the privileges Patriarchall, and
metropoliticke. For not to touch other diversities, which were between the
Patriarckes specially taken, that Antiquity otherwise calls Archbishops, and
Patriarchs generally taken, that is between Patriarckes and those that were
but simply Primates, and Metropolitans, there was this difference between
them; that the Seat of the Patriarckes properly and especially taken, was
fixed, and annexed to the dignity of their Seas, and never varied for any
respect of anterioritie, of posterioritie, of promotion. In such sort as
Patriarckes properly taken, never preceded by any primates or Motropolitans,
whatsoever anterioritie of promotion the simple primates, or metropolitans had
before them; nor amongst the Patriarckes properly taken, the third never
preceded the second, whatsoever antiquity of promotion he had above him: but
their Seats were annexed to the order of their Seas, and not to that of their
promotion. Where Patriarckes generally and inproperlie taken, that is to say,
primates or metropolitans, had amongst them no Seats annexed to the dignity
of their Seas, but the ancientest primate, or Metropolitan preceded the others.
And therefore whatsoever extension, and communication that the less curious
authors have made of the name Patriark (...). (...). 123.
to other primates, and Metropolitanes, yet when there harh been question, to
speak of the Patriarckes properly so called, the Church never acknowledged
more then five Patriarckes, three ancient, and originarie, Rome, Alexandria,
and Antioch, and two accessorie, and supernumerarie (...), and Constantinople,
as it appears both by the testimony of the Emperor JUSTINIAN, who writes, the
most Blessed Archbishops and Patriarckes which are, he of ancient Rome, he of
Constantinople, he of Alexandria, he of Antioch, and he of Jerusalem; and by
the testimony of saint GREGORY the great, who reckons four Patriarckes Greg.
(...). ep. l 2. ep. 37.
besides the Pope, when he says in his Epistle to Natalis. Bishop of Salona;
If one of the four Patriarchs had committed such a disobedience, it could not
have passed without a grievous scandal: And by the testimony of the sixth
general Council of Constantinople, which says to the Emperor CONSTANTINE
Pogonat, We pray your imperial wisdom, that the copies of this decree, Sext.
(...). Constable. (...). 18 Theod. Bals. de (...). priuiledg. apud. l. eun clau.
may be sent to the five Patriarchall Thrones. And by the Testimony of
Balsamon, who compares the Patriarckes to the Organes of the Senses, and
affirms, that as there are five Senses in the human Body, so there are five
Patriarckes in the Church; The Patriarckes (says Salsamon) are as the five
senses in one only and selfsame head. And again, We acknowledge the five
most sacred Patriarckes for the only head of the Body of all the Churches
Idem. ibid. Conc. Nic. c. 7.
of God. And indeed the seventh Canon of the Council of Nicea in saying;
Because the ancient Custom and tradition bears, that the Bishop of Jerusalem
be honored, the Council or daineth that he have the next place of honor,
saving the dignity of his own Metropolitan. Does it not evidently show two
things; the one that the Sea whereof the Council spoke before this Canon had a
preeminent rank of honor, both before the Bishop of Jerusalem, and before all
the other Seas of the Church; And the other that the Bishop of Jerusalem had
the next place of honor after them, that is to say; followed them in order of
rank and precedencie, and had place of all the metropolitans, even his own,
to wit; the Arbishop of Cesarea, who was Metropolitan of Palestina, but
without any Patriarchall Jurisdiction; but contrariwise with an obligation to
remain subject in the first instance to the Jurisdiction of the metropolitan
of Palestina, and by appeal to that of the Patriarch of Antioch?

Now there were but three Seas which preceded that of Jerusalem, and after that
of Jerusalem, there were noe more Seas which had fixed places, but all the
other Primates and metropolitans changed their Seats, according to the
anterioritie, or posterioritie of their promotion. And consequently the
intention of the Council of Nicea was not to place in the ranks of Seas
truly Patriarchall, that is to say; which had Patriarchall place, and
jurisdiction, but only the three Seas before named there and I co. ad Antol.
ep. a 51.
in the same rank as they are there named; to wit, Rome, Alexandria, and
Antioch, as saint LEO the first protests to Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople
in these words; I am sorry that thy charity is fallen into this fault to
assaie to infring the most sacred constitutions of the canons of Nicea, as if
thou had wacht a time on purpose to make the Sea of Alexandria loose the
privilege of the second Conc. Nic. c 6.
honor, and the Church of Antioch the propriety of the third Dignity. And to
this it contradicts not that the same Council of Nicea says speaking of the
Sea of Antioch; Likewise both in Antioch, and in other provinces the
privileges to be preserved to the Churches. For he means by the other
provinces the Innoc. ad Alex. episc. Antioc. ep. 16.
Eastern provinces which he would should be subject to the Bishop of Antioch,
saving the right of those, who by reason of the too great distance; or
incommoditie of the ways, had accustomed to take the ordination Hier. ad Pam.
Co^terror.
of their Metropolitans from their Synods, which has given subject to Pope
Innocent the first to write, that by the Council of Nicea the Bishop Ioann.
of Antioch was established not over a Province, but over a Diocese; that
Ieros. ep. 77.
is to say, according to the Style of the ancient lawiers, over a Body and a
great number of Provinces: and to saint IEROM to say, that the Innoc. ad Alex.
Episc Antioc. ep. 16. Conc. Ephesians.
Council of Nicea had decreed; that Antioch should be the Metropolitan of all
the East: And to Alexander Patriarch of Antioch to complain, that the Cyprians
against the Canons of the Council of Nicea ordained their Conc. (...) (...).
2. Act. 7.
Bishop without his permission: And to the Cyprians contrariwise to protest,
that by the Canons of the Council of Nicea, the right of the ordination of
their Bishops had been preserved to them. The true Patriarchs then ancient, and
originarie, in regard of Jurisdiction were the only three Seas of saint PETER,
Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch, which were all three, in some sort one Sea, as
saint GREGORY the great Greg. ep. (...). (...) ep. 30.
witnesses to Eulogius Patriarch of Alexandria in these words; Although (said
he) there be many Apostles, yet for principality, the only Sea of the
prince of the Apostles has obtained the authority, which is in three places
from one only; for he exalted the Sea, wherein he vouchsafed to set up his
rect, and end his present life; he has adorned the Sea to which he ordained
the Evangelist his disciple; and he has established the Sea, wherein he was
resident seven years, although he were to depart from it. which our Hincmarus
long after repeated in these (...). in op. 55. ca (...). 6.
terms; the Seas of the Roman, Alexandrian, and Antiochian Churches, are one
same Sea of the great Prince of the Apostles, Peter.

And of this ternary number, the reason was, that saint PETER of In Chapt. 57.
whose authority, and superintendencie we will treat else where, willing in
his life time to cast the first foundations of the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, which ought to be observed after him, and the other Apostles,
judged that the easiest means to establish it, was to settle the principal
Seats in those places; where the principal Tribunalls of the temporal
Jurisdiction were constituted, because of the correspondencie which the
inferior Cities already had to those Seats. Now there were then, three
principal Cities Metropolitan and Capital in the Empire, bredd from (...)
Chrysostom. (...). 32.
the union of the Eastern Empire, that is to say; the Monarchy of Alexander
and of his Successors, with the Empire of the west. That of Alexandria which
Dion Chrysostom calls the second City beneath the Sun, which was the
Seat of the Empire of Egypt, and of the other neighbour-Regions (...) hell.
(...). (...). 3.
after converted into the prefecture of Egypt: That of Antioch which Josephus
calls the third City of the Roman world (and which is entitled by Chrysostom. ad.
pop. (...). hom. (...).
saint Chrysostom, the head, and mother-Cittie of the East) which was the head
of the particular Empire of the East, that is to say, of the Asian East, after
converted into the gouermnent of Siria, and other Eastern provinces; and that
of Rome, which was the head of the western Empire from whence the ancient
Jews called Rome the Empire of Edom, that is, the Empire of the West, by
allusion to Idumea, which was situate toward the West from the Southern Judea;
And they called Titus who sacked Jerusalem, Titus the Idumean, a thing which
gave occasion to the latter Rabbis, to derive the race of Titus from Idumea;
and that the (...) Paraphrast turns these words of Jeremias: He will visit
thee daughter of Edom into these; I will visit thee, impious Rome. For the
division of Alexanders Paraphi. (...). (...). (...). (...).
Empire having been finally reduced to two principal Empires, the one the
Empire of Egypt holden by the posterity of Ptolomeus son of Lagus whereof
Alexandria was the head; the other the Empire of Asia possessed by the
Successors of Seleucus, who after he had conquered Demetrius king of Asia; made
(say Eusebius and saint IEROM) of the two (...) and (...). (...) (...).
Kingdoms of Syria and Asia, one Empire, whose capital city was Antioch.
Then when those two Empires came to be united with that of the common wealth of
Rome, which before held the Empire of the West, there where three principal
Cities Metropolita^ and capital in the Empire, two subalterne, to wit
Alexandria, which was head of the Empire of the South, that is the Empire of
Egypt: and Antioch which was the head of the Empire of the East, that is the
Empire of Asia. And one (...), to wit Rome, which was particularly head of the
Empire of the West; and besides had the superintendencie over the heads of the
other two Empires. For I do not reckon Carthage, for so much as she was long
before made a member of the Western Empire.

For these causes then, as the Church cast her first root in Asia, saint PETER
also first planted his Episcopal Sea at Antioch, the capital city Greg. ep.
l. 6. ep 36.
of the East, where he was resident comprehending his voyages into the
neighbor provinces seven year, and there founded a successor, or rather a
succession, which was after the death of the Apostles, head of all the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Eastern Asia; from whence it is, that in
the Co^c. Chalc act. 7.
Council of Chalcedon, the Patriark of Antioch intitleth his Sea, the Sea of
S. PETER of the great city of the Antiochians: and that S. CHRYSOSTOM.
Chrysostom. homil. in beat Ignat.
citizen of Antioch cries, God showed by the effect, that he had great care of
the city of Antioch, for he ordained that Peter the superintendent of the
whole world; he, to whom he had consigned the keys of the Kingdom of heaven;
he, to whom he had committed the disposition of all things, should be a long
time resident there; and that S. INNOCENT the first, of the same time with S.
CHRYSOSTOM, Innocen. ad Alexan. Episc. Antioch. ep. 18.
writes to Alexander Patriark of Antioch; The Sea of Antioch had not given
place to the Sea of Rome, but what that obtained only by the way, this
obtained absolutely and finally. From whence the same saint PETER seeing that
the Church began to grow further, and to spread her roots through all the
world, he tra^sported himself to Rome; which was both in particular, head of
the West, and in general head of the world, and held there the Episcopal
Chair, co^prehending many voyages 25. years. Simon Peter (says saint Hier.
de script. eccl.
IEROM) son of Jona of the province of Galilee, of the borough of Bethsaida,
brother to Andrew the Apostle. and prince of the Apostles, after the Episcopate
of the Church of Antioch, and the preaching of the dispersion of those of the
Circumcision, who had believed in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithinia, came to Rome the second year of the Empire of Claudius, to overthrow
Simon the Magician, and there held 25. years the Episcopal Chair: And S. LEO
the first, addressing Athan. apol 2.
his speech in the form of Apostrophe to the same S. PETER; Thou had (said
he) already founded the Church of Antioch, in which the word Christian, first
received birth; thou had already replenished, Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bithinia, with the laws of the Evangelical preaching. Then finally
having established the superintende^cie of the Eastern Church at Antioch, and
of that of the West, at Rome, and considering he had still one of the three
capital cities of the Empire to provide for; to wit, that of Alexandria,
which was the head of the Empire of Egypt, he appointed and placed there his
second self, that is to say, his Ghostly child, and well-beloved disciple S.
Mark the Evangelist: From whence it is that Julius the first reported by S.
ATHANASIVS, writes of Alexandria, it was not a common Church, but of the number
of those that the Apostles themselves had instituted. And S. IEROM; The Church
of Alexandria does glory, that Hier. ad Theoph. ep. 68. Idem ad Pam. and
Marcel. ep. 78.
she pertakes in the faith of the Roman: And again, that the Chair of the
Apostle Peter confirms by his preaching, the preaching of the Chair of Mark
the Evangelist: And saint LEO the first, writing to Dioscorus Patriarch of
Alexandria: Since that the most blessed Apostle Peter, has received from our
Lord, the principality of the Apostleship, and that the Roman Church remains
in his institution, it is unlawful to believe that his holy disciple Mark,
who first governed (...) ad Diosc. ep. 79.
the Church of Alexandria, has formed his decrees upon any other rules of
tradition.

And from thence took beginning these three Patriarchall Seas, correspondent
to the three Imperial Seats, under which the general union of the Empire was
made, but not so yet equal, but that amongst these three first Churches, that
is to say, first in regard of the Churches of their divisions, there was one
first, of the first and exalted, and superintendent over both the others; to
wit, the Roman. From whence it is, that the Council (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...).
os Sardica, and the Council of Chalcedon, and the Emperor Justinian, and S
GREGORY the Great, call her the head of all the Churches; and that the Emperor
Valentinian intitles the Pope, The Rector of the vniuer salitie of Churches.
And that the Council of Chalcedon qualifies him: him to whom the guarde of the
vine is committed by our Savior. And that the Emperor (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...).
Constantine Pogonat, and the sixth Council of Constantinople call him the
(...). (...). 6. ast. 18. cp. ad Agath.
Protothrone of the universal Church; (...). in (...). ad (...).
the President of the Apostolical height; Ibid.
the Soucraigne Pope; (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
the Captain of the sacred warfare; and the universal Patriark, and
Arch-pastor: and call the other Patriarchs, Sinthrones of the Pope, aster the
Pope. For I will not add that which some Catholics use to allege of
Cassiodorus; to wit, that he attributed to the Pope, the title of Bishop of
the Patriarchs; as well, because Cassiodorus there speaks not of Patriarchs
properly taken, but extends the word to Primates, and Metropolitans; as,
because I doubt it must be read disiunctiuelie Papam vel Patriarchalem
Episcopum, and not explicatiuely Papam vel Patriarcharum Episcopum. It
suffices me to say, that as the city of Rome besides that she was head of
the Empire of the West, a thing which was common to her with the two other
cities of Alexandria and Antioch, each in the behalf of their ancient
territory, had yet this condition more above the rest, that she was also the
head of the universal Body of the Empire, so the final and absolute Sea of
S. PETER, which he constituted at Rome besides the Patriarchall jurisdiction,
and as correspondent to the Empire of the West, in which it agreed with the
other Patriarchall Chaires; had yet more, the degree of head of the Church, and
Prince of the Patriarchs, in which he was superior to the other patriarchall
Thrones.

And when there was question of things that went beyond the Patriarchall
jurisdiction, that is of greater causes, and which concerned the universal
Churches, as were causes of Faith, or of the general customs of the Church,
or those of the final deposition of Bishops; or those of judging the very
persons, of the Patriarchs, exercised Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over them,
and judged both of their judgments and of their persons. For S. PETER having
purposed to follow in the distributio^ of spiritual jurisdictions, the order
already established in the distribution of temporal jurisdiction; it must
follow that the same proportion that was between the seat of Rome, and the
seats of the other two Empires, in case of politic and secular jurisdiction,
must likewise be maintained between the Sea of the Bishop of Rome, and those
of the other Patriarchs in case of Ecclesiastical and spiritual jurisdiction:
and that for two causes, the one occasional and remote, to wit, the secular
dignity of the city of Rome which had moved S. PETER to set the spiritual
sovereignty of the Church, in that place, where already the temporal
sovereignty of the commonwealth was settled: and the other near, formal and
immediate, to wit, the spiritual dignity of S. PETER, for the eminency
whereof, it was fit, that he that was the head of the episcopal society,
should establish his final and absolute Throne, and plant the stock of his
direct succession in that place, where the stock and principal Seat of the
human and temporal jurisdiction, was already planted: As the Emperors
Theodosius and Valentinian (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
note in these words; The primacie of the Sea Apostolic has been
established both by the merit of Peter, who is the Prince of the Episcopal
society; and by the dignity of the city, and by the sacred authority of
the Synod.

Now, there was this difference between the seat of the city of Rome, and
the seats of the other prefectures, in matter of secular and temporal
jurisdiction, that not only the Emperor of the Roman commonwealth, commanded
the Prefects and Presidentes of the other Seats, but also that the city
prefect of Rome, besides the jurisdiction of his ordinary territory which was
limited in regard of judgment, in the first instance, to a certain number
of provinces, had yet as head of the Senate, and vicar to the Emperor, the
right of examining by appeal the causes of all the provinces of the Fmpire.
For when Augustus, and the Emperors following, established, or re-establisht the
office of Prefect of the city of Rome, they gave him power to judge of the
appeals of all the provinces Guide. Pan. cirol. com. in notit.
of the Roman circle, as the interpreter of the notice of the Empire; and even
the adversaries of the Roman Church do acknowledge, alleging; be it well, be
it evil, these words of Mecenas reported in Dion, that the Prefect of Imp.
Occ. c. 4. l. de Suburbic region. impr Francofurt aun. 1618. c. 1. Dio. Cassi.
l. 52.
the city shall judge of the appeals and prouocations of all the Magistrates
above mentioned: And those of Statius addressed to the city prefect under
Domitian.

Jnque sinum, quae saepe tuumfora turbida quaestu
Confugiunt legesque, vrbesque, vbicunque togatae, Stat. Sylu l. 1.

(...) longinquis implorant iura querelis.
And those of an epistle from the Senate to the judges of Carthage reported
Vopisc. in vita Floria.
by Vopiscus in the time of the Emperor Tacitus: All appeals shall belong to
the city Prefect, which shall yet proceed from the (...), and ordinary
Judges. And these of an other epistle of the Senate, to the Judges of Treues,
Vopisc. ib.
and to the Antiochians, Aquileyans, Milaneses, Alexandrians, Thessalonians,
Corinthians, and Athenians; The right of appeal has been universally decreed
to the Prefecture of the city: And these of an epistle of Tiberianus; The
appeals Vopisc ib. Codex Theod. l. 11. tit. 30. l. 13.
from all the powers, and from all the dignities, are returned to the city
Prefect. And these from a law of Constantine to Julian the city Prefect: We
will not that the judges from whom the appeal shall remitt the causes to our
clemency, but they shall have recourse to the sacred auditorie of thy
gravity, to whom we have committed our Vicarship; which was after abolished by
the translation of the appeals to the Pretoriall Prefects; from whence we
have a law of 1. Codex Theod l. 11. tit. 30. l. 27.
Constantius in the Theodosian-Code, which ordaines the Prefect of the Pretory
of Italy, to examine the appeals from Sicily, from Sardinia, from Calabria,
from Prussia, and from the provinces now called Lombardy, and adds for the
city Prefect informed by our answer has been advertised to depart from it.
By means whereof, as the city of Rome, besides that she is head of the
Empire of the West, leaves not to have dominion over the heads of the two
other Empires; or to reduce the matter into more strict terms; as the Prefect
of Rome in the first ages of the Empire, besides the ordinary jurisdiction that
he had over the provinces of his territory, yet left not as Vicar to the
Emperor and head of the Senate to judge of the appeals os all other provinces:
so the Pope, beside the jurisdiction he had in quality of Patriark of the
West, over the provinces of the patriarkship os the West; yet lest not as head
os the Church and successor of saint PFTFR, and principal Vicar of Christ to
have the supereminence, and general superintendence, over all the other
provinces. To the Roman Church (says saint IRENEVS) because of a more mighty
principality; Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
that is to say, as has above appeared, because of a principalitien ore
mighty then the temporal) it is necessary, that all Churches should agree.
And saint CYPRIAN; The Roman Church is the Chair os PEPER, Cypr. ad Corn. ep.
52.
and the principal and original of the Socerdotall unity. And Saint
Athanasius; They have had noe reverent esteem that Rome was the Sea
Apostolic, (...). (...) (...).
and metropolitan of Romania. And saint GREGORY Nazianzene; The (...). (...).
(...) (...) (...)
ancient Rome treads rightly in the faith, houlding all the West bound by the
healthful word, as it is convenient for her to do, that rules all the world.
And saint IEROM, a priest of the Church of Antioch, and disciple of S.
Gregory Nazianzene, writing to Pope Damasus; I know the Church is founded upon
that (...). ad Dam. ep. 57.
stone: whosoever eats the lamb out of that house, is profane: And a little
after; I know not Vitalis; I am ignorant of Miletius; I reject Paulinus:
whosoever gathers Aug. ep. 162.
not with thee scatters. And S. AVST. In the Roman Church has always (...),
the principality of the Sea Apostolic. And Prosper whom saint (...) Prosp de
(...). l. 2. (...). 6.
reputes his second self, and whom Joseph Scalager calls the most learned man
of his age; The principality of the Apostolic priesthood, has made (...)
greater by the Tribunal of Religion, then by that of the Empire; and else where
changing his prose into verse: Prosp. de (...).


Rome, great Apostle Peter's sacred Seat,
Head, of the Churches-Bodie, here below;
Has by Faithes Empire, made her self more great,
Then she by all her armed powers, could grow.
And (...) the first, in the epistle to Anastasius Bishop of Thessalonica; Leo
ad Anast Episcop (...). ep. (...).
It has been provided by a grand order, that all should not attribute all
things to themselves, but that in every province, there should be some whose
sentence might hold the first place amongst their brethren: And again; that
there might be others constituted in the greater cities, who might use a
greater diligence, by whom the care of the universal Church might flow to the
only Seat of Peter. And therefore (...) the Allexandria^s would accuse
Dionisius Patriark of Alexandria their Bishop, they went up to Rome, says S.
ATHANASIVS, and accused him (...) (...) (...). (...)
before (...) Bishop of Rome. And when the same ATHANASIVS, likewise Patriark
of Alexandria, Paul Bishop of Constautinople; and Marcellus Primat of Aneyra in
Galatia, had been deposed by diverse Counsels of the (...); The Bishop of Rome
(says Sozomene) restored to each one his (...) (...). (...) (...)
Church, because to him, for the dignity of his Sea, the care of all things
belonged. And when the cause of John Patriark of Antioch, had been propounded
to the Council of Ephesus, the Council remitted the judgment to the Pope: And
Iuuenall Bishop of Jerusalem said, that the anoient custom and (...) tradition
bare, that the Church of Antioch should be ruled by the Roman.

And when the Council of Chalcedon disanulled the acts of the false Council
of Ephesus, they excepted the creation of Maximus Patriark (...) (...).
of Antioch, because says Anatolius Archbishop of Constantinople; The Pope
having received him into his communion, has judged that he should rule the
Church of Antioch. And when Theodoret Bishop of Cyre in the borders of Persia,
and subject to the patriarkhip of Antioch, had been deposed in the same
Council of Ephesus, he appealed to the Pope, and the Council (...).
of Chalcedon received him; because says the Senate, The Pope had restored him
to his dignity. And when Flauianus Archbishop of Constantinople, had been
deposed by Dioscorus Patriark of Alexandria, and by the false Council of
Ephesus, he appealed likewise to the Pope; and that says the Emperor
Valentinian following the custom of the Counsels. (...) (...) (...) (...).
(...). (...). (...). (...)
And when John Patriark of Alexandria, had been driven from his Sea, by the
plott of the (...) Zeno, he also appealed to the Pope, and that with the
intercession of the Patriark of Antioch, as Liberatus Archdeacon of (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)
a writer of a thousand and one hundred years antiquity, reports in these
words; John (says Liberatus) having taken Synodicall letters of intercession
Liberat. c. 2.
from Calendian Patriarch of Antioch, appealed to Pope Simplicius. And thus
much of the comparison of the Pope, with the other Patriarchs: For (...)
as for the canon of the Council of Nicea, which seems to rule the Bishops In
chap. 32
of Alexandria and Antioch over the Bishop of Rome, it shall be spoken of
hereafter.

Of the difficulties of the Scripture, concerning the time of S. Peter's stay
at Antioch, and at Rome. CHAPT. IV.
BUT against this that we have affirmed of the sitting of Saint PFTER at
Antioch, and at Rome; Calvin, and the other adversaries of the Church, form
twelve principal objections; eight from the Scripture, and four from the
Fathers. The first objection is, that S. PAVL found S. PETER in Jerusalem the
two first voyages that he made thither; the one, three year after his
conversion; and the other, when Galat. 1. Act. 12. Hier. de script. cccl. in
Petro. Greg. ep. l. 6. ep. 36. Hier. ibid.
he carried the alms for the famine foretold by Agabus; and then that the
Episcopal stay of S. PETER at Antioch, which after S. Ieroms computation
between these two voyages, could not be seven years, as S. Gregory affirms
it, and as we suppose it; for as much as S. Paul's conuersio^happened at the
soonest, three years after the death of JESUS CHRIST; and S. PETER departed
from Jerusalem to go to Rome, the second year of the Empire of Claudius,
which was the eleauenth year after the death of Act. 15.
Christ. The second objection is, that S. PETER still assisted at Jerusalem,
at the Council holde^ for the legal causes about twenty year, say they,
after the death of our Lord and was crucified as we say, the fourteenth year
of the Empire of Nero, that is the seven and thirtith year after the death of
our Savior, and then he could not have been 25 year at Rome as we say. The
third that S. PAVL addressing the principal of his epistles to the Romans,
does not there salute S. PETER, whom he would not Romans 16.
have forgotten, if he had been there. The fourth is, that S. PAVL writing
Philip. 2.
from Rome to the Philippians, complained that every one sought his own, and
not that which was of Christ. And to Timothy that all had abandoned him: which
he would not have done if S. PETFR had been there. The 2. Tim. 4.
fist, that when S. PAVL came to Rome, the brethren went to meet him, Act. 28.
amongst whom there is noe mention of S. PETFR, and the Jews prayed him to
declare to them his opinion of the sect of the Christians, a thing they would
not have required, if S. PETER had preached at Rome before him. The sixth; that
S. LVKE who writ the history of the Acts of the Apostles, makes no mention of
S. PETER'S voyage to Rome. The seventh that S. PAVL who has described the
enterview between S. Galat. 1. and 2.
PETER and him at Jerusalem and Antioch, speaks not of their enter-view at
Joan. 21.
Rome, which was the most famous city of the world. And the eigth, that S.
John made mention of the kind of death by which S. PETER should glorify God,
but makes no mention of the place of his death. Now let us first dispatch the
objections taken out of scripture, and after we will proceed to those taken
out of the Fathers.

To the first objection then from Scripture, which is that S. PAVL still Calu.
inst. l. 4. c. 6.
found Saint PETER in Jerusalem in the two first voyages that he made (...);
(...) (...) one, three years after his conversion; and the other, when (...).
2.
(...) (...) (...) the alms for the famine, foretold by Agabus; and (...) 1.
Act. (...)
(...) (...) that the Episcopal stay of S. PETER at Antioch, which was (...)
(...) the two voyages, could not be of seven years: I answer, that the
(...) (...) of (...). Paul, happened not in the third year after the death of
our (...), as they pretend, a thing which troubles all the harmony of the
history, but the first. And this I prove in this manner. Between the Council
of Jerusalem, and S. (...) departure to go to Rome, S. Paul remained besides
the time employed in his (...), six year in the East; to wit, a year and a
half at Corinth; three months in the Synagogue (...) 18.
(...) 19.
of the jews at (...) (...); two years in the school of Tyrannus, three
months (...).
again in (...); and two other years finally in the prison at Act. 20.
(...) (...): for this word, and (...) forth two year after, has reference to
Act 24.
(...).
(...) time of saint Paul's imprisonment, and not to the time of the
institution of (...), as it appeared by saint Paul's testimony, who says,
that (...).
(...) had (...) (...) many years. Now saint Paul departed from (...) (...)
come to Rome the four and twentieth year after the death of (...) (...).
(...) (...) (...) (...) that he came forth of prison, when (...) (...) of
(...) was (...) in (...) steed; and (...) notes, that (...) (...) being (...)
to Rome was absolved from his faults committed (...), (...) the credit that
his brother Pallas had with the Emperor Nero: (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
(...) (...) Tacitus quoteth, that Pallas was fallen from Neros favor (...)
(...) (...) of Antistius, which was the second year after the (...) of Christ;
or if we comprehend the year of Christ's death, within (...) (...), the sieve
and twentieth. And to this S. IEROM agrees, (...) (...) says; Paul was sent
prisoner to Rome the five and twentieth year after the (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...)
(...) (...) (...) our Lord; that is the second year of Nero, when Festus
Procurator (...) (...) (...) Felix. From the four and twentieth year then
after the (...) of Christ, if you subtract the six years interposed between
the Council of (...), and the voyage of S. Paul to Rome, there will (...),
that the Council of Jerusalem was holden at the latest, the eighteenth year
after the death of our Lord, and not the twentieth as they suppose. Now between
the conversion of S. Paul, and the Council of (...) (...) (...) S. Paul
teaches us, that there were seauenteene years, (...) (...) writ to the
(...); three years after I went to Jerusalem to see (...). (...).
And again; and then after fourteen years I went up again into Jerusalem.
For where Calvin will have it that the voyage of Jerusalem where of S. (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)
Paul speaks in the Epistle to the Galathians, when he says, again after
fourteen (...) (...) went up to Jerusalem, should not be the voyage of the
Council Act. (...) 12
but the voyage of the alms for the famine is a gross ignorance, since the
voyage of the alms for the famine, was made before the death of (...) (...)
(...), who deceased as it shall hereafter appear, twelve year after the
death of Christ. And whereas the same Calvin says that the fourteen year
quoted by S. Paul, should not be added to the end (...) the (...) (...) before
mentioned but should be counted from his conversion, (...) (...) by the greek
phrase, which insinuates, that these fourteen years were interposed between
the voyage for the visit of S. Peter, and the voyage to the council; which
gave Beza occasion to translate it thus: And (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) interuented, I went up again into Jerusalem. And to saint
(...) (...) (...). Paul testifies that after seauenteene years (...) conferred
fully (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...). Then let us defalke from the four and twenty years (...) (...)
Death of Christ, at the end where of saint PAVLE went to (...), the six years
which passed between the Council of Jerusalem, and the departure of saint
Paul to go to Rome, and from the remainder which will be eighteen years,
subtract the seauenteene year, which passed between the Conversion of Saint
PAVL, and the Council of Jerusalem, it will appear that the conversion of
saint PAVL happened the first year after the death of our Lord, as the
Chronicon of Eusebius reckons it: and then that the third year after the
conversion of saint PAVL, which was that wherein saint PAVL transported
himself Galat. 1.
first into Jerusalem, and from Jerusalem, as says the Epistle, to the
Galathians Act. 11.
into Syria and Cilicia, that is to say, according to the history of the
Acts, to Tharsus and Antioch, was the fowrth year after the death of Leo ad
Anatol. Constable. Episc. ep. 51.
Christ, and consequently that the stay of S. PETER at Antioch began the
fourth year after the death of Christ. For S. LEO the first says plainly,
that the name of Christian had the original at Antioch, Saint Peter preaching
there, which could not have been so, if Saint Peter had not been come to
Antioch, within the compass of the same year that saint Paul arrived there,
during the which saint Luke testifies, that the disciples were first called
Christians at Antioch.

And against this it can not be said, that saint LVKE touches nothing Act. 11.
of this voyage of saint (...) to Antioch, for saint LVKE does no more touch
the conference of Saint PETER and saint PAVL at Antioch, which nevertheless
we learn out of the Epistle to the Galathians; nor that saint PAVLE recites,
in the Epistle to the Galathians the enterview between saint PETER and him at
Antioch, after the Council of Jerusalem. For besides that saint (...)
maintains, that the enterview between Augep. 19. ep. con.
saint PETER and saint PAVL at Antioch, was before the Council Faust. l. 19.
c. 17.
of Jerusalem, though it be recited after it, saint PAVLE does no where say,
that saint PETER and he never met more then once at Antioch. Now the voyage
that saint PAVL made into Jerusalem when he carried the alms for the general
famine foretold by Agabus, and found Act. 12.
S. PETER prisoner there, was the cleauenth year after the death of our
Savior. For the Scripture says, that this famine fell out under Claudius: and
Dion reckons the beginning of the general famine, which happened Dio. hist. l.
60.
in Claudius his time under the 795. th year of the foundation of Rome which
was the second year of Claudius his Empire; that is to say, the Ios. ant. l.
19. c. 7.
eleauenth after the Death of our Lord: And Josephus observes, that Herod
called Agrippa, author of saint PETER'S imprisonment, deceased the seventh
year of his Reign, which was the third year of the Empire of Claudius. And
therefore between the first voyage of saint PAVL to Jerusalem, and the second,
there was seven year, that is to say, five whole years, and two imperfect
years, which is the time that the Fathers, Greg. ep. l. 6. ep. 36.
and we after them, assign for saint PETER'S stay at Antioch. For that the
Latin Chronicon of Eusebius says, that he was there twenty sieve years, it is
a deprauution of the copies of Bsale in which insteede of five, they have set
in 25. as it may be seen by the account of the years noted by retaile,
which, are five, to wit, from the three and twentieth of Tiberius, to the second
of Claudius; or possibly (a frequent chance in chronologicall tables) an
entire addition, as it is coniectured by the Armenian copy, and diverse latin
manuscripts of the same Chronicon of Eusebius, which are kept in the library
of the Vatican; and by the Greek and Latin edition of Scaliger, in none of
which, this quotation is to be found. And to this there is no repugna^cy in
that that the history of the Acts following the custom of the Scripture,
which is often to recite immediately things far from that time places the
voyage of saint PAVL to Jerusalem Act. 11. verse. 30.
presently after the prophecy of Agalus: for saint LVKE speaking of Ibid.
verse. 28.
the famine foretold by Agabus, adds, which also happened under Claudius
(...), to show that the prophecy had been long before the Empire of (...): by
means whereof between the prophecy of Agapus, and the time of the famine
which began but the second year of the Empire of (...) there were past many
years: nether that the same history notes, that PAVL and BARNABAS conuersed a
year at Antioch: for (...) (...) (...).
that should not be taken from their arrival until the voyage of the (...);
which was executed many years after the prophecy of Agabus; (...) verses 26
and. 27.
but it is meant, that they staide a whole year at Antioch, without departing
from it, and then came again: nor that it says that Agabus came at the same
time to Antioch; for this note of time is referred in general to the time
before the Empire of Claudius; and it is put to discern the time of the
pronunciation of the prophecy, which was under the Empire of (...), from the
time wherein it was accomplished, which was under the Empire of Claudius.

To the second objection, which is, that Saint PETER assisted at the (...).
(...) 4 c. 6 The author of the (...) upon the Church c 8.
Council of Jerusalem which was celebrated twenty year after the Death of
Christ; and consequently could not be arrived at Rome the second year of the
Empire of Claudius, which was the eleauenth after the Death of Christ; neither
could then have, been Bishop there twenty five year; (...) answer there is
nothing incompatible between these two histories For Suetonius writes, that
Claudius drove the Jews out of Rome which moved (...), said he, at the
instance of Christ. Now Orosius notes, and that as he says, after Josephus,
that this banishment happened the ninth (...) hist. l. 7. c. (...).
year of the Empire of Claudius, which was the eighteenth year after the
Death of our, Lord; that is to say, as we have demonstrated in the solution
last past, the same year of the Council of Jerusalem. And saint LVKE
consirmes, who writes, that saint PAVL being come to Corinth, Act. 19.
a little after the Council of Jerusalem, found Prisca and Aquila there, who
were, said he new returne'd out of Italy, because Claudius had commanded all
the Jews to go forth of Rome. And therefore what wonder is it that saint
PETER beiug arrived at Rome the second year of the Empire of Claudius, and
having been constrained to avoid Rome with the other Jews seven year after;
that is to say, the ninth year of the Reign of Claudius, because of the
Edict published by him against the Jews; were in the East at the Council of
Jerusalem, which was celebrated that same year, and afterward, the heat of
the Edict being cooled, returned to Rome? Rome. 16.


To the third objection, which is, that saint PAVL writing to the Romans,
saluted not saint PETER, which he could not have forgotten to do, if he had
been there: we answer, that the Epistle to the Romans, was written in the
time of the Jews exile from Rome, and during saint PETER'S being in the East,
to wit, between the Council of Jerusalem, Rom 15.
and the death of Claudius, for it was written at Corinth, when saint PAVL
(...). (...).
passed by there, to make his last journey to Jerusalem. And therefore although
(...) and Aquila, and some other less notable Jews, were already returned to
Rome, nevertheless it follows not that saint PETER, who was the principal
author of the Jews conversion, for which their nation was banished, should so
soon return. Jointly that if this argument Heb. 13.
were of weight, we must withal conclude, that Timothy was not Bishop of
Ephesus, for S. PAVL writing to the Ephesians, makes no mention of him: and
that saint, James was not Bishop of Jerusalem, for in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, written in saint James his life time as appears by these (...), know
that the brother Timothy has been licenced, with whom, if he return (...). I
will visit you: there is no mention made of saint James. And therefore so far
is Theodoret (an author of the same time, with the Counsels of Ephesus and
Chalcedon, and one of the most famous writers of the Ecclesiastical history)
from taking one argument from the Epistle to the Romans, as the Popes
adversaries do, to call in question S. PETER'S stay at Rome; as contrariwise,
commenting the Epistle to the Romans, he says, that saint PAVL there uses the
word, to confirm, for as much as S. Peter had already founded Theod. in p. ad
Rom c. 1. c
the Gospel amongst them. Because (says Theodoret) that the great Peter, had
already declared to them the evangelical doctrine, therefore saint Paul
necessarily adds, to confirm you.

To the fourth objection, which is that S. PAVL writing from Rome, not only
touches no word of S. PETER, but also in the epistle written to the
Philippians from Rome says; that all sought that which was of themselves,
Phillp. 2. 2. Tim. 4.
and none sought which was of Christ: And in the second to Timothy, written
from the same place, that all had forsaken him. We answer, that in the one he
speaks of those that he might have sent to the Philippians, and Chrysostom. in 2 Timothy c. 4
that in the other he speaks, either of his familiars, as S. CHRYSOSTOM. says,
and of those which were accustomed to follow him, or of those that had power to
defend him, at the Imperial Tribunal of which number S. PETER was like to be
none. And besides we maintain, that S. PAVL speaks by Synecdoche saying,
all, insteede of saying, many, as S. IEROM (...) in ep ad Ephesians. c. 1. Bulling.
in 2. Tim. c. 4
acknowledges in these words; For as much as saint Paul had been forsaken by
many, he therefore writes, that all had forsaken him: And Bullinger minister
of Zurich, In these; I doubt not, but the Apostle used a Synecdoche, in this
passage, saying he had been forsaken of all, when as, only some had sorsaken
him. And finally we will add, that if from the silence of S. PAVL, it be
permitted to infer, that saint PETER was not at Rome, when saint PAVL writ
these epistles; we must then also conclude by the same argument that saint
PAVL was not there. For in any one of the epistles, that S. PAVL has written
from Rome, he neither makes mention of the city, nor Church of Rome; and we
only know that he writ them from Rome, because in the epistle to the
Philippians, he speaks of Cesars house; and Ahilipp. 4.
because in the epistle to the Ephesians; and to the Colossians; and in the
second to Timothy, he speaks of his prison.

To the sift objection, which is, that when saint PAVL arrived at Rome, Act. 18.
the brethren went to meet him, amongst whom there is no mention of S. PETER;
We answer, that all the Roman Church, went not to meet S. PAVL, but some
particular Christians, the Church then not being so free and quiet at Rome, as
they could make those public demonstratio^s; but contrarily so oppressed and
enclosed, as the most part of the faithful, were constrained to hide
themselves in caves, and places under ground, to avoid the persecutions and
tyrannies of the infidells. Jointly that we say not, that S. PETER remained
always fixed and tied to Rome, while he was Bishop thereof, but that he went
from time to time, planting the Gospel in the lesser cities, and placing
Bishops over them, and that during these voyages he administered the Roman
Church, by the ministry of Linus and Cletus, whom he had there establishes
for his Coadiutors; which is the cause for which (if we believe Russinus) they
are sometimes Ruffi. praef. in Clem.
reckoned in the order of the Bishops of Rome, before S. CLEMENT, and sometimes
after him. And whereas the Jews prayed S. PAVL when he Act. 28.
came to Rome, to inform them of the sect of the Christians, which they Calu.
inst. l. 4 c. 6.
object to us they would not have done, if saint PETER had already been Bishop
there; We answer, that they prayed S. PAVL to inform them, The author of the
trea. upon the Church. c. 8.
not of the sect of the Christians, but of the opinion that he (whom they
reputed to be greatly versed in the Jewish doctrine) had of them. Otherwise,
how could S. PAVL say in his epistle to the Romans, above four year before
his arrival at Rome; your faith is declared through the whole world? Romans 1.


To the sixth objection; which is, that S. LVKE, who has written the history
of the Apostles, speaks not of the voyage of S. PETER to Rome; we answer, S.
LVKE purposed to write particularly the acts of saint PAVL his master, and
not these of the other Apostles. For except that which past between the death
of our Lord, and the conversion of saint PAVL, where he treates the history of
the Apostles in common, to make it serve for a foundation to the particular
relation of the acts of S. PAVL, and except the discourse of the conversion of
Cornelius, which he adds there, for as much as this conversion, was the
ouerture of the Gospel to the Gentiles, for whose vocation S. PAVL had been
called; S. LVKE does not, after that to the end of his book, make mention of
any other Apostle, unless in as much as he was in the place where S. PAVL
was; and yet he omitts the voyage of S, PAVL to Jerusalem, to visit S. PETER,
and S. PETER and S. PAVLES meeting at Antioch, and the right hand of
association given by S. PETER, S. JAMES, and S. JOHN to S. PAVL; and the voyage
of the same S, PAVL into Galatia, which caused Beza to say, Luke has omitted
many things, and principally S. PAVLES voyage to the Galathians. And (...)
annot. (...) (...). ep. (...) (...).
therefore so far is S. IEROM from making use of S. LVKES silence, to weaken
the credit of S. PETER'S stay at Rome, as contrariwise he argues the stay of
S. PETER at Antioch and at Rome, to show how S. LVKE has passed many things
under silence, and takes this foundation for a certain and (...) ep. (...)
(...). (...). 2
undoubted principle of history. Finally (says S. IEROM) we have learnt,
that Peter was the first Bishop of the Church of Antioch, and that from thence,
be was transferred to Tome, which Luke has utterly omitted.

To the seventh objection, which is that S. PAVL speaks of the enterview
between S. PETER and himself, both at Jerusalem and Antioch, but speaks of no
meeting, between S. PETER and him at Rome, which was the (...) (...). of
(...), upon the (...). (...). 8.
famousest city of the world; we answer, that the epistle to the Galatia^s,
which is the only place where S. PAVL speaks of the enterviews between S.
PETER and him, to dissipate the reproaches that they that would seduce the
(...), laid upon him, that he had not been instituted Apostle by Christ, but by
S. PETER, and by the other Apostles who gave him their right hands for
associatio^; was written (if we believe S. CHRYSOSTOM before (...) (...)
(...) (...) Romans
the epistle to the Romans; and then we must not think it strange that S. PAVL
touched nothing there, of the enterview of S. PETER and him at Rome; since it
was written, before the voyage of S. PAVL to Rome.

To the eighth objection, which is that S. JOHN makes mention of the kind of
death of S. PETER, but makes noe mention of the place of his (...) (...). (...)
(...) (...). (...) (...) (...). 8.
death: we answer two things; the one, that S. JOHN makes mention of the kind
of S. PETER'S death, and not of of the place where, because the kind, and not
the place of the death of S. PETER, belonges to the explication of this
prophecy of our Lord; When thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy
(...) (...).
hands: And the other, that so far is this clause of S. JOHN from weakening
the belief of S. PETER'S death at Rome, that it fully confirms and
authoriseth it. For S. JOHN having writ his Gospel many years after the
martyrdom of S. PEEER, and having explained, and proved this (...) os our
Lord, thou shall stretch forth thy hands, by the kind of S. PETER'S death,
without specifying it particularly; it must be, that when S. JOHN (...) his
Gospel, the kind of S. PETER'S death was known and evident to all parts of
the Church. Now, the kind of S. PETER'S death could not be known to all parts
of the Church, but the place of his death must likewise be known to them, nor
could the place of S. PETER'S death be known to all the Church, and be any
other then Rome. For how could it Dion Cor
happen, that not only all the ancient authors, yea those that writ in the
next age after S. JOHN as pud Eus. hist. eccl. l. 2. c. 25.
S. DIONISIVS of Corinth, Iren. aduers. (...). l. 3. c. 3.
S. IRENEVS, Caius apud Eus. hist. eccl. l 2. c. 25.
Caius, Tert. de praescrip.
Tertullian, and infinite others, but the very stones also, and the
inscriptions of the sepulchers of S. PETER and S. PAVL, which were yet
preserved, and publicly showed at Rome in the time of Caius, should witness
with a common voice, that S, PETER had been martired at Rome, and that noe
other Church but the Roman, did ever glory in his Relics, and his martyrdom,
if from the time wherein S. John writ his Gospel, the place of S. PFTERS
death had been known to all the parts of the Church, and had been any other
then Rome? And therefore, what remains in all the texts objected to us from
scripture, which agrees not perfectly with the Chronology of the Church,
concerning the history of S. PETER? Saint PAVL affirms that three year after
his conversion, he traveled to Ieru. Galat. 1.
salem to visit S. PETER; consents not that exactly with our computatio^, which
reckons the conversion of S. PAVL, the first year after the death of our Lord;
and the voyage of S. PETER to Antioch, the fifth? S. LVKE reports, that S.
PAVL being come to Jerusalem for the distributio^ of the alms during the
famine, which began the eleauenth year after the death of Christ, found S.
PETER there prisoner; does not that wholly agree Act. 12.
with our Chronology, which supposes, that the Episcopal Seat of saint PETER
at Antioch, was seven year, five complete, and two imperfect? The same S.
LVKE writes, that S. PETER withdrawing himself from Jerusalem at his delivery,
which was the second year of the Reign of Ibid.
Claudius, went into an other place; that is to say, into an other place
proper to go out of Judea; and from the jurisdiction of Herod, such as was
Ioppa, where those used to imbarke, that would sail to Rome, and into the
west: does not that excellently agree with S. IEROMS computatio^, who Hier. de
script. eccl. in Petro.
reports that S. PETER came to Rome, the second year of the Empire of
Claudius? For that S. LVKE says only, that he went into an other place, and
expresses not whither, but leaves him seven year after without mention, it is
not to abandon the history of S. PAVL his master. The same S. LVKE testifies,
that S. PETER was again at the Council at Jerusalem Act. 15.
holden for legal causes. Fitts not that just with that, that Suetonius says,
(...). in Claud.
that Claudius drove the Jews from Rome, which raisd tumults for Christ's Oros.
hist. l. 7. c. c. 6
cause, and to that, that Orosius notes, that this banishment was in the ninth
year of Claudius; that is, the eighteenth year after the death of Christ,
which was the very year of the Council? S. JOHN expounds this prophecy
Ioann. 21.
of our Lord to S. PETER; Thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and aen other
shall girde thee, by the kind of S. PETER'S death; and adds, that our Lord
foretelling enigmaticallie the martyrdom of S. PETER, said to him, follow me;
does not this agree, with that Tertullian says, speaking of Tert. de
praescript. Amb. Orat. in Auxent. de non trad Basil. ep. l. 5. 1. Pet. c. 5.
Exe^p graec. Oecum. and alia.
the Roman Church: Happy Church, in which the Apostles have shedd all their
doctrine, with their blood, in which Peter is equalled to the passion of our
Lord: And with what S. AMBROSE writes that S. Peter being come forth of Rome to
fly persecution, our Lord appeared to him, and said; I go to Rome to be
crucified again?

S. PETER insinuates in his first epistle, that he writ it from Babylon; and
many greek copies contrarily date it from Rome: Is not this solued by that,
that Eusebius and S. IEROM say, that S. PETER calls Rome allegorically Eusebius.
hist. eccl. l. 2. c. 14.
Babylon, for as much as Rome was then in regard of the Jews, the same as the
Asian Babylon had been in the time of the Prophets? He adds the salutation of
MARK: The Church (said he) which is in Babylon, and Mark my son, salute
Hieron. de script. eccl. in Marc. 1. Pet. ibid.
you: does not that agree, both with the use of the word Marcus, which was a
Roman name, and not a Babylonian; and with these words of Papias auditor of S.
JOHN, reported by Clemens Alexandrinus; Mark being requested (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...)
at Rome by the brethren, writ a short Gospel which Peter having read
approved? For whereas Erasmus says that S. IEROM attributes the name of `
Babylon to Roms in choler, for as much as he had been evil entreated (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)
there; and will have that Babylon, whereof S. PETER speaks, to be the
Asirian-Babylon; These are two childish ignorances, the one not to know that S.
IEROM had already interpreted that Babylon, whereof S. PETER (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...)
speaks to be Rome, both in his commentary upon Esaias, and in his catalogue of
the Ecclesiastical Authors, written long before the evil entreaty (...) in
(...). c. 47. (...). de (...). (...). in (...). (...). Ant l. 17. (...). (...).
The author of the (...). upon the Chapter c. 8.
that he received at Rome, which happened under Syricius: And the other, not to
know, that when S. PETER writ this epistle; Josephus witnesses, there were
then no Jews in Babylon. But this is enough of the instances of scripture;
let us proceed to those of the Fathers, which consist in four principal
objections.

The first, that Clemens Comanus writes to JAMES brother of our Lord, Bishop of
Jerusalem, the death of S. PETER at Rome, a thing repugnant (say the
obiectors) to scripture, which witnesses that JAMES was martired long before
the death of PETER. The second, that S. IEROM writes, that S. PETER was
crucified in Judea. The third, that S. AVST. affirms, that the history of the
battle of S. PETER and Simon Magus at (...).
Rome, proceeded from an opinion, or as they say, from a fabulous narration:
And the fowrth, that in the order of PETER'S successors, some place (...).
(...) and (...) before Clement, and some after: to which they farther add for
the banquet and confectes after the Feast, that Eusebius and the Legend; upon
which they charge us, that we found the Papacy contradict one another; for as
much as Eusebius says, that S. PETER was crucified; and the Legend says, he
was beheaded.

To the first of these obiectio^s; which is, that Clement writing to JAMES
brother to our Lord, declares to him, the martyrdom of S. PETER; We answer
three things; first, that that epistle is apocripha and supposed; for (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)
though it was translated from Greek into latin by Ruffinus, and that it is
cited by the first Council of Vaison which was holden under the Emperor (...)
the third, containing many good doctrines, nevertheless it is certain, thar
the Greek original of the recognitions of Clement, to which it was annexed
and relative, was apocripha, and had been either supposed or corrupted by the
Hebionites. The second, that the Bishop of Jerusalem, to whom this epistle is
addressed, was not JAMES the Apostle, brother to our Lord, but Simon brother
and successor in the Bishopric to JAMES the (...). co^t. (...). (...). 30.
Apostle entitled the brother of our Lord; whom this epistle calls JAMES
brother of our Lord, according to the custom the Hebrews had to bear many
names, and sometimes to inherit names one from an other; as it appears both by
the repugnancie of the time of the death of the Apostle JAMES brother of our
Lord, which Ruffinus interpretor and advocate for his epistle, who had
translated the Ecclesiastical history of Eusebius, (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...)
could not be ignorant of; and by the inscription, in the which the author of
the epistle intitles him, to whom he addresses it, JAMES brother of our Lord,
and Bishop of Jerusalem, and intitles him not Apostle, which he could not have
forgotten to do in that place, if it had been the Apostle JAMES brother to our
Lord. And the third, that those that object this, strayning forth a gnat,
swallow a Camel; that is, in thinking to tax the ignorance of others in the
matter of the Chronology of the Fathers, discover their own in the history
of the Scripture; for the Apostle S. JAMES, whose martyrdom they say, the
Scripture reports, was the Apostle JAMES, brother of JOHN, martir'd by Herod,
in the twelfth of the Acts, and (...). 8
not the Apostle JAMES brother of our Lord, who was ten years after still in
Jerusalem, and of whose death, the Scripture never speaks in any Hegesip.
hist. l. 5. apud Eus. hist. eccl. l. 2 c. 22.
part of it, the Church having learnt what she knows of it, not from the
Scripture, but from Josephus, and from Hegesippus, and from Clement
Alexa^drinus, and from Eusebius, and from S. IEROM, who testify that JAMES the
Clem. Alex l. 7. Hypotyp. apud. (...). de scrip. eccl. Eus. hist. eccl l. 2. c.
22.
Apostle, brother of our Lord, dyed under the Pontificate of Ananus the young,
and in the seventh year of the Empire of Nero.

To the second objection, which is, that S. IEROM writes, that S, PETER was
crucified in Judea; we answer that S. IEROM does no where write, that S. PETER
was crucified in Judea, but contrarily he plainly affirms, (...). de (...).
eccl in Jacob.
that he was crucified at Rome: PETER (said he) held the Sacerdotall Chair at
Rome, till the fourteenth year of Nero, by whom he was crucified. And again;
He was buried at Rome, in the Vatican, near the triumpball Street, where he
is celebrated The auct. of the trea. upon. the Chapter c. 8. in the old edi tions
by the veneration of all the City. Only after he has reported the words
of our Lord; Behold, I send you prophets, and wise men and Scribes, and you
will kill them, and crucify them, and whip them, in your Synagogues: he adds,
(...) (...) that there are diverse Gifts in the disciples of Christ, according
to the Apostle to Hier. de scrip eccl. in Petr. Idem ibid. Hier. in Matthew l. 4.
c 23.
the Corinthians; Some are Prophets, who foretell things to come; some are wise
men, who know when they should pronounce the word; others Scribes well learned
in the law; whereof Steven has been stoned, Paul beheaded, Peter crucified.
But that S. PETER was crucified in Judea, he has, no where said; and if he had
been crucified by the Jews, he had intended it (in the same sense wherein S.
PAVL Cor. c. 2.
cries, that the Jews crucified the Lord of Glory, that is to say,) the
jews caused him to be crucified, but not that he had been crucified in Judea;
otherwise, they must also have concluded, that S. PAVL was not beheaded at
Rome; but in Judea, for S. IEROM says it equally of the one, and of the
other, whereof PAVLE has been heheaded, and PETER Crucified.

To the third objection, which is, that S. AUGUSTINE writ, that the history of
the combatt of S. PETER, and Simon the Magitian at Rome had The auct. of the
treat of. thevoc. of. Ministers.
taken ground from an opinion. We answer that S. AUGUSTINE says no such
thing. And indeed how should he say it, that had for suertie and forerunners
in this history, not only S. IVSTIN Martyr, an author of the next age after
Simon Magus, who writ thus to the Pagan Emperors, from, and in the name of all
the Christians: One Simon a Samaritan, having by the Devils art, done works
by enchantment, under the Emperor Claudius, in your Just. Martyra (...). 2.
imperial City of Rome, was accounted, a God, and, honored by you with a
Statue as a God; And Iren. aduers. (...). es. l 1. c. 20.
S. Ireneus, and Tert. in apol. aduers gent.
Tertullian, which writ the like, but also Arnob. co^t. gent. l. 2
Arnobius, Eus. hist. eccl. l. 2 c. 14.
Eusebius, Cyrill. Hier. catich 6.
S. CYRILL of Jerusalem, Epiph. haeres. 21.
S. EPIPHANIVS, Philastr. Brix. in Simon.
(...) (...). de script. eccl.
S. JEROME, Sulp. Seu. hist sacr. l. 2 Aug. ep. 86 Aug. in Cat haeres. haeres 1.
Sulpitius seuerus who all affirm, that Simon, having vndertake^, by art
magic to fly at Rome, was hindered from it, and caused to fall by S. PETER?
he says only that whereas some held, that the particular custom observed by
the Roman Church to forbear dinner on Saturdaies, proceeded from a fast
celebrated by S. PETER the Satturdaie before this act, was an opinion. Behold
his words; It is (said he) the opinion of many, although many Romans hold
it to be false that the apostle Peter being on the Sundaie to combat against
Simon the magitian for the peril of so great a temptation, fasted the day
before, both he and the Church of the same City, and that having obtained so
prosperous and glorious a success, he continued the same custom, and that
some Churches of the west imitated him. But that the history of the conflict
of S. PETER and Simon Magus at Rome, was grounded upon an opinion, he says
nothing near it, contrariwise he setts it down for the first principle in his
book of heresies in these words: Simon would have made it believed that he was
Jupiter, ad that a common woman, whose names was Helen, with whom he had joined
himself for a complice of his crimes, was Minerua, and gave the images of
himself and his Copesmate to be adored to his desciples, and had obtained that
they might be constituted by public authority, amongst the images of the
Gods at Rome, in which City the blessed Apostle Peter extinguished him, by
the power of God Almighty. Which it seems, the profane authors themselves,
though curious to bury the memory of all the miracles of Christianity, have
obliquely pointed at, when (...) says, that there was a spectacle exhibited in
a full theater in Nero's time whereby they should have made the (...)-flight
appear, but the Icarus fell against Sucton. in (...) (...). l. 6
Nero's chamber, and watered it with blood: and when Dion Chrysostom says,
that Nero had a long time near him in his palace, a certain man who promised
to (...). (...) de (...). (...). 1
fly.

To the fowrth objection, which is, that amongst the Successors of S. PETER,
some place Linus and Cletus before Clement, and some after: we The auct. of
the trea. upon the (...) 8 (...). (...). (...). (...) 27.
answer, that S. EPIPHANIVS has prevented and solued it, 1250. years agone,
in these word: At Rome were first Apostles and Bishops Peter and Paul, and
then Linus, then Cletus, and then Clement etc. and let none wonder that others
received the Bishopric before Clement. And a little after; whether that the
Apostles being still alive, Clement had received the ordination of the
Bishopric from Peter, and having resused it, abstained from it; for he says
in one of his Epistles; I go my ways and withdraw myself, till the people of
God be erected, etc. or whether after the decease of the Apostles, he have been
instituted by Cletus, we do not evidently know, but it may be, that having
been promoted to the Bishopric, and having refused it etc. he was again
constrained, after the death of Linus and of Cletus to accept of it. For that
which the obiectors add for the banquet, and to make up their mouths, that
Eusebius says that S. PETER was crucified, and that the Legend, where upon we
ground the Papacy says, he was beheaded, there are two ridiculous ingredients
in this last Service; the one to impute to us, that we ground the history of
S. PETER'S seat at Rome, which is testified by all the first ages of the Church
upon the Legend, which is a book written in the last ages by a Jacobin called
Jacobus de voragine: And the other, not to discern, that, that S. PETER, that
the Lege^d said was beheaded, is S. PETER the Iacobin Martyr; who was beheaded
for the Catholic faith, in the time (...). (...) Petr Mart (...). Aur (...).
of the Albigeses. about 400. year agone, and not S. PETER the Apostle, whom
it assirmes to have been crucified.

But now let us leave the objections of the Popes adversaries, and let us hear
the testimonies of the Fathers. S. DIONISIVS Bishop of Corinth, Apost. (...)
(...). (...). 2. c. 25. (...). (...). 3. c. 3.
writing to be Church of Rome in the next age after the Apostles; you have
(said he) mingled the plant of the Roman and Corinthian Church made by PETER
and PAVL: And a little after; for having taught together in Italy, they were
both martired at one and the same time. And S. IRENEVS; We represent the
tradition apostolic, of the greatest and most ancient Church, founded at Rome,
by the two glorious Apostles PETER and PAVL: And again; The blessed Apostles
then founding and instructing the Church, consigned the Episcopat of the
administration (...). (...) (...).
of the Church to Linus. And TERTVLLIAN; Happy Church wherein the Apostles
have shed all their doctrine with their blood, in which PETER is equalled (...)
(...). (...) (...) l. 2. c. 15.
to the passion of our Lord. And CAIUS of one time with Tertulian; If thou will
gue to the Vaticane, or to the way of Hostia, thou shall find the trophies,
(that is the Sepulchers) of those, which have founded this Church. And CLEMENT
Alexandrius, and before him Papias the hearer of S. JOHN; Mark (...). (...)
(...). l. 3. c. 1. (...). (...) (...) ep. (...).
being entreated at Roman by the brethren, writ a brief Gospel, which
PETER haueing read, approved. And ORIGIN; PETER was crucified at Rome, with his
head downwards. And saint CYPRIAN; The Rome a^ Church, is the Chair of PETER,
and the principal Church, from whence proceeded, the Sacerdotall unity.
(...). hist. ec (...) l. 2. c. 14.
And EVSEBIVS; Under the Empire of Claudius, the providence of God, brought the
great Apostle Saint PETER to Rome: And again; the histories bear, that PAVL
was beheaded, and PETER crucified at Rome, under Nero; and the titles Lactan
inst l. 4. c. 21.
of PETER and PAVL preserved to this day in their sepulchers, confirm it. And
LACTANTIVS; PETER and PAVL preached at Rome, and their (...) remained written
for memory. And S. ATHANASIVS; though it were declared Athan. apo 2.
to PETER and PAVL, that they should suffer (...) dome at Rome; yet they (...)
Cyril. (...) (...). 6.
not to travel thither. And S. CYRILL of Jerusalem; PETER and PAVL presidents
of the Church, came to Rome. And saint EPIPHANIVS; At Rome were first Apostles
and Bishops, PETER and `PAVL, and then Linus, and then Cletus, and then
Clement. And saint AMBROSE; PETER is our warrant for this custom, who has
been Bishop of the Roman Church: And again; Christ Amb. de Sacram. l 3 c. 1.
Cod. l. 1.
haueing answered PETER, I go to Rome to be crucified again; PETER
understood, that this answer belonged to his Cross: And the Emperors GRATIAN,
and VALENTINIAN, and THEODOSIUS; We will that all the people ruled by the
Empire of our clemency, live in such Religion, as the Religion insinuated
hither-to by the diuiue Apostle PETER declares, that he gave to the Romans.
Opt. cont. Parm. l. 2.
And OPTATVS Mileuitanus; Thou can not deny, but that thou know, that in
the City of Rome, the Episcopal Chair was first conferred to Peter, wherein
Peter head of the Apostles sat. And saint IEROM; Simon PETER, Son of Hier.
de (...). eccl. in Petr.
Jona, of the Province of Galilee, of the Borough of Bethsaida, brother to the
Apostle Andrew, and Prince of the Apostles, after the Episcopat of the Church
of Antioch, and the preaching of the dispersion of those of the Circumcision,
which had believed in Idem. ibid. in Hegesippo.
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and (...), came to Rome the second year of
the Empire of Claudius, to overthrow Simon Magus, and held the Sacerdotall
Chair twenty five years there. And again, Hegesippus affirms; That he Id
in dial. aduers. Lucis.
came to Rome under Anicetus, who was tenth Bishop of Rome after PETER. And
else where, Cyprian addressed the Council of africa, to Steven Bishop of the
Roman (...). inuect.
Church, who was the twenty sixth after the Blessed Peter. And RVFFINVS; Sulp.
Scu. hist. sacr. l. 2.
Peter ruled the Roman Church, for the space of twenty four years. And
SVLPITIVS Seuerus; The Christian Religion had then taken root in the City of
Rome Peter being Chrysostom. in ep. ad Rom hom. 32.
Bishop there. And S. CHRYSOSTOM: What spectacle shall Rome, see in the day
of Iudgemeut, Paul comeing forth of his grave, risen again with PETER. And
OROSIVS; Nero (...) PETER to death by the Cross, and PAVL by the sword. Oros
l. 7. c. 7.
And saint AVGVSTIN; We see the most eminent height of the thrice noble
Empire, Aug. ep. 42. Id cont. Iul Pelag l. 1. Id. cont. Petil. l. 2. c. 51.
submitting his diadem, bend his knee to the supulcher of the fisherman PETER:
And in an other place; I think this part of the world ought to suffice thee,
wherein our Lord would crown, with a most glorious martyr dome, the first of
his Apostles. And else where; What has the chair of the Roman Church done to
thee, wherein Id. ep. 165.
PETER has been set, and wherein now Anastasius sitts? And again To PETER
has succeeded Linus, to Linus Clement; to Clement, Anacletus, to Anacletus
Euaristus.

Of the Canon of the Council of Nicea, touching the government of the
Patriarchs. CHAPT. V.
Having dispatched the difficulties of the Scripture, and of the Fathers,
concerning S. PETER'S stay at Antioch, and Rome; there remains to solue the
objections, that the adversaries of the Church, make against what we have said
of the Popes superioritle, over the other patriarchs: whereof the principal is
taken from one of the Canons of the counsel of Nicea, which ordaines, that the
ancient customs observed in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, should go on; to
wit, that the Bishop of Alexandria, should have the power of all those things,
because it was also so accustomed to the Bishop of Rome. Now the adversaries of
the Church, do more willing lie make use of the Council of Nicea in Co^c.
Nic. c. 6.
such like cases, then of any other; because the acts of the Council of
Nicea, (which, if we had them, might clear the sense of the Canons of the
same Council) are lost; and that there remain to us of the acts of the first
four general Counsels no more but those of Ephesus, and of Chalcedon. And
therefore we must supply what wants in the brevity and omission of this
Canon, by conferring it with the acts of the other counsels, or by the
examination of the histories of their ages.

To this objection then we bring two Answers, the first is, that it has
already been above showed in the Chapter of the patriarchs, that the pope had
two distinct qualities, the one of patriarch of the West, and the other of head
of the Church, universal, as the Prefect of the City Presecture; by which
the adversaries of the Church, would measure the spiritual Jurisdiction of the
Pope, who had 2. distinct qualities, the one of pre: (...) (...). (...) (...).
fect of the City Prefecture, in which he was equal to the prefect of the
other provinces; and the other, of head of the senate, and Vicar of the
Emperor, (...) 1618. (...) (...) 2. (...). 2. (...) (...). 1. (...) 1.
in which he was superior to the prefects of provinces, and judged by appeal,
of the cause of all their Iurisdictio^s By means whereof, although in things
that concerned but the patriarchall Jurisdiction as were the celebratio^ of
provincial, or national cou^cells; the correctio^s of ma^ners, of the simple
priests or deaco^s; the confirmatio^s either mediate, or immediate, of the
Bishops of the Patriarkship, and the subalterne judgments of the causes even
of Bishops. All the other Patriarchs were squared out by the model and
pattern, of that of Rome; nevertheless, when there question of things that
went beyond the limitts of Patriarchall jurisdiction, that is to (...), of
Mayor causes, and which conuerned the universal Church; as were causes of
Faith, or general customs of the Church, or those of the final depositions
of Bishops, or that of the judgments eue^ of the persons of the Patriarchs,
the Bishop of Rome as head of the Church, and superintendent of the other
Patriarchs, exercised Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over the^ and judged of
their judgments and persons. And therefore when the counsel of Nicea ordained
that in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, the Bishop of Alexandria should remain
in possession of the authority he had for all the causes, whereof the council
the^ spoke; that is to say, for the celebration of Provincial and national
Synods; for the correction of minor, and particular causes; and for the
confirmation either mediate or immediate of the Bishops of the same provinces;
and adds, for as much as this also is accustomed to the Bishop of Rome; it is
certain that the intention of the counsel was not, by (...). (...). c. 6.
that to square the Bishop of Alexandria by him of Rome, in things that wet
beyond the limitts, and authority of Patriarchall jurisdiction, and concerned
the jurisdiction of the head of the Church, and the government of the
universal society but in those things only, that were withim the bounds,
and within the faculty of Patriarchall jurisdiction. No more then when they
measured the power that the other Prefects of the Empire had within the
compass of their provinces by the power that the prefects of the city of
Rome had within the provinces of his Prefecture, they pretended not by that,
that in matters that wen forth by appeal from the other provinces, the city
Prefecte, as head of the Senate and Vicar to the Prince, was not Superior to
all the others: nor that when in a national Council, they square out the
power that the Archbishops have over the Bishops of their provinces to the
model of that which the Primate of the nations, has, as particular Archbishop
over the Bishops of his quarter they pretend not by that, that in things which
go beyond the jurisdiction of the provinces, and regard the general interest
of the nation, the Primat should not be superior to the other Archbishops; nor
finally, when in a regiment of men of war, they measure the power that every
particular Captain has to command his company, by the pattern and model
that the Campe-Master of the Regiment has over his; they intend not by that,
in things which are not in the particular comaund of every company, but have
regard to the order, the disposition, and government of the Regiment in
general, the Campe-Master should not be superior to all the other captains.
For both before the Council of Nicea, when the Churchmen of Alexandria, would
accuse Dionisius the Patriarch of Alexandria their Bishop, who was the first
Patriarch of the Church after the Pope, they transported themselves Ath. de
sent. Dionis. see above in Chap. 25.
(says Athanasius) to Rome, and accused him before Dionisius Bishop of Rome;
and presently after the Council of Nicea when the council of Antioch, Sea of
the third Patriarkeship had been celebrated, it was argued of nullitie, because
says SOCRATES, the Ecclesiastical law forbad, to rule the Churches whithout
Soc. hist. ec cl. l. 2. c. 8.
the sentence of the Bishop of Rome. And when the same Council of Antioch, and
the other counsels of the East, had deposed S. ATHANAS. Patriarch of
Alexandria, and Marcellus Primate of Ancyra in Galatia, and Asclepas Bishop of
Gaza, in Palestina a city of the Patriarkeship of Antioch; The Bishop of Rome
Soc hist. ec cl. l. 3, c. 7.
(says Sozomene) restored them every one to his Church, because to him, for
the dignity of his Sea appertained the care of all things. And when the
Council of Sardica within twenty year of that of Nicea, and holden for the
Confirmation of that of Nicea and composed of the like or a greater number of
Bishops the^ that of Nicea, and at which assisted the same Osius Bishop of
Corduba; the same saint A THANASIVS then Patriarch of Alexandria, and the same
Protogenes Bishop of Sardica, which had assisted at that of Nicea, proceeded to
the direction of ecclesiastical causes; it did not only authorize the
appeals, from the Bishops of all the Earth to the Pope, but also declared that
it was a very good and convenient thing, that from all Co^c. Sard can 5. See
Balsamon upon this Canon.
the Provinces, the Bishops should refer the affairs, to their head; that is
to say, to the Sea of the Apostle PETER. And when the Council of Capua which
the third Council of Carthage calls a general council, deputed Theophilus
Patriarch of Alexandria, because of the neighborhood of his Co^c. Sard. ep. ad
Iul. in fragm. Hilar.
Patriarkship, to examine the cause of Flauianus Patriarch of Antioch; saint
AMBROSE writ to him, that after he had judged it, he must get the Pope Amb. ep.
78
to confirm his judgment. And when the general council of Ephesus passed to
the cause of John Patriarch of Antioch; Iuuenall Bishop of Jerusalem said that
the ancient custom bare, that the Church of Antioch was always governed by
the Roman: and the council in the Body of it, remitted the judgment of the
Patriarch of Antioch, to the Pope. And when Dioscorus, Conc. Ephesians. part. 2. act.
5. in relat. in Caelest.
Patriarch of Alexandria, had in the false Council of Ephesus condemned and
deposed Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople; Flauianus appealed from him to the
Pope; and that, says the Emperor Valentinian following the custom Vale^t.
apud Theod. in ep. pradm. Co^c. Chalc
of the Counsels And when the Council of Chalcedon disanulled the false
Council of Ephesus it was voted by Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, that of
all the acts of that council, none should remain in force, except the
creation of Maximus Patriarch of Antioch, because the Pope having Co^c. Chalc
act. 10.
received him into his communion, had judged that he should govern the Church
of Antioch, and when Theodoret Bishop of Cyre neighbor to Persia, and one of
the Subjects of the Patriarkship of Antioch, who had been deposed by the same
counsel of Ephesus, and had, from it appealed to the Pope, presented himself
at the counsel of Chalcedon; the senators, to cause order Co^c. Chalc act 1.
to be observed there, commanded he should come in, for as much as the Pope
had restored him to his Bishopric. And when the Popes Legates bare the first
word in the Council, not only they entitled Ib. and Euag. l. 2. c. 4.
the Pope the head of all the Churches; but also when the Fathers of the
council in their Body, sent their Relation to the Pope, they entreated him as
the head of the universal Church; Thou have guided us (said (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...)
they) by the legates, as the head does the members. And again; As in this,
which is for the (...), we have brought correspondencie to our head, so thy
Sovereignty may fulfill, in the behalf of thie Children, that which concerns
decency: and they treated Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, as ghostly
vassal to the Pope; (...) (said they) has extended his felony even against
him, to whom the (...).
(...) of the Vine has by our Savior been committed: that is to say, against
thy Holiness. Evident and manifest arguments, that the Pope had two qualities
distinct; the one of Patriarch of the West and the other of Sovereign Vicar of
Christ, and head of the universal Church; and that when the other Patriarchs
were compared to him, it was in quality of Patriarch of the West; and not in
the quality of Sovereign Vicar of Christ, and head of the universal Church.

The second Solution is, that the Council of Nicea speaks of the (...). (...)
c. 6.
Bishop of Alexandria with restriction; and of the Pope without restriction;
from whence it is, that the Senators assisting at the Council of Chalcedon, to
cause order to be observed there, after they had heard the lecture of the sixth
Canon of the Council of Nicea, and of the third Canon (...). (...) act. 16.
of the Council of Constantinople, inferred thereupon; thus it appears from
hence, that all primacie, and principal honor, has always been (...) to the
Bishop of Rome: a thing that amazes, me that the Greek Schismatickes, and
(...) amongst the rest, did not perceive it. For Nilus (...). (...).
Archbishop of Thesalonica, disputing against the Pope, says: If the Canon of
(...) (...) (...) (...). l 2.
the Council of Nicea, had distributed the Climates of the earth to every one
of the Bishops-Generall, (so he calls the Patriarchs) and had determinately
settled nothing upon the Sea of the Pope, but had contented itself with saying,
that he had received the primacie, there had been some reason to esteem that
all the earth had been under him. And nevertheless, not only the Council of
Constantinople ordaines that the Bishops should not exceed their limitts, but
that (...) (...) c. 2.
according to the Canons of the Council of Nicea, the Bishop of Alexandria
governed only, the affairs of Egypt; And the Bishops of the East, that is, of
the Patriarkship of Antioch, only the affairs of the East, And the Council
of Chalcedon ordaines, to the Bishop of Jerusalem, the three Palestina's; And
to him of Constantinople; Asia minor, Pontus, and Thrasia, and the (...). (...)
(...). 7.
Barbarous provinces, that is to say, Russia and Muscouia; without ever goeing
about, either that or any other Council, to set out a part to the (...).
(...) (...). (...).
Bishop of Rome, nor prescribe limitts, out of which he might not exercise his
authority: But even the Council of Nicea speaks of the Bishop of Alexandria
with restriction, assigning him the provinces of Egypt Libia and Pentapolis,
and of the Pope without restriction, leaving him the way free, Conc. Nic.
(...) 6.
and assigning him noe limitts; nor any determinate number of provinces. The
customs said the Canon observed from antiquity in Egypt, Libia, and
Pentapolis, are to be maintained, to wit, that the Bishop of Alexandria, have
the power, of all those things, for as much as this is also accustomed to the
Bishop of Rome. By means whereof, it remains in the liberty of the Reader to
supply the word, over all the Church, and to express the Canon in this sense;
that the customs observed from antiquity in Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis,
should be maintained; to wit, that the Bishop of Alexandria, have the power of
all those things, for as much as this is also accustomed to the Bishop of Rome,
over all the Church. For what was this (...). (...).
custom practiced by the Bishop of Rome, but that whereof saint IRENEVS (...).
l. 3. (...) 3.
speaks, when he says to the Roman Church; because of a more (...) (...). 262.
mighty Principality, it is necessary that all the Church should agree. And
saint AUSTIN when he writes; In the Roman Church has always flourisht, the
principality of the Sea Apostolic: And Socrates when he affirms; that the
Ecclesiastical law bare, that uo decrees might be made in the Church, without
the Soz. hist. cc cl. l. 3. c. 8.
sentence of the Bishop of Rome. And Sozomene when he notes, that to the Bishop
of Rome, because of the dignity of his Seat, the care of all things
apportained?

And so who sees not, that the intention of the Council, was net to compare
the Bishop of Alexandria with the Pope formallie, but anologically; that is to
say, that the intention of the Council, was not to compare the authority of
the Bishop of Alexandria, over the provinces of Egypt; Libia and Pentapolis,
with the authority of the Pope, over any determinate territory; but to
compare the authority of the Bishop of Alexandria over the provinces of Egypt,
Libia, and Pentapolis, with the authority of the Pope over the whole Church? It
is certain that in this clause; for as much as this is also accustomed to the
Bishopof Rome, there is an omission Conc. hist. c. 6.
which should be supplied, either by the extent of an universal word, of
particular restriction. Now that the design of the Council was not to compare
the Sea of Alexandria as head of the particular Prefecture of Egypt, with the
sea of Rome as head of an other particular prefecture, but to compare the Sea
of Alexandria, as head of the particular prefecture of Egypt, with the Sea of
Rome, as head of all the Empire; the decree of the Council of Chalcedon, which
shall be spoken of hereafter, shows it, In chap. 34
when it says, designing the temporal cause of the privileges of the Church
of Rome, The fathers yielded the privileges to the Sea of the ancient Rome,
for as much as that City held the Empire: And the Confronting of these Co^c
Chalc act. 16. can 18.
words of Socrates, The Ecclesiastical rule bare, that no laws should be
introduced into the Church, without the sentence of the Bishop of Rome: with
these of the Bishops of Egypt, to the Council of Chalcedon: Permit us to
attend the Co^c. Chalc act. 4.
ordination of our Archbishop, to the end, that according to the ancient
customs, we may follow his sentence: And again: It is the custom in the
provinces of the prefecture of Egypt, to do noe such ting, without the
sentence and ordinance, of the Archbishop Ib.
of Alexandria, confirms it. For to say, that there could be nothing
established in the universal Church without the sentence of the Bishop of
Rome, and to say there could be nothing established in the provinces of the
Prefecture of Egypt, without the sentence of the Bishop of Alexandria, was it
not to make the Bishop of Alexandria that in the prefecture of Egypt, that the
Bishop of Rome was over the whole Church? And therefore the Council saying
simply, for as much as this is also accustomed to the Conc. Nic. (...). 6.
Bishop of Rome, and not specifying where, nor bringing in (...) restriction,
what should hinder us from supplying, over all the Church, and from answering,
that the intention of the Council was, to ordain, that the Bishop of
Alexandria, who in Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis, was as Vicar bred from the Sea
of saint PETER, who had there established his second self; that is to say,
his son, and well-beloved disciple, the Evangelist saint MARK, should have the
superintendencie of the Ecclesiastical affairs in all these provinces; for as
much as the Bishop of Rome to whom (...). l. (...) (...). 8
(as Sozomene says) because of the dignity of his Seat, the care of all
things appertained; had it generally over all the Church? or if they will
press us to reduce the enthymeme of the Council into the form of a complete
sillogisme, what can hinder us from reducing it into this: The same privileges
that the Bishop of Rome has in regard of the whole Soz. Ibid.
Church; the other Patriarchs have proportionablie every one, in reregard of
his Patriarkship: Now the Bishop of Rome has this privilege that to him,
because of the dignity of his Sea, the care of all things pertaines, and that
without him, nothing can be decided, of things which concern the government of
the universal Church: the Bishop of Alexandria then ought to enjoy by
proportion, the same privileges in the provinces (...) (...) (...). l 2.
(...). 8
of his Patriarkship; that is to say, in the provinces of Egypt, Libia, and
Pentapolis; to wit, that to him, because of the dignity of his Sea
appertains the superintendencie of the Churches of the same Provinces; and
that without him nothing should be decided in causes which concern them. For
that the Patriarchs in their divisions were as images and modells of the Popes
authority, and as Vicars borne from the Apostolic Sea; that is to say,
were, every one in the extent of his Patriarkship, that, that the Pope was
universally over the whole Church. And then, that as the River Melas in Greece
produced the same kinds of animals and plants, as Nilus in Egypt, but lesser
and proportionable to the quantity of his course, so the same authority, that
the Pope had over all the Church; to wit, that without him nothing might be
decided, in things which had regard to the universal Church; the Bishop of
Alexandria had it, proportionablie in his division; to wit, that without him,
nothing could be decided of the Ecclesiastical causes of Egypt, and of all the
division of Alexandria, it appears by ten means besides many others.

It appears first by the diversity of the conditions under which the Pope,
and the other Patriarchs participated to the succession of the Sea of Saint
PETER, who was the head and superintendent of Episcopal jurisdiction; for the
Pope only bare the title of absolute successor, and ordinary Vicar to saint
PETER, as being constituted in the Tribunal, where saint PETER had established
his final and absolute Sea, and where he had planted the stock of his direct
Succession: from whence it is, that saint CYPRIAN calls the Roman Church, the
Chair of Peter, and the principal Cyp (...) (...). (...). (...).
Church, and the original of the Sacer dot all unity; and that the council
of Sardica exhortes the Bishops of all the provinces, to referr the causes to
their head; that is to say, to the Sea of the Apostle PETER: and that (...)
(...). (...). (...) (...) (...). (...) p 15.
says, that the Death, of Pope Felix, was the providence of God, least the Sea
of PETER might be dishonored, being governed by two (...): and that saint IEROM
writes to Pope DAMASVS; I am joined (...) (...) (...) (...) 14. (...) (...)
(...) (...) 58 (...). (...). (...)
in communion with thy (...); that is to say, with the Chair of PETER: and
that Pope Innocent the first reported and approved by saint AUSTIN, writ to
the Bishops of Africa; I conceive that all our brethren and colleagues, can
refer causes, and principally concerning faith, to none but to PETER; that
(...) (...). (...) (...) (...). (...).
is to (...); to the author of their name and dignity; and that the Legates of
Pope (...), in the oration that they made to the Council of Ephesus, and which
was confessed and registered by the ordinance of the Council called the Pope,
the Successor, (...). (...). (...) 2 (...). (...)
and ordinary Vicar of saint PETER; And that the council of Chalcedon
entitled the Epistle of the Pope saint LEO the first; The Sermon of saint
PETER'S (...) (...) (...). (...).
Sea: whereas the part that the other patriarchs had to the Successioin of
saint PETER, was an oblique and collateral part, and founded upon subalterne
and particular causes; to wit, that of the patriarch of Antioch upon the
passing and transitory Sea of saint PETER at Antioch; from whence it is that
saint CHRYSOSTOM says; Peter the superintendet (...) (...) (...) (...)
of the whole world, he to who^ Christ had co^signed the keys of the kingdom
of heaven, to whom he had committed the disposition of all things, was a long
time resident at Antioch: And that the Pope Innocent the first, time sellow to
the same (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
saint (...), writ to Alexander the Patriarch of Antioch: The Sea of Antioch
had not given, place to Rome, had it not been, that what that (...) but by the
way, this has obtained absolutely and finally: And that of the patriarch of
Alexandria, upon the commission that saint PETER gave to his second-selfe; that
is to say, to his dear, and well-beloved disciple saint MARK, to go found the
Church of Alexandria, the Metropolitan city of Egypt, and of the provinces
adjacent; from whence saint GREGORY the great cries out; The sea of Peter in
three places, is of one alone; for he Greg.
had exalted the Sea, wherein he vouchsafed to stay, and finish his present
life: he Magn. l. 6. ep. 37.
has adorned the Sea, to which he has ordained the Euaugelist his disciple;
he has established the Sea, wherein he was resident seven year, though he
were to depart from it. By which means, as the Pope represented the Stock of
the direct succession of saint PETER; and the other Patriarchs represented the
branches of the oblique and collateral succession of saint PETER; so what the
Pope was in regard of the universal Church, the other Patriarchs were in the
behalf of their particular Patriarckships; and reciprocally what the other
Patriarchs were, in the behalf of their particular Patriarkships, the Pope
was, in regard of the universal Church.

It appears secondly by the analogy of the ancient order of the Church, which
bare that the same privileges that the Patriarchs, Primats, and Metropolitans
had, to wit, that without them nothing could be decided, of the affairs of
their deuisions; and that the Provincial, national, or Patriarchall
Counsels, which were held in their territories, could not be esteemed perfect,
if they assisted not there, the Popes had the^ for the affairs which regarded
the government of the universal Church, and for the celebration of general
Counsels; and reciprocallie that the same privileges that the Popes had, as
that the care of all the Church pertained to them, and that without them
nothing could be decided of points concerning the universal Church, nor
general Counsels be celebrated; the Patriarchs, Primats, and Metropolitans,
had them proportionablie in their limitts, to wit, that the care of all the
affairs of their deuisions, belonged to them, and without them nothing could
be decided, in the affairs of their jurisdictions, nor the Counsels of their
territories be celebrated. For as the Council of Antioch, which I allege
because it borrowes this decree, not from the discipline of the Arrians, Conc.
Antioch. c. 9.
but from the ancient form of the Church, says, that the care of all the
Province belongs to the Metropolitan. So Sozomen says that the Bishop of Rome
restored Athanasius, Patriarch of Alexandria; Paul Bishop of Constable antinople;
Marcellus primate of Ancyra in Galatia, for that to him because of the dignity
of Soz. hist. eccl. l. 3. c. 7
his Sea; the care of all things appertained. And as the same Council of
Antioch says, speaking of particular Counsels; That Sinod is perfect, at
Cone. Antioch c. 16.
which the Metropolitan assists; So Socrates witnesses; That General
Counsels, and which were to provide for the General laws of the Church,
could not be celebrated without the Pope. JULIUS, (says he) had not assisted
at the Council of Antioch; nor had sent any in his place, although the Canon
of the Church forbids to make Soc. hist. eccl. l. 2 c. 8.
Ecclesiastical laws without the sentence of the Bishop of Rome or according
to the translation of EPIPHANIVS, followed by Cassiodorus, to celebrate Soz.
hist. eccl. l. 3. c. 8.
Counsels without the sentence of the Bishop of Rome: And Sozomene; There was
an eccclesiastic all law, which annulled all things that were instituted in
the Churches, Constable. nou. Theod. tit. 24.
without the sentence of the Bishop of Rome. And the Emperors Theodosius and
Valentinian; We decree, that accoding to the ancient custom, nothing shall be
innouated in the Churches, without that sentence of the reverend Pope of the
City of Ibid.
Rome. Now, how was this any other thing, but to make the Pope what Co^c.
Chalc apud. Leo^.
the same law of Theodosius and Valectinian calls him: to wit, the Rector of
Co^c Sard. in fragm.
the vniuer salitie of Churches: and what the Council of Chalcedo^ intitles
him, to wit, the Guardian of the Lords Vine: and what the Council of Sardica,
Hill. Co^c. Chalc in. ep ad Leon. Cod. l. 7.
the Council of Chalcedon, and the Emperor Justinian qualify him; to wit, the
head of Bishops? For if as the Provincial, National; or Patriarchall
Counsels, could not be reputed perfect, nor decide the affairs of the (...),
or of the nation, or of the Province, without the Metropolitan (...) (...)
(...) the general Counsels could not be general, nor decide (...) (...)
which concerned the universal Church, without the assistance and (...) of the
Bishop of Rome: And if as S. IEROM says that the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
Council of (...) had ordained, that Antioch should be the metropolitan, (...)
spiritual of all the East; so not only saint ATHANASIVS calls Rome, the Sea
(...) and metropolitan of Romania; that is, of all the Roman Empire, and beats
the Arrians with the epistle which they had written (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
to the Pope, in the which, though fainedly, irronically, they had called the
Roman Church, the School of the Apostles, and the Metropolitan of religion;
but also S. GREGORY Nazianzene cries out; the ancient Rome marches right in
the says, (...) all the west tied by the healthful word, as it is convenient
that (...) should do, which rules all the world: And if, as the Bishops of
Egypt protested at the Council of Chalcedon, that it was the custom in the
provinces (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
of the (...) of Egypt, to do nothing without the sentence and ordinance of
the Archbishop of Alexandria; So Socrates says, that the Coucell of Antioch,
was argued of nullitie, for as much as the ancient Ecclesiastical law bare,
that the Churches could not be ruled, without the (...) of the Bishop of Rome
how is it that the Bishop of Rome was not metropolita of the universal Church,
and such in regard of the whole Church, (...) (...) Patriark and Metropolitan
was, in regard of his division? And if (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
the Pope reciprocallie, as heir to the principal Sea of S. PETER, and
Metropolitan of the universal Church, was Rector of the universality of
Churches; how could it be that the original Patriarks, which were heirs of
the (...) Chaires of S. PETER, and the Metropolitans of the second (...) of the
Empire, were not by proportion in the behalf of their divisions, that which
the Pope was over the whole extent of the Church?

It appears thirdly by the proceeding of the same Council of Nicea, and in
the same Canon. For what cause had the Council of Nicea to repress the
rebellion of Meletius Bishop of Sycopolis in Egypt, who refused to obey the
Bishop of Alexandria his Patriarch, alleged the custom of the Pope, and not
that of the Patriark of Antioch? The Patriark of Antioch, was in person at the
Council, which the Pope was not, he was nearer both to the city of Nicea
wherein the Council wae holden, and to the Sea of Alexandria, in whose favor
this Cano^ was made, then the Pope: he had the (...) over fifteen great
provinces, where of the least contained more countries, then the Protestants
attribute to the Patriarkship of the Pope. For what cause does the Council to
suppress Meletius, allege the custom of the Bishop of Rome, and not that of
the Bishop of Antioch, but because the Bishop of Antioch his authority, was of
positive right, as well as that of the Bishop of Alexandria; by which means,
the same (...) that carried Meletius to deny the one, might likewise have
carried him to deny the other; where the Popes authority was of divine right;
that is to say, as S. AUSTIN and the Mileu. Council speak; drawn Aug.
(...). 92
(...) the authority of the holy scriptures? Moreover for what cause did the
Counsel of Nicea confirm the custom of the Patriark of Alexandria, and that
of the Patriark of Antioch, and not confirm that of the Pope, but because the
Popes authority depends not of the authority of Counsels, but proceeded
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
from the very mouth of our Lord, as Pope Gelasius who^ S. (...) the second S.
AVS. or rather the second Oracle of the African Church calls the Reverend
Prelat of the Sea Apostolic, has since expressed it in (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...)
there words: The holy Roman Catholic Apostolic Church, has not been
preferred before other Churches, by any synodicall constitutions, but has
obtained the primacie Eua^gelicall voice of our Lord and Savior, when he said;
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church? Now, this being
so, how is it not manifest, that the intention of the Council was not to
restrain the authority of the Pope, to the limits of a simple particular
Patriarkship, as that of the other Patriarchs; but to propound the authority
that the Pope had in regard of the universal Church, for a type and pattern
of the authority of the other Patriarchs, in regard of their patriarkships;
for either the law divine gave nothing to the Pope over the other Bishops; or
if it gave him any thing, it was given him over all the Earth, although for
the commodity of the universal government of the Church, the Pope abstained
from the immediate administration of the other Patriarkships, and contented
himself, with the only immediate government of the patriarkship of the West;
and with the mediate and general superintendencie over the rest.

It appears fowthly, by the possession wherein the Pope remained, after the
Canon of the Council of Nicea, of judging the persons and judgments of the
other Patriarchs, and that in the view, and with the applause, even of those
that had made the canon, and of their successors, and without that any ever
murmured, that this practice contradicted it: for how had Pope Julius the
first, who was created Pope five years after the Coucell of Nicea, restored
those great Champions of the Council of Nicea saint ATHANASIVS Patriark of
Alexandria; Marcellus Primat of Ancyra in Galatia, and Asclepas Bishop of Gaza
in Palestina, because to him (says Sozomen) Soz. hist. eccl. l. 3. c. 7.
for the dignity of his Sea, the care of all things apperteyned; if the
intention of the Council of Nicea, had been to restrain the authority of the
Pope into the only limitts of a particular Patriarkship, as well as that of
the other Patriarchs? And how had those great Cha^pions, and defendors of the
Counsel of Nicea, made use of the Popes restitution, to re-enter their Seas,
if it had been contrary to the canon of the Council of Nicea, the which
themselves had helped to compose, and S. ATHANASIVS amongst the rest, who had
been the soul and pen thereof, and was then heir and successor to Alexander
Patriark of Alexandria, in whose favor and upon whose particular the article
had been set down? And how could Pope Julius have reproched the Arrians, that
they had altered the decrees of the Counsel of Nicea, if himself, in restoring
S. ATHANASIVS Patriark of Alexandria, Ibid.
Paul Bishop of Constantinople, Marcellus Primat of Ancyra in Galatia, Asclepas
Bishop of Gaza in Palestina, Lucius Bishop of Andrinopolis in Thrace; and in
disannulling the Counsels of Tire, Antioch, and Constantinople, which had been
holden against them; had violated the cano^ of the council of Nicea? And why
did not the Arrians reply to him, that it was himself that infringed the
decrees of the Council of Nicea, if the intention of the Council of Nicea had
been to restrain the Popes authority, to the only limits of a particular
Patriarkship, as well as that of the other Patriarks? And how had the Council
of Sardica, wherein the Council of Co^c. Sard. c. 5.
Nicea was again put to the trial; and which was holden twenty two years
after the Council of Nicea, and to defend the authority of the Council Co^c.
Sard (...). ad Iul. in frag. (...). p. 15.
of Nicea, and by many of the same Fathers that had assisted at the Counsel of
Nicea reduced into a written law; that Bishops deposed by the Counsels of
their provinces, might appeal from the^ to the Pope: and declared that it was
a very good and fit thing, that from all the provinces, the Bishops should
referr the affairs to their head; that is to say, to the Sea Apostlick of S.
PETER; if the intention of the Counsel of Nicea had been, to restrain the
Popes authority, into the only limits of a particular Patriarkship, as well
as that of the other Patriarchs? And how had the general Council of Ephesus
reserved the cause of John Patriark of Antioch, to the judgment of the Pope?
And how had Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople, after he had bee^ deposed by
Dioscorus Patriark of Alexandria, and by the second Council of Ephesus;
appealed from them to the Pope, and that (says the Emperor Valentinian the
third) according to the custom of the Counsels? And how (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...)
finally had Theodoret, one of the Bishops of the Patriarkship of Antioch,
having been deposed in the same second Council of Ephesus; and having thence
appealed to the Pope, been received into the Council of Chalcedon, because the
Pope had restored him to his Bishopric, if the intention of the Council of
Nicea had been, not to propose the authority of the Pope, in regard of the
universal Church for type and pattern of the authority of the other
Patriarchs in regard of their Patriarkships, but to restrain the Popes
authority, into the only limits of a particular Patriarkship, as well as that
of the other Patriarchs.

It appears in the fifth place, by the title of universal Patriarch, and
universal Pope, that the Churchmen of the other Patriarkships, and
particularly those of Alexandria, who had more interest in the observation of
the sixth Canon of the Council of Nicea, then any other, as having been made
in favor of their Church, yielded to the Pope. For when the Priests and
deacons of the Patriarchall Church of Alexandria, presented their requests to
the Council of Chalcedon, from which the person of the Pope was as far
distant, as it is between Rome and Asia, they couched them in these terms; To
the most holy, and most blessed universal Patriark of (...) Chalc (...). 3.
great Rome, (...) and to the holy and universal Council.: And this they
did, all the Council seeing and approving it, and ordayning that they should
be inserted into the Acts, and consequently not holding them for strange new,
and unwonted things. And when the Religious men of Antioch, presented in
Constantinople their requests to Pope Agapet, they couched them, and made them
to be inserted into the Acts of the Council of Constantinople, holden against
Anthymus, and celebrated under the Emperor Conc Constant lib. (...) apud. (...)
80.
Justinian, in these words; To our most holy and blessed Lord Agapet,
Archbishop of the ancient Rome, and universal Pairiark. And when the great
scourge of the Nouatians, Eulogius Patriark of Alexandria, and heir of the
Rights conferred upon the patriarkship of Alexandria by the Council of Nicea,
set hand to penn, he did not only say (disputing against the Noua^ians) that
PETER only had received the keys, that is to say, originally; but also
writing to the Pope S. GREGORY; he called him (...) l. 7 (...) (...) (...)
universal Pope. Now how is this any other thing, then to protest, that what
the other Patriarchs were every one, in the behalf of his own Patriarkship
the Pope was the same in the behalf of the world? For as Chap. 7.
for the part that the Bishop of Constantinople challenged in this title
afterward, it shall be hereafter showed, that it was by virtue of the right of
the Bishop of Rome, that he pretended it to be communicated to him, by the
erection of Constantinople into the title of the second Rome: And as for the
refusal, that the Pope S. GREGORY made of the use thereof; it shall be
answered in the same chapter.

It appears in the sixth place, by the proceeding of Theodosius, the second
Emperor of the East, who resolving at the instance of Atticus Bishop of
Constantinople, to make the city of Constantinople enjoy the title C^^p. 6.
of Patriarkship, which he pretended had been attributed to him in the Council
of Constantinople, published a law, which has always (as shall hereafter
appear) remained without effect; by which he alleged, that Constantinople
had the privileges of the ancient Rome; and ordained that she should exercise
them, not only in all the provinces of Pontus, Asia minor, and Thracia, but
also in all the provinces of Illiria. The one of the heads of this law, we
learn from Socrates, who said, the Bishop of Cyzica being dead, Sisinnius
Archbishop of Constantinople, ordained Proclus Bishop of Cyzica; but the
Cyzicenians, that is to say, the Bishop of the division Soc. hist (...). l. 7.
(...). 28.
of Cyzica, seeing he went about it prevented him, and ordained a religious
mancalled Dalmatius, and this they executed, despising the law, which forbad to
ordain Bishops without the sentence of the Bishop of Constantinople;
alleging, it had been made only for the person of (...): And the other we
learn from the law omni (...) (...), which is a fragment of that where of
Socrates makes mention, which forbids that even in all the provinces of the
Eastern Illyria, any thing should (...), but with the knowledge of the Bishop
of Constantinople, (...) (says the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
law) that all innovation ceasing (so speaks the Emperor, because (...)
abusing the simplicity of his youth, had ginen him to understand falsely, that
the refusal that the Bishops of Illeria made, to acknowledge him for Patriarch,
had begun but since the schism of Arsacius his (...)) the antiquity, and the
precedent Ecclesiastical Canons, which have been observed hitherto (he means
the Canons of the Council of Constantinople, holden under Nectarius, which had
attributed to the Sea of Constantinople, even in spiritual causes, the title
of the second Rome; and it had been admittted in some provinces of Pontus, Asia
Minor, and Thracia) shall also have place through all the provinces of Illiria;
that is to say, of the Eastern Illiria; to wit, thae if there do any
controversy arise, it may not be reserred to the holy judgment and sacerdotall
council, without the knowledge of the most holy, and right Reverend the Bishop
of the city of Constantinople, which has the privileges of the ancient
Rome. And Photius Patriarch of Constantinople reporting the same Phot. in (...)
(...). tit. 8.
law; The sixth constitution (said he) of the second title of the first book
of the code ordains, that all the Canonical questions, that shall arise in
all Illiria, may not be, decided without the sentence of the Bishop of
Constantinople, and of his Synod, which has the privileges of the ancient
Rome. Now, what was this privilege of the ancient Rome, to whose imitation
nothing could be decided, not only in all the provinces of Thracia, Pontus,
and (...) (...) but also in all the provinces of the Eastern Illiria, without
the knowledge, or according to the text of Socrates and of Photius, without the
sentence of the Bishop of Constantidople, and of his Synod, but that which we
now come from speaking of with the same (...), that the Ecclesiastical Soc.
(...). (...). l. 2. c. 8.
law gave the Pope through the whole earth; to wit, that without the sentence
of the Bishop of Rome, there might be made no new definition Co^st. nou. Theod.
tit. 24.
in what part of the world soever: and which the law of Valentinian inserted
into the new constitutions of the same Theodosius renewes in these words: We
decree, that according to the ancient custom, nothing shall be innouated in
the Churches, without the sentence of the Bishop of Rome? And therefore, what
other thing was it to grant to the Bishop of Constantinople in Ecclesiastical
matters, the privileges of the city of Rome, but to make the Bishop of
Constantinople, particularly in his division, what the Bishop of Rome was, over
all the Earth?

It appeaaes in the seventh place, by the possession wherein the Pope
continued notwithstanding the erection of the Patriarkship of (...), to judge
of the judgments, and of the persons of the Patriarchs of Constantinople, and
to receive the appeals in mayor causes from their divisions. For not only the
Popes, as well after the Council of Constantinople, wherein the erectio^ of
the Patriarkship of Constantinople was attempted; as after that of Chalcedon,
where it was again set upon, remained in perpetual possession to judge of
the judgments, and of the persons of the Patriarchs of Constantinople; and to
receive the appeals of the mayor causes from their divisions; but also the
Patriarchs of Constantinople remained in perpetual profession of obedience and
of subjection to the Pope. The one of these points shall be seen hereafter,
both by the appeal that SCHRYSOSTOME In chap. 7. (...). (...) (...). ep. (...).
Archbishop of Constantinople cast in, from the Council of Constantinople to
Pope Innocent the first; and by the appeal that Eutiches Abbot of
Constantinople cast in from Flauianus Patriark of Constantinople to Pope Leo
the first; and by the appeal that the same Flauianus Patriark of
Constantinople cast in, from the second Council of Ephesus to the same Pope
Leo the first; and that says the Emperor Valentinia^ the 3rd. according
Valent. ep. ad Theod.
to the custom of Counsels, and by the condemnation that Pope Felix the third
made of Acacius Patriark of Constantinople; in virtue whereof he was raced, yea
after his death, out of the records of the Church of Constantinople; Marcell.
com. in Chron (...). l. 5. ind. (...) ep. 24. and 64. In chap. 7.
and by the deposition that Pope Agapet made of Anthymus Patriarch of
Constantinople; and by the judgment that the Pope S. GREGORY the Great, gave
in the causes of John priest of Chalcedon, and Athanasius a Regular of Lycaonia
appealing to him from the tribunal of the Patriarch of Constantinople. And the
other shall appear in the same chapter, by the protestations that (...).
Constable. ep. ad Horm.
John the second Council. Constable sub Men. act. 4
Anthimus, Ibid.
Menas, and Gregor. (...). l. 7. ind. 2. ep. 63.
John the fowrth Patriarchs of Constantinople, every one in his time made, to
acknowledge themselves submitted and subject to the Pope, and to the Roman
Church. Now how was this any other thing, but a perpetual testimony, that
the Patriark all dignity exempted not those that were thereof provided, from
the jurisdiction and superiority of the Pope; and then, that the intention of
the Council of Nicea, had never been, to restrain the Popes authority,
within the simple limitts, of a particular patriarkship, as well as that of
other Patriarchs, but to propose the Popes authority, in regard of the
universal Church, for a type and pattern of the authority of the other
Patriarchs, in regard of their patriarkships?

It appears in the eight place, by the proceeding of the Emperor Justinian the
first, who desiring to erect the first Iustinianea of Bulgaria the city of
his Birth, into the form of a supernumerary patriarkship, over the six
Archbishoprickes of the six provinces, near to that town, ordained, that in
those six provinces, she should hold the place of the Sea Apostolic of Rome,
following the definitions of Pope Vigilius: Just. (...). 131.
We decree (says the Emperor) that the blessed Bishop of the first
Iustinianea, shall have under his proper jurisdiction, the Bishops of the
Mediterranean Dacia, of Dacia Rypensis, of Triballea, of Dardania, of upper
Misia, and of Pannonia; and that they shall be ordained by him, and by his
proper Synod; and that in the provinces subiest to him, he shall hold the place
of the Sea Apostolic of Rome, following the things defined by the holy Pope
Vigilius. For that the intention of the Emperor Justinian, was to erect by this
law, the Bishopric of the first Iustinianea of Bulgaria, into the form of a
Patriarkship of honor, although this honor remained to him but in shadow and
smoke we learn from two cases. The one, that in the Council of
Constantinople surnamed Trullian holden under Justinian the second, before
Bulgaria was possessed by the Infidells, John Bishop of Iustinianopolis, signed
in (...). (...). Trull.
the rank of the Patriarchs in this order; Paul of Constantinople, Peter of
Alexandria, Anastasius of Jerusalem, George of Antioch, and John of
Iustinianopolis. And the other, that ever after the return of Bulgaria to be
Christian, the latter Greeks did in some sort, continue this title to him, as
Curopalates a Greek Author acknowledges, when he coupleth the Archbishop of
Bulgaria, with the Patriarchs in these terms; The designatio^ of the other
Patriarchs, is made without any diversity, as well of him of Alexandria, of
him of Antioch, of him of Jerusalem, as also of the Archbishop of the first
Iustinia Mich. Codin. dictus vulgo (...) c. de Patr. designat. Barlaam ep.
Gyrac. ep. 1.
nea called Achrida, and of all Bulgaria: And as Barlaam a Greek Author,
native of Peloponosus confirms it in his disputations against the Greek
schismatics, when he writes, that in the part separate from the Pope, there
were five Patriarchs; on the other part, says he, the are five Patriarchs,
reckoning him of Bulgaria. And that this privilege to hold the place of the
Sea Apostolic in the six provinces near the first Iustinianea, was not by
co-ordination with the Pope, but by subordination to the Pope; that is to say,
it was not by form of exemption from the authority of the Pope, but by form
of submission and substitution to the authority of the Pope. We learn from
the epistles of S. GREGORY the Great, which testify, as it shall appear in
the chapter following, that the same S. GREGORY Greg. l. 4 ep. 6. and 15.
confirmed, yet fifty year after this law, the election of the Bishop Item l.
2. ep. 6.
of the first Iustinianea, sent him the Archiepiscopall mantle, renewed to him
the Vicarship of the Sea Apostolic, judged by appeal of the Bishops of his
division; and chasticed himself, when he had judged amiss.

It appears in the ninth place, by the proceeding of the Bishop of
Constantinople, who having obtained in the Council of Constantinople, holden
under Theodosius the Great, a decree which ordained, that his Sea should be
the second after Rome, because Constantinople was the second Rome; and having
made this decree to be explained by a surreptitious Canon, in the Council of
Chalcedon, in such sort as he was permitted to enjoy the Co^c. Chalc act. 15
can. 28.
same privileges with the Pope, after the Pope; attempted to participate with
the Pope, the title of universal Patriarch, and to inscribe himself
universal Patriarch, not in regard of the Pope, but under the pope, and in
regard of the other patriarchs, and to this the other patriarchs, and the
Emperors themselves, and the Counsels of the East, consented, and communicated
to him this nomination. For in the Council of Constantinople holden against
Anthimus, not only the title of universal Patriarch was Conc. Co^st sub Men.
act. 1.
attributed to the Pope, but also to the Bishop of Constantinople. And in the
seventh law of the Code, the Emperor Justinian called Epiphanius Patriarch
Ibid. act. 5.
of Constantinople, Oecumenic all Patriark but under the Pope, whom he Cod. l.
1. tit. 1. l. 7.
calls in the same law, the head of all the holy ministers of God. And in
Cod. Paris Antuerp and Genesis tit 1. l. 7.
the sixth general Council, not only the Emperor Constantine Pogonat,
intitles the Pope, General Arch-pastor, and the Protothrone of all Patriarchs;
but also the epistle of Cyrus Patriarch of Alexandria, read in the same (...).
(...) ep. ad Synod. Apost. Co^c. Constable 6. act. 18. epist. ad Agath.
Council, qualifies Sergius Patriarch of Constantinople, with the title of
Oecumenic all Patriarch. Now how was this any other then to presuppose, that
the Pope had always been universal and Oecumenic all Patriarch? For if the
Patriarch of Constantinople, by virtue of the erection of Constantinople into
the title of second Rome, made as he pretended for spiritual Rights in Co^c
Constable 6. act. 13.
the first Council of Constantinople, attributed to himself jointly with the
Pope, though under the Pope, the title of universal Patriarch; and that all
the other Patriarchs, and the Emperors themselves, and the Council of the
East, consented to it, and communicated to him, this nomination; how does it
not appear manifestly, that they then acknowledged, that before the holding of
the first Council of Constantinople, the Bishop of Rome was universal and
Oecumenic all Patriarch; and by consequent, that the intention of the Council
of Nicea had not been to restrain the Popes authority to the only limits of
a particular patriarkship, as that of the other patriarkships, but to propound
the Popes authority, in regard of the universal Church, for a type and
pattern of the authority of the other Patriarchs, in regard of their
patriarkships?

It appears in the tenth place, by the epistle of Innocent the first, whom
Aug. ep. 106.
S. AUSTIN calls Pope of happy memory, to Alexander Patriarch of Antioch,
wherein he writes to him, that the Council of Nicea had established (...)
(...) Alex (...) Ant. (...). 18. Ibid.
the Patriarkship of Antioch, not over a Province, but over a Body, and a
mass of Provinces; and adds, that Antioch had not yielded to Rome, but that
what Antioch had tra^sitorilie (to wit, S. PETER'S Sea,) Rome had it finally
and absolutely: and by the testimony of S. IEROM priest of the Patriarkship of
Antioch, who says that the Council of Nicea had (...) (...). Idem ad (...)
(...). 57. and 58.
ordained that Antioch should be the metropolitan of all the East; and
nevertheless cries, that the Church is built upon the Popes communion, and
upon the chair of S. PETER, and that he will not acknowledge the Patriarks of
Antioch, but whiles they communicate with the Pope: from whence it arises,
that the intention of the Council of Nicea had not been to make the Popes
authority, and that of the Patriarch of Antioch, equal.

And finally it appears by the difference that the Council of Chalcedon,
(where this very decree of the Council of Nicea was read,) put between
Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, who possessed the Sea, in whose favor the
Canon had been made, and the Pope; accounting the Pope for Guardian of our
Lords Vine, and the Patriarch of Alexandria for one of his subguardians. For
not only the Coucell of Chalcedon writing to the Pope, calls him the head of
Bishops: We beseech thee (says the Council) to (...) Cont. (...). ad. l
(...). (...) 3. c. 2
our judgment with thy decrees, that as we have brought consent in matters of
weal to our head, so thy Sovereignty, (...), or according to the other
copies; (...), the Sovereignty may fulfill in the behalf of thy children,
that which is for decency. But also speaking of the presu^ptions of Dioscorus
Patriarch of (...), adds for the last, to make his insolence co^pleat, that he
(...) set upon the proper person of him to whom our Lord had committed the
guard of the Vine; he has (said they) extended his felony, even against him,
to whom the (...). (...) ibid.
guard of the vine, was committed by our Savior, that is to say, (added they)
against thy Holiness. Now was not this to protest, that what Dioscorus
Patriarch of Alexandria, was over the Churches of Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis,
the Pope was the same over all the Churches of the world; and to authorize what
the Emperor Valentinian the third had said but a while before, that the Pope Ad
(...). (...). Theod. no (...). constable. (...). 24. (...) (...) (...) (...) 22
was Rector of the universality of Churches. And what the Bishop of Patara in
Lycia, one of the Provinces of Asia, said afterward to the Emperor Justinian,
that there was noe king in the world, which was over all the world, as the
Pope was over the Church of all the earth? For this occasion then; to wit,
that the Patriarkships, and namely those of Alexandria, and Antioch, which had
been founded from the time of S. PETER, and by S. PETER himself, were as
Vicarships (I mean Vicarships borne and perpetual, and not Vicarships
delegate and arbitrary) of the Sea of S. PETER; or rather to repeat S.
GREGORY'S words, one same Sea of S. PETER with that of Rome; when the Fathers
of the Council of Nicea confirmed the privileges of the Bishop of Alexandria,
troubled by Meletius head of the Schismatics of Egypt, they decreed that the
Bishop of Alexandria in the Provinces of his Patriarkship, should euioy the
Rights of the Bishop of Rome, as the Sea of Alexandria in Egypt, Libia, and
Pentapolis, being an originarie and perpetual Vicarship of S. PETER'S sea, but
not that they thereby pretended in things that exceeded Patriarchall
authority, either to equal him with the Pope, or to exempt him from the Popes
jurisdiction. Otherwise how could Pope (...) the first in the view of the
Fathers of the same counsel of Nicea, who were still for the most part living
and breatihng have re-established S. ATHANAS. Patriarch of Alexandria; Paul
Bishop of Constantinople; Marcellus Primat of Galatia; and Asclepas Bishop of
Gaza in Palestina, Prelates who had all assisted at the Council of Nicea, could
not be ignorant of the Canons thereof, since they helped to compose them: for
that (says Soz. l. 3. c. 8
Sozomene) to him, because of the dignity of his Sea, the care of all things
appertained? Athanas. apol. 2.
And how could S. ATHANASIVS have alleged for his (...) these words of the
same Julius; Are you ignorant that the custom is, that you first write to us,
and so from hence must proceed the just decision of all things; and therefore,
if there were any suspicion raised against the Bishop there; that is to say
of Alexandria, you must have written of it to the Church here; that is to
say, the Church of Rome? And how could Peter Patriark of Alexandria, and S.
ATHANASIVS successor, having been driven from his Sea, have been restored upon
the letters that he brought from Pope DAMASVS, which confirmed (says Socrates)
the says of Soc. l 4. c. 37.
Moses, and the ordination of PETER? And how, when Flauianus Bishop of
Constantinople, having been deposed in the false Council of Ephesus by
Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, could the Emperor Valentinian In epist.
(...). (...). (...)
have said; Antiquity has yielded to the most holy Bishop of Rome, the
Priesthood over all, etc. For this cause the Bishop of Constantinople,
according to the custom of the Counsels, has appealed to him? And how could
Pope Leo the first, have written to Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, that if
Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, and Iuuenall Bishop of Jerusalem, should
come to repentance, and accompany their conversion with such satisfaction, Leo
1. ep. 44.
as it should seem ought not to be despised, the thing should be reserved to
the more mature deliberation of the Sea Apostolic? And how could the Fathers
of the Council of Chalcedon, addressing their relation to the Pope, and
speaking of Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, and of the false Council of
Ephesus, have said; He has extended his frenzy even against him, to whom the
guard of the vine was committed by our Savior; that is to say, against thy
Holiness? And when a little after the celebration of the same Council, Peter
surnamed Mongus, and John surnamed Talaia, having been created by diverse
factions, Patriarchs of Alexandria, how could the Gelas. ep. ad Episc. Dardan.
Pope have committed the care of the provinces of Egypt to Acasius Patriarch of
Constantinople? And how could John having been deposed from the Patriarkship of
Alexandria by the Synod of Egypt, and by the complot of the Emperor Zeno, and
appealed to the Pope, and taken with him Synodicall letters of intercession
from Calendion Patriarch of Antioch Liberat. in breuiar. c. 12.
to favor his appeal? And the same John Patriarch of Alexandria, having
appealed to the Pope, how could the Pope have deposed Peter his adversary, and
with him Acacius Bishop of Constantinople who adhered to Euag. l 3. c. 15.
him, and that with such effect, that even after their death, they were raced
(...). Imp. epist ad Hormisd.
in Constantinople and in Alexandria, out of the Catalogue of the Patriarchs of
Alexandria and Constantinople, and their names blotted out of the records of
their Churches, and excluded from the recital of the mysteries.

Of the addition of the word Churches suburbicary made by Ruffinus, in the
latin translation of the Canons of the Council of Nicea. CHAP. VI.
Against these things, nevertheless the Popes adversaries object the
translation of Ruffinus priest of Aquilea, who adds to the Epilogue that he
has made of the latin translation of the Canon of the Council of Nicea, the
word Churches suburbicary, which is neither in the Greek text, nor in the
ancient complete and formal latin editions, and turns the article in these
terms, that the Bishop (...). (...) l. 2.
of Alexandria, should have the care of the Churches of Egypt; and he of Rome,
of the Churches (...): from whence they draw this impertinent conclusion; that
the Pope had there no jurisdiction, but over the Churches neighboring to this
(...); and they triumph so upon it, as after a thousand writings which they
have published upon this subject, they have even this last year caused to be
imprinted a topographicall mapp of the ancient (...) of the Pope, and have
accompanied it with a discourse, (...); Of the (...) suburbicarie; where they
have assigned him for all jurisdiction, (...) (...) (...) etc. (...). (...)
(...) (...) (...). 16. 8.
a (...) thousand paces about the city of Rome; that is to say, about as
much Ground, as is between Paris, and Orleans: But I hope soon to set a
Catastrophe to their Tragedy, and to turn their triumph into obsequies;

Superbos (...). 1. (...). 35.

Vertere funeribus triumphos.
For who sees not, that it is a wilful blindness, having the greek text, and
the ancient latin editions complete, and in form, of the Canon of the
Council of Nicea in their hands, to tie themselves to the Epilogized
translation of a man, that S. IEROM avouches to have been, a very (...).
(...) (...). 2.
evil translator; and who bsides for his errors, had been excommunicated, and
noted (says the same S. IEROM) with the brand of heresy by Pope Anastasius,
and by the Roman Church?

There are three things which principally make a Translator unfit to be
credited, passion, ignorance, and rashness. Now, as for passion, who has ever
better deserved to be reproched in this regard, in matters that concern the
Roman Church, then Ruffinus, who had been excommunicated for his errors in
faith by Pope Anastasius, and by the Roman Church, and that before he writ his
history, which was written after Alaricus coming into Italy; that is to say
under the Popedom of Innocent successor of Anastasius? Russinus (says Pope
Anastasius) is so excluded from our (...), Russin. ep ad Chrom (...) (...)
(...). ep. (...) (...). (...) Hier. al (...). Russin l. 2.
as we are not curious to know, neither what he does, nor where he is; let
him look to himself, where he can be absolved. And S. IEROM; Pope Anastasius
in the epistle he writ against thee to John Bishop of Jerusalem, has taxed
this desault, justifying me, me that did it, and condemning thee, thee I say
that would not do it. And again speaking of the confession of Russinus
faith, which he salslie assirmed to have been approved by the Bishops of
Italy; How should Italy (said he) have approved that which Rome has
rejected. how should Id. (...).
the Bishops receive that, which the Sea Apostolic has condemned? And a
little Id. (...).
after; Thou do so avoid the judgment of the city of Rome, that thou
chosest rather to support a siege of Barbarians, (this he spoke because of the
coming of Alaricus to Aquilea, whither Ruffinus had retired himself) then the
sen tence of a peaceable city. For whereas Gennadius, places Ruffinus
amongst the Orchodoxall Authors, it was because Gennadius was of the Sect of
one of the branches of Pelagius beresie, whereof Ruffinus had cast the roots;
but not, that Ruffinus did not dye an heretic, and anathematized by the Roman
Church, as saint JEROME insinuates when he says, describing enigmaticallie the
reuolte, anathema, and the (...) (...). (...) (...). (...)
sepulcher of Ruffinus, who was dead in Sicilia; The Scorpion is pres (...)
under the Sicilian earth, between Enceladus and Porphirus, it must be read,
between Enceladus and Porphirion, who were two of the Giants that the
Poetical fables had said to be revolted against Jupiter, and had been stricken
dead with thunder bolts, and covered with the Mountains of Sicilia. With what
faith then can they allege the words of Ruffinus, when the authority of the
Roman Church is in question, by whose Tribunal he had been condemned and
excommunicated? you can scarce light upon a place in Ruffinus translations,
where there is an occasion presented to speak of the Pope and of the Roman
Church, but he sharpens and enuenoms it as particularly when Eusebius reporting
the history of Pope Victor, who had excommunicated the Church of Asia, be cause
of the question about keeping the pasch; says, There are yet to be found
letters of the Bishops, which handled Victor some what roughly, (Ruffinus Eus.
hist. ec. cl. l. (...). c 24
adds of his own,) as providing unprofitably for the affairs of the Church;
and Id ibid.
in the verse following, where Eusebius writes; Ireneus exhorted Victor not to
cut off all the Churches of God which held the tradition of this ancient
custom. Rufsinus turns it; Ireneus reprehended him that he had not done well
to cut off from the body of unity so many and so great Churches of God: and
sees not, that in thinking to calumniate Pope Victor, he callumniates the
council of Nicea, who renewed the same excommunication, a thing possibly
pardonable in Eusebius; who besides that he was an Arrian, writ his histories
before the Council of Nicea: but inexcusable in Ruffinus, who made his
translation afterward. With what color then, would they square the intention
of the original Greek of the canons of the Council of Nicea, by the addition
that Ruffinus a passionate translator, incensed against the Church of Rome,
has made thereto?

And as for ignorance what translator was ever more worthy to be refused in
that regard then Ruffinus, whose clauses are almost as many prooffs of
ignorance and impertinencie? for what could be imagined more unapt, then to
make of, James, Bishop of Jerusalem; James, Bishop of the Apostles: of the
Greek word, (...) which signfies Blessed or happy a Saint called Macarius: of
Eusebius Pamphilus, an heretic and an Arrian, Pamphilus, a Catholic Ruff in
hist. eccl. Eusebius. l. 1. c 1.
and a Martyr: of Xistus a pithagorian and Pagan Philosopher, XISTVS Pope and
Martyr. An error that S, IEROM bitterly reproues, and which gave occasion to
saint AUSTIN to stumble and retract upon the same Ibid. l. 5. c. 24.
matter: of question which comes of quaero, a verb active, querimony, which
Hier. ep. ad Ctesiph.
comes of queror, a verb deponent, of Corepiscopus, whereof the Nicea Council
speaks, the vacant place of a Bishop, and so of infinite others, which Ibidem.
Ibidem.
moved saint IEROM to say, that Ruffinus was so unapt, in both tongues, Aug.
Retr. l 2 c. 42.
as the Romans took him for a Grecian, and the Greeks for a Roman?

And as for boldness and rashness, what interpreter ever showed less Hier. ad
uers. Ruff. apol 2
Religion or Faith in observing the text of his Authors then Ruffinus, who has
always taken liberty to add, or diminish, as it seemed good to him? Conc Nic.
(...) Apol. con. Rust l. 2.
Thy conscience (says saint IEROM, speaking to Ruffinus of the translation he
had made of Origin) knows what thou have added, and what thou have taken away,
and what thouhast changed from one place to an other, as it has pleased thee.
Idem. Ibid.
And Erasmus in his preface upon saint HILARY; Ruffinus has (...) Erasm. Rot
(...). in Hilat. Ios. Scal. annot. in Chro. Eus. number.
to himself, the same authority, in the translation of all the books which
he has translated, and principally in that of Origens writings, and in that
of Eusebius history, but this is not the liberty of an interpreter, but the
license of a defiler of an others works. And Scaliger in his annotations upon
the Chronicle of Eusebius: It is the custom of Ruffinus (says he) to omit,
to pervert, and to change the texts as MMLXV. Ruff hist. eccl. l. 10. c 6.
he list. With what face then, can they now leave the Greek text of the
Council of Nicea, to have recourse to Ruffinus translations, a perpetual
corrupter of the translations of antiqultie, and particularly of that of the
Canons of Nicea, where of he Suppresses some; diuides others; mangles some;
adds to others; depraues some, mistakes the sense of others? I have said
Suppresses some; for he suppresses the twentieth Canon of the Council of Nicea,
which contains the Ordenance to adore standing in the Sundaies service and
during the fifty days of Pentecoste: And that in hate of the resurrection of
the very flesh, which as an Origenist he opposed, no more remembering what he
had written of it, when he was yet a Catholic. I have said divided, and
multiplied others; for he divided the eigth and the ninteenth Canons, into two
others, and of either of them made two different Canons. I have said mangles
some, for he mangles the sixth, and ecclipseth from it, the Rights of the Bishop
of Antioch, in favor of John Bishop of Jerusalem whom he pretended to be an
Origenist as himself was; And maymes the end of the thirteenth. And that which
the fathers say of Dying penitents, to whom the Councellregrauntes the
communion of the Sacrament, after the examination of the Bishop, with condition
notwithstanding, that if they chance to survive, they shall be admitted but to
the communion of prayers: he interprets it, of the examination of the Bishop
for penitents recovered. I have said, adds to others; for he adds to the
eighteenth this whole clause, That Deacons in the absence of Bishops and
priests, might distribut the Eucharist. And to the ninth (...); or have been
convinced thereof by others: which are no more within the Greek text of the
Council, then this of the Churches suburbicary. I have said depraues some; for
he depraues the ninteenth and says of Deaconesses in general, that which the
Canon only says of the Paulianist deaconesses. I have said mistakes the sense
of others, for in the eigth he is ignorant of the sense of the word
Corepiscopus, and turns it, the vacant place of a Bishop. And in the ninth
that of the word, (...), and interprets, of confession of priests after
promotion, That, which the council says, of the Confession of Priests before
promotion; that is to say, of the Confession made in the trial of those that
were to be promoted to priesthood.

For whereas some to warrant the clause of the Churches Suburbicary allege,
that Pope Gelasius, writing about the end of the same age, approved the works
of Russinus, excepting those things that saint IEROM had Lib de (...). Reg.
Impr. (...) (...) 1618. (...). 2. c. 6. (...), Pap 1. in. decret de (...).
script Id. ibid.
reprehended. It is a vain and frivolous warrantie; for as much as Pope
Gelasius intended to speak of the works, or dogmaticall translations of
Russinus, as was the Commentary upon the Creed, and the translations of the
treatises of some Greek divines, and not of his historical works or
translations: Otherwise how could Pope Gelasius in the same decree have
condemned the ten books of the recognitions of Clement, which had been
translated by Russinus? and how could he have written in the same place, the
holy Roman Catholic and Apostolic Church has not been preferred before
other Churches by any Synodicall Constitutions, but has obtained the primacie
by the Evangelical voice of our Lord and Savior, saying; Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock I will build my Church? And how could he have written elsewhere
speaking of the ancient canons Id in (...) (...). (...). Id. ep. ad. (...).
(...). I (...) de (...). (...). (...). (...).
of the Church: These are the Canons which ordain, that from all parts of the
world, the appeals shall be brought to the Sea Apostolic? And how could he
have said, that the care of the Regions of Egypt, and of Antioch, had been by
Pope Felix committed to Acacius Patriark of Constantinople? And whereas they
add that saint CYRILL sending the Canons of the Council of Nicea, to the
Bishops of Africa, writ to them, that they might find them in the
Ecclesiastical history; which they pretend must be understood of the history
of (...); for as much as those of Socrates, Theodoret, and Sozomene, were
written since, and besides contain nothing of the canons of the Council of
Nicea this is yet a more feeble and deceiptfull caution. For besides that many
others had made collections of the Ecclesiastical history (as amongst the
Catholics, saint ATHANASIVS Bishop of Alexandria, who had composed a volume
entitled, Synodica. Soc hist. eccl. l. 1. (...). 13.
Theodorus Bishop of Mopsvestia, not yet then noted for heresy, who had framed
a particular history of the Council of Nicea, Philip of Sida, who had
compiled an universal Ecclesiastical history: And amongst the heretics
Theod: Mopsuest. apud. Nicet (...). l. 5. c. 7. and 9. Phillip. sid. apud. Soc.
hist. eccl. l. 7. c. 27.
Philostorgius the Arrian; and Sabinus the Macedonian) where is the article of
the Bishop of Antioch, and the precept to adore standing on the sundaies, and
during the fifty days of Pentecoste, which were contained in saint Cyrills
Copy, to be found in Ruffinus edition? and contrariwise where are the
permission to deacons to distribute the Eucharist in the absence of priests and
Bishops: and the restitution of the communion to penitents, before the
accomplishement of their penance: and (...). apud. Niceph. l. 9. c. 19. and l.
(...). c 29. and Nicet. l. 5. c. 7. and 9.
the extension of the canon of the Paulianict deaconesses to all deaconesses in
general: and the equivocation and mistaking of the confession of priests after
promotion, which are all in the edition of Ruffinus to be read in the copy of
saint CYRILL? contrariwise, if saint CYRILLS intention had been to approve the
edition of Russinus by this remittment; Sabin Maced apud. Soc. hist. ec cl. l.
1. c. 7. and alibi.
why did not the Africans which turned, or caused to be turned, from Greek
into Latin, saint CYRILLS Greek Copy, follow Ruffinus in their translation,
and put in the Clause of Churches Suburbicarie? And saint CYRILL himself, if
he had believed that the clause of, Churches Conc. Ephesians. p 1. (...) ep. Celest.
Pap Conc. Ephesians. act. 3.
suburbicary, should have been added to the Cano^ of the Council of Nicea, how
could he have taken, a Vicarship and commission from Pope Celestine, to execute
the sentence of the Sea Apostolic against Nestorius Ibid.
Archbishop of Constantinople? And how could he and the other Bishops Conc.
Ephesians. p. 2 act. 5. in relat. ad (...).
of the Council of Ephesus; have approved of the oration of the Popes Legates,
by which they called the Pope, the head of the Church, and the Vicar and
ordinary Successor of saint PETER? and why had they reserved the judgment of
the cause of John Patriarch of Antioch to the Pope?

And then, what proof is there, that Ruffinus by the word suburbicary, did
intend the Churches within a hundred thousand paces of the City of Rome, and
not the Churches of all the Cities subject to the Empire of the City of
Rome, Is there any likelihood, that the Bishop of Alexandria, should have had
Egypt Libia, and Pentapolis, under which were yet intended many other great
provinces, either annexed or subalterne as Ammoniaca, Maroeotides, Thebaidis;
and besides the immense Region of Epiph. Hier. Milet Leo imp: in. vit. Chrysostom.
Ethiopia from whence the Greek Emperor Leo, surnamed the Philosopher, says
in the life of saint CHRYSOSTOM, that the Emperor Arcadius caused Theophilus
Patriarch of Alexandria to cometo Constantinople, accompanied with Indian and
Egiptian Bishops; And that the Bishop of Rome by whom they squared him, had no
more but those only Churches, that where near the (...) of Rome: Theocritus
writes, that Ptolomeus Philadelphus, king of Egypt, of whose Empire the
Provinces since attributed to the Patriarkship of Alexandria made the
principal part, commanded 33339. cities.

Of towns, thirty three thousand, three hundred thirty nine;
Under the yoke of his decrees; their servile heads incline. (...). Idyl. 17.
Strab. geogr. l. 17.

And Strabo, and Diodorus Siculus, and the interpreter of the notice of the
Empire after them say, that the ancient division of Egypt, was divided Diodor.
sicul. bibl. l 2.
into thirty six provinces whereof Delta in Egypt contained ten; and the (...)
Theodosius the second writing to Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria to cause him
to come to the false Counsel of Ephesus, sent to him (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...).
to bring his ten metropolitan Bishops, or ten of his metropolita^ Bishops;
that is to say heads of Provinces with him. And the Bishop of Antioch who was
but the third Patriarch, had under him the two Syria's, the three (...). de
(...). Pap. and (...)
(...), the two Cilicia's, the three Arabia's, the Region of Euphrates,
Mesopotamia, Jsauria, and Osrhoene. and more as he pretended the Isle of (...).
Ephesians part. 2. act. 7.
Cyprus, without reckoning many other provinces, which though he (...) not
their metropolitans, yet nevertheless acknowledge him. For there were many
provinces which acknowledged their Patriarks, and were obliged to appear at
their patriarchall Synods, although they took not from them the ordination of
their metropolitans; from whence it is that Balsamon writes, that the Council
of Antioch holden under the Balsamon. in Conc. Constable. (...) c (...)
patriark Peter, Jberia Asiatica otherwise called the province of the Georgians
was made Autocephalus, that is to say, exempt from taking the ordination of
their Metropolitan, any other where, then from the Synod of the province, and
nevertheless still remained subject to the patriarch (...). (...) (...). 28.
of Antioch. And when the Council of Chalcedon would erect Constantinople into
a patriarkship, they assigned him for his patriarchall Division the provinces
of Trace, pontus, Asia minor, with the Barbarous provinces; (...). in
Terpsichor.
that is to say, Russia and Muscouia, which together contained more ground
then all Europe; principally if we give Credit to Herodotus, who says, that
the Thracians were the greatest nation of the world next the Indians. And the
Pope who was the first patriarch, and the pattern and model of all the
patriarchs, to have been restrained to the only Churches near the City of
Rome, what a Birthright had that been? For to say that the Pope had in his
portion the City of Rome, which recompensed in splendour and dignity, the
extent of the other patriarkships; and besides that the provinces near the
City of Rome were much more peopled, then the provinces near the other
patriarchall Cities: who knows not first, that the City of Rome being under
the Popes government, is not because of his dignity of patriarch, but because
of his quality of Bishop? (...) Sic bibl (...) (...) ibid l. 17.
And secondly, who knows not, that Diodorus Siculus writes, that many placed
Alexandria the first or second of all the Cities of the world; and assirmes,
that in his time, there were above three hundred thousand. (...). (...). l. 4.
(...) le (...) (...).
Freemen inhabitans in Alexandria: and that Herodian says, that Geta esteemed,
that Alexandria and Antioch, were not far short of Rome: and that (...) calls
Constantinople equal to Rome? And as for the provinces near Constantinople
and Alexandria, who knows not that they were no Ios de Beil (...). 2.
less peopled then the provinces near and contiguous to Rome; and
principally; if we believe Josephus, wherein (...) says, that Egypt contained
(...), Sic. (...) (...). l. (...)
Seauenty five hundred thousand of men, without accompting the inhabitants of
Alexandria: And Diodorus Siculus who says; that the ancient Egypt contained
above eighteen thousand Cities or famous Boroughes?

The word Suburbicary being derived as Grammar teaches us, from the word vrbs,
the laws of Etimology will, that the variety of the signisications, should be
ruled according to the difference of the acceptions of the word vrbs the
primitive: Now the word vrbs preciselie taken for the (...) of Rome, had two
Offices; the one, to distinguish her from all Cities contained under the
Empire of the same City of Rome, which was Called by excellency and
absolutely vrbs; from whence it is that S. (...) 40 (...) (...) (...). (...).
18.
CYPRIAN calls the Clearks of Rome, Clearkes of the City, and the first
Council of Arles, intitles the Deacons of Rome, the deatons of the City. And
Optatus Mileuitanus calls Zepherinus Bishop of Rome, Zepherinus of the Opt Mil.
con. Parm. l. 1.
City. And GREGORY of Tours, says, Papam Vrbis, intending the Pope of Rome;
and that conformablie both to the eminency of the City, and Greg. Tour.
hist. Franc. l. 2 Dio hist. Romans l. 52.
to the Council that Mecenas, reported by Dion, gave to Augustus, to make all
other people take their Cities, but for Country howses and Villages and to
believe that there was but one City, truly a City, to wit, Rome: And the
other, to distinguish it from the only Cities, subject to the Prouostship of
Rome, which they called the Prefecture of the City, which contained the next
hundred thousand paces to the City of Rome. And therefore as the word vrbs,
taken precisely for the City of Rome, had two uses; one relative to the
Imperial territory of the City of Rome, and the other, relative to the
prouostall territory of the City of Rome: so the word suburbicary taken
according to the reason of the etymology, ought to have two offices; the one
general, to wit, to design all the Cities situate within the imperial
territory of Rome, that ancient writers called Romania: from whence it is that
saint ATHANASIVS said, that Rome was the Sea Apostolic and Metropolitan of
Romania: the other particular, Epiph. (...). 46. (...) 49.
and more proper to lawyers; to wit, to design the only Cities, situate
within the prouostall territory of Rome; that is to say, within a hundred
thousand paces about Rome, which they called suburbicary, to distinguish the^
Possi l in vita. August. c. 30. and (...).
from the Cities of Italy, subject to the Pretoriall prefect of Italy, who
held his Seat at Milan; the which, and principally since the time of
Constantine, Athanad Solit. vit. agent.
was partycularly called Italy; for before Constantines time, the pretoriall
Prefecture was not yet divided into four Pretoriall Prefectures, of Italy, of
Gallia, of Illiria, and of the East, but consisted in one only Prefecture
though it were sometimes solidarily administered by two persons. Now to pretend
that it were in this second sense; to wit, not by relation to the Imperial
territory of Rome; but by relation to the Prouostall territory of Rome, that
Ruffinus has translated, that the Bishop of Rome should have the care of the
Churches suburbicary; what were this but to find the Readers some what to
laugh at? For besides that this term was not in use but in the authors that
have written since Constantin, and the Council of Nicea, who ever heard of
shutting up the Popes authority within the next hundred thousand paces of the
City of Rome? is there so simple a scholar that knows not, that the Pope
setting aside his quality, of head of the Church, was Patriarcke of the West;
Bas. ep 10. Ier. ad. Marc. presb. Ce. led. ep. 77.
whence it is, that saint BASILE considering him as Patriarch, calls him the
Corypheos of the western people, And that S. JEROME speaking of him in the
same quality, cries out, let them condemn me of heresy with the west; let
them condemn me of heresy with Egypt; that is to say with Damasus Soc. hist.
eccl. l. 4. c. 37.
and with PETER, understanding by Damasus, Pope Damasus, and by PETER, Peter
Patriarch of Alexandria; whom Socrates says, Pope Damasus had newly then
restored. And even the Greek Scismaticks; did not they ancie^tly acknowledge,
that the Patriarkship of the Pope, did anciently co^taine all the provinces of
the Empire of the West, that is to say, all the Provinces of Italy, Africa,
Spain, France, and the Germanies, England, and the Western Illiria, under
which was understood Dalmatia, Hu^garia, and the neighboring provinces? Thou
See, says Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica, disputing against Nil. de (...).
Pap.
the Latins, that the Canon of the Council of Nicea esteems, that the rules
of the Fathers ought to be confirmed, which have distributed to every Church
their privileges, to wit, that some of the Nations should be submitted to the
Bishop of Alexandria, others to the Bishop of Antioch, as those of Syria, and
the two Cilicia's, Coelosiria, and Mesopotamia: And to the Bishop of Rome is
given the same, to wit, that he have the superintendencie of those of the West.
And Zonarus a Greek commenter and a Schismatic, expounding (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...)
the sixth Cano^ of the Coucell of Nicea long before Nilus; The Council (says
(...)) ordaines, that the Bishop of Alexandria, should have the (...) of (...),
of Libia, and Pentapolis etc. as the ancient custom had given to the Bishop of
Rome, to command in the provinces of the west. yea, does not the same Zonarus
write, that the patriarkship of Rome, comprehended not (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...)
only all the provinces of the Empire of the West, but also almost all the
western provinces of the Empire of the East? To the Roman Church (says (...)
comenting the fifth Canon of the Council of Sardica) were then (...) almost
all the western Churches; to wit, those of Macedonia, those of Illiria, those
of (...), those of Peloponesus; those of Epirus, which have since been
attributed to the Sea of Constantinople. For those provinces that Zonarus calls
western, were all of the Empire of the East; but they were called western, and
appertained to the Patriarkship of the west, for as much as they had been (...)
the ancient Empire of the West, such as it had been possessed by the
Commonweal of Rome, before the Empire of Asia, holden by the Seleucides and
other neighbour-Princes, and that of Egypt were united to it, and such (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)
as it had been limited by the Emperors Antonius and Geta, when they (...) to
divide the Roman world, and set the Bosphorus for a bar between the two
Empires: and such as it remained in the portion of the Emperors of the West,
when the heirs of Constantine shared the body of the State, and assigned the
mountain of Thuscis in Trace, for a bound be tweene both Empires. From whence
it is, that saint ATHANASIVS (...) (...) Bishop of Thessalonica amongst the
Bishops of the West. And that Socrates says that Paul Bishop of Constantinople
was banished from the Empire of the East, and confined to Thessalonica. And
therefore when in the last division of the Empire they added the eleauen
provinces of the Esterne Illyria, to the forty nine provinces of the
Pretoriall Prefecture of the East, to make thereof the Empire of the East; they
remained within the Popes patriarkship, though they were become parts of the
Empire of the East, and were called the Western provinces of the Empire of the
East, to distinguist them from those of the same Empire, which were under the
pretoriall prefecture of the East.

And it is not to be objected, that the law Omni innouatione cessante, made by
Theodosius the second at the instance as it has been abouesaid of Atti cus
Bishop of Constantinople, attributes to the patriarkship of Constantinople, not
only the provinces of Thracia, Asia minor, and Pontus, but also those of the
Eastern Illyria. For it appears by a thousand testimonies, that this law
remained without effect, and had no place after the death of Atticus. It
appears first by the testimony of Socrates, who says, first that the
inhabitants of Cyzica a City of Hellespont, would not receive Proclus, that
the Bishop of Constantinople had ordained Bishop of Cyzica, alleging that the
law of the Emperor Theodosius the second where of the law Omni (...) cessante
is but a paragraph inserted into the Code by the heedlesnes of Triboniam, had
been made but for Atticus, his life time. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
They ordained (says Socrates) Dalmatius, despising the law which commanded
that the ordinatio^ of Bishops should not be made without the sentence of the
Bishop of Constantinople and slighted this law, as having been granted to
Atticus only for his life. It appears secondly by the testimony of the Pope
sainr LEO, who was created Pope, eighteen years after this law, who teaches
us, that the causes of the Eastern Illyria went even then to the Archbishop of
(...) Vicar of the Sea Apostolic, in the Eastern Illyria, and that with the
good likeing, and the strong hand of the ministers of the Empire of the East;
and reprehends Anastasius Archbishop of (...) his Vicar in Illyria, because
having sent for Atticus the Metropolitan of the old Epirus, Atticus having
excused himself upon his sickness, and upon the extreamitie of the winter, he
had employed the arms of the Empire of the East, to bring him by force. Thou
have (said he) had Leo ad Anast. ep. 82.
recourse to the Tribunal of the Prefecture of Illyria, and have moved the
Sovereign power, amongst all worldly powers, to make an innocent Bishop
appear, and to pull him from the sacred grates of his Church: and neither for
the indisposition of his person, nor for the sharpness of the winter, could he
obtain any (...), but has been constrained to put himself into ways full of
perils, and through impenitrable snowes: And again; We have in such sort
committed our Vicarship to thy Charity, as thou art called to a part of the
care, but not to the Ibid.
fullness of power.

It appears thirdly, by the testimony of the Council of Chalcedon, holden
thirty years after this law, which decrees that the Bishop of Co^c. Chalc
act. 15. c. 28.
Constantinople, shall ordain but only the Metropolitans of Pontus, Asia
minor and Thracia; that is to say, declares that the law of Theodosius the
second and particularly the Paragraph Omni innouatione cessante, should have
no place; and that the provinces of the Eastern Illyria, thould remain to the
Patriarkship of Rome, and not to that of Constantinople. It appears fowrthlie,
by the testimony of the Emperor Justinian the first who erecting the
Bishoprike of the first Iustinianea into the form of a Primacie, or
supernumerary Patriarkship; and attributing to him many of the Provinces of
the Eastern Illyria; yields for a reason of this attribution, the definition
of Pope Vigilius, and not that of the Patriarch of Constantinople; and
ordaines, that the Bishop of the first Iustinianea, shall there hold the place,
of the Sea Apostolic of Rome, and not of the Sea of Constantinople. We Just.
nouel 131.
ordain (said he) that he shall have under his jurisdiction, the Bishops of
the Mediterranian Dacia, Dacia Dypensis, Triballea, Dardania, upper Mysia,
Pannonia, etc. and that in the provinces subject to him, he shall hold the
place of the Sea Apostolic of Rome, following the definition of the holy
Pope, Vigilius. It appears fifthy by the testimony of saint GREGORY the
great, who writes to the Bishops of Illyria: Greg. Magn. ad Episc. per. Illyr.
l. 4. ep. 9.
Following the desires of your demand, we confirm by the consent of our
authority, our brother John in the Bishopric of the first Justinianea. And
in the Epistle to himself; The relation of our brethren and fellow-Bishops,
Idem. ad Ioa^n. episc. prim. Justin. l. 4. ep 15.
has declared to us that thou art called to the Episcopal dignity, by the
unanimous consent of all the Council, and by the will of the most Excellent
Prince; that is to say, of the Emperor Mauricius, third Successor to
Justinian; whereto we also give our consent in the person of thy fraternity,
etc: and send thee the Pall according to custom, and decree by a reiterated
innovation, that thou exercise the Vicarship of the Sea Apostolic: And
elsewhere, judging the appeal from the sentence of the same John Bishop of the
first Iustinianea against Adrian Bishop of Thebes, one of the Bishops of his
primacie; because (said he) that Idem. l. 2. ep. 6.
we see, that under the shadow of our Vicarship, thou presumest to do unjust
things; we reserve with the help of Christ, to determine again of this
quality; etc: and the while, abrogating and disannulling the decrees of thy
sentence, we ordain by the authority of the blessed Prince of the Apostles,
that thou remain deprived of the sacred Communion for the space of thirty
days?

It appears in the sixth place, by the testimony of John Bishop of
Thessalonica, who in the third general Counsel of Constantinople, which we
call the sixth general Counsel signed with the title of Vicar of the sea
Apostolic of (...), in these words: John by the mercy of God, Bishop of
Thessalonica, and (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
vicar, and native Legate of the Sea Apostolic of Rome, have subscribed. It
appears in the seventh place, by the testimony of Leo the Learned the Greek
Emperor, who reckons amongst the Churches ecclipsed, a little while before him,
from the Sea of Rome, and submitted to the Sea of Constantinople; that of
Thessalonica, Metropolitan of Macedonia; (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
that of Nicopolis metropolitan of the ancient Epirus, that of Patros, that of
Corinth, and that of Athens: The Metropolitans (said he) which have been
subtracted from the Patriarkship of Rome, and which are now subiest, they and
their Bishop to the Sea of Constantinople are these: the Archbishop of
Thessalonica; the Archbishop of Syracusa the Archbishop of Corinth; the
Archbishop of Rhegium; the Archbishop of Nicopolis; the Archbishop of Athens;
the (...) of Patros. And finally it appears by the testimony of Zonarus, the
most famous Canonist of the Greeks, who interpreting the words of the Council
of Chalcedon, (...). (...) c. 28.
that the Bishop of Constantinople should ordain but only the metropolitans
(...). in (...) Chalc c. 28.
of Pontus, Asia, and Thracia, adds, for the Diocesses, to wit; those of
Macedonia, Thessalia, Hellada, Peloponesus, Epirus, and Illyria, were at that
tymestill subject to the Bishop of Rome. And then if the law Omni innouatione
cessante, had been executed, and that the Provinces of the Eastern Illyria
should have remained after that disposed to the Bishop of Constantinople would
not the consequence have been yet worse for the Popes adversaries? for that
Pope Leo the first, who was made Pope eighteen year after this law, reproues
the Archbishop of Thessalonica his vicar in Illyria (because having called
Atticus Metropolitan of the ancient Epirus, and he excusing himself upon his
sickness, and upon the winters cold, he had employed the arm of the Eastern
Empire, to make him come by force) and writ to him; We have in such sort
(...) ad (...). (...). 28.
committed our Vicarship to thy charity as thou art called to a part of the
care, and not to the fullness of power: And that the Emperor Justinian being
willing to exalt the Bishop of the first Iustinianea of Bulgaria over (...).
(...). 131.
diverse Provinces of the Eastern Illyria, alleges for a reason of his
ordinance, the definition of Pope Vigilius, and not that of the Patriark Cyp.
ad (...). (...). 67.
of Constantinople, and constitutes him vicar of the Apostolic Sea of Rome in
these very Provinces; does it not necessarily show, Id. ad (...). and pleb.
Hisp. ep 68.
that either the law of the Emperor Theodosius the second had remained without
effect, or that the Pope had jurisdiction out of his Patriarship? and that
before the Council of Nicea, saint CYPRIAN Sulp. (...). hist. (...). l. 2
solicited Pope Steven to write to the Gauls, that Marcian (...). hist. (...)
(...). l. 3. c. 23.
Bishop of Arles might be discharged; and reproved the same Steven, for that he
had upon a false report restored Basilides and Martial Ep. (...).
Bishop of Spain, deposed for having abiured in the persecution (...). apud.
Theod. hist. (...). l. 2. c. 8.
time: And that a while after the Council of Nicea, Valens Bishop of Murses in
Pannonia, and Vrsatius Bishop of Singidon in Mysia, asked Soc. (...). (...).
(...). l. 6. c. 36.
the Popes pardon for the slanders they had published against saint
ATHANASIVS: and that Socrates says, that Perigenes Bishop (...) (...) (...)
of Patros in Achaya was by the Popes commandment made Bishop (...) ad (...).
ep. 82.
of Corinth: And that saint PROSPER writes, that Pope Celestine, sent Germanus
Bishop of Auxera, his vicar into Scotland: and that the Bishop of Thessalonica
had been from time to time, till Pope Leo the first; and from Pope Leo the
first, to the time of Pope GREGORY the great, vicars of the Sea Apostolic in
Macedonian, Achaya, Epirus, and other Greek Provinces, and not vicars of
simple negotiation as Balsamon pretends; (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
but Vicars of jurisdiction as Zonarus, and the Greek Emperor Leo, Leo Imp. de
ordin. (...). thron. Constable. subiectar.
more learned and more ancient then he, b sext. in Trull. Zon. in Co^c. Sard.
c. 5. and in Coc. Chalc c. 28.
and the very Epistle of Pope Leo Leo ep. 82.
bear witness: show they not plainly; either that the Pope had jurisdiction
out of his Patriarkship; or that his Patriarkship extended further, then the
Prouostship of Rome? For as for the new Critickes that object, that the Emperor
Valentinian the third commanded by one of his laws the prefect of the City,
that he should banish those which were not in the Popes Communion from the
space of an hund red thousand paces about the City of Rome, and infer from
thence, that the Popes authority, did then extend but an hundred thousand
paces about Rome; they show themselves blind with two more then Tiresian Lid
de (...). (...). (...). Fra^c. an. 1618. dissert. 2 c. 3.
blindnesses: the one not to see that there was difference between this, that
the Emperor Valentinian the third did; which was to bear so great a respect to
the Popes, as not to permit to those, that were out of their Communion, the
very temporal dwelling within the Prouostships of the City of Rome; and the
consequence that they infer from Cod. Theod l. 16. (...). de (...) l. 62.
it; which is to say; that the Popes had not power to exclude those which were
not in their communion, from the spiritual communion of all the Church: And
the other not to perceive, that the bound of an hundred thousand paces, is
fitted to the law, not because the Popes jurisdiction extended no further; but
because the ordinary jurisdiction of the Provost of the City of Rome, to
whom the law was directed, extended no further then over the next hundred
thousand paces to the City of Rome. Otherwise, how could saint PROSPER have
said, speaking of Pope Celestins proceedinges against Coelestius: he commanded
Prosp. Aquit. l. co^t. Collat. Aug. ad.
Coelestius should be driven from the utmost ends of Italy? and how could
saint, AUSTIN have written, that Pope Innocent and Pope Zosimus, condemned
Pelagius and Coelestius, through all the Christian Opt. ep. 1. 57.
world? and how should the same Emperor Valentinian the third have Theod. nou.
Co^st. tit. 24. ad calcem Cod. Theod.
said in an other law; We ordain by a perpetual sanction, that neither to
the Bishops of the Gauls, nor to those of other provinces, it shall be lawful
against the ancient custom. to attempt any thing, without the authority of
the Reverend Pope, of the eternal City; but that to them, and to all, that
be for a law, that the authority of the Sea Apostolic shall have ordained?
But why should we have recourse to reason, to confute that which ruins and
destroies it self by the proper hippothesis thereof? for had not the City of
Constantinople been formed and made, by the pattern of the ancient Rome? had
she not the same offices, privileges, and politic orders with the ancient
Rome? from whencet he ancient Rome says by the mouth of Claudian; Claud. de
Bell. Gild.


Cum subito par Roma mihi, diuisaque sumpsit
Aequales aurora togas.
Had she not a Senate as Rome had? had she not one of the Consulls as Rome had?
had she not a Provost of the City, whose ordinary jurisdiction was enclosed
within the next hundred thousand paces to the City of Constantinople, as Rome
had? and when they would honor her with spiritual privileges, and erect her
into the title of a Patriarkship; did they not rule her, by the square and by
the model of the Patriarkship of Rome, alleging, that as she was honored
with like temporal privileges as Rome was; so it was Co^c. Chalc act. 15.
(...). 28.
reasonable to honor her that is to say, in a Patriarchall degree) with like
Ecclesiastical privileges? If then the Patriarkship of Constantinople, were
squared by that of Rome; and Constantinople had her Provost of the City,
whose ordinary jurisdiction was contained within the next hundred thousand
paces to the City of Constantinople, as well as that of Rome; who sees not,
that either the Patriarchall jurisdiction of the Pope, must not be restrained,
within the ordinary territory of the Prouostship of the City of Rome; that is
to say, within an hundred thousand paces next the City of Rome; or that the
Patriarchall jurisdiction of the Bishop of Constantinople must likewise be
restrained within the ordinary territory of the provost of the City of
Constantinople, that is to say; within an hundred thousand paces next the
City of Constantinople? for that Constantius Son of Constantine attributed
to the Provost of the City of Constantinople, (...). (...) (...) (...).
the appeals from the divisions of Thrace, of Pontus and Asia, it was not of
the ordinary jurisdiction of the Prouostship of the City of Constantinople,
noe more then the appeals of all the Provinces of the Empire, that the ancient
Emperors had attributed to the Provost of Rome, were of the simple and precise
ordinary jurisdiction of the Prouostship of the City of Rome. By means
whereof, to form and mould the spiritual authority of the Bishop of
Constantinople, by the pattern and model of that of the Bishop of Rome; it
was necessary, either that the spiritual authority of the Pope; should be
extended over all that which was of the extraordinary jurisdiction of the
Provost of the City of Rome; or that the spiritual authority of the Bishop
of Constantinople should be enclosed within the only bounds of the ordinary
jurisdiction of the Provost of the City of Constantinople, that is to say;
within the next hundred thousand paces of the City of Constantinople. Now, so
far was this from being so, that the patriarchall territory of the Bishop of
Constantinople was confined within an hundred thousand paces next the City;
as contrary wise the Patriarckship of Constantinople had for division, the
provinces of Pontus, Thracia; Asia minor; and the barbarous Provinces; that is
to say; Russia and Muscouia; which (...). (...) (...). (...) (...)
contained more ground, then all Europe?

And against this it is not to be said, that Constans son of Constantine, and
brother to Constantius had deprived the Provost of the City of Rome from the
right of examining by appeal, the causes of Cod. Theod. l. (...) (...) (...)
(...) 27.
all the provinces, and had attributed it to the pretoriall Prouosts. For if
the Pope had been squared by the pattern of the provost of the City of Rome,
it had been by the pattern of the provost of the City of Rome, not such as
he was since the Empire of Constantine, but such as he had been under the
Empire of the Predecessors of Constantine: Otherwise how had the Council of
Nicea confirmed the ancient prerogatives (...). (...). (...).
of the Bishop of Alexandria in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis; for as much rs
they were grounded upon the custom of the Bishop of Rome?

Moreover, the same law of Constans son of Constantine, which took away
the appeals of the provinces of Italy from the provost of the (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...)
city, and attributed them to the pretoriall provost of Italy comprehended
by names Sicilia, Sardinia, Campania, Calabria, and Brusse. And nevertheless
it is certain, that these provinces, and particularly Sicilia, remained
always in the Popes patriarkship, as long as the Latin and Greek Churches
were united. For those that say that Sicilia was added to the patriarkship of
Constantinople, when Justinian attributed the Secular appeals of Sicilia to
the praetor of Constantinople, committ two gross ignorances; the one, not to
know that the spiritual jurisdiction of Sycilia, was not transferred to the
Patriarkship of Constantinople, till after the Greek Emperors infected with
the heresy of the Iconoclasts, had been driven from Rome, and in revenge had
deprived the Pope, not only of the exercise of spiritual authority, but also
from the temporal reuenew that he had in Sicilia, which remained to them: and
the other, not to perceive, that seeing Sicilia (which was out of the ordinary
territory of the Provost of the City, and belonged before the usurpation of
the Vandalls, to the Pretoriall Provost of Italy; and since the expulsion of
the Vandalls to the Praetor of Constantinople, to whom Justinian had attributed
it; for as much as when he re-conquered Sicilia, the Goths still held Italy)
was of the Popes Patriarkship, the Popes authority was not then restrained to
the only territory of the Prouostship of the City of Rome; for that Sicilia
both before and after Justinian, had been and remained under the Patriarkship
of Rome, till the time of the Iconoclast Emperors, we learn both from the
Epistles of saint LEO, the first, written near a hundred years bofore
Justinian which ordained the Bishops of Sicilia, to send every year three
Bishops of their provincial Synod to Rome the third of Leo ad Episc. Sicil ep
4.
the Calends of October: and from the Epistles of saint GREGORY the Great,
written fifty years after Justinian, whereby Greg. Magn. l. 2. indict. 10.
ep. 4. and alibi.
he made Maximian Bishop of Syracusa, his Vicar over all the Churches of
Sycilia: and from the sixth general Council, where the Bishops of Sicilia
signed amongst the Bishops of the Popes Patriarkship: and from the Council
Trullian, celebrated under Justinian the second Co^c. Co^st. sext. act. 4.
Co^c. Trull c. 36.
where the description of the Patriarkship of Constantinople was repeated
without any mention of Sicilia: and finally from the very confession of the
Greek Emperor Leo, surnamed the Learned, who places Leo. Imp. in ordin. ec
cl. thron.
amongst the Churches subtracted from the Sea of Rome, and attributed to the
Sea of Constantinople, the metropolitan Church of Syracusa Constable subject. apud.
Leunclau. in iur.
and all her subalterne Churches?

And so what remains but that Ruffinus an author that saint IEROM says is
full of impiety of language; and that Joseph Scalager Oriental. Acyrologus.
Hier. aduers.
calls a slanderous and ignorant interpretor; and who was so little curious in
the style of the lawyers, as he employed (with Lampridius and the other
authors of the declination of the latin tongue; Ruff. apoll. 2.
yea, as saint IEROM reproacheth it to him, with the vulgar) Ios. Scal. ano. in
chro. Eus. number.
the word parents, to signify Kinsmen, setts therein the adjective
Suburbicary, not according to the special use of the lawyers, but according to
the etymology of the word? and then that as the LXXXIIII
general office of the word vrbs absolutely taken, and by excellency Hier. a
luers. Ruff. appol. 2. Opt. Miliuit. cont. Parm. l. 1. and Greg. Turon. hist
Franc. l. 2. Ath. ad Solit vit. agent.
for the City of Rome, was to distinguish her from all the Cities subject to
the Roman Empire, from whence it is, that they called the Bishop of Rome for
distinction from all other Bishops; the Bishop of the City; so Ruffinus, by
the Churches Suburbicary, intends not the Churches within an hundred thousand
paces of the City of Rome; but the Churches of all the Cities, subject to
the Empire of the City of Rome; which saint ATHANASIVS calls the Sea
Apostolic, and Metropolitan of Romania? And indeed, that Ruffinus in
translating, or rather in epilogizing the Canon of the Nicean Council omitts
the clause of the Patriarkship of Antioch; and translates only, that the
Bishop of Alexandria shall have the care of the Churches of Egypt; and (...) of
Rome, that of the Churches Suburbicary: is it not a manifest proof that he
uses these words, not in form of division, but in form of Subordination; and
that this which he says, that the Bishop of Rome, should have the care of the
Suburbicary Churches, and that which Socrates and Sozomene say, Soc. hist. ec
cl. l. 2. c. 8.
that to the Bishop of Rome, because of the dignity of his Seat; Soz. hist.
eccl. l. 3. c. 7.
(...) care of all things belong, is one and the same language: or rather
that this that Ruffinus says here, that the Bishop of Rome is to have the care
of the Suburbicary Churches; and this that he says elsewhere; Rome by the
grace of God, is the head of all the Christrians; is one and the same thing?
But grant that Ruffinus by the Rust. in Hier. (...). 2.
word Churches Suburbicarie does intend in generalll all the Churches of the
provinces, subject to the Empire of Rome; nor in particular, the only Churches
of the City, subject to the Prouostship of Rome; but intends the Churches of
the Provinces or Nations, where the Metropolitans or Primats acknowledge the
Pope immediately without the intermedling of any the Patriarks; to wit, the
Churches of the Patriarkship of the west, would that hinder that besides the
immediate superintendencie that the Pope has over the provinces of his
Patriarkship, he might not have a mediate superintendencie over all the
provinces of the others?

Hemer, if it be lawful to compare things sacred to profane, does not he
teach us, that besides the Command Agamemnon had, as a particular King over
the compaines of his own subjects; and the other kings like him, every one
over their own; he had yet beyond that, as head and Captain general, over
the Army of the Greeks, the universal authority and superintendencie over
the other kings, and over their Companies? And will not the adversaries (...).
de (...). reg. (...). (...). (...). 1618. (...) (...).
of the Pope have it, that the Provost of the City of Rome, to whose
temporal proportion they pretend to square the Popes spiritual authority,
besides the ordinary jurisdiction of his Prouostship, wherein they equal him
to other Prouosts had besides in the first ages an other extraordinary
jurisdiction, by which as head of the Senate, and Vicar of the Emperor, he was
superior to other Prouosts, and judged of the appeals of all the Provinces?
And (...). ep. (...).
saint BASIL that great Archbishop of Cappadocia did not he consider the Pope
some times as Patriarch of the west, where he calls him the Corypheos of those
of the west; and sometimes as head (...). (...) (...). (...) 77.
of the universal Church, when he writes to those of the west; Be it that you
repute yourselfe head of the universal Church; the head cannot say to the
feet, you are not necessary to me: be it that you place yourselues, in the
rank of the other members of the Church; you cannot say to us, that are
constituted in one same body with you, you are not necessary to me? for that
he uses this disjunctive particle (be it) it is not there to cast any doubt,
but to distinguish the address of his speech into two branches; whereof the
one, to wit, be it that you repute yourself head of the vniuersail Church; had
regard to the Pope: and the other, to wit; be it that you place yourselues in
the rank of the other members; had regard to the other Bishops of the west.
And does not he himself report, that Eustathius Bishop of Sebaste in Armenia
having been deposed by the Council of Melitina in Armenia, a Catholic and
orthodoxall Council and having brought letters of restitution from Pope
Liberius, was received without form of process into the Council (...).
(...). (...).
of (...) in Cappadocia? And does not saint IEROM, who was priest of Antioch
and creature to Paulinus the Bishop of Antioch, and resident within Hier. cont.
Joan. Hier.
the division of the Patriarkship of (...), say; What should the Churches of
the East do, and those of Egypt, and that of the Sea Apostolic? designing by
the Churches of the Sea Apostolic, those which were subject immediately, Id.
contra Vigil.
without acknowledging any other Patriarch between, to the Patriarkship of
the Pope: And by the Churches of Egypt, those which answered to the
Patriarkship of Alexandria: and by the Churches of the East, those which were
submitted to the Patriarkship of Antioch? And yet for all that, does he not
write to Pope Damasus about the contention of Vitalis, Id. ad Dam (...). 57.
Meletius, and Paulinus, Competitors in the Patriarkship of Antioch; I am
joined in communion with thy blessedness; that is to say: with the Chair Ibid.
of PETER; I know the Church is built upon that rock. And a little after; I
know not Vitalis, I reiest Meletius, I am ignorant of Paulinus; whosoever
gathers not with thee, scatters? That is to say, does he not teach us that the
distinction of the Popes patriarkship, from the other patriarkships, hindered
not the Popes superiority over the others? And did not Flauianus Archbishop In
ep. (...). Co^c. Chalc Ibid.
of Constantinople write to Pope Leo; We have given aduertisment to your
Holiness, of the excommunication of Eutyches, that you may make his (...)
Ibid. and Lib. in (...). c. 12. See chap. 7 Vict. Tun. in Zen. and Euag. hist.
eccl. l. 3. c. 18.
known to all the Bishops, resident under your piety? And yet for all this,
did he not, when Eutyches pretended to have appealed to the Pope, submitt his
judgment to that of the Pope? And did not himself in the second Council of
Ephesus, appeal to the Pope? And John the second, and Anthimus, and Menas, and
John the fourth his successors, did they not acknowledge and protest, that they
were subject to the Pope? And the Popes that came after Leo, did not they
depose Acacius, and Anthimus, Patriarchs of Constantinople, and judge by
appeal the causes of John and Athanasius subjects to the Patriarchs of
Constantinople? And did not the Pope S. GREGORY Greg. Mag. l 4. ep. 82. and l.
5. ep. 64.
the great, call the Bishops of the West his Bishops? If the causes (said he)
of the Bishops, which are committed to me, are treated by the religious
Emperors, by Id. e. l. 4. ep. 64.
the intercessions of strangers; miserable man that I am, what do I in this
Church? but that my Bishops despise me, and have recourse to secular judges
against me, I thank God almighty for it, and I impute it to my sins. Yet
did not he say of all the Bishops in general; If there be any fault in the
Bishops, I know noe Bishop, but is subject to the Sea Apostolic? And Julian
the former, who lived 1050. years past, did he not turn the hundred thirtith
one new co^stitution into Iul. ante. cess. nou. 119. in ver. nou. Just. 131.
these words; yet more raw, the^ those of Ruffinus; That the Bishop of the
first Iustinianea should have the same right over the Bishops subject to him;
as the Bishop of Rome had over the Bishops submitted to him? And yet by this
does he pretend to equal the Bishop of the first Iustinianea to the Pope, or
to exempt him and his Bishops from the Popes jurisdiction? Nothing less; but
by the Bishops submitted to the Pope, he intended, the Bishops submitted
immediately to the Pope without the interposition of other Patriarks, as Just.
nou. 131.
it appears both by the original greek of the law, which bears this: We
ordain, that in all provinces subject to him, he hold the place of the Sea
Apostolicle Cod. tit. 1. l. 8.
of Rome, following the things defined by the most holy Pope Vigilius: And by
the law of the same Justinian to Epiphanius, which says; We will suffer
nothing to pass, concerning the state of the holy Churches, which shall not be
also referred, to the blessedness of the most holy Pope; for as much as he is
the head of all the most holy Greg. Mag. l. 4. indict. 13. cp. 9. and 15. Item.
l. 2. indict. 11. cp. 6.
Ministers of God: And by the places above cited of saint GREGORY the great,
which witness that the Pope confirmed even then; that is to say, fifty year
after Julian the former, the election of the Bishop of the first Iustinianea;
and sent him the Archiepiscopall mantle, and the reuocation of the Vicarship of
the Sea Apostolic, and judged by appeal of the causes of his Bishops, and
chasticed him himself, when he had misiudged. But in sum whatsoever the
sense of this addition of Russinus be, it imports little to know it. For
having been excommunicated for his errors in says, by the Pope and the Roman
Church; who doubts but if he could insert into his translation, any thing to
the Popes prejudice, he has done it?

It (...) before the Council of Nicea, which wills that to every Church the
prerogatives thereof, be preserved; the Roman Church was Conc. (...). c. 6.
she, whereof S. IRENEVS cries out, to this Church because of a more mighty
principality; that is to say, because of a principality more mighty then
(...). l. 3 c. 3.
the temporal, it is necessary that all the Churches should agree. It was she,
that Cypr. ad (...). ep. (...).
S. CYPRIAN called the Chair of Peter, and the principal Church, from whence
the (...) all unity proceeded. It was she of whom S. IEROM writ; I (...). ad
(...). (...). (...).
know the Church is built upon this stone; whosoever eats the lamb out of
this house, is profane. It was she of whom S. AUSTIN said, In the Roman Church
has always (...) the principality of the Sea Apostolic. It suffices that
before Aug. (...). 162.
the Council of Nicea which ordains that the ancient customs should remain
entire; the law Ecclesiastical sorbad, to canonize Churches; that is to (...),
to make canons touching the generality of Churches, without the sentence of
the Bishop of Rome: that the Ecclesiastical custom bare, that the final
depositions of Bishops, could not be proceeded to without attending the
decision from Rome, and that from the time of the Emperor Gallienus, that is to
say, more then sixty years before the Council of Nicea, the Churchmen of
Egypt, desiring to accuse Dionisius Bishop (...). apol. 2.
of Alexandria their Patriarch, went up says saint ATHANASIVS Patriarch of the
same Sea of Alexandria to Rome, and accused him before (...) Bishop of Rome. It
suffices that presently after the same Council Athan. de (...). (...). and
(...) nod. (...). Socr. hist. (...). l. 2. c. (...).
of Nicea, when S. ATHANASIVS Patriarch of Alexandria, Paul Bishop of
Constantiuople, Marcellus Primate of Galatia, Asclepas Bishop of Gaza in
Palestina, had been deposed by diverse Counsels of the East; Julius Bishop of
Rome, restored to every one his Church, because to him (says Sozomene) for the
dignity of his Sea, the care of all things appertayned. It suffices, Soz.
hist. (...) l. 3. c. (...). Soc. hist. (...) l 4. c. (...).
that after the death of ATHANASIVS, Pope Damasus confirmed the ordination of
Peter Patriarch of Alexandria, successor to the same saint ATHANASIVS, and
restored him to his Sea of Alexandria, It suffices, that in the Council of
Sardica holden for the defense of the Council of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
12.
(...), and whereat assisted besides more then three hundred other Bishops, the
same Osius, that was President at the Council of Nicea; the same saint
ATHANASIVS which had helped to frame the acts of the Council of Nicea; the
same Protogenes Bishop of Sardica, which was at the Council of Nicea, the
Episcopal appeals to the Pope, were authorized by a written law, and the
Bishops of all the provinces exhorted to referr the affairs to their head that
is to say, to the Sea of the Apostle PETER. It suffices that in the Council
of Lampsacus in Asia the Macedonians purposing to return to the Catholic
Church, sent their Legates from Asia to Rome, to protest obedience to the Pope,
and to oblige themselves to come up to his Tribunal, or to the judges
delegated by him in all causes that should be attempted against them. It
suffices, that in the Council of Tyana in Cappadocia, Eustachius Bishop of
Sebastia in Armenia, who had been deposed by the Council of Melitina, the
Metropolitan city of (...). (...). 70.
Armenia, bringing letters of restitution from Pope Liberius, was received
without form of process, and had place as a Bishop in the Council. It (...)
hist. (...) 2 c 36 and (...). l. 4 c. 8.
(...), that when the Emperor Constantius had caused S. ATHANAS. Patriarch of
Alexandria, to be deposed in a Council of more then three hundred Bishops of
the East and West, he thought he had not satisfied his desire; if the thing
(says Amianus Marcellinus) were not confirmed by the authority Amian. Marc.
(...). l. 15.
whereof the Bishops of the eternal city are superiors. It suffices that
when the same Canon of the Council of Nicea, which is now in question, was
renewed in the Council of Constantinople, the other Patriarchs and Primats
Co^c. Constable c. 2.
were forbidden to meddle, beyond their divisions: Let the Bishop of Alexandria
(said the Synod) govern only what belongs to Egypt; and let the Bishops of
the East, that is to say, of the patriarkship of Antioch, admister only to
the East; where never Counsel interdicted the Pope from meddling in matters
which were out of his patriarkship: Contrariwise the Pope in importa^t
occasions, has always taken notice of the ecclesiastical affairs of the
Empire of the East, and judged by appeal the causes of other patriarkships,
the Catholic Counsels of the East themselves, yiedling to be solicitors and
executors of his sentences: and oppositely never any of the other Patriarks
once attempted, to examine the Ecclesiastical causes of the Empire of the
West, and of the patriarchall division of the Pope. It suffices, that in the
Aug. ep. 92.
Mileuitan Council holden by the Bishops of Asrica; and by S. AUSTIN amongst
others, it was affirmed, that the Popes authority was of divine right, Cod.
Theo nou. Theo. and Valent. tit. 24.
and drawn from the authority of the holy Scriptures: and then not to be
restrained to the simple patriarkship of Rome, but universal; and such as the
law of the Emperor Valentinian the third describes it, when it calls the Pope,
the Rector of the universality of Churches. And the Emperor Justinian when
Cod. Paris. Antuerp. and Genesis tit. 1. l. 7.
he writes, that the Pope is the head of all the most holy ministers of God.
And the Bishop of Patara in Lycia, one of the provinces in Asia, when he says
to the same Emperor Justinian, that there were many kings and princes in Lib.
in breuiar. c. 22.
the world, but there was noe one of them, that was over all the earth, as the
Pope was over the Church of all the world. It suffices, that in the general
Council of Ephesus, when the Fathers had executed the sentence of deposition,
that the Pope had pronounced at Rome against Nestorius; when they should Conc.
Ephesians. p. 2. act. 5. in relat. ad Cael.
have passed to the cause of John Patriark of Antioch, the Council reserved
the judgment thereof to the Pope, and that according to the ancient custom
and tradition Apostolical. It suffices, that in the false Council Ibid. act.
4.
of Ephesus, after Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, and his pretended
general Council, had deposed Flauianus Archbishop of Constantinople, and
Theodoret Bishop of Sire; Flauianus (says the Emperor Valentinian) Valent. 3.
Imp. in ep. praeamb. Co^c. Chalc Theodor. ep. ad Leo^. Ibid.
according to the custom of Counsels, appealed from him to the Pope; and
Theodoret did the like: and that the Pope upon these appeals, replaced
Flauianus already dead, into the Catalogue of the Bishops of Constantinople,
and restored to Theodoret his Bishopric, and annulled all the acts of the
false Council of Ephesus, except the creation of Maximus Patriark of Antioch,
which remained in force, because said Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, the
Pope having received him into his communion, judged that he Co^c. Chalc act. 10.
should rule the Church of Antioch. And finally it suffices, that when the
greek text of the same canon of the Council of Nicea, translated by Ruffinus,
had been read in the Council of Chalcedon, a Council composed of above six
hundred Greek Fathers, who understood both Greek, and the Greek Canons
better then Ruffinus, who was so unapt and barbarous in both the tougues as S.
IEROM says; the Latins took him for (...). ad. (...). (...). apol. 2.
a Grecian, and the Greeks for a Latin: so far were the Fathers of that
Conncell from inferring from thence, any equallitie between the Pope and the
Patrirake of Alexandria, that contrariwise in their Synodicall relation, they
protested they held the Pope for the head of their society; Co^c. Chalc part.
3. in relat. ad Leon. Ibid.
Thou rulest over us (said they) as the head does over the members. And again,
We pray thee to honor our judgment, with thy decrees, and that as in what
concerns the weal, we have brought correspondencie to our head, so thy (...)
would (...) to thy children, what concerns decency: And on the other side,
they (...) (...) (...) of Alexandria as subject, and ghostly vassal to the
Pope, in these words; ` (...) has extended his (...), even against him to
(...).
whom the guarde of the Vine has been committed by our (...); that is to sait,
(...) thy (...).

Of the claim of the Bishops of Constantinople. CHAPT. VII.
BUT the adversaries of the Church not finding any foundation in the history
of the other Patriarchs, to establish the equallitie, that they would
introduce, between the Pope, and the simple Patriarchs, had recourse to the
claims of the Bishops of Constantinople which are to be reduced principally
into two. The first claim was that of Anatolius, who packed in the Council of
Chalcedon by the (...) of the Emperor Marcian, and of the (...) of the city
of Constantinople, to be declared the second (...), and to (...) after the
Pope, the like (...) of honor as the Pope; because Constantinople was a second
Rome, that is to say, packed to be declared equal to the Pope, not in regard
of the Pope, to whom (...) he and all his Catholic successors, always
protested (...) inferiors, but in regard of the other Patriarchs over whom he
affected to be, what the Pope was over him and them. For that is it that these
words of the Council of Chalcedon signify that the city of (...) (...)
(...) (...). (...) (...). c. 28
should be honored in Ecclesiastical causes, as the Roman, being the second
after her; to wit, that as the Bishop of Rome, had the (...) absolutely over
all the Patriarchs, so the Bishop of Constantinople should have it after him,
over all other Patriarchs. It was ordained (says I (...). (...) l 2. c. 4.
(...), repeating the same Canon) that the Sea of new Rome, because of the
(...) (...) she held after the ancient Rome, should have the primacie before
the other Sea. The second Claim was, that of John and of Cyriacus Patriarchs
of (...), who in the time of Pelagius the second and of Saint GREGORY, would
participate in the title of universal Bishop, which in the presence, and with
the consent of the Council of Chalcedon had been attributed to the Pope;
pretending, that by the same Council of Chalcedon, it had been said, that the
Bishop of Constantinople should enjoy the like (...) of honor as the Pope,
after the Pope: and then, that as the Pope had the right to bear the title of
universal Bishop through all the world; so the (...) of Constantinople should
have the right to bear it in the Empire of the East. For that such was their
Claim, it appears besides a thousand other proofs, by the capitulation of
the great Comentor of Homer Eustathius Patriarch of Constantinople, and the
other (...) would have renewed with the Latins, under the Greek Emperor
Basilius six hundred years agone; to wit, that the Bishop of Constantinople,
might be called universal in the Empire of the East, as the Pope (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...).
over all the world. The Bishop of Constantinople (says Glabar, an author of
the same age) with his Prince Basilius and some other Greeks, held a Council
(...) it might be lawful for them with the Popes consent, to have the Church
of (...) to be held and called in that compass universal, as the Roman is, in
the (...) of the whole world.

Now may I in two words, not only confute these two objections, but also
retort them against the Popes adversaries. For if the Bishop of Constantinople
pretended to obtain the second place after the Pope, be cause Constantinople
was a second Rome; that is to say, a part and a branche of the city and
Church of Rome, for what cause is it not manisest, that the Church of Rome
before his challenge, had then the primacie before all other Churches; as also
the officers of the Emperor Marcian acknow. ledged in these terms; even when
they protected Anatolius: By the proofs Co^c. (...) act. 16.
which have been produced on both sides, it appears that the primacie before
all, and the principal honor has been preserved by the canons, to the most
beloved of God, the Archbishop of the ancient Rome? And if the Bishop of
Constantinople would participate in the title and nomination of universal
Bishop, because Constantinople was a second Rome, how could it be, but that the
title of universal Bishop, did appartaine primitiuely and originally to the
Bishop of Rome? But for as much as the beginning of these contentions, came
from the Council of Constantinople, it is best to take the business at the
source of the history, which is thus: At the Council of Constantinople held
under the great Theodosius, the Greek Bishops ordained in favor of the City
of Constantinople, and in favor of the Emperor of the East, who resided there
to make a new Sea of the Empire that the Bishop of Constantinople, should have
the prerogatives of honor after him of Rome, because Constantinople was a
second Rome. Now this Canon was noe Canon Co^c. Constable c. 3.
of a General Council; for be it that it was framed by the Council of
Constantinople that we call General; or be it was made by that which was
reassembled at Constantinople the year following; the Council of
Constantinople that we call Oecumenicall, having been composed only of the
provinces of the Empire of the East, and being become general but by the
adiunction and confirmation of that which was celebrated at the same time at
Rome, and this Canon not having been sent thither it could not hold the place
of a Canon of a general Council And therefore when Anatolius Bishop of
Constantinople, would have caused it to be renewed in the Council of
Chalcedon, the Popes Co^c Chalc act. 16.
Legates answered, that is was not to be found in the Code of the Synodicall
Canons of the universal Church and added, that is was never put in practice.
If the Bishops of Constantinople (said they,) have enjoyed, it what Ibid.
would they have more? and if they have not enjoyed it, why do they demand
it? and for this very cause, Pope Leo writ back to Anatolius: The signatures
Leo ad Anatol. Episc. Co^st. ep. 51.
of certain Bishops made as thou pretendest more then threescore years agone,
cannot uphold thy intention, to which being tardie and long ago fallen, thou
have sought weak and feeble proppes: for never having been transmitted to the
knowledge of the Sea Apostolic, it could obtain noe force. And saint
GREGORY to Greg. Magn. l. 6. indict. 15. (...). 31.
the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch; The Roman Church has never
hitherto, neither now does receive the Canons or acts of the Council of
Constantinople; but she has admitted that Synod in what it has defined
against Macedonius. Anatolius then seeing this Canon had remained without
effect, for want of having been confirmed by the Pope, and by the western
Church, resolved to take the occasion of the Council of Chalcedon, celebrated
at the gates of Constantinople, and of the deposition of ` Dioscorus Bishop of
Alexandria and second Patriarch of the Church, which rank he desired to
possess, to attempt to cause it to be renewed. And therefore spying out at the
Evening of the twelfth day, the time that the assembly of the Council was
separated, and that the legates of the Pope, and the Senate were retired, and
that there were none remaining, but the Bishops that he thought he could easily
bring to his Bow; making use of the absence of the Prelates of Egypt and of
Libia, who assisted not at the last Sessions of the Council; for as much as
there was yet noe (...) of Alexandria established in Dioscorus his steed; and
prevailing with the fearefulnes of Maximus Bishop of Antioch, created in the
(...) (...) of Ephesus, who for the sense he had of the vice of his (...),
durst not open his mouth against Anatolius who had ordained (...) he (...) a
decree be particularized which renewed the pretended Canon of the Council of
Constantinople, and made it be signed by certain (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
Bishops of the provinces near Constantinople. There was that (...) (says
(...)) an other Session, when after the departure of the Judges and the (...),
and the Legates of the Sea Apostolic, certain privileges were (...) to the
Church of Constantinople by Anatolius his usurpation, taking advantage of
(...) condemnation. The next day the Popes Legates stood upon the form of this
surprise to the Council, and represented that the Bishops themselves that had
signed this decree, had signed it by constraint. But the plott was so well laid
for Anatolius, borne out by the Emperor, and by the Senate of Constantinople,
and by the Prelates of his division, that their resistance was in vain. For
part of the Bishops being absent, as those of the Patriarkship of Alexandria,
who had the principal interest in it, and part dissembling their opposition,
as Maximus Patriarch of (...), who afterward complained to the Pope of the
preiudices that the priuiledgs of his Church had received in the Council of
(...), and part confessing against their will, that they had signed it (...)
(...) (...). 60
with their will, as the Bishops of Asia minor, who had already protested in
the sowrth action, that they had as lieue dye, as permit that the Bishop of
Constantinople should ordain their metropolitans. And besides that Eusebius
Bishop of Dorylaus, one of the Bishops of the division of Constantinople,
assuring falsely, that the Pope was of agreement with the Article; the Council
passed forward to the approbation of the Canon; and when the legates of the
Pope opposed it, they writ to the Pope to pray him to confirm it, in these
terms: We pray thee to honor our decree (...). (...) (...). 3.
with thy judgment, and as we have brought correspondence to our head for
matters of weal, so thy souer aigntie may fulfill to thy children in matters
of decency; for in so doing, the religious Emperors shall be gratified. Now
the Pope had been allreadie desired not to give consent to such enterprises,
for upon this, that in the Council of Ephesus, Juuenall Bishop of Jerusalem
abusing the absence and contumacie of John Patriarch of Antioch, and assaying
to usurp the jurisdiction of Palestina, against the Canon of the Council of
Nicea, which attributed the superintendencie of Palestina, and of the Bishop of
Jerusalem himself, to the Archbishop of Cesarea, one of the metropolitans of
the Patriarkship of Antioch: saint CYRILL Patriarch of Alexandria, prayed the
Pope to consent that such attempts should take place In the Council of Ephesus
(says Pope LEO the first, in his Epistle I (...). ad.
to Maximus Patriarch of Antioch) Iuuenall Bishop thought to have found Maxim.
(...). (...). ep. 60.
out a sufficient occasion, to obtain the principality of Palestina, and to
cause his audacious, insolence to be confirmed by surreptitious writings which
saint Cyrill of holy memory justly haueing in honor, represented to me, and
declared to me by his letters; what Iuuenalls ambition had attempted, and
requested me with great (...) and care, that no consent might be given to such
unlawful attempts.

For those causes then, and also that Maximus Patriarch of Antioch had renewed
the same request unto him, the Pope insteede of confirming the decree of the
Council of Chalcedon, seeing it inviolated the order of the Council of Nicea,
which had given the second place to the Bishop of Alexandria; and the third
place to the Patriarch of Antioch, annulled and abrogated it, by these words
addressed to the Empress Pulcheria; Ibid. ep. 53.
The piety of your Faith joined with us we annull the plotts of the Bishops
repugnant to the rules of the holy canons established at Nicea, and by virtue
of the authority of the blessed Apostle PETER, we wholly abrogate them by a
general sentence. And that with such effect, as the Emperor and the Bishop of
Constantinople, were constrained for the time to depart from their pursuit, as
it appears by these words of the same Pope to Anatolius: This thy fault which
thou have committed to Ibid. ep. 69
augment thy power, as thou say by the exhortations of others, thy tharitie
had better and more sincerely blotted out, if that which could not be attempted
against thy will, thou had not imputed it only to the Council of thy
Clergy etc. but it is an agreeable thing, to me most dear brother, that thou
do now protest to be displeased with what should not even then have pleased
thee; but the profession of thy love, and the testimony of the Christian
Prince shall suffice to cause thee to re-enter into common grace, and let not
his correction seem tardie, that has gotten so reverent a suertie. And from
hence it comes, that in many greek and latin copies, this canon is only in
the history of the acts, but not in the Catalogue of the Canons noe more then
the twenty ninth and thirtith, and that it is manifest to have been transferred
from the history of the acts into the roll of the Canons, which possible is
the subject that has given saint GREGORY occasion to complain, that the
Council of Chalcedon had Greg. Mag. l. 5. ind. 14 ep. 14.
been altered by the Greeks.

Afterward when Rome was fallen into the servitude of the northern nations, a
people barbarous and heretical, the Patriarchs of Constantinople making use
of the opportunity or rather importunity of the time, again set forward the
instance of this Canon, and obtained from the Emperor Zeno, who reigned in the
East, a law, whereby he confirmed the precedence to the Bishop of
Constantinople, before the other Patriarchs; that is to say, before the other
Patriarchs of the East. And one from the Emperor Justinian after the recovery
of Rome, by which he ordained, that the Bishop of Constantinople should hold
the second place in the Church: We ordain (said the Emperor Justinian) Just.
(...). 131.
that the blessed Archbishop of Constantinople new Rome, shall have the second
place after the holy Sea Apostolic of the ancient Rome, and shall be
preferred before all other Seas: From whence it is, that Liberatus timefellowe
with Justinian speaking of the Council of Chalcedon adds, Liberat. in breu. c.
13.
And although the Sea Apostolic, to this day contradicts this decree,
nevertheless the decree of the Synod, does in some sort remain by the
Emperors protection.

Now Anatolius had procured that the Clerks of the Council of Chalcedon, in
renewing the Canon of the Council of Constantinople, should insert a word
therein. For whereas the Council of Constantinople had simply ordained, that
the Bishop of Constantinople should have the prerogatives of honor after the
Pope; those that renewed is, added thereto (Equal) and couched the reuocation
of the Canon in these (...). Chalc (...). 15. (...). 18
words: that the Chair of Constantinople should have the prerogatives equal
to that of the ancient Rome, and shall have the same advantages in
Ecclesiastical causes as she has, being the second after her: that is to
say, ordained that the same prerogatives, as the Pope had absolutely over all
Patriarchs, the Bishop of Constantinople should have them after the Pope, over
the other Patriarchs.

The Bishops of Constantinople then seeing, that this Canon not only granted
them, to hold the second place after the Bishop of Rome, but also to enjoy the
same privileges with him as Constantinople, being a division of Rome, and a
second Rome; went so far as to desire to participate in the same titles of
honor, which had been yielded to the Bishop of Rome, to possess them in a
second place; and in form of adiunctes and colleagues with him; and finding
that in the Council of Chalcedon, the title (...) or universal had been
offered to the Bishop of Rome, they (...) (...) act. (...) (...). Alexand.
insisted as second Popes and Bishops of the second Rome, to participate
therein, not in intention to exercise it, in regard of the Pope, but under the
Pope, and in regard of the other Patriarchs, and were openly fauor'd therein by
the Emperors. For not only the Council of Constantinople holden under the
Emperor Justin predecessor to Justinian, yielded the (...). Constable (...) (...).
(...). Just. (...). and (...) (...) (...). (...). 1. l. 7.
title of universal Patriarch to John the third Patriarch of Constantinople;
but also the Emperor Justinian in the law, to Epiphanius Patriarch of
Constantinople, exhibited to him the title of universal Patriarch; and after
under the same Justinian the Council of Constantinople holden against (...),
attributed the name of universal to Menas; and still after under Mauritius,
John Bishop of Constantinople surnamed the Faster, held a kind (...) Constable
(...) Men. (...). and seq. Greg. l. 7. (...). 2. ep. 69.
of Council at Constantinople, where he began to entitle, and inscribe
himself, Universal Bishop; and then the Popes displaied their censures against
this title; for although the Synods of the East, had before this time yielded
the title of universal Bishop, to the Bishop of Constantinople, nevertheless
the Bishop of Constantinople, had never yet presumed, to inscribe and subscribe
himself Universal Patriarch, until the Council of Constantinople holden
under Mauricius the Emperor. And therefore the Pope Pelagius the second,
predecesson to saint GREGORY, abrogated and annulled all the decrees of that
Council, except what had been decided concerning the cause of Gregory (...)
of Antioch. It has been Pelag. Pap. 2. (...). 1.
reported to the holy Sea Apostolic (faith Pope Pelagius the second) that
John Bishop of Constantinople, intitles himself Universal, and that upon this
presumption of his, he has called you to a general Council, notwithstanding
that the authority of calling general Synods, has been consigned by a
singular privilege to the Sea Apostolic, of the blessed Peter. And a little
after; Greg. Mag. l. 4. indict. 13. op. 38. and l. 7. cp. 69.
And therefore all that you have decreed, in that noe Synod of yours, for Synod
so attempted, it could not be, but a conuenticle; I ordain by the authority
of the blessed PETER, that it be annulled and abrogated. And saint GREGORY
successor of the same Pelagius: Our predecessor Pelagius of blessed memory,
has disannulled by a sentence entirely valid all the acts of that Synod,
except what concerned the cause of Gregory Bishop of Antioch of reverend
memory. When Pope Pelagius was dead, and saint GREGORY his successor
established in the Popedom, the same John Bishop of Constantinople assisted by
the favor of the Emperor Mauricius still continued his challenge, and
perseuered to attribute to himself, the quality of universal Bishop; not to
exercise it in the Popes behalf, but to exercise it in the Popes absence, and
as colleague and adiunct to the Pope in the universality, over the Empire of
the East, and toward the other Patriarchs. For it shall be showed hereafter,
that he always acknowledged the Pope for head and stock of the universality,
and for absolutely universal over all the Church, and did protest himself to
be his subject and inferior; and did not pretend to enjoy the title of
universal, but under the Pope, and by association subalterne and subordinate
to the Popes authority; which was soon after interdicted him by the Emperor
Phocas immediate Successor to Mauricius, who declared that the title of
universal Bishop, appertained but to the Bishop of Rome only, and could not
be communicated to him of Constantinople. And so much of the truth of the
history; Now let us come to the objections which are drawn from it.

To the first then of these objections, which is that in the Council of
Chalcedon, Anatolius packed to be declared equal to the Pope after the Pope;
we bring three Answers. The first answer is, that he pretended not, to be
declared equal to the Pope in regard of the Pope; but under the Pope, and in
regard of the other Patriarchs; that is to say, that he did not pretend to
have like advantage over the Pope, as the Pope had over him; but to have the
same privileges over the other patriarchs, as the Pope had over him and them;
and by this means to be equal to the Pope, not in regard of the Pope, but in
regard of the other patriarks. And this is testified by the universal history
of the Bishops of Constantinople, which have been from the first contention to
the second; that is to say since Anatolius until Cyriacus; over all which the
Pope has exercised a perpetual jurisdiction, and judged continually both of
their judgments, and of their persons. For not to speak of Paul Bishop of
Constantinople, that Pope Julius restored to his Seat; for as much as to him
(says (...)) Soz. hist. (...) cl l. 3 c. 8.
for the dignity of his Sea, the care of all things appertained: Not to speak
of saint CHRYSOSTOM, who having been deposed from the Sea of Constantinople,
appealed by writing to the Pope, that he might cause the judgment of his
deposition to be made void: Not to speak of Eutiches, who having been judged
by Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople, and having alleged that he had appealed
to the Pope, was again judged by the Pope, Flauianus and the Council of
Chalcedon consenting to it; where Anatolius himself was in person, approving
the judgment: Not to speak of Flauianus, who having been deposed in the false
Council of Ephesus appealed from it to the Pope, and that says In ep. (...).
Co^c. (...)
the Emperor Valentinian, following the custom of Counsels: Not to speak of
Anatolius, who having been chosen Bishop of Constantinople in the false
Council of Ephesus, and consequently his election being void, was made valid
by the Pope; as Pope Leo testifies to the Emperor in these words: It ought to
have sufficed him, that by the help of your piety, and the consent of my
favor he has obtained the Bishopric of so great a City. (...) ep. 52.
And in brief, not to speak of all the former examples, but to restrain
myself to the only time between Anatolius and Cyriacus when Acacius who was
created Patriarch of Constantinople, thirteen year after the death of
Anatolius, fell into the faction of heretics, had not the Churches of the
Patriarkship of Constantinople recourse to Pope Symmachus, as to the superior
both of them and their Patriarch? Seeinge thy Children to perish (said they) in
the preuarication of our father Ep. eccl. Orient. ad Sym. in vo. lum.
Orthodoxograph. impress. Basil.
Acacius, delay not or rather to speak with the prophet, slumber not, but make
have to deliver us: And again; Thou art taught daily, by thy sacred doctor,
Peter, to feed the flock of Christ, which is committed to thee through the
whole world, not constrained by force, but willingly, thou that cryest with
the blessed Paul to us thy subjects; we will not have dominion over you in the
says, but will cooperate with you in joy? And did not Pope Felix depose the
Teod. Anagnost. ad calcem (...). eccl. Theod. in edit. Rob. Steph.
same Acacius from the Patriarkship of Constantinople yea with such effect,
that although Acacius borne out as long as he lived by the heretics, despised
the Popes Sentence, nevertheless after his death, his name even in
Constantiuople itself; was raced out from the records of his Church and
excluded from the recital of the mysteries? And when Macedonius Patriarch of
Constantinople, was solicited by the Emperor Anastasius, to take out of the
service of his Church, the memory of the Council of Chalcedon; did not he
answer him; that (...) (...) not do it without a general Council, wherein
the Bishop of great (...) (...) be President? And when John Patriarch of
Constantinople executed the sentence of the Sea Apostolic against the memory
of (...) his Predecessor; did he not write to Pope Hormisdas: I promise, (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...).
in time to come, no more to recite amongst the sacred Mysteries, those who are
separated from the Communion of the Catholic Church; that is to say, that
(...) not wholly consent with the Sea Apostolic: that if in any thing I
attempt to depart from this my profession, I protest my-self to be
comprehended, by mine own condemnation, in the number of those whom I have
(...).
condemned? And when Anthymus was installed in the Patriarkship of (...), did
he nor oblige himself to do all that the (...) Pope of Great Rome should
decree? And did he not write to all the Patriarchs that he wholly followed the
Sea Apostolic: And when Pope Agapet was arrived at Constantinople, did he not
depose the same Anthymus (...). (...). 24. (...). (...). in (...). (...) (...)
sub Men. (...). 4.
from the Patriarkship of Constantinople; and did he not excommunicate the
Empress Theodora, who sustained him? And when Menas Patriarch of
Constantinople, gave his voice in the Council of Constantinople, did he not
say; We follow in all things the Sea Apostolic, and obaie it? And when the
Emperor Justinian pressed by the Empress, who was an Eutychian would persecute
Pope Siluerius, did not the Bishop of Patara in Lycia, one of the subjects to
the Pattriarkship of Constantinople, represent to him, that there was no king
in the world, that was over all the world, as the Pope was over all the earth?
And (...). in (...). c. 22.
even in the time of saint GREGORY, until whose Popedom, the temporal
dignity of the City of Rome grew into such a diminution, and that of
Constantinople contrariwise to such a height, that Constantinople then exceeded
Rome, and all the other Cities of the world,

As the high Cypres sharpe-head does outgrowl
The crooked wreathes of Shrubbs that spread below.
The Churchmen of the division of Constantinople, after they had been judged at
the Tribunal of the Patriarch of Constantinople, (...) l (...). (...) 2. (...)
(...). and l. 7. (...). 64. (...). l. 7 (...). 63.
did they not go by appeal, to that of the Pope? And did not the Emperor and
the Patriarch of Constantinople themselves, Confess that the Church of
Constantinople, was subject to the Sea Apostolic?

The second answer is, so far of is it that from this Canon there may be
drawn any arguments to oppose the primacie of the Pope, as contrariwise there
may from hence be drawn, strong reasons to (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
defend it. For from this, that the first Council of Constantinople, and the
Council of Chalcedon ordained, that the Bishops of Constantinople, should hold
the second place after the Bishop of Rome, and should enjoy after him the same
privileges, because Constantinople was a second Rome, does it not appear that
before the Council of Constantinople and Chalcedon, the Pope was the first of
all the Patriarchs, and the first not in simple primacie of order, but in
primacie of jurisdiction; since the equality that these Canons gave to the
Bishop of Constantinople with the Pope, was excepting the primacie of order,
which they reserved to the Pope: And since, by virtue of this equality in the
second degree, the Bishops of Constantinople attributed to themselves, the
right of receiving appeals from the Patriarkships of the East, and to ordain
in extraordinary occurrences the persons of their Patriarchs, and to
participate in the title of universal Bishop, and to call the general
Counsels of the Empire of the East, and to judge the Patriarchs of the East?
For was it not under this pretense that Anatolius, before the Council of
Chalcedon ordained Leo ad Martian. ep. 52.
Maximus Patriarch of Antioch? Anatolius (says Pope Leo the first) without
any example, and against the Constitutions of the Canons, has presumed to
ordain the Bishop of Antioch, which we would not revoke, for the desire of
repairing faith, and for the zeal of peace. And was it not under this
pretense, that he would have brought under the Patriarkships of Alexandria and
of Antioch; from whence it is, that the same Pope Leo reproached it to him,
that he had packed this decree, not simply to exalte his rank, but to
increase his power? This thy fault (said he) Idem ad (...).
which to augment thy power, thou (...) committed as thou say by the
exhortation of others, thy charity had better and more sincerely blotted out,
if thou had not imputed that which could not be attempted without thy will,
to the only Idem ad (...).
Counsels of thy Clergy. And elsewhere; After the vicious beginnings of thy
promotion, after the ordination of the Bishop of Antioch, which against the
rules of the Canons thou have attributed to thy self, I am grieved that thy
dilection has fallen so far, as to insringe the holy Constitutions of the
canons of Nicea; as if thou had watched a time for thy purpose, wherein the
Sea of Alexandria was fallen from the privilege of the second honor, and
wherein the Church of Antioch had lost the propriety of the third dignity; to
the end that those places being subjected to thy jurisdiction, all the
Metropolitans might be deprived of their proper honor. And was it not under
this pretense, that the Patriarchs of Constantinople attributed to themselves
the appeals from other Patriarchs? That which was defined (says Balsamon) in
the Balsam. in Conc. Sard c. 3.
Council of Sardica for the Pope concerning appeals, ought also to be
extended to the Patriarch of Constantinople, for as much as he has been by
diverse canons, (meaning the canon of the Council of Chalcedon, and that of the
Council Trullian) honored in the same sort as the Pope. And again; This Ibid.
privilege belonges not to the Pope alone, that every Bishop being condemned
should have recourse to the Sea of Rome, but it ought also to be understood, of
the Patriarch of Constantinople. And Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica; the
Hilar. de prim. Pap. l. 2.
twenty eight canon of the Council of Chalcedon, and the thirty sixth of the
sixth Council, honoring the Sea of Constantinople, with the same privileges
with that of Rome, grant also manifestly the appeals to that of
Constantinople. And in brief was it not under this very pretense, that when
Gregory Patriarch of Antioch had appealed to the Emperor and to the Council
from the persecutions of the Governors of Syria; John Patriarch Euag. hist.
Eccl. l. 6. c. 7.
of Constantinople presumed to call a generali Council of the Church of the
East, and to assign the other Patriarchs and Metropolitans of Pelag. 2. ep. 1.
the Empire of the East, to be there, and there to judge with them, the cause
of Gregory, and there to entitle himself universal Bishop? Greg. ep. l. 7.
ind. 2. (...). 69.
Now is not this to protest, that before that Constantinople was erected into
the title of second Rome, and that the Counsels of Constantinople and
Chalcedon had made this pretended extension of the privileges of the Bishop of
Rome to him of Constantinople; the universal primacie and superintendencie of
the Church, belonged to the Pope? For to say, that at least it appears from
these words of the Council of Chalcedon; The Fathers did justly exhibit the
privileges to the Co^c. (...) act. 15. c. 28
Sea of the ancient Rome, for as much as that city had the Empire; and the
hundred and fifty Religious Fathers, moved with the same consideration (...)
attributed equal privileges, to the holy Sea of the City of (...). That the
cause wherefore the Fathers which had preceded the first Council of (...), had
given the primacie to the Pope was not the Succession of saint PETER, but the
dignity of the city of Rome; besides that here, the question is not of
right, but of possession, nor of (...) the cause, wherefore the Fathers which
lived before the first Council of (...), had granted the primacie to the Pope;
but to know whether indeed, they had granted it him, when the Bishop of the
Council of Chalcedon said: that the primacie had been exhibited to the Church
of Rome, because the city of Rome was the Seat of the Empire; they intended
not that the dignity of the city of Rome had been the next conjoined and
immediate cause of the primacie of the Bishop of Rome but the cause antecedent,
obiectiue, and remote, contrariwise, the next and conjoined cause of the
primacie of the Church of Rome, they acknowledged to be the Succession of saint
PETER, as it appears both by the title that they gave to the Popes Epistle,
calling it the sermon (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
of the Sea of saint PETER: and by the protestation that they made, that the
Popes primacie was of divine right, and instituted by the proper mouth of our
Lord, when they said, speaking of Dioscorus; He has extended (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...)
his (...) (...) against him, to whom the guarde of the vine was committed by
our (...), But the cause of the cause; that is to say, the cause that moved
saint PETER, head of the Apostles, to place and settle his Sea at Rome rather
then in an other place, they pretended to have been the dignity of the City.
By means whereof these two causes were not exclusive but inclusiue one to the
other: As also the law of the Emperors (...) and Valentinian, made six year
before the Counsel of Chalcedon, (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
comoynes them in these words: Three things have established the primacie of
the Sea Apostolic; the Merit of saint Peter, who is the Prince of the
Episcopal (...); the dignity of the City; and the Synodicall authority.

And to this there is no repugnancie in that which the Fathers of the same
Council argued also of the dignity of the city of Constantinople, and they
alleged that it was second Rome, to infer from thence, the second place to
the Bishop of Constantinople: for they grounded not their (...) de (...). l. 5.
instance simply upon the temporal dignity of the city of Constantinople,
which was, says saint AVSTINE, daughter to the city of Rome: but also upon
the spiritual dignity of the Church of Constantinople, which was daughter to
the Church of Rome, forasmuch as a part of the Clergy of Rome, were
transferred to Constantinople, with the other Roman inhabi tants, when one of
the halues of the Empire was transported thither; that is to say, they did not
lean only upon this, that the City of Constantinople was an other Seat of
the Empire; but upon this, that the Church of Constantinople was a Swarm and a
collonie of the Church of Rome, and (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
the Episcopal Sea of Constantinople a member and part of the Sea Episcopal
of Rome; or rather, one and the same Sea Episcopal, and one and the same
Throne of saint PETER with that of Rome, as John Patriarch of Constantinople
protests to Pope Hormisdas, in these words: I esteem (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...)
the Church of your ancient and this new Rome, to be one self-same Church; and
I make account that that Sea of saint Peter, and this of this Imperial city,
is one self same (...): And as it seems the title of the law of the Emperor
(...) (...) it, when he calls the Sea of Constantinople, the Sea (...) and
Zonarus when he says, that in the time of the Council entitled (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...)
the 8th. Occumenicall, the Bishop of Rome and him of Constantinople (...)
(...) (...) and homothronall; that is to say, united in one selfsame (...),
and set in one selfsame Sea. And therefore, the Fathers of the Counsel of
Chalcedon, did noly allege in their Cano^, that it was reasonable that
Constantinople being adorned by the Empire and the Senate, should enioyalsoin
the second place after the City of Rome, the same privileges in Co^c. Chalc
act. 15 c. 28.
Ecclesiastical causes; but adds thereto in their relation two other
reasons, taken from the spiritual affinity of the Church of Constantinople
with that of Rome. The one, the facility of the influence of the government of
the Church of Rome into that of Constantinople; for as much as the beams of
the Sea Apostolic, might spread more commodiouslie from Rome to
Constantinople, then to the other Patriarchall Seas, because of the
communication that those two cities, which made one self same head of the
Empire, had together. By means whereof, it was more convenient, that the rules
which the other Patriarkships should take from the Roman Church the Church of
Ca^stantinople, where resided in ordinary the Nuncios of the Sea Apostolic,
and which was nearer the Patriarkship of Rome, should receive them first and
immediately from the Roman Church, and then communicate them to the other Seas,
which were farther off. The other, that the Church of Constantinople, was
daughter and extract from the Roman Church; we have (said they,) been
encouraged to do this, for that the Beam Apostolic reigning amidst you; and
you by your ordinary government (...) Co^c. Chalc apud Leon
it to the Church of Constantinople, you may cause it to shine the (...) into
these parts, because you are wonted without envy to inriche those of your
lineage, with the participation of your Goods. And therefore Pope Leo, with a
purpose to cut off in a word, all their hope of this pretense, writ to the
Emperor that Constantinople, what soever Anatotius might attempt, could never
be made a Sea Apostolic: Let Anatolius (said he) not disdain the imperial
(...), which he cannot make a Sea Apostolic: which moved the latter Greeks
to add Leo ad Martian. Aug ep. 52.
another devise. For considering that the pretense of the unity of their Sea
with that of saint PETER, could not serve for a good Color of a Spiritual
title, to perserue thereto the second place in the Church, they have had
recourse, to derive by a fabulous list, and which has noe testimony Catalog.
(...). (...). (...) (...). in iur. (...). l 4 Niceph.
in antiquity, the Succession of the Bishops of Bizantium from saint ANDREW,
brother to saint PETER, to maintain to the Church of Constantinople, built
upon the foundation of Byzantium the second Sea after that of saint PETER.

The third Answer is what soever the aim and sense of this Canon may be;
there can noething be inferred from it either lawful or Canonical; forasmuch
as it was a surreptitious Canon, and obtained by (...). (...). in. Chron.
fraud and by surprise; and against which there were thirteen nullities,
whereof the least is sufficient to impose a perpetual silence, to all those
that allege it. The first nullitie is, that they were neither the presidents
of the Council, nor the Bishops of the Council which propounded and
particularized this Canon, but the Clerks of the Church of Constantinople, and
particularly Aetius Archdeacon of Constantinople, as it appears both from the
eleventh action, in which one of the clauses which was after entered into this
Canon to wit, that the Metropolitans of Asia minor, should Co^c. Chalc can. 28.
receive their ordination from the Bishop of Constantinople, having been
contested by the Bishops of Asia, the only Clerks of the Church of
Constantinople, Ibid. act. 11.
with loud voices cried out; Let the ordinance of the hundred and fifty
fathers (so called they the Canon of the Council of Constautinople, falsely
alleged to that purpose) stand; let not the privileges of Constantinople
perish, let the ordinations be made, according to the custom, by our Bishop:
And from the words of Aetius Archdeacon of Constantinople, when he would have
excused the obreption of this Canon, which were; It is a (...). Chalc act.
(...).
thing accustomed in Synods, after principal matters have been defined, to
question and decide some other necessary things. Now we have; to wit the holy
Church of Constantinople, some articles to propound: And from the excuse that
Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople made, when he departed from this canon,
which was that he had been set on to solicit it, by the importunity of his
clergy. This thy fault (says Pope Leo answering Anatolius) which to augment
(...) (...) (...). ep. 69.
thy power, thou had committed, as thou say, by the exhortation of others,
thou had better and more sincerely blotted out, if thou had not imputed to
the only council of thy clergy, that which could not be attempted without
thy consent.

The second nullitie is, that this decree was made at an undue hour, and after
the assembly of the Council had been separated; and when the Popes Legates
and the Senators which assisted there on the Emperors part, were retired; as it
appears both by the complaint that the Popes (...) made thereof the morrow
after, to the Emperors officers, (...) to keep order in the Council, which
contained these words: (...) after the departure of your excellency and of our
humility, they say there (...). (...) (...). 16.
were made certain articles, that we pretend to be contrary to the canons,
and to (...) discipline: And by the answer of the Emperors officers, which
(...). (...). in (...). (...). (...).
was; If there were any articles framed after our departure, let them be read.
And by these words of Liberatus; There was that day, another session, wherein
after the departure of the Judges, and the Senate, and the Legates of the Sea
Apostolic, certain privileges were adjudged to the Church of
Constantinople, taking advantage of the condemnation of Dioscorus. And to that,
is not (...) the excuse that Actius Archdeacon of Constantinople alleged to
the Emperors officers in these words: We requested my Lords the Bishops of
Rome to (...). (...) (...). 1.
assist to it, they refused saying, they had noe commandment to that effect:
Weereported it also to your magnificence, you commanded the Synod should
examine it, when your excellency was gone forth, the holy Bishops which are
here, risinge as for a common business, required that the action should be
made; now it is in our hands, nothing has been done in a corner or by stealth,
but the action has been competent and canonical. For either the clerks of
Constantinople, had made no such request to the Popes Legates and the Emperors
officers; or it was not that day, nor upon the point of the action, otherwise
the Emperors officers would not have answered the Popes Legates, as being
ignorant of the history; If there be any article framed since our departure,
let it le read. Ibid.


The third nullitie is, that this canon was made, the Bishops of all the other
Patriarkships being absent, and in the only presence of the Bishops of the
Patriarkship of Antioch, and of the provinces near Constantinople. That it was
so, besides that the Bishops of the western provinces of the Empire of the
East; that is to say, of the Eastern Illyria, and of the natural Greek
provinces; as of Macedonia, of Hellada, of Peloponesus, of Thessalia, and of
the Isle of Creete, who had assisted at the other actions, were there omitted;
neither were the Popes Legates, (who represented all the Bishops of the Empire
of the west) there, Anatolius having watched the time of their absence; nor
any of the Bishops of the Patriarkship of Alexandria, which were those that
had the principal interest in the business. (...). l. 4. c. 7.
For as for this that Calvin says, that Proterius Patriarch of Alexandria was
there, it is an ignorance disproued by the signatures of the canon, and by all
the histories of antiquity, which teach us, that Proterius was not created
Patriarch of Alexandria, till after the council of (...) (...). in (...).
(...). 14.
had been finished, and till the Egiptian Bishops were returned from Chalcedon,
into Alexandria.

The fourth nullitie is, that even those that signed this canon, signed it
against their wills, as the Popes Legates protested when they complained (...).
(...) act. 16.
that they had made the Bishops subscribe byforce, or to unwritten canons. And
it is no opposition to this, that the next day when the Senators asked the
Bishops of Pontus, and of Asia, whether they had signed this canon Id. (...).
with their will or against it, they answered that they had signed it without
constraint. For this interrogatory and this answer had been procured by
Anatolius, and by the Clerks of Constantinople, abusing the favor of the
Emperor, and the support of the Senate, as it appears by the protestation that
the Bishops of Asia had made in the eleauenth Session of the Council, against
the right that the Bishop of Constantinople would have attributed to himself,
to ordain the Archbishop of Ephesus, Metropolitan of Asia Minor; which was
afterward one of the principal articles of this decree. The Reverend Bishops
of Asia (says the eleauenth Action of the Council (...). act. 11
of Chalcedon) prostrated themselves before the Council and cried out; have
compassion upon us; have compassion upon our children, (that is to say, either
of their Ghostly children, which were their Diocesans; or of their chil dren
borne by wives, married before their Priesthood) least by our occasion, and by
our Sins, they should dye etc. for if a Bishop of (...) be ordained here,
Ibid.
both our children will die, and the city will be rooted out. And again; The
most glorious Senators said; The most reverend Bishops of Asia present in this
(...), protest that if there be here an other Bishop ordained, there will be a
(...) in the city of Ephesus. Let the Synod then declare, where the canons
will that the Bishop of Ephesus be ordained. And a little after; The most
Reverend Bishops ans Ibid.
wered; In the Province. And Diogenes the most reverend Bishop of (...) said;
such is the custom, if the Bishop of Ephesus took his ordination from the
Bishop of Constantinople, these things would not happen, etc. And Leontius
right Reverend Bishop of Magnesia added; Since S. Timothy until this present,
there have been twenty seven Bishops created, all have been ordained at
Ephesus; one only (...), has been violently ordained here, from whence there
have ensued many murders. Ibidem.
And in the end, The Right Reverend Bishops cried out; Let the canons stand,
etc. And the Clerks of Constantinople contrariwise; Let the ordinance of the
hundred and fifty Fathers stand; Let not the privileges of Constantinople
perish; Let the ordination acording to custom be made by our Archbishop. From
whence it appears evidently, that the Bishops of Asia, and the Clerks of
Constantinople, were directly contrary in this article: And that what Diogenes
Bishop of Cyzica, and the other Asian Bishops said then when the canon was read
over again, to wit, that they had signed voluntarily, was so far from being
true, that contrariwise the same Diogenes Bishop of Cyzica, and the other Asian
Bishops had protested, that if they should consent, that the Bishop of
Constantinople, should ordain the Metropolitans of Asia, which was one of the
principal clauses of the Canon, their Diocesans would perish, and their
cities would be put to fire and sword.

The fifth nullitie is, that the Clerks of Constantinople saigning to re new
by this decree, the canon of the Council of Constantinople, which is called
the canon of the hundred and fifty Fathers, did insert therein two manifest
falsehoods; the one was, that they added thereto the word equal, which was not
in the canon of the Council of Constantinople. For whereas (...). Constable (...).
3.
the Council of Constantinople had said simply; That the Bishop of
Constantinople should have the prerogatives of honor after the Bishop of Rome;
those that renewed the canon, supposed that it had said; that the Bishop of
Constantinople, (...). (...) act. 15 (...). 28.
should have the prerogatives of honor equal after the Bishop of Rome: And the
other, that they imputed to the Council of Constantinople, that it had
adjudged the ordination of the Metropolitans of Pontus, and Asia minor, to the
Bishop of Constantinople; a thing, whereof the Council of Constantinople, had
not only spoken nothing to that purpose, but had pronounced (...). Constable c. 2.
clean contrary, that the Bishops of Asia, should govern the affairs of
Asia. And the Bishop of Thracia, that is to say, of Constantinople, should
only (...). hist. (...). l. 5. c. (...)
(...) the affairs of Thracia; which Socrates repeates in these words: (...)
obtained the great city and Thracia: And Helladius successor to Basilius in
the Bishopric of Cesarea in Cappadocia, obtained the division of Pontus, etc.
And (...) Bishop of Iconia, and Optimus Bishop of Antioch in Pisidia, that of
Asia. And is it not to be said, that those that renewed the decree annexed
thereunto, the ordinatio^ of the Bishops of Pontus, and Asia; not as a thing
decreed by the Council, but as a thing added by them. For besides (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
this, that their text bears; The hundred and fifty religious Fathers (...)
with the same design, have granted equal prerogatives, to the most holy Sea
of (...) Rome; reasonably judging, that the Imperial city, which is adorned
by the Senate, and has the same privileges with the ancient Rome, should also
be equally exalted in Ecclesiastical affairs, being the second after her, and
that she shall ordain the Metropolitans in the Diocesses of Pontus, Asia, and
Thracia: words Ibid.
which have manifest relation to the canon of the Council of Constantinople,
when the Bishops of Asia protested, they could not suffer, that their
Metropolitans should be ordained by the Bishop of Constantinople, the Clerks
of Constantinople cried out; Let the canon of the hundred and fifty Fathers
stand; let not the privileges of Constantinople perish; let the ordination be
Act. 11.
made, according to custom, by our Bishop.

The sixth nullitie is, that when this canon was again put to the touch, and
propounded to be reuiewed in the Council, the liberty of the assistants had
already been prepossessed by the te^porall officers of the city of
Constantinople. For the Senators of the city of Constantinople, that the
Emperor had deputed, to maintain order in the Council, considered so much
their own interest in the challenge of Anatolius, esteemeing they might by
this means, still augment the dignity of their city, and in such sort
imprinted into the spirits of the assistants, that it was the desire and
passion of the Emperor; that the Bishops of the Council believed, they could
not resist this decree, without offending the Emperor, and the Senate of
Constantinople, and all the Imperial Court of the East; as it appears by the
relation of the Bishops of the Council to the Pope, in these words: We
gratifieing the most religious and Christian Emperors, who (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...).
take pleasure in this decree, and all the illustrious Senate, and in a word,
all the royal city; have esteemed it to purpose, that this honor should be
confirmed by the general Council. And a little after; We pray you then to
honor our judgment, with (...).
your decrees; and that as in what concerned the weal we have brought (...) to
our head; so your sovereignty may accomplish toward your children, what
concerns decency; for in so doing, the religious Emperors shall be gratified.

The seventh nullitie is, that Eusebius Bishop of Dorylaus, and abettor to
Anatolius his Claim, used a manifest surprise, to cause this decree to be
approved by the Council, which was, to testify to the Council, that (...)
(...) act. 16.
it was agreeable to the Pope: I have (said Eusebius of Dorylaus) voluntarily
signed this canon, because I have read it at Rome to the most holy Pope, in
the presence of the clerks of Constantinople, and he approved it. From whence
it is, that the Bishops of the Council writ to the Pope, in the relation that
they addressed to him, that it was upon this foundation that they had proceeded
to the confirmation of the decree: We have (said they) taken the (...) (...)
(...). (...) (...).
to confirm it, as a thing begun by your Holiness, in favor of those that
you (...) always desired to cherish, knowing that in whasoeuer children do
well, it is referred to their Fathers. And nevertheless this testimony, was a
testimony sull of falsehood and imposture, as it appears both by the
instruction (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
that the Pope had consigned to the Legates which bare; Suffer not the canon of
the holy Fathers to be violated by any rashness: And a little after; And if
any perchance trusting in the power of their own cities, shall attempt to
usurp any thing; repress them as agrees with (...): And by the words of
the same Leo, who writ in the epistle to Maximus; If they say, that the (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...)
brethren which I have sent in my steed, to the Synod, have done any thing
(...) what concerns Faith, it shall be no force, for as much as they have been
sent by the Sea Apostolic to this end only, to root out heresies, and to
defend (...): And in his epistle to Anatolius; Never may my conscience
consent, that so (...) a (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
covetousness, shall be helped by my favor; but rather that it be suppressed
by me, and by those that allow not the proud, but consent with the humble.

The eight nullitie is, that when they would proceed to the approbation of the
canon, the Popes Legates protested a nullitie against it, and made their
protestation to be registered within the acts of the Council. This appears
first by the verbal process of the Council, where their opposition is
couched in these words: We require your excellence to command, that the
things which were yesterdaie done against the canons in our absence, (...).
(...) act. 16.
may be cut of; or if not, that our contradiction may be inserted into the
acts, that we may know what we have to report to the Apostolic Bishop, and
to the President of the whole Churches, that he may pronounce the injury done
to his Sea, and to the subversion of the canons: This they added, not that this
decree gave any authority to the Patriarch of Constantinople but after the
Pope, and in regard of the other Patriarchs, but forasmuch as to propound it
without the Popes consent, who was the protector of the rightes of the other
Patriarchs, and preserver of the canons; and to make it pass against the
opposition of his Legates, it was to wound the dignity of the Sea Apostolic,
and to infringe the ancient discipline, which annulled the rules of the Socr.
hist. eccl. l. 2. c. 8 Leo ad Anatol. ep. 51.
Church, made without the sentence of the Bishop of Rome. And secondly it
appears by these words of the Pope to Anatolius: Our brethren sent in behalf
of the Sea Apostolic, which presided in my steed at the Council, resisted
pertinently and constantly to those unlawful attempts, crying out with a loud
voice, that the presumption of a pernicious novelty, might not be exalted
against the canons of the Council of Nicea: And their contradiction cannot be
doubted, since thou thy-self complainest in thy letters, that they have desired
to cross thy enterprise, wherein thou do greatly recommend them to me; but
thou accusest thy-selfe, for not obeying them. And thirdly it appears by the
relation of the Council itself, to the Pope, which contains these words;
Daigne most holy and blessed Father, to Co^c. (...) ep. ad Leo^.
embrace these things, for the most holy Bishops Paschasinus and (...), and the
most religious Priest Boniface, holding the place of your Holiness, have
greatly striued to contradict this rule, desiring that such a good might take
the entire original from your providence; to the end that as the rule of
Faith, so that of good order, might be attributed to you.

The ninth nullitie is, that the Pope insteede of consenting to the request
that the Council solicited by Anatolius, and by the Emperor, and the Senate,
had made to him to confirm this canon, disannulled and abolished it: Ioyninge
with us (said the Pope in his epistle to the Empress (...)) Ieo ad Pulcher.
ep. 53.
the piety of your faith, we annull the plotts of the Bishops repugnant to
the rules of the holy canons established at Nicea, and by virtue of the
authority of the blessed Apostle Peter, do wholly abrogate them by a general
sentence: And Pope Gelas. Pap. 1. tom. de anathem. vincul.
Gelasius forty years after repeating the same history, That which the
authority of the Sea Apostolic has confirmed in the Council of Chalcedon,
has remained in force; and what she has refused, could obtain noe
steadfastness: And only she has disannulled that, which the Synodicall
congregation had adjudged against order should be usurped And it is not to be
said, that the Pope abrogated this canon for passion, or out of desire to
contradict, and not in zeal to preserve the right of the other Seas, and to
maintain the canons of the Council of Nicea; for the Pope did not abrogate it
of his own motion, but having been already prayed before by saint CYRILL
Patriarch of Alexandria, and since by Maximus Patriarch of Antioch, not to
permit that such attempts should take place, and that the rights of the
Churches settled by the Council of Nicea, should be violated. Thy charity
(says Pope Leo in his epistle to Maximus Patriarch of Antioch) having esteemed
that some what ought to be done for the privileges of your Church, let it take
care (...) ad Max. (...) Antioc. cp. 60.
to explain it by letters, that we may answer absolutely and fitly to thy
consultation; for the present it shall suffice to pronounce in general, that
if any thing seem to have been attempted, or even for a time exhorted by any
one, in what Synod soever it be, against the canons of the Council of Nicea,
it cannot do prejudice to the inviolable decrees. And a little after; In the
Council of Ephesus, Juuenall the Bishop Ibid.
thought to have found a sufficient advantage; (to wit, that of the schism of
John Patriarch of Antioch) to obtain the principality of Palestina, and to
cause his insolent boldenes to be confirmed with surreptitious writings; which
Cyrillus of holy memory justly abhorring, represented to me, and entreated me
with great instance and care, that noe consent should be given to such lawless
attempts.

The tenth nullitie is, that Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople seeing this
canon could not subsist if it were discovered that it had been annulled by the
Pope, concealed from the Bishops of the Council of Chalcedon the abrogation
that the Pope had made of this decree, and kept back the Popes letters,
whereby he had annulled and abolished it, a fraud so perilous, as it had like
to have turned vpsidowne all the Church of the Empire of the East. For the Pope
having joined in one letter the abrogation of this decree, with the
confirmation that he made of the other acts of the Council, Anatolius because
he would not show the censure of his ambition, concealed the Popes letters,
where the one and the other clause was contained; which was the clause that the
Eastern Churches remained in such doubt, whether or not the Pope had confirmed
the Council of Chalcedon, as infinite people for this cause making difficulty
to receive it; the Emperor was feign to request the Pope, to dispatch new
letters confirmatiue of the Faith of the Council of Chalcedon to all the
Bishops who had assisted there, and to send them to each one of them in their
Churches. This (said Pope Leo in his answer to the Emperor Martian) your
clemency thinks will be more easily fufilled, if throughout all the Churches
we Leo ad Mart. Aug. cp. 57.
signify, that the definitions of the Council of Chalcedon have pleased the
Sea Apostolic, a thing whereof there was noe occasion of doubt, etc. seeing I
have written to your Glory, and to the Bishop of Constantinople, letters which
evidently (...), that I approved those things which had been there defined
concerning Catholic Faith: but because by the same letters I had reproved
those things, which under the occasion of the Synod had been euilly attempted,
he rather chose to conceal my applause, then to publish his ambition. And in
his epistle to the Empress Pulcheria: Id. ad Pulcher. Aug. cp. 58.
whereas the most Religious Emperor, has willed that I should write letters to
all the Bishops, which assisted at the Council of Chalcedon, whereby I should
confirm what was then defined concerning Faith, I have willingly accomplished
it, least the deceiptfull dissimulation of some, should pretend to put people
in doubt of my sentence, although by the means of the Bishop of
Constantinople, to whom I had largely testified my joy, that which I had
written, might have come to the knowledge of all, if he had not rather chosen
to conceal my contentment, then to publish the rebuke of his ambition.

The eleauenth nullitie is, that Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, even he
that had packed this Canon, he himself in whose favor it had been
particularized, departed from it, as is seen by the text of the epistle that
Leo ad Anat. cp 59
Pope Leo the first writ him, which is such: This thy fault which to increase
thy power thou have committed, as thou say, by the exhortation of others, thy
charity had better and more sincerely blotted out, if that which could not be
attempted without thy consent, thou had not imputed it, to the only
Counsels of thy Clergy, etc. But it contents me much dear brother, that thy
dilection protests to be agreeued with that which even then ought not to have
pleased thee; it (...) to re-enter into common grace: the profession of thy
charity together with the attestation of the most Christian Prince; and let
not his correction seem tardie that has gotten so reverent a surety: And Gel
Pap. tom- de Anath. vinc
by these words of Pope Gelasius written forty years after against Acacius:
That which the Sea Apostolic consented not to, nor did the Emperor impose it,
nor Anatolius usurp it: and all was put into the power of the Sea Apostolic;
and therefore what the Sea Apostolic confirmed in the Council of Chalcedon,
has been in force, what it refused could not be steadfast.

The twelfth nullitie is, that this Canon has been falselie inserted into the
catalogue of the Canons of the Council of Chalcedon, by the latter Greeks,
which perchance made Saint GREGORY to Greg. l. 5. indict. 14. cp. 14.
say; The Council of Chalcedon has in one place been (...) by the Church of
Constantinople; for during all the age of the Council of Chalcedon, this Canon
which had been but proiected and not confirmed, remained in the only history
of the Acts, and was not inserted into the catalogue of the Canons, till a long
time after; as it appears both by the testimony of the most ancient Greek
and latin copies; in all which, the Roll of the Canons contains but twenty
seven Canons. And by the collection of Theodoret, an author of the same age,
in Theodor. in Synagoge cannon. in bibliotheca regia Medicea.
which the list of the Canons of the Council of Chalcedon, is but of twenty
seven Canons. And by the Edition of Dionisius Exiguus time-fellow with the
Emperor Justinian, whose catalogue of the Canons of the Council, comprehend
but twenty seven Canons: And Dionis. Exig. in Cod. can.
by the acknowledgement that Theodoret Anagnestes, a Greek author makes
thereof in these words: The Council of Chalcedon published twenty seven
Canons. Theodor. Anagn. ad calc. hist. Eccl.


And the thirteenth nullitie is finally, that the number of thirty Canons,
which the Greeks of following ages have attributed to the council Theod in
edit. Rob. Steph. col. lect. l. 1.
of Chalcedon, to comprehend this, and to make it come in under the title of
the twenty eight is a supposed number. For it is evident that the two last
canons, to wit, the twenty ninth and the thirtith are noe canons, but are,
the one of them, an interlocution between Paschasinus the Popes Legate, and
Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople: and the other a prohibition prouisorie, to
any of the Bishops of Egypt, which had excused themselves, from signing the
epistle of Pope Leo, because they remained without a Patriarch, not to depart
from Constantinople, before the arrival of the news of the creation of a new
Patriarch of Alexandria: which have been taken out of the history of the Acts
of the Council, and transferred into the catalogue of the Canons. Whereunto it
serves not to allege for counterbattery, that the council Trullian which was
holden two hundred and forty years after the council of Chalcedon, cites
this canon as a canon of the Council of Chalcedon: for besides that in saying,
we renew the decree made by the hundred and fifty Fathers Co^c. Constable 6. in
Trull. can. 36.
assembled in this religious and royal city; and by the six hundred and
thirty Fathers assembled at Chalcedon, it shows sufficiently how this canon
had In chap. 15
been till then disputed and called in question; the Council Trullian was
aschismaticall, ignorant, and unlawful Council, as it shall hereafter
appear, both by the testimony of BEDA an author of the same time; Bed. de sex
aetatibus.
who calls it an impious Council; and by the approbation which was made there
of the Council of Africa concerning the Anabaptisme of heretics, which had
been an erroneous and reprouable Council, as Saint AUGUSTINE, and all
antiquity do testify, and as the Popes adversaries themselves do
acknowledge: And this suffficeth for the first objection. Now let us go
forward to the second.

To the second objection then, which is that the Bishop of Constantinople, went
about to participate in the title of Oecumenicall or universal, whereof the
Pope had received the nomination in the Council of Chalcedon; we bring four
Answers: The first answer is, that it was not to possess this title by the
exclusion of the Pope; but to possess it by the association of the Pope, and
in regard of the other Patriarchs; for not only in the Council of Chalcedon,
the title of universal had been offered the Pope, before the Bishop of
Constantinople had ever presumed to aspire to it; but in the Council of
Constantinople holden under Menas, which is the first Council where the name
of Universal had been given to the Patriarch of Constantinople, be it
directly, or be it from the relation of a Council holden a little before it;
there were read the requests of the Churchmen of Constantinople, of Antioch,
and of Jerusalem, presented in Constantinople it self to Pope Agapet, and
couched in these terms: To our Co^c. Constable sub Men. act. 1.
most holy and most blessed Lord Agapet, Archbishop of the ancient Rome and
universal Patriarch, And during the contention of saint GREGORY, and the
Patriarks of Constantinople; Eulogius patriarch of Alexandria, writing Greg. l.
7. ind. 1. ep. 30
to Pope GREGORY calls him Uniuersall Pope. And in the next age after saint
GREGORY, the Emperor Constantine the bearded, residing at Constantinople, and
assisting at the third general Council of Constantinople, intituleth the
pope, Uniuersall Patriarch, and Arch-Pastor: You have (said he in the epistle
to the council of the West) seconded your captain the Cont. 6.
Constable. act. 18.
universal ^ier arch and Patriarch. And again; You have been present by your
Procurators, you and the universal Arch-Pastor at our council. And after,
when the Emperor Basilius the younger, and Eustachius Patriarch of
Constantinople would have reconciled themselves to the Roman Church, they
Ibidem.
capituled, that it might be lawful for them to obtain with the consent of
the Pope, that the Church of Constantinople should be called Uniuersall in the
(...).
Rod. hist. l. (...). c. 1.
compass thereof, as the Roman was in the compass of the whole world. And
still after them Balsamon, although puffed up with his imaginary title of
Patriarch of Antioch, and a great enemy to the Latins which possessed his
pretended patriarksip, he favored the Pope as little as he could; and
attempted to prove all the patriarchs equal, for that which concerns the
ordinary administration of their patriarkships; nevertheless he confessed that
the custom of the Greeks, was to attribute to the Pope, the title of
Universal Pope; and to the Bishop of Constantinople, Theod.
that of Universal Patriarch, I have (said he) a purpose to tell, wherefore
Bals. medit (...).
the Pope of Rome is called, Universal Pope; and likewise the patriarch of
Constantinople, Ibid.
Universal patriarch. And a little after: But because the Devil of self-loue
has separated the Pope from the society of the other most holy Patriarchs,
and has restrained him only into the West, I omit this discourse as
unprofitable.

The second Answer is, that by the word Universal, the Bishop of
Constantinople never pretended to exempt himself from the Popes jurisdiction,
but acknowledged himself subject and inferior to the Pope, as it appears by
those very pieces where the name of Universal is attributed to the Bishop of
Constantinople; which do all testify, that he was subject and inferior to the
Pope, and that the instance that he made to be adjoined and associated to the
Pope in the participation of the universality, was not to the end to possess
it in regard of the Pope, but under the Pope, and in regard of the other
Patriarchs; always acknowledging the Pope for stock and head of the
universality, and protesting himself his subject and his inferior. For in the
law of the Emperor Justinian to Epiphanius Patriarch of Constantinople, which
is the first where the word universal is offerred to the Patriarch Cod. Just.
impress.
of Constantinople, does not Justinian write to him: We have in all things
preserved the Estate of the unity of the holy Churches, with the most Paris.
Antwerp. and Geneu. tit. 1. l. 7.
holy Pope of ancient Rome, to whom we have written the like. For we suffer
not that any thing should pass touching the Ecclesiastical Estate, which
shall not be also referred to his Blessedness, for as much as he is the head
of all the most holy Prelates of God? And in the Council of Constantinople
holden under Menas which is the first Council in form, where we Co^c. Constable
sub Men. act. 4.
see the title of Universal, given to the Patriarch of Constantinople: Is it
not (says Anthimus Patriarch of Constantinople) protested to do all that the
Sovereign Pope of great Rome should decree: And writ to all the most holy
Patriarchs, that he would altogether follow the Sea Apostolic? And Menas
Patriarch of Constantinople, does noe he himself pronounce these words; We
will in all things follow and obey the Sea Apostolic? Ibid.
And in the heat of the question of the word Universal, does not saint
GREGORY report, that John Priest of Chalcedon a City situate in Asia, and
at the gates of Constantinople, having been judged at the Tribunal of John
Patriarch of Constantinople, appealed from him to the Sea Apostolic, and was
again judged at Rome, and the Bishop of Constantinople giving his helping hand
to it, even then when he took upon him, the quality of universal, and
sending the Acts of the first judgment to Rome, to be reuiewed by the Pope?
Greg. l. 5. indict. 14. epist. 24.
Know thou not (Says saint GREGORY) that in the cause of John the Priest,
against our brother and fellow-Bishop, John of Constantinople, he had recourse
according to the Canons to the Sea Apostolic, and Id. l, 4. ind. 13. ep. 39.
that it has been defined by our sentence? And elsewhere; John Bishop of
Constantinople, has gone so far as under pretense of the cause of John the
Priest, he has sent hither Acts, wherein almost at the end of every line, he
calls himself universal Patriarch.

And finally the Emperor, and the Patriarch of Constantinople, did they not
themselves acknowledge in the strenght of this dispute, that the Church of
Constantinople was subject to the Roman Church, as saint GREGORY reports it
in these words: Who is it (says he) Id l. 7. ind. 2. ep. 63.
that doubts, but that the Church of Constantinople, is subject to the Sea
Apostolic; which the most Religious Lord the Emperor, and our brother Bishop
of the same city, continually protest? For as for the illusion of those, who
to weaken the credit of this passage, cavil upon the word Eusebius, which is
in the printed copies, before these words, Bishop of the same city; and
object, that the Bishop of Constantinople then being, was not called Eusebius,
but Cyriacus: I will not stand upon it, to say that there was noe inconvenience
in it that Cyriacus, might have had two names, and be called Eusebius Cyriacus,
as Saint JEROME was called EVSEBIVS JEROME: And besides that the word,
Eusebius might there be taken adiectiuely, and signify pious and religious, as
when Theod. histor. Eccl. l. 1. c. 6.
Arrius writ to Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia: Farewell Eusebius truly
Eusebius; that is to say, farewell Eusebius truly Religious. It will be a
short cut to answer at the first, that it is an error of the Exemplarists,
who of an ((...)) evil written, and for that occasion blotted out, and written
again, have made Eusebius: for the copies of this epistle which had been
current two hundred year after saint GREGORY read simply, (and our brother
Bishop of the same city) without making any mention of (...), as is seen
by the relation of Amalarius Bishop of Treuers, who lived eight hundred years
agone; who inserting into his Book of the Ecclesiastical offices, this
epistle of saint GREGORY whole and entire, from the beginning to the endinge,
reports the period now in question in these only words, without any mention
of Eusebius; for as for that (...). (...) (...) (...). l. 4. c. 36
which is spoken of the Church of Constantinople; who doubts but it is subject
to the Sea Apostolic, which the most Religious Lord the Emperor, and our
brother the Bishop of the same Town continually protest? And therefore also
when the Patriarchs of Constantinople, were in any Synodicall action with the
Popes Legates; yea, within Constantinople it self, they abstayned from the
title of Universal, and left it to the Popes Legates alone for their master,
to the end to show, that they held the Pope for head and stock of the
Universality; and did repute themselves Universal but in the absence of him,
or of those that represented him; as appears by the signatures of the third
general Council of Constantinople, which was celebrated under Constantine
Pogonat in the next age after Saint GREGORY; wherein the Popes Legates signed
in the quality of Legates to the universal Pope; and the Patriarch of
Constantinople, in the quality of only Bishop of Constantinople: for though
the epistle of the Emperor to the Patriark of Constantinople, written before
the holding of the Council, attributes to him, the title of Universal,
nevertheless in the signatures of the Council, the only Legates of the Pope,
take the title of Universal for their master, and sign in this form;
Theodorus, humble Priest of the holy Church of Rome, and holding the place of
the blessed and universal Pope of the city of Rome Agatho, I have
subscribed. George humble Priest of the holy Church of Rome, and holdinge the
place of the blessed and Universal Pope of the City of Rome Agatho, I have
subscribed. John (...). Constable (...). 18.
humble `Deacon of the holy Church of Rome, and holding the place of the
blessed and universal Pope of the City of Rome, Agatho, I have subscribed.
And the Patriarch of Constantinople forbear it, and signed thus; George by the
mercy of God Bishop of Constantinople new Rome, I have voted and subscribed.

The third Answer is, that whatsoever was the intention of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, so far was he from doing any thing against the Popes
authority, as contrariwise he confirmed and (...) it altogether. And that it
is so, how from this, that the Bishop of Constantinople, pretended to be
universal Bishop, because Constantinople had been associated to the Rights of
Rome, can it chose but follow, that the Bishop of Rome, was so primitiuely and
originallie? For as for those that say, that the Patriarch of Constantinople
was called Oecumenicall Bishop in the same sense, wherein the other Patriarchs
were so called, (not knowing that there is great difference (...) (...) (...)
(...). (...) (...).
between the word, Catholic Bishop, which Nilus attributes to the
Patriarchs, which signifies general Bishop of a Region, and the word (...)
Bishop, which signifies universal Bishop, either of all the Imperial Orb, or
of the particular Orb of the Empire of Constantinople;) I will not stand to
confute them; it shall suffice me to ask them, why then the Patriarch of
Constantinople never gave the name of universal Patriarch, to the other
Patriarchs of the East? And why the other Patriarchs of the East, never gave it
one to another, but have yielded it only to the Bishops of Rome, and of
Constantinople? And why the Bishops of Constantinople, have stirred up so many
tragedies to participate therein, and have alleged that Constantinople was
the second Rome, and ought after her to enjoy the same Rights and privileges?
And in brief, it shall sussice me to ask them; why then both anciently and
even to this day, the Patriarch of Constantinople does attribute to himself, by
virtue of his universality, this advantage above the other Patriarchs of the
East; to call the general Counsels of the East, and to preside in them, and
to judge by appeal of the sentences of the other Patriarchs? It has been
reported (says Pope Pelagius in the epistle before Pelag. Pap. 2. cp. 1.
alleged to those of the East) to the Sea Apostolic, that John Bishop of
Constantinople inscribes himself Universal; and by virtue of that his
presumption, has called you to a general Council. And the Emperors
Constantine Leo and Co^ stantinus apud Leunclau. (...). 3. de Pat.
and Leo; The care and the judgment of all the Metropolitanships, and
Bishoprics, and of all the Monasteries and Churches, appertain to their
proper Patriarch; but the Patriarch ol Constantinople, may in the territory of
the other Seas, when there has been noe precedent consecration plant the
Cross; and not only so, but also may decide and determine the controversies
bredd' in the other Seas. And Nilus; The twenty eight canon of the Council
Nilus de prim. Pap. l. 2.
of Chalcedon; and the thirtith six of the sixth Council honoring the Sea of
Constantinople with like privileges to that of Rome, grant also manifestly,
the appeals to that of Constantinople: And Balsamon; This privilege is not
given Balsam. in Co^c. Sard. c. 5.
to the Pope alone; to wit, that every condemned Bishop should have recourse
to the Sea of Rome, but it ought also to be understood of the Patriarch of
Constantinople. And elsewhere; that which nevertheless is but a claim bredd
amongst the Greeks, since the schism; The fifteenth canon of Id. in Co^c.
Ant. c. 15.
the council of Antioch, was abolished by the fourth Canon of the council of
Sardica; or at least is to be understood of the Synods, which are subject to
noe appeal, as those of the Pope, and of the Patriarch of Constantinople. For
as See belovve. in the chapt. of the Council of sardica.
for the place of Photius from whence they infer that the Patriarchs were as
the Prefects of the Pretorie, from whence there was noe appeal, that shall be
satisfied hereafter, and showed that it is a vice in the transcription of the
copies.

And the fourth and last Answer is, that this claim was not long suffered in
the Bishop of Constantinople, for the Emperor Mauricius who favored it, having
been extinguished by the conspiracy of Phocas, the same Phocas interposed his
temporal authority, and forbadd him any more to call himself Universal
Bishop, reserving that title only to the Pope alone. It is true, that
afterward the Empire being again fallen into the hands of two heretical
Emperors Heraclius and Constans, successors to Phocas; the Greeks again set
abroache this custom, and not only set it abroache, but have since
continued it even to the last ages, as it appears by the inscriptions of Ius
Canon. Orient. l. 3. Ibid.
(...), Germanus, Constantius, Alexius, and other Patriarchs of Constantinople,
reported in the Canon law of the Greeks, where they inscribe and sign,
Universal Patriarks. Only they use this distinction, that they call the Pope,
Universal Pope; and the Patriarch of Constantinople, Universal Patriarch: And
that if it be lawful to give way to conjectures for two reasons; the one,
because the antiquity of the title of Universal Patriarch, was evidently
restrained by this distinction, to the superiority only over the simple
Patriarchs; wherein the Pope was not comprehended, as it appear; when saint
GREGORY says; that if one of the (...) Patriarchs had done that against the
Popes letters, that was Greg. l. 2. indict. 10. (...). 17.
done by the Bishop of Salona, such a disobedience could not have past without
a most (...) (...). And the other, forasmuch as the Constantinopolitans (...)
the word POPE, except amongst the monks, to be a title more exalted, then that
of PATRIARK; because the name of Pope was more reverend amongst the Bythinians,
a people near Constantinople, (...) (...).
who had accustomed in the time of Paganism, to call Jupiter (...) (...) that
of Patriarch; from whence it is, that the latter Greeks have (...), although
ignorantly, that the reason why the Patriarchs of (...) bare the title of
Pope, came from this, that saint CYRILLVS Patriarch of Alexandria, had been
legate to the Pope in the Council of (...), as Balsamon notes in these terms:
The (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
Bishop of Alexandria has been called Pope, for as much as saint CYRILLVS in
the third Council received the privileges of the Pope of Rome Celestinus. And
Nicephorus in these; Celestinus Bishop of Rome, refused to assist at the
Council of Ephesus, for the danger of navigations; but he writ to Cyrillus,
that he should hold his place there, and since that time the fame goes, that
(...) (...) the Tyara, and the name of Pope, and of judge of the world.

For whereas Beda, Paul the Deacon, Theophanes, and Anastasius the (...), and
after Anastasius the Bibliothecary, all the latin (...) say, that Phocas
judged; that the Sea of the Roman and Apostolic (...) (...) (...)
Church, was the head of all the Churches; forasmuch as the Church of (...)
(...) herself, the first of all the Churches; It is a mistake that Beda an
English author, and later by an hundred year then Phocas, has made of the
question, which was about the word, Universal, and not about the word, (...);
And of this we have two certain and undoubted proofs; the one that saint
GREGORY, who is he only of all the authors of the age that has spoken of
this contestation, and who was himself one of the parties contesting, testifies
that the dispute was about the word Universal, and not about the word First.
And the other, that the Patriarchs of Constantinople have always remained
within the terms of the second Sea; and have perpetually yielded the first, to
the Bishop of Rome. For never can it be found in any monument of antiquity,
that the Church of Constantinople, has at any time taken the title of the
first of all the Churches: contrariwise, all the pens of antiquity have
witnessed that the Church of Constantinople never affected more then the second
in the Church, and has always given the first to the Church of Rome; for in
the Council of Constantinople, which was the source of all those prete^ces, it
was (...), that the Bishop of Constantinople should have the prerogatives of
honor after the Pope; because Constantinople was a second Rome. They (...)
(...) (...)
(...) ((...) Socrates) that the Bishop of Constantinople should have the (...)
of honor after the Bishop of Rome, because Constantinople was a second Rome.
(...) (...) (...)
And in the Council of Chalcedon it was ordained, she should be honored as the
Church of Rome, being the second after her: It was esteemed fit says (...))
that the Sea of new Rome, because of the second rank it held after that of
(...) Rome, should be preferred before the others. And in the third general
council of Constantinople, which was the sixth general council; the (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)
council called the Pope, the Protothrone of the universal Church: and the
Emperor (...) Pogonat, called the Patriarks Synthrones of the Pope, after the
Pope; that is to (...), set in one same throne with the Pope, after the Pope.
And in the council entitled Trullian, the canon of the council of Chalcedon
was renewed in these words: We decree that the Sea of Constantinople, shall
have (...) (...) to the Sea of ancient Rome, and shall be honored in (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) it, being the second after it. And when Nicephorus Patriarch of
(...) writes against the Iconoclasts he calls the Sea of Rome, the (...) and
Apostolic Sea. The divine Patriarch Nicephorus (says Zonarus) speaking of
the Icconomaks writes thus; their being cut of from the Catholic Church,
appears clearly (amonst other things) by the letters of the blessed Zon. in
Co^c. Chalc c. 28.
Archbishop of Rome; that is to say, of the first and apostolic Sea.

And against this it is not to be objected, that the Emperor Zeno calls
Constantinople, the mother of all the Orthodoxall; For he speaks of the
orthodoxall of his Empire; that is to say, of the Empire of the East; within
the which there remained the year before, noe Patriarchall Sea except Cod. l.
1. tit 2. l. 16.
that of Constantinople, but was possessed by heretical Patriarchs. As little
is it to be objected that Justinian says, that the Church of Constantinople is
the head of all the other Churches; For he speaks, not of the Church of Ibid.
l. 24.
Constantinople in regard of the Churches of the whole world, but of the
Cathedral Church of the City of Constantinople; that is to say, of the
Church of saint Sophia that he calls the great Church of Constantinople, in
regard of the other Churches of the Patriarkship of Constantinople, as it
appears both by the next following discourse of the Chartularies, and by the
Seventh law of the foregoeing title, where he writes to the Bishop of
Constantinople; That the Pope is head of all the holy Prelates of Gods And by
the 131. Nouel. where the same Justinian ordains, that the Cod. l. 1. tit 1.
l. 7.
Sea of Constantinople, should be the second after Rome: We ordain (says
(...). 131.
he) according to the definition of Counsels, that the holy Pope of old
Rome, shall be the first of all Prelates; and that the blessed Archbishop of
Constantinople new Rome, should have the second place, after the Sea Apostolic
of old Rome. Less yet is it to be objected, that some latter Greeks say,
that the Counsels of Constantinople and Chalcedon; adjudged the primacie to
the Church of Constantinople; for they will not say, that the intention of
those Counsels was then, to judge the primacie to the Church of
Constantinople, but by prophetical spirit, to judge the primacy to the Church
of Constantinople, after the Roman Church should have lost it. And to this end
they pretend, that the word, after, which the Council of Constantinople made
use of when it says, the Bishop of Constantinople should have the privileges
of bonor after him of Rome, was not a note of order, but a note of time; that
is to say, that the Fathers of the Council foreseeing by divine inspiration,
that the Sea of Rome should one day fall into the heresy of the double
procession of the holy Ghost (so call they the doctrine of the procession of
the holy Ghost, by deriuation from the Father, and from the Son) and by that
occasion fall from her rank; they ordained, that after the Bishop of Rome
should have lost his primacie, the Bishop of Constantinople should possess it.
Which Zonarus, although a Greek and a Schismaticke reports and confutes in
these words: Some (said he) believe that the Zon. in Co^c. Constable 1. c. 3.
preposition (after) is a mark of time, and not a submission of honor to the
Church of Rome; and they make use for the proof of their opinion, of the
twenty eigth Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, etc. But the 130. Nou. of
Justinian, inserted in the Ibid.
third title of the fifth book of the Basilickes, give the Canons otherwise to
be understood. And a little below; From hence it appears manifestly, that the
preposition (after) signifies submission and inferioritie. And elsewhere: the
Council of Chalcedon Ibid.
ordaines, that new Rome should be honored with the same Ecclessiasticall
prerogatives as old Rome, and should be preferred in honor before all the other
Churches, being the second after her; for it is impossible, that she should be
equally honored in all things; unless they will say, that those divine
Fathers foreseeing by Zon. in Coc. Chalc c. 28.
the light of the holy spirit, that the Church of Rome should be cut off, from
the body of the orthodox, and be banished from the Society of the faithful,
because of the diversity of the doctrine; they destined that of Constantinople
to be one day the first, and so esteemed it then worthy to enjoy in all things
equal privileges; to wit when she should have received the primacie, as the
Roman Chuch had in former time had it. And again; But to this sense the
thirty sixth canon of the council Ibid.
Trullian does oppose it self; which having placed the Sea of Constantinople
second after that of old Rome, adds; And after it, that of Alexandria; and
after that of Alexandria, that of Antioch; and after that of Antioch, that of
Jerusalem. And therefore not only Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica writing
against the latins, confesses ingeniously, that the Greeks never disputed
for primacie with the Roman Church: We are not (said he) Nil. de (...) Pap.
l. 1.
separated from peace, for attributing to ourselves the primacie, nor for
refusing to hold the second place after the principality of Rome; for we
never contested for primacie with the Roman Church, But even amongst the
Authors of the last age, Duaren although a great enemy to the Pope,
acknowledges, that the sentence of Phocas interuened upon the word,
Universal, and not upon the word, First. Behold his words: Boniface the third
(said he) obtained with great contention from Phocas to be made oecumenicall
Duaren. de Sacr. (...). Min. l. 1. c. 10.
and universal Bishop. Only he shows his galle in saying that Boniface
obtained from Phocas to be made universal Bishop; where he should have said,
that he obtained of Phocas, that the title of universal Bishop, should be
preserved to him alone; and that the Bishop of Constantinople who desired to
participate in it, might be excluded from it. For neither did the Bishop of
Constantinople, dispute the title of Universal Bishop with the Pope, but
pretended he ought to be therein associated with him: neither did the title of
Universal Bishop, begin to be attributed to the Pope by Phocas, but from the
time of the Emperor Marcian above an hundred fifty year before Phocas, it had
been exhibited to him in the council of Chalcedon: and after that, under the
Emperor Justinian, above fifty years before Phocas, it had been given him in
Constantinople it self; as it appears both by the Acts of the Council of
Chalcedon, wherein the petitions of the Clerks of Alexandria presented to the
Council, bore; To Co^c. (...) act. 3.
the most holy and universal patriarch Leo, and to the holy general
Council: And by the testimony of saint GREGORY, who wrote to Eulogius
Patriarch Greg. l. 7. indict. 1. ep 30. and. l 4. indict. 13. cp. 32. and 34
of Alexandria: Your Holiness knows, that the title of universal Bishop,
has been offerred in the council of Chalcedon, and by the following Fathers
to my predecessors. And by the Acts of the Council of Constantinople holden
under Menas, and confirmed by Justinian where the petitions of the Regulars of
Constantinople, and of Syria, and of the Bishops of the Patriarkships of
Antioch, and of Jerusalem to Pope Agapet, were inserted with this inscription:
To our holy and blessed Lord, the Archbishop of old Rome, and universal Co^c.
Constable sub Men. act. 2.
Patriark, Agapetus. In such sort, as be it that Phocas sentence, were upon the
word, universal, it cannot be said, that Phocas was the author of the
attribution of this title to the Pope, since from the time of the Council of
Chalcedon, and since under the Empire of Justinian, it has been attributed to
him: or be it that it interuened upon the word, First, the original thereof,
could not be imputed to Phocas, since the Emperor Justinian more then fifty
year before Phocas, had written: We ordain, Just. nou. 131.
following the definitions of the Counsels, that the holy Pope of old Rome,
be the first of all the Prelates; and that the blessed Archbishop of
Constantinople new Rome, have the second place after the Sea Apostolic of old
Rome, and be preferred before all the other Seas.

But it may be replied, that S. GREGORY did not only condemn the use of the
word universal in the person of the Btshop of Constantinople, but refused it
himself, in his own. For having admonisht the Bishop of Alexandria, that he
should give this title neither to him, nor to the Bishop of Constantinople; and
the Bishop of Alexandria having written to him, that he had abstained
according to this admonition, from attributing it to the Bishop of
Constantinople; he replies: I said you Greg. l. 7. ind. 1. ep. 30
should give such a title neither to me, nor to any other; and behold in the
front of your Epistle, which you have addressed to myself, which have made you
this prohibition, you have imprinted this title of proud nomination; Calling me
Uniuersall Pope, Id. ibid. and l 4; ind. (...). ep. 32. and. 34
which I pray your most dear holiness noe more to do. And a little after;
And certainly your holiness knows, that this title was offered in the
Council of Chalcedon, and since again by the Fathers followinge to my
Predecessors, but none of them would ever use this word, because in preserving
in this world the honor of all Bishops, they might maiutaine their own toward
God Almighty. To this then, to make an end, we answer; that the word
Oecumenicall or universal has two meaninges; the one proper, litterall, and
grammatical, whereby it signifies only Bishop And the other transferred and
metaphorical, whereby it signifies, superintendment over all Bishops: And saint
GREGORY Greg. ind. 13. ep. 36. and l. 7. ind. 2. ep. 69.
censered this title in the first sense, forasmuch as it would have ensued,
from the use of this word grammaticallie taken, and measured by the letter,
that there had been but one Bishop only, be it in all the Empire, or be it in
the particular Empire of Constantinople; and that all the rest had been but his
commissioners and deputies, and not true Bishops in title, and true offices of
Christ. If there be one that is universal Bishop (says saint GREGORY) all
the rest are noe more Bishops. Now saint GREGORY maintained, that all Bishops
were true titularie Bishops, and true ministers, and officers of Christ,
although concerning jurisdiction, they were subordinate one to an other; as the
inferior judges of a Kingdom, although concerning jurisdiction, they be
subalterne to the superior Judges, and that there be appeals from the one to
the other, yet are they not their commissioners or their deputies; but are also
themselves Judges in title, and ministers and officers to the Prince: And
therefore he opposed this title, as a title full of sacrilege and arrogancy;
by which he that usurps it putts himself into the place of God, making of
Gods officers; and even in that by which they are Gods officers; and exalting
himfelfe for that which is of the Episcopoll order, above his Brethren; that
is to say, denying to his Brethren, the Essence and the propriety of
Bishops; and holding them, but for commissioners and substitutes in the Bishops
Sea, and not for true Bishops in title, and true ministers and officers of
Christ: And in brief reputing himself, not as Servant constituted over his
Matt. 24.
fellow servants, whereof the Gospel speaks, but as the Master and Lord of
his fellow servants. And it is not to be said, that the Bishop of
Constantinople, pretended not to the title of universal Bishop in this first
sense: for when a title has two senses, whereof the one is evil and
pernicious; it is easy for him that is in possession of such a title, to
transferr it abusiuelie from one sense to the other. And therefore saint
GREGORY rejected absolutely, the use of the word Universal, for fear least
under pretense of an acception in process of time, it might be captiouslie
drawn to the other: And for this cause he withstood it, not according to the
metaphorical sense which was given it, but according to the natural and
original sense which it had. For that it was in this sense, that Greg l 6.
(...). 15. ep. 30. and alibi.
saint GREGORY cried out; That he that entitled himself, Uniuersall Bishop,
exalted himself lick Lucifer above his Brethren, and was a forerunner of
Antichrist; to wittin as much, as the word Uniuersall Bishop, took from others
the quality of Bishops, and the title of officers of Christ; And not Id. l. 2.
ind. 21. ep 30.
to deny in case of jurisdiction, the prelature and superiority of one Bishop
over others, he shows it sufficiently when he writes; For as much as it is
notorious, that the Sea Apostolic, by Gods institution is preferred, before
all other Churches, so much, amongst many cares, we are most diligent in that
which we must have, when for the consecration of a Bishop, they attend our
will: And when he alleadges, to distinguish between these words, Principality
and Universality, the example of S. PETER, who was indeed Prince of the
Apostles, and head of the universal Church, and notwitstanding, was not
universal Apostle. The care of the Church (said he) has been committed Id.
l. 4. in l. 13. cp. 32
to the holy Apostle, and Prince of all the Apostles Peter; the care and
principality of the universal Church, has been committed to him, and yet he
is not called universal Apostle: And when he adds, that none of the Saints
under the law was ever called universal; The Saints before the law (said
he) the Id. l. 4. ind. 13. ep 38.
Saints under the law, and the Saints under grace, compounding one Body of
Christ, have all been constituted amongst the members of the Church, and none
would ever be called Universal. Certain proofs, that by the universality
that S. GREGORY opposed, he intended not to exclude the principality and
superintendence of one Bishop over others, not to deprive himself of the
quality of head of the Church; noe more then in denying that saint PETER was
universal Apostle, he denied him to be head of the Apostles, and that the
principality and superintende^cie of the universal Church was committed to
him; he that contrariwise came from saying; The principality of the universal
Church is committed to Peter; nor in denying that any under the law was called
universal; he means not to deny, that the highest Priest of the law, was
head of the Jewish Church, and had the superintendencie over all the other
Priests and Levites. And therefore what pretense is left, to the Ministers of
the excellent King to abuse this passage, to calumniate the Sea Apostolic?
They say S. GREGORY cries out, That a Bishop that intitles himself,
Universal Bishop, exalts himself like Greg. l. 6. ind. 15. ep. 30.
Lucifer, above his brethren, and is a forerunner of Antichrist; it is true,
but besides, this is so too, that S. ATHANASIVS cries yet with a stronger
voice; Athan. ad solit. vit. agent.
That an Emperor that makes himself Prince of Bishops, and presides in
judgments Ecclesiastical, is the abomination foretold by Daniel: Who knows
not that there is great difference between Forerunner and Predecessor: And
that Antichrist should not sit in the Seat of his Forerunners (for fo are all
heretics and schismatics) noe more then our Lord sat in the Seat of S.
JOHN, who was yet his Forerunner, but not his Predecessor? otherwise Antichrist
must sit in the Episcopal Seat of Constantinople; for it was the Bishop of
Constantinople, that S. GREGORY pretended by this clause to qualify the
Forerunner of Antichrist. And then what blindness is it, to strike upon the
refusal that S, GREGORY made of the title of Universal; and not to see that
the same S. GREGORY protests, that by the refusal of this word, he intends
not to refuse the quality of head of the Church, nor superintendencie and
jurisdiction, over all the other Bishops, Archbishops, and Patriarks? for what
age of S. GREGORYS epistles is not full of testimonies, that the Roman Church,
is the head of all the Churches?

Heaven, in her bosom, not so many Stars embow'rs;
The Sea so many sails, The Earth so many Flowers.
He writ in the epistle to John Bishop of Syracusa; Who doubts but the Church
Greg. l. 7. ind 2. ep. 63.
of Constantinople, is subject to the Sea Apostolic? which the most Religious
Lord the Emperor, and our brother the Bishop of the same city protest
continually. He writes in the Epistle following, to the same Bishop; If there
be any crime found in Bishops; I know noe Bishop but is subject to the Sea
Apostolic; Greg. l. 7. ind. 2. ep. 64.
but when crimes exact it not, all according to the condition of humility, are
equal. He writes in the Epistle to John the defendant, correcting the
judgment which had been given against the Bishop Steven; If they answer he
had neither Metropolitan nor Patriarch, it must be replied, that the cause
should have been heard and determined by the Sea Apostolic, which is the head
of all the Churches. He writes in the Fpistle to John Bishop of Panormus: We
admonish thee, that the Reverence of the Sea Apostolic be not troubled Ibid.
ep: (...).
by the presumption of any. For then the state of the members remains entire,
when (...) injury is done to the head of the faith. He writes in the Epistle
to Natalis Bishop of Salona; If one of the four Patriarks had committed such
an act, Id. l. 2. ind. 10. ep. 37.
so great a disobedience, could not have passed without a grievous scandal. He
annulled in his Epistles to John Bishop of Constantinople the Judgment of the
Church of Constantinople, against John Priest of Chalcedon; Reproving (said he)
the sentence of the foresaid Judges, we declare him by our definition, to Id.
l. 5. ind. 14. ep. 15.
be Catholic and free from all heretical crime. And elsewhere; Know (...)
not Ib. ep. 24.
that in the cause of John the Priest, against our brother and Colleague, John
of Constantinople: He had recourse according to the Canons, to the Sea
Apostolic, and it has been defined by our sentence? He abrogated in his
Epistle to Athanasius (...) Regular of Lycaonia the decree of John Bishop of
Constantinople against him, and restored him to his place: We decree thee
(said he) to be exempted Ib. ep. 64.
from all blott of heretical frowardnes, and do grant thee free leave to
return into thy Monastery, and to hold the same place and rank as thou
did before. He abrogated in the Epistle to John Archbishop of Larissa in
Thessalia, the sentence of the same Archbishop of Larissa against Adrian Bishop
of Thebes, and one of the fuffragans of the Archbishopricke of Larissa, and
ecclipsed the Bishopric of Thebes from the jurisdiction of the
Archbishopricke of Larissa; and ordained that if the Archbishop of Larissa
should ever more undertake to exercise jurisdiction over the Bishop of Thebes,
he should be deprived of the communion of the Body of Christ, and that it might
not be restored to him, except at the point of death, but by the leave of the
Bishop of Rome, We ordain (said he) that thy brotherhood Id. l. 2. ind. 11.
ep. 7.
obtain from the power thou had before over the Bishop of Thebes, and over
his Church, and according to the letters of our Predecessor: for if any cause
either of Greg. l. 2. ind. 11. ep. 6.
faith, or of crime, or of money, be pretended against our said Colleague
Adrian, it may be judged, if it be a matter of mean importance, by our
Nuncios, which are, or shall be in the Royal City; that is to say, in
Constantinople; and if it be a matter of Weight, that it should be reported
bither to the Sea Apostolic to be decided by the sentence of our audience.
And if at any time, or for what occasion (...), thou do attempt to contradict
this our decree, know that we declare thee (...) from the sacred Communion, so
as it may not be restored to thee unless in the article of death, but with
the leave of the Bishop of Rome. And finally he abrogated in his Epistle to
John Patriarch of the first Iustinianea, who had confirmed the sentence of the
Archbishop of Larissa, the judgment of the said John Primate of the first
Iustinianea, and condemns him to remain deprived of the communion of the
Body of Christ for the space of thirty days: Abrogating (said he) and
annulling the decrees of thy sentence; We decree by the authority of the
blessed Prince of the Apostles, that thou shall be deprived of the sacred
communion, for the space of thirty days. Now, what was this, but to cry
with a loud voice, that in refusinge the title of Universal; he refused not
therefore the title of Head of the Church, and the Jurisdiction and
superintendency over all other Bishops, Archbishops, and Patriarks?

Of the Order of sitting in the Council of Nicea. CHAPT. VIII.
BUT Calvin, to fight against this doctrine, and to prove that the Pope is not
head of the Church, nor Superior to the other Patriarchs, uses four
principal means; first, that the Popes legates have not presided, in the
ancient General Counsels. The second that the Pope called them not. The third
that the appeals of Bishops were not to the Pope. And the fourth that the
Canons of Africa forbadd the Bishop of the first Sea; by which Calvin
impertinently (...) the Pope, to call himself Prince of Bishops: and the first
means he strives to prove by Seven examples, which we had best confute all
at a clapp, for (...) they will object them to us in a second Answer.

He produces then before all things, the order of the Council of The first
objection of Calvin against. the precedencie of the Pope in the Counsels.
Nicea, which he ignorantly calls the Council of Nice, not knowing that the
Council of Nice was an heretical Council, that the Arrians held at Nice in
Thrace, to deceive the Catholics by the affinity of the words Nice and Nicea,
(...) and (...) compounded almost of the same letters. The Arrians (says the
Epistle of the Asians to Liberius) caused to be signed by fraud and periuries
at Constantinople a faith contrary to that of the Soc. hist. ec cl. l. 4. c.
11.
holy Council of Nicea, which had been brought from Nice in Thrace. And
Socrates: They transported themselves into a city of Trace called Nice, and
after a long st aie, held there an other Council etc. to surprise the simple,
by the affinity Id. edit. graec. l. 2. c. 37.
of the words. For the simple people believed that it was the faith of Nicea in
Bithinia. And Theodoret: They brought many Bishops against their wills, into a
Town Theod. hist. eccl. l. 2. c. 21.
of Thrace, whose name was Nice. And Sozomene; Passing through Thrace, they
came into a city of the Country called Nice, (...) there kept a Conuenticle
etc. And this they did expressly at Nice, to the end to persuade the simple
people to consent to it, (...) Soz. hist. ec cl l. 4. c. 18.
by the neerenes of the words, and believing it to be the decree which was made
at Nicea. For although Stephanus do indeed, put in a City of Nicea in
Thrace, nevertheless, besides that Ammianus Marcellinus says, that the Am.
Marc. l 31.
(...) of Thrace, situate upon the passage from Italy to Constantinople, which
was the same wherein the Arrians had held their false Council, was called
Nice; The Grecia^ Ecclesiastical historians very notably mark this
difference, between the Council of the Catholics and that of the Annians,
upon the name where of the fraud was founded; that that of the Catholics was
holden at Nicea (...) and that of the heretics at Nice (...); and reporting
the two impostures of the Arrians, use in the first (which was to hold a
mocke-Councell at Nice in Thrace) the word, affinity of name, and say, that
the Arrians advised themselves of this Theod. hist eccl l. 2. c. 16.
fraud, to surprise the simple, by the affinity of the names. And in the
second, which was to hold a mock Council at Nicea in Bithinia, they Soc.
edit. (...). l. 2. c. 27.
use the word, identity of names, and say, that they committed this fraud, to
surprise the simple by the identity of names. By which means, that in the
writings of saint HILLARY, the Town of Nice in Thrace where the Conuenticle of
the Arrians was held, is called Nicea, It is a vice of the Copists, which have
imposed it upon some learned men. But in Sum what soever the city of Nice
in Thrace be, it is Certain, that that of Nicea in Bithinia, where the
Catholic Council was holden, was The french translator Nicephorus and others.
called, (...), and not (...), Nicea, and not Nice. Which I would not reproach
to Calvin, were it not, that all the Authors of the Ecclesiastical history,
agreeing in this note, he is as inexcusable for having been ignorant of it, as
many Catholics which are deceived after him, are excusable for having
followed him bonafide. But here is to much of this digression; let us come to
the point.

He alleadges then, that in the Council of Nicea, S. ATHANASIVS Calu. inst. l.
4 c. 7.
presided, and that the Popes Legates had only the fourth place, I pray you
(says Calvin) if they had acknowledged Julius for head of the Church, would
those that represented his person, have been cast back to the fourth place?
Had Athanasius presided in the general Council, where the order of the
Hierarchy ought to be siugularly observed? Now, what should I answer to this,
but what the oracle said of Chalcedon; to wit, that heresy is the land of the
blind? For all the Authors of Ecclesiastical antiquity, Epiph. haer. Melet.
S. EPIPHANIVS, Ruffin. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 5. and 14.
Ruffinus, Soc. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 15.
Socrates, Theod. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 27.
Theodoret, Soz hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 17.
Sozomene, and Athan. apol. 2. Hillar. in frag. Syn. Arim.
S. ATHANASIVS himself, and the Council of Alexandria, reported by him, to
whom we may over and above add S. HILLARY; testify, that S. ATHANASIVS was
yet Deacon, in the time of the Council of Nicea, and was not made Bishop of
Alexandria, till five months after the Council of Nicea; and that Alexander
Bishop of Alexandria his Predecessor, assisted at the Council of Nicea, and
did not preside there, (so far was S. ATHANASIVS that was then but his Deacon
from presiding) but only held the second place there, and was preceded by the
Popes Legates. It is true, Calvin may easily be pardoned this error, since he
is so ignorant in the Theodor. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 26. Socr. hist. Eccl. l.
1. c. 23.
Ecclesiastical history, as to have believed that Sabellius who was above
threescore years before Arrius and the Council of Nicea, was since both the
one and the other. But let us leave the error there, and pass forward to the
consequence. Calu. inst. l. 1. c. 23. sect. 4.


Caluins argument then against the Legates of the Pope is, that Sozomen writes;
At this Council assisted from the Sea Apostolic, Macarius Bishop of Soz.
hist.
Jerusalem, Eustachius Bishop of Antioch, Alexander Bishop of Alexandria; and
Eccl. l. 1. c. 16.
as for Julius Bishop of Rome, he assisted not at it, because of his age; but
in his steed, there assisted Vito and Vincentius Priests of the same Church.
And from thence Calvin infers, that the Legates of Julius were only then in the
fourth place; and consequently that Julius did not preside there, Now could I
note in passing by, that the Council of Nicea was not holden under Julius, as
Calvin thought, but under Sybuester the predecessor of Julius, and that it is a
deprauation of Sozomens copies, that has deceived Calvin; and before him
Cassiodorus, Beda, and many others. For first Eusebius. in Chron.
Eusebius, Hier. in Chron.
saint IEROM, Soc. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 27.
Socrates, Theod. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 3.
Theodoret, Gel. in act. Conc. Nic.
Gelasius of Cyzica, and the ancient latin subscriptions: and after all those
Hincmarus Archbishop of Rheims testify, the Council of Nicea was holde^ in
the time of Syluester, and not of Julius. Hincmar. opusc. 55 c. 20.
And secondly Sozomene notes, that under the third consulship of Crispus and
Constantine Caesar's, which is he by whom he has begun his history, Soz. in
praef. oper. Soz. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 2.
Syluester was Bishop of Rome. Now the third consulship of Crispus and
Constantine ended but four months before the ouerture of the Council of
Nicea, which begun in the month of May under the co^sulship of Paulinus and
Julianus; by which means Julius could not have sent his Legates, seeing Socr.
hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 9.
between Syluester and Julius, Sozomene reports, that there was a Papacy
interposed; which was that of Marcus, which according to S. IEROM Id. ibid.
Soz. l. 1. c. 25.
Conc. Chalc. act. 2.
Soz. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 20.
Hier. in Chron.
lasted eight months. And thirdly the cause wherefore Sozomene observes
Theodor. (...). (...). l. 1. c. 7. Soz. hist. (...). l. 4. c. 7.
that the Bishop of Rome assisted not at the Council, which was his extreme
age, or as Theodoret says, his profound age, could not agree with the person
of Julius, who lived till thirty years after the Council. And fourthly
Sozomene assigns but twenty five years to Julius Socr. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c.
27.
Papacy; in which place we must read but fifteen with Socrates; and
consequently he could not presuppose, that Julius had been Pope, in Soz ibid.
the time of the Council of Nicea; seeing as well he, as Socrates affirm,
Soc. ibid.
that Julius dyed, after the death of Magnentius Gallus and Siluanus; Id ibid.
Ibid.
that is to say, thirty years after the Council; for Magnentius was slain,
according to Socrates, under the sixth consulship of Constantine; and the
second of Gallus; which was the twenty eigth year after the Council, and
Gallus under the seventh of Constantine, and the third of his owne^, which was
the twenty ninth year after the Am. Marc. l. 15.
Council, and Siluaus, according to Amianus Marcellinus, after Gallus. I add,
that Julius would never have reproched to those of the East, that Soz l. 3. c.
9.
they did not request him to assist at the Council of Antioch, which was
holden sixteen years after the Council of Nicea, if he had been so old Soc.
edit. (...). l. 2. c. 7.
at the time of the Council of Nicea, as he could not be there. I add, that
Sozomene had had much more cause to impute it to Julius his age, that he was
not at the Council of Sardica, which was holden twenty (...). c. 20.
two year after that of Nicea, then that he was not at that of Nicea. And
finally I add, that Sozomene himself decides the point of the question, and
teaches us, that it is a vice in the writing, which is slipped into the text of
the history. For after he had finished in the closing up of the first book,
the whole narration of the Council of Nicea with these words: Here (...) this
place ends all that concerns the Council of Nicea: (...). hist. Eccl. l. 2.
c. 1.
And after he had employed all the ninteen first chapters of his second book,
to set down what past between the Council of Nicea, and that of Antioch
against Eustathius: when he had finished the recital of the Council of
Antioch against Eustathius, he begins the twentieth chapter Id. c. 20.
of his second book with these words: In this time, Marcus having for a short
space holden the Bishops Sea of Rome, after Syluester; Julius took the
government of the Sea of Rome: and Maximus after Macarius, of that of
Jerusalem. From whence it appears manifestly, either that the word, Julius,
which is in the precedent book, where Sozomene says, speaking of the Council
of Nicea, Julius Bishop of Rome because of his age, was not there, is a note
which slipped out of the margent, into the text; and that Sozomene had simply
said, as Eusebius; The Bishop of Rome, because of his Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l.
3. c. 7.
age was not there: or that, insteede of (...), we must read (...), that is
to say; ancient, or venerable: But because we have handled this matter more at
large elsewhere; to wit, in the preface, composed by us at Rome, but published
without our name, before Gelasius of Cyzica, we Co^c. (...). Imp. Com tom. 1.
will here content ourselves to remitt the Readers to that; and the while we
will examine the place of Sozomene.

Sozomene then (says (...)) writes; At this Council assisted of the Seas Soz.
hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 16.
Apostolic, Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem, Eustathius Bishop of Antioch,
Alexander Bishop of Alexandria; and as for the Bishop of Rome, he was not there
because of his age; but in his steed, there assisted Vito, and Uincentius,
Priests of the same Church. This is true, but so far of is it, that from hence
it follows, that Sozomene puts the Popes Legates in the fourth place; As
contrariwise it is evident, even there, that he attribures to them the first.
For being constrained to follow the tract of his discourse, which obliged him,
since he had purposed to speak of the Apostolic Prelate which assisted at
the Council, to begin with those that were there in person; before he would
make mention of those which were there but by their Legates; he ^^erted of set
purpose the order of the enumeration, and began with the fourth and last of all
the Patriarchs, which was the Bishop of Jerusalem, who was then but a
Patriarcke of honor, and then went up increasing to him of Antioch, who was the
third and then came to him of Alexandria, who was the second, to the end to
keep the last place of the progress, for the Popes Legates. Now, what could
be done more expressly, and with more note to testify the primacie of the
Pope? A man that being to describe an Imperial diet, where the Emperor
assisted but representatiuelie, would begin with the Princes of the Empire, who
had assisted there in person; but to keep the greater dignity to the Emperor,
would inuert the order of the other Princes and would say, rising from the
last to the first of the Princes of the Empire there assisted at the Imperial
diet; the Marquese of Brandenbourg; the Count Palatine, the Duke of Saxony, the
Archbishop of Collen, the Archbishop of (...), the Archbishop of Ments, and the
King of Bohemia; and as for the Emperor, he was not there, but deputed two
Vicars there to hold his place: should he in doing so, give the last rank to
the Emperor, or the first? For that the order reported in Sozomene, was the
inuerted order, and not the direct order of the Sea of the Patriarchs, it
appears both by the confession of Calvin, who cries out; Amongst the
Patriarks, Jerusalem Calu. inst. l. 4. c. 6.
has ^en^ the last: and by all the Ecclesiastical histories, which teach us,
that Jerusalem was the fourth of the patriarkships, and Antioch the third, and
Alexandria the second. And by the Canons of the Council of Nicoa it self,
which setts Alexandria before Antioch, and Antioch before Jerusalem. And by the
express report that Socrates Socr. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 12.
made of the direct order of the Council, taken by the very synodicall book
of S. ATHANASIVS, which is thus: Osius Bishop of (...), Uito and Vincentius
Priests, Alexander of Egypt, Eustathius of great Antioch, Macarius of
Jerusalem: In which Catalogue Saint ATHANASIVS, and Socrates, put Osius the
Bishop, and Uito, and Uincentius Priests; as holding but one and the same place
in the first rank: And Alexander Patriarch of Alexandria, who was the second
Patriarch in the second place; and Eustachius Patriarch of Antioch, who was the
third Patriarch, in the third: And Macarius Patriarch of Jerusalem, who was the
fourth Patriarch, in the fourth place.

But they will reply, that Eusebius, and after him Theodoret, and So^omene
make mention but of two Legates of the Pope Vito and Vin^; and consequently that
S. ATHANASIVS and Socrates could not place Osius, Vito, and Vincentius, as
being all three Legates to the Pope, in one same place to this reply then, the
answer shall be, that the Popes (...) accustomed to send two sorts of Legates
to the general Counsels celebrated in the East; the one Bishops, taken out of
the body of the Roman Patriarchall Church: As Arcadius and Proiectas Bishops,
to the first Council of Ephesus. Julian Bishop of Pozzoly, to the second.
Paschasinus Bishop of Lilybea, to the Council of Chalcedon; and the other
Priests taken out of the body of the particular Roman Church, (...) Vito and
Vincentius to the Council of Nicea: Archidamus and Philo^elius, to the
Council of Sardica: Phillip to the first Council of Ephe^^^^ Boniface to the
Council of Chalcedon. And the reason of this was that the body of the (...):
Church, was never at the general counsels celebrated out of the (...) of the
West; but the Pope held at Rome, a Council of the Bishops of the West, whose
resolution he sent by a legation to the Council, of the other Patriarchall
divisions assembled in the (...); (...) at (...), confirmed by a Council
holden afterward, that which had been decided at the Counsels of the other
patriarchall divisions assembled in the East: And from this concourse, arose
the absolute title of general Council. The Legates then, that the Pope sent,
to (...) the voice of the (...) Church, to the (...) Counsels assembled in the
East, were of two sorts; the one taken from the body of the Bishops, to
represent in general the whole body of the (...) Church, that is to say;
(...) the person of the Pope, as of the other Bishops of the West, and the
other Priests and Deacons, taken from the (...) Clergy of the Roman Church, to
represent particularly the (...) and person of the Pope: And this was some
times the practice of those of the East in the western ex pedition: For when
Flauianus Patriarch of Antioch, sent his embassage to Rome, to recover the
grace of the Pope; he added to it, besides the Priests and Deacons of the
Church of Antioch, Acacius Bishop of Beroe in Syria, one of the Bishops of his
patriarkship, who was (says Theodoret) Theodor. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 23.
head of the legation; and some other Bishops of the same division; to the end
to show the consent of his patriarchall Church with his particular Church. But
let us leave those of the East, and return to the Pope.

The Pope then to cause the (...) of the western Church to be carried to the
general Counsels, celebrated in the East, sent a legation compounded of two
kind of Legates; the one internal, and taken from the body of the particular
Roman Church, whom we with Co^c. Sard. (...). (...)
the Council of Sardica call, Legates taken out of the Popes own side: and the
other external, and taken out of the order of the Bishops: And this legation
was sometimes made by two distinct commissions; as in the sixth general
Council; the Legates from the popes particular person, and those from the
Council of Rome, were deputed feuerally: And sometimes by a joint deputation,
as in the Council of Ephesus and Chalcedon. Now were those Legates that we call
internal (that is to say taken out of the particular Clergy of the Roman
Church) the principal Legates, not in honor; except when the Popes legations,
and those of the Council of Rome, were distinct; but as for the instructions,
and in the report of the Popes intentions. And therefore also when there was
question of the particular voice of the Pope, they were often named alone; as
in the history of Sozomene, Soz. hist. Eccl. l. x. c. 17.
and in the list of the signatures of the Council of Sardica, because, they
were only Legates deputed both from the person of the Pope, Athana. apol. 2.
and from the body of his Church. And of those examples we have one remarkable
in the commission that the Council of Ephesus gave to the Bishops that it sent
to Constantinople: for by this commission, the Council of Ephesus entitled
Phillip Priest of the Roman Church, Co^c. (...). edit. graec. inter epist.
Catholic.
Legate from the Pope in these words: To Phillip Priest, holding the place of
the Bishop of Rome, Celestine; to Arcadius, to (...), etc. And entitled not
Arcadius Legate to the Pope, though he were both Bishop and Legate to the Pope
altogether: because Phillip was Legate a latire, from the Pope; that is to say,
a Legate taken out of the very body of the particular Roman Church; and
Arcadius was Legate from the Patriarchall Roman Church; that is to say, Legate
from the Pope and Council of Rome; by means whereof, when Sozomene and
Theodoret say, there were two Legates from the Pope at the Council of Nicea; to
wit, Uito and Uincentius; and that S. ATHANASIVS and Socrates, put Osius,
Uito, and Vincentius into one place; they contradict not one an other; for as
much as the one speaks only of the internal Legates, that we call Legates a
latere, of which Osius was none; and the other speaks of the Legates, as well
internal as external, whereof Osius was one. And in this the ancient Greek
Hincmar. opusc. 55. capitul. c. 20.
and Latin Canonists, agree with us: For not only Hincmarus Archbishop of
Rhemes, who flourished in the time of Charles the Balde, and was not suspected
to favor the Pope much, writes; At the Council of Nicea in the place of
Syluester, Osius Bishop of Cordua, and Vito, and Vincentius Priests of the
city of Rome presided: But also Dalmatius Bishop of Cyzica in Asia, one of
the Fathers of the Council of Ephesus, who lived near a thousand two hundred
years ago; and after Gel. Cyz. in prolog. Syntag.
him Gelasius Priest of Cyzica, who lived under the Emperor Zeno a thousand one
hundred and forty years ago; that is to say, in the Conc. Nic.
next age to the Council of Nicea; and from whose pen is come to us the famous
Canon of the Eucharist, so much cited by Calvin and by all the Sacramentaries,
written in the extract of the same Council of Nicea, that Osius was the Popes
Legate in the Council of Nicea; and that Vito and Vincentius were his
Colleagues. At this Council (says Gel. in Syn Conc. Nic. l. 2. c. 5.
(...) of Cyzica, speaking after Dalmatius of Cyzica of the Council of Nicea)
assisted Osius Bishop of Cordua, who held the place of the Bishop of great Rome
Syluester, with the Priests Uito and Vincentius. And not only Gelasius of
Cyzica uses these words; but Photius Patriarch of Constantinople, the
greatestenemie to the Roman Church that ever was amongst the Greeks,
alleges them near eight hundred years ago, in these Phot. Biblioth.
words: I have (said he) read a book in form of a history entitled, The
Ibid.
Acts of the Council of Nicea, containing three tomes, and bearing (added he a
little after) the title of Gelasius of Cyzica; in this book (says he) the
Author writes, that Osius Bishop of Cordua, and Vito and Vincentius Roman
Priests assisted at the Council from the part of Syluester Bishop of Rome. And
not only Photius alleges them; but himself in his treaty of the Synods,
dedicated to Michell King of the Bulgarians, and reported by Euthymius, writes;
with Vito and Uincentius was joined Osius Bishop of Cordua. Phot. ep. de 7.
Syn. in Panopl.


And indeed, for what other cause, should Osius simply a Bishop of the
patriarkship of the Roman Church; and subject in the first instance Euthym. p.
2. tit. 24. Catalog.
to the Metropolitan of Seuilla in Spain, and by appeal to the Patriarch of
the West, have preceded all the Patriarks of the East; yea, in the East it
Conc. Elib.
self he that in the Council of Eluira that we call Elibertin, composed of
Conc to. 1.
ninteene Bishops of Spain had held but the second or according to others,
Collect.
the eleauenth place. And in the Council of Arles compounded of two Co^c. Hisp.
hundred Bishops, had had noe rank amongst the principal Bishops of a Gars.
Loais.
the Council, but for the same cause, for which Uito and Uincentius simple
Aug. cont. Parm. l. 2. c. 5.
Priests of the Roman Church, preceded them; to wit, for the order of his
legation? for to precede them by virtue of the particular conditions of his
person, neither age, nor antiquity of promotion, nor learning, nor desert,
has ever given rank in general Counsels to any simple Bishops before
Archbishops, much less before the Patriarks; otherwise the distinction of the
Seas had been introduced in vain, and the personal condition of Osius were
good to make his person reverent, but not to make him preside in a general
Council, where the order of the Hierarchy (says Calvin) ought to be
singularly observed. (...). inst. l. 4. c. 7.
Jointly, that even in all these qualities, there were many in the Council,
that surpassed him. For if we speak of persecutions for the Faith, (...)
Bishop of one of the cities of Thebaida, who had lost a knee under (...). hist
Eccl. l. (...). c. 4.
the persecution of Maximinus and an eye, whose skarre the Emperor Constantine
was wont to kiss; was not he there? Potamon Bishop of Heraclea Soc. l. 1. c.
11.
in Egypt, whom S. EPIPHANIVS calls, great Bishop and great (...), and who in
the same persecution, had had an eye put out; was not Epiph. co^t. (...).
(...). 68.
he there? Paul Bishop of Neocesarea upon Euphrates, whose hands had been
maimed with a hott iron, in the persecution of Licinius; was not he Theod. hist
Eccl l. 1. c. 7.
there?

And if we speak of the guiftes of prophetie and working of miracles,
Spiridion Bishop of Trimithunta in Cyprus, that Ruffinus calls a man of the
Ruffi. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 5.
order of the Prophets; was not he there? James that great Bishop of Antioch in
Mygdonia, otherwise called Nisibis, that Theodoret says Theod. lust. Eccl. l.
1. c. 7.
had raised again the dead, and whom he intitles the prince of the troop of
the Council; was not he there? S. NICHOLAS Bishop of Myra in Lycia, a man for
b. Theod. hist. Sanct. (...). c. (...).
manners and for miracles Apostolical; was not he there? And if we speak of
credit and estimation, with the Emperor; even he whose credit we learn from
Osius; to wit Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea in Palestina, who^ the Emperor from
his childhood had known in the East, Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 1. c 13.
and whom he testified in his conceit to be worthy of the Bishopric of the
whole earth, Ep. Co^st. apud (...). (...) vit. Co^st l. 3. c. 59.
and to whom besides so many other letters and marks of familiarity, he
directed the first commission, for the re-establishment of the Churches in the
East, Eus. de vit. Constable. l. 2. c. 44.
and the charge of the transcription of the sacred books Id. l. 4. c. 36.
for the Churches of Constantinople; was not he there? Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia, who afterward baptized the Emperor, and who was Metropolitan of the
provinces where the Council was held, and Bishop of the Seat of the Empire in
the East, and of the city where the Emperor resided, a man (say Socrates and
Sozomene) endued with great Socr. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 6.
authority, and very prudent, and honored in the palace of the Emperor (for
the eclipse of his favor with the Emperor, happened not till after the Soz.
l. 1. c. 15.
Council, and lasted but a moment) was not he there? Alexander Bishop Soc. l.
1. c. 1. Cod Just. l. 1 tit. de his qui'in Eccl. manumittuntur.
of the future Imperial city of Byzantium, converted by exchange of name
into Constantinople; was not he there? Paphnutius of whom Socrates says, the
Emperor honored him extraordinarily, and kept him ordinarily in his Court; was
not he there? Protogenes Bishop of Sardica, to whom the Emperor had addressed
his first law for the manumission in Churches, Cod. Theo l 4. tit 70.
and to Osius the second law; was not he there? Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 4. c.
35.


And if we speak of learning; the same Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea, of whom
the Emperor said, that he more then admired his knowledge and his Theod.
histor. Eccl. l. 1. c. 26. Id. l. 1. c. 7. Soz. l. 2. c. 19.
studies; was not he there? Alexander Patriarch of Alexandria, whom Theodoret
calls, the admirable Bishop; was not he there? Eustachius Patriarch of Antioch,
who made the oration of the Council, and whom Sozomene intitles the miracle of
eloquence; was not he there?

And if we speak of reverence for age; the same Alexander of Alexandria,
Ruffi. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 5 Theodor. (...). Eccl. l. 1. c. 9.
whom the histories of the Council call, the old man; and whom the epistle of
the Council exalts, for having at that age sustained so many labors; was not
he there? Alexander Bishop of Constantinople of threescore and three years of
age, whether he were then Bishop in chief, (...). hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 3.
or as the Patriarchs of the Church of Constantinople will have it Coadiutor,
and Legate of Metrophanes, yet elder then himself; was not he there?

And if we must speak of the antiquity of promotion; Zeno whom saint
EPIPHANIVS calls, antique Bishop of Phenicia, evil qualified Epiph. her 69.
by the lists of the signatures of the Council, Bishop of Tire; was not he
Epiph. ibid.
there? Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, before Bishop of Berith, whom saint
EPIPHANIVS calls, the ancient old man of Nicomedia; was not he there? And in
brief, an infinite number of other Bishops, that Eusebius, for the antiquity
as well of their age as of their promotion, comprehends in the Eus. de vit.
Cont. l. 3. c. 9.
first clause of this passage; some where honored, because of their length of
time; others flourished in the rigor of their age and spirits; others were
newly entered into the course of their charges, were not they there? For that in
the Council of Sardica, the age of Osius was accounted amongst those things
that purchased him Reverence; that was more then twenty year after the Theod.
hist Eccl. l. 2 c. 8.
Council of Nicea. And that saint ATHANASIVS calls him, the Father of Bishops,
and says he died a centenarie it was near forty year after the Athan. ad
solit. vit. agent.
Council of Nicea, But if none of these, what personal quality soever he
had, noe not Alexander Patriarch of Alexandria, whom the Epistle of the
Council calls, the master of the Council; that is to say, Master for
sufficiency, Theod. hist. eccl. l. 1. c. 9.
did advance himself a finger breadth, beyond the degree of his dignity: for
what cause should Osius for his particular co^ditio^s, have been President of
all the Assembly? For to say Osius presided there as the Emperors deputy,
the Emperor was in person at the Council, and so could have noe deputy; and
besides that, he presided not there, but was set there beneath the Bishops and
in a lower Seat; and after he had attended, and desired the leave of the
Bishops, to show that in matter of Eus. de vit Constable. l. 3. c. 10.
Religion, he was of the number not of the Judges, but of those that were to be
judged. And in the sirst Council of Arles, where the Emperor Soc. l. 1. c. 1
Constantine assisted also in person, and Osius with him, as it appears by the
reproaches of the Donatists against the Judges of that Council wherein Osius
was inwrapped; not only Osius who was already then in Aug. cont. Parm. l. 1.
c. 4. 5 6. 7.
as great Credit with that Emperor witness the Epistle of the iudowing the
Churches of Africa, did not preside there, but even in the letter of the
Council was not placed amongst the first Bishops, but comprehended Eus. hist.
(...) cl. l 10. c. 6 Pars. act. Council. Arelat. sub Constantin in ep. ad (...).
under the curtain of silence with the troop and multitude of the Bishops.
And in the Council of Sardica, where Osius presided, as well as at the Council
of Nicea, he was so evil willed by Constantius the Lord of the Empire, who was
an Arrian that he could not be said there to preside, in quality neither of a
favorite or of a Deputy to the Emperor; contrariwise the care he had to make
himself Procurator and Promoter of the Popes Rights, and the instance he made
for the appeals to the Pope, and for the honor of saint PETER'S memory, and the
iustificatiue Co^c. Sardic. Can. 3. 4. 5.
relation of the Counsels, which Protogenes Bishop of Sardica and he,
dedicated to the Pope; and the protestation that he and the other Bishops
inserted into the Epistle of the Council to the Pope, to hold Soz. hist. ec
cl. l. 3. c. 12.
him for head of the Church, and to acknowledge, That it was a convenient
Epist. Co^c. Sard. ad Iul. in fragm. Hilar. de gest. Council. Arim. and apud.
Nicol. 1. ep. ad Episcop Gal.
thing, that from all Provinces of the earth, the Prelates of God should referr
all affairs to their head; that is to say, to the Sea of the Apostle Peter;
show sufficiently that it was from the part of the Pope, and not of the
Emperors that he presided there.

And from this it derogates not, that saint ATHANASIVS making the recital of
the signatures of the Council of Sardica, puts the signatures of Osius,
without a title of Legation, and before that of the Pope in those words: Osius
of Spain, Julius of Rome, by Archidamas and Philoxemus: Athan. apol. 2.
For besides that, this recital follows not the ranks of the dignities, as
it appears by Nessus an African Bishop, who is placed there before Gratus
Archbishop of Carthage. And moreover, that he uses this order for as much as
Osius signed the Epistle of the Council immediately, and by himself and the
Pope mediatelie, and by another the legates of the Pope, who were Bishops, had
a vote of their own in the Council, and the Priests not. From whence it is,
that when the legations of the Pope and of the Council of Rome were distinct,
as in the sixth general Council, the legates of the Council of Rome because
they where Bishops, took the quality of difinitors, and signed in this form:
John unworthy Bishop of the holy Church of Port, and legate of all the Synod
of the Conc. 6. (...). act. 18
holy and apostolic Sea of the city of Rome, I have defined and subscribed
And the Legates from the particular person of the Pope abstained from it, and
(...). Co^st. act. 18.
signed thus: Theodorus humble Priest of the holy Church of Rome and holding
the place of the most blessed and universal Pope of the city of Rome,
Agatho, I have subscribed. Now, saint ATHANASIVS had an interest, not to
diminish the number of those that voted for his justification in the Counsel
of Sardica, and not to loose that of Osius. For this cause then he procured him
to sign, not as a simple reporter of the Popes voice, but as having right
himself to vote, and say his opinion in the Council, and reserved to
Archidamus and Philoxemus, who were but simple Priests, and had noe voice of
their own in the Council, the office to represent the voice and the signature
of the Pope; and in truth with what a face could Osius have accepted to preside
in the Counsels, whether of Nicea or Sardica in the behalf of the Emperors,
he that writ to the Emperor Constantius; Go (...). (...). ad Co^st. in Script.
not about to meddle in Ecclesiastical affairs, and command not us in such
matters, but rather learn of us: God has committed the Empire to thee, and
the government Athan. ad solit.
of the Churches to us. And S. ATHANASIVS, How could he have past without
censure, he that cries out; that an Emperor presiding in Ecclesiastical
Athan. ad (...).
judgments, is the abomination foretold by Daniell.

For that afterward in the Council of Chalcedon, the Emperor Marcian presided;
the Fathers of the Council declared, that it was not for things
Ecclesiastical, but for order and temporal policy; to the end, to hinder
such seditions, as had happened in the false Council of Ephesus, and
testified, that the presidencie of the Emperor, whas not of the essence of the
Council, as that of the Pope, but only for comeliness Ep. Conc. (...). ad I
con. act. 1. and seq q.
and ornament. Thou gouernest us there (said they to the Pope) (...) the head
does the members, contributing thy good will by those that hold thy place; and
the faithful Emperors presided there for ornament, or to cause good order to
be observed there. And in the sixth general Council holden under the Emperor
Constantine Pogonat, it is said in the Roll of the causes of the Laycks: the
most religious and Christian Emperor presiding; that has reference not to the
assembly of the Synod, but to the assembly of the Senate, and of the
imperial offices. For there were two distinct assemblies in the hall of the
Council: the one, that of the Senators, and officers of the Empire, wherein
the Emperor presided; and the other; that of the Synod of the Bishops, wherein
the Popes Legates presided, as it appears, both by the verbal process of the
Counsels, which after it had decreed, Co^c. Co^st. 6. act. 1. and seqq.
the assembly of the officers of the Empire, added; the holy and general
Council being also assembled, called by the imperial ordinance in this Royal
and God-protected City: to wit the most reverend Priests Theodore and
George, and the most Reverend John the deacon holding the place of the most
holy and sacred Archbishop In ep. Greg (...). ad Le on (...). ep. 1.
of old Rome, Agatho; and George the most holy and sacred Archbishop of this
famous city of Constantinople new Rome; And by the protestation that the same
Emperor sent to Rome for the holding of the Council in these words: I will
not sit as Emperor with them, and I will not speak Emperiouslie, but as one
of them, and what the Prelates shall ordain, I will execute: And finally by
the modesty which he used in the signatures, in signing last, and after all
the Bishops. For whereas in the false Council entitled Trullian, the Emperor
Justinian (...) his son signed contrary to his Fathers modesty, before all
the Prelates: it was an irregular action, and done in an erroneous and
illegitimat Council, as it shall appear hereafter; And then, if creditt with
Emperors, should have given any Bishop the prerogative In cap. 15.
to preside in Council, what Bishop had ever more credit with the Emperor
Constantius then (...) Bisohp of Murses; to whose meritts, Sulp. Seu. hist.
sacr. l. 2.
and not to his Soldiers valor, he said he ought the victory over
Magne^sius, and the preservation of his Empire; And upon whose industry and
counsels, he depended in all affairs of Religion: Who not witdstanding, never
presided in any one of the many Counsels, holden under Constantius? Or what
Bishop had ever more creditt with the Emperor (...), then Theodorus Archbishop
of Cesarea in Cappadocia, who was his Euag. hist. eccl. l. 4. c. 37.
dear and trusty Counselor and Assessor; or rather, the soul and Oracle of
all his Counsels; who notwithstanding presided not, in the fifth General
Council, but sat there in his simple rank of Metropolitan, below Co^c.
Co^st. oecum. 5. act. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.
all the Patriarks and legates of the Patriarchs?

Now if Osius had presided in the Council of Nicea, for the meritts, and
conditions of his person, must not the election have been made before by a
solemn and authentical act in the Council? or if he had presided there by
delegation from the Emperor, must not the same Emperor have signified it, and
enrolled his commission in the Council? for if they say, there is noe mention
found of it, because the acts of the Council are lost, wherefore should they
rather exact testimonies of the delegation of Osius by the Pope, then by the
Emperor, and not content themselves that the analogy of the ancient
Ecclesiastical order, and that which is saved from the Shypwracke of the acts
of the Council in the memory of the following ages, and has been collected
by Dalmasius or others yet more ancient; and by Gelasius of Cyzica, Greek and
Thrace authors, the one writing a hundred year, and the other an hundred and
fifty after the Counsel of Nicea; and the Confession of the latter, and
Schismatic Greeks themselves, as (...) and others do plainly inform us
of it, in affirming that Osius, was (...) legate, with Vito, and (...); And
that saint ATHANASIVS and Socrates, do tacitly inform us so, in setting Osius
Vito, and (...), in one and the same place, and before the second Eus. de vit.
Constable. l. 2. c. 62.
Patriarch? For where (...), and after him Socrates, and Sozamene say, that
from before the Council of Nicea, the Emperor Constantine had sent Osius from
Nicomedia into Egypt, to assaie to pacify the difference of the Church of
(...), which commission happened not seven year (...) the Council of Nicea,
as they conceive that would salve the acts entitled from Siluester; but the
next year before the Council of Nicea, as it appears by Sozomens history,
who putts the calling of the Soz. hist. eccl. l. 1. c. 17.
Council of Nicea, presently after the return of Osius, what can assure us,
that it had not been with the advice and authority of Pope Siluester? or
rather, what can assure us, that it was not Pope Siluester, that sent him
Epist. Lib. ad Constable. in opusc, Lucif.
to the Emperor into the East, to provide for the trouble of Arrius; whereof
the Bishop of Alexandria had written to the same Siluester, and to (...) the
Emperor, to interpose his authority, and that what remains to us from the
(...) of the Ecclesiastical history, more (...) (...) in the first (...) of
the Emperors to note their actions, then those of the Popes; to the end, to
strengthen the Church, with the temporal authority of the Empire, has not
past it over in (...)? or (...) (...) (...) who can (...) us, that the same
Eusebius with an (...) malice, as being an Arrian, and for that cause an Enemy
to the Roman Church, has not (...) (...), as well as he dissembled., that
Alexander (...) of (...), (...) the relation of the trouble of the Church of
(...), to Pope (...), and an other relation (...) the circular letters
addressed to the (...) Bishops of the East, as it appears from Epiph co^t.
(...). (...). (...) Soc. hist. cc cl. l. 1. c. 6.
the number and the degrees of those that were excommunicated; where of there
is mention (...), which (...) (...), we learn evidently (...) Pope (...), who
writes to the Emperor Constantius: We have Theod hist (...) l. (...). c. 5.
(...) in our (...) (...) (...) of the Bishop (...), (...) (...) to Siluester,
of holy memory; and (...), from saint (...), Patriarch of the same Epist. Lib.
ad. Constable. vbi sup.
place of (...), who (...) (...) Pope CELESTINE; The long (...) of the (...),
(...) me to communicate those things to your (...). Cyril. ep. ad Celest. in
(...). (...). part. 1. (...) (...) (...)


The Fathers of the third (...) Council of Constantinople, which was the (...)
general Council, (...) (...) and which lived near a thousand year ago, and
had read (...) (...) Ecclesiastical histories, that (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...)
the (...) of (...) (...) (...) robbed from us, and in whose cares there
sounded yet the memory of the acts of the Council of Nicea, do not (...)
thoroughly (...), that not only the Emperor Constantine, but also Pope (...),
wrought for the (...) of this Council; when they (...) The most sacred (...),
and the famous (...); called the great and (...). Co^st. oecum. 6. (...). 18.
(...) (...) Council at Nicea? And does not the analogy of the history
inform us, that the Pope before the celebration of the Counsel of Nicea, must
(...) have holden a (...) Council of the western Church; that is to (...); a
Council compounded of the deputies, from the particular (...) of the (...)
Provinces, to send by delegates, carrying the (...) of that Council the sense
of all the western Church to the (...) of (...), as it was done when there was
question of holding the (...) of (...), and (...)? Otherwise, how had the
Council of (...), which was compounded but only of the Eastern Provinces,
and where there were but (...) or (...) Bishops of all the west, been
originallie (...) and (...); (I say originally, and not by accession, as that
of (...),) if some one of them had not been deputed, to (...) the voice of all
the western Church? And which of those Bishops (...) it (...), except Osius,
who only had his (...) with the Popes (...), before the heads of all the other
(...) (...)? For if the authors of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
the (...) all history for the most part (...), which remain to us, have
spoken of noe Council of the West preambulary to that of (...), what (...) is
it, (...) that of the Council of Capua; that the Council of (...) (...)
general Coucell, and that saint AMBROSE Co^c. Carth 3. c. 38.
describes, as assembled from all the parts of the world, and for the affairs
Amb. ep. 78.
of the East, there is found noe author of the ancient. Ecclesiastical
history that speaks a word? And if Eusebius and those that have followed him,
have made noe memory of the Council of the West, holden for the preparation
of the Council of Nicea; what marvel is it, if they have made noe mention,
of the deputation of the Bishop, sent (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
from the Pope; and the Council of the West, to represent their person at the
Council of Nicea? We find indeed, that Eusebius Bishop of (...) (...) in
Italy, and Lucifer Bishop of (...) in Sardinia, two Bishops of Ruff. hist.
eccl. l. 3. c. 27.
the Popes Patriarkship, where (...) into the, East and that at the issue of
their banishment one of them, to wit, Lucifer, created in Syria, Soc. hist. ec
(...) l. 3. c. 27.
(...) (...) of (...) and assisted by one of his deacons, at the Ibid.
Council of Alexandria, holden for the restitution of the Churches: And Ibid.
the other; to wit Eusebius, assisted there in person, but that they bare the
quality of the Popes Legates, when they were banished into the East, or since
we find nothing in all the Grecian antiquity: And nevertheless, saint IEROM
describing the life of Lucifer, says; Lucifer Bishop of Calaris, Hier. de
script Eccl in Lucif.
sent Legate for the faith with Pancratius and Hyllarius, Clerks of the Roman
Church, by the Bishop Liberius to Constantius, because he would not under the
name of Athanasius condemn the Faith of Nicea, was banished into Palestina. And
describing that of Eusebius: Eusebius (says he) made, from a Lecturer Idem
Ibid. in Eusebius.
in the Roman Church, Bishop of Vercelles, was for the confession of his faith,
(...) by the Emperor Constantius to Scythopolis, and from thence to Cappadocia.
And saint HILLARIE describing the Council of Millan, from whence they where
both sent into the East by Constantius: Eusebius Bishop of (...) (says he) is
there with the clerks of Rome, and Lucifer Bishop of Sardinia. And Liberius
himself, in an Epistle to the Emperor Constantius, Hilar. ad Constant. l. 1.
which remains to us in the works of Lucifer; I have (said he) sent to you
my holy Brother and fellow-bishop Lucifer, with Pancratius my fellow-Priest,
Liber. epist ad Constant. in oper.
and Hillary Deacon. And Nicetas a grave Greek Author, and who had seen many
Ecclesiastical histories, that time has envied to us, expounding Lucifer. and
in fragm.
these words of saint GREGORY Nazianzene: There were at Cesarea in Coppadocia,
Bishops of the west, which drew all that were orthodoxall to Hilar. Greg.
Nazian. Or. in Basil.
them; add's, These Bishops were Lucifer and Eusebius, who had been sent from
Rome.

And why then, as all the ancient Greeks co^cealed the deputation of (...)
Nicet. Serr ibid.
and Eusebius Bishops of Uercelles, from the Pope, to the Emperor Constantius;
so could not Eusebius and those that have followed him conceal the deputation
of Osius from the Pope, be it to the Emperor Constantine, or be it to the
Church of Alexandria? And if from this, that Eusebius notes not, that Osius.
(whom in hate to Catholic doctrine, he vouchsafes not so much as to name in
all the history of the life of Constantine) was sent by the Emperor into Egypt
as the Popes legate, or from this that he does not relate that Osius assisted
at the Council of Nicea as the Popes Legate, (...) do ensue, that it was not
in the quality of the Popes legate, that Osius presided at the Council of
Nicea; must we not conclude by the same means, that he presided not there at
all? for Eusebius says not, that Osius presided at the Council of Nicea; he
only Eusebius. de vit. Constable l. 3. c. 7.
says, that he sat there, with many others: From Spain itself (said he)
there was one very famous Bishop set with many others. Two only historians
do inform us of it; the one is Socrates, who says after saint ATHANASIVS,
Gel. in Synt. Conc Nicen. l. 2. c. 5.
At this Council assisted Osius Bishop of Cordula, Uito and Uincentius
Priests: The other Dalmatius of the same time with Socrates, who writes; and
Galatius of Cyzica fifty years after him; At this Council assisted Osius
Legate of the Bishop of Great Rome Siluester; with the Priests Uito, and
Uincentius; but as for Eusebius he says thereof nothing at all; contrariwise,
he affirms cleerelie that the Priests of the Bishop of Rome, whom he reserues
to name last, as the seal and the Crown of the Council, Eusebius. de vit.
Constable. l. 3. c. 7.
held there the rank of their Bishop. The Bishop of the city regnant (says
he) assisted not there because of his age, but his priests kept his rank
there. Now by what arithmeticke could the priests of the Roman Church, keep
there the rank of the Bishop of Rome, if Osius possessed the first place,
otherwise then in the quality of their Colleague, and filling up one selfsame
place with them?

Moreover, how had not the Patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem
lost at the Council of Nicea their rightes of the second, third, Conc. (...)
(...). c. 6. 7.
and fowrth Seats in the Counsels, against the express protestation, that
the Council of Nicea made to preserve their privileges; if Osius Uito, and
Uincentius, had held diverse places there and not one and the same place? And
how had the Council of Constantinople, celebrated in the same age, that the
Grecians call the second general Council, when they would erect
Constantinople into a Patriarkship, ordained that the Patriarch of
Constantinople should hold the second place after the Bishop of Rome; if in the
first general Council the Bishop of Rome had not held the first place? And
how could the legates of the Pope in the Council of Chalcedon have complained,
that Dioscorus had presumed to undertake to preside in a pretended general
Council, without the Popes authority, Co^c. Chalc act. 1.
which had never been lawful nor ever had been done, if Osius had presided in
the Council of Nicea without the Popes authority? And how could the Emperor
Justinian have said; We decree following all the sower holy Just. nou. 131.
Concells, that the most holy Pope of old Rome, be the first of all the
Prelates; if in the first of all the general Counsels, a simple Bishop of
Spain, had been the first, otherwise then in the quality of delegate by the
Pope?

And finally, how came it that an Action so irregular, as that by which a man
who was neither Metropolitan nor Patriarch, had preceded all the Patriarchs of
the East; and even in the East was not noted amongst the extraordinary examples
of antiquity? And how came it, not to speak of the interest of the
Patriarchs, that Theognis Bishop of Nicea, the City wherein the Council was
celebrated, and Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia head of the Arrian faction, and
Metropolitan of the Province of Bithinia wherein the Council was holden, and
Bishop of the Seat of the Emperors in the East, did not oppose it: as well as
when Fortunius Archbishop of Carthage was at Constantinople the Metropolitans
subject to the Patriarkship of Constantinople, opposed this that the Archbishop
of Carthage, should have caused the acts of the second general Council of
Constantinople to be searched, to see what place the legate of Primosus
Archbishop of Carthage had there; And how chanced it, that they, and the other
Arrians, who after the death of Constantine and Constans, the Catholic
brothers to Constantius the heretical Emperor stirred heaven and earth to
reuerse the authority of the Conncells of Nicea and Sardica, could not allege
for a means of nullitie, that Osius had presided irregularly in the one and
the other, if he had presided otherwise, then as representing the person of
him, to whom the right to preside did appertain?

But the question in the matter that Calvin propounds, is not between the Pope
and Osius, who at least was one of the Suffragans or rear Suffragans of the
Pope; that is to say, one of the Bishops of the Popes Patriarchall division;
And by consequence, what rank soever he held, it could not tend to the Popes
prejudice? For were it that the Pope sent him from the West into the East, with
the title of legate; or were it, that being already there, the Pope had chosen
and designed him by letters to represent his person; or were it, that neither
the one nor the other had chanced, but that being at the Council, he had been
entreated as the most ancient Bishop there present of the Popes Patriarkship,
to join himselfo with his deputies, to help them to present him; it could be
noe way to the disadvantage of his Patriarch: It is between the Pope and the
other patriarks, and consists in this, whether at the Council of Nicea the
Popes deputies were set after the other three patriarks, Soc. hist. Eccl. l.
1. c. 12.
or before them. Now of this ATHANASIVS and Socrates put us out of doubt, when
they say, that the order of the Council was: Soz. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 18.
Osius Bishop of Corduba Vito and Uincentius priests, Alexander of Egypt,
Eustachius Patriarch of great Antioch, and Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem. For to
this that Eustachius Patriarch of Anthioch, or as others say, Eusebius
Archbishop of Cesarea, made the oration of the Council to the Em peror, and
was set at the head of the Bishops on the rigth hand in respect of the Emperor
to whom his speech was directed; it suffices to answer two things; the one,
that the highest qualified were not chosen to preach the oration, but the most
eloquent, amongst whom Eustachius, that Sozomene calls admirable in eloquence,
held the first Idem l 2. c. 18.
rank; And the other, that the right hand at the coming in, and reckoning
Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 10.
from the place where Constantine was, who had his back turned toward the
door, and his face to the Fathers; at the first encounter of whom in coming
from the door, he stayed, was not the most honorable place in the Council,
but the right hand at goeing forth; and to reckon from the place where the
Gospel was set, as appears by the order of the Council of Chabcedon and of
the Council of Constantinople, Co^c. Chalc Co^c. Co^st. sub Men. Act. 1. ct
seqq.
holden under Menas, where the Presidents were set at the left hand from the
side where they came in, which was the right hand from the side of the
Gospel; and the others at the right hand.

Of the order of the sittings in the first Council of Epehsus. CHAPT. IX.
THE second objection of Calvin, is taken from the first Council of Ephesus,
and couched by him in these words; At the first Inst. l. 4. c. 7
Council of Ephesus, says Calvin, Pope Celestin used an oblique practice,
praying saint CYLILL Bishop of Alexandria, who otherwise was to preside there,
to hold his place; And the Popes Ambassadors were there in an inferior place.
But with what oblique faith was this done? For first Pope Celestine had made
saint CYRILL Patriarch of ALEXANDRIA his Vicar in the East, before any
Council was spoken of to be kept at Ephesus, and had given him commission to
execute at Constantinople, the rudgement pronounced at Rome against Nestorius
Archbishop of Constantinople; Adding to thee (said Pope Celestine in his
Epistle to Co^c. Ephesians impress.
saint CYRILL;) the authority of our Sea, and using with power the
representation Heidelb. c. 16.
of our place, thou shall execute exactlie and constantly this Sentence; to
wit, that if within ten days, reckoned since the day of this monitory,
Nestorius do not anathematise by writing his wicked doctrines etc. thy holiness
should provide for that Church without delaie, and declare him to be wholly
cut of from our Body. And in the Epistle to Nestorius, read and inserted into
the Acts of the Council: We have sent the form of this judgment with all
the verbal I bid. c. 17
process to our holy fellow-Bishop of Alexandria, to the end that he being
made our Uicar, may execute these things. And in the Epistle to the Clergy of
Constantinople; We have conferred our Uicarship, because of the far distance
Ibid. c. 17
of places, to our holy brother Cyrillus. And the Council of Ephesus in the
relation to the Emperor; The sentence of him and his before there Ibid. o. 65.
was any Synod assembled at Ephesus, the most holy Celestine Bishop of great
(...) had testified by his letters, and had committed to the most holy and most
beloved of God, Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, to be his Uicar. And saint CYRILL
himself in the Epistle against Nestorius, addressed to the
Constantinopolitans; We are constrained (said he) to signify to him by
Synodicall Ibid c. 15.
letters, that if (...) speedily, that is to say, within the time defined by
the most holy Bishop of the Roman Church, he renounce not the novelties of his
doctrine, he shall have noe more communion with us, nor place amongst the
Ministers of God?

And secondly Celestine making saint CYRILL his vicar, it was by Ibid. c. 65
form of commission, and not by form of entreaty. He committed to Marcell.
Com. in chron.
him (says the Council of Ephesus) to be his Uicar. And Marcellinus Comes of
the same time with Justinian; Nestorius was condemned at Ephesus (...). in
(...). l. 5 Theoph. hist. (...). ante Conc. Ephesians. imp. Heid.
in a Synod of two hundred holy Fathers, Celestine declaring to the Council,
Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, his Uicar for the time. And Liberatus, the African
author of the same age: Celestine signified to Nestorius that he had given his
Uicarship to CYRILLVS. And Theophanes the Greeke-historian; Celestine of Rome
writ to Cyrill of Alexandria to hold his place in the Basil. in Nomoc. Phot
(...). 8. c. 1.
Synod. And Balsamon, not only a Grecian but a Scismaticke: Celestine, when he
could not assist at Ephesus, and judge Nestorius in person, thought good to
permit saint CYRILL, to preside in his place at this Council. And Niceph.
hist. Eccl. l. 14. c. 34.
Nicephorus; Celestine Bishop of Rome refused to assist at the Council of
Ephesus, for the peril of the navigations, but he writ to CYRILL to hold his
place there, and after that time the fame goes, that Cyrill received the Tyara
and the name of Pope, and of judge of the whole world.

And thirdly, who revealed to Calvin that it was not, in the quality of the
Popes Legates but in his own name, that saint CYRILL presided in the Council?
For did not Prosper an author of the same time say, Prosp. in Chron. Id. cont.
(...). Coc. (...) (...). Heid. c. 45.
To the heresy of Nestorius, CYRILLS industry, and Celestines authority
principally resisted. And again, Celestine cut of the Nestorian impiety,
aided CYRILL with the Apostolic sword. And the letters of the Bishops,
writing from Constantinople to the Council; Do they not bear this
superscription; To the most holy and beloved of God, Bishops and Fathers, who
by Gods grace are assembled in the Metropolitan City of Ephesus; Celestine
Cyrillus Iuuenall, and others; to show that the Pope though absent, preceded
saint CYRILL, even in the person of saint CYRILL? And did not the Popes legates
thank the Fathers of the Synod, because Co^c Ephesians part. 1. Act. 2.
they had showed themselves, holy members to their holy head, that is to
say, to the Pope. And saint CYCILL writing to Pope Celestine; Does he not Ep.
Cyril. ad Celest. in Conc. Ephesians. part, 1.
call him his Father, though himself were an ancienter Patriark by tenn year
then Celestine? And did not the Council in the Body of it make themselves
executioners of the Popes Indgements against the same Nestorius, when they
said; We are come not without tears to pronounce this Conc. Ephesians. p. 2. Act.
1. in depos. Nestor.
sadd sentence, constrained by the force of the Canons, and by the letters of
our holy Father and fellow-Minister, Celestine? And then if Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria, had not presided at the Council of Nicea, but was there, Socrat.
hist Eccl. l. 1. c. 12.
preceeded by two simple priests of the Roman Church Vito and Vincentius, why
should saint CYRILL one of his successors, and Patriarch of Alexandria as he
was, and noe less enemy to Nestorius then Alexander was to Arrius, have
presided at that of Ephesus, a city that was in Asia, and out of the
Patriarkship of Alexandria, as well as Nicea was? And if that appertained by
right to saint CYRILL, for what cause did Dioscorus his Successor obtain
surteptitious letters from the Emperor under pretense of the refusal that
Eutyches made of the Popes Contil. Ephesians. 2. lect. in Co^c Chalc Act. 1.
legates, forasmuch as they had been entertained, feasted and gratified with
presents by his adversary; that is to say, by Flauianus Archbishop of
Constantinople to preside at the false Council of Ephesus? And for what cause,
notwithstanding the said letter, was he accused for this attempt at the
Council of Chalcedon, as for a new and unheard Co^c. Chale Act. 1.
of enterprise: He must (said Lucentius Bishop of Ascoli) give up an (...) of
his judgment, for as much as having noe right to do the Office of a Judge, he
has usurped it, and has presumed to hold a Synod without the authority of
the Sea Apostolic, which has never been lawful, neither was ever done? And
for what cause did the Council of Chalcedon, call his presidencie Tyranny;
and Uictor of Tunes author of the following Epist. Council. Chalc ad Leon. page
25.
age; usurped principality? for whereas Calvin adds, that at the Council of
Ephesus, the other legates of the Pope, sat after saint CYRILL; that was,
because saint CYRILL had been first deputed, and before the Council, and that
the others came thither but at the end thereof; and Victor. Tun. in Consulat.
Postumian. and Zenon.
besides, that amongst colleagues of one same legation, he that of himself was
already in greatest dignity, was to precede.

Of the order of the sittings of the second Council of Ephesus. CHAPT. X.
THE third objection of Calvin is; That in the second Council of Calu. inst.
l. 4. c. 7.
Ephesus, Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria presided; and that although the issue
of this Council was unlawful; nevertheless at the beginning when order was
yet observed, the Popes deputies did not question him (...) the first place: An
objection that contains as many falsehoods as words: For first the second
Council of Ephesus, that the Greeks call the Council of robbery, was all
disordered from the beginning to the ending; Lex Vale^t. and Marc. contra. 2.
Council. Ephesians. in fin. Council. Chalc. c. 11
Those things shall cease (said the law) which have taken their original from
injustice. And indeed, how could it be otherwise having begunn by practices,
by Steel and weapons? for Chrysaphius, Master of the imperial palace, who
was an Eutychian, and Eutyches his God-sonne, Liber. in (...). c. 11.
sent thither from the beginning, Id. Ib. c. 12.
regiments of Soldiers, to authorize by force (...) the abbettor of the
Eutychian heresy, and to exclude from judgment, all those that were suspected
by Eutyches. Now Eutyches refused the Popes legates amongst others, as well
because the Pope had confirmed Zonar. in Theod. 2. Niceph. l. 14. c. 47.
the sentence of Flauiauus Bishop of Constantinople against him, as in their
own interest, because that being arrived at Constantinople, Flauianus that
(...) held for his adversary, had entertained and feasted them; The legates
Act. 1. Council. Ephesians. 2 lecta in Council. Chalc. Act. 1.
(says Eutyches) sent by the most holy and most beloved of God the Archbishop
(...) Rome, Leo, are suspected by me, for they have been entertained, and
feasted, (...) gratified with presents by the most beloved of God the Bishop
Flauianus. (...) these causes then Chrysaphius desirous to exclude them from
the Cedren. in Theod. 2:
judgment of the Council, obtained by surprise letters from the Emperor
Theodosius the second (a man that signed dispatches without Epist. Theodos. ad
Elpid. and ad (...). lect in Co^c Chalc. Act. 1.
reading them, wherefore his sister to reproach him for his simplicity, once
made him sign the bondage of his wife) by which, under (...) of refusing those
that had already judged Eutyches, he ordained (...) to preside there, and
accompained them with men of war to have the sway there. Now, how unlawful
this beginning was, (...) needs noe other judge but the same Emperor, who
afterward informed of the deceit that Chrysaphius had made use of to him-ward,
(...) him by exile and confiscation of goods and offices. And secondly where
Calvin says, that the Popes Legates did not dispute for Cedrenus in Theod.
(...) Niceph. l. 14. c 49.
the first place there, is manifestly false. For Liberatus an author of the
next ensuing age writes exppressely, The Popes deputies would not endure to
sit there because the precedence had not been given to their sacred Sea.
(...). (...) Breu c. 12.
And when the Acts of the same Council (all which Dioscorus had falsified)
were read over in the Council of Chalcedon, when they came to name Julian,
legate to Pope Leo; it was said that the Act was false, and that the name of
Leo, had not been there received. And Council. Chalc. Act 1.
thirdly, the first complaint that the Popes Legates propounded to the Council
of Chalcedon against Dioscorus, was; That he had presumed to hold Ibidem.
an Oecumenicall Council without commission from the Sea Apostolic, which
had never been either done, or lawful to be done. And finally the primacie
that Dioscorus had usurped in the false Council of Ephesus, though by
surreptitious letters from the Emperor, and upon the refusal of the Popes
Legates, was declared, Tyranny, and himself deposed, Council. Chalc. Act 5
amongst other causes, for having set upon the Pope. By the decrees of his
tyranny; (said the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon writing to Pope Leo)
he has absolved Eutyches, who for his impiety had been condemned, Ibidem ad
Ibid.
and has restored to him the dignity whereof he was deprived by your
Holiness, And a little after; And to make up all this, he has extended his
felony, (...) against him to whom the guarde of the Vine has been committed by
our Lord, that is to say, against your Holiness. Is not this a goodly example
for (...) against the Pope?

Of the order of the sittings of the Council of Chalcedon. CHAPT. XI.
CAluins fowrth objection is taken from the Council of Just. l. 4. c. 7.
Chalcedon. In the Council of Chalcedon (says he) Pope Leo (...) it of Grace
of the Emperor, that his Ambassadors might preside there because the Bishops of
the East who had presided in the second (...) of Ephesus, had misbehaued
themselves there, and had abused their power: And I for my part must needs
ask him, how long he will abuse our patience? For Leo did nothing less,
then to pray the Emperor that his deputies might preside at the Council of
Chalcedon, but having sent in the first month of the same year a legation to
Constantinople (...) Lucentius a Bishop and (...) a priest; Leo. ep. 42.
and after haueing added to them upon the occurrence of the celebration of the
Council (...) Leo ep. 47 Leo ep. 39. and 54.
Bishop of Lylibea in Sicilia; and having associated with him Julian a latin
Bishop of the Isle of Cos in the Grecian Sea, who was already in those parts,
and resided as Nuntio at Constantinople with the Emperor; he declared to the
Emperor not in form of a request, but in form (...) a resolution, that it
must be this Paschasinus Bishop of Lylibea, of whose sufficiency and
constancy to maintain the truth, he had more assurance then of the rest that
should preside in his name at the Council; as also (...) was there the head of
the legation, and carried the vote in the conclusion of the Counsel, though he
had been last sent. Now who sees not that this was not to demand, that his
legates might preside there, but to appoint which of his legates should preside
there? I have (said he) Leo. Ep. 47.
sent my Brother and fellow-Bishop Paschasinus of the Province, which seems to
me most secure, that he may sulfill my place, and have associated with him our
brother and fellowe-Priest Boniface, comprehending with them, those that we had
already formerly sent; to whom I have added for a Colleague the Bishop Julian.
And a little after; Because some of our brethren, a thing which we can not
speak of without grief, could not keep their Catholic Constancy, against
the whirlewindes of falsehood, it is Convenient that my said brother and
fellowe-Bishop Paschasinus should preside in my place in the Synod. For whereas
Calvin says, That by those brethren that could not maintain their Constancy
against the whirlwindes of falsehood, he intended not the legates of the Pope
which had withdrawn themselves, but the Bishops of the East, who had presided
at the false Council of Ephesus; to wit, Dioscorus; it is an ignorance that
deserves the Ferula, since Dioscorus and his accomplices, were themselves the
whirlewindes of falsehood. And indeed why should Pope Leo in the Epistle that
Calvin cites of him which was written under the Consulship of Adelphius, have
prayed the Emperor that he might preside by himself, or by his legates at the
Council of Chalcedon, since from the precedent year, that is to say, under
the consulship of Valentinian and Abienus, and before it was known there
should be any Council holden at Chalcedon, the Emperor had written to him;
Our desire is, that Marcian. Imp. ad Leon. ep. 33. in proeam. Council. Chalc.
Id. ep. 34, (...).
all impiety being banished by a Council assembled under your authority, an
entire peace may be restored to all the Bishops of the Catholic faith. And
again, It remains, if it pleasse your Holiness, that you travel into these
parts, and celebrate a Synod here etc. or if it be troublesome to come
hither, your Holiness may please to signify it by your letters: Which
Theodorus Anagnostes citing the same letters, repeates in these terms; Marcian
and Pulcheria writ to Leo Pope of Rome, yiedling to him all authority: And
how could he have prayed the Emperor, Theodor. Anag. Collect. l. 1. ad calc.
hist.
since without attending the Emperors answer, and the next day after he had
sent him the letter, he writ to the Council: The Emperor Eccl. Theo dor. in
edit. Graec.
has invited us by his letters, to co^tribute our presence at the reverend
Synod, which the necessity of time and Custom will not permit;
nevertheless, your brotherhoods may make account, that in these brothers of
mine, Paschasinus and Lucentius Bishops, Robert. (...). Leo ep. 45
and Boniface and Basilius priests, sent from the Sea Apostolic, I do preside
in your Council? For the letter the Pope writ to the Emperor, was dated the
sixth of the calends, of Iulie; and that he writ to the Council, was dated
the fifth. And why should he have prayed him, since in the secular (...). Imp.
Marcian in fiu Conc. Chalc.
confirmation of the Acts of the Council, the same Emperor says: The
Council of Chalcedon has examined matters of faith, by the authority of the
Blessed Leo Bishop of the City eternal in glory Rome? And why, since the
Fathers of the Council writ to the Pope; Thou did preside in the Council,
as Co^c. Chalc ep. ad Leon. p. 3.
the head to the members, exhibiting there thy good will by those that held thy
place; And the faithsull Emperors presided there, for policy and ornament? And
why since the Emperor Anastasius a while after, pressing Macedonius Patriark of
Constantinople to race out of the Roll of his Church the name of the same
Council of Chalcedon, Macedonius answered him; That he could not do it
without Theodor. Anagn. vbi supra. l. 2.
a general Council wherein the Bishop of great Rome did preside.

Of the order of the sittings of the fifth Council of Constantinople. CHAPT.
XII.
CAluins fifth objection is, That Menas presided at the, fifth Council Inst.
l. 4. c. 7.
of Constantinople; And that the Pope being called thither, debated not the
first place, but without any difficulty, suffercd Menas Patriarch of the
place to preside. Which is an objection, wherein ignorances march by troops.
For first Menas was dead five years before, the fifth Council of Conc. oecu.
6. Act 3.
Constantinople was holden as appears by the Acts of the fixth Council Vict.
Tun. in Chron. anno 13. post. Cons. Basil.
of Constantinople, which say Menas dyed the one and we^ntith year of the
Empire of Justinian: but the fisth Council of Constantinople was holden the
twenty seventh. And by Uictor of Tunes an author of the same age, who, says,
That the fifth Council of Constantinople, was holden under Eutychius Conc. 5.
oecum. Act. 1. 2. 3. 4. and seqq.
Successor to Menas: And by the very Acts of the fifth general Council in all
the Sessions whereof Eutychius is named, and not Menas. For what we have from
the Council of Constantinople under Menas, are but particular acts and
preambulatory to the General Council, which was Euagr. hist Eccl. l. (...) c.
36.
after holden under Eutychius, which has given occasion to Euagrius and to
Nicephorus, to mistake and to think that the fifth Council of Constantinople
had been begun under Menas and finished under Eutychius, as impertinently as the
same Euagrius places Epiphanius between Anthymus and Menas, and makes
Epiphanius succeed Anthymus, whereas contrariwise he was his predecessor. And
secondly Pope Agapet, who went to Constantinople, not to assist at any
Council, but to treat a peace between the Emperor Justinian and Theodat king
of the Goths, was dead, when the Council of Constantinople holden under
Menas, was celebrated; And by conseuqent had noe Co^c. Co^st. sub (...). Act. 1.
occasion to debate for the first place; and Siluerius his Successor in whose
time this Council was holden never was at Constantinople. And suppose Agapet
had been living and present at the Council, how could Menas have presumed to
preside in his presence; he that said Menas. in Co^c. Co^st. Act. 4.
in the same Council; We follow the Sea Apostolic and obey it? And who had
been made Patriarch of Constantinople, and his Predecessor Marcel. Com in
Chron. Men. in Co^c. Co^st. Act. 4.
Anthymus, deposed from the Patriarkship of Constantinople by Pope Agapet; And
who calls Pope Agapet, his Father of most holy memory? And how would the
Emperor Jusiinian have permitted it, he that said; We will not suffer that
any thing shall pass concerning the estate of Cod l. 7.
Churches, but what should be referred to the blessedness of the holy Pope of
old Rome; for as much as he is the head of the holy Prelates of God: And Just.
novel 131.
again; We decree according to the definitions of the four Counsels. that
the holy Pope of old Rome, be the first of all the Prelates; and we ordain,
that the blessed Archbishop of Constantinople new Rome shall have the second
place after the holy Sea Apostolic of old Rome, and shall preceede all the
other Seas. Also how would he have permitted it, he that forsook his great
friend Anthymus, whom he had exalted from the Bishops Sea of Trebysond, to the
Patriarkship of Constantinople, and suffered him to be deposed in his presence
from the Patriarkship of Constantinople by Pope Agapet? We know (says he law
of the Emperor Justinian) that the same has been done to Anthymus, who has
been Just. nou. 42.
deposed from the Sea of this Royal city, by the most holy Bishop of
old-Rome Agapet of holy and glorious memory, because that against all the
sacred canons he had intruded himself into a Sea that appartained not to him.
For what he adds presently after (but he has also been deposed and condemned
by the common sentence, first of that person of holy memory, and then of the
holy Synod here celebrated, because he had straied from the right doctrine,)
has reference not to the deposition of Anthimus of the Patriarkship of
Constantinople as the Patriarch Nicephorus and Cedrenus supposed, authors far
from the age of Justinian, but to the deposition of Anthimus from the Bishops
Sea of Trebisond.

For the understanding whereof, you must know that there were two depositions
of Anthymus, one from the Patriarkship of Constantinople, which was made and
perfected by the Popes only action; and wherein the Council of
Constantinople, whereof Justinian speaks, had noe hand; and the other from
the Bishops Sea of Trebyzond, which was indeed begun by the Pope, who
ordained, that if Anthymus did not purge himself of the heresy which was
imputed to him, he should be deposed also from the Bishops Sea of Trebisond,
which had been reserved to him by the first deposition, and should be withal
excommunicated and deprived of all Sacerdotall title, and of all Catholic
nomination. But because the Pope could not finish this second deposition, by
reason death prevented him before he had the leisure to be fully cleared from
the condition that was thereunto apposed, it was finished and executed in the
Council. This appears by the Acts of the same Council, whereof Justinian
speaks, to wit, of the Council of Constantinople holden by Menas; for the
confirmation whereof, was published two months after, this law which is
annexed to the end of the Council. For the action that precedeth it, is the
last, although it be first recited God (say the Regulars of Syria, in their
petition to the Emperor, reported by the same Acts) sent into this city
Agapet, truly Agapet, that is to say, beloved of God and man, Co^c Constable sub
Men. act. 1.
Pope of old Rome, for the deposition of Anthymus, and of the foresaid
heretics, as (...) he sent great Peter to the Romans for the destruction of
the witcheraft of Simon. This reverend person then knowinge by the requests of
many of ours, the things iniustly attempted upon the Churches, and knowinge
them by sight, would not so much as admit into his presence Anthymus
transgressor of the canons, but justly deposed him from the Episcopal Sea of
this city. And a little after; After Conc. sub Men. act. 1.
the Bishops of Palestina assembled in this city, and the other Eastern
Bishops, that is to say, of the Patriarkships of Antioch and Jerusalem, and
the deputies of the others Bishops, and we, did again present petitions
touching Anthymus and the other heretics, and demanded that Anthymus should
certify his believe by libell to the Sea Apostolic, and should purge himself
from all heretical errors, and in this case should return to the Church of
Trebisonde; or if he would not do it, that he should be finally condemned and
deposed from all sacerdot all dignity and action. And a little beneath; These
our just requests, the same most holy personage, Ibid.
to wit Agapet, preventing them, and seeing Anthymus had failed to appear, he
condemned him with the foresaid heretics, and despoyled him of all office and
dignity sacerdot all, and of all title orthodoxall, even till the penance of
his errors. And Ibid. aand. 4.
the Fathers of the Council itself in the sentence of the Synod; The blessed
Pope Agapet of most holy and happy memory, settinge with God his hand to the
sacred canons, deposed Anthymus from the Sea which appartained not to him,
pardonning those which had participated or communicated in this act; that is to
say, Peter Patriarch of Jerusalem, and other of the East. And a little after;
Ibid.
But because that even in doctrine, Anthymus was burdened with infinite
accusations, and that many petitions and supplications were presented against
him, and by diverse reverend personages to a most religious Emperor, and to the
most blessed Pope; the same most blessed Pope, after much pain taken with a
fatherly care, to call back his soul etc. pronounced a sentence by writing
against him full of clemency and seemly holiness, grauntinge him time of
repentance, and ordaining, that till he had changed his opinion, and satisfied
the doctrines canonically defined by the Fathers, he should neither have the
title of a Catholic nor a Prelate. From whence it appears, that the Pope had
made two diverse depositions of Anthymus, and in two differinge times, one from
the Patriarkship of Constantinople, and that grounded upon discipline, because
against the canons Anthymus was exalted from the Bishops Sea of Trebisond, to
the Patriarkship of Constantinople: And the other from the Bishops Sea of
Trebisond, which had been reserved to him by the deposition from the
Patriarkship of Constantinople, and that grounded upon doctrine, because
Anthymus was accused and defamed for heresy. But the difference that was
between these two depositions, was that the first, I mean, that from the
Patriarkship of Constantinople, was absolute and definitive, and made and
perfected by the Pope, without the helping hand of any Council. For whereas
within the petition of the Bishops of the Patriarkships of Antioch and
Jerusalem to the Pope, the latin interpreter has unaptly translated
Exossauimus Anthymum, you must say, Conc. sub Men. act. 1.
you have cast forth Anthymus (...), and not (...), as it appears by this that
follows; And our Emperor has participated in your good Ibid.
work. And the second; to wit, that from the Bishopric of Trebisond was by
provision, and conditional, and tempered with this clause until penance,
which left the sentence depending, and subject to reuocation, in case that
Anthymus should appear and purge himself of heresy. Now the Pope died before
he had leisure to attend whether Anthimus would come to repentance, and purge
himself both of the contempt and of the heresy, which was imputed to him. For
this cause then, the Council of Constantinople holden under Menas, taking it
up where the Pope left it, and making an end to fulfill all the formalities
required to clear the doubt of the condition, cited Anthymus again, and
seeing he appeared not, executed the second sentence of the Pope against him,
and deposed him from the Bishopric of Trebizond, and from all Sacerdotall and
Catholic title, but without touching in any sort the deposition already
made and perfected from the Patriarkship of Constantinople: We (say the Co^c.
Constable sub Men. act. 4.
Fathers of the Council) followinge those things well examined by the blessed
Pope, ordain that he shall be cast out of the body of the holy Church of God,
and despoyled of the Bishopric of Trebizond, and deprived of all Sacerdotall
dignity and action, and according to the sentence of the most holy Pope of the
appellation of Catholic. For whereas the narration of the sentence of the
Council, and the law of Justinian reporting the history of the same
sentence, places amongst the causes of Anthymus deposition, the transgression
that he had made of the Canons in usurping the Sea of Constantinople, that
makes nothing toward inferringe, that the deposition that the Council decreed
against him, should be the deposition of the Patriarkship of Constantinople;
forasmuch as the Council reported the memory of this usurpation, not to depose
him then from the Patriarkship of Constantinople, from which the same Council
testifies, that he had already been entirely excluded; but to aggrauate the
crime for which it would depose him from the Archbishoprike of Trebizond, to
wit heresy, by a commemoration of his fore goeing crimes, as it appears both
from the disposition of the sentence of the same Council, and from that of the
sentence of Menas who presided there, and from the repetition which was made of
it in the Council of Jerusalem holden under Peter Patriarch of Jerusalem: In
all which places there is nothing spoken of, but the deposition of Anthymus
from the Archbishopricke of Trebizond, and not from that of the Patriarkship of
Constantinople. And indeed, how could the Council of Constantinople where
Menas presided, touch the deposition of Anthymus from the Patriarkship of
Constantinople, and Menas vote there in quality of Patriarch of
Constantinople, since Menas had been promoted to the Patriarkship of
Constantinople by the deposition of Anthymus? For of this Co^c. Constable sub Men.
act. 1.
all the ancient monuments are of agreement: Agapet (say the Syrians to the
Emperor) has justly deposed Anthymus from the Episcopal Sea of the city of
Constantinople; and with the help of your Imperial authority cooperatinge
and lendinge a hand to the divine canons, have proposed the holy Menas to the
same Marcell. Comes in Chron.
Church. And Marcellinus Comes of the same time with Menas: Agapet being come
from Rome to Constantinople, drove away soon after his arrival Anthymus from
the Church, saying, that according to the Ecclesiastical rule, he was an
adulterer, because he had left his Church, and had packt for another, and
ordained the Priest Menas Bishop in his place. And Liberatus of the same time
with Liberat. in breuiar. c. 21.
Marcellinus: The Empress promisinge in secrett great presents to the Pope, if
he would suffer Anthymus in his Sea; and on the other side tempting him with
threats; the Pope persisted in not harkninge to her request; and Anthymus
seeinge he was cast out of his Sea, gave up the mantle that he had to the
Emperors, and retired himself to a place, where the Empress took him into her
protection. And then the Pope infauour of the Emperor, ordained Menas Bishop in
his steed, consecrating him with his own hand. And Victor of Tunes of the
same time with Liberatus: Agapet Vict Tun. in Chron.
Archbishop of Rome, came to Constantinople, and deposed Anthymus Bishop of
Constantinople, usurper of the Church, and enemy to the Council of Chalcedon,
and excommunicated the Empress, and made Menas Bishop of the Church of
Constantinople. An admirable effect of the power of S. PETER'S Successor in the
time that the Church of Constantinople was most flourishing and triumphant, and
the Church of Rome contrariwise, most abated and afflicted: when Constantinople
was the Seat of the Empire, and the mansion of Justinian the Emperor
conquering and victorious; and that Rome on the other side was noe more a
city, but a tomb and carcass of a city, a servant and slave of the Goths
a barbarous and Arrian people, a poor Pope, that the tyranny of Theodat king
of the Goths, who otherwise threatened him to root out the Roman Church, had
forced to transport himself into the East, to solicit the Emperor Justinian to
withdraw his arms out of Italy; and so poor, as he was feign to sell the
sacred Vessels of his Church, to perform his voyage, being in Constantinople
a stranger and without support, yea evil received and entertained by the
Emperor; nevertheless deposes and casts out of his Sea, Anthymus Patriarch of
Constantinople, powerful in means and favor about the Emperor, and whom the
Emperor and the Empress had exalted from the Bishopric of Trebizond to the
Patriarkship of Constantinople, and pardons the Bishops of the East, who had
communicated with him; and excommunicates the Empress, who obstinately
defended him, and established Menas in his place: And Calvin will have it, that
Menas who was Agapets creature, preceded Agapet in the Council of
Constantinople, in whose time Agapet was already dead; and wherein there is
never mention made of him, but with this title of Agapet of holy memory: What
an Argus is he in antiquity?

But, at the least will Calvin reply; the Bishops of Italy that assisted with
Menas at the Council of Constantinople after the death of Agapet, did not
preside there. It is true: But what will this reply serve him for, but to
increase his shame? for these Bishops were noe more the Popes deputies when the
Council was holden, and had noe commission to be there, but were Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons which were long before come out of Italy for other
businesses, (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
and whose legation was finished both by the arrival and by the death of
Agapet, and who assisted not at the Synod, which was noe general Council, but
a simple council of the Patriarkship of Constantinople, and of some strange
Bishops resident at Constantinople; but for honor sake; and by virtue of the
Emperors commandment as exlegates, and not as Legates. Neither must he hope
to escape by this excuse, that he pretended to speak of Uigilius and not of
Agapet, for Vigilius was neither Pope nor present at Constantinople, when the
council of Constantinople holden under Menas was celebrated.

Less yet can Calvin save himself, by saying that his intention was to
speak of the council holden under Eutychius: for Uigilius who was then Pope,
was neither present by himself, nor by his Legates, and consequently had not
occasion to hold the second place; but confirmed it by writing: Council. Constable.
6. act. 18.
Vigilius (says Euagrius) (...). hist. Eccl. l. 4. c (...).
consented by letters with the Council: And Photius: (...). de sept Synod
Vigilius approved by writing, the faith of the Fathers. And that he refused to
assist there, it was not (as Nicephorus a Schismatic author Niceph. hist.
(...): l. 17. c. 27.
and later by many ages pretends) because he disdayned to receive the Bishop
of Constantinople into one Seat with him, that is to say, that he would have
sat in a seat more exalted. For how should that have been put in dispute,
since the same Nicephorus says, Id. c. 9.
it had been practiced twenty eight years before by Pope John, who had sat
within Constantinople in a throne exalted above Epiphanius Patriarch of the
place, and that (adds he) Ibid.
not to abandon the prerogative of the Sea Apostolic, But forasmuch as he
saw the Emperor resolute to cause the three chapters to be condemned, so were
called certain writings of Theodorus of Mopsuestia, of Ibas, and of
Theodoret, which had been read in the council of Chalcedon, and feared that if
this condemnation should be made, the Bishops of the Provinces of the West not
being present, it might begett a schism between those of the West, and those
of the East. For those of the West held, that to condemn those three chapters,
it was to give advantage to the Entychians, and to make a breach in the
Council of Chalcedon, who had received into their communion, Ibas and
Theodoret authors of those writings and defendor of Theodorus of Mopsuestia;
and those of the East contrariwise held, that to maintain them, was to give
advantage to the Nestorians, and to oppose the Council of Ephesus, which had
condemned the doctrine therein contained, and denied that to censure them, was
to do wrong to the Council of Chalcedon, who had indeed received Theodoret
and Ibas into their communion, but after they had made them detest the doctrine
of Nestorius. For this occasion, though Pope Uigilius in his particular
condemned Conc 5. act. 7. and 8.
these three chapters, yet he would not assist at a Council, wherein they
should go about to condemn them publicly, unless it had been a general
Council, and wherein the Bishops of the West had been present, as well as those
of the East: And he admitted not the reason alleged by the Legates of the
Council, that in the other general Conc. 5. act. 2. in relat Legator. Conc.
Counsels there had been few Bishops of the West, forasmuch as those few
Bishops of the West which had been in other general Counsels, went thither
after Counsels holden upon the same matter in the West, whose resolution they
bearing with them, they carried the voice of all the western Church into the
East.

To this fear there concurred also that that Vigilius, had to renew the
opinion that was held of him during his Antipapacie, I say during his
Antipapacie, because in the beginning Uigilius was intruded into the Papacy by
the private suit of the Empress, who was an Eutychian, his predecessor
Siluerius a true and lawful Pope, Liber. in breuiar. c. 22.
still living, and with this simoniacall and heretical covenant not only to
condemn the three chapters, but to approve the faith of Anthymus; which he
did; and therefore sometimes as false Pope, and sometimes as an abettor of
heretics, he was excommunicated by the true Pope Siluerius, Silver. ep. ad
Vigil
and by the Bishops that adhered to him, and amongst others by the Prelates of
Africa. Victor Tun. qui Chronic.
For those that suspect that Liberatus, Laurent. Sur. ln not. ad Liber.
the most exact monument that we have of antiquity has been depraved in the
fall of Uigilius, are mistaken; seeing Victor of Tunes, Victor. in Chron. an.
2. post Consul. Basil.
time-fellowe of them both, recites the same history; but after, Siluerius
being dead, and Vigilius having been for the good of peace accepted by the
election of the clergy of Rome, he became true Pope, and then so far was he
from communicating with Anthymus, that contrariwise he rather chose to suffer
all kind of disgraces, then to consent to it; yea, he went so far, as to
condemn the same Empress, who had exalted him to the Papacy, as S. GREGORY
testifies in these words: Greg. l. 2. indict. 10. epist. 36. Paul. Diac. sieve
Theophan. hist. l. 17. and alij.
The Pope Uigilius constituted in the royal city, (that is to say, at
Constantinople) published a sentence of condemnaiion against Theodor a then
(...), and against the Acephales.

This then was the cause why Uigilius assisted not at the fifth Council, but if
he had assisted there, who doubts but he had presided, since the letters that
Eutychius Patriarch of Constantinople writ to him to obtain the celebration
of the Council, imported thus much: We require that Council. 5. act. 1.
your Blessedness presiding over us under the Sacerdotall tranquillity and
meekenes, Ibid. act. 5. in histor. Concilij Mopsuest.
the holy Gospel being set in the middle (which was a form of obligation
by oath, to vote according to conscience) the three chapters which are in
question, may be examined? Well do I know that the minister Iunius would
correct these words; presidente nobis vestra be atitudine; and change them into
these, (...) nobiscum vestra be atitudine. But who sees not, this is a
corruption, and noe correction? For besides that this clause, under the
Sacerdotall quiet and peace, presuppose presidency, and not simple residency,
does not the Pope repeat the request of Eutychius in these words: Your
brotherhood has required that we presiding (vobis praesidentibus) the three
chapters might be examined? And after when the Council deputed all the
Patriarchs who were there in person, Eutychius Patriarch of Constantinople,
Conc 5. act. 1.
Apollinarius Patriarch of Alexandria, Domnus Patriarch of Antioch, and
seauenteene of the principal Metropolitans with them to the Pope, to beseech
him to assist at the Council: is it not enough to testify, that they
acknowledged the Pope for the Chief of the Patriarchs, and that if he had
assisted at the Council, he had presided there? And when the Emperor (...)
writes to the Bishops of the Council of Mopsuestia, that they should inform
what had past about the (...) of the name of (...) Ibid. act. 5.
of Mopsuestia, from the records of his Church, and adds; And sendes two (...)
thereof, one to us, and the other to the most holy Pope: Is not this enough to
testify, that if the Pope had been at the Council, he had presided there? And
when the fifth Council itself inserts within the acts thereof, the relation of
the Council of Mopsuestia to the Pope, and inrolles it in these words; They
made also a relation to the most holy Pope Vigilius which (...) Ibid.
these words; It is very convenient, o most holies, (so called they the Pope
in the plural number, to give him the more respect) since you hold the first
(...) of the priesthood, that those things which concern the state of the holy
(...), should be represented to your divinely honored Blessedness. Is it not
enough to testify, that the Pope had primacie over all the other Bishops, and
that if he had (...) at the (...) he had presided there? And when Marcellinus
Comes an author of the same age, says; that within the cathedral Church of
Constantinople, where the Patriarch of Constantinople should principally keep
his rank, Pope John predecessor to Agapet, was set at the right hand that is
to say at the right hand in regard of the (...); and within the right
Tribunal of the Church; dexter dextro insedit Ecclesia solio: And if we
believe Nicephorus, in a (...) eminent and exalted. Is not this enough to
show, that if the Pope had assisted at the council of Constantinople, he had
presided there? And when the Greek historians report that Macedonius Patriark
of Constantinople, who lived forty years (...) the fifth general Council
findinge himself pressed by the Emperor Anastasius to blott out of the records
of his Church, the name of the counsel of Chalcedon, answered, That he could
not do it, without a general (...), Theodor. Anagnost. Collect. l. 2. ad
calce^ hist. Eccl.
wherein the Bishop of great Rome should (...): Is not this enough to testify,
that if the Pope Vigilius had assisted at the Council, he had presided there?
And when the Emperor Justinian himself, who caused the Council to be
celebrated says; We ordain according to the definitions of the four holy
Theod. in edit. (...). Robert. Steph. (...). nou. 151.
Counsels, that the most holy Pope of old Rome, should be first of all the
Prelates; and that the (...) Archbishop of Constantinople, should be the second
after the holy Sea Apostolic of old Rome, and should precede all the other
Seas. And elsewhere; The Pope is the head of all the holy (...) of God: Is it
not enough to show, (...). (...). 1. l. 7. impr. Paris. An. tuerp and Geneu.
that if the Pope had been at the Council, he had presided there?

But the Council ((...) the Popes adversaries) was celebrated notwithstanding
the Pope was neither at it by himself, nor by his deputies. It is true,
forasmuch as the Fathers of the Council had already drawn a writing from the
Pope, whereby he had promised them to consent to the holding of a regular
Council, that is to say, complete, and to assist at it: We agree (said he)
that assembling a regular Council, equity being observed, Council. 5. act. 1.
and the sacred holy Ghospells being set in the middle, we united with our
brethren will conferr of the three chapters. But those that make this
observation, add yet five more to it; the first, that it was not held for
general, but since the Pope confirmed it; and that while it was celebrated,
although all the other Patriarchs assisted at it either personally or
representatiuely; in any of the acts, it never took the title of General.
Uigilius (say the Fathers of the sixth general Council) consented to (...);
and the (...) Co^c. Constable (...). 6. act. 18.
Council was established. The second, that howsoever Pope Vigilius refused to
be there, although he was in Constantinople itself and under Justinians
halberds, the Council never past to proceed against him. The third, that the
great African light Primasius Bishop of Adrumeta, whose writings do to this
day illustrate the Catholic Church, being within Constantinople, and being
cited by the Council to assist at it, preferred the Popes authority before
the citations of the Council, and answered those that summond him from the
Council; The Pope not being there present, I Council. 5. act. 2.
will not go. The fourth, that the strongest and last persuasion that the
Emperor used to the council, to dispose them to the condemnation of the three
chapters, was to send them particular writings of Pope Uigilius, whereby he
had condemned them. And the fifth, that till three or four Ibid. act. 7.
Popes after Vigilius, whose intention was a long while called in question;
Pelagius, S. GREGORY, and Sergius had confirmed this council, there were both
in the West and East so many schisms and oppositions against it, and so many
Bishops and counsels, that supposed that it was to gain the crown of
martyrdom, to dye for resisting it; some believing Pope Vigilius never
confirmed it, and others believing that Pope Vigilius who was said to confirm
it, was not true Pope, forasmuch as he had intruded into the Papacy, his
predecessor being yet living, that whatsoever threatenings, banishments and
punishment the Emperor Justinian employed upon it he could never compass it,
neither he nor his next successors; but this is enough for this objection of
Calvin, let us go on to the rest.

Of the order of the sittings in the sixth Council of Carthage. CHAPT. XIII.
CAluins sixth objection is taken from the sixth Council of Carthage: In the
sixth Council of Carthage (says Calvin) Inst. l. c. 7.
Aurelius Archbishop of the city presided, and not the Ambassadors of the Sea
of Rome. Now we might send him to dispute this matter with Hincmarus
Archbishop of Rheims of almost eight hundred years antiquity who said
contrariwise, speaking of the sixth Council of Carthage: Hinemar. ep. ad
The Council of Carthage where the Sea Apostolic presided by his Uicars.
Nevertheless least it should seem to be a delaie, the best will be to try it
out in the Nicol. apud Flodoard. hist Eccl. Romans l. 3.
field. To this objection then we will bring three answers; the first that
there is nothing more uncertain then the Rolls of the sittings, and
signatures of Counsels, where the copies vary and mistake at every turn,
sometimes following the order of the persons sending, somtymes the order of the
persons sent, somtymes the order of the time of their arrival, somtymes the
errors in the writing which slipp in, in the transcription of listes and
Catalogues as it appears, besides an hundred other proofs by the repetition
of one of the Sessions of the first Council of Ephesus, inserted into the
latin copy of the Council of Chalcedon, in which Arcadius, Proiectus and
Phillippus, the Popes legates, Council. Chalc Act. 1.
are named, not only after all the Bishops, but even after Bessula Deacon and
legate of Carthage, which was the order of the time of their arrival; and
nevertheless, the greek original of the same Council of Ephesus, places
them in all the Sessions whereat they assisted immediately after saint CYRILL
first legate of the Pope; and as it appears by the thing itself which is
presented by the testimony of Hincmarus; for Hincmarns affirms particularly,
(that the Sea Apostolic presided by legates, at the Council of Carthage, in
these words; Hincmar vbi supra.
The Council of Carthage where the Sea (...) presided by Uicars. The second
that there where diverse kinds of legates, some which represented the
negotiating person of the Pope, as (...), Agents, Nuntios, Apocrisaries, and
Ambassadors; and others, which represented the judiciary person of the Pope, as
Cathedraticall Vicars and legates, a kind only necessary for general
Counsels, where the Body of the Church speaks with her head, and not for
particular Counsels, as this of Carthage was. Now amongst these deputies, some
held the rank of those that sent them, and others not, for in the Council of
Chalcedon, Council Chalc. Act. 1. and. seqq.
Justinian Bishop of Cos, legate or rather Nuntio and Ambassador from the Pope
to Constantinople, although he bore the (...) of the Pope legate at the
Council, nevertheless sat not with the other legates of the Pope, but after
the Patriarchs and among the (...); and at the Council of Constantinople
holden under Menas, the Ambassadors of the Patriarchs of Antioch and Jerusalem
were not set in the rank of their Patriarchs, but in the rank of their
simple personal dignity, and after the Archbishops and Bishops. Conc. Constable.
sub. (...). A and 1 2. 3. and. 4.
And the third Answer finally is, that in the sixth Council of Carthage, the
legation of the Popes deputies was finished by the death of Sozimus, who had
sent them the year before, and had not been renewed by Boniface his Successor,
whose creation they knew well, for they procured Conc. Carth. 6. c. 6. and 5.
and charged themselves Conc. A^ric. c. 100.
to carry him the Counsels letters, but they had not yet received any
commission from him, and treated only upon the memories that they had brought
from his predecessor. By means whereof, they were noe more the Popes legates,
but Exlegates, continuing nevertheless in office to solicit for the rights of
the Roman Church that they had begun in the former Council; and for this cause
bearing for honor sake in the signatures, the title of the Legates of the Roman
Church, but not the title of legates or Vicars of Pope Boniface then sitting.
And indeed if they had been then, in the actual quality of the Popes Vicars,
and Cathedraticall Vicars; that is to say, representing the judiciary person
of the Pope, they had been set one with an other, and had all signed in the
rank of Bishops. Now this was not so, for Faustinus Archbishop of Potentia
assisted but in his simple rank of Archbishop, below Aurelius Archbishop of
Carthage and Ualentine Archbishop of Numidia, and Phillippus and Asellus were
not there in the rank of Bishops; but sat and signed as simple priests after
all the Bishops; where as in the Council of Ephesus which was general, the
same Phillip priest Conc. Ephesians. impress. Heid. Act. 1. and Romans Act. 4.
as Vicar, deputed to represent the iudiciarie person of the Pope, was set with
saint CYRILL and Arcadius likewise the Popes legates before all the other
Primates, Archbishop,s and Bishops. It it true that Faustinus, Phillippus, and
Asellus, had been either nuntios or legates to Pope Sozimus in a Council
holden the year before at Carthage under the twelfth consulship of Honorius
and the eigth of Theodosius as it appears from the discourse and from the
Epistle of the sixth Council of Carthage, but of this Council (for that which
is inserted under the date of the same consulls in the Rapsodie of the
Counsels of Africa speaks not of the Popes legates) there remains to us noe
piece whereby we may judge whether the Popes agents presided, or presided not;
only it appears, that the authority of the Pope was very eminent there, for
it was sent to Rome and confirmed by the Pope, as Prosper an author of the same
age testifies in these words: Prosp. in Chron.
Under the 12th. Consulship of Honorius, and the eigth of Theodosius, a
Council of two hundred and fourteen Bishops, having been holden at Carthage,
the Synodicall decrees were carried to Pope Sozimus. Which having been approved
by him the heresy of Pelagius was condemned throughout the world. And again;
Id cont. Colla^.
Pope Zosimus annexed to the decrees of the African Counsels, the force of his
sentence, and for the extirpation of the wicked, armed the right hand of all
the Prelates, with the sword of Peter.

Of the order of the sittings in the Council of Aquilea. CHAPT. XIV.
THE seventh objection of Calvin is, That there was a general Council (...)
inst. l. 4. c. 7.
kept even in Italy, to wit, (adds he) the Council of Aquilea, wherein
saint AMBROSE presided for the credit that he had with the Emperor. Now this
objection, is the crown and masterpiece of all Caluins objections for matter
of impertinency: For first S. AMBROSE did not preside there, but Valerianus
Bishop of Aquilea; the Bishop of Milan and the Bishop of Aquilea having been in
such sort equals and paralells until the time of (...), as when the
Bishopric of Milan was vacant, as Pope Pelagius the first tyme-fellowe to
Justinian notes it, the Bishop of Aquilea ordained him of Milan: And when the
Bishopric of Aquilea was vacant, the Bishop Pelag Pap. 1. apud Great. c. 24 q.
1.
of Milan ordained him of Aquilea; by means whereof, each of them in his
Diocese had his rank before the other, and in any third place, the ancienter
of the two preceded, as at the Council of Rome, S. AMBROSE preceded Valerian,
and at the Council of Aquilea, Ualerian preceded S. AMBROSE. It is true S.
AMBROSE disputed there more then the rest because of his learning: And Aurelius
Bishop of Bologna after him which deceived the author of Synodica, published by
the Minister Pappus a greek author and meanly instructed in latin affairs,
and many others with him. But he presided not there, if we give credit to the
acts of the Council, which are couched in these terms; Under the consulship
of Eucherius and Euagrius in the nones of September, there were set in the
Church of Aquilea, Ualerian, Act. Conc. Aquil.
Ambrose, Eusebius, Limenius and others. And then if he had presided there to
what purpose was it to interpret that it was for the favor the Emperor bore
him. Was not S. AMBROSE an Archbishop, and Archbishop of Milan, a city says
S. ATHANASIVS, metropolitan of Italy, Athan. ad solit. vit. agent.
that is to say, not of all Italy, but of that part of Italy which was
subject to the pretoriall Prefect of Italy, and which was particularly called
Italy, to distinguish it from the provinces subject to the Provost or Vicar of
Rome? and therefore what marvel had it been, that the Council of Aquilea
being celebrated in the metropolitan city of Istria, which was one of the
provinces of Italy, and subject to the Vicar of Italy, that is to say, to
the Vicar of the Provost of the Pretory of Italy in Italy, and the Pope not
being there, neither by himself, nor his Legates, if S. AMBROSE, who was both
the most ancient Archbishop, and the Archbishop of Milan, metropolita^ of
Italy had presided there? And secondly the council of Aquilea which lasted
but half a day, was not a general council, but a particular Council,
compounded only of the Bishops of Lombardie and of Prouence, and of one Bishop
of Illiria, and of some deputies of Africa, and of the Gauls: for there were
in all but thirty Bishops, amongst which there was but one only Legate,
neither of the Pope, nor of the other Patriarks. Now how could it be general
if there were noe Bishop of the East, nor any Patriark nor Patriarchs Legate?
Nay how could it be general, since the only reason that Palladius the
heretic made that he would not answer there was, that it was not a general
Council? We have promised (said he) that Act. Conc. Aquil.
we will prove that we are Christians, but in a general Council; we answer
you not, least we should prejudice a future Council. Nay, how could it have
been universal, since the Fathers of the Council themselves confessed Ibidem.
in their Epistle to the Emperor; That is was not reasonable that for two
wretched heretics, the Churches of the whole world should be abandoned by
their Bishops? Nay how could it have been general; since the same year the
general Council of Constantinople was celebrated? for the Council of Aquilea
was held in September under the consulship of Euagrius and Eucherius; and the
Council of Constantinople was assembled the same year, not in the month of
May as Socrates and those that have followed him have conceived, but upon the
end of Autumn as it appears by the words lately cited from (...), and by the
very epistle of the Council of Constantinople to the Pope, Theod. hist. Eccl.
l. 5. c. 9.
where the Fathers testified, that the Council of Constantinople had been
called after the holding of that of Aquilea. It is true it had been proiected
at the beginning to have holden a larger Council at Aquilea, but because the
adversaries were not judged worthy that for them there should be called a
quantity of Bishops necessary neither for a general Council, not for a
Patriarchall Council, the Pope not only abstained from sending, but also
presently after the celebration of the Council of Aquilea, as being nothing
less then universal, set himself to cause a general Council to be
celebrated; and to this effect called by his letters addressed to the Emperor
Theodosius, the Bishops of the East to the Council of Constantinople; Witness
these words of the same Bishops to Pope Damasus; Theod hist. Eccl l. 5. c. 9.
We were come to Constantinople at the arrival of the letters from your
Reverence sent after the Council of Aquilea to the most religious Emperor; And
held himself a Council of the Bishops of the West at Rome, where assisted the
chief of those that had been at Aquilea; And amongst others saint AMBROSE
Archbishop of Milan and Valerianus Archbishop of Aquilea; and in the which
presiding, he approved what had been done at Constantinople; and by this
approbatron, made the Council of Constantinople (...). For whereas it is (...)
that in this concourse of Counsels it was not the Council of Rome whereat the
Pope was present, that obtained the title of a General Council, but the
Council of Constantinople; It suffices to say, that it was because the
Simbole of faith which was published there against Macedonius, was composed in
the Council of Constantinople, whereat there assisted the Bishops of the
Provinces, where the question was disputed and was but confirmed, and not
composed at the Council of Rome; and that the Counsels oecumenicall by
concourse took their name from the place where the Simbole of the Faith was
composed, and not from the place where it was only confirmed.

Of the calling of Counsels. CHAPT. XV.
THere follows the calling of Counsels, that Calvin affirms to have been
only done by the Emperors: The General Council (says Calvin) Calvin. inst.
l 4. c. 9.
was never declared but by the Emperor, and the Bishops were called by his
authority. Now from whence does he infer this? Upon this, that the Counsels
bare on their brow the conuocations of the Emperors. Fine and subtle logiquel
as if it had been an incompatible thing that the Emperors should call the
counsels, in regard of temporal authority, to make them obligatorie to the
secular Tribunal, and executory by the ministry of the officers of the
Emperor, and to take away the crime of treason and the hinderance of politic
laws, which forbad them to make any assemblies, D. de collegijs illicitis. l.
1.
but with permission of the Emperors; And that the Popes (without whom (said
Socrates) Soc. hist. Eccl l. 2. c. 8
the Churches cannot be ruled; or according to the translation of Epiphanius
followed by Cassiodorus, Hist. tripart. l. 4. c. 9.
the counsels cannot be celebrated) should call them in regard of spiritual
and Ecclesiastical authority. But rather, as if it had not been a thing
perpetually used and practiced, that the spiritual authority of the Popes,
should be required with the temporal authority of the Emperors; that is to
say, that there were two conuocations of Counsels; the one Ecclesiastical to
make them obligatorie in conscience, and spirituallie; and the other Politic,
to make them executory by the secular arm, and temporally.

For first, as for the ensign bearer and forerunner of all the general
Counsels, which is that of Nicea, the Fathers of the third general Council
of Constantinople, otherwise called the sixth general Council, Greek
Fathers, as has been already often noted, of near a thousand years
antiquity, and enlightened by many histories that time has subtracted from
us, did they not say; The most sacred Constantine, Council. oecumen. 6. act. 18.
and the praise worthy Siluester, called the famous council of Nicea? And as
for the Council of Sardica, which was the appendix and supply of that of
Nicea, the demand that Eusebius of Nicomedia head of the Arrian faction made
after the Council of Antioch to Pope Julius of a Council which since it could
not be general at Rome, was afterward appointed at Sardica; and the complaint
of those that blamed the same Julius for the little time that was given them to
assemble at Sardica, does it not teach us, that the Pope had cooperated with
the Emperors in the calling the Council of Sardica: Eusebius (says S. ATHANA:
Athan. de fuga sua Apol.
SIVS) and his writ to Julius, and to amaze us, required that he would call a
Council: For you must read there with the greek text, that he would call a
Council; and not with the latin translation, that a Council might be called.
And again, Idem ad solit.
Julius writ back, that there should be a council held where we would. And
the same Julius reported by S. ATHANASIVS; Your deputies (said he, answering
the Eusebians) Id. apol. 2.
have solicited me to call a Council, and to write to Athanasius into
Alexandria, and to those of the Eusebian party, to the end that in the
presence of all, the cause might be defined in just judgment. And Socrates;
Soc. l. 2. c. 20.
There was a general Council published at Sardica a city of Illyria by the
ordinance of the two Emperors. And a little after; Others complained of the
brevity of the time, Ibid.
and laid the blame upon Julius Bishop of Rome. Which Harmenopolus himself,
though a late greek and a schismaticke, Harm. in epitom. can
acknowledges in these words; By the advice of the Emperors, and of the
Bishops of Rome, there assembled a Council of three hundred forty one holy
Fathers at Sardica, which confirmed the Council of Nicea. For that he accounts
not the Council of Sardica for universal, because the Arrians separated
themselves from it, makes nothing to the purpose of the convocation, which at
least was universal. There was (said Socrates) a general Council published.

And as for the Council of Constantinople, these words of the epistle of the
Bishops of Constantinople to Pope Damasus, and to the Synod of Rome,
celebrating by the will of God the Synod of Rome; You Theodor. hist. Eccl. l.
5. c. 9.
have called us with a brotherly Charity, as your own members, by the
letters of the most Religious Emperor: And a little after; But the execution of
this Theodor. hist. Eccl. l 5. c. 9.
desire was impossible to many, for we were gone to Constantinople upon your
Dignities letters sent the year last past, after the council of Aquilea, to
the most religious Emperor Theodosius; Do they not sufficiently demonstrate,
that Pope Damasus by his letters written the year before; that is to say,
before the Synod of Rome, and when he was yet alone, had concurred with the
Emperor, or rather the Emperor with him, for the calling the Council of
Constantinople, and for the first council of Ephesus; which only of the name,
deserves the title of council (for the second was excluded from the rank of
counsels:) Do not those words of Liberatus Archdeacon Liberat. in breuiar.
c. 5
of Carthage, an African Author, and of near a thosand one hundred years
antiquity; Cyrill with his, provided with the Uicarship of the Sea
Apostolic, having called a Council of two hundred Bishops cited Nestorius:
Do they not testify that it had been called at the instance, and with the
cooperation of S. CYRILL Patriarch of Alexandria, already before made Vicar
and executor of the Popes authority in the East?

And as for the council of Chalcedon these declarations of the Emperor Martian
to Pope LEO, when there was a question of holding the council afterward
transferred to Chalcedon; Council. Chalc. P. I.
Our desire is, that all impiety being banished by this council celebrated
under your authority, an entire peace may be restored to the Bishops of the
Catholic faith: And again; Ibid.
There rests, if it please your Holiness that you come into these parts, and
here celebrate the Synod, that you will daigne to do it for the zeal of
Religion. And a little after; Or if it, be burdensome to you, to come hither,
that you will signify it to us by your letters Ibid.
that we may dispatch our sacred Patents into the East, and into Thracia and
Illiria, that all the most holy Bishops may assemble in some such place as
shall seem good to us, and decree by their sentences, things profitable to
Christian Religion and Catholic faith; as your Holiness according to
Ecclesiastical rules has defined it. And these of the same LEO; It has
pleased, both to the ordinance of Epist. (...).
the most Religious Emperors and to the consent of the Sea Apostolic, that
the general council of Chalcedon should be called. And these of the Bishops
of the second Moesia, to the Emperor Leo, translated from greek into latin by
Epiphanius, at the instance of Cassiodorus; The faith of the incarnation of
Cassiod. de (...). lect. c. 11.
our Savior, has been confirmed by many Bishops assembled by the
commandment of the Roman Pope Leo, who is truly head of Bishops and of
Anatolius Patriarch of Constantinople, in a council celebrated under the two
Emperors: Do they not evidently prove, that Pope LEO cooperated with the
Emperors Ep. Episc. Moes. pro Coc. Chalc
for the calling of the council of Chalcedon?

And for the second general council of Constantinople, which we call the
fifth general council; this answer of the Pope Vigilius to the letters of
the Patriarch of Constantinople; Having known your desire by your Co^c. Constable
(...). act. 1.
demands; we agree, that for the three chapters in question, there shall be
made a regular council, where preserving equity, the holy Gospel being set
in the midst, we united with our brethren, may conferr. Does it not make
plain that the holding this Council had been preceded by the Popes consent
and permission? For the Council was assembled in the month of May, the twelfth
year after the Consulship of Basilius; and the Popes answer Ibid.
had been made in the month of January before. And these words of the sixth
Council; Vigilius consented to Justinian, and the fifth Council was
established: Co^c. oecum 6. act. 18.
Do they not convince, either that the convocation or the confirmation of the
Council, was taken from the Pope? And that a while after, John Patriarch of
Constantinople having gone about as Bishop of the second Rome, to participate
with the Pope, in the title of Uniuersall Bishop, would attribute to himself
the authority of calling General Counsels in the East; is it not a manifest
proof that the authority of the spiritual calling of Counsels, appertained
to the Popes? It has been (says Pope Pelagius the second in his Epistle to
those of the East, Pelag. (...). ep. 1.
cited by saint GREGORY) reported to the Sea Apostolic, that John Bishop of
Constantinople, has entitled himself Uniuersall Bishop, and by a Gregor. l.
7. Indict. 2. ep. 69.
virtue of this his presumption, has called you to agenerall Council although
the authority of calling General Counsels be attributed by a singular
privilege to the Sea Apostolitk of saint PETER.

And for the sixth general Council, which was holden under the Emperor
Constantine Pogonat, and in the same city of Constantinople that the Emperor
would not call the Bishops of the Eastern part of the Empire which was
separated for the Monothelite heresy, from the obedience of the Sea
Apostolic, till first the Pope had called the Bishops of the western part to
Rome; Epist. Co^st. Imp. ad Patriar. Constant. Council. 6. Act. 1.
and till the legates from the Pope, and from the Council of Rome, were come
to him; does it not presuppose that the spiritual authority of the Pope, did
flow together with the temporal authority of the Emperor, or rather preceded
it for the celebration of Counsels? And that the same Council speaking to the
Emperor alleges to him for the image and parallel of his Acts, as well as
of his name the example of the great Constantine in these words; Constantine
Augustus, and Pope Siluester of Reverend memory, called the famous Council of
Nicea, Does it not confirm it? And for the second Council of Nicea which is
the seventh general Council, what Pope Gregory the second had answered a
while before to the Emperor Leo the Iconolast, Council. 6. Act. 18.
who desired to cause a Council to be holden for the business; Greg. (...). ad
Leon. ep 1.
Thou have written that a general Council might be holden, but it seems not
fit to us. And again; Ibid.
Put case we had harkened to thee, and the Prelates had been gathered from all
the earth, and that the Senate and the Council had been set, where had the
religious Emperor the lover of Christ been, to sit there according to custom?
And that which the Fathers of the Council allege amongst the nullities of
the Synod of the Iconoclasts; Council oecum. 7. Act. 6.
It had not for cooperator, as that (...) which now is celebrated, the Pope of
Rome nor his Prelates, neither by his Legates, nor by circular letters (that is
to say, addressed to all the provinces) as is the law of Counsels; does it
not insinuate, that the Popes authority was required with that of the Emperors
for the lawful celebration of Counsels: Now these are all the general
Counsels which have been celebrated from the age of the Apostles till the
separation that Photius made of the Greek church from the latin. For as for
the Council of Constantinople surnamed Trullian, that the Greeks call, the
supply of the sixth Couucell; For as much as the sixth Council which was
holden under Constantine Pogonat, having made noe canons; some of those Bishops
that had been present, reassembled themselves ten years after under Justinian
the second his Son; and made some certain canons which they published with
the title of canons of the sixth Council; I meddle not with it because none of
the Bishops of the West assisted there and consequently it was not general. It
is true, that Balsamon, Balsam. in proef. Council. in Trull
and after him Nilus Nil. (...) prim. Pap. l. 2.
Archbishop of (...) says, that he had seen in one of the copies of the same
Council Trullian, a catalogue of signatures, which also is at Rome and which
has been printed with the Greek Texts of the Council; from whence it is
collected, that Basilius Bishop of Gortina, Metropolitan of the Isle of Creete,
and legate of the Council of Rome, and a certain Bishop of Rauenna assisted
there. But he forgetts like a Greek Schismaticke as he is, to tell two other
things; the one, that the title of legate of the Council of Rome that this
Basilius bore, had noe reference to what he was then; for there was noe
Council holden in the west for the preparation of the Council surnamed
Trullan; but to what he had been in the sixth Council whereto he had signed
with this title Council. 6. Act. 18.
Basilius unworthy Bishop of Gortina, Metropolitan of the Isle of Creete, and
Legate of all the holy Synod of the Sea Apostolic of old Rome: And the
other, that even in the sixth Council, he bore this title, but as a title of
honor, and not as actual Legate either of the Pope, or of the Council of
Rome; I said, neither of the Pope, nor of the Council of Rome, because the
Pope, and the Council of Rome at the express request of the Emperor sent two
distinct legations, (...). Imp ad. (...). Pap in Proeamb. Conc. 6.
a thing never before heard of to the sixth Council; whereof the one, to wit
that of the Pope, was of two Priests, a Deacon, and a subdeacon, who sat
before all the Patriarchs of the sixth Council. And the other, to wit; that
of the Council of Rome, was of three Bishops, who sat after the Patriarchs,
to show that they were two distinct legations. Now neither in the one nor
other of these two legations, had Basilius Bishop of Gortyna, (who was neither
of the Body of the Clergy of Rome, nor of the body of the Council holden at
Rome,) been named, as it appears as well by the Popes letters, as by those of
the Council of Rome. Council. oecum. 6. Act. 4.
Only it happened that this Basilius being the Popes ordinary legate in the
Isle of Creete, for those things which concerned the jurisdiction of the Sea
Apostolic in his Province; as he of Thessalonica in the province of
Macedonia; and he of Corinth in the Province of Achaia: The legates of the
Council of Rome finding him in those parts, for honors sake associated him,
and him of Corinth not with the legates of the Pope, but with them; For he
subscribes with the legates of the Council of Rome, who signed after all the
Patriarchs, and not with the Popes Legates, who signed before all the
Patriarchs. Council. (...). Act. 18.
But this association was only for the sixth general Council. And that
afterward in the Council surnamed Trullian he continued to attribute to
himself the name of legate of the Council of Rome; it was as a memorial of
the honor he had received in the sixth Council following the custom of the
Greeks, who when they have borne a title in any solemn action, preserve it
many years after in memory of the honor they have once received. And it will
nothing avail to say, that at least he was the Popes legate in the Isle of
Creete, when he assisted at the Council surnamed Trullian; for there was
great difference between the Metropolitans, honored with the Title of the
Popes legates in their Provinces, and whose legation was attributed to their
Seas; As the Archbishop of Arles amongst the Gauls; Greg. Magn. l. 4. Indict.
14. ep. 52. and 53
The Archbishop of Thessalonica in Macedonia; Leo ad Anast. These. ep. 82.
The Archbishop of Corinth in Peloponesus; And the Synodicall Legates deputed
from the Pope or the western Church to the general Counsels, forasmuch as
the one contributed to the universality of the Counsels, the authority of
those that sent them; and the others conferred noe more, but that of their own
persons, or their particular Provinces. And therefore the assistance of
Basilius Bishop of Gortyna at the Council surnamed Trullian, wherein he held
not the place of the Pope, but signed after all the other Patriarchs, yea after
some Metropolitans, Council. in Trull. in subscript.
did nothing avail to make it general. And as for the Archbishop of Rauenna,
he signed not: from whence it is, that Balsamon could not tell his name, but
because his predecessor had assisted by Attorney at the sixth Council, whereof
the Council Trullian pretended to be a supply; a place to sign in, was
reserved for him, as one absent, in these words: Council. Trull. in subscript.
The place of the Bishop of Heraclea, of him of Rauenna, and of him of Corinth.
Therefore even from that, from whence Balsamon inferrs, that the Bishop of
Rauenna assisted at the Council surnamed Trullian; to wit, from the Roll of
the subscriptions; we collect the contrary, that he assisted not there at
all. And indeed, if the Bishop of Rauenna, or any other Western Bishop had
assisted there, how could that Council have commtited the error it did
committ, besides, (...) others, in approueing the Council of Carthage holden
under saint CYPRIAN, for the rebaptisation of Heretics? Council. Trull. c. 1.
For there was not a Bishop in the West so ignorant, as not to know, that the
Council holden under saint CYPRIAN was an erroneous Council, whose doctrine
was condemned by the Roman Church, and had been the seed and original of the
Donatists here sies. For if they object with Balsamon and (...), that the
Council surnamed Trullian, that would be taken for a supply of the sixth
general Council, and pass the Canons thereof, for canons of the sixth
General Council, attributes to it self in the forefro^t of their decrees,
the title of General; Counsel we answer that it was not because it was so,
but because it expected to be so, by the addition of the Western Church, and
of the Pope, for whom there was a blanke left to sign in, above all the
Patriarchs, in these words, Council. Trull. in subscript.
A place for the most bolie Pope of Rome; A thing that plainly shows, that
the Pope had noe deputies there. Now so far was the Pope and the Western
Church from signing to it, as contrariwise they prepared themselves rather to
endure (...)
Martyrdom. For the Emperor having sent the copy of the Council (...) to
Rome, to pray the Pope to set to his subscription, the Pope rather chose to
incur all the Emperors hatred and persecution, then to consent to it, as BEDA
an author of the same age testifies in these words: The Emperor Justinian the
second (says he) Bed. de se aetatib.
having sent Zachary his Constable, commanded him to confine Pope Sergius to
Constantinople, because he would not favor the (...) Council that he had made
at Constantinople, and had refused to sign it. But the Garrison of Rauenna,
and of the neighboring place prevented the impious commands of the Emperor,
and repulsed (...) with outrages and injuries, from the City of Rome. And it
is not to be said, either that Pope Adrian praised the allegation that
Tarhasius Patriarch of Constantinople had made in his synodicall Epistle of the
eightith two canon of that Counsel against the Iconoclasts: Or that the
legates of the same Pope Adrian did not oppose themselves against the apology
that Tarhasius Patriarch of Constan tinople made for the canons of that
Council, at the second Council of Nicea. For that Pope Adrian praised the
allegation of Tarhasius, it was not because of the authority of this Council
that Tarhasius had cited under the title of the sixth Council, but because of
the doctrine of the canon which was sound and orthodoxall; and that not only
the Popes legates, did not oppose themselves against it, but also some Popes
have alleged it, against the Iconoclasts, it was because the arguments taken
from those canons were good, in regard of the Greeks that had received them;
And besides that if the authority of the Sea Apostolic had been wounded in
the Council Trullian by the proceedings of the Emperor Justinian Rhinotmete
this wound had been in some measure repaired by the same Emperor with his other
crimes; when at Pope Constantines arrival in the East, He prostrated himself
(says BEDA) Beda de sexoetatib.
on the Earth before him, and praying him to intercede for his Sins, renewed
to him all the privileges of his Church.

But against this prescription, the adversaries to the Sea Apostolic, frame
three principal objections; The first, that Ruffinus speakeing of the Council
of Nicea says, Ruff. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 1.
that the Emperor by advise of the Churchmen called a (...) at Nicea, and
makes noe particular mention of the Pope. The second, that Julius reproached
the Bishops of the Council of Antioch, Socrat. hist. Eccl l. 2. c. 17. and
(...) (...). c. 10.
That they had not called him to their Council. And the third that saint IEROM
treating of a Council holden amongst the Gauls cries; Hier. contr Ruff. Apol.
2.
What Emperor commanded this Synod to be called? To the first then of these
objections; which is, that Ruffinus says; That the Emperor by the advice of
the Clergy, called a Council at Nicea; We answer, that although Ruffinus,
because of the hate he bore to the Roman Church, from whence he had been
excommunicated for his errors, whould not express the history but in general
terms, and by these words; by the advice of the Churchmen; Nevertheless, he
always gives it to be inferred from thence, that the ecclesiastical
authority preceded the Imperial convocation; and that the Imperial
convocation, was but an execution of the Ecclesiastical advise; For whereas
saint EPIPHANIVS says; Epiphan in here is. Melet.
That the care of Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, moved Constantine to
assemble the Council; this word, moved, excludes not the means and
interuention of the Pope, to whom Alexander had written of it by especial
letters; as Liberius testifies to the Emperor Constantius in these terms;
Liber. epist. ad Constant. in fragm. Hilar. and apud. Lucif Caral.
We have the letters of the Bishop Alexander to Siluester of holy memory,
and by consequent is not incompatible with these words of the third general
Council of Constantinople; Conc 6 oecum. Act. 18.
Constantine Augustus and Pope Siluester of Reverend memory, called the famous
Council of Nicea.

To the second opposition, which is, that Julius reproached it to the Bishops
of the Synod of Antioch, that they had not called him to their Council; from
whence the Adversaries of the Sea Apostolic infer, that it did not belong
to the Pope to call Counsels; We answer, that the objection is not valide;
and the reason of the nullitie is; that this was not a general Council, to
which the convocation of the Pope, either mediate or immediate was necessary;
but a particular Council of the Bishops of the Patriarkship of Antioch which
the Patriarch of Antioch might call alone, and at which the other Bishops who
were but in small number, assisted but by aggregation. And therefore the Pope
does not reproach it to them, that their Council was not called by him, or at
his c Socr. histor. l. 2. c 17.
instance, but for (...) much as that Council which was a particular Council,
had undertaken, as compounded of Arrian Bishops, who violated all order and
discipline, to decide things that concerned the universal Church ordayning in
hate to saint ATHANASIVS; That every Bishop, that after he had been deposed by
a Synod, should continue still to perform episcopal functions, without having
been first reestablisht by an other greater Synod, should be incapable of
restitution; and that the laws of the Church bore, that there could noe
decrees be made in the Churches; that is to say, as Calvin himself interprets
it, Inst. l. 4. c. 7.
for things regarding the universal Church, without the Sentence of the Bishop
of Rome, he reproacheth it to them, that they had exceeded the power of a
particular Council; That is to say, had decided the affairs which concerned
the general government of the Church, without having invited him to assiste
at it, either by himself, or by his Legates. A thing, that if we were stripped of
all other arguments, would sufficiently show the Popes authority; for if the
absence of the Pope alone and not of any other Patriarch or Metropolitan, were
an impediment to the making of decrees, to oblige the universal Church; how
can it be, but the Pope must be head of the Church, and Superior of the other
Patriarchs?

To the third objection, which is, that saint IEROM speaking of a certain e
Hier. Apol. aduers. Ruff. l. 2.
Council holden amongst the Gauls, cries; What Emperor has commanded this
Synod to he assembled? From whence they infer, that the Emperors only called
the general Counsels. We answer, it is a very Sophisme; for the Council
whereof saint IEROM spoke, was not a general Council, but a particular, that
Ruffinus pretends to have been holden in Gaul against saint HILLARY. Now we
agree of all sides, and Calvin himself confesses it, Calvin. Inst. l. 4. c. 7.
that the Metropolitans, Primates, and Patriarchs called particular Counsels.
And the Counsels of the western Church holden at Rome by Pope DAMASVS in the
time of the heresy of the Macedonians; by Pope Celestine against the heresy
of the Nestorians; by Pope LEO against the heresy of the Eutychians; by Pope
Agatho against the heresy of the Monothelites, enforced the most obstinate to
confess, that the Pope, if not as head of the universal Church, yet at least
as Patriarch of the West, called the Patriarchall Counsels of the western
Church; and not only called the Patriarchall Counsels of the Western Church,
but also when there was need, caused to be called extraordinarily, the
national or provincial Cou^cells of such a Nation or Province of the West, as
he thought to be necessary; as it appears; for Africa from these wordos S.
AUGUSTINE; Aug. Epist. 157.
The Ecclesiastical necessity enjoined us by the Reverend Pope Zosime Bishop
of the Sea Apostolic, had drawn us to Caesaria; And for Macedonia, Achaia,
and Thessalia; from these of Pope LEO to Anastasius Bishop of Thessalonica, his
Legate in those provinces; Leo ad Anast. Epist. 82.
If There be any mayor cause moved, for which it shall be necessary, to cause
an Episcopal assembly to be called, let it suffice thee to call two Bishops
of every Province such as the Metropolitans shall choose. And for Spain, from
these of the same LEO; Id epist. 91.
We have sent letters to our brethren and fellow Bishops of Arragon, of
Carthagena, of Portugal, and of Galitia, and baue declared to them the
assembly of a general Council; that is to say, general for Spain. In
which place, they must not cavil upon the word, Council, and convert it into
Counsel; For the first Council of Bracara, reporting the same history,
says, Co^c Brac 1. in praefac
By the commandment of Leo the Bishops of Arragon; Carthagena, Portugal and
Andaluzia held a Council amongst them. But besides the spiritual authority,
were it of Metropolitans, Primates, and Patriarchs for the calling of
particular Counsels, be it of the Popes as we pretend for the calling of
general Counsels, the temporal authority of the Emperors was also
requisite as well to avoid state iealousies, and hinder suspicions of
conspiracies against the Empire, as to take order for the Charge of
transportations, Staples, and provisions, and to furnish the costs of the
voyages, which the Churches then newly out of the persecution of the Pagans
could yet hardly bear. And therefore when there was question of calling not
only general Counsels of all the Earth, but also the general Council of
the Western Church, the temporal authority of the Emperors, concurred with
the Spiritual authority of Popes for the execution of the convocation. The
Emperor Valentinian, says Pope Sixtus the third tymefellowe to saint CYRILL,
Ep. ad Orient.
has commanded by our authority, that the Synod should be called. And when
there was question of calling National Synods, if it were within the countries
of the Empire, the authority of Emperors or of their lieuetenans, was also
required; and if it were within the ecclipsed countries or not depending from
the Empire, that of the Kings of the nations where it was to be celebrated,
must be joined thereto; as when the first Council of Bracara in Spain was
called, it is said it was called, Conc. Brac. 1. in praes.
by the commandment of the glorious King Ariamira, or according to others,
Theodomina. And when the second Council of Tours speaks of the first Council
of Orleans holden under Clouis it is said, it was done, Co^c. Turon. 2. c. 22
at the request of the most invincible king Clouis. And when the second
Council of Mascon was holden under King Gontran, it was ordained, Council.
Matisc. 2. c. 20.
that the ordinary National Counsels should be celebrated from three year
to three year; and that the care to cause them to be assembled, appertained to
the Bishop of Lion, and the disposition to the most magnificent Prince. Now if
the temporal convocation of National Counsels made by the Emperors, or by
the Princes of the Nations, were (...) impediment, but that the spiritual
convocation of the same Counsels might be due to the Primats of the Nations;
Why should the temporal convocation of general Counsels made by the Emperor
be an impediment why the authority to call them spiritually; that is to say,
in behalf of spiritual and ecclesiastical power, might not belong to the
Pope?

For that then as we have newly said, the authority of Emperors was
necessary; and (...) to make the decisions of Counsels executorie by the
Secular arm, and by the ministers and officers of temporal justice, who
otherwise would not have labored to punish corporally those that should
contradict. And that is the cause wherefore the Fathers of the Counsels were
so careful to set this title in the forefront of their acts; The most holy
and general Council called by the authority of the most religious Emperor;
to the end to make their decrees executorie temporallie, and by the ministry
of the Secular Tribunal, but not to make them obligatorie in conscience and
spirituallie. For when was it (says saint ATHANASIVS) Ath ad solit. (...). a
(...),
that the judgment of the Church has ever taken authority from the Emperor?
And indeed who can doubt, but that if there had been any general Council
holden under the Pagan Emperors, the Christians had been obliged in conscience
and to the spiritual Tribunal of the Church, though it had not been called by
them. And that if the Turk should ever make himself universal monarch of the
world, and that there should be a general Council holden under (...) Empire,
the Christians should be obliged in conscience, and to the spiritual Tribunal
of the Church though it were not called by him. And then if the authority
necessary to make general Counsels obligatorie in conscience, ought to be
perpetual and always to have place; how can that be by imperial authority,
which has been divided into so many parcells, as at this day in a manner
the least part of it belonges to the Empire. For the convocation of the
plurality dispersed, must depend from an unity, and from an unity that has
authority over every individual of the plurality: as the ancient Emperors
themselves acknowledged that of the Pope to be, when they ordained, Non (...).
(...). 24.
That every Bishop that being called to the Popes judgment, should (...) to
come, should be constrained by the Governor of the Province to appear. And
therefore as often as our adversaries cry out; such an Emperor called such or
such a Council so often they loose their time and their labor. For we are
agreed, that whilst the Emperors were Monarchs of the world, or of the greater
part of the world, they called them all in regard of temporal authority; but
we say besides, the secular authority of the Emperor, which was necessary to
make the conuocations of Counsels authentical temporally must an other
authority interuene; to wit, a spiritual and ecclesiastical authority, to
make it lawful and authentical spirituallle, and to make that the Counsels
may be said to be called from God, and obligatorie in conscience, and to the
Spiritual Tribunal of the Church. Now that we maintain to have been the
authority of him who was the principle and center of ecclesiastical unity,
Cypr ad Cornel. ep. 15.
and the head of all the Bishops, and without whose sentence it was unlawful
to make definitive laws in the Church; to wit, the Pope, (...). Cod. (...).
1. l. 7.
whose authority for this regard ought to concur with the authority of t
(...). hist. Eccl. l 2. c. 8.
the Emperors, either actuallie or virtuallie. I said either actuallie or
virtuallie, for as much as it sufficed for the spiritual validity of the
convocation of Counsels, that the Popes did either call them or cause them to
be called, or approved their convocation. For when the Emperors called them,
either at the Popes instance, or with the consent and approbation of the Pope:
the spiritual convocation of the Pope was always reputed to interuene as also
the Catholic Emperors, and which abstained from tyranizing over the Church
never called them but when the Pope required it of them, or they required it of
the Pope; And when they were required by the Pope, they were always ready to
call them, although that for the places where they should be celebrated, the
Emperors because of the commodities or incommodities of the State, reserved the
election to themselves. For whereas the Emperor Constantius refused Pope
Liberius, who demanded of him that a general Theod. hist. Eccl. l 2. c. 16.
Council might be holden for saint ATHANASIVS cause; it was the refusal of an
Arrian Emperor, noe less an enemy to the Son of God, then to saint
ATHANASIVS. And whereas the Emperor Arcadius refused Sozom. hist. Eccles l. 8
c. vlt.
Pope Innocent, who sent, ( says Sozomene) five Bishops and two priests of the
Roman Church to the Emperors, to demand of them a Council for the cause of
saint Chrysostom, and sent saint CHRYSOSTOM into a more remote banishment, it
wasatyrannicall act of an Emperor possessed by the Enemies of this holy man.

For this then the temporal convocation of the Emperors was necessary, to wit,
that the ministers of the Empire who were obliged by the politic and
imperial laws not to suffer any assemblies without the Emperors permission,
should not hinder them; and that the Estate should have noe color of
iealousies; and that the officers of the city should furnish the charges
Staples, and transportations of the Bishops, and that the Counsels should be
kept at the expenses of the imperial Exchequer; and that finally the decrees
of Counsels might be obligatorie to the secular Tribunal, and executory
temporallie, and by the Ministry of the politic Magistrate; but not that the
convocation of the Emperors was of the essence of the Council, as that of the
Popes was; nor served to make them obligatorie in conscience, and to the
spiritual Tribunal of the Church, noe more then the Presidency of the same
Emperors at the Counsels, either by themselves or their Officers was of the
essence of the Counsels, as that of the Pope was, but only for comelynes and
ornament, and for keepeing order and temporal policy; witness this language of
the Council of (...) to Pope LEO the first; Thou did Co^c. Chalc ep. a l.
Leon.
preside by thy legates in the Council, as the head to the members, and the
Emperors presided there for seemelynesse and ornament, striving with thee as
Zorobabel with Jesus, to renew in doctrine the building the Jerusalem of the
Church. For what means this comparison of Pope LEO with Jesus high Priest of
the Jewish law, and of the Emperor Marcian with Zorobabel Prince of the Jewish
people, but that there was like analogy in Christian Religions, between the
Pope and the Emperor for the holding of Counsels, as there was in the Jewish
Church between the high Priest which was Jesus, and the Prince of the people,
which was Zorobabel for the building of the Temple; that is to say, that the
one, to wit the Pope should concur there as head of the Priesthood and
spiritual jurisdiction: and the other, to wit the Emperor; should concur
there, as head of the politic and temporal jurisdiction; and therefore when
there is question of the calling of Counsels, there must be a distinction
between the spiritual calling of Counsels, and the temporal calling of
Counsels; that is to say, between the convocation necessary to make their
assembly authentical temporallie, and the convocation necessary to make
their assembly authentical in conscience and spirituallie. In the first case
there was nothing to be determined between the Popes and the Emperors; for
none doubts, but the authority necessary to call general Counsels
temporallie, and to make them executory by the secular arm, was the authority
of the Emperors, noe more then at this day any doubts, but the authority
necessary to make the convocation of National Counsels authentical
temporally must be that of the Kings or Princes within whose estates they are
to be holden. In the second case, there was yet less, for as much as it is
evident, that the authority necessary to legitimate in conscience the
convocation of Counsels; and to make them obligatorie spirituallie, must be a
spiritual and ecclesiastical authority, a temporal Magistrate not being
able to conferr any spiritual authority to Counsels. And indeed when the
Emperors have pretended to call general Counsels without being moved thereto,
or seconded by the just ecclesiastical authority, those Counsels have been
declared illegitimate, not only by the final issue of their judgments, but
by the original vice of their form, if the Popes confirmation did not come in
to correct the defect. For the Council of Arimini which was compounded of
four hundred Bishops, and which had been called by the Emperor Constantius,
was declared inualid, not only for the issue of the judgment, but for this
cause amongst others, says the Council of those of the West, reported by
Theodoret, That it had been holden without the consent of the Bishop of Rome,
whose sentence Theod. hist. Eccl. l. (...). c. 22.
should first of all have been attended. And in the Council of Chalcedon, the
first complaint that was made against the false Council of Ephesus, that the
Emperor Theodosius the second, surprised by the fraud of the Eutychians, had
called without the Popes authority, although with a request to the Pope, to
assist at it, or to send to it was, That Dioscorus presumed to hold a Council
without the Bishop of Romes Council. Chalc. Act. 1.
permission, which had never been lawful or before done, By means whereof,
all the question of the spiritual and ecclesiastical authority necessary
from the part of the convocation to make Counsels lawful in conscience and
obligatory to the internal Tribunal of the Church, is between the Pope and
the other Patriarchs; and consistes in this to wit, to whom, either to the
Pope, or to the other Patriarchs it belonged to call Counsels spiritually. Now
who doubts but it must be to him of the Patriarchs that ought to preside
there, and the defect of whose presence either mediare or immediate, rendered
the Counsels inualid? And who sees not, that even if the Pope had not been the
direct Successor of saint PETER; if he had not been his Vicar, in whose name
all Counsels ought to be called; if he had not been the center of the
ecclesiastical unity and Communion, if he had not been the Bishop as saint
CYPRIAN says, of the chair of Peter, and of the principal Church, Cyp. ad
Cornel. ep 55.
from whence the Sacerdotall unity proceeded; and in brief, had he not been
superior in authority to the other Patriarchs, but only the first of them in
order, it belonged to him to call them, as it did anciently to the President of
the senate, to call the Senate? And therefore when Pope Gelasius says; The Sea
Apostolic only decreed that the Council of Chalcedon should (...). (...)
(...) (...). (...).
be holden; It is not to the exclusion of the Emperor, that he makes this
restriction but to the exclusion of the other Patriarchs. And when Pope
Pelagius S. GREGORY'S predecessor writes; The authority to call general
Counsels, has been attributed by a singular privilege, to the Sea
Apostolic of holy Peter. It is not to the exclusion of the Emperors, that he
Pelag. 2. epist. ad Orient.
makes this limitation, but to the exclusion of the other Patriarchs, and
particularly of the Bishop of Constantinople; for the Bishop of Constantinople
pretending by the creation of his city, into the title of the second Rome, to
have been made equal to the Pope, not in regard of the Pope, as has been
above said, but in regard of the other Patriarchs had dared to presume to
participate in the East, in the title of universal Patriark; which before c 7.
title the Pope had received at the Council of Chalcedon; and in continuance
of this presumption, had endeavored to call a general Council; that is to
say, a general Council of the Empire of the East in the East. To the end
then to repress his arrogance, the Pope put him in mind that the power to
call general counsels; that is to say, the general counsels, as well of all
the Empire, as of the particular Empire of Constantinople, as a ease exceeding
the simple patriarchall authority, belonged to the only direct and absolute
successor of S. PETER; It has been reported to the Sea Apostolic (says the
same Pelagius, writing to the Bishops of Pelag. 2. epist. ad Orient.
the East) that John Bishop of Constantinople has entitled himself
universal, and by virtue of this his presumption, has called you to a
general Council: he means, the general Council of the East whereof
Euagrius speaks, called for the cause of Gregory Patriarch of Antioch)
notwithstanding that Euagr. hist. Eccl. l. 6. c 7.
the authority of calling general Counsels, has been attributed by a
singular privilege to the Sea Apostolic of the holy Peter. And a little
after; And therefore all that you have decreed in this your not Council, but
conuenticle; I ordain by the authority of holy PETER Prince of the Apostles,
etc. that it be disanulled and abrogated. Which S. GREGORY the great also
reports in these words: Our predecessor Pelagius of happy memory, has
abrogated by a sentence entirely Gregor. Magn l 7. indict. 2. ep. 69.
valid, all the acts of this Synod, except what concerned the affair of
Gregory Bishop of Antioch of happy memory. Now does not this alone suffice
to decide the whole question? For if the Bishop of Constantinople under
pretense of the equality that he challenged to have obtained with the Pope in
superiority over the other Patriarchs, presumed to call the general Counsels
of the East: why is it not manifest, that the authority to call general
Counsels, forasmuch as concerns spiritual and Ecclesiastical power,
belonged to the Pope? And if it were so, when the Emperors possessed almost all
the Regions of the Empire, and when the Catholic Church was spread almost
over all the other patriarkships, how much more now when that the Emperors
hold but the least part of the Estates of the ancient Empire, and that the
Catholic Church is almost reduced into the provinces of the patriarkship of
the Pope, or to those, that by the conversion of countries newly discovered,
have drawn their mission and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction from them? But here
is enough of the calling of Counsels; let us go forward to the other
Articles.

CARD. PERRONS REPLY TO THE KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, THE THIRD BOOK.
Of Appeals. CHAPT. I.
The continuance of the Kings Answer.
FOr (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) observation; (that is to say, of a contrary
observation to (...) his (...) had said, that those which were excommunicate
by any of the Churches, were presently acknowledged to be (...) of through
all the Catholic Church,) it (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).

THE REPLY.
AND what does this then signify, that Theodoret speaking of the (...) that
the (...) made of saint ATHANASIVS Patriarch, of Alexandria, at the tribunal
of Pope Julius, writes: Julius following the law of the Church commanded
them to come to Theod. hist Eccl. li 2 c. 4.
Rome, and cited the divine (...) in judgment? And what does this then
signify that (...) faith, that after the same ATHANASIVS; (...) of Alexandria;
Paul Bishop of (...) (...) Marcellus Primat of (...) in (...) Asclepas Bishop
of Gaza in (...); And Lucius Bishop of Andrinopolis in Thrace, had been deposed
by diverse Counsels of the Soz. hist. Eccl. l. 3 c. 7.
(...) of the East, The Pope restored them every one to his Church; because to
him for the dignity of his Sea, appertained the care of all things? And what
then does this signify, that the Emperor Valentinian, writ to the Emperor
Theodosius, that Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople (...). (...). Conc. Chalced.
deposed in the second Council of Ephesus had according to the custom of
Counsels, appealed to the Pope? And what then does this signify, that the
senators of the Council of Chalcedon say in the restitution of Theodoret
Bishop of Cyre (...) a town bordering upon (...), who had been deposed in the
same Synod of Ephesus, and had appealed from it, to Pope LEO: Let the most
religions Co^c. Chalc Act 1.
Bishop Theodoret come in, that he may partake of the Council, for as much as
the most holy Archbishop Leo has restored him to his Bishopric? For as for
the impertinent shift of those that answer, that the restitution that the Pope
makes of Bishops which had been deposed by the Counsels of their Provinces,
was but a simple declaration, that he was of opinion they ought to be restored,
and not a formal and iuridicall restitution; And likewise, that the deposition
that he made of the Bishops or Priests of other Provinces, was but a
declaration, that his opinion was, that they ought to be deposed, and not a
formal and iuridicall deposition; what can there be imagined more unapt and
more ridiculous? Is there so young a Nouice in the laws, that knows not how
differing these things are, to be of opinion that a man ought to be absolved,
and to absolve; or to be of opinion, that a man ought to be condemned, and to
condemn him: And that if all the Parliaments of the world had pronounced that
it was their opinion, that a criminal person ought to be condemned, he were
not condemned thereby, unless they pronounced planelie, we have condemned and
do condemn him? for as much as the one is an act of science and the other is
an act of authority; and that the least doctors can do the one, and only
Judges the other. But why said I so young a Nouice in the laws? Is there a
man so destitute of common sense as can not discern, that when the Pope
restores any one, who had been deposed by the Council of his province, if the
Popes restitution were but a simple advice, that he ought to be restored; he
that had been deposed, had not more right to return into his Bishopric after
the restitution then before; And that his diocesans were noe more obliged in
conscience to receive him, then they were before. Moreover, if the Popes
restitution, were but simply an advise; that he that was deposed, ought to be
restored, what end would there be of Ecclesiastical contentions? for the
Bishops that had deposed him, being of opinion that he ought to be deposed,
and the Pope being of opinion that he ought to be restored, if the Popes
restitution were but a simple advise, that he ought to be restored, to whose
advise should the restored person be obliged to yield? If to that which seemed
most just to him, then it was he himself that was the judge of his deposition
or restitution; if to that of the Pope, then it were noe more an act of advise
and Council, but an act of jurisdiction and authority, and not a simple act
of jurisdiction and authority by which the Pope restored him for his part, and
as much as was in him; but an act of jurisdiction and operative authority upon
the precedent sentence, and abrogating the first judgment. O strange gloss to
say; that when Pope Julius restored saint ATHANASIVS Patriarch of Alexandria;
Paul Bishop of Constantinople; Marcellus Primate of Ancyra in Galatia;
Asclepas Bishop of Palestina; or that when Pope LEO restored Theodoret Bishop
of Cyre, then living; and Flauianus Patriarch of Constantinople after his
death; he did noe other thing then to declare, that his opinion was, that they
ought to be restored. Or to say, that when Pope Felix opposed Acacius (...) of
Constantinople: or that when Pope Agapet deposed (...) Patriarch of
Constantinople, he did (...) other thing then to declare, that his opinion was,
that he ought to be deposed? And wherefore then, to recapitulate what has so
often been alleged, when saint CYPRIAN solicites Pope (...) to depose Marcian
Bishop of Arles, did he write to him; (...). ep. 67.
Let there he letters from thee directed into the province, and to the people
(...) at Arles by which Marcian being interdicted, an other may be substituted
in his steed? And wherefore then when Theodoret speaks of the cause of saint
ATHANASIVS Patriarch of Alexandria, does he say; (...). (...) Eccl. l. 2. c.
4.
Julius according to the Ecclesiastical law, commanded the Eusebians to
appear at Rome, and gave a day to the divine Athanasius, to appear in
judgment? And wherefore then when Sozomene speaks of the restitution of the
same saint ATHANASIVS Patriarch of Alexandria; of Paul Bishop of
Constantinople; of Marcellus Primate of Ancyra in Galatia; of Asclepas Bishop
of Gaza in Palestina; and of Lucius, Bishop of Andrinople in Thrace, does he
write; Sozom. hist. l 3. c 7
Julius Bishop of Rome restored each of them to his Church, because to him for
the dignity of his Sea, the care of all things appertained? And for what does
he add, Ibid.
that he commanded those that had deposed them, to appear at a set day at
Rome, to yield an account of their judgment, and threatened them not to let
them escape unpunished, if they would not leave to inouate? And again; that in
the pursuit of this restitution, Ibid.
Athanasius, Patriarch of Alexandria, and Paul Bishop of Constantinople;
receuored their Seas: And besides, that the Courcell of Sardica answered, that
they could not abstain k Id. ib. c. 10
from the Communion of ATHANASIVS Patriarch of Alexandria, and Paul Bishop of
Constantinople; because Julius Bishop of Rome having examined their cause, had
not condemned them? For as for the rebellious and ontragious letters that the
Bishops of the East; that is to say, the Bishops of the Patriarkship of
Antioch and their accomplices who were Arrians writ against this restitution, it
has been already above spoken of, and shall again be treated of hereafter
It suffices that the complaint which they made, Soz hist. Eccl l. 3. c. 7.
that the Pope had injured their Council, and abrogated their sentence,
shows that the Popes action had not been a simple advise, but a formal
judgment. And wherefore then when the great Council of Sardica, for so saint
ATHANASIVS calls it, Athan. in Apol. 2.
holden for the defense of the same saint ATHANASIVS, and of the other Bishops
that the Pope had restored would convert the discipline of appeals into a
written law did they ordain, that when a Bishop should be deposed by the
Council of his Nation, and should appeal from it to the Pope, they should not
establishe a Successor in the place of the Bishop deposed, till the Pope had
judged of the appeal? If a Bishop (says the Canon) Council. Sardic. c. 4.
has been deposed by the judgment of the Bishops of the neighbor provinces,
and pretends that he (...) to be heard again, let (...) other be suhstituted
in his Sea, till the Bishop of Rome examining the affair, have pronounced the
definition. And wherefore then when (...) and Vrsacius the two principal
adversaries to saint ATHANASIVS would depart from their pursuit, did they come
to Rome to ask pardon of the Pope for the slanders they had laid upon saint
ATHANASIVS? They came in person (said Sulpitius Seuerus) to ask o (...).
Sever. hist. sacr l. 2.
pardon of Julius Bishop of Rome? And themselves in the act of their penance;
Athan. Apol. 2.
your Piety in your natural goodness, has daigned to pardon our error. And
wherefore then when the same Vrsacius and Valens had obtained the Popes pardon,
did they add this protestation at the end of their act; And besides this we
promise, that if upon this occasion either those of the East, or Athanasius
himself will maliciously appeal us in judgment, Ibidem.
we will not depart from what you shall ordain? And the legates of the Asian
Bishops to Pope Liberius in like manner; If ante one after this profession of
faith expounded by us, will attempt any accusation against us, or against
those that have sent us; Soc. hist. Eccl l. 4 c. 12.
let him come with letters from your Holiness before such orthodoxall Bishops
as your Holiness shall think fit, and contest with us in judgment; And if a
crime appear, let the author be punished? And wherefore when the Arrians
constrained Pope Liberius to condemn saint ATHANASIVS, did they insert these
words into the false letter that they made him sign; (...). (...). le (...).
(...). p. 36
I have (...) the tradition of the Elders, sent in my behalf, Lucius, Paul,
and Aelianus priests of the Roman Church into Alexandria to Athanasius, to
cause him to come to Rome, to the end I might appoint he being present upon his
person, what the discipline of the Church exacts? And for what cause does S.
BASILE testify, that when Pope Liberius had restored Eustathius Bishop of
Sebaste in Armenia, who had been deposed by the Council of Militina in
Armenia, an orthodox and Catholic council, the council of Tyana in
Cappadocia received him without inquiring of the condition; by means whereof
he had been restored: The things (says he) which were propounded to him by
the blessed Liberius, Basil. ep. 74.
and those whereto he submitted himself, we know not, saving that he brought a
letter which restored him, which having been showed to the Council of Iyana,
he was reestablished in his Bishopric? And wherefore then when S. JOHN
CHRYSOSTOM had recourse by letters to Pope Innocent to procure the sentence to
be abrogated that the mock council of Constantinople had pronounced against
him, did he write to him; One thing, I require Chrysostom. ad Innoc. ep. 2.
of your vigilant soul, which is, that although those that have troubled the
world, be sick of an impenitent and incurable disease yet if they will remedy
it they may neither be punished, nor interdicted? And wherefore then when the
council of Ephesus had excommunicated and deposed John Patriarch of Antioch,
and his adherents, did it reserve the definitive judgment to the Pope, to
correct or confirm the action, and besought the Pope to conceive a just
indignation against him, that so he might punish him for his rashness? We
have (say the Fathers of the council) reserved him to the judgment of thy
Co^c. Ephesians. p 2. act. 5. relat. ad Coelest.
piety; and the while we have declared them excommunicate and deprived of all
Saurdot all power. And a while after, May it then please thy Holiness to
conceive a Ibidem.
just indignation against these things; for if it be lawful for every one to
do outrage to the greatest Seas; (so spoke they because of the Sea of
Alexandria, which preceded that of Antioch) and to pronounce sentences
unlawful and not canonical, or rather contumelies, against those over whom
they have noe power etc. Ecclesiastical affairs will fall into an excessive
confusion; but if those that committ such enterprises may be punished according
to their desert, all (...) will cease. And wherefore then when the Emperor
Valentinian the third would suppress by one of his laws Hilarie Bishop of
Arles, who had presumed to consecrate Bishops of the Gauls without the Popes
license, does he say; That the Popes clemency alone permitted Hilarie still
to Novel. Theod. tit. 24.
bear the title of a Bishop? And again; We ordain, that whatsoever the Sea
Apostolic shall decree, shall be a law, (that is to say, shall be executed
by Ibid.
the ministers of the Imperial justice) and that every Bishop who being
called to Rome by the Pope, shall refuse to appear, shall be constrained by
the Governor of the province? And wherefore then when Flauianus Archbishop of
Constantinople Ep. Valent. Imper. in ep. praeam. Co^c. (...)
had been condemned by the false Council of Ephesus, did the same Valentinian
the third write to the Emperor Theodosius his Father in law; We ought in our
days to preserve to the blessed Apostle Peter, the dignity of the Reverence
proper to him, inuiolate, that the blessed Bishop of the city of Rome, to
whom antiquity has yielded the Priesthood over all, may have way to judge of
Bishops, and of faith: For for this reason Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople,
followiug the custom of Counsels, has appealed to him by petition in the
contention moved concerning faith? And wherefore then when Theodoret had been
condemned in the same Council of Ephesus, did he write to the Pope; I attend
the sentence Theod. ep. ad Leon.
of your Apostolic Throne, and do beseech your Holiness to succor me
appealing to your right and just judgment, and to command that I may he
transported to you, and verify that my doctrine sollowes the Apostolical
paths? And for what cause when the Pope had restored him, did the Senators
that assisted Co^c. Chalc act. 1.
at the Council of Chalcedon say; Let the most Reverend Bishop Theodoret come
in, because the most holy Archbishop Leo has restored him to his Bishops Sea?
And the Council even the same; Theodoret is worthy of his Sea; Long Ibid.
act. 8
live Archbishop Leo; Leo has judged the judgment of God? And wherefore then
when Pope Leo would set his hand to the restitution of the Bishops, that had
inclined to the false Council of Ephesus, did he write to Anatolius Archbishop
of Constantinople; But as for those that have more (...) sinned (...) co ad
Anatol. ep. 4 4.
in this cause, if perchance they come to repentance, and abandoning the
defense of themselves, being converted to condemn their own error, and that
their satisfaction may be such, as it seems they ought not to be rejected,
let the matter be reserved to the more mature determination of the Sea
Apostolic? And for what cause when Paschasianus the Popes Legate, voted upon
the same subject, did he pronounce in the presence of the Council of
Chalcedon, that the Pope had pardoned all the Bishops and Archbishops of the
East, which had suffered themselves to be (...) borne by the violence of
Dioscorus? The Sea Co^c. Chalc act. 3.
Apostolic (says he) has granted them pardon for what they have against
their (...) committed, for as much as they have hither to remained adhering to
the most holy Archbishop Leo, and to the most holy and universal Council?
And wherefore then when Dioscorus and the false Council of Ephesus had
restored Eutyches, who had been judged in the first instance, by the Archbishop
of Constantinople, and in the (...) instance by the Pope, did the Council of
Chalcedon cry out, that Dioscorus and the false Council of Ephesus had
restored to Eutyches the dignity that the Pope had deprived him of; He has
(said they) declared Eutyches in (...), and has restored to him the dignity
taken Ibid. p. 3.
from him by your Holiness? And wherefore then when John Patriarch of
Alexandria, had been deposed from his patriarkship, and Peter surnamed Mongus
established in his place, did John appeal to Pope Simplicius, and took
Synodicall letters from Calendion Patriarch of Antioch, to accompany his
appeal? John (says Liberatus) addressed himself to Calendion Patriarch
Liberat. in (...). c. 16.
of Antioch, and having gotten from him Synodic all letters of intercession,
appealed to Pope Simplicius? And wherefore then when Pope Felix successor to
Simplicius, had deposed the same Peter Mongus Patriarch of Alexandria, Vict.
Tun. (...) in Zenon.
and Acacius Patriarch of Constantinople, and Peter surnamed the Tanner,
Patriarch of Antioch: and that these three Patriarchs trusting upon the support
of the Emperor Zeno, who was an heretic like themselves, despised the Popes
sentence; does Victor of Tunes say, that they dyed all three, under damnation?
And wherefore then when the Emperor Justin a Catholic Prince was come to the
Empire, was the sentence that the Pope had pronounced against them executed so
exactlie, that their names even after their deaths were blotted out of the
records of the Churches of Alexandria, of Antioch, and of Constantinople: And
that for the rest that had communicated with them, but were not comprehended by
name within the Popes letters, the Emperor was feign to demand pardon of Just.
ep. ad Hormisd.
the Pope for them? We ask grace (says the Emperor, writing to Pope
Hormisdas) for the names, not of Acacius, not of either Peter; that is to say,
not of Peter Patriarch of Antioch, and of Peter Patriarch of Alexandria, not of
Dioscorus, or Timotheus, of whom your Holiness letters to us directed, made
especial mention, but of those whom the Episcopal Reuereuce has celebrated
in the other cities? And wherefore then when Pope Agapet deposed within
Constantinople Liberat. in (...) c. 12.
itself Anthimus Patriarch of Constantinople, does Liberatus say; The
Empress Theodora wife to the Emperor Justinian on the one side secretly
offered great presents to Pope Agapet, and one the other side tried him with
threats, to hinder him from deposing Anthimus; but the Pope persisted in not
hearing her request: And Anthimus seeing himself cast out of his Sea, rendered
up the Archiepiscopall mantle to the Emperors, and retired himself into a
place, where the Empress took him into her protection? And for what cause
when the Council of Constan (...), holden under Menas, speaks of the
deposition of the same (...) Patriarch of Constantinople, does it say, that
the Pope had pardoned Peter Patriarch of Jerusalem, and the other Bishops of
the East that had communicated with him? It must not be wondered at (says the
Co^c. Constable sub Men. act. 1.
Council) if the great Sea Apostolic still continue to follow the first
tract, preserving the Rights of the Church inuiolate, and maintayning the
faith, and granting pardon to those that have sinned. And again; The blessed
Pope Ibid. act. 4.
Agapet of holy and Reverend memory, comeing into this Royal City, has
next God given his helping hand to the sacred Canons, and has cast Anthimus
out of the Sea which appertained not to him, and has pardoned those who had
participated or communicated with him? And wherefore then when John Archbishop
of Larissa, and John Primate of the first Justinianea had iniustly condemned
the one in the first, and the other in the second instance Adrian Bishop of
Thebes in Thessalia, did Saint GREGORY deprive the Bishop of the first
Iustinianea of the communion, Gregor. Mag. l. 2. indict. (...). ep. 6.
for the space of thirty days, and Ecclipsed the Bishopric of Thebes from
the jurisdiction of the Archbishopricke of Larissa; and ordained, that if the
Archbishop of Larissa should any more attempt Ibid. ep. 7
to enterprise any thing upon the Bishop of Thebes, he should remain deprived
of the sacred communion, so as it might not be restored to him, except at the
point of death, without the leave of the Bishop of Rome? And wherefore then
when the same S. GREGORY restored Id. l. 5. ind. 14. ep. 64.
Athanasius Abbot of Tamnaca in Lycaonia, who had been deposed by John
Patriarch of Constantinople, and had appealed from him to the Sea Apostolic,
did he say to him; We declare thee free from all crime of heresy, and give
thee free le aue to repair to thy Monastery, and there to hold the same
place as thou did before? But for as much as these shifts are more then
sufficiently confuted by the only Canons of the Council of Sardica, which
were framed to justify the restitution of S. ATHANASIVS, and in the presence
of S. ATHANASIVS himself, we remitt the Reader to the Chapter we shall
hereafter make thereof: And the while we will examine In the chapter of the
Council of Sardica.
the objections that Calvin alleadges against the appeals to the Sea
Apostolic, which consist in five principal instances; which though they are
treated of under two titles; the one of corrections, and the other of appeals:
Nevertheless for as much as the right of appeals dependes Calu. inst. l. 4.
6. 7.
from that of corrections; and besides that Calvin mingles the instances of the
one with the instances of the other, we will treat of them under one Title; to
wit, under that of Appeals.

Of the opposition of S. Ireneus to Pope Victor. CHAPT. II.
THE first instance then that Calvin alleges against the Popes Id. ibid.
censures, is taken from Eusebius an Arrian author, and from Ruffinus enemy to
the Roman Church his translator; who writ, that S. IRENEVS reprehended Pope
Uictor for having excommunicated the Churches of Asia for the question of the
day of Pasche, which they observed according to a particular tradition that S.
JOHN had introduced for a time in their provinces, because of the neighborhood
of the Jews, and to bury the Synagogue with honor, and not according to Calu.
vbi supra.
the universal tradition of the Apostles. Jreneus (says Calvin) reprehended
Pope Victor bitterly, because for a light cause he had moved a great and
perilous contention in the Church. There is this in the text that Calvin
produces; He reprehended him, that he had not done well, to cut of from the
body of unity, so many and so great Churches. But against whom makes
this, but against Ruffin. in verse. hist.
those that object it? for who sees not, that S. IRENEVS, does not there Ecel.
Eus. l 5. c. 24.
reprehend the Pope for the want of power, but for the ill use of his power;
and does not reproache to the Pope, that he could not excomcommunicate the
Asians, but admonishes him, that for so small a cause he should not have cut
of so many provinces from the body of the Church? Jreneus (says Eusebius)
did fitly exhort Pope Victor, that he should Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 24.
not cut of all the Churches of God which held this ancient tradition. And
Ruffinus translating and enuenoming Eusebius, says; He questioned Victor, that
he had Ruffin. ib. c. 24.
not done well in cutting of from the body of unity so many and so great
Churches of Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
God. And in truth, how could S. IRENEVS have reprehended the Pope for want of
power; he that cries: To the Roman Church, because of a more (...). book.
Chapt. 25.
powerful principality; (that is to say, as above appears, because of a
principality more powerful then the temporal: or as we have expounded
otherwhere; because of a more powerful Original) it is necessary that every
Church should agree? And therefore also S. IRENEVS alleges not to Pope
Victor the example of him, and of the other Bishops of the Gauls assembled in
a council holden expresselie for this effect, who had Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5
c. 22.
not excommunicated the Asians, nor the example of Narcissus Bishop of
Jerusalem, and of the Bishops of Palestina assembled in an other Council,
holden expressly for the same effect; who had not excommunicated them, nor the
example of Palmas, and of the other Bishops of Pontus assembled in the same
manner, and for the same cause in the Region of Pontus, who had not
excommunicoted them, but only alleadges to Iren. apud Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5.
c. 26.
him the example of the Popes his predecessors: The Prelates (says he) who
have presided before Soter in the Church where thou presidest, Anisius, Pius,
Hyginus, Telesphorus, and Sixtus, have not observed this custom, etc. and
nevertheless none of those that observed it, have been excommunicated. And
yet, o admirable providence of God, the success of the after ages showed, that
even in the use of his power, the Popes proceeding was just For after the death
of Victor, the Counsels of Nicea, of Constantinople, and of Ephesus, Conc.
Antioch. c. 1. Co^c Constable c 7.
excommunicated again those that held the same custom with the provinces,
that the Pope had excommunicated, and placed them in the Catalogue Co^c. Ephesians.
p. 2. act. 6.
of heretics, under the titles of heretics Quarto decumans!

But to this instance Caluins Sect do annexe two new observations; the first,
that the Pope having threatened the Bishops of Asia to excommunicate them,
Polycrates the Bishop of Ephesus and Metropolitan of Asia, despised the Popes
threats, as it appears by the answer of the same Polycrates Fuseb hist.
Eccl. l. 5. c. 24.
to Pope Uictor, which is inserted in the writings of Eusehius, and of S.
IEROM, and which S IEROM seems to approve when he says, Hieron. in script.
Ec-(...). in Polycr.
he reports it to show the spirit and authority of the man. And the second,
that when the Pope pronounced anciently his excommunications, he did noe other
thing but separate himself from the communion of those that he excommunicated
and did not thereby separate them from the universal communion of the Church.
To the first then we say, that so far is this epistle of Polycrates from
abating and diminishing the Popes authority, that contrary wise it greatly
magnifies and exaltes it. For although Polycrates blinded with the love of the
custom of his nation, which he believed to be grounded upon the word of God,
who had assigned the of the Month of March for the observation of the Pasche,
and upon the example of saint JOHN'S tradition maintains it obstinately;
Nevertheless, Exodus 12.
this that he answers, speaking in his own name, and in the name of the
Council of the Bishops of Asia, to whom he presided; I fear not those that
threaten us, for my elders have said, it is better to obaie God Hieronym. vbi
supra.
then man. Does it not show, that had it not been, that he believed the Popes
threate, was against the express word of God, there had been cause to fear
it, and he had been obliged to obaie him; for who knows not, that this
answer; it is better to obaie God then men, is not to be made but to those,
whom we were obliged to obaie, if their commandments were not contrary to
the commaundments of God; And that he adds, that he had called the Bishops of
Asia, to a National Council, being summoned to it by the Pope; does it not
insinuate, that the other Counsels where of Eusebius speaks, that were holden
about this matter, Eusebius. hist Eccl. l. 5. c. 23.
through all the provinces of the Earth, and particularly that of Palestina,
which if you believe the act that Beda said came to his hands, Theophilus Beda
in frag. de Aequinoctio. vernali.
Archbishop of Cesarea had called by the authority of Victor, were holden at
the instance of the Pope, and consequently that the Pope was the first mouer of
the universal Church? And that the Counsels of Nicea, of Constantinople of
Ephesus embraced the censure of Victor, and excommunicated those that observed
the custom of Polycrates: does it not prove, that it was not the Pope; but
Polycrates that was deceived, in beleiuing that the Popes commandment, was
against Gods commandment? And that saint IEROM himself, celebrates the
Paschall homelyes of Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, which followed the
order of Nicea concerning the Pasche; Does it not justify, that when saint
IEROM says; that he reports the Epistle of Policrates, to show the spirit,
and authority of the man; he intends by authority, not authority of right,
but of fact; that is to say, the credit that Polycrates had amongst the Asians
and other Quartodecumans?

To the second observation; which is, that when the Pope excommucated other
Bishops, Archbishops, or Patriarchs, he separated himself from their
communion, but did not thereby separate them from the communion of the Church;
We will do noe other thing, then examine examples that they alleged for
proof of their hypothesis; And yet we will not examine them all, for we have
already confuted the (...). book chap. 27.
most part of them in the Chapters preceding; as that of saint HILARY against
Liberius, and others the like? We will only treat of those that they propound
to us a new, which consist in three principal heads: The first is that the
fifth Counsel of Carthage ordained, that every Bishop that should fall into
the cases mentioned by the tenth and thirteenth canons of the same Council,
should content himself with the communion of his one Church alone, from whence
they conclude, that every excommunication, did not import privation of
Sacraments. The second, that Nicephorus writes, that Pope Vigilius having
excommunicated Menas Patriarch of Constantinople for four months, Menas
yielded him the same measure. And the third, that Sigesbert speaking of the
proceeding of Niceph. hist. Eccl l. 17. c 26.
Pope Innocent in the cause of saint CHRYSOSTOM says, that Pope Innocent and
the Bishops of the West suspended themselves from the Sigebert in Chron. ad
ann. 409.
communion of those of the East.

To the first then of these examples, which is; That the fifth Council of
Carthage odaines, that every Bishop that should fall into the case of Canons
above mentioned, should content himself with the communion of his own Church
only; We answer two things, The one, that the censure whereof the Canons of
this Council speak, was not an excommunication, but a restitution of
communion, by which those that did fall into the cases whereof there is
question, might administer the (...) in their own Diocesses, and to their own
People but not out of their diocesses. And the other, that the Pope himself,
often used (...) restriction, as it appears by the August. Epist. 162. (...).
Plantin (...). 2
Epistle of saint AVGVSRINE to Pope Celestine where speaking of the Bishops of
Africa, that the Popes his Predecessors had restored, whether by judgment, or
by confirmation into their Seas he reckons amongst the rest, Uictor one of the
Bishops of Mauritania Cesarea, who had been restored, conditionally not to
communicate but in his own Diocese. And by the Epistle of Pope LEO the first,
to Anatolius Patriarch of Constantinople; Leo ad Anatol. (...). epist. 38.
who ordained that the Bishops of the East, who had sinned in the false
Council of Ephesus, and desired to return to the communion of the Sea
Apostolic, they should remain till they had made sussicient satisfaction,
enclosed within the communion of their own Diocesses only, and barred from
communicating with other Catholic Bishops From whence it appears, that the
Pope had the Sovereign judgment, as well of the Bishops that ought to be
admitted to the Catholic commuuion, as of those that ought to be admitted to
the communion of their own Diocesses. For whereas Balsamon interpreting one
Balsam. in Co^c. Carth c. 79.
of these Canons, says, that it was a custom particular only to Africa, and
that it was practiced nowhere else; it was an ignorance of one that had learnt
but half his lesson.

To the second example, which is, that Nicephorus says, that Pope Uigilius
having excommunicated Menas Patriarch of Constantinople for four Months, and
that within Constantinople itself, Menas did the like Niceph. (...) (...)
Ibidem.
in his behalf; And that the Emperor Justinian angry with Uigilius act, set
men to apprehend him, by means whereof he fledd into the Temple of saint
SERGIVS, where he stuck amongst the organ Pipes because of his grossenes. We
answer two things; the one, that Nicephorus is an author not only removed
from Justinians age more then seven hundred years but a Schismaticke, and
often fabulous, and so dimsighted in the ecclesiastical Chronology of that
age, as he places a Pope called Agatho in the same Chapter, and in the
Chapters before, between Agapet and (...), and will have it that this Agatho
held a Council at Constantinople after Agapets death; and that he and Menas
presided there, against all history, which teaches us, that there was never
any Pope called Agatho, either that succeeded Agapet, or was tyme-fellowe with
Menas, nor that ever was at Constantinople; And that the first Pope that bore
the name of Agatho, was above an hundred and fifty year after Agapetus, and
never set foot in Constantinople; And that if by Agatho Nicephorus mean
Boniface the second who was created in Justinians time, and whose name seems
to have some affinity with the Greek signification of the word Agatho,
neither was Boniface the second Successor, but Predecessor to Agapetus, nor
ever saw Constantinople. And the other that this particular history of
Nicephorus is a fable; as it appears as well, because neither Procopius, nor
Liberatus, nor Victor Tunonensis, nor Marcellinus Comes, nor Euagrius, some
Grecians and some latins that have written the history of Justinian; and all
either of the same time, or of the same age, with Justinian, say nothing of
it, as because it is disproued by the dates of Chronology For Nicephorus
says, that Instinian repented this action because the Empress Theodora
interposed her intercession, and obtained that Justinian should receive
Uigilius, and Uigilius should admit Menas to the communion; and adds, that
this fell out the same year of the fifth general Council, which was the
twenty seventh year of the Empire of Justinian. Council. Constable. 6. oecumenic.
act. 3. and Vict. Tun. in Justin.
Now besides that the Empress was not likely to solicit either for Uigilius,
who had excommunicated her, Gregor. magn. l. 2. indict 10. epist. 36. Paul.
Diac. sieve Theophan. hist. l. 17. and (...)
because she would have enforced him to have received Anthymus Patriarch of
Constantinople, whose heresy she followed; or for Menas, who had been
established in steed of Anthymus; Council Constable. sub Men. act. 1. Marcellin.
Com. in Chron. Liberat. in breuiar. c. 21. Victor Tun. (...) Chron.
Procopius Procop. de bell. Goth. l. 3. de bello Pers. l. 1. and de bell Ital
aduersus Goth. l. 4.
and Uictor of Tunes Victor Tunensis Chron. in Justin.
Authors of the same time, and Theophanes Theoph. vel secundu^ alios, Paul.
Diacon. in Justinian.
after them affirm, that the Empress Theodora was dead in the beginning of
the two and twentieth year of Justinian, that is to say, more then sieve year
before the fifth Council of the same stamp, it is that Anastasius
Bibliothecary, (...). Bibliothec. de vit. Pontific. in Vigil,
an Author noe less fabulous in things remote from this time, and four
hundred year distant from the age of Justinian, says, that the Emperor in the
beginning received Vigilius with great honor and went to meet him, the Clergy
of Constantinople singing: Behold the Lord, the Ruler comes: But that
afterward the Empress who was an Eutychian having wonn her husband to cause
Anthymus to be restored, the head of the Eutychian faction, and Uigilius having
called them, Dioclesian Eleutherius one of the assistants struck Vigilius upon
the face, and said to him, Manslayer know thou to whom thou speak? art
thou ignorant that thou slewest Pope Siluerius? By occasion whereof Uigilius
being fledd into Chalcedon, the Empress made him be plucked out of the Temple
of S. EVPHEMIA, and made him be dragged with a cord about his neck through the
streets of Constantinople; for first, neither Procopius, nor Victor of Tunes,
nor Liberatus, nor Marcellinus Comes, nor Euagrius report any such thing. And
secondly, the same repugnancie as is in the fable of Nicephorus, is in this
also; to wit, that the Empress was then already dead. And it is not to be
said, that the acts that runn under Uigilius his name against Menas, Vigil ep.
ad universe.
make mention of the evil entertainment that Uigilius received from the
Emperor. For besides this, that the date of the acts which is of the five and
twentieth year of the Empire of Justinian, seems to be disproued by the acts
of the sixth general Council, where the legates of the Pope did prove, that
the writing which the Monothelites had supposed under this title, Council.
Constable. 6. oecum act. 3.
A discourse of Menas to Vigilius, in the fifth Council, was false, for as
much as the fifth Council had been (...) the twenty seventh year of the
Empire of Justinian, and that Menas was dead the one and twentieth. If it be not
so, that in steed of (...), which signifies one and twentieth, it should be
read (...), which signifies (...) and twentieth, which were yet sufficient for
the conclusion, that the Popes legates would draw from it; to wit, that Menas
was dead before the fifth Council. Besides this I say, these acts speak not
but of the flight of Uigilius to the Temples of S. PETER and of S. EVPHEMIA,
and affirm that it happened, not for the quarrel of Anthimus and the
Empress, but because Uigilius had condemned the Emperors Edict, concerning the
three chapters; and they noted, that the retreat of Uigilius into the Temple
of S. EVPHEMIA, was but the five and twentieth year of the Empire of Justinian,
more then three year before which Vigil. ep. ad universe
time Theodora the Empress was dead: And the^ suppose that Vigilius, the
memory of whose intrusion made him the more apt to be despised, for as much as
he got into the Papacy by the plott of the Empress, and with (...) and
simonicall covenants, his predecessor Siluerius being still alive, and was
become true Pope but after the death of Siluerius; after which the Clergy of
Rome for the benefit of peace had accepted him, had been persecuted and
unworthily used at Constantinople by the Emperor, with whom he was constrained
to spend his life in exile, because the Goths under the conduct of their new
King Totilas, had again taken Rome; whereto would this turn, but to the
glory of Uigilius, and to the shame of the Emperor? For says not Nicephorus,
that the Emperor repented Niceph. vbi supra.
it, and do not the same acts show, that he sent the principal ministers of
his Empire to Uigilius to pray him to return? And that Uigilius during this
persecution, remained so constant, that he would Vigil. ep. ad (...).
never give any way to the Emperors violences, but deposed in Constantinople
it self Theodorus Archbishop of Cesarea, the principal Governor of the
Emperor; and excommunicated Menas Patriarch of Constantinople, and all that
adhered to him. Did it not thoroughly show, the confidence he had in the
dignity of his Sea? We decree thee (says he) o Theodorus, Vigil. Pap. in
fragm. damnat. Theod. to. 2. Council.
late Bishop of Cesarea, by the publication of this sentence, deprived as well
of Sacerdot all honor, and of the Catholic communion, as of all Episcopal
power and function; and we ordain, that thou shall hereafter apply thy-self
to nothing, but to the tears of penance, by which having obtained remission
of thy crimes, thou may recover; if thou deseruest it, the place of (...),
and of communion with me, or after my death, with my successor. And thou Menas
Bishop of the city of Constantinople, which art inwrapt with the same crime,
with all the Bishops, Metropolitans, and Micropolitans, etc, we suspend you
from the sacred communion, till each of you, acknowledging the error os his
preuarication, have blotted out before us his proper fault with a competent
satisfaction. And this that he cries out, numbering Theodorus Ibidem.
his crimes; Thou art come in despising the authority of the Sea Apostolic,
which had pronounced interdiction by us into the Church where there hung the
Emperors Edicte, (...) there have celebrated the solemnity of Mass. And this
that he adds; We have charged the Ministers of the most clement Idem ep. ad
(...).
Emperor, to signify to him from us, that he ought not to communicate with
those which have by us been excommunicated, least he thereby run, which God
forbid, into a grievous sin. Does it not show that the Pope in
excommunicating the other Bishops, Archbishops, and Patriarks, did not only
pretend to separate himself from their communion, but to separate them, and
cut them of from the communion of the Church? And as for the persecution of
the Empress which happened long before, and for an other cause, to wit,
forasmuch as Vigilius after his predecessor Siluerius was dead, and that he was
become true Pope, would not keep the promise that he had made, and secretly
accomplished to her during his Antipapacy, to admit Anthymus and the other
Eutychians into his communion: What greater glory could Uigilius receive, then
that whereof S. GREGORY speaks when he writes; Pope Uigilius constituted in
the Royal city, that is to say, at Gregor. Magn. l. 2. indict. 10. ep. 36.
Constantinople, published a sentence of condemnation against Theodora then
Empress, and against the Acephales? And what more visible punishment could the
Empress receive, then that whereof Victor Tunonensis writes; The ninth year
after the Consulship of Basilius, the Empress Theodora, enemy Vict. Tun. in
Chron.
to the Council of Chalcedon stricken her whole body over with the wound of
an universal canker; (that is to say, with leprosy) prodigiouslie ended her
life? For whereas the same Uictor, who was a Schismaticke, and took part with
Rusticus the Deacon, and other Roman Clerks revolted against Pope Vigilius,
and against the fifth general Council, writes that the Bishops of Africa,
that is to say, the schismatic Bishops of Africa (for the Catholic
Bishops of Africa took the other part) excommunicated Vigilius, there has
already been two things spoken of concerning this; the one that they held not
Uigilius Ibidem.
for true Pope, but for an intrusiue Pope, because he had usurped the Papacy,
his predecessor Siluerius being yet alive, as it appears by this, that the
same Victor places a little after amongst the nullities of the fifth general
Council, the vice of the creation of Uigilius, who had, said he, Vict. Tun ad
ann. 13. post co^sul. Basil.
(...) ordained Bishop of Rome, Siluerius being still alive. And the other,
that Pope Siluerius had already long before excommunicated Uigilius for having
intruded himself into the Papacy in these terms; Do Silver. Pap ep ad Vigil
thou then receive, and those that consent whith thee the sentence of pain of
condemnation, and know that being condemned by us, by the judgment of the holy
Ghost, and by the Apostolic authority, that the name and office of
Sacerdotall ministry, is taken from thee. And again; (...) Siluerius Pope of
Ibidem.
the city of Rome giving consent to all the statutes, I have signed this
decree of Anathema against the usurper Uigilius. By means whereof, the act of
the Schismatic Bishops of Asrica against Uigilius, was rather a renouation
and an application of the excommunication of Pope Silutrius, then a primitive
and original excommunication.

To the third example, which is, that Sigebert writes, that Pope Sigebert. in
Chron ad ann. 409.
Innocent the first, and the Bishops of the West, suspended themselves from the
communion of those of the East for the quarrel of Saint CHRYSOSTOM; from
whence the Protestants infer, that when the Pope excommunicated the other
Bishops, Archbishops, or Patriarks, he separated himself from their communion;
and did not separate them, from the communion of the Church: We have three
answers; the first, that it is a ridiculous thing, to allege for the
testimony of the history of Pope Innocent, and of S. CHRYSOSTOM, Sigebert;
who writ seven hundred years after them, and who was an open enemy to the
Sea Apostolic, and partaker with the Emperor Henry the fourth against Pope
Gregory the seventh and his successors. The second, that Pope Innocent the
first, did not suspend himself from the communion of those of the East, but
suspended those of the East from the Ecclesiastical communion: the which
although they still continued in fact with some of their Diocesans according to
the custom of Schismatickes, this hindered them not from being suspended by
right, and that they should send to demand restitution of the Pope, as it
appears by these words of the same Innocent in the epistle to Boniface; Know
(says he, speaking of those of Innoc. ad Bonif. ep. 14.
Antioch) that we have received them into our bowels, least the members which
had a long while required health, should be excluded from the unity of the
body. And in the epistle to Maximianus; What we have done in the behalf Idem
ad Maximian. epist. 16.
of those of Antioch, we will do it in the behalf of others, if they will
accomplish the same treaties and conditions, and send as those did, to beseech
by a solemn legation, that the communion might be restored to them. And in the
Epistle to Alexander Patriarch of Antioch; I have diligently inquired, whether
the cause of the blessed Bishop John had been satisfied in all conditions, and
having learned from those of your legation, that all things had been
accomplished according to our desire I have by the grace of God, admitted the
communion of your Church. And a little after; As for the letters of the Bishop
Atticus, because they were joined with yours, we have received them, least the
refusal of a man, already a long while suspended by us, should turn to your
prejudice; and yet we have sufficiently, and more then sufficiently ordained in
the acts, what ought to be observed in his person. And Theodoret Theodor. hist.
Eccl. l. 5 c. 34.
treating of the same matter; John being dead, those of the West, would never
admit the communion, either of the Egiptians, those of the East, nor of the
Bishops of Bosphorus and Thrace; that is to say, of the division of
Constantinople, till they had inscribed the name of that admirable personage
into the roll of the Bishops his predecessors; and esteemed Arsacius, that
succeeded him, scarce worthy of a salutation; and as for Atticus successor of
Arsactus, after many legations and requests for peace, they received him
finally, but when he had added the name of John to the other Bishops. And the
third, that if what Sigebert writes were true, there were great difference
between suspending themselves from the communion of any one, which was
sometimes done by intermitting the commerce of communicatory letters, and
excommunicating him, or making him incommunicable, (...) and that in the matter
of very excommunications there was great difference between minor
excommunications, which deprived those that were smitten with them from the use
of the Sacraments, but deprived them not as is above said, from the other
fruits of the Above 1. book Chap. 27.
Churches communion; and the mayor excommunications, which took away not
only the use of the Sacraments, but cast out those that were therewith
attainted, from the body and society of the Church. Now it was with this kind
of excommunication, wherewith Pope Victor excommunicated the Bishops of Asia,
who observed the Pasche Eus. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 25.
according to the Jewish computation. Victor (says Eusebius) moved with the
answer of Polycrates, attempted to cut of at one blow from the common union,
all the Diocesses of Asia, and the neighboring Churches as Heterodoxall, and
proscribed them by letters, declaring all the brethren which inhabited those
Regions, incommunicable. And again; Ireneus exhorted Victor, that he should
not cut Ibid. c. A6.
of (...) all the Churches of God, that observed the tradition of this ancient
custom. By which words it may appear, that the meaning of Vistors censure
was, not simply to separate himself from the communion of the Asians, but to
divide and cut of the Asians from the body and society of the whole Church;
and that the remonstrance and exhortation that S. IRENEVS and others made him,
was not to keep him from seperating himself from the communion of the Asians,
but that he should not cut of the Asians from the body and common mass of
the Church for the verbes, to proscribe, and to declare incommunicable,
express an other thing, then to separate himself from them; and the Greek
word (...) whereof Eusebius makes use, signifies to divide and cut of from
the body and from the mass; for which cause Ruffinus has translated it; to
cut of from the unity of the body; He reproved him (says Ruffi. hist. Eccl.
l. 5. c. 24.
Ruffinus) for not doing well in cutting of from the unity of the body, so
many and so great Churches of God. And certainly, what subject of terror had
Pope Victor give to the Bishops of Asia in threatening to excommunicate them, if
he had intended only to separate himself from them? And why should Polycrates
have said, that having the word of God for him, he Polycrat. apud Eusebius hist.
Eccl. l 5 c. 24. and apud Hieron. in catal. scrip. Eccles.
feared not those that threatened him; if this threat had been noe more but to
separate himself from their communion, and not to separate and cut them of,
from the communion of the body, and from the society of the Church? For what
greater wound had the Asian Bishops received in the Popes separation from them,
then the Pope in the Asian Bishops separation from him, if the Popes
excommunication had been noe other thing, then a declaration, that separated
himself from their communion? Contrariwise, the Bishops of Asia minor, and of
the neighboring provinces, that the Pope comprehended in his censure, being so
great number as Polycrates says, that if he should represent their names, the
multitude would seem too great; why had it not been more opprobry for the
Pope, to be separated from them, then for them to be separated from the Pope,
if the Popes excommunication, had been but a simple declaration that he
departed from their communion? And it can not be said, that Eusebius writes,
that Victor attempted to cut them of; for the question is not of the
diminutiue terms, which Eusebius, whom S. IEROM calls the ensignebearer of the
Arrian faction, uses with an Arrian en Eusebius. (...). Ruffin. Apol. 1.
uie and malignitie against the Roman Church; but of the intention of Victor,
and of the Bishops that made their remonstrances to him. And yet less can it
be replied that the other Bishops opposed themselves against it, for they
opposed it not, but in the form of remonstrances and exhortations,
representing to him not that he could not do it and that he enterprized beyond
his jurisdiction; but that for so small a cause he ought not to cut of so
many Churches from the universal body and society of the Church. Wherein
was discovered the evil will of Eusebius against the Roman Church, who says
that the other Bishops did bitterly reprove Victor; and when there is question
to produce an example of the bitterness of their reprehensions, he alleadges for
his only pattern; the words of S. IRENEVS, where there is not one bitter word
to be found, and which contains only simple and gentle remonstrances, and
full of submission to the person of Victor, and to the authority of his Sea.
For to represent to the Pope that he ought not to cut of so many Churches
from the body, and from the society of the universal Church; was it any
other thing then to confess, that if the cause had been sufficient, as
afterward Co^c. Antioch c. 1. Conc. Ephesians. p. 2. act. 6.
the Counsels of Nicea and of Ephesus showed it to be, it belonged to him to
cut them of, and chiefly in the time of the pagan Emperors, under whom noe
general counsels could be celebrated? And to use the word (...), which
signifies to divide and cut of from the body and from the mass; what was it,
but to say, that it was the Roman Church; that as the stock and root did not
cut her self of from the Churches, that she excommuni cated, but cut them of
from her self, and in cutting them of from her self, cut them of from the
communion of the whole body, noe more nor less, then the head in cutting of
any member from the communion thereof, cutts not it self of from that, but
cutts of that from it self; and in cutting it of, does not only cut it of
from the communion of the head only, but from the communion of the whole
body; or that the stock and root, in cutting of some branche, cuts not of it
self from that, but cutts that of from it self, and in cutting it of, cutts
it not of only from the communion of the root, but from that of the whole
tree? And therefore we also see, that in all the breaches of communion which
have been between the Roman Church and the other Churches, there has happened
four things? The first, that when other Churches have separated themselves
from the Roman, all the Catholic Churches have always remained united with
the Roman, and have separated themselves from those which have forsaken her.
The second, that when it has been the Roman Church, which has excommunicated
others, all the Catholic Churches have forsaken them; or if they not thought
the cause of the excommunication grievous, have had recourse to the Roman
Church with remonstrances, and intercessions to beseech her to suspend and
revoke her censure; as it appears both by the words of S. IRENEVS to Pope
Victor upon the excommunication of the Asians: he Iren. apud. Eusebius. vbi supra
exhorted him not to cut of all the Churches of God (...) held the tradition
of this ancient custom. And by those of Dionisius Bishop of Dionis. Alexa^d.
apud Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. (...).
Alexandria, to Pope Steven, upon the condemnation of the Bishops of
Cappadocia; I have (said he) written beseeching him for all these things; or
occording to the other translation; beseeching him for them all. And by these
of Socrates upon the Popes censure against Flauianus Patriarch of Antioch;
Socr. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 15.
Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria having sent the Priest Isidorus appeased
Damasus (you must read Anastasius) his indignation, and represented to him,
that it was profitable for the concord of the people, to forgett the fault of
Flauianus; and so the communion having been restored to Flauianus, the
factions of the people of Antioch were soon after reunited. And by these of
the Council of Carthage upon Pope Innocents sentence against Theophilus
Patriark of Alexandria for S. CHRYSOSTOMES cause; It had been agreed upon, that
concerning the dissension of the Roman and Alexandrian Churches, Pope Co^c
Cart. (...) (...). (...). 7. and (...) (...). 2.
Innocent should be written to, that both Churches may observe the peace that
our Lord has commanded. For why should it be ordained, that Pope Innocent
should be written to, and not Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, but because
it was the Pope that kept the key of the Ecclesiastical communion; and that it
was the Roman Church to whom it belonged to receive the Alexandrian Church into
her communion, and not to the Alexandrian Church to receive the Roman into her
communion? And in brief, that it belonged to the Roman Church to prescribe to
the Alexandrian, the laws of the reunion, and not to the Alexandrian to (...)
them to the Roman; as Theodoret witnesses, that it happened a while after in
these words; John being dead, those of the West would never admit the
communion nether of the Egiptians, nor of those of the East, nor of the
`Bishops Theo lor (...). Eccl. l. 5. c. 34.
of Bosphorus and Thrace till they had inscribed the name of this admirable
personage into the roll of the Bishops his predecessors? And the third, that
when the separation has continued, those that were excluded from the communion
of the Roman, have always been cast out from the communion of the other
Catholic Churches, and reputed for heretics or schismatickes; as
it-appeares even in the business of the Asians excommunicated by Victor, whose
Sectaries were afterward constrained Conc Ephesians. p 2. act. 6.
to abjure their heresy in these terms; I anathematize all heresy, and
particularly that of the Quartodecumans? And the fowrth, that when the divided
parts were to be reunited, the other Churches have always sent to take and
demand their restitution into the commnnion of the Roman Church, and that the
Roman Church never sent, to take or demand that of other Churches? Those of
the West (says Theodoret, speaking of Theodor. (...) Eccl. l. 5 c. 23.
Flauianus Patriarch of Antioch) promised to lay by all bitterness, and to
(...) the Ambassadors that Flauianus should send. Which the divine Flauianus
having heard, he sent a legation of famous Bishops, and Priests, and Deacons of
Antioch to Rome. And Socrates; The communion having been restored to Soc. hist.
(...). l. 5. c 15.
Flauianus, the parts of the Church of Antioch, were soon after reunited, And
Pope Innocent the first, writing to Alexander Patriarch of Antioch upon S. JOHN
CHRYSOSTOMES cause; I have diligently in quired whether Innocent (...) (...).
cp. 17.
the case of the blessed Bishop John, had been satisfied in all points, and
having found by those of your (...), that all things had been accomplished
according to our desire, I have by the grace of God admitted the communion of
your Church. And (...) treating of the same matter. John being dead, those of
the West would Theodor. (...). (...). vbi supra.
never admit the communion, neither of the Egiptians, nor of those of the
East, nor of the Bishops of Bosphorus and Thrace; that is to say, of the
division of Constantinople till they had inscribed the name of that admirable
personage, into the roll of the Bishops his predecessors, and scarcely
esteemed Arsacius who had succeeded him (...) to (...) saluted; and as for
Atticus successor to Arsacius, after many legations Ibid.
and (...) for peace, they finally received him, but when he had first added
the name of John to the other Bishops. And Pope Leo in his Epistle to Anatolius
Leo (...) Anatol. ep. 38.
Patriark of Constantinople concerning the Bishops of the false council of
Ephesus; We will (said he) that by our Legates, the care of the affair being
communicated to thee, it be ordained, that those that with full satisfaction
shall condemn their evil actions, and rather chose to accuse, then to defend
themselves, shall enjoy the unity of our peace and communion. And else where;
But as for those that have more grievously sinned, if they after such
satisfaction, as it shall seem it ought not Id. adeund ep. 44.
to be refused etc. let the things be reserved to the more mature determination
of the Sea Apostolic. And Pope Hormisdas tyme-felowe with the Emperor Justin
in his Epistle to Epiphanius Patriarch of Constantinople; You must (said he)
put on my person, and of those that shall (...) with you in communion, Conc.
sub. Men Act. (...) Ibid.
and by you to the Sea Apostolic, inform us by your letters therein, (...)
therein the tenor of the libells which they shall have presented. And again;
Which we thought wought to impose upon you, laying our charge upon your
diligence, because you have given noe small proof of your resistance to
heretics. And Victor of Tunes reporting the same history: The Emperor Justin
reunited those of the East etc. with Vict. Tun. in Chrome
(...) satisfaction for those of the West. And the Emperor Justinian nephew and
Successor to Justin, in the Epistle to Pope John surnamed (...); We have
hastened to submitt and unit to your Holiness Sea, all the (...) of the Codic l
1. Tit. (...). l 8.
East Countries. And certainly if the Pope had holden noe other rank in the
ecclesiastical communion then the other Patriarchs, Archbishops, or Bishops,
for what cause was it, that when the Pope excommunicated any other Patriarchs,
as when he excommunicated Flauianus, (...), and Peter Patriarchs of Antioch or
as when he excommunicated Nestorius Accacius and Anthimus Archbishops of
Constantinople or as when he excommunicated Theophilus, Peter, and other
Patriarchs of Alexandria, he did for all this incurr noe censure, from the
Bishops, or Catholic Counsels, but was reputed to do, what he might do?
Whereas, when any other Patriarch, yea under the pretense of a general
Council, did (...) the Pope, he was punished and deposed for this presumption,
as for an enormious and extraordinary Sacrilege. For what had not Dioscorus
Patriarch of Alexandria done in his false Council of Ephesus? he had embraced
the heresy of Eutyches; he had condemned the Catholic doctrine; he had
excommunicated Flauianus Archbishop of Constantinople who maintained it; and
had not only excommunicated him, but also slain him: And neuertelesse, o
eminent dignity of the (...) Apostolic! these Sacrileges were not the
principal causes of his deposition, but that he and his pretended Council had
dared to excommunicate the Pope; Dioscorus (says Anatolius Archbishop of
Constantinople) Council. Chalced. Act. 5.
bath not hene deposed for the faith, but because he excommunicated my Lord,
the Archbishop Leo, and that having been cited thrice before the Council, he
appeared not. And the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon in their relation to
the Pope; After all these things (said they) he has extended his frenzy even
Co^c. Chale relat. ad Leon.
against him; to whom the guard of the Vine has been committed by our Savior,
that is to say, against thy Holynesses, and has me ditated an excommunication
against him, who laboreth to unite the body of the Church. But why should we
have recourse to particular examples, since the common voice of antiquity
teaches us, that in all the tumults, and in all the confusions of the Schisms
and heresies, which have perturbed the Christian Religion, the Roman Church
has always been as the center, the principle, and original of the
ecclesiastical communion, and as the Ensign colonel of the army of Jesus
Christ, upon whom all the other Catholic (...) have cast their eyes, and to
whom they have gathered (...) separating themselves from the communion of those
that, communicated not with her and embracing the communion of those, who
communicated with her? For what mean these words of saint IRENEVS With the
Roman Iren. l. 3. c. 3
Church because of a more powerful principality, it is necessary that every
Church should complie: And these of saint CYPRIAN; The Roman Church is the Cypr
ad Corn. (...)
Chair of Peter, and the principal Church, from whence the Sacerdot all
unity has proceeded: And these of saint AMBROSE; He asked whether the Bishop
of Ambros. de obit. Frat.
that place, consented with the Catholic Bishops; that is to say, with the
Roman Church: And these of Theodoret; The Emperor Gratian commanded that the
Churches should he delivered to those, that held communion with Damasus, which
Theod. Iustor Eccl l. 5. c. 2.
was (added he,) executed throughout the world: but that the Roman Church, was
the center, the beginning and the root of ecclesiastical communion, and that
whosoever was admitted to her communion, was likewise admitted to the communion
of the whole Body of the Catholic Church; and that those, who were excluded
out of her communion, were excluded out of the communion of the whole Body of
the Catholic Church? And what mean these words of saint HIEROM: I am joined
in Hieron. ad Damas. ep. 57.
communion with thy Blessedness; that is to say, with the Sea of Peter, I know
the Church is founded upon that Rock, etc. whosoever eats the lamb out of
this house, he is profane. And a little after; I know not Vitalis, I am
iguorant of Paulinus, Ibid. ep. 8
I reject Meletius whosoever gathers not with the, scatters. And again: In the
mean time I cry; If any one be joined to Peter's Chair, he is mine. And
these Optat. Mileuit cont. Parm. l. (...).
of Optatus Mileuitanus: At Rome there has been settled to Peter the Episcopal
Chair, in which there was set the first of all the Apostles, Peter, etc. to
the end that in this only Chair the unity of all, might be preserved. And a
little after: In the person of Cyricius, all the world co^municates with us, by
the commerce of formed Idem ibidem.
letters. And again; From whence is it, that you pretend to usurp to your
selves, the keys of the Kingdom, you that combat against Peter's Chair by
your presumptions and bold Sacriledges? But that the Roman Church was the
center, the principle, Idem ibidem.
and the root of Ecclesiastical communion, and that those that were admitted
into her communion, were admitted into the communion of the whole Catholic
Church; and that those, that were excluded from her communion, were excluded
from the communion of the whole Body of the Catholic Church? And what mean
these words of saint AUSTIN, In the Roman Church has always flourisht the
principality of the Aug ep. 162.
Apostolic Sea. And those of Eulalius Bishop of Syracusa to saint FVLGENTIV Se
to turn him from goeing to the Monasteries of Egypt: The Author vit ^^^lgent
F^^liciano successori ipsus. ^icat.
Countries whither thou desire to travel, a perfidious dissension, has
separated them from the communion of the blessed Peter; all those Religious
persons, whose admirable abstinence is celebrated, should not have the
Sacraments of the Altar common with thee^ And these of Victor of Tunes,
speaking of the rebellion of Vitalian against the Emperor Anastasius, the
heretic: He would never promise Vict. Tun. Chronic. in Anast.
peace to the Emperor, till first he had restored the defendors of the Council
of Chalcedon, who had been banished into their own Seas, and till he had united
all the Churches of the East, to the Roman: But that the Roman Church was the
center, principle and the root of the Ecclesiastical communion; and that
those who were admitted to her communion, were admitted to the communion of the
whole Catholic Church; and that those who were excluded from the communion of
the whole Body of the Catholic Church? And what do these words of John
Patriarch of Constantinople intend; We promise, not to recite amidst the sacred
mysteries the names of those, who are separated Joan. Patr. Constant. ep. ad
Hormisd tom 2. Council.
from the communion of the Catholic Church: that is to say, who do not
fully consent with the Sea Apostolic? And those of the Emperor JUSTINIAN;
We preserve in all things, the unity of the most holy Churches with the most
holy Pope of old Rome? And these of Menas Patriarch of Constantinople: We
follow Cod. l. 1. tit 1 l. 7. Council.
the Sea Apostolic and obeie it, and communicate with those that communicate
therewith; and condemn those, that it condemns? And these of the Bishops
Constable. sub. Men. act 4 Greg.
returning from the Schism to the Church in the time of saint GREGORY the
Great: I promise I will never return to the Schism, from whence, Ma^n. l. 10
indict. 5. ep. 31.
by the mercy of our Redeemer, I have been delivered; but that I will remain
always in the unity of the Catholic Church, and in the communion of the
Bishop of Rome; but that the Roman Church was the center, the principle, and
the Root, of the ecclesiastical communion; and that those that were admitted
into her communion, were admitted into the Communion of the whole Catholic
Church and that those that were separated from her communion, were separated
from the communion of the whole Body of the Catholic Church?

Of the oppositions of saint Cyprian. CHAPT. III.
THE second instance of Calvin, is taken from saint CYPRIAN, Inst. Calu. 4 c. 7.
and consistes in seven heads produced by him, or by his disciples; The
first; that saint CYPRIAN calls Pope Steven, Brother. The second that he
complains, because Basilides a Bishop of Spain, having been deposed by a
Synod of his Province, for having bowed under persecution, and an other having
been ordained in his place, Pope Steven restored him. The third, that he says,
there were but a small number of lost and desperate persons, who believed that
the authority of the Bishops of Africa, was lesser. The fowrth, that he says,
that the ecclesiastical causes ought to be determined, where they were bredd.
The fifth, that he affirms, that the Episcopal power is one thing, whereof
every one holds his portion, vndiuidedly. The sixth, that he cries, none of
us constitutes himself Bishopp of Bishopps. And the seventh, finally that he
uses rude words against Pope Steven, and accuses him of ignorance and of
presumption. To the first then of these heads, which is that saint CYPRIAN
calls Pope Cornelius brother: We Cyp. in ep. ad Cornel.
answer, he calls him Brother, not to deny to him the superintendencie of the
Ecclesiastical government; but for two other causes: The one to insinuate
that the Popes superintendencie over other Bishops, was not a Lordly Monarchy,
as that of temporal princes over their subjects; but a gentle and brotherly
Monarchy, as that of an elder brother over his younger Brethren, which is the
title that our Lord himself would bear when he made himself be called the
first borne amongst Rom 8.
many brethren, and which is the memorial of humility, that God had Deuter.
17
given to the Kings of his people, when he had pronounced; Thou shall take a
king from amongst thy brethren. And again that the kings heart, may not
Ibidem.
be exalted above his brethren. From whence it is, that the Scripture, to
represent this brotherly Monarchy, as well in the Sacerdotall, as in the
politic Esdr. 1. c. 3.
order, says in the first book of Esdras: And Joshua son of Iosedeck (...)
up, and the priests his brethren, and built up the Altar of God. And the other
to signify the unity of the communion, that Tertullian calls the nomination
of brotherhood and to show that he spoke not of the Antipope Nouatianus, to
whom the Schismatickes adhered; but of the true Pope Cornelius and of Steven
his successor, with whom the Catholic Bishops communicated as Erasmus has
acknowledged upon the same place of saint CYPRIAN in these terms: The word,
BROTHER does not Erasm. annot. in ep. Cyprian. ad Cornel.
there signify equality, but society of Religion: For that it was a familiar
thing for ancient authors to use the word Brother not to exclude the
superiority (...), but to express the unity of communion, it appears by a
thousand testimonies It appears first by the testimony of saint AMBROSE, who
calls the Bishop of Rome, his holy Brother, and neuerthelesse' Ambros. ep 78.
in the same place aduertiseth Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, who was a
committee from the Council of Capua, to judge the cause of Flauianus Patriarch
of Antioch, to procure his judgment to be confirmed by the Pope We conceive
(said he,) that you ought to reserr the affair Id. ibid.
to our holy brother Bishop of the Roman Church for we presume you will judge
so as can not displease him. And a little after that, We having received the
tenor of Id. ibid.
your acts, when we shall see that you have judged things so, as the Roman
Church shall undoubtedly approve, we will receive with joy the fruit of your
examination. It appears secondly by the testimony of the Catholic Bishops
of Africa who answered the Donatists in the conference of Carthage, that
Cecilianus Archbishop of Carthage had been their brother: He was (says
Collat. Carthag. Act. 3.
saint AUSTIN) our brother because of the communion of the Sacraments. And
nevertheless, the Archbishop of Carthage was head and Superintendent of all the
Bishops of Africa. It appears thirdly by the testimony of saint AUGUSTINE,
who calls Aurelius Archbishop of Carthage his brother; and neuerthesse, saint
AUGUSTINE was the spiritual subject to Aurtlius, and had been made Bishop of
Hippo by means of the dispensation Possi l. in vit. Aug. August de oper.
Monarch.
that Aurelius had given to Ualerius, to take him for coadiutor, and himself
acknowledged that he was obliged to execute his commaundeme^ts. I have (said
he) obeyed thy commandments my holy brother (...). It appears Conc.
Carthag. 3. c. 45
fowrthlie, by the testimony of Epigonius one of the Bishops of the third
Council of Carthage, who calls the same Aurelius, his brother; and
nevertheless acknowledges in the same place, that Aurelius had
superintendencie over all Africa. It appears in the fifth place by the
testimony of John Patriarch of Constantinople, who writing to Pope Hormisdas,
Joan Constant. Patr. ep ad Hormisd.
intituleth him his Brother, and nevertheless protests; we do in all things
follow the Sea Apostolic, and preach all that has been thereby decided; And
promise in the time to come, not to recite amidst the sacred mysteries, the
names of those that are separated from the communion of the Catholic Church;
that is to say (adds he) that do not altogether agree with the Sea
Apostolic. And finally, it appears by the testimony of the Emperor
Justinian, who Codic. l. 1. tit. 1. l. 8.
(...) to Pope John surnamed Mercurius; We demand that your Fatherly (...)
may declare to us your intention by your letters, directed to us, and to the
most holy Bishop and Patriarch of this famous city your brother. And
nevertheless in the same Epistle, and in the Epistle to the Patriarch of
Constantinople, Cod l 1. t. 1. l 7.
he affirms that the Pope is the head of all the holy Prelates of God. And
the same may be said of the words Colleague, or Fellow-Minister; that the
ancient Catholic Bishops sometimes attribute to the Pope, not to weaken the
Superiority of the Government, but to design the society Matthew. 24.
of the Ministry, and to show that the faithful and wise servant, that the
Master has substituted over the company of his servants to give them their
nourishment in due season, is not Lord, but fellow Servant to his fellow
Servants. For that the Fathers do so understand it, it appears by many
Examples: It appears first, by the Epistle of the Synod of Athan. de fuga. sua
Apolog.
Alexandria, where the Bishops of Egypt call saint ATHANASIVS Patriarch of
Alexandria their Colleague; who nevertheless, was their head, (...) Nicen.
can. 6. and Council. Chalced. Act. 4.
and had jurisdiction over all the Bishops of Egypt and Libia; as it appears
both from the sixth Canon of the Council, which gives perfect authority to
the Bishop of Alexandria over all the Bishops of Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis;
And from the Remonstrance that the Metropolitans of Council. Chalced. Act. 4.
Egypt made to the Council of Chalcedon, that they could enterprise nothing
without the authority of the Bishop of Alexandria. It appears secondly, by
the Epistle of Proclus Archbishop of Constantinople, who entreats Domnus
Patriarch of Antioch that he would bear with the infirmities of Athanasius
Bishop of Perhes, his fellow Minister, and to grant Ibid. Act. 14.
him for his judges, other Bishops then his Metropolitan, who was suspected by
him. It appears thirdly by the sentence of the Bishops of the Council of
Ephesus, who called Pope Celestin, their most holy Father and fellow Minister;
and nenerthelesse made themselves the executioners of his Decrees: Constrained
Necessarily (said they.) by the force of the Canons, Council. Ephesians. p. 2. Act. 1.
and by the letters of our most holy father and fellow-minister Celestin, we
are come not without tears to pronounce this heavy sentence against
Nestorius. And finally, it appears by the writings of Optatus Bishop of
Mileuis in Africa, who calls the Pope Siricius companion of Society with the
Catholic Optat. Mileu. cont. Parm. l. 2.
Bishops: and nevertheless acknowledges him in the same place, for the heir of
saint PETER'S Chair, and for center and principle of Ecclesiastical unity.

To the second head, which is, that saint CYPRIAN complains, that Cyp ad Cler.
and pleb. Hispa ep. 68.
Basilides a Bishops of Spain having been deposed by the Council of the
Province, for having yielded under the persecution, and an other having been
ordained in his place, Pope Steven had restored him: We answer, that this
complaint, insteede of wounding the Popes authority, wholly confirms it. For
saint CYPRIAN complains not of the enterprise made by the Pope, but of the
surprise made upon the Pope by Basilides, who had misinformed him concerning
that affair. Behold his (...); That Basilides, said he, after the discovery
of his crimes and the ignominy of his conscience, Ib. ibid.
made naked by his own confession travailing to Rome has deceived our brother
Steven remote by a far distance, of place, and ignorant of the history in
fact and the truth of the matter, which has been concealed from him to procure
that he might be unjustly restored to his Bishopric from which he had been
justly deposed, cannot annull an ordination lawfully made etc. Neither is he
so worthy of blame who has by negligence suffered himself to be misinformed,
as he is worthy of execration that has fraudulently imposed it upon him. Now
who sees not, that this manner of speech is not to reprove, the interprize
made by the Pope, but the surprise made upon the Pope: And indeed how could
saint CYPRIAN reprove the enterprise made by the Pope, he that writes to him;
Id. ad Steph. (...) 67.
(...) there be letters directed from thee into the province, and to the people
that inhabit Arles, whereby Marcian being deposed, an other may be substituted
in his place?.

To the third head, that is, that saint CYPRIAN writes; Since it has (...) Id.
ad Cor nel ep. 55.
or dained to us all, or by us all, and that it is just and equitable that
every cause should be heard where the crime has been committed, and that to
every pastor there should be assigned a part of the flock which he may rule
and govern besore he come to yield an account of his actions to God, those
that we rule, must not run here and there, and cause the well united concord
of the Bishops to knock one against an other by a fraudulent and deceiptfull
rashness, but plead their cause where there may be accusers and witnesses of
their crimes. We answer, that he speaks here of minor and particular
causes, whereof it was afterward ordained in the Council of Carthage, That
particular causes should be determined within Council. dict. African c. 62.
their provinces; that is to say, causes os manners, and which concerned
nothing but the lives of Clerks, and of inferior Clerks only; that is to
say, of Priests, deacons, subdeacons, and other ecclesiastical persons
constituted to the lesser orders, as it appears both by these words; Those
whom we rule, and by the quality of Fortunatus person of whom the question
was, who was a priest of the Church of Carthage, who had been excommunicated
for his crimes by saint CYPRIAN and had made a Schism against him at Carthage.
And not of Mayor causes as those of faith, or of the Sacraments, or of the
general customs of the Church, or of the depositions of the persons of
Bishops; the definition of which causes might be reserved for the judgments
beyond the Seas. For that there was ever this difference in Africa between the
inferior Clerks; that is to say, Priests, deacons, subdeacons and other
ecclesiastical persons constituted to the lesser orders; and the superior
Clerks, that is say Bishops; that the causes of the inferior Clerks of
Africa, ought to be determined in Africa, and not pass beyond the Seas; but
that the causes of the superior Clerks, that is to say of Bishops, might be
transferred to the judgment beyond the Seas, we learn it from saint
AUGUSTINE, who cries out, that Cecilianus one of saint CYPRIANS Successors in
the Archbishoprike of Carthage, and within forty years of S. CYPRIANS time,
who had been condemned in Africa by a Council of seventy Bishops, might
reserve his cause beyond the Seas, for as much as he was of the order of
Bishops, and not of that of Priests, deacons and other inferior Clerks. There
was noe question then (says saint AUGUSTINE) Ang. ep. 162.
of Priests or Deacons, or other Clerks of the inferior order, but of the
Colleagues that is to say, of Bishops who might reserve their cause entire to
the judgment of the other Colleagues, and principally of the Churches
Apostolic. For whereas saint AUGUSTINE uses the word Churches Apostolic in
the plural number, we answer that, in the Chapter following, and show, that
it is not to exclude the eminency of the Roman Church over the rest, (...) of
contrariwise he said but three lines before. In the Roman Church Id. ibid.
has always flourisht the principality Apostolic. But to prevent the
malice of the Donatists who refused the judgment that Pope Melchiades had
given of the cause of Cecilianus; for as much as they said, that Melchiades had
sacrificed to Idols, and consequenrlie, could not judge of the cause of
Cecilianus, who was accused of a crime of the like nature, or equivalent to it.
It suffices at this time to infer from the words of saint AUGUSTINE that
there was this difference between the superior and inferior Clerks of Africa,
that the causes of the superior Clerks might be judged beyond the Seas, and
not those of the inferior Clerks; And therefore, where saint CYPRIAN says,
that every cause should be judged where the crime had been committed; he spoke
of the causes of inferior Clerks; that is to say, of Priests, Deacons,
subdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical persons constituted to the lesser order;
and not of the causes of superior Clerks; that is to say, of Bishops.

To the fowrth head, which is, that saint CYPRIAN complains, That the
authority of the Bishops of Africa seemed less to some lost and desperate
Cypr. ad Cornel. ep. 55.
persons, who had already the year before been judged by them; We answer
two things, the one, that the word lesser, has noe reference here to the
Roman Church, and is not a Comparatiue of relative signification, but it is a
comparitiue of positive signification; which has noe other meaning, but less
then it should be; that is to say, little, or not great enough; as when the
same S. CYPRIAN writeh in the Epistle to Antonius If the number of Bishops
resident in Africa seemed less sufficient; that is to say, not enough
sufficient: And the other that if it were a comparison of the comparatiue
signification, it should noe more have reference to the Roman Church, but to
these words; paucis desperatis and perditis, interpreting them in the ablative
and not in the dative; and translating the period in this sense; If it be not
peradventure that the authority of the Bishops constituted in Asrica, who had
already judged of them be esteemed less then a small number of desperate and
lost, men: it seems, that the continuance of the period does afterward declare
which compares the number of the Bishops of Africa, who had judged of
Fortunatus with those that took part with Fortunatus and not with the Roman
Church in these words; If the number of those that judged of Ibid.
them the year past, comprehending the Priests and deacons, be reckoned, it
will be found there were more assistants present at the judgment and at the
examination of the cause, then of those that took Fortunatus part. And indeed
if saint CYPRIAN had intended this word in a comparatiue signification, and in
regard of the Roman Church; how could he have said three lines above, they
presumed to sail to the Roman Church which is the Chair of Peter, and the
principal Church, from whence the Sacerdot all unity has proceeded? And how
coul Optatus Mileuitanus an African, as well as he say; At Rome has been
constituted Opt. Mileu. cont. Parmen l. 2.
to Peter the chief, the Episcopal Chair, that in this only Chair, the
unity of all might be preserved? And how could saint AUGUSTINE, an (...) as
well as either of them, say; That Cecilianus might despise the Aug. ep. 162.
conspiring multitude of his Enemies: that is to say, of seauentie Bishops of
Africa assembled in the Council of Numidia with him, For as much as he saw
himself united by letters communicatorie with the Roman Church, in which had
always flourisht the principality of the Sea Apostolic; and with the other
Countries, from whence the Gospel came into Africa. And again; Id. ep. 92.
That he doubted not, but that Pelagius and Celestius, who had been judged by
two Counsels of Africa, whould more easily yield to the Popes authority
drawn out of the authority of the holy Scriptures.

To the fifth head, which is, that the same S. CYPRIAN says; That there is but
one Bishopric whence every one holds his portion vndiuidedlie. We answer,
Cypr. de unit. Eccl.
he uses this language, to insinuate that the Bishopric cannot be possessed
separatelie, out of the unity and society of the Episcopal Body; but not to
deny, but that in the unity of this Episcopal Body, the functions of
Episcopal power are exercised in a more principal and eminent manner in the
Roman Church, then in the other Churches; noe more then when we say, that the
soul is possessed by all the parts of the body inseparably and vndiuidedly;
we intend not to, say, that for the exercise of her functions, she resides
not in a more principal and eminent fashion in the head, then in the other
parts; otherwise, why should he call the Roman Church, the Chair of PETER,
and the Id. ad Cornel. ep. 55.
principal Church, and the original of Sacerdot all unity?

To the sixth head, which is, that S. CYPRIAN says in the Council holden for
the rebaptization of heretics, None of us constitutes himself Cypr. in (...).
Council. Carth.
Bishop of Bishops; We answer he speaks there only of the Bishops of
Africa, to whom he directs his speech, and whom he exhorts to tell their
opinion freely in the Council without being held back by the respect of the
authority that as Primate of Africa he had over them. And we will add that
if he had holden this language even to tax and prevent the Pope obliquely,
who afterward condemned him, the matter would be of noe weight, for as much as
this Counsel was an erroneous Counsel, where S. CYPRIAN cast the foundations
of the Donatists heresy; and that as such, it was not only condemned by the
Pope, and by all the rest of the Church, but even by those that had adhered to
saint CYPRIAN; witness these words of saint (...); The Blessed Cyprian strove
to avoid the myrie Hier. cont. Lucif.
lakes, and not to drink of the strainge waters; and upon this subject,
addressed the Synod of Africa to Steven Bishop of Rome who was the twenty
sixth after saint PETER, but his strife was in vain. And finally, those that
had been of the same opinion with Cyprian, set forth a new decree saying;
What shall we do? So has it (...) delivered to them by their Ancestors and
ours?

To the seventh head, which is of the inuectiues that S. CYP. suffered to
slipp out of his mouth after the contention that he had with Pope Steven for
the rebaptizatio^ of heretics, taxing him of ignorance and presumption. We
answer, it is impiety in Calvin to allege them, since S. AVSTINE (...). de
Bapt. (...). (...) l. 5. c. 25.
holds them unworthy to be reported, and covers them with this excuse: The
things which Cyprian in anger has spread against Steven, I will not fuffer
them to pass under my penn. And we add, the resistance that Pope Steven made
to the error of S. CYPRIAN, was the safety of the church, as saint Uincent,
Lerin: witnesses in these words; Then the Blessed Vincent. Lyrin in. Com.
part. 1.
Steven resisted, with, but before his Colleagues; iudginge it as I conceive, a
thing worthy of him that he should surmount them as much in Faith as he did in
the authority of his place.

Of the Commission of the Emperor Constantine the Great, for the judgment of
Cecilianus Archbishop of Carthage. CHAPT. IV.
THe third instance of Calvin, is taken from Optatus Mileuitanus Calu Inst. l 4
c. 7 Opt. Mileu. cont. (...) l. 1. Aug ep. 162.
and from saint AUGUSTINE; who say, that the Donatists having accused
Cecilianus Archbishop of Carthage, and Felix Bishop of Aptunge, his Ordinator,
and besought the Emperor Constantine, who the^ was resident amongst the Gauls,
to give them Judges of the Gauls: the Emperor gave them three Bishops of the
Gauls whom he sent to Rome to judge the affair with Pope Melchiades. But whom
does this Instance combat against, but those that allege it. For the Emperor
being constrained by the importunity of the Donatists, and that as himself
protested against all Ecclesiastical order, to give them Judges; and having
given them according to their demand, Judges of the Gauls, what could he more
expressly do, to testify the Popes authority, then to remitt them to Rome,
and to ordain that the same Judges of the Gauls that he had given them
should transporte themselves from the Gauls to Rome, to the end the cause
might be (...) at the Popes Tribunal, and under the presidencie and direction
of the Pope. Was there a Stronger means to prove what we read in S.
ATHANASIVS; That ancient custom of the Church was that the causes of (...)
(...) ad (...). (...). (...). (...) 2. (...). l. 3. c. 9.
Bishops could not be determined, till first the decision had been made at Rome
And (...) (...): That the Sacerdot all law required, that those things which
were constituted without the Bishop of Romes sentence should be annulled.
Nevertheless for as much as Calvin obiectes, that if this cause had belonged
to the Popes Ordinary jurisdiction he ought not to have judged it by the
Emperors commission; it is necessary to clear it. To this objection then,
before we (...) the matter to the bottom, we will answer in form of a
prologue five things: first, that it was not a commission except in regard of
the three Assessors of the Gauls, that the Emperor named to content the
importunity of the Donatists and to the end that they might serve for (...)
and warrants of the sincerity of the proceedings of the Council of Rome but a
remittme^t: as it appears both by the Emperors confession, who avowed that it
belo^ged not to him to examine this cause, and by the election that the Pope
made of fifteen other Bishops that he took for his assista^ts, besides those
that the Emperor had nominated. And therefore although S. AVG. in regard of the
Donatists inte^tio^ sometimes calls this remittme^ta delegation nevertheless
he shows sufficiently, that it was rather a relegation, then a delegation,
when he notes that the reason wherefore the Emperor did it, was for as much as
he durst not judge the cause of a Bishop: Your Superiors, (said he to the
Donatists) first brought the cause of Cecilianus to the Emperor Constantine.
And a little after; But because (...) Aug. ep. 166.
durst not judge the cause of a Bishop. he delegated the examination and (...)
thereof to Bishops. I add, that he used this language by Synecdoche, and
referringe the word delegation to the Judges of the Gauls only, that were
deputed to assist at the Council of Rome, and not to all the Council of Rome,
as he witnesses elsewhere by these words: The Emperor gave to the Donatists
the Judges that themselves had demanded: that is to (...), Aug ep. 171.
the Judges of the Gauls. And again, Donatus was heard at Rome by the Judges
that himself had demanded. For of the ninteene Bishops of the Council of
Rome, there were but three of the quality of those that Donatus had demanded.
Donatus had demanded but three: but saint AUSTIN extendes Aug. de Agon.
Christ. c. 29.
this clause by Synecdoche to all the Counsel, for as much as the three Judges
demanded by Donatus, had judged in Common with all the Council, and were
found so conformable to the rest, as the judgment Optat. Mileuit. cont. Parm
l. 1.
of the Council, which passed all with one voice, and without any diversity
of opinions, and theirs was one self same thing.

The second answer is that Constantine did not interpose his authority in
this affair as Master by himself of the cause, but as an Arbiter sought by
the Donatists, and assuringe himself as a Catholic that he should be avowed
by the Catholics. This Matter, (says saint AVGVSTIN) belonged Aug. ep. 162.
greatly to the Emperors care whereof he ought to give an account to God; for
the Donatists had made him arbiter and judge of the cause of the tradition, and
of the Schism. From whence it appears, that the Emperors interposition in
this cause, was a matter of fact, and not of right, and whose example cannot be
alleged for a pattern of the ancient discipline of the Church. The third,
that it was not a controversy questioned amongst the Catholics, and according
to the ordinary laws of the Church, but a Suit commenced by the heretics
against the Catholics, and by ways extraordinary to all the laws and forms
of the Church. For the Donatists had already broken the bond of unity, and
shaken off the yoke of the Churches authority. They were (says saint
AVGVSTIN) already Aug. ibid.
culpable of the Schism, and already stained with the horrible crime of the
(...) of Altar against Altar. By means whereof, there being noe judge common
between them, and the Catholics in the Church, there remained nothing for
them to do, but to have recourse to the Arbitrements of the secular powers,
whose examples could noe more be drawn into consequence against the
ordininarie authority of the Christian Church, then the judgment that
Ptolomeus Philometor Joseph. antiquit. l. 13. c. 6.
king of Egypt, gave between the Jews and the Samaritans, could form a
president against the ordinary authority of the high priest, and of the
Sacerdotall college of the Jewish Church. The fowrth, that the cause
questioned in this process, was not a cause of right, and that should be
proved by ecclesiastical means, such as the testimonies of Scripture, or the
traditions of the Apostles, or the Custom of the Church, or the sentences of
the Fathers, but a question of fact, and whereof the hypothesis was mingled
with accessories that belonged not to the causes of the Church, and could not
be examined by ecclesiastical means only, but must be justified by human
and secular means, as the confronting of witnesses, the acts of Notaries (yea
Pagan and heathen ones) the Records of Clerks, Opt. (...) (...). Parm. l. 1.
August. ep 162.
and even the applications of questions, and corporal tortures. For the
accusation of the Donatists was principally grounded upon the framing of a
false letter, that they had forged against Felix Bishop of Aptunge, for the
examination whereof there must be a secular and proconsulary (...). purgat.
(...). and Cecilian.
judgment interposed between the ecclesiastical judgments; that is to say
between the Council of Rome and that of Arles to convince the forgers of the
falsehood by the, application of Aug. ep. 152.
rackes and tortures. We have undertaken (says saint AUSTIN) the defense of
the cause of Cecilianus, although it belong not to the cause of the Aug ep. 162.
Church, that we may make their calumnies appear even in that. And again
speaking of the torture which was offered to the scriuener Ingentius or
Uigentius, to make him confess whether he had falsified the letter of the
Aedile Alfius Cecilianus to Felix Bishop of Aptunge: The Proconsull (said he)
amongst the fearful cries of the vshers, and the bloody hands of the hangmen
would not have condemned a Colleague of his being absent. And the fifth, that
all the acts that the Donatists extorted from the Emperor in this (...) he
protested them to be so many irregularities and nullities and so many
unlawful enterprises unjust and extraordinary, wherein he suffered himself to
be constrained against his will, to give way to the passion and malice of the
Donatists, and in yiedling to them, to assaie to reduce them to the peace and
unity of the Church; and he was so (...) from desiring to have the example
thereof serve for a law to the Bishops, as contrariwise he promised to ask
the Bishops pardon; the history is this:

The Donatists having accused Cecilianus Archbishop of Carthage, of treason, or
communication with traitors; that is to say, with those that had delivered the
holy Books, and the sacred Vessels to be put into the fire in the
persecution time; yea, even to have been ordained by a traitor; so did they
entitle Felix Bisop of Aptunge, they first obtained a judgment of seauentie
Bishops in Africa against him. Then discerning that Cecilianus despised (...)
judgment, as well because it was given against an absent person, as because
(as saint AVSTINE says) that he saw himself united by communicatory Aug
(...) 162.
letters with the Roman Church, in the which (adds the same saint AUGUSTINE)
has always flourisht, the principality of the Sea Apostolic, and with the
other Countries from whence the Gospel came in to Africa, they resolved to
pursue beyond the seas a new judgment. Now they seared the Popes Tribunal
both in general, because all Italy had been trobled with persecutions under
the Empire of Dioclesian, by means whereof they figured to themselves that
there would be many Bishops that had bowed or bent, and consequently would
supporte the cause of Ceci (...); and in particular if we believe the
Donatists in the conference of Carthage, because the Pope Melchiades was
suspected by them as a complice, as they pretended of the same crime, or one
equivalent to that of him that ordained Cecilianus. They began (said saint
AUGUSTINE, speaking of the Donatists of Aug. in (...) (...).
the conference of Carthage) to charge Melchiades of the crime of Treason, and
to (...) that their superiors had shunned his judgment, because he was a (...)
part 3.
Traitor. For these causes then, that is to say; be it for the suspicion that
they had in common against all Italy, be it for that they had in particular
against the Pope, they addressed themselves to the Emperor Constantine; who
then was resident amongst the Gauls, and besought him to give them judges from
amongst the Gauls, because in that province whereof his Father Constantius had
had government, there had been noe persecution, which was to refuse in general
all the provinces, where Dioclesians persecution had taken place, amongst which
Italy was one of the principal. Your Superior (says Optatus Mil.) Optat.
co^tr Parm. l. 1. c 72.
presented to the Emperor, yet ignorant of the affair, the request which
follows: We beseech thee o excellent Emperor Constantine, because thou art
of a just race, whose father amongst all the Emperors, never practiced any
persecution, and that the Gauls are freed from this crime, for in Africa there
are contententions amongst us, let there be given to us Judges from amongst the
Gauls. And what marvel is it, if they addressed themselves to Costantine,
Aug. (...). lit. Petil. l. 2 c. 92.
since after they had recourse to the Emperor Julian the Apostata, a pagan and
an infidel prince, the Emperor Constantine amazed and angry with this
proceeding, reproached it to the Donatists, and objected to them that they
would receive judgment from him, who himself did attend the judgment of
Christ. He durst not, (says saint AVSTINE) judge the cause of a Bishop. And
Optatus Mileuitanus from whom S. AUGUSTINE Aug. op. 166.
borrowed this history; He answered them (says he) with a spirit Optat. l.
1.
full of indignation; you ask of me judgment in this world; of me I say,
that do my self attend the judgment of Christ; that is to say, you would
have me constitute my self for a Judge of the Ministers, of Christ, I that do
my self attend the judgment of Christ. Which was the same protestation that he
made afterward at the Counsel of Nicea in these words, repeated by our
glorious CHARLEMAINE; Capitul. Carol.
To me, who am constituted in a lay condition, it is not lawful to Magn. 1. 6.
Ambros.
judge of Bishops. And this the Emperor Ualentinian renewed in these words,
repeated by saint AMBROSE; and by the same CHALEMAINE; Epist 32. and capit.
Your business o Bishops, is far, above us; and therefore treat amongst you
of Car. Magn.
your causes. And that S. ATHANASIVS remembered to the Emperor Constatius ibid.
in these terms; What has the Emperor in common with the judgment of Athan.
ep. ad Solit.
Bishops? And again; when did the judgments of the Church take their force
from Ibidem.
the Emperor? And saint MARTIN to Maximus; This is a new and never heard
Sulpit. hist sacr. l. 2.
of impiety, that a secular judge should judge a cause of the Church, And this
was the first protestation of irregularitie, made by the Emperor Constantine
against the Donatists; to wit, that leaving the way, and the ordinary
progress of the judgments of the Church, they had recourse to him to obtain
Judges, and which has, been always followed since by the pious and religious
Catholic Emperors.

This request nevertheless of the Donatists, that the Emperor rejected as a
judge, he believed, that he ought not altogether to reject as an arbiter and
compounder of the business, but thought it to be to purpose in some sort to
make use of the arbiterment that the Donatists referred to him, to assaie to
reconcile them to the Catholics whose communion he held, and for that
occasion assured himself that he ought to be auowed and agreed unto by them.
And therefore desiring on the one side to preserve the form of the ordinary
judgments of the Church; and on the other side being constrained to give some
way to the hardness of those that he desired to bring back by fair means, he
remitted them from the Gauls, to Rome, to be judged by the Pope Melchiades,
with the assistance of three Bishops of the Gauls that he caused to travail
thither, Maternus of Cologne Rheticius of Autun, and Marinus of Arles, that
they might be witnesses and warrants of the sincerity of his proceedings: I
have ordained (says the Emperor in his Epistle to Melchiades, evil inscribed
to Mechiades and to Marcus) that Cecilianus with ten of his Eusebius. hist.
Eccles. l. 10 c. 5.
accusers, and ten of his abetters; that is to say, ten Africa^ Bishops which
opposed him, and ten of Africa Bishops which maintained him, traveled so far
as to Rome, that in your presence, joining with you Rheticius, Maternus and
(...) your Colleagues, whom for this effect I have enjoined to trasport
themselves to Rome, he may be heard so as you shall know that it belonges to
the most religious law. I have said in the Epistle, evil inscribed to
Melchiades and to Marcus, for there it must be read (...), and not (...), as
well because Marcus was not Bishop of Rome till after Siluester, Successor to
Melchiades, as because, if this Marcus had been any other then a Bishop, the
Emperor would not have said, jointly with you, your colleagues Rheticius,
Maternus and Marinus. And if he had been Bishop, he had not directed (...)
letter to Melchiades Bishop of Rome and to Marcus, without adding to it the
quality of Bishop. These three Bishops of the Gauls then having been upon the
nomination of the Emperor, admitted by the Pope, and called by him to the
Council of Rome became judges of the right of the affairs. Now to whom does
it not hereby appear quite contrary to that which the Caluenists pretended
to infer? For first, if the Emperor, as he Optat. contr. Parm. l. 1.
protests himself, had noe right to judge the causes of Bishops, how could
he in right give them Judges? I say in right, and not in fact, for as much as
the Emperor could well give them Judges in fact, and whose judgment should be
obligatorie to the secular Tribunal, and executory by the officers of the
Empire, and under the imposition of pains and temporal punishments; but he
could not give them Judges in right, whose Judgments should be obligatorie in
conscience, and to the Tribunal of the Church, and should make those that
contradicted, culpable of spiritual censures and punishments. And secondly the
Donatists having specified in their request, that they demanded Judges of the
Gauls, and that of purpose to exclude particularly the judges of Italy; the
Emperor harkening to their request, and giving them Judges of the Gauls, how
had he sent them to Rome to judge the cause with the Pope, and under his
Presidencie and direction, who was he against whom, if we give creditt to the
Donatists in the conference of Carthage, their petition was principally
presented, if he had not acknowledged that the Pope was natural and
inevitable Judge of the cause? Is there any likelihood, that the Emperor being
resident amongst the Gauls, and the Judges whom he nominated for the
Donatists, being risident there, that he would have sent them from about his
person where they were, to the Popes person, from whom they were separated by
so large a distance of Sea and land to serve him for assistants, if he had
believed that it was himself and not the Pope, that was the Natural Judge of
the affair. To what purpose should he have made the Donatists take so much
pains, who came to him out of Africa into Gallia; and the three Judges that
he granted them, who were also in Gallia, to travail from thence to Rome, if
he had not acknowledged that which we read lately Iul. ep. ad Euscbian. apud.
in saint ATHANASIVS; That the causes of the Bishops could not be determined,
till de decision had been made at Rome. And in Sozomene; That those things that
were constituted without the sentence of the Bishop of Rome, were nullities.
And in Athan. see above.
saint AUGUSTINE upon the same place, that in the Roman Church had Sozom. l. 3.
c. 10.
always flourisht the principallitie of the Sea Apostolic? But let us kintt
up See above.
our history. To these three Bishops nominated by the Emperor, the Pope yet
added fifteen more; whose names Optatus reports; Merocles Bishop Opt. cont.
Parm. l. 1.
of Milan; Florian Bishop of Cesena; Zoticus Bishop of Quintian; Stemnius
Bishop of Arimini; Felix Bishop of Florence; Gaudensius Bishop of Pisa;
Constantius Bishop of Faensa; Proterius Bishop of Capua; Theophilus Bishop of
Beneuentum; Sauinus Bishop of Terracina; Secundus Bishop of Preneste; Felix
Bishop of the three lodges; Maximus Bishop of Hostia; Euander Bishop of Ursin,
and Donatian Bishop of Foro-Clodi. Now if the Pope had not been judge of this
case but by deputation, and that the Emperors address to him had been but a
simple commission, and not a remittment, how could he have taken fifteen
others Bishops for his assistants, besides those that had been nominated by the
Emperor, and Bishops of Italy also, which was the province that the Donatists
had principally pretended to refufe by their petition? And why did not the
Donatists reproach to him, that he had exceeded the bounds of his commission?
For as for Caluins saying, that the Emperor nominated Judges out of Gallia,
Instit. l. 4. c. 7.
Spain, and Italy, it is an ignorance disproued by Optatus who affirms that
the Council of Rome was compounded but of ninteen Bishops in all; towitt, of
the Pope, three Bishops of Gauls, and fifteen Bishops of Italy; and that
there were noe Bishops of Spain; and teaches us, that the Emperor nominated
but only three Bishops of the Gauls. Judges (says Optatus) were given;
Maternus of Cologna, Rheticius of Autun, and Opt. cont. Parm. l. 2
Marinus of Arles. And indeed, how could the Donatists have desired Judges out
of Spain, where the persecution had been so cruel? Wherefore although S.
AUGUSTINE extendes as far as he can the Emperors commission to the judges of
the Council of Rome, of purpose to make that Council not capable of refusal
by the Donatists, who having taken the Emperor for their arbiter, it seemed
they could not decline a judgment wherein his authority had interuened; yet he
extends it noe farther then to say; that the Emperor sent Bishops to Rome, to
judge the cause with Melchiades, and never goes so far as to say, that he gave
commission Aug. ep. 162.
to Melchiades, or gave him for a judge. Contrariwise, speaking of the judges
given by the Emperor, he restraines them, as has been (...) above noted to the
Bishops of the Gauls only. Judges (says he) were given to the Donatists,
those that they had demanded, that is to say, the Bishops Id. ep. 171.
of the Gauls: Insinuating thereby, that the Pope was none of the judges that
were given; and that the Emperors delegation extended it self noe farther,
then only to the judges of the Gauls, which he had deputed, to the end they
might be witnesses and colleagues of the Popes judgment, and did not
comprehended the Pope. From whence it appears, that when he said, that the
Emperor delegated the examination of Cecilianus Id. ep. 166
his cause to the Bishops; or that the Council of Rome absolved Cecilianus, by
the Emperors commandment; he speaks by Synecdoche, that De vnic. bapt. cont
Petil. c. 16
is to say, by extending the part to the whole, for as much as the Bishops
delegated by the Emperor, and enabled by the Emperors commission, which was
valid in respect of the Donatists, that had sought it, made a part of the
Council of Rome, where Cecilianus his cause was examined, and a part so
conformable to the opinion of the whole, as the judgment of the Emperors
Commissioners, and that of the whole Council, was one self same thing.
Otherwise we must conclude by the same reason, that Donatus had demanded for
judges, all those that assisted at the Council of Rome; that is to say, both
the Pope, and the fifteen judges of Italy; for S. AVGVSTIN says in the like
words; that Donatus was heard at August. de agon. Chr. c. 29.
Rome by the judges that he had demanded: And yet it is certain that Donatus
had demanded none but the three judges of the Gauls; yea, with the exclusion
of the others. But S. AUSTIN says, that he had been heard by the judges, that
he had demanded; for as much as amongst the judges that heard him, were those
that he had demanded; who being conformable in their opinions with the rest,
it was as much as if he had demanded them all. Let us finishe our history;
The Pope assisted by these eighteen Bishops, three nominated by the Emperor,
and fifteen chosen by him, judged the cause of Cecilianus, and judged it so
soundly, as saint AUSTIN takes occasion from thence to call him the Aug. ep.
161.
FATHER of the Christian People. How innocent (says saint AUSTIN) was the last
sentence pronounced by the blessed Melchiades; how entire, how prudent, how
peaceable? And a while after; O blessed man o Son of Christian peace, and
Father of Christian people! From this judgment of the Popes, notwithstanding
the Donatists appealed to the Emperor; and that was the second irregularitie,
and so great and enormious an irregularitie, that it made the Emperors hair
stand on end. To this appeal (says Optatus Mileu.) the Optat. co^tr Parm. l.
1.
Emperor answered thus: O, madd impudence of fury, they have put in an appeal
(that is to say, a secular appeal, and to the imperial Tribunal) as in the
causes of the Gentiles. And the Emperor Constantine himself, in the Epistle to
the Catholic Bishops:: What so great frenzy (says he) perseuers in Constable.
Ep. ad Episc.
them, as to persuade themselves with an incredible arrogance of things which
are not Cathol. ad calc.
permitted, either to be spoken or heard. And a little after; They seek for
secular judgments, Gestor. Purgat.
and leave those that are celestial; o madd impudence of fury! And again;
What will these detractors (you must read detrectators) say of the law, who
(...). and Foelic.
refusing the heavenly judgment, have demanded mine? is this the account
they make of Christ our Savior? He was far enough then, from approving the
appeal from the Popes judgment to his; since he calls this Appeal; a thing
not fit to be spoken or heard, maddimpudence of surie, a recourse from
heavenly to earthly judgment, and a contempt of Christ's authority.
Nevertheless, pressed by the Donatists importunity, he granted them an other
Council at Arles, not in the form of a judgment of appeal, as the Donatists
pretended; but in the form of a civil request, and of a more ample review of
the cause, which the Donatists, who complaining for the omission Epist. (...)
t. ad Ablau.
of Felix his crime, said had not been fully heard. And this again,
irregularly; that is to say, against the ordinary course of the judgments of
Aug ep. 68 and lib. de vnic. bapt. c. 16.
the Church, and to give way to the Donatists fury. He gave them (says saint
AUSTIN) an other judgment at Arles; that is to say, of other Bishops, not
that it was necessary, but giving way to their perverseness. At this
Council, Aug. ep. 162.
compounded of two hundred Bishops, assisted the Popes legates, as appears by
the Catalogue of the Bishops of the first Council of Arles, although Aug
contr. Parm. l. 1. c. 5.
confusedly and ill applied to the Canons of the the second. And Marinus,
Rheticius and Maternus assistants at the first judgment; for that Epist. Co^.
(...). Arelat. 1.
the Popes legates are not named in the Epistle from the Council to the Pope;
it is because themselves were the Messengers that carried them. And the
relation of the Council was directed to Pope Siluester Successor Ibid.
to Melchiades in these words; Being come to Arles, by the will of the pious
Emperor, from thence, most Religious Pope (or according to other copies) most
glorious Pope, we salute thee with all due reverence. And the Fathers of the
Council, testified to the Pope in their Epistle, a great grief, that he could
not assist there in person; and protested, t hat if he had been there present,
they would have pronounced, yet a more rigorous sentence Ibid.
against the slanderors. But that, said they, could not be, for as much as thou
might not remove from the place where the Apostles sit continually, and
where their blood without intermission, gives testimony to the glory of God.
And they sent their decrees to the Pope, that he might spread them through all
the parts of the world. It has pleased (said Ibidem.
they) according to the ancient custom these things should be intimated to
thee, who hold the mayor administrations and by thee principally to all.
For insteede of these maimed and corrupted words; Placuit etiam, antequam ante
qui maiores Dioceses tenes, per te potissimum omnibus insinuare; You must
restore, (...) etiam (...) iuxta consuetudinem antiquam, adte qui maiores
dioceses (or maiores Dioceseos) tenes, and per te potissimum omnibus,
insinuari; That is to say; It has pleased, according to ancient custom, that
these things should be insinuated to thee, that hold the mayor
administrations, or the maioritie of the administration, and by thee to all.
For the proper and original signification of the word Diocese, is to signify,
administration. From whence it is, that Zonara speaking of the Empire of
Constantine, and Jerene, say; All the Diocese of the Zonar. Annal. tom. 3. in
Constant. and Iren.
Empire, meaning all the administration of the Empire. From whence appears
Caluins extreme ignorance, who says that Marinus Bishop of Arles judged by
appeal of the sentence of Pope Melchiades, and that Pope Melchiades Inst. l.
4. c. 7.
endured it, and never opposed himself against it. For besides Melchiades was
dead before the Council of Arles (which was holden under Siluester his
successor) was celebrated, and had need of a strainger miracle, then that of
Caluins to raise him up again, if it had been an appeal from the Pope, the
Popes Legates would not have assisted there, and would not have judged by
appeal of their Masters judgment; and the Council would not have addressed
their relation to the Pope; and would not have bewailed the Popes absence; and
would not have said, that if the Pope had been present, they had pronunced a
more heavy sentence against the delinquents. And then how could Marinus Bishop
of Arles, who had been one of Pope Melchiades assistants, at the judgment
given at Rome, have judged by appeal of the Council of Rome? And how could
the other assistants of the Pope have judged by appeal of the Popes judgment,
or rather of their own? For not only the same Marinus Bishop of Arles, who
had been one of the Popes assistants at the Council of Rome, assisted at the
Council of Arles; but also the other Bishops who had acompanied the Pope at
the judgment of Rome, as well those that the Emperors had nominated, as
Maternus Bishop of Epist. Council. Arelat. 1
Cologna, Rheticius Bishop of Autun, Marinus Bishop of Arles, as those that the
Pope had associated there; as Merocles of Milan, Proterius of Capua, and others
were present, voted, and signed at the Council of Arles. And besides how could
Marinus, and all the Council have written to the Pope, That he held the mayor
dioceses, or, the mayor administrations; a thing that whatsoever it signify,
attributes to the Pope a prerogative, that the Bishop of Arles and the other
Bishops of the Council had not, if Marinus had been judge by appeal of the
Popes judgment? for whereas some of Caluins disciples say that is was not the
same Marinus The author of the tract of the Church chap. 8.
Bishop of Arles that was at the Council of Rome, who judged of the Popes
sentence; but Martian Bishop of Arles his Successor; this is an ignorance, yet
greater then the former; for there is not so mean a Scholar, but knows, that
Martian Bishop of Arles was dead more then fifty years before Marinus, and
before the Council of Arles. Jointly, Edit. 2.
that the Bishop of Arles, and particularly Martian, could not judge of the
Pope by appeal, since the same Martian being fallen into the Sect of the
Nouatians, saint CYPRIAN had addressed himself in these words to Pope
Cornelius, to pray him to depose him. Let there be letters written Cypr. ad
Steph. ep. 67.
from thee, into the province, and to the people inhabiting Arles, (...) (...)
being deposed, another may be placed in his steed. And indeed that which
saint AUSTIN says to the Donatists; put case that the Bishops which judged Ep.
162.
at Rome, had not been good Judges, yet there remained the universal Council
of the whole Catholic Church; Does it not verisie, that after the Popes
judgment (supposing and not granting that it had been subject to appeal)
there remains noe other judgment but that of the general Council of the
whole Church? But let us return to the Council of Arles: From this Council
then, the Donatists had again recourse to the Emperor, and forced him to
examine the cause himself. And this was the fowrth irregularitie, as it
appears by the protestation that the Emperor made for which he would ask
pardon of the Bishops. He gave way (says saint AUGUSTINE) to their
importunity, to stopp their mouths, and yielded (...) Ep. 162.
sarr, as to judge this cause after the Bishops, but with an intent afterward
to crave pardon of the holy Bishops. Now how can an example for which the
emperor protests that himself will crave the Bishops pardon, serve for a law
to the Bishops: yet this was not all, for the Donatists did noe more obey the
judgment of the Emperor then they had done to that of the Aug. ibid.
Council of Rome holden in the Popes presence; or to that of the Council of
Arles, holden in the presence of the Popes legates, but disavowed the Petitions
that they had presented to the Emperor Constantine and said that that business
was not for the emperors examination, and that it was not their solicitation
that brought it before him, and cast this imputation upon the Catholics; so
as the last dispute was whether the Catholics, or the Donatistes had caused
the Emperor to intervene in this cause, both disavowing it. If he be culpable,
(says saint AUSTIN, speaking of the Bishop Felix, who ordained Cecllianus who^
the Emperor Ep. 162.
had caused to be heard before the Proco^sull of Africa) that has been
absolved by an earthly judge not having demanded it, how much more are those
(...), that wouldhaue an earthly king to be judge of their cause For if it be
noe crime to have appealed to the Empero, rit is noe crime to have been heard
by the Emperor, neither the^ by him to whom the Emperor had delegated the
cause, that is to say, by the Proconsull. Ep. 166.
And again; know that your superiors have first brought Cecilianus his cause
before Constantine, oblige us to prove it to you; and if we prove it not, do
with us what you can.

Now let us recapitnlate all the heads of this history: The first head, say
the Caluinists, was that the Donatists addressed themselves to the Emperor
Constantine to ask Judges of him; it is true, but what consequence can you
draw from this example? For were not the Donatistes already Schismatickes,
Aug. ep. 162.
and separated from the obedience and from the communion of the Church? And
besides, had not they recourse afterward to the Emperor Julian the Apostata, a
pagan and insidell Prince to recover their Churches, that the Christian and
Catholic Princes had taken from them, and with this Elogie, that in him only
all justice remained? And Aug. contr liter. (...). l. 2. cap. 92. Ep 166
did not saint AUGUSTINE cry out to them; If it were in your power, you would
not now call against us the Emperor Constantine, because he favors the truth,
but you would rather call Julian the Apostata out of hell? The second head was,
that the Emperor partly yiedling to their importunity, granted them Judges
from the province that they had demanded; that is to say, from the Gauls; it
is true, but did not the Emperor protest before he granted Optat. co^t. (...).
l. 1.
this to them; that it belonged not to him, who attended the judgment of
Christ, to meddle with the judgments of Christ's Ministers? And after he had
granted them this, did he not remitt them to Rome to judge the cause with the
Pope, and under the Presidencie and direction of the Pope? The third head was,
that the Donatists appealed from the Popes judgment, to the Emperors
judgment; it is true: But does not the Emperor cry out, that this appeal was
a thing not fit to be spoken or heard? that it was a madd impudence of fury;
that it was a recourse from he auenlie to earthly judgment, and a manifest
contempt of Christ's authority? The fowrth head was, that notwithstanding this
protestation, the Emperor granted them a Council at Arks; it is true: but
does not saint AUGUSTINE testify, that it was an irregular action, when he
says that the Emperor did it, giving, way to the peruersues Ibidem.
of the Donatists? And that the Popes legates and the assistants that were with
him at the Council of Rome, were present at that of Arles. (...).
And that the Fathers of the Council, bewailed that the Pope could not assist
there, and said, that if he had been there present, they had pronounced a more
severe sentence against the Donatists; does it not prove, that it was not a
judgment of appeal, but a more ample reuiew of the cause which the Donatists
said was not fully heard. The fifth head was that Ibidem.
the Donatists had recourse again from the council of Arles to the Emperor,
and prayed him to take the examination of the cause himself, which he did, it
is true; but does not saint AVGVSTIN say that he protested the he would
afterward crave pardon of the holy Bishops? And does he not further testify
that the Donatists did noe more agree to the Emperors Ibidem.
judgment then to the former? The Emperor (says he) is chosen judge; Aug.
ep. 162.
the Emperor judging is despised. With what ingenuitie then, can Calvin and
Calvin. Inst. l. 4. c. 7.
his disciples say, that this history is enough to end the question, and
fully to clear the business; for who sees not, that these proceedings, not
having been at the instance of the Catholic party, and according to The
author of the (...) of the Church c. 8.
the ordinary forms of the Church, but at the insta^ce of the heretical
party, and by extraordinary ways and against which the Emperor himself
protests for injustice, for fury, for impiety, and obliges himself to ask
the Prelates pardon: And having finally been rejected and disauowed, even by
those that had solicited for them, and as it were snatched it out of the
Emperors hands, there is noe more justice in making use of them, to the
prejudice of the ordinary laws of the Church, and to propound them for copies
and paternes of the ancient form and ecclesiastical discipline, then to
allege against the present authority of the Pope and the Council the
audience and conference that King Charles the ninth granted at Poissy to the
Protestants of his Kingdom, after the council of Sens and Trent, to the end
to prove to bring them back to the church, by way of mildenes and
accommodation, and to infer from thence, that the Conference of Poissy, was
given above the Counsels of Sens and Trent:

Of the decree of the Mileuitan Council concerning the beyond -- Sea Appeals.
CHAPT. V.
THE fowrth instance of Calvin is; that in the Mileuitan Council holden under
Pope Innocent the first thousand two hundred years ago, the Bishops of Africa
forbad the clerks of their Provinces the appeals beyond Seas, In the
Mileuitan Couueell, says Calvin, where saint AUGUSTINE assisted; Calu. Inst.
l. 4 c. 7.
those that should appeal beyond Sea; were excommunicated. It is true, but to
Council. Mileuit. can. 22.
this instance we bring two sharp and decisiue answers: the first. that the
canon is meant but of appeals in minor and personal causes, as were causes as
well pecuniarie as moral, that is to say, as well civil as criminal of
clerks, and not in mayor causes, that is to say, in common and Eclesiasticall
causes, as were causes of Faith and Sacraments, or of the universal customs
of the church. And the second, that he speaks but of the Appeals of Priests
deacons, and other clerks of the inferior order; and not of the Appeals of
the Clerks of Superior orders; that is to sale, of Bishops. For the clearing
then of the first of these doubts; which is, that the Canon is meant but of
Appeals in minor causes, it must be known, that the ecelesiasticall
Tribunalls, did then examine not only the spiritual and religious causes of
the Church, but also all the temporal and secular causes of ecclesiastical
persons, as well civil as criminal. This appears both by the first Council
of Constantinople; which ordaines, That if any one do begin a particular
process against a Bishop, as having Co^c. Co^st. 1. c. 6.
received loss or injury from him, the person and Religion of the accuser
shall not be examined, but if it be an ecclesiastical crime, the accusers
person shall be examined and first it shall not be lawful for heretics to
accuse orthodox Bishops for ecclesiastical causes: And by the third Council
of Carthage, celebrated ninteen years before the Mileuitan Council; which
decrees, That (...) Conc. Charth. (...). c 7.
Clerk that leaving the Ecclesiastical government, would purge himself in
the public judgments, although the sentence be to his advantage, if it be in
a criminal judgment, he shall loose his degree; and if it be in civil
judgment, he shall loose that which has been adjudged to him. And by the
Epistle to the Emperor Theodosius Conc. Ephesians. Act. 1.
the second who to advance the judgment of the controversy of Nestorius,
imposed truce to the Council of Ephesus of all pecuniarie and criminal
causes, and ordained that they should handle noe cause, neither ecclesiastical
nor other, till that of Faith were determined. Now these different sorts of
causes, were not reputed to be all of a weight; but the one, to wit those that
regard Faith, or the general customs of the Church, were called mayor causes,
mayor businesses, mayor affairs. And the others, to wit, those that regard
the particular persons of clergy men, and consisted in accusation of manners,
or pursuit of pecuniarie interests, were called minor causes, minor
businesses, and minor affairs; And that by a distinction taken from the
analogy of the Scripture, which (...) that Iethro advised Moses to suffer the
minor causes of the Israelites to be judged by the inferior judges, and to
reserve to himself only Exodus 18.
the mayor causes: Those that shall be mayor causes, said he, let them bring
to thee, but let themselves judge the minor causes, The use of this distinction
may be seen in a thousand places of antiquities. It appears in these words
of the Epistle of the same Pope Innocent, under whom the Mileuitan Council
Innoc ep. ad (...).
was holden, to Uictricius; If they be mayor causes that are in question, after
the Episcopal judgment, let them be referred to the Sea Apostolic, as the
Synod and ancient customs (vetus and not beata) ordain. Which Epistle I the
rather allege, because it was cited by the Bishops of France in the second
Council of Tours a thousand and seven hundred years agone. It appears Conc.
Turon 2. c. 21
in these words of the Epistle of the Pope saint LEO the first to (...) Bishop
of Thesalonica his Vicar in Macedonia and other provinces (...) Constantinople;
If any mayor cause be moved for which it may be reasonable Leo ep. 82
and necessary to call an Episcopal assembly, let it suffice thee to cause
two Bishops to come to thee out of every province, such as the Metropolitans
would choose. And a little after; And if their judgment be found differing from
thy opinion let the acts be sent to us with authentical testimony, that all
dissentions taken away, a sentence pleasing to God may be decreed. It appears
(...) l 2.
in these words of the Epistle of saint GREGORY the Great, to John Ep. (...).
Bishop of the first Iustinianea: If any cause of faith, or of crime, or of
pecuniary matter be objected against our Colleague Adrian Bishop of Thebes,
let it be judged if it be a matter of light importance by our Nuncios, which
are or shall be in the royal City; that is to say, at Constantinople; and
if it be a matter of weight, let it be referred hither to the Sea Apostolic.
And finally it appears in the capitularie of Cap. Carol (...) gn. l 6. (...)
287.
our great Emperor Charlemaine, where the words of Pope Innocent the first,
are repeated by form of law, in these words: If they be mayor the Sea
Apostolic, as the Synod and the blessed (or to read better, the ancient)
custom ordaines. And from thence it is that Hincmarus Archbishop of Rheims,
writing a little after, that is to say under Charles the Balde to Pope Hincm.
ep. ad Nicol. (...). apud Flodoard. hist. Eccl. Rem. l. 3.
Nicholas the first, makes him this protestation; Let it not please God, that
we should so despise the privilege of the first and sovereign sea of the
Pope of the holy Roman Church, as to weary your sovereign authority with
all the Controversies and with all the quarrels of the Clergy, as well of the
Superior as inferior order, which the canons of the Council of Nicea and the
decrees of Innocent, and of the other Popes of the holy sea of Rome, command
to be determined in their provinces And again; We Metropolitans trauailinge
in our provincial Counsels, decide carnal controversies, and have care after
judgment to referr the mayor causes, and of mayor persons, to the examination
of the Pope of the Sovereign Sea. And from hence it is also that Gerson
declaming long time after against the disorders in the court of Rome during
the schism of John the twenty three, cries out; If the judgment of minor
causes be reproved in Gers. de Protest. Eccl. Consid. 8.
Moses by Iethro, how would it be in the Pope and in his Court of so many
continual and importune employments of most profane and unworthy processes.

The first solution then that we bring to the prohibition that the Bishops of
the Mileuitan Council made to their clerks from appealing beyond Sea, is that
the words of the Council were intended not of appeals in mayor causes; that
is to say, in causes that concern faith or the universal customs of the
church; but of appeals in minor causes; that is to say, in causes moral or
pecuniarie of Ecclesiastical persons. And this solution besides the places
already alleged, we draw first from the text of the canon which says
preciselie; In the cause that they shall have to show, that he speaks of
their particular causes, and not of the causes of the church. And secondly from
the argument that has been set before one of the places of the Greek
translation of this canon near thousand years ago, which says in their
proper causes, to distinguish them Edit. Graec Conc. Carth. c. 26.
from Ecclesiastical causes: for the first council of Constantinople that the
Greeks held for the Palladium of their discipline; And the third Co^c. Co^st.
1. c. 6
Council of Carthage, oppose proper causes to ecclesiastical causes, not that
proper and temporal causes of ecclesiastical persons were not Co^c. Carth 3.
c. 7.
sometimes called ecclesiastical causes, but because when the word
ecclesiastical cause was specially taken, it was restrained only to
ecclesiastical matter. And thirdly we collect it from the practice and
proceedinges of the same Mileuitan Council. For after that Pelagius, whose
cause was a mayor cause, and belonging to the Faith, had been judged in the
East by the Bishops of Palestina, and that Celestius his disciple had been
heard and excommunicated for the same cause in Africa, by the African Bishops,
the Mileuitan Council remitted the final judgment thereof to the Pope, in
these words: Because God by the gift of his principal Epist. Council. Mil. ad
Innoc. inter. Ep.
grace, has placed thee in the Sea Apostolic, and in our days, given thee
for such as we ought rather to fear that it should be imputed to us for a
crime of negligence if we chould conceal from they Reverence, those things
that ought Aug. ep. (...)
to be represented for the good of the Church, then to apprehend that they
would seem troublesome or contemptible to thee: We beseech the to apply thy
pastoral diligence to the great perils of the sick members of Christ And a
little after; Iusinuating these things into they Apostolical breast, we need
not extend our-selues in language, and to amplify so great an impiety with
words, being assured that they will so move thee, as thou can not delaie
their correction, least they should spread farther. And again; But we hope,
with the help of the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, who vouchsafe to govern
thee consulting with him, and to hear thee praying to him, that those that
hold these doctrins so perverse and pernicious, will more easily yield to the
authority of thy Holiness, drawn out of the authority of the holy
scriptures, in such sort as we may have more cause to rejoice in their
correction, then to afflict ourselves in their ruin. A marvelous encounter of
the effects of Gods providence, which willed that the same Mileuitan Council,
which the Lutherans and Caluinists abuse to overthrow the Popes authority,
not only puts it in practice, but also witnesses that it is of divine right,
and grounded upon the authority of the holy scriptures. For to think, to
shift off this Epithete, drawn from the authority of the holy scriptures, by
saying that the Council speaks not of the cathedral and Judiciary authority
of the Pope, but of the authority of the passages of the scripture, alleged
by the Pope against Pelagius, it is a childish and ridiculous shifte, as well
because, the Pope had not then alleged any thing against the Pelagians, as
because it had been a singular impertinencie that the Pelagians would rather
yield to the Popes authority, then to that of the other Bishops, doctors, and
Catholic Counsels, and amongst the rest, of saint IEROM, saint AUGUSTINE,
and of the two Counsels of Africa, whereof books are full says saint
PROSPER, Prosp. de Ingr.


Of Channells that we bring,
From the eternal Spring.
Because the Popes authority was drawn from the authority of the holy
scriptures; If by the Popes authority, they had intended the passages
alleged by the Pope, and not the authority of the Popes chair. Jointly that
the five Bishops of Africa who accompained the relation of the Mileuitan
Council with their letters, did sufficiently explicate^ of what authority
the Mileuitan Council intended to speak, when they writ to the Pope; If the
abettors of (...) knew, that the Aug. ep. 95
book, which they believe or know to be his, has been anathematized and
condemned by the authority of the Catholic Bishops, and principally by that
of thy Holiness, which we doubt not, but it is of greater weight in his
behalf; we will imagine, that they will noe more dare to disturb the souls
of the faithful which are simply Christian. And fowerthlie, we collect it
from the words of the same saint INNOCENT the first, to whom the Mileuitan
Council address their relation, who not only in the Epistle already cited,
to Victricius; says, That the ancient custom bare, Innoc ep. ad Victiic.
that the mayor causes after the Episcopal judgment, were referred to the Sea
Apostolic; but also in the very answer of the Mileuitan Council
witnesses, that causes of Faith, were wont to have recourse to the Sea
Apostolic; As many times (said he) as there is question of any matter
Inter. ep. Aug. ep. 93.
of faith, I make accounte that all my brethren and fellow Bishops cannot
choose but referr it to Peter; that is to say, to the (...) of their name and
dignity. Which words are not to be argued of ambition, since saint AUSTIN
commendes them as just and lawful, in these words; Upon this the relations of
the two Counsels of Carthage and Mileuis were sent Aug. ep. 106.
to the Sea Apostolic. And a little after; We writ also to Pope Innocent of
blessed memory, familiar letters, wherein we treated the affair somewhat
more amply. To all these things he answered us in the same manner as was
convenient and fit, that the Prelate of the Sea Apostolic should answer us.
And finally we draw it from the issue of Celestius his cause, which was that
Pope Innocent having been prevented by death before he could bring it to
effect, Pope Zosimus his Successor and that even at the instance of the
Counsels of Africa, who sent to Rome the verbal process of that, that past
between them, and Celestius finished it. And after he had heard Celestius in
person, and deliberated whether he would absolve him or not absolve him from
the excommunication that the Bishops of Africa had pronounced against him, he
finally confirmed the sentence of the Counsels of Africa, and declared him
condemned and excommunicated through the whole earth. Celestius (says saint
AUGUSTINE, speaking of the answers that Aug de pecc. orig. cont. Pelag and
Celest. c. 7.
Celestius made to the Interrogatories of Pope Zosimus) would not condemn the
things that had been objected to him by the Deacon Paulinus in the Council of
Carthage; but he durst not resist the letters of the blessed Pope Innocent, but
promised to comdemne all, what that Sea would comdemne. And therefore having
been gently fomented like a frantic person, to the end to give him a little
rest, it was not yet thought fit that he ought to be absolved from the bonds
of excommunication, but for the space of two months attending an answer from
Africa, leisure for repentance was given him, under a certain medecinall
sweetenes of judgment. And again: Of this new heresy Pelagius Aug. ep. 157.
and Celestius having been the authors, or the most famous and violent
promoters, they themselves by the means of the watchfulnes of two Episcopal
Counsels, with the help of God, who takes the protection of his Church, have
also been condemned in all the Christian world, by the Reverend Prelates of the
Sea Apostolic; yea even to the number of two, Pope Innocent, and Pope
Zosimus, if they do not correct themselves, and besides do penance. And
Prosper his disciple; Under the twelfth consulship of Honorius and of
Theodosius; Prosper. in Chronic.
the decrees of the Council of Carthage two hundred and fourteen Bishops, were
carried to Pope Zosimus, which having been approved, the Pelagian heresy, was
condemned throughout the world. And again; The Pope, Zosimus Id contr.
Collator.
of blessed memory, added the force of his sentence to the decrees of the
Counsels of Africa; and to cut of impious persons, armed the right hands of
all the Bishops, with the sword of Peter.

The second solution that when bring to the place of the Mileuitan Council is,
that the Canon speaks but of inferior clerks, which were Priests, deacons,
subdeacons, and other lesser Orders, and not superior Clerks; that is to say,
Bishops, whose causes, because of the importance and dignity of their persons,
were reputed mayor causes; as Pope Nicholas the first, though long after,
writes to the Bishops of France, in Nicol. 1. ep ad Episc. Gallic.
these words: The more the Bishops are in a principal degree. and more
exalted in the Church of God, the more when their preservation is treated of,
or their deposition, ought their causes to be reckoned amongst mayor and
difficult causes; for they are the first in the Church; they are those which
hold the reed in their hand, to measure the holy Jerusalem; they are those
that rule in Gods buildings. And this solution we draw first from the very
words of the Mileuitan Council, which are; It has been thought fit, that
Conc. Mileuit. c. 22.
the Priests, Deacons, and other Clerks of the inferior order, in the causes
that they shall have, if they complain of the judgments of their Bishops,
appeal not but to the Counsels of Africa, or to the Primates of their
provinces. By which words restrained to only priests, deacons, and other
Clerks of inferior order; it is manifest that the Counsels except the Clerks
of the superior order; that is to say, Bishops. And secondly, we draw it out
of the Epistle of Pope Julius the first, reported by saint ATHANASIVS, which
says; that saint ATHANASIVS, could not be definitiuely judged without the
Roman Church, because he was of the Ibid.
order of Bishops: They were (said he) Bishops, and not of vulgar Churches And
a little after; If then there were such a suspicion conceived against the
Bishops there, it must have been written of, to this Church here. Hereby
testifying to us; that there was this difference between the Bishops and the
inferior Clerks, as the causes of inferior clerks were determined in
particular Counsels; but the causes of Bishops could not be judged
definitiuely without the Pope. And thirdly we collect it from saint AUGUSTINE,
who teaches us, as we note in the appendix of the conference of
Fontaine-bleau, that the prerogative of Bishops, and that Refut. de l'obiect 1.
du Decret.
of priests, deacons, and other inferior Clerks were distinct in Africa, for
matter of appeal; and that the one, to wit Bishops, might appeal beyond Sea,
and not the others; yea grounds the justice of the Catholics of Africa, who
took part with Cecilianus Archbishop of Carthage against the Donatists, who
opposed him upon this, that Cecilianus having been judged by a Council of
seauentie African Bishops assembled at Carthage could have appealed beyond Sea;
for as much as he was not of the number of Priests, deacons or other inferior
Clerks, but was of Aug ep. 162.
the order of Bishops: He might (says saint AUSTIN) despise the conspiring
multitude of his enemies because he saw himself joined by communicatorie
letterrs with the Roman Church, in which has always flourisht the
principality of the Sea Apostolic, and with the (...) transmarine Churches.
For (adds he a little (...)) there was noe question of Priests, deacons, or
other Clerks of the inferior order, but of the colleagues; (that is to say,)
of Bishops, who might reserve their cause entire to the judgment of other
Bishops, and principally of the Churches Apostolic. In which place saint
AUSTIN uses the word Churches Apostolic, in the plural number, not to deny
the eminency of the Roman Church over the other Apostolic Churches, of which
contrariwise he had newly said, that Cecilianus might despise the conspiring
multitude of his Enemies, for as much as he saw himself united by
communicatorie letters, with the Sea of Rome, in which had always flourisht
the principality of the Sea Apostolic, but to the end to shutt up the gate
against the shift of the Donatists, which calumniated and rejected the
judgment that Pope Melchiades had made of Cecilianus, because they said that
Melchiades, not only was culpable of the crime of treason as well as
Cecilianus, and by consequent capable of refusal in this case; but also whilst
he was yet a deacon had Sacrificed to Idols, with Pope Marcellinus. For
although this reproach were false, as appears by the computation that saint
AUGUSTINE (...) de (...). Bap. (...).
gives it elsewhere, and by the testimony that Theodoret gives to Marcellinus,
to have been most excellent in persecution: Nevertheless it gave (...). hist
Eccl. (...). c. (...).
color to the Donatists to reuolte against the Popes judgment; therefore
saint AUSTIN without tying himself to the specialitie of the Roman Church,
contents himself to say in general, that Cecilianus might reserve his cause
to the judgment of the transmarine Churches, and principally those that are
Apostolic; to infer thence, that the Donatists, (who upon the only
sentence of the Council of Afric, and without attending a judgment from
beyond Sea, had instituted an other Archbishop at Carthage,) were (...). For
the privilege that the Bishops of Afric had, that they might appeal beyond
Sea, was such; that their causes could not be determined, either till the Roman
Church should examine them, or in default of the Roman Church, (putting it in
the form of a case given, Aug. ep. 16.
not granted that they had just cause to refuse the Pope in any affair;)
till the judgment of all the other tra^smarine Churches, and principally
Apostolic, had interuened as S. AVS. declares a while after, in these words;
Put the case that the Bishops that judged the cause at Rome, had not been good
judges there remained yet the universal Council of the whole Church. For this
cause then the Mileuitan Council, willing according to the ancient African
discipline, (witnessed by saint AUSTIN himself) to except at the Canon where
the defense of the appeals beyond Sea is questioned; the clerks of the
superior order, that is to say, the Bishops, put in by way of bar, the
specification of priests, Deacons and other Clerks of the inferior order, to
hinder Bishops from being comprehended therein. Conc. (...) leuit. c. 22
It has been thought fit (says the Council,) that the Priests, Deacons, and
other clerks of the inferior order, should not appeal but to the Council of
Africa, or to the (...) of their own provinces. For whereas the Greeks in
their rapsody of the African Counsels, which they call the Counsels of
Carthage; (...) add at the end of a place, where the canon is reported out of
his place, Edit Graec. Conc. Carthag. c. 28. vel. secundum alios 31.
these words; as it has been often ordained of Bishops; a clause that if it
were true, shows plainly, that the body of the Cano^ speaks not of Bishops,
it is a false addition made by the Greeks, and followed in the form of diverse
reading by some latin copists.

Our ways to disprove this are seven. The first is, that neither in the
original texts of the (...) Council, nor in Gratians citations, nor Impress.
in the copies that are transcribed in form by the centuriators of Germany,
Paris. apud Gallict. du Pre. 1524. and Francisc Regnaut. 1553 and Guillel.
nor in the Council of Carthage, holden under the twelfth Consulship of
Honorius where the canons of the Mileuitan Council were re ported; nor in all
the hundred and five chapters of the latin rapsodie of the Counsels of
Africa, this cause is not to be found. The second, that in the very rapsodie of
the Greeks, in the place where the Council of Thibout 1555. Impress Basil.
per Joan Opoporin. 1535. Impress. Venet 1585.
Carthage, relative to that of Mileuis is inserted there is noe mention made of
this clause. The third, that never before the Mileuitan Council, there had
been any speech of interdicting the appeals beyond the Sea to the Bishops;
contrariwise, saint AUSTIN testifies, that the ancient discipline of Africa,
bare, that Bishops had right to appeal beyond Sea; by Decret.
means whereof the Mileuitan Council could not add to their decree; as Great.
c. 2. q. 6 etc 21. q. 3.
it has often (...) ordained of Bishops. The fowrth, that they had never begun
to make this Defense for Bishops before it had been done for Priests, deacons,
Centur. Magdeburg Centur. 5. col. 839.
and the inferior clerks, who were much less privileged then the Bishops.
The fifth, that these words; As it has been often ordained of Bishops, can not
be compatible with the text of the Canon; which wills, that the appeals
whereof it speaks, should have recourse to the Primates Co^c. Afric. c 93.
of provinces. For the causes of Bishops went not by appeal, but in in the
first instance, to the Primates of the Provinces. If any Bishop be accused
Edit. Graec.
Co^c. Carth c. 126. vel secundum alios 127.
(says the Council of Hippo and after that the third Counsel of Carthage;)
let the accuser bring the cause to the Primate of the province. And it is not
to be replied, that the Canon importes; to the African Counsels, or to the
Primates Aug. ep. 162.
of their Provinces; for besides that by the African Counsels, he inte^ds the
provincial Counsels of Africa, as it appears by this alternatiue, or Conc.
Hippon c. 7.
to the Primates of their provinces; which was put there, because the Primates
Conc. Carthag. 3 c. 7.
judged with the Counsels of their Provinces: The Greeks, to find a place
for their addition, without multiplying the words of the article, have taken
away (...) his place, the clause of the African Counsels, and left Edit.
Graec. Council.
that only, of the Primates of Provinces, as being one same thing. Yet will
it Carth. c. 26
less avail to object, that in two most incorrect manuscripts; there is, or
to the General Council; that is to say, to the General Council of Africa,
For besides that, all the greek and latin impression, disprove this different
reading, even the addition of the other clause can not sufferr it. For as much
as these words; as it has often been ordained of Bishops, show, that the
precedent period spoke not of Bishops, but of inferior Clerks whose causes
went not to the general Counsels of Africa. And because even those that
allege the canon with the first addition, and Hincm. in ep. (...). cap. 17.
amongst others Hincmarus, and the Conuenticle of Rheims, the one under Charles
the Bald; the other under Hugh Capet, are ignorant of the second, as not
contained in the copies of their time: And the rapsodists of the Centur.
Greeks, even the same. And it serves for nothing to say, that, in Magdeb.
cent. 10. coll. 494.
the Epistle to Pope Celestine, there is found a like clause. For neither does
that epistle speak seperately of the inferior clerks, as does the first Edit.
Graec. Conc. Carth. c. 26.
period of this Canon; but speaks jointly of the inferior Clerks and of the
Bishops; and it is to be understood respectively of the one and of the other;
neither was it done as it shall appear hereafter, before the Co^c. Afric. c.
105.
controversies of the Bishops appeals, as was the Mileuitan Council, Beneath.
chap. 10.
but after. The sixth way of disproofe, is, that Pope Innocent the first,
commended the Mileuitan Council, for having carried themselves worthily for
the honor of the Sea Apostolic; You provided (said he) diligently and
worthily for the Apostolic all honor. And again; You shall enjoy the glory of
having observed the Canons. Which he had never done, if in the prohibition of
appeals beyond Sea, the Mileuitan Council had comprehended the causes of
Bishops. And the seventh finally, that Cresconius an African author and
ancient, of a thousand years in the Epitomie that he compiled of the Canons,
registers the title of this Canon in the same terms of the original latin of
the Mileuitan Council, and of the Council os Carthage, holden under the
twefth consulship of Honorius, where the Mileuitan was inserted; that is to
say, restraines it to only priests and deacons in these words; For priests
(said he) And deacons, let Cresc. in (...). can. capit. 285.
not them appeal, but to the Counsels of Africa. I add, that if this addition
should be true, it would not belong to the Mileuitan Council, which touches,
not one word of Bishops appeals, but to the sixth Council of Carthage, where
the business of the Bishops appeals was questioned. For the place of the Greek
rapsody that contains it, is noe relative, eitheir See beneath. chap. 7.
to the Mileuitan Counsel nor to the Council of Carthage, (...) under the
twelfth Consulship of Honorius, where the Mileuitan was reported; but to the
sixth Council of Carthage, and the copy of some latin collections, whither
it has been transferred, bear the title of the sixth Council of Carthage.
And finally, I say it is so far from being true, as the very place where it
is found, is forged. For neither the sixth Council of Carthage made any Canon
concerning Bishops appeals but ordained, that the resolution of the affair
should be put off, till the Greek copies of the Council of Nicea, which
arrived long after, had been brought out of the East, and that when they should
come, there should be a new Council called to deliberate of it, and the while
that the Conc Carthag. 6. c. 9.
Bishops appeals should continue, neither was the collection of thirty three
Canons annexed by the Greeks, before the rapsodie of the Counsels Conc.
Carthag. 6. c. 7.
of Africa, and published in some latin copies, under the name of the sixth
Counsel of Carthage made in the sixth Council of Carthage but is a mingle
ma^gle of diverse African Canons, peeced together by some impertinent compiler,
and published, as shall (...) appear, under the name of the sixth Counsel of
Carthage. But for as much as the clereing of Beneath. chap. 49.
these two last points, depends upon the order and distinction of the
Counsels of Africa, that the ignorance of the Copyer and compilers, has
strangely confounded, it is necessary to inform the Readers therein before I
pass further.

Of the order and distinction of the Counsels of Carthage; CHAPT. VI.
TO bring some light to this confusion, you must note, that there are three
ways by which the Canons of the Counsels of Africa are come to our hands;
the first, the original text of the Counsels of Africa, which are come in
form to us, amongst which are seven Counsels of Carthage which are escaped
from the injury of time, and some Counsels of Numidia. The seco^dis this
latin rapsodie of the Canons of the Cou^cells of Africa, contained in an
hundred and five chapters which we call the counsel of Africa. And the third
is this greek rapsodie of the same Canons of the Counsels of Africa,
contained in a hundred thirty (...) whereof the first thirty three are
translated from a latin collection, falsely attributed to the sixth Council of
Carthage. And the hundred and five others, are translated from the latin
rapsodie; And therefore according to those three ways, we will distribute the
discourse of the distinction of the Counsels of Africa into three parts.

Of the Counsels of Africa then, which are come in form to us, the first is
the Council of Carthage holden under Gratus Archbishop of Carthage in the time
of the Emperor Constantine, son to the Great Fulg. Ferr. in Breu.
Constantine, when Paulus and Macarius were sent into Africa, and whose Canons
are cited by Fulgentius Ferrandus an ancient African Canonist, Can. art. 4. 24.
123. and alibi.
with this title: The Council of Carthage, holden under saint GRATVS; which
Council we call the first, because it is the first of the orthodox Counsels
of Africa that has come to our hands; for that, that was held by saint
CYPRIAN, was an erroneous Council, and reproved by the Church. The second is
the Council of Carthage, celebrated under Genetlius, during the Empire of
Valentinian the first. The second is the Council of Carthage, assembled in the
time of Cornelius under the Consulships of Cesarius and Atticus. The fowrth is
the Council of Carthage called under the Consulship of Honorius and
Eutychianus, where the conditions of those that ought to be received into
ecclesiastical orders were decided. The fifth is the Council dated after the
consulship whether of Stilicon and Aurelianus; or whether as the Illustrious
cardinal Baronius will have it, of Cesarius and Atticus; where was decreed the
legation to the Emperors, for the destruction of the relickes of Idolatry. The
sixth is, the Council that was gathered after the twelfth consulship of
Honorius the eigth of the calends of June for the cause of Apiarius. And the
seventh is that that was kept the third of the calends of June of the same
year, after the Bishops assembled at the sixth Council of Carthage were
retired, and had left with Aurelius one and twenty deputies of all their
assembly, to the end to frame rules necessary for Africa. Now in the business
of these seven counsels, we shall meet with seven principal difficulties,
which we will assaie to remove all in this chapter; the first difficulty is,
concerning the second and third council of Carthage, whereof some authors of
this age, reuerse the order, and will have the second to be the eigth or the
ninth; and the third to be the second, and from the third they cut of many
canons, which they attribute to the sixth. A thing that not only disturbes the
order, and the credit of the ecclesiastical history, but also diminishes the
antiquity of many canons, aduantageous to the Catholic cause, which are
contained in the second and third, by means whereof, the interest of the same
cause, obliges me to replace them in their rank, and the rather because the
Edit. Conc. Colon. 1606.
last impression of the counsels which has been made upon this new
chronology, begins to take such footing in men's spirits, as the more part of
the modern writers, sufferr themselves to be carried away with it. Now, I
cannot set to my hand to correct it, without shouldering and removing the
computation of the most learned and Illustrious cardinal Baronius: for it is
he, under whose authority, they cover themselves, and out of whose writings
they take all their arguments; and therefore before I enter into the matter, I
will beseech that great Ornament of the Church now that he discernes from
heaven his obliuions and ours, to pardon me, if I be in any thing different
from the course of his nanalls. For who can be such a Homer, as in so long and
prodigious a labor not sometimes to slumber? but we must always remember,
that his defects are beneath his glory, and that if within the great and
immense mass of his works, there be found (as within the body of the moon)
some marks and spotts, they hinder him not from shyning above all other
Ecclesiastical historians,

As Luna, when the nights dim Curtain shrines
The skies; the fainter light of Stars out-shines.
The reasons then, for which the Illustrious Cardinal Baronius (...) Annal.
tom 5 (...) 397.
departed, in the second Council of Carthage from the ordinary chronology,
are sower: the first, that the inscription of this council is Ualentinian, Et
(...) appendic. (...) Tom 5. ann. 397.
being the fowrth time consul with Theodosius, which can not be understood of
Ualentinian the first, and of the great Theodosius, who were never together
consulls, and therefore ought to have reference to Et (...) Epito D. (...).
(...) (...). (...). and in (...) Conc.
Theodosius the second and Ualentinian the third who were consulls together the
year of Christ three hundred twenty five. And for as much, as when
Ualentinian is named before Theodosius it is Ualentinian the first, and
Theodosius Col ex (...). (...) Binn.
the great which are intended; he will have it, that the order has been
inuerted, and that insteede of Ualentinian and Theodosius, it should be
restored Theodosius and Ualentinian. And because the fowrth consulship Tom 1.
of Ualentinian the third fell out after the possession of Africa by the
Vandalls, and after the death of Aurelius Bishop of Carthage he conceaues that
in steed of IIII. we should read IV. and that these two letters, are not (...)
of cyphering, but an abridgement of the word Junior: and that the inscription
speaks of the young Ualentinian. The second reason is that this Council was
holden under Genedius, Archbishop of Carthage, which cannot be before Aurelius,
for before Aurelius there was noe Bishop of Carthage, that bare the name of
Genedius. The third reason is, that there is mention made in this Council of
Aurelius and of Genedius, as being both present there; by means whereof, it
must be that this Genedius was condintor to Aurelius, which could not have
been but in the extreme old age of Aurelius; and by consequent, long after
the date of the second Council of Carthage. And the fowrth which is the
strongest of all, that Alipius Bishop of Tagast, and Ualentin Primate of
Numidia, are there nominated as present and speaking in the Council, which
cannot agree to the Chronology of the second Council of Carthage, in the time
whereof, neither Alipius as appears by saint Aug. ep 8.
Conc. Afric. c. 53.
AUGUSTINE was Bishop of Tagast nor Ualentin as appears by the African
Council, Primate of Numidia.

Now to the first of these objections, which is of the date, it has been
Praefat in Frag. Hallar
already answered by many and amongst the rest, by Monsieur le Feure,
afterward Tutor to the most Christian King, that in steed of these words
Ualentinian for the fowrth time, and Theodosius Consulls, it must be read
Ualentinian for the fowrth time and Neoterius consulls, the copiers having
ignorantly from the abridgement of these letters Neot: made Theod:

To the second objection, which is of the name Genedius, which is not found
attributed to any Bishop of Carthage before Aurelius; it has likewise been
answered, that it must not be read Genedius but Genetlius, which is the name of
Aurelius predecessor, and so the ancient Manuscriptes Fulg. Ferr. in Breuiar.
have it; And so Fulgentius Ferrandus an African Author, reads it whose
antiquity is of above a thousand two hundred years: To which there Can c. 4.
and alibi.
may be added that the appendix of the capitularie of Charlemaine cites Capit.
Carol. Magn. add. 4.
the ninth canon of the same Council with these terms, The Bishop Genilius
has said; which is a word corrupted from the name Genetlius.

To the third objection, which is of the presence of (...) mentioned Pref. in
Frag. Hilar
in some canons of this council; Monsieur le Feure answers, that he has
seen some Manuscripts, which insteede of Aurelius have in the second canon
Epigonius, and in the fifth and sixth Genetlius. Though it should be read
Aurelius, it does not therefore follow, that the council intended to speak
of Aurelius Bishop of Carthage; for the name of Aurelius was a name very common
to the Bishops of Africa, as in the council holden under the consulship of
Cesarius and Atticus, Aurelius (...) In Council. Afric. ant. c. 1.
of Carthage makes mention of an other Bishop called Aurelius: Reginus (says
he) has brought me letters from Crescentianus Bishop of the first Sea of
Numidia, as he pretends and from Aurelius our fellow Bishops: And in the
conference Collat. Carth. Act. 1.
of Carthage with the Donatists; There was amongst the Catholic Bishops
Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, and Aurelius Bishop of Macomades. And if this same
Aurelius, had been Bishop of Carthage, it need not follow therefore, that
Genetlius had been his coadiutor. Contrariwise it would follow from thence,
that it should be Genetlius that had been Bishop of Carthage in Chief, and
Aurelius his coadiutor; For the Council entitled the second of Carthage; had
been called by Genetlius, as he testifies in these Conc. Carthag 2. c. 1.
words: You have travailed to Carthage according to the request of my letters.
Now the letters to call (...) council had not been dispatched in Genetlius his
name, and principally (...) being present and resident at Carthage, if Aurelius
had been chief Archbishop, and that Genetlius had been but his coadiutor. For
the privilege to call General Counsels of Africa, belonged of right to the
Archbishops of Carthage; and to (...) it apperteyned to sign the letters which
they called in greek Synodicall, and in latin tractatorie; and not tractorie,
as Erasmus supposed, and some new censors after him, not considering the
difference that was between the tractory letters that the Emperors dispatched
to send for their officers, and to cause them to be defraied by the way; and
the tractatory letters, that the Primates write either to their Suffragans, to
call them to the Counsels of their Provinces; or to strainge Bishops, to
advertise them Ambr ep. 32 and 82.
of what they had done in the Counsels of their Provinces; for the one Conc.
Carthag. 3. c. 48. and Conc.
was called tractory, of the word, traho; and the other was called tractatory,
of the word, tractatus, which signifies Synod, or Council: From whence it is
that saint AMBROSE, and the Counsels of Carthage, call the Council Afric. c.
14
of Nicea, Trastatus Nicenus; and that the Council of Zelles in Africa calls
the Epistle that Pope Siricius writ to the Africans, not to the end to Conc.
zellen. Vulg. vocat. Telens in prooem. Conc.
call them, but to the end to advertise them of what had been ordained in the
Council of Rome, tractatory. And that saint AVGVSTIN intitleth the Synodicall
Epistles of the Council of the Maximianists holden at Carthage, TRACTATORIE.
And therefore in all the places of the Afric. c. 43. etc. 57.
African Counsels, where this word is used, not only the latin edi Edit.
Graec
say tractatory, but even the greek translation made before the Co^c. Carth c.
90.
time of Justinian Rhinotmete, that is near a thousand years, agone, has it
Sinodicall.

To the fowrth objection, which is that in the Council entitled the second of
Carthage, there is mention made of Alipius Bishop of Sagast, and of Ualentine
Primate of Numidia, to which there has as yet been nothing answered, and which
is in truth such, as if the edition of this place were correct, the Illustrious
Cardinal Baronius his reason had been invincible; I answer these two words;
Alypius Bishop of Sagast and Ualentine Primate of Numidia are not of the
original text of the second Council of Carthage, but they are two quotations
which have been added to the repetition of one of the canons of this Council,
which was made in the collection entitled the sixth Council of Carthage. I
will take the business at the spring, to make the readers understand it the
better: Amongst the monuments of antiquity which are come to us, there it
found as is already above said, a Collection of thirty three Canons, taken
out of diverse precedent Counsels; And amongst the rest, from the first
Council of Carthage holden under Gratus Archbishop of Carthage, from the
second Council of Carthage, holden under Genetlius Archbishop of Carthage; and
from the third and fifth Counsels of Carthage, holden under Aurelius
Archbishop of Carthage Successor to each of them, but which have been since
compiled and assembled into a collection, be it as we pretend by a particular
rapsody; be it as some others pretend by the sixth Council of Carthage. Now it
is happened, that the copyers of this collection, entitled the sixth Council
of Carthage, believing that the canons that are inserted there, had been made
in the sixth Council of Carthage, and not borrowed and repeated out of the
preceding Counsels, have accommodated in their copies, the most part of the
quotations of the articles, to the time and to the persons of the sixth
Council of Carthage. For example; in the fifte Canon of the collection,
entitled the sixth Council of Carthage, which is a canon taken from two
places, out of the first Council of Carthage, celebrated Council. Carthag 1. c.
10. and 13. Full. Ferr. in Breu. Cor. art. 24 and 123.
under the Archbishop Gratus, as it appears, (...) by the text of the first
Council of Carthage of whose truth both sides are agreed; and by Fulgentius
Ferrandus, who alleadges the second part of this canon, with the title of the
Canons of the Council holden under saint GRATVS; and by the Council of Ayx in
Germany, called in the time of Lewis the Debonnaire, Council. Aquisgran. c. 61.
who cites the last part with this inscription; Gratus has said, the copiers
to fit it to the time of the sixth Council of Carthage, have Council. dict.
Carthag. 6 c. 5.
changed the ticket of the article; and in steed of these words, The Bishop
Gratus has said, have put it. Aurelius has said. In the third canon
Council-(...) Honor 12. and Theodos 8. Coss in Council.
of the same collection, entitled the sixth Council of Carthage, which is
taken, out of the second canon of the Council holden under Genetlius
Archbishop of Carthage, after these words: As in the council last past, the
rule of continence and chastity was treated of, which could not have been
pronounced Afric. c. 76 and deinceps vsque ad cap. 94.
in the sixth council of Carthage, for as much as in the council holden under
the twelfth consulship of Honorius, which did immediately precede the sixth
Conncell of Carthage, there was nothing ordained concerning the continence of
the Clergy: the copyers of the collection notwithstanding to fit them to the
time of the sixth Coucell of Carthage, where Faustinus the Popes Legate
assisted, have changed the following clause, and in steed of these words, all
the Bishops say; have put; Faustinus, Bishop of Potentia says. In the ninth
canon of the same collection, which is a canon taken out of the second Council
of Carthage, where after the proposition of Felix and Epigonius, Genetlius
spoke again; Co^c. Carth 2 c. 7.
the exemplifiers of the collection to apply this Canon to the time of the
sixth Council of Carthage, have suppressed the word Genetlius, and instead of
these words Genetlius Bishop, have put, Augustine Legate of (...) dict. Carth.
6. c. 9.
the province of Numidia has said. And finally in the thirteenth Canon of the
same collection, which is a centon taken from the three last canons of the
Council holden under Genetlius, which we call the second of Carthage; the
exemplifiers to make the words of the canon agree Co^c. Carth 2. c. 11. 12.
and 13.
with the time of the sixth of Carthage, have chainged the word Genetlius,
which was in all the three places of that Council which we call the second of
Carthage, and have put Aurelius in steed of it. And they cannot say, that the
canons of the Council holden under Genetlius are not repeated in the
collectio^ entitled, the sixth Council of Carthage; but that the canons of
the collection entitled the sixth Council of Carthage, are repeated in the
Council holden under Genetlius. For besides that the Canons of the Counsels
of Carthage holden under Genetlius, and repeated in the collection entitled,
the sixth Council of Carthage, are cited by Fulgentius Ferandus, as canons of
the counsels holden under Genetlius, and placed before the canons of the
Council of Carthage holden under Aurelius; the words of the same canons are
couched in the council holden under Genetlius in their order, and at their
length; and with Fulg. Ferr. in Breuiar. Can artic. 4. 96. 194 and alibi.
their reasons and relations to the antecedent and subsequent clauses; whereas
in the collection entitled, the sixth Council of Carthage, they are compiled
in form of centons of diverse canons of the council holden under Genetlius,
and couched as shall hereafter appear impertinentlie, and without order of
relation or dependencie one upon an other. Now the abuse of Scriueners has not
yet stayed there, for this first error has by reflection produced a second; to
wit, that the Exemplifiers of the Council holden under Genetlius, which we
call the second of Carthage, finding in the collection, entitled the sixth
Council of Carthage, the canons of the second repeated, and noted with these
new quotations, have transferred them, and made some of them retrograde into
the copies of the second; sometimes in form of diverse readings, as those of
the cano^ of the celibat, where the writers in steed of these words, all the
Bishops said, have put in the marge^t, Other copies say; Faustinus Bishop of
Potentia did Co^c. Carth 4. ad marg. c. 2.
(...): sometimes in the form of a continued text, and without the note of
diverse reading; as in the second, third, fowrth, and sixth canon of the second
council of Carthage; in the first whereof the ancient manuscripts of the
second Council of Carthage; cited by Monsieur le feure, have Epigonius;
Praefat. in frag. Hilar.
and in the three others, Genetlius; the exemplifiers have taken away
Epigonius and Genetlius, and put in Aurelius. Now of this kind do we
maintain the two quotations to be, that are here in question; that is to
say, that the two names Alypius Bishop of Tagast, and Ualentine (...) of
Numidia, are not of the original text of the Council holden under Genetlius,
which we call the second of Carthage, but have been transferred thither, from
the repetition of the Canons of the same Council, which had been made in the
collection entitled, the sixth council of Carthage. And thus much for answer
to the last of the Illustrious Cardinal Baronius. We are now to pass forward
to ours.

The reasons then, by virtue whereof we separate ourselves from the chronology
of the Illustrious Cardinal Baronius, who places the Council of Genetlius
under the emperor Valentinian the third, and adhere to the ordinary
computation, which places it under the emperor Valentinian the second,
consists in ten principal proofs: The first proof is that, we have now
some what touched; to wit, that many of the canons of the Council holden
under Genetlius, are repeated in the Collection entitled the sixth Council of
Carthage; from whence it appears, that the Council holden under Genetlius
preceded the sixth Council of Carthage. Now the Council holden under
Genetlius, could not precede the sixth Council of Carthage, unless Genetlius
had been chief Bishop of Carthage, before Aurelius: for in the time of the
sixth Council of Carthage, Aurelius had noe coadiutor, and Genetlius could not
have been Predecessor to Aurelius, but he must have lived, not under the Empire
of Ualentinian the third who began not his Reign, till six year after the
sixth Council of Carthage, but under the Empire of Valentinian the second.

The second proof is, that the Council entitled, the second of Co^c. Carth
1. c. 2.
Carthage, was called by Genetlius, as it has been above said, and as he
declared it himself in these words: You have travailed to Carthage upon the
instance of my letters: by means whereof he must necessarily be Archbishop of
Carthage in chief, and not coadiutor to Aurelius, and consequently, that the
Council entitled the second of Carthage, was holden under Ualentinian the
second, and not under Ualentinian the third. The third proof is, that saint
AVGVS. having repented that he was made coadiutor with identitie of title to
Ualerius Bishop of Hippo, because he believed that it was forbidden by the
Council of Nicea, and Act. design. Erad apud August. ep. 110.
having upon this occasion procured in the sixth council of Carthage, that
those that ordained Bishops, should be obliged to read the decrees of Possid.
in vit. August.
the Cou^cells to them, before they ordanied them; there is noe appearance,
that after the third Council of Carthage, Aurelius should have made Co^c.
Carth 3. c. 3.
Genetlius his coadiutor, with identitie of title. The fowerth proof is, that
after Aurelius there was noe Bishop of Carthage which bore the name of
Genetlius, nor any room vacant where to place him: For to Aurelius succeeded
Ep. Capreol.
Capreolus, to Capreolus, Quod-vult Deus; to Quod vult-Deus, Deo gratias:
Whereas between the promotion of Gratus, who assisted at the Episc. Carth. ad
Council Ephesians.
Council of Sardica, which was holden the three hundred and forty seventh
year, and the death of Aurelius, who still lived according to Victor.
the computation of the Illustrious Cardinal Baronius, the year four Vtic.
persec. Vandal l 1.
hundred twenty five, there was so long a space, as there must necessarily be
one or more Bishops between both. The fifth proof is, that Id. Ibidem.
Fulgentius Ferrandus an African author of more then a thousand one hundred
years antiquity, not only places Genetlius between Gratus and Aurelius,
but also places the Council of Carthage holden under Genetlius, Eulg.
Ferrand. iu Breuiar.
before the third Council of Carthage, and other Counsels of Carthage,
assembled under Aurelius. For in the fourth article of his Epitomy, Can. art. 4.
speaking of the ordination of Bishops, which ought to be done by three
Bishops, with the Metropolitans consent, he alleges for the credit of this
decree, the Council of Carthage holden vuder the Prelate Genetlius, the tenth
title, and the general Council of Carthage, title forty seventh; and the
Council of zelles: which general Council of Carthage was the third Council
of Carthage, as it appears both by the words of the decree alleged, which
are there; and because it is placed before the Council of Zelles, which was
holden under the twelfth consulship of Honorius; that is to say, the year
before the sixth Council of (...). Ferrand. in Breuiar.
Carthage. And in the twenty fowrth article speaking of the decree which
forbids Bishops to usurp one an others people, he alleges for warrant Can.
artic. 24.
to that law, the Council of Carthage under S. GRATVS, title the ninth and
the Council of Carthage under the Prelate Genetlius, title the ninth: And the
Council of Carthage title the fifth putting the Counsel of Carthage,
celebrated under S. GRATVS; which was the first Council of Carthage, in the
first place; and the Council of Carthage celebrated under Genetlius in the
second place; and the other Council of Carthage in the third place. The sixth
proof is, that in the third Council of Carthage, holden under the consulship
of Cesarius and Atticus; whereof the preface is reported in the Rapsody of the
Council of Africa; Uictor Bishop of Co^c. Afric. in Conc. hab. 6. Call.
September sub. Coss. Caesar. and Attic.
Pupputa, is nominated amongst the Bishops of the Council, with the Epithere
of old man, whereas in the Council of Carthage holden under Genetlius he is
named without any mention of age; a thing which shows that the Council
holden under Genetlius, had preceded the third Council of Carthage. For there
is noe appearance that in the third Council of Carthage, Uictor of Pupputa
should have been called old man, and that in the Council holden under
Genetlius; if this Council had been celebrated, as the Illustrious Cardinal
Baronius would have it, twenty seven years after the third Council of
Carthage, the mention of his age should have been omitted. The seventh proof
is, that in the third Council of Carthage Epigonius calls the same Uictor of
Pupputa, the father of the African Bishops, and the most ancient in promotion;
Co^c. Carth 3. c. 44.
And nevertheless in the Council of Carthage, holden under (...), Co^c. Carth
sub. Cypr. art. 16.
he is mentioned after Victor Bishop of Abdera, a city of Africa so called,
otherwise called Gemanicia, that S. CYPRIAN calls, Abbir of (...); and Uictor
of Vtica, Abdir, and Ptolomy, Abdeira. A thing that evidently Vict. Vtic. de
persecut. Vand. l. 2.
shows, that the Council of Carthage holden under Genetlius preceded the
third Council of Carthage. For the Africans were so curious Ptolem.
to observe the orders of promotion in the Catalogues of their Cou^cells, Greg.
l. 4. Aug. de Vict. ep. 217.
that they never inuerted it, as appears by the complaint that S. AVGVS. made
to Victorinus, that in his tractatorie, or according to Erasmus Editio^,
tractorie, he had named him before some Bishops, in promotion more Co^c. Carth
7. in cata. log. and in subscrip. Et Co^c. Afric. ante c. 95 and post. c. 100.
ancient then himself. The eigth proof is, that Victor Bishop of Abdera, who
assisted at the Council holde^ under Genetlius, that we call the second
Council of Carthage was dead before the time of the Emperor Valentinian the
third, and consequently that the Emperor mentioned in the Date of the same
counsel, could be noe other then Ualentinian the second; for from the time of
the seventh Counsel of Carthage which was holden six Co^c. Carth 2. in
process. verbal. and Conc.
years before the Empire of Ualentinia^ the third, it was noe more Uictor, but
Candidus that was Bishop of Abdera. The ninth proof is, that Uictor Bishop of
Pupputa, and Epigonius Bishop of Bulla regalis, who were present Afric. in
process. ver. bal. Council. sub Caesar. and Artic. Council.
in the second and third council of Carthage, were deceased long before the
Empire of Ualentinian the third, which began the year four hundred twenty
five. For in the conference of Carthage, which was holde^ the year four
hundred and eleauen is was noe more Uictor, but Pa^nonius that was Carth. 2. c.
7 and Conc. Carth. 3. c. 42. 44 and 50.
Bishop of Pupputa; nor Epigonius but Dominick, that was Bishop of Bulla
regalis. The tenth proof is, that in the second Council of Carthage, there is
mention made of the Counsel celebrated the years before in the pretory, which
could not agree with the time of Aurelius, under whose Pontificate Coll. Carth
Act. 1.
all the Counsels of Africa were celebrated, within the divisions of Co^c.
Carth 2. c. 1.
the Basilickes. The 11th. proof is, that in the same 2d. council of Carthage
it is said, that the decree of clergy continence had been made; that is to Co^c
Carth 2. c. 2. (...)
say, reduced into a written law in the former council: which could not
agree with the time of the Emperor Ualentinian the third, since more the^
twelve year before he came to the Empire, the fifth Council of Carthage,
Co^c. Carth 5. c. 3.
had cited the decrees of the clergies continence, as made in former counsels,
but in the time of the Emperor Ualentinian the second under whom the letter of
Siricius to the African Bishops concerning the clergies continence, was carried
into Africa. For whereas the council of Zelles holden only seven years
before the Empire of Ualentinian the third caused to be read and inserted into
the acts thereof, two letters of Pope Co^c. Zellens male inscript.
Siricius, that was not particularly for the Statute of clergy continence,
which had been published long before in Africa; but for the other articles
Telens. in prooem.
which were therein contained. And the twelfth proof finally is, that Pulg.
Ferrand. iu Breu. Can. art. 4. 6. and alibi.
the twelfth council of Toledo a general council for all Spain, a province
near to Africa, holden under the King Flauius Eruigius, and in the age of the
Emperor Constantine Pogonat, and of the third general council of
Constantinople; that is to say, near a thousand years agone, cites the
council of Carthage holden under Genetlius, which we call the second council
of Carthage, with thetitle of the second counsel of Africa, in these words,
In the second council of Africa the fifth canon, Felix the Bishop of
Selempsela said; I insinuate also, if you please to your holiness, that the
dioceses that never had Bishops, may have none. And a little after; Genetlius
Bishop says; If the motion made by our brother and fellow Bishop Felix, please
you, let it be confirmed by us all; and cites the council celebrated under the
cnsulship of Cesarius and Atticus, that we call the third council of Carthage,
with the title of Conc. Tolet. 12. c. 4.
the third Council of Africa in these words; In the third council of Africa,
the two and fortith Canon, Epigonius Bishop pronounced this amongst other
things; I conceive that a people that has always been under the subjection of
a Bishop, Ibidem.
and never had a proper Bishop, ought not to be admitted to have a Bishop. All
which is said nevertheless with so much respect, as the world shall know, that
we admire the great cardinal Baronius, even when we reprove him; and we do
acknowledge that his dreams are more learned, then the cleerest sight of
others.

The second question concerning the counsels of Africa in chief, is about the
number of the Canons of the third Council of Carthage and consists in this;
whether the third Council of Carthage has published all the fifttie Canons
that are in the ordinary editions; and amongst the rest, the canon of the
Canonical book, which is the forty seventh; or whether it has published but
twenty one. The new promulgators of the canons of the African church will have
it, that it published but 21. amongst which that of the canonical books, which
they pretend to have been framed by the sixth counsel of Carthage, is not
comprehended. And we contrariwise maintain that the third council of Carthage
has published all the fifty canons contained in the ordinary edition; and
amongst the rest, that of the canonical Books. Their prete^ces are grounded
upon two reasons; the one, that there are but twenty one Canons, or few more
of the third counsel of Carthage inserted into the African Rapsody, amongst
the which, the canon of the canonical books is none; and the other that in
the continuance of this cano^, it is said that they must communicate with Pope
Boniface and with other Bishops beyond Sea; which Boniface was of the time not
of the third Council of Carthage, but of the sixth. To the first then of their
reasons we answer that whereas they say there are but twenty three canons of
the third council of Carthage in the rapsody of the cou^cells of Africa, it is
because the rapsodist, as it has above appeared, has inserted there but the
Canons of the third Council of Carthage, which had added some amplification or
modification to the canons of the council of Hippo, and has not set in those
that had first been instituted in the Council of Hippo, and had been but
repeated in the third of Carthage, amongst which was that of the canonical
books, as it appears by the thirtith cano^ of the council of Hippo, whose
quotation remains to us in Co^c. Hippon. c. 30.
these words; What are the canonical Scriptures which ought to be read in
Churches, and besides which, noe others ought to be read. To the second reason
which is taken out of the Illustrious Cardinal Baronius, who says, that the
fifty canons contained in the copies of the counsel of Carthage, cannot be
all of this council, and particulaaly the canon of the number of the
canonical Books; for as much as in the end of the same canon, there is
mention made of Pope Boniface, who was long time after; we answer two things;
the one that it is not in the original canon of the copies of the third
council of Carthage, wherein this mention is found of Pope Boniface; but in
the repetition that is made of the same canon, in the collection of the thirty
three Canons, attributed to the sixth Counsel of Carthage, holden under Pope
Boniface; from whence certain ignorant exemplifiers have taken it away, and
made it retrograde in form of a diverse reading in the margent of some of the
copies of the third Counsel of Carthage; and the other, that if this
continuance were of the original text of the canon, it must have been read
Syricius and not Bonifacius; as it appears both by the canon following, where
the Fathers speaking of an other matter, say, It Come. (...) 3. c. 48.
(...) been concluded that we should consult with our brethren and colleagues
Cyricius and Simplicianus: And because that Pope Innocent the first, a little
after Cyricius, who dyed six months after the third counsel of Carthage, had
already made a catalogue of the canonical books, comfortable to that of the
third Council of Carthage, more then fifteen year before Boniface, and the
sixth Council of Carthage; which the fathers of the Innoc 1. ep ad Exup.
sixth Council of Carthage, whereat the Popes legates assisted, could not be
ignorant of. By means whereof, there was noe more need to demand the Popes
confirmation in this regard; in the time of the sixth Council of Carthage: But
it is not sufficient to solue the reasons of the contrary opinion, but we must
propound our own. The (...) then, that we make to convince that the third
Council of Carthage has published the fifty Canons that are in the ordinary
editions; and amongst others, that of the catalogue of the canonical books is
grounded upon four reasons; the firstreason is, that the twelfth Counsel of
Toledo, which was holde^ near a thousand year ago cites the 42th. Co^c.
Tolet 12. c. 4.
cano^ of the third Counsel of Carthage in these words; In the 42th. canon of
the third council of Africa, it is said; that a people that has been always
subject to a diocese, shall receive noe other Bishop for Bishop. Which are the
proper words of the two and fortith Canon of the third Council of Carthage,
which we (...) in our haudes. The second that in the repetition of twenty
three of the canons of the Council of Carthage, holden under Cesarius and
Atticus the sixth of the calends of September; that is to say, of the third
Council of Carthage, which is made in the African Rapsody, there is a canon
repeated which says, That it shall be also lawful to read the passions of the
Martyrs; which canon being bound by the aduerbe (also) to Co^c. Afric. c. 13.
some Canon from whence it has been separated, can have noe relation, but to
the Canon, that forbidds any other scriptures, but the Canonical Scripture to
be read in Churches; and consequently supposes, that the Canon of the
canonical Scriptures, had been published in the Council holden under the
consulship of Atticus and Cesarius, which is the third Council of Carthage;
but that it has been omitted in the Rapsody, because it reports none but
those Canons that have added some amplification or diminution to the Canons of
the Council of Hippo, which the Illustrious Cardinal Baronius could not see,
for the impediment that was given him by the vicious collocation that the
Exemplifiers of the latin Rapsody have made of the preface of the Council
holden after the Consulship of Stelicon, which they have interposed between
the exordium of the Council, holden under Atticus and Cesarius, and the first
Canon of the same Council: a thing which gave him occasion to think, that all
the thirty two canons following were of the Council celebrated after
Stilicons consulship; whereas the Annal tom 5. ad ann. 401.
twenty three first, were of the Council celebrated under Cesarius and
Atticus, as we will prove hereafter, by the order of the dates, and by Beneath
in the Chapt. of the African Council.
conferring of the Greek edition, and as it is confirmed also, by the
fowrteenth of the same Canons, which makes mention of Syricius and of
Simplicianus, which were not Bishops together but under the consulship of
Cesarius and Atticus. The third reason is; that Fulgentius Ferandus cites
these two Canons; to wit that of the reading of the canonical books; and
that of the reading of the passion of Martyrs, as two consequent canons; and
the one under the title of the forty fifth, and the other of the forty sixth
Canon of the Council of Carthage in these words; That Fulg. Ferrand in (...).
Can. art. 228. and 229.
there should be nothing read in the Church but the canonical scriptures; the
Council of Laodicea Canon fifty sixth and the Council of Carthage Canon
forty fifth. That it shall be also lawful to read the Martirs Passions on
the days of their Martyrdom; the Council of Carthage Canon forty sixth.
Which cannot be meant, but of the third Council of Carthage, as well because
the collection entitled the sixth Council of Carthage, contains but thirty
three Canons; as because the last of these two Canons is not found in the
collection entitled the sixth Council of Carthage; and that there is but
only in the third council of Carthage where they are couched one next after
the other. And the fowrth finally, because saint AUSTIN teaches us. that the
first amongst the counsels of Carthage, wherein the roll of the canonical
books was published, was the third Council of Carthage, and not the sixth,
for he writes in the Epistle to Quintianus; That in the same Council, where
the roll of the canonical books was entered, it was also ordained that a
Bishop should not usurp the clerk of an other Bishop; I am amazed (said he)
that thou do admonish me to command Aug. ep. 235.
that those that come from your quarters into our Monasteries, should not be
received; that, that which has been decreed in the council by us, may be
observed; and that thou remembrest not, that in the same council it was
determined, what the canonical Scriptures are, which ought to be read to the
people. Then reuiew this council, and bring to thy memory all things that
thou shall read there, and thou shall perceive it was so decided only of the
clergy, and not of the laity, that coming from other dioceses they should not
be received into our Monasteries, not that there is a word of a Monastery, but
because it has been decreed, that none should receive the clerk of an other.
Now the canon that prohibits Bishops to receive Conci. Carthag. c. 21.
the clerks of other Bishops, is in the third Council of Carthage, but not in
the sixth. Moreover he adds, that in a later Council it had been ordained,
that those that departed from a monastery should not be admitted to be clerks
or superintendents of an other monastery. In the Counsel, (said he) where it
was determined, what were the canonical scriptures Aug. ibidem.
there was noe mention made of a Monastery; only it was ordained, that none
should receive the Clerk of an other; but in a later Council it has been
decreed, that those that have retired themselves, or have been expelled out of
any monastery, should not be made clerks in any other place or superintend
any minasteries: which shows again that the Council of Carthage where the
catalogue of the canonical Books was published where of saint: AVSTINE
speaks, was the third Council, and not the sixth: for the canon that forbidds
to receive a Religious man that retires from a monastery, and to make him
clerk or superintendent of an other monastery, was instituted in the fifth
Council of Carthage, which preceded the sixth near eighteen years.

The third controversy is concerning the fowrth Council of Carthage, Co^c.
Carth 5. c. 13.
holden under the consulship of Honorius, and of Eutychianus; that is to say,
the next year after the consulship of Cesarius and Atticus; the which not the
Illustrious cardinal Baronius, but the new publishers of the greek edition of
the Counsels of Africa race from the number of the ancient Counsels; moved
thereto, because it is not inserted into that Rapsodie of the Counsels of
Africa, that we call the African Council. Now this conjecture is so weak,
that it is not worth the confutation. For besides that the collection that we
call the African Council, is far from comprehending either in general, all
the Counsels of Africa witness the Council of Suffetula, the Council of
Septimunica, the Counsel of Marazan, the Council of Tusdra, the Council of
Macri, the Council Fulg. Ferr, in Breu.
of Zelles the council of Tunis, the counsel of Iuca or rather Tuca cited by
Can art. 2.
Fulgentius Ferandus, which are not spoken of in the body of the African Id.
art. 11.
rapsody; or in particular all the counsels of Carthage, and principally, if
Id art. 44.
Id. art. 23.
we believe the edition of the same Ferandus who alleges the fifth canon Id
art. 76.
of the fifty fifth Council of Carthage. There are two evident reasons Id.
art. 65.
Id. art. 61.
wherefore the fowrth council of Carthage ought not to be inserted into Id.
art. 26.
the collection of the counsels of Africa, that we call the African cou^cells;
Fulg Feraud. in Breu. Can. artic. 13.
the one, that he, that collected them, had restrained himself of deliberate
purpose as it appears by the division of the nintie ninth canon of his
rapsodie which is the last of the seventh Council of Carthage; which to find
the rekoning just he diuides in two, to make but one century of African canons,
within which the fowrth Council of Carthage which only contained a hundred
and four canons, could not enter; and the other, that the fowrth council of
Carthage, having prescribed the laws, under which all the ecclesiastical
persons of Africa ought to be promoted to the order of Priestood; there was noe
need to inserte it into the body of this Rapsodie, to keep them from
wandering from the matter; for as much as all ecclesiastical persons, and
particularly Bishops were obliged to keep it in their hands. To those two
reasons I will yet annex two others, which convince that it is truly ancient,
and due to the age whereto we attribute it; the one is that the things there
decided, agree wholly to the Estate of Africa in S. AVG. times, as the
profession which this council obliges Bishops to make, coming to the Bishops
Sea, That one self same Co^c. Carth 4. c. 1.
God, is the author of the old and new testament, and that the devil is become
ill by the liberty of his will to exclude the Maniches, as the belief that is
exacted from them, that out of the Catholic Church one is saved to exclude
the Ibidem. c. 84.
Donatists; as the prohibition that he made, to drive the Gentills, or the
Jews, or the heretics out of the Church before the mass (that is to say,
the dimission) of the catechumens; which shows that this council was holden
while paganism lasted. Yet amongst the provinces Ibid. cap. 44.
of the Christians, or as the canons that he instituted, that the Clerks
should not nourishe, either their hair of their head, or their beard Ibid.
cap. 52.
and might get their meat drink and cloth, by a trade, or by husbandry,
without derogating from their office, which were composed, to impugn certain
Religious persons slothful and long heared, that saint AUSTIN combats in the
work of the travail of Religious persons, who held it Aug de oper Monath.
for an oprobry, that Religious men should labor with their hands or shave
their heads. The other reason is, that the decrees of this council are
acknowledged, and cited not only by all the canonists that have written since
six hundred years, as Burchard, Iuon, and Gratian, but also by Isidorus Bishop
of Hispalis, now called Seuill, a city neighboring upon Africa,, who lived a
thousand years agone; who reported the canon of the ordination of Exorcists,
in these words. When the Exorcists Isidor. de offic. Ecci. l. 2. cap de
Exorcist.
are ordained, they take (as says the canon) from the Bishops hand, the little
Book where the exorcismes are written, receiving the power to impose hands
upon the Energumenes, whether they be baptized or Catechumens. Which are the
very words of the seventh Canon of the fowrth Council of Carthage: And by
Hincmarus, ancient Archbishop of Rheims, who cites the Canon where it is
forbidden to the Bishop to judge the cause Hincmar. opusc. 55.
of any without his clergy, in these terms: Let the Bishop hear noe man's
cause, without the presence of his Clergy; which are the very words of the
twenty third canon of the fowrth Council of Carthage.

The fowrth difference is, upon the order of the fifth Council of Carthage,
that the Illustrious cardinal Baronius, pretends to have been transferred from
the degree; and that it ought to be placed again in the third place; that is
to say between the Council of Carthage, holden under the consulship of
Cesarius and Atticus, that he places in the second rank, and the fowrth. The
reasons of the Illustrious Cardinal Baronius are, the one that the date of
this Council which is not filled up in the printed editions, but only
bears, The sixth of the calends of June after the Consulship, without
specifying the consulls names, is found in some manuscripts filled up with
these words Cesarius and Atticus: by which means this council must have been
holden the next year after the celebration of the Council, that we call the
third of Carthage, and he, the second which was holden under the consulship of
Cesarius and Atticus; and the other, that there is a Co^c. Carth 5. c. 15.
canon in the fifth Council of Carthage, which ordaines that the Emperor may
be besought to root out the relickes of Idolatry. From whence it follows,
that this Council has preceded the commandment that the Emperors gave to
abolish the remainder of Idolatry. Now this Commandment was given under the
consulship of Theodosius, the year of our Lord, according to our computation
three hundred nintie nine by two edicts, the one addressed to Apollodorus vicar
of Cod. Theod. l. 16. Titul. De page l. 16.
Africa, where the Emperors command that the pagans Idols, should be taken
out of their temples and their sacrifices abolisht. And the other addressed to
Eutychianus, provost of the Eastern Pretory; where they commanded, that the
temples of the pagans that were in the fields, Ibid. l. 18.
should be demolished without trouble or tumult; And consequently says he, the
Council had been holden the year before, which was the year after the
Consulship of Cesarius and Atticus. To the first then of these reasons, we
answer that the manuscript which says, after the Consulship of Cesarius and
Atticus, is not confirmed by the universal consent of the other manuscriptes;
for there are collections in manuscripts of Mercator, as the new publishers of
the Counsels of Africa have noted; which say, after the Consulship of Flauius
Stelicon. And to the second we say, that the Cano^ that ordaines the request
for the abolishme^t of the remainders of Idolatry has nothing in it common
with the Edicts of the Emperors of the year three hundred nintie nine.
Forasmuch as the Emperors had only ordained by one of the Edicts; that the
Sacrifices should be taken out of the Temples; and the Idols deposited into
the hands of the Ministers of the Empire, but that the buildings should still
be kept entire; and by the other, that the Temples of the pagans which were in
the fields, Co^c. Carth 5. c. 15.
should be demolished. And the fifth Council of Carthage demaun des, that the
remainder of Idolatry, should be abolished, not only in the Idols, but also
in the woods and in the trees. For the pagans adored not only the similitudes
of the false Gods, but also adored certain (...) thicketts, and certain
ancient Trees, that they believed to be the dwellinges and mansions of the
presence of their Gods From whence it is, that Quintilian speaking of Ennius,
said, We adore Ennius, as we do Instit. Orat l. 10.
thicketts that are become sacred through age. These trees then, and these
groves polluted by the worship that the Pagans yielded to the^, the canon
demanded to be rooted out, as well as the Idols and similitudes. From whence
may be drawn, that it is so far from following thence, that this canon was
before the Emperors Edictes; as contrariwise it appears hereby, that it was
after them. For as for the decree, where was required Council. Afric. c. 25.
the destruction of the temples built in fields, which gave noe ornament to
cities; which seems to have preceded the Edict of the Emperors, addressed to
the provost of the East, it is not in the fifth Council of Carthage in chief,
but in the only Rapsody of the council of Africa, which has transferred this
canon and many others, from the Council holden after the consulship of
Honorius and Eutychianus, Council. Afric. in Praefat.
where the first legation to the Emperors was decreed, to the Council holden
after the consulship of Stelicon, where the second was decreed. By Council.
Celebr. post.
means whereof the observation of the Illustrious Cardinal Baronius is
Consul. Honor and Eutych.
good to overthrow the order of the African Rapsody, and to show that it was
made by some gross and ignorant Rapsodist; and not to remove the chronology
of the fifth Council of Carthage. But we have said Council. Afric. c. 35
enough of these reasons; it is time to propound ours. The motive then that
incites us to believe, that the Council that we call the fifth of Carthage,
has been holden in the time wherein we place it; that is to say, between the
fowrth Council of Carthage and the sixth consists besides the common consent
of copies, and the universal voice of Canonists in two reasons; the one is,
that S. AVGVSTIN in his Epistle to Quintianus, after he has spoken of the
Council, where there were jointly published the Canon of the canonical Books;
and that of the prohibition to Bishops, to usurp one an others Clerks, which
was the third Council of August. ad Quintian. Ep. 235
Carthage, says, And after in a fresh Council it has been ordained, that
those who retire from a monastery, or are driven from it, shall not be received
elsewhere to be clerks, or to be superintendents in an other Monastery; which
are the words of the thirteenth Cano^, of the fifth Council of Carthage: from
whence it is gathered, that the fifth Council of Carthage that saint AVGVSTIN
calls fresh, in regard of the third Council of Carthage, was not holde^n the
next year after the third council of Carthage, but a long while after: and
by consequent, ought to keep the rank of the fifth and not of the fowrth
Council of Carthage. The other reason is, that in the Epistle two hundred
thirty sixth written to Xantippus Primat of Numidia, the same saint AVGVSTIN
cites the canon, by which those that had neglected to follow their cause a
whole year together, were excluded from goeing forward with it, which is the
twelfth canon of the fifth Council of Carthage, as a canon newly instituted.
From whence it appears, that the fifth Council of Carthage was holden after
that, that we call the fowrth. For saint AUGUSTINE testifies, that the year in
which he writ this Epistle, the Pasch should be the eigth of the Ides of
April. I have (said he,) heard the cause of Abundantius, there being yet a
hundred days to Pasch Sundaie, which August. ad Xanthip. ep. 236.
shall be this year the eigth of the Ides of April. This I have had care to
insinuate to your Reverence, because of the Council, and I have not concealed
it from himself, but have faithfully advertised him, of what was there
instituted, that if within a year, in case he thinks he should be provided
of a judgment, he neglect to pursue Pro. and legendum vt.
his cause, none may after give him audience. Now Pasch never fell out upon the
eigth of the Ides of April while Xanthippus was Primat of Numidia, but the
year of our salvation four hundred and two, which was the year of the fifth
consulship of Archadius and Honorius, and consequently the fifth Council of
Carthage, that had been holden the year before, fell out in the year four
hundred and one, that is to say in the year after the consulship of Stelicon;
which was two year after the years of the consulship of Honorius and
Eutychianus, in which the fowrth council of Carthage had been celebrated.

The fifth question is concerning the second Mileuitan Council, holden under
the Consulship of Honorius and Constantius, that the new publishers of the
Council of Africa pretend to have made noe canons, moved by three conjectures;
the first, because in the Rapsody of the African canons, there is noe mention
made of this Council. The second because the canons that are thereto
attributed, are in part taken from the first Mileuitan Council; and in part
from the Council holden under the twelfth consulship of Honorius. And the
third, that amongst the Canons that are thereto assigned, there are some, that
cannot agree, either with the place or time wherein it was celebrated. To these
three conjectures, we have also three answers. The first answer is, that the
Council celebrated under the twelfth Co^sulship of Theodosius against Pelagius
and Celestius, was rather a repetition and confirmation of the Mileuitan
council, which had been holden the year before against the same heretics,
then a new Council. By means whereof, it must not be held strange, if the
African Rapsody whereinto the Counsel celebrated vnderthe twelfth consulship
of Houorius is inserted, has not reported the Canons of the second Mileuitan
Council; and principally the second Mileuitan Council, having been but a
provincial Council of the Bishops of Numidia, which had not the force of a
national Council of Africa, but by the concurrencie of the Council of the
Proconsulary Province, celebrated the same year at Carthage; and by the
emologation that was made thereof the year following in the general Council
of all Africa assembled at Carthage For the Bishop Aurelius, who is mentioned
in the inscription of the Mileuitan Council, reported by saint AVGVSTIN, is
not Aurelius Council. Afric. in Praef. Council hab. 5. Calend. sept. sub. (...).
Caesar. and Attic.
Bishop of Carthage, but Aurelius one of the Bishops of Numidia, whereof
mention is made in the Council holden under Cesarius and Atticus, otherwise he
could not have been put in the third place, and named after Siluanus and
Valentinus. For Aurelius Bishop of Carthage presided in all the Episcopal
assemblies of Africa as well at Carthage, as out of Carthage, as it appears
both by the commandment read in the conference of Collat. Car thag. Act. 1.
Carthage, which says, Aurelius Bishop of Carthage presiding, and Siluanus
Primat of Numidia; and by the first Mileuitan Council, where Aurelius Bishop
of Carthage presided, and preceded Xanthippus Primate of Numidia, Co^c. Afric.
in Praef. c. 53.
Predecessor to Siluanus, and Nicetius Primat of Mauritania Sitifensis, and
Valentine, and all the other Bishops. The second answer is, that the writers
finding in the African Rapsody the Canons and the preface of the fist Mileuitan
Council, and believing there was noe other Mileuitan Council, but that, that
was holden against Pelagius and not being enough conversant in history to
discern them by the distance of dates, have mingled a part of the preface, and
of the decrees of the one, with the text of the other. And the third, that the
same Bookebinders, finding the greater part of the canons of the Mileuitan
Council in the Council holden under the twelfth consulship of Honorius; and
upon this occasion conceiving that the Counsel holden under the twelfth
Consulship of Honorius was but a repetition of the Mileuitan, have added to the
Mileuitan what they have found more in the Counsel holden under the twelfth
con sulship of Honorius, and have yet added thereto, some other canons taken
out of other Counsels. But that for this cause it follows, that the second
Mileuitan Council has made noe canons, we deny, and deny it with the
authority of the second Council of Tours, celebrated a thousand and fifteen
years agone, which cites the canons of the second Mileuitan Counsels, in
these words; It has been ordained in the ancient Conc. Turon. 2. cap. 21.
Mileuitan Canons, that every Bishop that in case of necessity etc. vailes a
virgin before the age of twenty five year, shall not be holden culpable of
breaking the Council, were this number is prescribed. Which are the very words
of the twenty sixth canon of the Mileuitan Council, that we have in our
hands at this day.

The sixth controversy is, concerning the dura^ce of the sixth Council, of
Carthage, which not only the Protestants, but the Illustrious Cardinal
Baronius himself, and the doctors of Collen which have followed him in Edit.
Council. Colon. 1606. page 619. and 621.
the last impression of the Council, will have, to have continued five.
years; to wit, to the time of the Epistle of the Bishops of Africa to Pope
Celestine, which was written under the consulship of Victor and of Castinus.
And we contrariwise maintanie, that it ended the same year wherein it began;
to wit, the year after the twelfth Consulship of Honorius; that is to say,
the year of the Consulship of Monaxius and Plinta; and thatall the assemblies
which were made after upon the subject of appeals, were as many distinct and
separated Counsels; and for proof of our intention, we will employ two
reasons: the one, that the Bishops of the sixth council of Carthage protested
that they would answer nothing concerning the appeals till the copies of the
exemplifications of the council of Nicea, kept at Constantinople, and in
Alexandria, had Conc Carthag 6. c. 10.
been brought out of the East; and that when they should come, they whould
assemble a council to advise upon it. From whence, it appears that the sixth
council of Carthage was finished the same year wherein it began, and lasted
but till the copies came out of the East, which arrived in the month of
November of the consulship of Monaxius and Plinta; and the other, that when
there was question of the last process of Apiarius, and of the second voyage
of Faustinus into Africa; the Bishops of Africa writ to Pope Celestine, that
they had assembled a council, expressly upon the occurrence of this Business;
from it may be gathered, that the sixth council of Carthage had not continued
till then: Our holy brother Epist. Council. Afric. ad Caelest.
and fellow Bishop Faustinus, said they, coming to us, we have assembled a
council. Whereto there may yet be added, that between the first appeal of
Apiarius, when he was pursued by the inhabitants of Sicca, which was determined
in the sixth council of Carthage in the presence of Flauianus; and the second
appeal of the same Apiarius, when he was pusued by the inhabitants of
Thabraca, which was determined in the Council holden after the return of
Faustinus into Africa; there did again interuene an other Council, by which
he had been deprived a second time, of the (...) of all the Bishops of Africa.
And it is not to be replied, Praef. Council Carth. 7
that the sixth Council of Carthage chose twenty two deputiesto finish what
had not been determined in the general assembly of the Council, for it was
an ordinary thing for the general Counsels of Africa, when they had been
some days together, to avoid the wearysomnes, and the expenses of so great a
multitude of Bishops, to choose three or four (...) from every province, who
should prepare and put into form the acts of the Council: as in the Council
holden the year before under the twelfth Consulship of Honorius after the
constitution of the (...), there was chosen three deputies of every province,
to determine Coccil. Afric. c. 94.
the other business of the Council, and to reduce into form, the acts of
what had been there resolved. And nevertheless, so far is it from appearing
from thence, that this Council lasted to the year following, as contrariwise
the year followinge, which was the year after the twelfth consulship of
Honorius, there was assembled a new Council, the Co^c. (...) 6 in (...) and
cap. 1.
eigth of the calends of June, which was that that we call the sixth of
Carthage.

The seventh skirmish is about the collection entitled, the sixth Council of
Carthage which is a gathering of thirty three of the principal canons of the
former Counsels of Carthage, which many think to have been made in the sixth
Counsel of Carthage and we co^ntrarywise pretend it to be compiled by some
impertinent Rapsodist, whether an African during the last and most barbarous
time of the dominion of the Uandalls in Africa; or an Europian, while the
heresy and tyranny of the Vandalls, hindered the catholics on this side the
Sea, from being able to have exact communication and knowledge of the
ecclesiastical things of Africa And we are grounded in this belief by
infinite reasons: The first reason is that Fulgentius Ferandus an African
deacon, and very conversant in the African antiquity, who writ a little before
the expulsion of the Uandalls out of Africa, not only makes noe mention of
this collecton that they entitle the sixth council of Carthage but also
citinge some of the canons that are there, alleges them under the title of
canons of the former Counsels of Carthage. As when he cites the canon Fulg.
Ferand in (...) Can art. 4.
of the canonical Books, he cites it from the Council of Carthage where
there was added the permission to read the Passions of the martyrs, which is
the third Council of Carthage; and does not note that this canon has been
published in any other Council of Carthage: when he registers the prohibition
of ordayninge Bishops without the Ibid. art. 16
consent of their Primate; he alleges it with these quotations, (...)
Council of Carthage, under the Prelate Genetlius, title tenth, the General
Council of Carthage, title forty fowerth: And the Council of Zelles in the
recital of the Popes Epistle: and makes noe mention amongst the places where
this canon of the Council is, that we call the sixth Council of Carthage,
which was holden the year after that of Zelles. When he inrolls the canon of
the celibate of Bishops, Priests and deacons, he inserts it with this
quotation, The Council of Carthage title the first, and Council of Zelles;
And of the Counsel of Carthage, holden after that of Zelles; which is that
which we call the sixth, he speaks not one word. And it is not to be objected,
that these fragments are found in the collection of Dionisius Exiguus. For
besides that the collection of Dionisius Exiguus, was compiled not by a
natural African, as was Fulgentius Ferandus, but by a Scythian, it was made
after the Register of Ferandus, as it appears both by the canons of the
Apostles which are there inserted, which in Pope Gelasius his time, and in
Fulgentius Ferandus his time who were both Africans, were neither receuied in
the church of Rome nor in the African church; and for this cause are not
mentioned in the Register of Ferandus: and by the division of the last canon of
the seventh council of carthage, which the collection Collect. Dionys. in
Conc. dict.
of Dionisius, and the Greek edition that follows it, do divide Afric c. 99
c. 100.
inpertinently into two canons: whereas Fulgentius Ferandus, and the Edit.
Graec. Co^c. Carth. c. 133.
original text of the seventh Council of Carthage, do place them under one
only title. And to this there is noe opposition, in this, that Victor Bishop
of Tununes, or according to others Tons, extendes the Fulg Ferand. in (...).
Can art. 73.
(...) of Fulgentius Ferandus, if the quotations be not transposed, to the one
and twe^tith year of the Empire of Justinian. For it is certain that
Fulgentius Ferandus writ from the time of the Emperor Anastasius, and of
Council. Carth. 7. c. 5.
Fulgentius Bishop of Ruspa, to whom he dedicated the Epistle of the five
questions. Isidor. de Scriptor.


The second reason is that these fragments; entitled the sixth Council of
Carthage, are not in the collection of Jsidorus Mercator, and in the Eccl. c.
14. Annal. tom 5. ann. 419. number. 59.
ordinary volumes of the Cou^cells, where the Cou^cells of Africa in chief,
are reported, and all the other ancient Counsels of the latin church, whereof
we make use. Contrariwise, that the sixth Council of Carthage Impress. nou
Council. Colon. tom. 1. page 620.
which is there inserted contains noe canons, and comprehends but the verbal
process of what passed between the Popes legates, and the Bishops of Africa,
about the matter of appeals; which verbal process is reduced only to tenn
Chapters; after which immediately follows in the Council. Carth. celebrat. v.
Calend.
ordinary copies, the seventh Council of Carthage. The third reason is, that
the sixth Council of Carthage and the seventh, were not two different
Counsels, but two actions of one and the same Council, the one Sept. Caesar
and Attic.
celebrated the eigth of the calends of June under the twelfth consulship Coss.
relat. in Conc.
of Honorius; and the other celebrated three days after; to wit, the fifth of
the calends of June, under the same twelfth consulship of Honorius; but Afric.
Co^c. Carth.
that they are reckoned as two different Counsels, for as much as the Theodos.
and. Rumorid. Coss. relat. in Conc.
first was holden by all the two hundred and seauenteen Bishops that were come
to the Council: and the second was holden by the twenty two deputies, that
stayed to finish the affairs of the Council, after the two hundred and
seauenteen bishops had been licenced to depart. For that the Africa post. cap.
57. Council. Carth. Honor. 7. and Theodos.
Illustrious Cardinal Baronius, and the Doctors of Coloigne write, that the
two hundred and seauenteen Bishops assisted not at the first action of the
Council, but by their deputations and signatures; and that there was none
present at the first act but the twenty two deputies that were at Coss. relat.
in Afric. post. c. 63.
the second, moved with this, that the verbal process of the first says,
Aurelius and the sever all legates of the African province then sitting, is
contradicted both by the ancient custom of the Counsels of Africa, which
Co^c. Carth Honor. 12. and Theod. 8. Coss. relat in Afric c. 94. and
teaches us, that there was great difference between the deputies that the
provinces elected to assist at the Counsels, and the deputies that the
counsels elected to finish the rest of their affairs: And by the ouerture of
the first act, where Aurelius gave thanks to God for the arrival of so Conc.
7. Carth. relat. in Afric post. c. 94.
great a company; and by the ouerture of the second where it was said, that
the twenty two deputies had been chosen, because the other Bishops had
complained that they could not stay the end of the affairs Co^c. Carth 6 c. 1.
of the Council; by means whereof, if these thirty three canons had Edit.
Graec Co^c Afric. Paris. apud Abraham.
been made in the sixth Council of Carthage as the quotations of the times and
persons seem to show; that they have not only been compiled there, but made
there, and as the new publishers of the African counsels Pacard. ann 1615. in
Praef. p. 35. and 38.
maintain, they must have been made either at the first act, or between
these two acts, and before the separation of the entire company of the
Council. For Faustinus the Popes legate who is represented pronouncing Council.
dict. Carth gg. 6. c. 4.
one of the thirty three Canons, departed the morrow after the second act,
which contains but the five Canons, that bare the title Con. Afric c. 100.
of the seventh Council of Carthage; and consequently, it is necessary that
the edition of the thirty three canons should have been made in the whole
assembly of the general Council of Africa, that is to say, in the presence
of all the two hundred seauenteen Bishops; and before the Rapsody of the
hundred canons that we call the African Council, into which the five canons of
the second act are inserted; and which also the collection of Dionisius and
the Greek translation place after the collection of the thirty three canons
entitled the sixth Council of Carthage. Now this is against the express
distinction that Cresconius, one of the principal maintainers of the
collection of Dionisius, setts between the collection of the thirty three
canons attributed to the sixth Counsel of Carthage, and the Rapsody of the
hundred canons, that they call the African Council. For cyting the order of
the voyages of the Bishops beyond Seas, which in the collection of the thirty
three canons attributed to the sixth Council of Carthage is the twenty third,
and in the collection of the hundred canons that we call the African Council,
is the seauentie third, he cites the twenty third, and all the rest of the
same Crescon. in Breu. Canon art. 154 and alibi.
collection under the simple title of the Council of Carthage; and the
seauentie third with the title of the general Council of Carthage. The fourth
reason is, that if even the thirty three canons attributed to the Id. ibid.
sixth Council of Carthage, should not be pretended to have been made, Noua
Editio Graeca Codicis Canon
but only collected in the sixth Council of Carthage, there is noe appearance
that those two collections to wit, that of the thirty three canons, that is
entitled the sixth Council of Carthage; and that of the Asric. impress. Paris
apud
hundred canons, that they call the African Council, having been both compiled
in one Council as the new publishers of the Counsel of Africa Abraham Pacard.
maintain, and as Dionisius Exiguus and those that have follwed him suppose,
that they would have registered the same canons in the^ both. Contrariwise Anno
1615. in Praef. Page 35. and 38.
the division of the inscriptions would, that into the first should be
inserted, the only canons of the Counsels celebrated before the promotion of
Aurelius; and into the second the canons of, the Counsels Collect. Dionys. in
Council.
holden after the promotion of Aurelius. For (...) collection of Dionisius, and
the greek translation that follows it, putts this inscription in the Carthag.
in inscrip. cap 1.
front of the first collection, After this, the things published in diverse
African Counsels, are acknowledged to have been inserted into the present
acts: a clause Edit Craec Council.
that shows plainly, that it is a Rapsodyst, and not the clerk of a council
that speaks: And in the front of the second this; There were recited also
Carth. ibid Collect.
in this Synod, diverse Counsels of the whole Province of Africa, celebrated in
the Dionys. in inscript.
times preceding Aurelius. And neuerthelesses, not only the first collection
does indifferently embrace the Canons of the Council holden both before
Council. Afric.
and after the promotion of Aurelius; but also the most part of the Edit. Graec
Council.
Canons that are inserted into the first collection, are so also into the
second; as the Canon of the celibat of Bishops, Priests and deacons, which
Carth. post can. 33.
had been made in the fifth Council of Carthage, is reported in the
collections Conc dict. Carthag. 6 c. 25.
of the thirty three Canons, under the title of the twenty (...) Canon, and
in the collection of the hundred Canons, under the title Conc. dict. Afric. c.
73 Conc. dict.
of the thirty seventh Canon; of the prohibition of Priests, deacons, and
other inferior clerks to appeal beyond Sea, which had been made in the second
Mileuitan Council, and confirmed in the Council holvnder Carthag. 6 c 28.
the twelfth consulship of Honorius, is reported in the collection of Conc.
dict. Afric. c. 92
the thirty three canons, under the twenty eigth Canon; and in the collection
of the hundred Canons under the title of the ninetith two canon; and so of
many others.

The fifth reason is, that the preface of the collection of the thirty three
Canons is all taken from the discourse, that Genetlius made in Co^c. Carth 1.
c. 1.
the beginning of the second Council of Carthage, which after some words,
contains these, because you are here present under the auspices of (...)
favor, the ecclesiastical faith that we consigne ought to be before all
things uniformly confessed in this glorious assembly. And then afterward, the
order of every point of ecclesiastical discipline, ought to be established and
(...) by the consent of all, to the end that the Spirits of our brethren and
(...) Bishop newly promoted, should be confirmed in the resolution of the
things propounded, and that as we have received from our Fathers by an assured
trust, the Trinity which we retain (...) in our breasts; that is to say,
Legendum (...)and no^ dispositione.
the unity of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, which is
acknowledged to have noe novelty; in the same sort as we have learnt it, so
we teach Legendum sinibus, and non sinibus Legendum nouitatem, and non,
notitiam.
(...) to the people of God. After which words, these immediately follow, (...)
was said by all the Bishops; so certainly have we received it, so we hold it,
following the faith Apostolic. From this former discourse then, the compilers
of the collection entitled the sixth Council of Carthage, have stolen their
prologue, except that in steed of these words; (...) the Bishop said; they
have set down to fit their theft to the sixth Council of Carthage; All the
Council says. And in steed of this answer. It was said by all the Bishops;
they have set; it was said by all (...) Bishops newly promoted. Behold their
language; All the Council says; Conc. dict. Carth. c. 2.
under the auspices of Gods favor, the ecclesiastical Faith that we consigne
(...) to be before all things uniformly confessed in this glorious assembly,
and then the order of every point of Ecclesiastical Discipline ought to be
established by the consent of all, and to confirm the spirits of our brethren
and fellow Bishops, (...) promoted; those things must be propounded which we
have received from our Fathers by an assured deposition, to the end that the
unity of the trinity that we retain consecrated in our senses (so have they
corrected the word finibus which was in the second Council of Carthage, not
discerning that in the steed of finibus, must be read, sinibus, that is,
breasts) to (...) of the Father, son, and holy Ghost; which is acknowledged
to have (...) difference (so have they corrected the word notitiam, not seeing
that in steed of notitiam, must be read, nouitatem, which is an allusion of
(...) that Genetlius would make to the word, vnitatem) In the same (...) as we
have learnt it, so we teach it to Gods people. And immediately after, Item it
was said, by all the Bishops newly promoted; So certainly have we received
it, so we hold it, so we teach it, following the Evangelical faith, with
your doctrine. Now this fragment cannot subsist neither in the place nor form
where it is coucht, For besides that the Fathers of the sixth Council of
Carthage had already, yea from the (...) of the Council, and before all other
things, caused the creed Council. Carthag. 6. c. 1. 9. and 10.
of the Council of Nicea to be read, by means whereof this instance of
propounding the faith of the Trinity was to noe purpose; how could it be all
the Council that said, to confirm the spirit of our (...) and fellow Bishops
newly promoted; those things must be propounded which we have learnt from our
Fathers? And how could the Bishops newly promoted answer; so have we received
it, so we hold it, so we (...) it following the Evangelical faith with
your doctrine? For the Bisshops newly promoted which made this Answer; where
they not parts of the Body of the Council? and then what likelihood is there,
that all the Bishops in a Council should pronounce word for word, (...)
selfsame speech? There is often times noted in the front of the Canons; a all
the Council says; for as much as such Canons having (...) propounded and read
by some of the Fathers of the Council, all the rest have given their consent
unto it. And there are also sometimes Clauses of two or three words,
pronounced together by all the Bishops of a Council; And principally in the
acclamations to Princes; where one of the Bishops having begun a period, all
the Council. Constable. sub. (...). and alibi.
rest repeat with him in the form of an Echo the same words. There are also
sometimes orations composed and pronounced by the deputies of Counsels, which
are attributed to the whole body Council. Constable. 6. Act. 18.
of the Counsels, but that a whole Council has made and pronounced,
immediately one same oration, and principally an oration that had been spoken
word by word by one Bishop in an other Council near thirty year before,
there is noe spark of likelihood in it.

The sixth reason is that the most part of the Canons of this pretended
Council, are taken from diverse Clauses of former Counsels; sticthed together,
and threded as it were in the form of Centons, one at the end of an other, and
joined with so little relation, and so vnaptlie and impertinently as the
Collection can but be attributed to the ignorance of a particular Rapsodist,
and not to the sufficiency and napacitie of the Fathers of the Council. I
will content myself with producinge two examples, to the end that from thence,
the readers may conjecture the rest. The first example shall be drawn from the
Co^c. Carth dict. 6. c. 4.
fifth Canon, whereof this is the tenor: Aurelius Bishop says, there is none
doubts, but that the greedines of Covetousness, is the mother of all evils;
and therefore it must be interdicted, that any should usurp the bounds of an
other, or for hope of profitt to trench beyond the limitts established by the
Fathers, neither shall it be lawful for any to take usury of any thing
whatsoever: although the new propositions which are either obscure or hidden
under the generality of words being considered by us, shall receive a rule.
But for the rest those whereof the Scripture has clearly determined must not
longer be delayed, but rather to execute judgment. And therefore that which is
reproved in laymen, ought by as much stronger reason to be condemned before all
others in ecclesiastical persons, all the Council says; None can labor
without danger either against the prophets or the Gospel. Now this Canon is a
centon compiled of two clauses, taken the one from the Co^c. Carth 1. c. 10.
tenth Canon of the first Council of Carthage, which forbidds Bishops to
trench upon the lymitts of their fellowe-Bretheren; and the other Council.
Carth. 1. c. 13.
from the thirteenth which forbidds Clerks to lend upon usury; between which
the Rapsodist has vnaptlie interposed this interlocution; although the new
propositions which either are obscure or hidden under the generality of
words, being considered by us, shall receive a rule, yet those where the
ordonance of the seripture is clear, must not be delayed, but rather the
judgment must be executed; which is not of the body of the original Canon,
but is an answer to the demand that Abundantius Bishop Co^c. Carth 1. c. 13.
of Adrumeta had made, that they should confirm in the first Council of
Carthage, which was a general Council of all Africa, the decree that had been
propounded in the Council of Adrumeta, which was a particular Council of one
of the provinces of Africa; that it was not lawful for Clerks to lend upon
usury. To this demand then Gratus answered that new propositions and the
decisions whereof were either obscure or ambigious in the Scripture, it was
reasonable to deliberate of before they should be resolved. But that those
where the ordonance of the Scripture was clear, as in the case of usury,
which was evidently forbidden both by the old and new Testament, there needed
noe deliberation but execution. And the Rapsodist has inserted the answer
into his centon without making mention of the question. And to tie it to the
rest of his faggot, he has put in there the word, although, which has noe
relation either to the words before or after; But this will best appear by
confronting the Texts. The first clause then of this centon, is taken from the
tenth Canon of the first Council of Carthage, where the text says. Gratus
Bishop said, Co^c. Carth 1. c. 10.
that none doubts, but that the greedines of avarice, is the root of all
evils; and therefore it must be forbidden, that any man should usurp the
ends of another, or trench upon an other Bishop his colleague. And the second is
taken from Co^c. Carth 1. c. 13.
the thirteenth Cano^ of the same Counsel, whereof the words are these:
Abundantius Bishop of adrumeta said, It has been ordained in our Council,
that it is not lawful for clerks to lend upon usury: and if it seem to your
Holiness and to this Council to be to purpose, let it be appointed by this
present decree. Gratus the Bishop said, new propositions, which are either
obscure or hidden (...) the ambiguitie of any general words; we deliberate
of, before we set down a Rule concerning them; but those wherein the
ordinance of the divine Scriptures is clear, it is not needful to delay the
judgment, but rather to execute it. And so that which is reproved even in the
laity, ought by a much stronger reason to be condemned in ecclesiastical
persons, before all others. All the Bishops said, None can do any thing
contrary to the prophets, nor contrary to the Gospel without peril. And out
of these two Canons of the first Council of Carthage, separated by the
interposition of two other Canons, and distant by more then twelve periods one
from an other, the gatherer of the collection entitled the sixth Council of
Carthage, has made this continued text under the title of the fifth Canon of
the sixth Council of Carthage. Aurelius the Bishop said, none can doubt, Conc.
dict. Carth. 6. c. 5.
but that the greedines of Avarice is the mother of all evil, and therefore it
must be forbidden, that any man should usurp the ends of an other, or for
hope of profitt trench beyond the lymittes prescribed by the Fathers; and that
that also it shall not be lawful for any clergy man to lend upon usury;
although new propositions, which are either obscure or hidden under the
generality of words, should be considered by us, before we set down a rule
concerning them: yet those where, the ordinance of the divine Scripture is
clear, must not be delayed, but rather proceeded in to Judgment: and so that
which is reproved even in laymen, ought to be by stronger reason much more
condemned in Clergymen. All the Council said, none can act any thing without
peril contrary to the law or the prophets. In which place yet to accommodate
this confusion to the time of the sixth, Council of Carthage he has changed,
either he or the exemplifiers which came after him, the word Gratus into
Aurelius, against the credit of all antiquity, which teaches us, that the
first Council of Carthage was holden under Gratus, and not under Aurelius; and
contrary to the copies of the first Council of Carthage, in the truth whereof
we all agree on both sides, which says Gratus and not Fulg. Ferrand in Breu.
Canart. 24. and 123.
Aurelius; and against the testimony of Fulgentius Ferandus, who cites the two
Canons whereof this centon is compounded with the title of canons of the
Council holden under saint Gratus. The second example, shall be drawn from
the thirteenth Canon of the same collection, Conc. dict Carth. 6. c. 13.
which consists in these words: Aurelius the Bishop said; that we ought, (...)
observe the decrees of the ancient Fathers; as also, that without consulting
with (...) Primat of every Province, many Bishops assembled presume not so
easily (...) ordain a Bishop, unless in case of necessity three Bishops, in
what place (...) they should be, ought by his commandment, to ordain a
Bishop; and (...) any one do in any thing contradict his profession or
signature, he depriues (...) of this Society. Now this gallymaufery is a
medley stitched and patched together from the three different clauses of the
second Council of Carthage, where they are couched with their reasons,
relations, and dependancies; whereas in this centon, they are inserted without
Cresc. Episc. Silemsilensis
any relation or connection one to an other. The first clause is taken from the
tenth Canon of the second council of Carthage, where after Felix Bishop of a
city of Africa called Selemsela, or according to the collation Collat. Car
thag. in recent Epis. Donatist.
of Carthage, Silemsila showed that the ancient Counsels decreed, that a
Bishop should be judged by twelve Bishops; a Priest by six; and a deacon by
three; there follow these words: Genetlius Bishop said; what says your Act. 1
art. 176.
Holiness to this? All the Bishops said, that the decrees of the ancient
Fathers Council. Carthag. 2 c. 10.
ought to be observed. The second clause is taken from the twelfth Canon of the
same second Council of Carthage, wherein after the complaint Numid. Ma xulit.
Collat Carthag Act. 1. art. 112.
that Numidius Bishop of Massilia, (or according to the collation of Carthage,
Maxulia: for Masculia, whereof the Bishop Uictorianus was at one of the acts
of the third Council of Carthage, was an other Bishoprike) had made to
Genetlius that some Bishops dispising the Primats of their Do natus Masculitan
Optat. Mileuit. l. 1. Fo lix.
provinces, ordained Bishops without receiving letters from the^; and the
answer that Genetlius gave him, that this was a thing that concerned their
common honor, and they must all give their votes; there follow these words:
It was said by all Episc Mozulitanc^sis and Vital is episcop.
the Bishops, It pleases us all, that the Primate of the Province not having
been consulted with, none should presume so easily (though with many
Bishops) to ordain a Bishop, etc. but in a case of necessity, three Bishops
in what place soever Mascul. Donatistae in Collat.
they shall be, with the commandment of the Primat, may ordain a Bishop.
The third is taken out of the last Canon of the same Council, where after
Genetlius had demanded, will it please you then, that all things that have
been Carth. Act. 1 art. 188. and 202.
decreed in your most glorious assembly, shall be observed by all? and that
all the Bishops, had answered; It pleases us, it pleases us, that they should
be Council. Carth. 2. c. 12
observed by all, these words follow, Genetlius Bishop said, and if (against
our expectation) it happen that they should be violated in any point, what do
Co^c. Carth 2. c. 13.
you ordain ought to be done? It was said by all the Bishops: Whosoever shall
contradict his protestation or his signature, shall make himself incapable of
this Society. And of these three diverse clauses repeated in three several
canons, and which have noe relation one to an other, he that gathered the
collection entitled the sixth Council of Carthage, had made this centon as a
Co^c. Carth dict. 6. c. 13.
continned Canon; Aurelius the Bishop said, what say your Holiness to this?
All the Bishops answered; that we ought to observe the Canons of antiquity, as
also; that without consulting with the Primate of every Province, many
Bishops assembled, ought not to presume, so easily to ordain a Bishop, unless
in case of necessity, three Bishops in what place soever they be, with his
commandment ought to ordain a Bishop; and if any man happen in any thing
to contradict his profession or his signature, he shall thereby make himself
incapable of this Society. And to the end to fit it to the time of the sixth
Council of Carthage, either he, or the Exemplifiers which have come after him,
have changed the name of Genetlius into that of Aurelius, against the credit of
the copies of the second Council of Carthage, which say, Fulg. Fera^d in Breu.
Genetlius; and of Fulgentius Ferrandus, who cites these Canons with the title
of the Council holden under Genetlius. Can. art. 55. and 96. and artic. 4.


The seaue^th reason, but one that co^prehendes under it a legio^ of others, is
that almost all the canons that are inserted into this collection, are there
inserted with precise notes of Canons composed and pronounced in the sixth
Council of Carthage; and nevertheless, there is scarce one of them; where
there are not some clauses, that cannot agree neither with the time, nor Co^c.
dict. Carth. 6. c. 3.
with the persons, nor yet with the discipline of the Fathers of the sixth
coucell of Carthage. As for example; in the third cano^, it is said, when in
the Council past, the continence of the clergy was treated of, these three
degrees were restrained by the consecrations, as to one kind of conscription of
Chastity; to wit, Bishops, Priests, and deacons. Now it has already been
showed, that these words cannot be of the sixth Council of Carthage, as well
Co^c. Carth. c. 2.
because they are word by word in the second Council of Carthage, which had
been celebrated thirty year before, and with this same remitment to the past
Council; as because in the Council of Carthage holden under the twelfth
consulship of Honorius, which had immediately preceded the Co^c. Carth (...).
Honor. 12.
sixth council of Carthage, there had been nothing ordained concerning the
continence of the clergy: And it cannot be said, that by this phrase Theod 8.
(...) (...) in Afric.
in the council past, they intended to speak of the Council assembled under
the consulship of Vincentius and Flauitas, which had been celebrated Council.
Carth 5 c (...). and Council dict. Afric. c. 37.
eighteen years before the sixth council of Carthage. For besides that this
note of time, in Concilio praeterito, determinately taken, and to say, in the
past council, has reference to the council last past; and indeterminately
taken, and to say, in a council past, it cannot have been used by the sixth
council of Carthage, in the time whereof, the decree of clergy contine^ce had
been published, not in one, but in many and several Counsels; as the Council
dict. Carth. 6. c. 25.
twenty fifth canon of the same collection declares; when it says, That has
pleased us, which has also been confirmed in several Counsels; that the
subdeacons which handle the Sacraments, and the Deacons, Priests, and Bishops,
according to the former decrees, shall abstain even from their wives. The
word, in Concilio praeterito, cannot be expounded of the Council holden under
the Consulship of Uincentius and Flauitas; for as much as the canon of the
celibat, published under the consulship of Uincentius and Flauitas, is wholly
reported in the same collection, more then twenty chapters Con. dict. Carth.
6. c. 5.
after. In the fifth Canon the text says, Faustinus Bishop of Potentia of the
Province of Urbin, Legate of the Roman Church, says; It pleases that Bishops,
Priects, and Deacons, or those that handle the Sacraments; keeping chastity,
shall abstain even from their own wives. Now this Canon is not a Canon by
itself, but the train of a former Canon; that is to say, of the second canon
of the second Council of Carthage, in the which the compiler of Co^c. Carth 2.
c 2.
the collection, or his exemplifiers, in steed of these words; It was said by
all the Bishops, it pleases all, that the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, or
those that handle the Sacraments, keeping chastity, shall abstain even from
their own wives; has put to fit the decree to the time of the sixth Council
of Carthage; Faustinus Bishop of Potentia, of the Province of Vrbin, Legate of
the Roman Church, says; It pleases that Bishops, Priests, deacons, or those
that shall handle the Sacraments keeping chastity, shall abstain even from
their own wives. Syric. Ep. ad Afric. citat. in Co^c. Zell. and apud
A thing that can noe way subsist. For besides, that if it had been the Popes
legate that had spoken this language, he would never have forgotten to mention
the decrees of the celibate, sent to the Bishops of Africa by Pope Syricius; It
is evident, that this clause is not a Canon a part, but Fulg. Ferr. in Breu.
Can. art. 130.
it is the approbation and conclusion of the proposition of the Canon; and
therefore also in the second Counsel of Carthage, it is joined in one and the
same cano^ with the preceding article. And nevertheless the author Conc. dict.
Carthag. 6. in titul. c. 3.
of the collection entitled the sixth Council of Carthage, not only has
thereof made two canons in chief, but the better to distinguish and Ibid in
titul. d. 4.
make manifest his impertine^cie, has entitled the^ with two differing
titles, Edit. Grec Co^c. Carth in titul. c 3. and 4.
and has placed before the one of them this inscription: Of continence,
chapter the third. And before the other, Of the diverse orders that ought to
abstain from their wives, chapter fourth. And the Greek Interpreter the
Council. dict. Carthag. 6. c. 6.
very same. In the ninth canon, the text of the collection is, Augustine Bishop
Legate of the province of Numidia said, Uouchsafe to ordain that if any in
respest of their crimes be cast out of the Church, and that any Bishop or
Priest receive them into communion, he may be held to be inuolued in the like
crime, as those that shun the regular judgment of their Bishop. Now these
are the words of the second Council of Carthage, where after Felix Bishop of
Selemsela, and Epigonius Bishop of Bulla Regia (for it must be read Bullensium
regiorum and not Bullensium regionum as it appears both by the acts Collat.
Carth. Act 1.
of the conference of Carthage which say, Bullensium regiorum; and by the
Geograficall tables of Ptolomy, where there is a city of Africa called
Bullaria, Ptolom. Geogr. l. 4. legendum.
which is a corrupt abridgement of the word Bulla regia) had made the
proposition of the article; Genetlius Bishop of Carthage replied; With (...) id
est (...).
good cause then do our Brethren and fellow Bishops propound, that those
that in respect of their crimes are cast out of the Church, if avoiding the
regular judgment of their Bishop, they be received to the communion by any
Bishop or Priest, Council. Carth 2. c. 7.
he shall be held to be inuolued in the like crime. Only there is this
difference, that whereas the second Conncell of Carthage says: Genetlius
Bishop says; the compiler, or his exemplifers, to accommodate the Canon to the
time of the sixth Council of Carthage, have set, Augustine Bishop Legate of the
province of Numidia says; which is a metamophosis, that cannot take place as
well because Epigonius was dead as it has been above showed, a long time
before the sixth Council of Carthage; as because saint AVGVSTIN would not have
said in the sixth Council of Carthage, Vouchsafe to ordain, of a thing
already ordained, and in the same terms thirty year before. In the
fourteenth canon the collection says; Item, it Council. dict. Carth c. 14.
has pleased, that from the province of Tripolis, in regard of the small
number of Bishops, there one only Bishop may come in legation, and that in
the same province, a Priest may be heard by five Bishops, and a Deacon by
three, the proper Bishop of the Diocese, as has been aboue-said, sitting with
them. Now the first clause of this decree, is a train of the second Canon of
the third Council of Carthage, where after the Fathers had ordained that there
should be sent to the national aniuersarie Counsels, three deputies from
every province, they added this exceptation; But from Tripolis, because of the
small Council. Carth. 3. c. 2.
number of Bishops, there shall come but one only Bishop. From this canon
then, the Rapsodists of the sixth Council of Carthage have separated and torn
the train from the head, and have set, by an order reuersed, the head, which
ordaines that there should come to the national Counsels but three deputies
from every province, in the eighteenth canon of their collection, and the
train which excepts the province of Tripolis, and the dispensation of sending
but one deputy, in the fourteenth, that is to say, after the thirteenth with
which it has noe relation. For that this exception has been made in the third
Council of Carthage and not in the fixth; and that it is a train of the
second canon of the third Council of Carthage, it appears both by the text of
the third Council of Carthage, where it is in the same words; and by the
Counsel of Carthage, holde^ under the twelfth consulship of Honorius, which
preceded the sixth Council of Council. Carth. Ho nor. 12. and Theod. 8.
Carthage, where it is said, that Plautius was come only Legate from the
province of Tripolis according to custom; a thing that evidently shows, that
the exception of the province of Tripolis, had preceded the sixth counsel of
Carthage. Coss. relat. in Council. Afric. c. 94
The other clause is, an ignorant addition, that the Rapsodist has thrust in,
by which he will have it, that in the province of Tripolis, five Bishops with
the diocesan, that is to say, six Bishops might judge a Priest; not
considering that in the province of Tripolis there was in all but five Bishops.
For that the Rapsodist means five Bishops besides the Diocesan, it is
apparent by these words: the proper Bishop, as has been ahoue said, being
present: Which remitts the Readers to the former canons, where the diocesan
Bishop is added, besides the Council. dict. Carrh. 6. c. (...).
six Bishops that ought to judge the Priests of the other Provinces; and by
Zonara and Balsamon, who say interpreting this canon; He means five Bishops,
besides the Diocesan Bishop, which ought to preside at this act; and Zon. in
Co^c. Carth c 14. Balsam.
that there was in all but five Bishops in the province of Tripolis, it is
manifest by the ninteenth canon of the third Council of Carthage which is the
sixteenth of the African Rapsody, where Aurelius says: In Tripolis as it ibid.
is affirmed, (or according to the Greek, as you know,) there are but five
Bishops. Co^c. Carth 3. c. 19.
In the sixteenth Canon, which is a confusion of four articles; all the
articles Edit. Graec. Council. Carth. c. 49.
are as so many canons of the third Counsel of Carthage, bound up and
patched together without order one with an other, and that cannot be presumed
to have been transferred from the sixth Counsel of Carthage Impress. Council.
Afric. Paris 16 r 5. apud Abraham Pacard. in Praef. page 35. and 38.
into the third as the new publishers of the counsels of Africa pretend; for
as much as the most part of the same canons had been instituted in the Counsel
of Hippo, which the first Mileuitan Council testifies to have been repeated in
the third Council of Carthage. In the seaue^teenth canon the collection says,
It has pleased, that Mauritania Sitifensis, (as it has requested of the
Primat of Numidia from whose Congregation it is now to be subtracted) Council.
Mi leuit. 1. relat in Afric post. c 52.
should have a Primat a part, which all Primates of African provinces, yea all
the Bishops consenting thereto, because of the length of the way, do permit
to be so. Now this canon could not be made in the sixth Council of Carthage,
Council. dict. Carth. 6. c. 17.
for more then twenty year before the sixth Council of Carthage, Mauritania
Sitifensis had a primat apart, as appears both by the third Council Co^c.
Carth 3. c. 2.
of Carthage which says, that there were none but the Provinces endued with
the first Seas, that should send Legates to the Counsels, and Come Carth 3. c.
48.
neuertelesse names the Legates of Mauritania Sitifensis; and by the first
Conc. Mileuit. 1. relat. in Afric p. c 52.
Mileuitan Council, where Nicetius is called, Primat of Mauritania Sitisensis.
And therefore also Fulgentius Ferandus attributes this decree to an other
Council of Carthage. In the eighteenth canon, it is said; Item, it has been
Fulg. Ferand. in Breu. Can. art. 81.
decreed, that those that ordain, shall imprint the canons of the Counsels in
the ears of the Bishops or Clearks, that are to be ordained; words which are
syllable for syllable, in the third Council of Carthage, and which cannot be
said to have Co^c. Carth dict. 6. c. 18 Co^c. Carth 3. c. 3.
been tra^sferred thither from the sixth, as the new publishers of the
Cou^cells of Africa pretend. For Possidius reports, that it was saint
AVGVSTIN, who having perceived that he had been created Bishop of Hippo jointly
Possid. in v. Aug.
with Valerius his Predecessor, contrary to the prohibition of the council
Conc. dict. Carthag. 6 c. 18.
of Nicea, after his promotion caused the decree of reading the canons of the
cou^cells, to those that were to be promoted to be made. To the same canon the
Rapsodist a^dds, Item, it has pleased that the Eucharist shall not be Co^c.
Carth 3 c 6.
given to the bodies of the dead etc. and that the ignorance of Priests do not
cause Co^c. Carth 3. c. 2.
men already dead to be baptized. For which cause it shall be confirmed in
this holy Synod, that according to the decrees of the council of Nicea in
ecclesiacticill causes which often decaie with age, to the damage of the
people, there shall be called every year a council, whereto all the
provinces that have Primats, shall send from their counsels, two legates, or
as many as they please, that the authority may be entire in the company
assembled: Which are two decrees, the one taken from the sixth canon of the
third council of carthage, which says, Item it has pleased that the
Eucharist shall not be given to the bodies of the dead etc. And the other
drawn from the second canon of the same third council of carthage, which
pronounces; It has pleased that for ecclesiastical causes, which often
decaie with age to the damage of the people, there shall be called every year
a council, to which all the provinces that have prime Seas, shall send three
Legates from their counsels, to the end that the authority should be entire,
and the assembly less subject to envy, and less costly to their hosts. Now
besides this that, the last of these canons has nothing common with the
prohibition of giving Co^c. Carth 3. c 7.
the Eucharist, or baptism to the dead, with which the Rapsodist ties it, but
speaks of causes attempted against ecclesiastical persons. And besides that
the mention of the Counsel of Nicea which is joined thereto, Conc Nic. c. 5.
is wholly impertinent, seeing the law of the Council of Nicea is but of
provincial Counsels, and not of National; it could have been neither made,
nor confirmed in the sixth Counsel of Carthage, for the dereee of the
Anniuersarie holding of the National Counsels of Africa, first entitled in
the Council of Hippo, and since renewed by this canon in the third Council of
Carthage, had been suppressed and abrogated more then Co^c. Hipp. c. 7.
twelf year before the sixth Council of Carthage, by the Council holde^
Co^c. Carth 3. c. 2. and 41 and Co^c. dict Afric. c. 18.
under the seventh consulship of Honorius, in these words; Because it had
been ordained in that Council of Hippo, the there should be holden every
year a General Council of Africa, not only here at Carthage, but in all
the other provinces vbi vitio. scriptorum non aduertentium vtrumque Canonem
esse eiusde^
every one in his turn, it has been reserved to be kept, sometimes in the
province of Numidia, and sometimes in that of Byzacia: But for as much as this
has seemed laborious to all the brethren, it has pleased that there should
be noe more anniuersarie necessity to trauaile-trouble the brethren, but that
when the common cause, that is to say of all Africa, shall require it, from
whatsoever part the letters Concilij, pro (...) superius, positum est (...)
(...).
shall be addressed to this Sea; the Synod shall be assembled in the province
that shall be thought fittest. In the ninteenth and tweentith it is said, that
Bishops and Priests accused, cannot be excommunicated unless after citation
and refusal to appear; which are two decrees transferred from the third Conc.
Hon 7 and Theod. 2.
Council of Carthage into this collection; and not transferred from this
collection into the copies of the third Council of Carthage, as the 11. Coss.
rerelat. in Afric. c. 62 Co^c. Carth 3. c. 7 and 8.
new publishers of the Council of Africa pretend. For S. AVGVSTIN himself
notes, that the decree forbidding to excommunicate accused Priests, but after
citation and refusal of appearance, was instituted in the time that Proculian
was Bishop for the Donatists at Hippo. Now Proculian Aug. ep. 137.
had lived and was dead a long while before the sixth Council of Carthage,
Aug. ep. 68
as it appears both by the letters of the clergy of Hippo to Ianuarius,
Collat. Carthag. Act 1. art. 201.
which testify, that Proculian was Bishop of Hippo, before the laws of the
Emperors against the Donatists came into Africa; and by the co^fere^ce of
Carthage, which was holden eight years before the sixth Council of Co^c dict.
Carth. 6. c. 24.
Carthage, in which time it was noe more Proculian, but Macrobius, that was
Bishop of the Donatists at Hippo. In the twenty fourth canon which is of the
canonical Books, the collection says, Be it also made known to our brother
and fellow. Bishop Boniface, and to the other Bishops of the same provinces,
for the confirmation of this canon, that these are the books that we have
received from our fathers, to be read in the church. Now we have already
showed by three reasons, and can yet confirm it by a fowrth that the canon of
canonical books had been published in the third council of Carthage. For the
first Mileuitan council testifies that the Statutes of the council Coc.
Mileuit. (...). in Conc.
of Hippo which contained forty one canons, amongst which was a decree of the
canonical books, had been inserted and confirmed in a more Afric. post. c 52
full council assembled at Carthage. Which can not be understood, but Co^c
Hipp. c 30.
of the third council of Carthage; that is to say, of the council holden the
fifth of the calends of September, under the consulship of Cesarius and Co^c
Carth 5 Calend. Sept. Caesar and Attic.
Atticus, in which was propounded the extract of the canons of the Council of
Hippo. Moreover we have proved that Pope Innocent the first, had already
framed a roll of the canonical Books agreeable to that of the Coss. relat. in
Council Afric c 1 Innoc. ad Exup. ep. 3.
third Council of Carthage more then fourteen year before Boniface, and the
sixth Council of Carthage. By means whereof, it had been an impertinent
thing, for the Bishops of the sixth Council of Carthage, to write to Pope
Boniface for the confirmation of this canon; and it cannot be said, that
perchance the Africans knew it not; for Faustinus the Popes legate who was
present at this Council, and Phillippus and Asellus priests of the Roman
Church, who assisted him, would not have permitted them to be ignorant of it.
In the twenty fifth, the collection Conc. dict. Carth 6. c. 25.
contains, Aurelius says: we add my most dear brothers moreover, as
relation bad been made of the incontinence of some clerks, although but
readers, toward their own wives; It was decreed, which also has been
confirmed in diverse Counsels; that the subdeacons which should handle the
sacraments, and the deacons and Priests and also Bishops, according to the
former Statutes, should abstain from their own wives etc: which if they
observe not, that they should be deposed from their (...) (...) office; but
that the other clerks should not be constrained by this law, but in a riper
age. Now besides that these are the words of the third canon Conc. Carth. 5.
c. 3.
of the fifth Council of Carthage, which says; moreover, as relation had beue
made of the incontinence of some clerks, though toward their own wives; It
was decreed, that Bishops priests, and deacons, according to the former
Statutes, should abstain even from their own wives; which if they observe
not, that they should be deposed from their ecclesiastical office; but that
other clerks should not be bound by this law: there are so many
impertiencies in the extract of the canon, as it could not be collected by the
Fathers of a Council. For first, these words, Aurelius says; We add my most
dear brethren; has noe relation Council. Carth. dict. 6. c. 24.
with the former canon of the same collection, which is of the catalogue of the
canonical books. And secondly, this contexture; Aurelius says We add my
most dear brethren: moreover, as relation had been made to the incontinencie
of some clerks, has noe construction, neither natural nor gramaticall, but
is a strained and impertinent conjunction to bring into Aurelius discourse the
words of the third Canon of the fifth Council of Carthage, which beginus with
these words: Moreover, as relation had been made of the incontinence of some
Clerks. And thirdly this parenthesis (although but readers) is directly
against the discipline of the Fathers of Africa; who never meant to deprive the
Readers from the use of their own wives; contrariwise, they have bound them,
coming to the age of Manhood, either to profess chastity, or to marry. It
has been ordained (says the third council of Carthage that Readers having
once attained to the age of (...), Co^c. Carth 3. c. 19.
shall be constrained either to take wives, or to make profession of chastity.
And fowrthly this exception, unless a riper age, utterly destroys the
intent of the council; which wills that none but Bishops, Priests, deacons and
subdeaco^s should be obliged receiving orders, to quit their wiue; and that
Conc. dict. Carth. 6. c. 23.
the other clerks which handle not the Sacraments, should not be obliged to
this Condition. In the twenty eight Canon, which is a repetition of the canon
instituted in the second Mileuitan Council, and confirmed Council. (...). 2. c.
22.
in the Council of Carthage holden under the twelfth Consulship of (...),
where it had been decided, that the priests Deacons and other inferior Co^c.
Carth Honor. 12. and Theodos. 8. Coss relat in Co^c. Afric. c. 92.
Clerks, cannot in their proper causes, appeal beyond Sea: the greek edition
and some latin copies add, as it hath-bene often said of Bishops, a thing which
can have noe ground, first because the original Canons of the second Mileuitan
Council, and of the Council holden under the twelfth consulship of Honorius,
from whence this repitition is taken, reduce the Collect. Cronys. in tit. Can 28
(...) to only priests, Deacons, and other inferior clerks, and make noe
mention of Bishops: Secondly, because the title of the same twenty eight Conc
dict. Carthag. 6.
canon which is in the collection of Dionisius Exiguus, and in the greek
edition, is restrained precisely to these words, that the priests, deacons and
Edit. Grec. Co^c. Carth 6. in tit. c. 28.
(...), that in their own cause appeal beyond Sea, should not be received to
the (...): and thirdly because the Fathers of the sixth Council of Carthage
protested in the acts of the same Council, that they would not Co^c. Carth 6.
c. 9. and. 10
meddle with this article, till the Copies of the Council of Nicea should be
brought out of the East, and after they should come, they would assemble a new
Synod to advise upon it. Now these copies came but in Inscript. ep. Cyrill. ad
Episc.
the month of November in the Consulship of Monaxius and Plinta, that is to
say six months after the calling of the sixth Council of Carthage; Afric.
Ann. tom. 5. ad. ann. 419.
in which time neither the sixth Council of Carthage was on foot, neither was
Faustinus Legate to Pope Boniface then in Africa, in whose presence this
collection is pretended to have been made. For that which Impress. Conc. Col.
ann. 1606. in not. ad Council.
the Illustrious Cardinal Baronius, and the doctors of Collen do suppose,
(that Innocentius and Marcellus bearers of the copies of the Council of Nicea,
arrived not in Afric till after the death of Pope Boniface, and in Carthag. 6
Inscript. ep. Cyril. and Attic.
the time of Pope Celestine; and upon this occasion put back the edition of
the collection of the thirty three Canons until the time of, Celestine, under
which Fauctinus made a second voyage into Africa,) is contradicted both by the
inscription of the same copies, which shows, that they were brought out of
Alexandria into Africa by the priest Innocentius, and sent from Africa by the
same Innocentius and by Marcellus Subdeacon of the Church of Carthage to
Boniface Bishop of the Roman Church, the sixth of the calends of december: and
by saint CYRILL that says to the Conc. dict. Afric. c. 102.
Africans in the end of his Epistle; As for the Pasch, we signify to you
according to the request that you have often made to us in your letters, that
we will celebrate it the seventeenth (or according to the correction of some
the fourteenth) of the calends of may, of the future indiction; for, for what
cause should the answer be made to the question that they had made to him of
the day of the next Pasch, if his answer were not to be returned before the
same Pasch. And by the Epistle of the Africans to Pope Celestine, which
testifies that they had sent the copies of the Exemplifications from the (...)
to Conc. dict. Afric. cap. 105.
his predecessor Boniface by Innocent priest, and Marcellus subdeacon. And from
this, that which saint JEROME writes to saint AVGVSTIN, derogates Hier. ep. 79.
not; The holy priest Innocent bearer of this epistle, took not the year
last past any letters from me to your Dignity, as if he should not have
returned into Africa. For so far is it from appearing by this that Innocent
stayed in the East till the year following as contrariwise it does the more
plainly appear, that he returned the same year into Africa, but that he made
a new voyage into the East the year after. And then if this collection Conc
dict. Carth. 6. c. 4.
have been framed in a Council of Carthage where Faustinus was present, as the
fourth canon of the same collection supposes; It must have been while the
first stay that Faustinus made in Africa, under the Popedom of Boniface, and
not during the second stay that he made there under the popedom of Celestine:
for the twenty fourth canon of the same collection Conc dict. Carth. 6. c. 28.
ordaines, that the article of the canonical Books, should be communicated to
Pope Boniface; whose Popedom met with the fiirst stay of Faustinus in
Africa; and not with the second.

The eigth reason is, that except Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, and Ualentine
Alypius, and saint AUGUSTINE Bishop of Numidia, there is not so much as one
neither of all the two hundred seauenteen Bishops who were present at the sixth
Council of Carthage, nor of the twenty two deputies that stayed at Carthage
after the separation of the rest of the Council, that is brought in to speak
in this collection: contrariwise all the other Bishops that are named there, as
Fortunatus, Felix of Selemsela; Numidius of Massilia, are the Bishops that
assisted thirty year before in the second Council of Carthage; and more then
this also the names of the Bishops of the sixth Council of Carthage, which are
mentioned in this collection, have been almost all supposed there in the steed
of others that have been taken away to set them in their places, as we have
showed amongst other examples by that of the fifth canon, which is taken from
the first Council of Carthage, where in steed of Gratus Bishop of Carthage,
there is set into the collection, Aurelius; and by that of the ninth which is
taken from the second Council of Carthage, where in steed of Genetlius Bishop
of Carthage, there is Co^c. Carth 1. Can. 10. and 13.
set into the collection Augustine Bishop Legate of the province of Numidia:
and by that of the thirteenth which is taken out of the same second Council of
Carthage, where in steed of Genetlius, there is set into Co^c. Carth 2. c.
(...).
the collection, Aurelius. A thing which could not have been done by the Co^c
Carth 2 c. 10. 12. and 13.
Fathers of a Council, who would never have changed the names of those, that
had first propounded the canons to set them under the names of others; and
that could not be attributed to the ignorance of the copies of the last ages,
but ought to be imputed either to the original Rapsodist, or to the
exemplifiers of the next ages after him. For the same mistakes and changes of
names which are in the latin edition of this collection, are in the collection
of Dionisius, which was made more then a thousand years ago; and in the
greek translation which was made shortly after.

And finally the ninth and last reason is, that the conclusion which is read
in some copies at the end of the collection, entitled the sixth Council of
Carthage,; and in others at the end of the Rapsody of the Council of Africa,
which we call the African Council, is taken word by word out of the
conclusion of the first Council of Carthage, except that in steed of Gratus,
there is (...). For behold the latin terms wherein it is reported in the
copies of Monsieur the president of Champigny, at the end of Cod. Manusc D. de
Champig.
the collection, intituted the sixth Council of Carthage; and in others, at
the end of the collection, entitled the African Council, Aurelius Episcopus
Conc. dict. Carth. 6. c. 40. qui secundum.
dixit, Juxta statuta totius Concilij congregati and meae mediocritatis
sententiam, placet facere rerum omnium conclusionem, vniuersi tituli and
designati huius (...) tractatum, and ecclesiae gesta suscipiant. And behold
how it is couched at alios. 33.
the end of the first Council of Carthage, Gratus Episcopus dixit, Iuxta Conc.
dict. Afric c. 100 Council.
statuta concilij, and meae mediocritatis sententiam, placet facere rerum
omnium conclusionem; vniuersi tituli disignati and digesti teneant sententias
suas. In which Carthag. 1. c. 14.
place the Rapsodists of the collection entitled the sixth Council of
Carthage, have impertinentlie taken the word, tituli, in the genitive singular;
and the greek interpretors even the same; and have expressed the period Edit.
(...)
in this sense; Be it registered in the acts of the Church, the treaty of all
the title designed and digested this day. Not considering that in Gratus his
proposition, it is a nominative plural; and not remembering that, tituli, in
the Statutes Co^c. Carth c. (...).
of the first Council of Carthage, signified Canons; and besides (...)
perceiving that the word Uniuersi, in the same first Council of Carthage, has
reference to the Bishops, and not to the decrees. For the order of the Sense
shows, that Gratus his proposition must be read by way of interrogation and
expounding it in these words: Does it please you according to the Statutes of
all the Council, and the sentence of my mediocritie, to make the conclusion of
all things: And in the second clause after the word, Vniuersi; to set in as in
all the other canons of the same Council dixerunt, and to interpret it in this
sense; all the Bishops did say, that the canons designed and digested,
maintain their sentences: and this done to repeat, Gratus Bishop says. I
know well nevertheless, that in the verbal process of the sixth Council of
Carthage inserted into the ordinary volumes of the Cou^cells, there were some
articles ordained to be registered, as it appears by the words of the Council
to Aurelius, which are these; The copies of the faith and of the Statute^s
Co^c. Carth c. 9.
of the Council of Nicea, which were brought to our Council by the Bishop
Cecilian, late predecessor to your Hollinesse which had assisted there, and
also the things that our Fathers constituted here following the same copies,
and those that we by a common Synod constitute now remain registered in the
present Ecclesiastical acts: But that these words; the things that we
constitute now by a common Council, are meant of the determination to send to
seek the Council of Nicea into the East, and to observe it; (treated in the
eight chapters preceding the verbal process; which the (...) would should be
reduced into writing; and not of any other decrees;) the rest of the speech
shows it; which is, To wit, that as it has been above said, your
Blessedness the Latin (...) ita vt and le Graec.
should vouchsafe to write to the Reverend Bishops of the Churches of Antioch,
Alexandria, and Constantinople, to send under the testimony of their letters,
the most certain copies of the Council of Nicea, whereby the truth being
cleared, the chapters (...).
that our brother and fellow Bishop Faustinus here present, and our fellow
Priests Phillipus and Asellus have brought with them in their instruction,
either if they be found, they shall be confirmed by us; or if they be not
found we will assemble a Synod to advise upon it. And as for these words; and
also the things that our Fathers constituted here following the same copies,
they are meant by the confirmatiue decrees of the Council of Nicea made by the
Council of Carthage, holden under Cecelianus and other (...) of the Bishops of
the sixth Council of Carthage, where the Statutes of the Council of Nicea had
been imposed both in gross and in retaile to all the ecclesiastical Orders of
Africa, and not of the canons of the collection entitled the sixth Council of
Carthage, whereof the more part, had been made in the Council holden under
Aurelius, and are not contained neither in Sense nor in words in the canons of
the Counsels of Nicea. Well do I know again, that the decrees of this
collection, are alleged both by the Epitomy of the Counsels, sent in Pope
Adrians name to Charlemaine, and by Hinckmarus Archbishop of Rheims in the
work of the fifty five Chapters, and by many others. But the misreckoning
being come from a higher root, and having had place from the time of Dionisius
and Cresconius, and of the Greek translation, it must not to be thought
strange, if from one absurdity many others have ensued. It suffices that
Fulgentius Ferandus, who was both before them and more versed in the knowledged
of the Counsels of Africa then they, represents no track of the collection of
the thirty three Canons, entitled the sixth Council of Carthage, for that
Fnlgentius Ferandus has preceded all the other collectors of this kind in
anti quitie; whether it were that Ferandus deaco^ of Carthage, that writ the
works of the five Questions to saint FVLGENTIVS Isidor. Hispal. De Scriptor.
Eccl. c. 14.
Bishop of Ruspia, in the time of the Emperor Anastasius, Or (...) (...) an
other deaco^ of Carthage, yet more ancient, which has borne (...) (...) of
Fulgentius Ferrandus, it appears as well because he speaks not, neither of
the Canons of the Apostles, nor of the Epistles of the Popes later then
Syricius: as because he makes mention of infinite Counsels of Africa: as of
the Council of Suffetula: of the Council of Septimunica, of the Council of
Marazan: of the Council of Tusdra: of the Council of Macria: of the Council
of Tenis: of the Council of Iuca; and of many Counsels of Carthage whereof
there is found no track, neither in Dionisius nor in Cresconius. And that he
has surpassed them in the knowledge of the Council of Africa, it is manifested
as well by the Cresc. ep. ad Liber. in Praef. Collect. Can.
same citations as by the testimony that Cresconius gives of him in the
Epistle to Liberinus, which contains these words; I did remonstrate to you,
that the Epitomy of the Canons had been already made by Ferandus most Reverend
(...) of Carthage, and that it ought to suffice for our instruction least
undertaking to (...) an other, it may seem that we would steal from his
wisdom. And therefore also those that have collected the body of the Council
in form, have passed over the medley of the thirty three canons, entitled by
some; the sixth Council of Carthage, in silence.

Of the African Council. CHAPT. VII.
NOW as for this medley and rapsody of the Counsels of Africa that we call the
African Council, which is a century of African canons, gathered from diverse
cou^cells, there are therein two difficulties. The first difficulty concerns
the author of the Rapsodie, and co^sists in this, to wit; whether this
composition has been made by any particular canonist; or whether it has been
gathered in a Council. The Greeks, and the Protestants who follow them, and
some Catholics as well ancient as modern, believe it to be made in a
council, which some suppose to have been the sixth Council of Carthage, and
others the seventh, and I contrariwise incline to believe, that it has been
made by some African canonist, and whilst the Uandalls possessed Africa, in which
time there could no national council be assembled in Africa: And this I
incline to believe for ten reasons amongst others: The first reason is, that
the Epistle of the Council of Africa to Pope Celestine is there inserted,
which was made in a counsel holden expressly, for the second process of
Apiarius, and after the last Co^c. Afric. cap. 105. in ep. ad Caelest.
voyage of Faustinus into Africa, as appears by these words; Our holy
Brother and fellow Bishop Faustinus, coming to us, we have assembled a
Council, and have believed that the aim of his coming has been, that as by
his procurement Apiarius had been once before restored to the priesthood, so
now by his labor, he might be purged from the accusations of the Tabracenians.
Now this Council that we call the ninth was holden long after the fixth and
seventh which had been celebrated under Boniface. And to sale that it was in
this ninth that the Rapsodie of the Counsels of Africa were made, it is a
thing that cannot subsist, for the Fathers would not have been contented, to
insert heereinto their Epistle only, but would have added to it somewhat of the
history, and of the date of their Council. The second reason is, that after
the quotation of the Council of Hippo, which is the first whose date is
registered in this Rapsody follow these words: The acts of this Council Co^c.
Afric. in not. ante. c. 1.
are not here described because the things that hane been therein ordained,
are above inserted, which words cannot have relation either to the rapsody of
the counsels of Africa, or to the sixth Council of Carthage; for the acts of
the Council of Hippo, which contain more then forty canons, are inserted
neither into the Rapsodie, which begins with the Council of Hippo, and
comprehends nothing that precedes it, nor in the thirty three canons
attribured to the sixth Council of Carthage, but are the words of the
Exemplifier or Rapsodist, which remitts the readers to find the Canons of the
Council of Hippo, to the former collections of the Counsels. The third reason
is, that in the quotation of the Council, (...) the fixth of the calends of
Julie, under the Consulship of Cesarius, and Atticus, there are these words,
Whosoever will search the acts of this council, shall Co^c. Afric. in notis.
ante. cap. 1.
find them in the authentic all copies: A thing which shows it is a
particular collection, and not a Council that speaks. The fourth reason is,
that at the head of the sixtith one chapter, after these words, Under the
consulships Council. Afrie. in not. ante. c. 61.
of the noble co^sulls, Stelico^ for the second time, and Arthemius the tenth
of the cale^ds of September at Carthage, in the Basilicke of the second region:
these follow, I have not transcribed from the one end to the other, the acts
of this counsel, for as much as they more regard (...) of time, then any
general ordinances, but for the instruction (...) the studious; I have
digested from them a brief Summary. From whence it appears, that this
collection was made by a particular compiler. For that the Greeks have
translated it in the third person, and in steed of these words, (...). Graec.
for the instruction of the studious; have turned it, of things studiously
ordained; Council Carth. ant. cap 94. vel (...). (...) 69.
that is to say, in steed of (...), have supposed (...), is a corruption too
apparent. The fifth reason is, that in the thirteenth chapter of the latin
Rapsody, which is the forty seventh of the Greek Rapsody, the Canon says
in either edition, Likewise also, that it may be lawful to read the Co^c.
(...). c. 13. and Edit. Graec. c. 47.
the passions of the Martyrs; which has noe relation to the words of the
former Canon, which are; that reconciliation shall not be refused to comedians:
but it is a train that has been torn from his head, that the latin Rapsody
Council. Afric. c. 12. and Edit. Graec. c. 46
has omitted, and that the Greek has tra^sferred from his place, to wit,
from the Canon, that forbids other Scriptures then those that are canonical to
be read in Churches, as appears both by the Council of Carthage entire, where
these two Canons are couched the one after the other, and by Ferandus his
Breuiarie, where they are quoted as two canons, Co^c. Carth 3. cap. 46. and 47.
following one an other in these words; That there shall be nothing read in the
Churches, but the Canonical Scriptures: the Council of Laodicea, title fifty
sixth and the Council of Carthage, title forty fifth. That it shall be
lawful also to read the Fulg. Ferr. in (...), art. 228. and 2. 9.
Martyrs passions in the anniuersary day of their Martyrdomes. Counsel of
Carthage, title forty sixth. A thing that shows that this collectio^ has
been made by a particular Rapsodist, who inserting the third Council of
Carthage into his Rapsody, has omitted the cano^ of the canonical Books;
forasmuch as this canon was made in the Council of Hippo, and was but repeated
in the third Council of Carthage, and had contented himself with inserting
that, that the Council of Carthage had added to it; to wit, the permission of
reading also in the Church, the passions of the Martyrs. The sixth reason is,
that of the fifth canon of the seventh council of Carthage (which ordaines,
Co^c. Carth 7. c. 5.
That if a Bishop says, that if any one have confessed (that is to say, with
civil confession) a crime to him alone, and that he after deny it, the Bishop
shall not hold it for an injury, if creditt be not given to his only
testimony, and that if the Bishop, moved with the scruple of his own
conscience, says that he will not communicate with him that so denies; as long
as the Bishop shall not communicate with him, other Bishops shall not
communicate with the Bishop.) The Rapsodist has made two different canons, to
wit, the nintie ninth and hudredth of his Rapsody; And to perfect the
construction of the nintie ninth, which otherwise was without sense, has added
these words, that he shall notwithstanding, secretly interdict him the
communion, till he conform himself: which are directly against the inte^tion
of the Council. See here the words of the nintie ninth. If a Bishop says,
that any one has confessed a crime to him alone and Co^c. Afric. in Edit.
that he deny it, and will not do penance for it, the Bishop shall not hold it
for a particular Joan. Schoffer. c. 99.
injury, that credit is not given to him alone: and if moved with the scruple
of his own conscience, he says that he will not communicate with him that so
denies, let him (...) interdict him the communion (...), till he conform
himself. And behold here the words of the hundredth: Whiles a Bishop
communicates not with Ibid. c. 100.
his excommunicated Diocesan, (...) not the other Bishops communicate with such
a Bishop. An error that the Fathers of the sixth or seventh Council of
Carthage would never have committed, if themselves had compiled this Rapsody,
seeing it was themselves that had composed the whole Canon. And it is not to be
said, that the later Exemplifiers perceiving this fault, have reunited the two
Canons in one, and have reported the canon complete, as it is couched in the
seventh council of Carthage. For the ancient latin Rapsodies, made two
canons of it as it appea-res both by the copies of Dionisius Exiguus that the
edition of Schoffer the Almaigne Printer has followed, and by the Epitomy of
Cresconius who cites them under two titles; the one of the nintie ninth cano^,
and the other of the hu^dredth; And by the words of the Greek tra^slatio^,
which distinguishes and divides the^ into two Canons. The seventh reason is,
that at the end Crescon. in Breu. can. art 288.
of the same canon, follow these words; Be it registered in the acts of the
Church the treaty of all the title designed and digested this day; and as for
the things which Edit. Graec.
have not yet been expressed we will write the^ the day following by our
brethren Fauctinus Council. Carth. cap. 132. 133.
Bishop, and Phillip and Asellus priests, to our (...) brother and fellow
Bishop Boniface. Which words besides that they are couched after the canon
Council. Afric. ad calcem. cap 100.
of the rash exco^munications, which is the hu^dredth of the Rapsodie, that is
to say, the fiftith and last of the seventh Council of Carthage, could not,
if they be authentical, be pronou^cedanie other where then in the seaue^th
Counsel of Carthage, for they testify that the Popes Legates, which were yet
present in the seaue^th Council of Carthage, departed the next day after they
had been pronounced. And nevertheless, not only they are not in the seventh
council of Carthage, but also in some copies they are set after the forty,
or according to others the thirty three canons, attributed severally to the
sixth Council of Carthage, and after the prohibition to alienate
ecclesiastical Goods. The eigth reason is, that at the end of the signatures
of the last counsel of the Rapsody, which is the se auenth counsel of
Carthage, it is said, And the other two hundred seauenteen Bishops subscribed:
Which is a manifest ignorance in the co^piler, who remembered not, that in the
seventh Counsel of Carthage, there were but twenty two Bishops; Council.
Afric. in subscript. c. 100.
For to ease the two hundred seauenteen Bishops which were at the sixth
Counsel of Carthage, they were sent back a while after into their Provinces;
and only twenty two chosen in their places, to finish the rest of the affairs
of the Counsel. This appears both by the signatures of the (...) Council of
Carthage where there did but twenty two Bishops sign, and by the inscription
of the same seaue^th Council of Carthage inserted into the Greek and latin
Rapsody in these words: Many of the Bishops co^playning that they could not
attend at the length of the other expeditio^s, and were pressed to return into
their provinces, it pleased all the Council, that by the whole assembly,
there might Council. Carth. 7. in Praef. cap. 1
be deputies chosen from every of the provinces which should remain to finish
the rest. From whence it happened, that those assisted there whose signatures
testify Et Conc. Afric. in Praefat. c. 95.
the^ to have been there present. A thing which manifestly shows, that this
clause; And the two hundred seauenteen other Bishops signed likewise; is of the
compilers style, and not of the acts of any Council. The ninth reason is,
that if this Rapsody had been co^piled by the Fathers of the seaue^th Counsel
of Carthage, or any other later; as the use that is there made of the Canons
at the seaue^th of Carthage, and other subsequent pieces do suppose, they would
never have forgotten tosett down the extract of the sixth counsel of Carthage,
and the thirty three Canons which are attributed to it, if at least they be
justly attributed to it. For with what color should the extract of the Canons
of the seventh Counsel of Carthage, which were made by the deputies that
remained of the sixth Council of Carthage after the rest were dismissed, have
been inserted into the Rapsody, and the Canons of the sixth council of
Carthage, which had been made by the whole council, not have been inserted?
And it will not serve to say that the sixth Council of Carthage is in an act
a part: for so is the seventh also which nevertheless is registered in the
Rapsodie. Less will it avail to say that the Canons of the sixth Council of
Carthage, are enrolled in the Greek Rapsody. For besides that the ancient and
original Rapsody is the latin and not the Greek, as it appears amongst
other means by the quotations of Cresconius, which answer to the numbers of
the latin, and not or the Greek; they are not inserted into the Body of the
Greek Crescon. in Breuiar. Can.
Rapsodie; that is to say, into the order and chronologicall clew of the
Rapsody, which begins at the Council of Hippo, and ends at the Epistles of the
Bishops of Africa to Pope Celestine: but in the extract and particular
collection of the Canons of the sixth Council of Carthage, that the Greeks
have tacked and annexed to the head of their Rapsody, which had not happened,
if it had been co^piled in an actual Council, for as much as the Fathers of
the Council whould have set the extract and the Canons of the sixth Counsel
of Carthage in their true place, which is between the Council holden under
the twelfth consulship of Theodosius, and the seventh Council of Carthage,
and not in a place anticipated. The tenth reason is, that if this Rapsody were
a reading of diverse former Counsels of Africa, which had been made in a later
Counsel, there would have been in the same Council some ordinance to read
them: as in the third Counsel of Carthage reported by the rapsody, it was
ordained that the Canons Co^c. Afric. in Praefat. c. 1.
of the Counsel of Hippo should be read there; and in the first Mileuitan
Counsel incorporated into the same Rapsody, it was ordained that the Canons
composed in the Council of Hippo, and after confirmed in the Council of Co^c.
Afric. in (...). cap. 53.
Carthage should be read there; A thing nevertheless, whereof there is no
tracke to be found. And this may be said of the reasons which inuit me to
believe that the Africa^ Rapsody has been compiled by some particular
canonist; it remains to examine the proofs of the contrary opinion.

The foundation the^ of those that think that the African Rapsodie has been
collected in an actual Council, is that at the head of the century, it is
said, In this Council were also recited diverse Counsels of the provinces of
Africa, In Clausulant Council Afric.
holden in the times past of Aurelius. Which clause some pretend to be relative
to the sixth and others to the seventh Council of Carthage: but this
foundation it self, has need of a foundation; for first it is not certain,
whether this clause be of the original text of the Rapsodie, or whether it be
a note of some exemplifier, who thought that the African century, that is to
say, the Rapsody of the hundred African Canons, that we call the African
Council, had been made in the sixth Council of Carthage contrary wise that at
the head of the collection entitled by some, the sixth Council of Garthage,
precedes such a like clause, in these words, Then were read the Canons of the
Counsel of Nicea, as they have above been inserted; After In Council. dicto.
sexto (...). ex Edit.
also were registered in the present Acts, the things that had been published in
the African Counsels; intimates that these two clauses are of the Exe^plifiers
style; (...) Schoffer. inter finem Conc. Ni cen. and 1 caput Conc Carthag. 6.
for besides that this remitment, as they have been above registered which is in
the latin addition of the first clause, shows that it is neitheir the sixth
Council of Carthage, nor the clerk of the sixth Counsel of Carthage; that
speaks; but the exemplifiers of the volumes of the Counsels, who to save the
pains of writing out the Canons of the Cou^cells of Nicea, which were produced
in the sixth counsel of Carthage, sendes the Reader to the place, where they
had been first transcribed in their form and in their order; to what purpose
was it, after it was said at the head of the collection, entitled the sixth
council of Carthage; there were also recited sundry canons of Africa, that is
to say, at the head of the Rapsody of the hundred canons. In this council
were likewise recited, diverse counsels of Africa, holden in the times past of
Aurelius? Secondly if this second clause, were of the original text of the
Rapsodie, that is nothing to oblige the reader to referr it to the sixth
council of Carthage; contrariwise that the clause says; In this Council were
likewise recited diverse Counsels of Africa, (...) in the times past, or
according to the Greek, in the times before Aurelius: In Edit. (...). Council.
Carth.
Gives to understand, that the two correlatiue terms of the clause, are not
the one, the sixth Counsel of Carthage, and the other the Body of the
Coucells inserted into the Rapsodie; but the one, the third counsel of
Carthage, and the other, the cou^cells holden under Aurelius before the third
council of Carthage. For in the whole body of the rapsody, there are many
things which have been made, not in the times of Aurelius which had preceded
the sixth council of Carthage, but in the last times of Aurelius, and after
the sixth council of Carthage. And therefore also Zonara the Greek canonist,
not only omitts this second clause, but also depriues the reader of means to
referr it, either to the sixth or seaue^th counsel of Carthage. Zonar. in Comm.
For he will have it (although ignorantly and against the custom log observed
amongst the Africans, to celebrate every year a national counsel Can. Conc.
(...). in Praefat Act 2. page 422
in Africa;) that the six counsels of Africa, whereof according to him, the
African Rapsody is compounded, and which contains the interim of more then
twelf year, have been as many Sessions of one and the same council of
Africa, separated and reassembled in seauerall times, and that in these six
Sessions, the Rapsody of the African Canons has been compiled. A thing which
cannot agree, neither with the sixth or seaue^th counsel of Carthage; which
were both celebrated as shall hereafter appear, in one same year, and in one
same month But it may be said, wherefore should the clause of the century have
reference to the third Council of Carthage? For two causes; the one, because
the third counsel of Carthage is the first whose canons are inserted into the
century of the African Canons: for although there be diverse Counsels quoted in
the African Rapsody, nevertheless there are but five Counsels that are
inserted there with their canons, whereof the first is the third Conncell of
Carthage. And the other, because the Rapsodist has not incorporated in his
Rapsodie all the Canons that were published in the third Council of Carthage,
but of fifty chapters that were couched there has only registered twenty
three in his century, and that in part to make up the number of the century;
and in part, because all the canons that were employed in the third Counsel
of Carthage were not all first instituted there, but that many of the^ had
been framed in the Council of Hippo, and had been but renewed or accompanied
with some moderations in the third Counsel of Carthage. For this cause then
the compiler taking from the third Council of Carthage and from what was
thereto annexed, which was the answer to the insta^ces of Musonius, but the
Canons that had added either some decision, or some kinds of moderation to the
Canons of the Council of Hippo; and willing nevertheless to hinder the
readers from believing, that these were all the canons that had been published
in the third council of Carthage, has set before his Rapsodie, whereof the
third (...) of Carthage makes the first part, In this Council were also read
diverse Counsels of Africa holden in the time befores Aurelius: and of those
has quoted particulaly three to wit that of Hippo, holden under the consulship
of Theodosius and Abundantius, the year 391: that of Carthage holden under the
consulship of Arcadius and Honorius, the year 394. And that of Carthage holden
under the consulship of Celarius and Atticus the year three hundred nintie
seven the sixth of the callends of Julie; for that the council of Carthage
holden under the consulship of Atticus and Cesarius the sixth of the calends of
Iulie, is quoted in the latin Rapsodie after the third Council of Carthage,
which was celebrated the same year, the fifth of the calends of September; it
is a manifest error in those that copied it, as it appears first by the order
of the dates; the one of the fifth of the calends of September; and the other
of the sixth of the calends of July. And secondly: Council. Afric. in not. ante
Can. 1.
by the note that in that of the sixth of the calends of July, the Canon was
decreed, That Bishops should not sail beyond Sea; without letters formed from
their Primates; which Canon is repeated in the third Counsel Co^c. Carthag. 3
c. 28
of Carthage complete. And thirdly because between the preface of the
Council holden under Atticus and Cesarius the fifth of the calendes of
September, in which Aurelius propounds, to cause the abridgement of the
Council of Hippo to be read, and the first Canon of the (...) where Epigonius
says in that abridgment that is drawn from the Council of Hippo; it Seems
there ought nothing to be changed but that the signification of the day of
Pasch should be made in the time of the Council, there could be nothing
interposed. A like error have they committed, when at the train of the same
Council, holden vndet Atticus and Cesarius the sixth of the calends of Iulie,
they have also interposed between the preface of the third Council of
Carthage and the first canon of the third Council of Carthage, the quotation
of the Council celebrated after the Consulship of Honorius and Eutychianus,
and that of the Council celebrated after the consulship of Stelicon with the
preface; A thing that not only reuerseth the order of the dates; for these two
last Counsels were holde^, the one, two year, and the other four year after
the third Council of Carthage, but also maimes the sense of the thirty fourth
Cano^ of the centuarie, which can have no perfect construction, if the date and
the preface of the Council after the consulship of Stelicon, to which this
canon is a relative, be not placed after the report of the signatures of the
third Counsel of Carthage; that is to say, between the three and thirtith
canon of the latin Rapsody, and the thirty fourth. And therefore the Greeks
have taken away these three quotations from the place where they are set in
Edit. Graec. Council Carth. post c.
the latin Rapsody, and have set them in the Greek Rapsody after the canons
and signatures of the third Council of Carthage, as pertinentlie for the two
last quotations, as impertinently for the first, which should precede the
Register of the third Counsel of Carthage. But this is enough for the question
of the compiling, which nevertheless I remitt to the Judgment of the readers.
For I know well that Cresconius an African canonist of (...) a thousand years
antiquity, has cited the canons of a Council, that he intitles the general
Council of Carthage, with numbers Crescon. in Breuiar. Cano^. artic
answering to the numbers of this collection, which we call the African
Council. It is true that he might either be abused about the clause whereof
we have spoken above; or else that he might call this collection the general
Council of Carthage, for as much as it is a collection of many several
Counsels of Carthage; as Gratian and the other canonists Did. 24 c. si quis
Presb. and alibi.
allege the collection of the Greek Synods, made by Martin the ancient
Bishop of Brague or Bracara in Spain, under the singular title of a Council,
and intitles it (...) Council of Pope Martin. Well know I also, that the
Africans in their Epistle to Pope Boniface, sent him the copy of some Canons
either made or confirmed by their Council, but there is no impediment, why
this sending may not be intended of the canons of the seventh Council of
Carthage, which had been holden in the presence of the legates of the said Pope
Boniface, the day before the date of this Epistle. And therefore without
perverting the judgment of the Readers, I have contented my self with touching
the causes of the first difference. Let us go on to the second.

The second difficulty has regard to the number of the canons of this
Rapsodie, and consists in this, that the latin editio^ co^taines but an
hundred canons, which with the Epistles and the act sent from the East, make
anhu^dred five chapters; and that of the Greeks contains an hundred thirty
three besides the Epistles. And the reason of this difference proceeds from
this, that the original Rapsody not comprehending all the canons of the
Council of Carthage, but being restrained to the number of an hundred, and the
Greeks not having the copies of those other Counsels of Carthage in chief,
that we have, it seemed necessary to them to add to this century an other
collection of thirty three Canons which goes under the title of the Canons of
the sixth Council of Carthage, but which is taken from diverse former
Counsels, and to set it at the head Crescon. in Breu. Can.
of their Rapsodie. For that the original rapsody contains but an hundred
Canons, and was conformable to the number and to the ciphers of the latin, and
not of the Greek, it appears by the citations that Cresconius an ancient
African Canonist makes of this medley, that we call the (...) Council, wherein
the numbers and titles of the Canons, answer the order of the latin Rapsody.

Whether the latin edition of the African Canons, be more faithful, then the
Greek Rapsody. CHAP. VIII.
The Adversaries of the Church will have it, that the relation of the Greek
rapsody is more faithful, then that of the latin Rapsody. And we contrary
wise maintain, that the Relation of the latin rapsody is much more sure,
saving some faults in the Exe^plifiers, the^ that of the Greek. and that for
three causes; the first because the Counsels of Africa, have been made in
latin and not in Greek, by means whereof, reason wills, that the latin
Rapsody which has been taken out of the original it self, except the
Epistles whereof it seems as it shall appear hereafter, that the latin has
been translated from the Greek translation, and that the (...) latin
original has been lost, must be more certain then the Greek Rapsody, which
had been made but upon the extracts of the translation. The second because the
Greeks have been much more ignorant in the matter of Counsels of Africa, then
the latins; as it appears by the erroneous Council holden under saint
CYPRIAN, that the Greeks have set into the rank of the orthodox Counsels of
Africa. And the third because that in the places, where the readings of the
Greek and Latin Edit. Graec
Rapsody differ, the readings of the latin Rapsody (...) with the Counsels
Co^c. Carth c. 71 vel secundum alios 73.
of Africa in chief, which we have in our hands, and with the custom of the
ancient African Church, reported by saint AUGUSTINE, by Fulgentius Ferrandus,
and other African Doctors; And the readings of Phot Nomocan. Tit 9. c 29.
the Greek Rapsody are repugnant thereunto. I will content myself to allege
two examples besides that, which we have already tendered Cedr. in hist.
Co^cill Nicen.
of the adition of the Bishops to the canon of the appeals.

The first example shall be taken from the seauentith one Canon of the Greek
Rapsody, where the African Fathers having said: It has pleased that the
Bishops, priests, and Deacons, according to the former determinations, shall
abstain from their own wives. The Greeks that do indeed forbid Priests to
marry after their promotion, yea call such marriages impious and detestable;
but if before their promotion they have been married, provided it were but
once, and besides that they be simple Priests and not Bishops; do permit them
the continuance of the wives that they have married before their priesthood;
have advised themselves to abuse Balsam. in Co^c Carth c. 73.
the ambiguitie of their tongue, which makes use of one same word, to express
(determination) and to express (term) and have converted these words,
according to the former determinations, or, according to their own
determinations, into these words, according to their proper terms. And to the
end to delude the sense of the canon have made weekly priests, who serve by
turns and alternatiue weeks, and observe the Celibat, during the weeks of
their Services, and intermit it during the rest. Now how false this
interpretation is, and how contrary to the intention of the African fathers
who never knew these weekly priests, nor these alternatiue Celibats, it
appears first by all the Conncell of the ancient Latin Church, holden in the
Regions near Africa, which oblige Bishops, Priests and deacons, without
distinction of turns and vicissitudes, to a perpetual Celibat. It has
pleased (says the Elibertine Council celebrated Council. Elibert. c. 33.
in the province of Grenado in Spain near an hundred years before the sixth
Council of Carthage) to ordain Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons,
established in the Ministry, to abstain wholly from their wives, and to (...)
no children. And the first Council of Toledo, celebrated in Spain, in the
time of the fifth Council of Carthage, from whence this canon is Conc. To. let
1 can. 1
taken, If any Deacons have lived incontinently with their wives, let them
not be honored with the degree of Priesthood. And the second Council of Arks,
celebrated Council. Arelat. 2. c.
a little after the sixth of Carthage: None constituted in the bond of
Marriage, can be admitted to Priesthood, without promise of Conversion.
Secondly it Co^c Carth 2 c. 2.
appears by all the Counsels of the African, Church which concern the same
matter: It has pleased (says the second Council of Carthage) that Edit.
Graec.
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, etc. practice entire continence etc. to the end
that what Council Carth. c. 3.
the Apostles have taught (or according to the Greek edition, given by
tradition) Ibid.
and antiquity itself observed, we also should observe. And again: It Co^c.
Carth 5. c. 3.
has pleased that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, or others that handle the
Sacraments, should live chastely and abstain euenfrom their own wives. And
the fifth Council of Carthage: It has pleased that Priests and Deacons,
according to their own Statutes (or as the best copies have it, according to
the former Statutes) should abstain from their own wives. It appears thirdly
by the testimony of all the doctors of the Latin church, and especially the
African, Ambres. de offic. l. 1. cap. vlt.
who have lived in the time of those Counsels; That the Ministry (says Saint
AMBROSE) must be preserved inuiolate and immaculate, without defiling it with
any conjugal embraces, you know it you that with integrity of body, Hier.
ad Pam. pro libr. adu Iouin l. 1.
and incorruption of modesty, abst ayning yourselues even from the use of
Marriage, have received the grace of the sacred Deaconship, And saint Hierom;
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are chosen either virgins, or in widowhood, or
at least are after Aug. de adulter. Coniug. l. 2 c. vlt.
their Priesthood, eternally chaste. And saint AUGUSTINE; The soul and penn of
the Counsels of Africa: We have, (said he) accustomed to propound to lay men,
that have put away their wives, the continence of Clergy men, who are often
taken by force, and against their wills, to undergo that charge; and having
accepted it, be are it with gods help lawfully, even to the end. We say to
them, what would become of you, if you were constrained and forced by the
violence of the people, to undergo this charge? would you not chastely
preserve the office wherewith you were charged, instantly converting your
selves to beseech of God such strength, as Eusebius. de demost.
before your never thought of? Whereto I might yet add the ancient Greek
doctors, Euang. l. 1. cap 9.
as Eusebius, who writes; Now the (...) of the divine word, do necessarily
Epiphan. contr. noua haeres. 59.
embrace abstinence from Marriages, to attend to a better imploymeut practizing
a generation of spiritual and incorporall children. Or as saint EPIPHANIVS,
that cries out; The holy Church of God receives not him, that has been but
once married, and conuerseth still with his wife, and begetts children for
Deacon, Priest, and Bishop. But because here the question is of the custom of
the latin Church; and particularly of the African, and notof the greek
Church; Fulg. Ferr. in Breu.
I set the greek testimonies aside. It appears fourthly by Fulgentius
Ferandus an African Canonist, of above 1100. years antiquity, who in his Can.
art. 16 Crescon in Breu. Canon art. 109.
epitomy of the Canons, registers the Canon of the Council of Carthage, in
these words; That Bishops Priests, and Deacons should abstain from their
Wives. And by Cresconius an African Canonist likewise, and of near a thousand
Edit. Grec.
years antiquity, who registers it in these words, That the priestlie
Council. Carth. cap. 7.
and leuiticall order ought to have no cohabitation with women. It appears
fistly by the proper text of the Canon, which plainly comprehends Bishops,
Council. in Trull. c. 12
which nevertheless the Greeks exclude from all conjugal acts, and to whom
this condition of serving by turns and alternatiue weeks cannot Cedre. in
hist. Council. Nicen.
agree. It appears besides this, by the sixth Cano^ of the same Counsel of
Carthage, which says; That readers when they are come to the years of
manhood, Council. dict. Carth. 6. c. 16.
shall be constrained either to marry, or profess chastity. A thing which
necessarily shows, that the use of Marriage, was wholly prohibited to Bishops.
Priests, and deacons. And finally, it appears by Andrew Gesnerus minister of
Zurich, and the German Centuriators being ashamed of this falsehood; for
Gesnerus interpreting the Greek translation of the Council of Carthage, has
turned it into these words; It has pleased, that Co^c. Carth ex edit.
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, according to their statutes, should abstain
even Graecolatin Andr.
from their wives: And the Centuriators of Germany epitomizing the same
Council of Carthage, report it in these words; That the Sacerdot all and
Gesn. c. 71. Ce^tur.
and Diaconall order, should abstain from their wives. But forasmuch as this
Mag. cent. 5. col. 829
matter was treated of more largely in the appendix of the conference of
Fontainebleau where we confuted the fable of Paphnucius reported by Socrates
and Sozomene Nouatian Authors, from whom the later Greeks have borrowed the
occasion of their fall, and expounded the Canon of the Counsels of Gangres
which seems to favor them: It shall suffice me for an end of this
aduertisment, to remitt the readers thereunto.

The second Example of infidelity, shall be taken out of the twenty fourth
Canon of the Greek Rapsody, which is the twenty fourth of those thirty three
latin Canons, whereof the collection is entitled the sixth Council of
Carthage, where the Greek interpretor has ecclipsed from the Catalogue of the
Canonical Books received in Africa, the two Books of the Machabes. Now that
this subctraction is a notable falsehood, appears by six vnreprochable' means.
It appears first by all the latin copies, as well printed as manuscripts of
the collection entitled (...). D. Praesid. de Champign. and alij innumeri.
the sixth Council of Carthage, in which the two Books of the Machabes are
expressed by name. It appears secondly by the forty seventh Canon of the
third Council of Carthage, from whence the canon of the collection entitled
the sixth Council of Carthage has been extracted, which mentions particularly
the two Books of the Machabes. It appears thirdly by the Canon of the
Canonical Books, inserted into saint AVGVSTINS second Book of Christian
Doctrine, where the two Books of the Machabes are expressly contained; and to
which saint AUGUSTINE, for an impediment that the number should not be varied
Aug. de Doctri. Christ. l. 2. c. 8.
by any addition, or Subtraction, setts to this seal, In these forty four
Books the authority of the old Testament is determined: And again repeates
the same seal in the Register of his retractions in these words: In the place
(...) (said he) of the second book of Christian Doctrine, where I have
written, in Aug. tract. l. 2. c. 4.
these forty four books, the authority of the old Testament is determined;
I made use of the word old Testament, according to the form of speech, which
the Church practices at this day; but the Apostle seems to call none the old
Testament but that which was given in the Mount Sinai. It appears fourthly by
the other writings, where saint AUGUSTINE speaks of the Machabees, as when De
Ciuit. l. 18. c. 36.
he says in the eighteenth Book of the city of God; Amongst the volumes
severed from this rank, are the books of the Machabees, which not the Jews
but the Church, hold for Canonical. And in the second book against the
Epistle of Gaudentius the Donatist, The scripture entitled from the Machabes,
the Jews Cont. Secundum Gaudent. Epist. l. 2. c. 23.
do not hold, as the law, the Prophetts, and the Psalms, which our Lord
alleges for his testimony, etc. But it has been received by the Church,
not unprofitable, if it be read or heard soberlie. In which passage that saint
AUGUSTINE says, that the Jews hold not the Scripture of the Machabees in the
same rank, as the Law, the Psalms, and the Prophets, is not to weaken the
authority of the Scripture of the Machabees; for the Jews do no more hold
Aug de praed. Sa^ct. l. 1. c. 14.
the book of Wisdom in the same degree of the Law, the Psalms, and the
Prophets; and our Lord has noe more alleged it amongst the Testimonies, then
that of the Machabees. And nevertheless S. AUGUSTINE says; The book of
WISDOM has merited after so long a continuance of years, to be read in the
Church of Christ, by the Readers of the Church of Christ, and to be heard by
all Christians, even from the Bishops to the lowest laymen, faithful
penitents, and catechumens, with the reverence of divine authority. And Ibid.
again; All the Doctors near the time of the Apostles, making use of the
testimony of the Books of WISDOM, have believed that they made use of none,
but a divine Testimony; but the reason why saint AUGUSTINE said, that the
Jews held not the Scripure of the Machaebees, in the rank of the law the
Prophetts and the Psalms, was to show the Donatists who were separated from
the Church, and yet made use of her own weapons to oppose her, that this
Scripture having been received into the Canon, not by the Cont. 2. Gaudent.
Epist. l. 2. c. 23.
Jews but by the Church they could not employ it against the sense and
Doctrine of the Church. And that he adds, that it was received by the Church,
not unprofitably. provided it be read soberly; it is not to the end to
diminishe the credit which ought to be given to it, but to repress the furious
consequences that the Donatists inferred upon it, and signifies no other thing,
but, provided it be read with settled senses, and not with madness and frenzy,
as the Donatists read it, who took occasion from the example of Sampson in the
history of the Judges, and from the example of Razias in the history of the
Machabees, whose zeal and not his act is commended, to kill and precipitate
themselves, which he confirms a while Ibid.
after in these words; We ought not then to approve by our consent, all things
which we read in the Scriptures to have been done by men even adorned with
praises by Gods own testimony, but to mingle our consideration with
discretion, bringing with us judgment not of our authority, but of the
authority, of the holy and divine Scriptures, which permit not us to praise
or imitate all the actions even of those, of whom the Scripture gives good and
glorious testimony, if they have done any thing that has not been well done
or that agrees not with the custom of the present time. It appears sifthly
by the Catalogue of the Canonical books, that Pope Innoc. 1. ad Exup. ep. 3,
Gelas. in Decret. lib. veter. testam.
Innocent the first, time fellow with S. AVSTINE, sent to Exuperius Bishop of
Tholosa, where the two Books of the Machabees are expressly contained. For
whereas Pope Gelasius in renewing the decree of the Canonical books makes use
of the history of the Machabees, but for one only book, it is because he
speaks according to the Style of S, AMBROSE, Ambros. de offic. l. 3. c. 14.
who reckons the first and second of the Machabees, for one and the same Book.
And whereas saint GREGORY the great, in his commentary Greg. in Job. c. 17.
upon Job, compounded near two hundred years after the Canon of the African
Fathers, cyting the Books of the Machabees, adds although not canonical, yet
written for the edification of the Church; that is because the first draught of
this comentary was made in the East. For saint (...) was not yet Pope, when he
first composed the comentarie up on Job, but a simple deacon, exercising the
(...) of Nuntio at Constantinople amongst the Greeks. For this occasion then
speaking in the East, of the Books of the Machabees; he added in the form of
a case put, and not granted; If not canonical, yet written for the edification
of the Church; that is to (...), the which if they were not canonical,
nevertheless had been written for the edification of the Church. It appears
finally, by the very continuance of the African canon, inserted into the Greek
Rapsody, which is, We have learnt from our Fathers, that those are the books
that ought to be read Edit. Graee Co^c. (...) c. 24.
(...) the Church. For not only all the ancient African Church, but also all
the ancient Western Church, had holden from age to age, the Books of the
Machabees to be canonical, as it appears, in regard of the ancient (...)
Cypr. ep. (...)
church, by the testimony of saint Cyprian, who calls the Machabees, (...)
scriptures; and in regard of the other parts of the western Ambros. de offic.
l. 13. c. 14.
church, by the testimony of saint AMBROSE, who cries out; Moses says as it
is written in the books of the Machabees; And by that of the great defender
Lucif. lib. de non parcend. in Deum. delinq.
of the Catholic Faith Lucifer Bishop of (...), who writ to the emperor
(...); The holy scripture speaks in the first book of the (...): And by an
infinite number of others, whose names I will not (...) particularly to report.
Only I will say in general that there was (...) any latin Author which
took liberty to remove the authority of the Book of the Machabees before
saint HIEROME, and Ruffinus (...) him, while he was his disciple. Whereupon,
there are three (...) to be made. The first observation is, that as saint
HIEROME, before the perfect maturitie of is studies, for afterward he changed
his opinion, ecclipsed from the canon of the old testament, the history of the
Machabees, so did he also shake in the canon of the new testament, Hier. in
Esai c. 8.
the epistle to the (...). The latin custom, says he receives not the
Epistle (...) Hebrews, amongst the canonical scriptures. And again; If any
one will In Ezech c 28 in ep. ad Ephesians. c. 3. and alibi.
(...) the Epistle, which under Paul's name has been written to the Hebrews.
And (...) where; Paul in his Epistle which is written, to the Hebrews, though
(...) of the latins doubt of it. By which means if the authority of saint
Hierom in Math. in c. 26.
HIEROME not yet fully instructed in the sense of the Church, be (...) for the
exclusion of one of these pieces; it is also available for the (...) of the
other. The second observation is, that saint HIEROME (...) induced to remove
this stone, by the commerce that he had with (...) Jews of Palestina, amongst
whom he inhabited, and from whom he (...) the Hebrew letters. For Istdore
Bishop of Seuilla, who writ a (...) years ago, reports; that the Jews in
hate of our Lord, rejected (...) (...) the Book of Wisdom: The Hebrews
(said Isidore, as some of Isidor. de Eccles. of. fic. l. 1. c. 13.
(...) sages have noted it) received the Book of Wisdom amongst the
canonical (...); but after they had taken Christ, and putt him to deach
remembering that (...) were in the same Book so many evident testimonies of
Christ, etc. they made (...) together, and least ours should convince them of
so manifest a (...), they cut it of from the prophetical volumes, and
prohibited theirs from reading Now the Jews could have no fair color to cut
of the Book of (...), from the roll of the Canonical Books, but because it
was not in (...) Canon of Esdras, a thing which likewise obliged them, to cut
of all (...) other Posthume books from the old restament; so call I all the
(...) of the old Testament, which had been written or published since (...) of
Esdras; and after the death of Esdras, as Ecclesiasticus, the (...) of Tobias,
the Book of Judith, and the two Books of Machabees. (...) these causes then,
saint HIEROME tying himself to the catalogue of the Jews, upon whose text,
and with whose help, and particularly of a certain Rabbin called Barabanus or
Barhanina whom Ruffinus by Hier. ad Pam. and Ocean. ep. 65.
way of reproach calls Barrabas; he had made the translation of his Bible, not
only excludes in his prologue upon the book of Kings, that he intitles the
armed prologue, and in his prologue upon the Proverbs; all the Hier. in Prol.
Galeat ep. 105 Hier. Praef. in Proverb ep. 115.
whole books which were not in the canon of Esdras; as were Wisdom,
Ecclesiacticus, Tobias, Judith, and the Machabees: but also in his prologue
upon Daniell reiects all the parts of the canonical Books, not comprehended
in the text of the Hebrowes, as were the Canticle of the three Children, and
the history of Susanna, and that of Bell. The Book of Daniell, Hier. Praef. in
Daniel. ep. 120.
says he, amongst the Hebrews, contains neiter the history of Susanna, nor
the Himne of the three Children nor the fables of the Dragon of (...) which
nevertheless, because they are spread over all the world, we have annexed
thereto; but after having marked them with an obeliske, which precedes them,
and cutts their throat. From whence it is that Ruffinus being grown his
enemy reprocheth him thus; All those then that supposed Ruff. in Hier. Inuect.
2.
Susanna had furnished all married and unmarried women with an example of
Chastity, have erred, it is not true; all those that conceived that Daniel yet
a child had been fulfilled with the Spirit of God, and had (...) the adulterous
Elders, have erred, it is not true. And the whole Church throughout the extent
of the world, as well as those that are still upon the Earth, as of those that
are before our Lord, be they holy coufessors, be they holy Martyrs, who have
sung in the Church of our Lord the Hymn of the three Children, have all erred
and sunge false things. Now then after four hundred years, does the truth of
the Law bought with Silver (So Hier. ad Pam. and Ocean. ep. 65. and Praef. in
Job. ep. 113.
he says, because saint HIEROM had given money to the Jews, to be helped by
them in the edition of this Bible) come to us from the Synagogue? And the third
observation finally is, that saint HIEROME being afterward more exactly
instructed in the truth of the sense of the Church, changed his opinion, and
retracted both in general and particular, all that he had written in these
three prologues. For in his Apology against Ruffinus, answering to his
reproach about the history of Susanna, and of the Dragon of Bell, and of the
canticle of the three Children, he says; Whereas I have reported what the
Hebrews used to object against the history of Hier. aduers. Ruff. apol. 2.
Susanna, and the Hymn of the three Children, and the fables of the Dragon of
Bell, which are not in the Hebrew volume, etc. I have not explicated what I
thought, but what the Jews were accustomed to say against us. And in his
preface upon the book of Tobias; The Hebrews (says he) cut of the book of
Hier. Praef. in Tob. ep. 100.
Toby from the Catalogue of the divine Scriptures. And again; The ie alousie
of the Hebrews does accuse us, and imputes it to us, that against their Canon
we transferr Ibidem.
the book of Toby into the latin ears: but I judge that it is better to
displease the judgment of the Pharisees, and to obey the commandments of the
Bishops. And in the exposition upon the forty fourth Psalm: Ruth, Hester, and
Judith, Hier. in exposit. Psalm. ad Princip. ep. 140.
have been so glorious, as they have given their names into the sacred volumes.
And in his preface upon the history of Indith: The book of Judith (said he)
is read by the Hebrews amongst the Hagiographs, whose authority is esteemed
Hier. praefat. in Judith. ep. (...)
less sufficient to decide contentious things, etc. but for as much, as the
Council of Nicea is read to have reckoned it amongst the holy Scriptures, I
have obeyed your demand. Words which plainly retract what he had said in his
Prologue upon the Proverbs: As then the Church reads Judith and Toby and the
Hier. Praefat. in Prou. ep. 115.
Machabees, but receaues them not amongst the canonical Books. so may she
read Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus for the edification of the people, but not
for the confirmation of Ecclesiastical Doctrines: And which cannot be avoided,
by answering that the word (holy Scriptures) does not there signify
Canonical: for the opposition that he makes of the Council of Nicea to the
Jews, which esteemed the Book of Judith amongst the Hagiograph books; Hier.
de (...). Eccl c. vlt. Hier. in Esai. c. 23.
whose authority is reputed less sufficient to divide contentious things,
stopps the mouth of that delusion. And finally in his commentary upon the
Prophet Esaias compounded long after the prologue armed, he setts the history
Alcim. Auit. l. 6. c. 17.
of the Machabees amongst the canonical Books, The Scripture (says he)
reports, that Alexander king of the Macedonians came out from the land of
Cethim. Which some Latins that followed being ignorant of, it befell that they
Bellator. apud. Cassiod. Divine lect c. 6.
were separated from the common voice of the western Church. For although the
greater part of the later Latin Doctors, as Alcimus, Bellator, (...),
Isidorus; have followed the catalogue of S. AVS. and of the third Casiodor.
ibid.
Council of Carthage, and set the history of the Machabees amongst the
Isidor. Orig. l. 6. c. 1. and de Divine. offic. l. (...).
canonical Books; yea that some of them, as Bellator, who lived in the time
of the Emperor Justinian the first, have illustrated it with commentaries;
nevertheless, some others not knowing that S. HIEROME had changed his opinion,
have tied themselves to that of S. HIEROME: But in Cassiodor. de Divine. lect.
c. 6.
sum, whatsoever the later Latin doctors have done, it is certain, that in
the Latin Church, never any before S. HIEROME, had removed the authority of
the six posthume books of the old Testament. For whereas S. HILARIE in his
commentary upon the Psalms composed, or rather as S. HIEROME says, translated
by him out of Origene, whilst he was in the Hier. Apol adu. Ruffin l. 1. Ad.
Aug ep 89. and in exposit. Ps. 126. ad
East, writes that the number of the canonical books of the old Testament, is
reduced according to the tradition of the Elders, either to the number of the
twetie two letters of the Hebrew alphabet, or by the addition of the Books of
Judith and of Tobias, to the number of twenty four letters of the Marcell. ep
141.
Greek Alphabet; besides that these marks are not the notes of S. HILARY,
Hilar. (...). in Psalm.
but the notes of Origene in his co^mentary upon the first psalm, that S.
HILARY has transcribed in part into his prologue upon the psalms. He means
by the tradition of the Elders, not the tradition of the Church, but the
traditions of the Jews; whereof some, to wit, these that made use of the
Hebrew tongue in their Synagogues, set twenty two Books into their cano^,
according to the number of the letters of the Hebrew Alphabet: And the others,
to wit, the Hellenist Jews; that is to say, those that used the Greek
tongue in their Synagogues, set in twenty four according to the number of
the Greek Alphabet, which co^taines twenty four letters.

But at the least will some man say, there are amongst the monuments of the
Greek Church, catalogues wherein the six postume Books of the old Testament
are omitted. Now this is a case apart: for the dispute which now is treated of
is not of the custom of the Greek Church, but of the the oustome of the
Latin Church, and particularly of the African in the times of the Counsels of
Carthage. Nevertheless, for as much as this chance may be met in our way,
we will furnish it with four aduertisments. The first advertisement shall be
that of the Greek canons, where these books are omitted, there are many
which have been supposed by the later Greeks, as amongst others the Synopsis
which bears the title of S. ATHANASIVS; the which also Beda and the copies of
Basile Beda Praefat. in Apocalypse. and edit. Basil oper. Athanas.
cast into the Tome of the Books falsely imputed, to S. ATHANASIVS. For the
Synopsis entitled from saint ATHANASIVS, defalketh Wisdom from the number of
the Canonical Books; and setts it into the (...) of the Books that were read
by the Catechumens only; directly against saint AUGUSTINE, who says, That the
books of Wisdom Aug. de praedest. Sanct. l. 1. c. 14.
had merited by so long a continuance of years, to be read in the Church of
Christ by the Readers of the Church of Christ, and to be heard by all the
Christians, from the Bishops to the lowest laymen, faithful penitents, and
(...) with reverence of divine authority; And against saint ATHANASIVS Athan.
Apol. 2.
himself, who cries out; They fear not what is written in the holy letters,
the false witness shall not be unpunished, and the lying mouth slayes the soul.

The second aduertissement shall be, that although the neighborhood and the
confusion of dwelling with the Jews, has sometimes hindered the Greeks, and
principally the Asians from setting the posthume books (...). hist. (...). l.
5. c. (...).
of the old Testament into their Canons, nevertheless there are none of those
books, but have been employed by diverse Greek Authors, in the quality of a
sacred and canonical book: as the book of wisdom Athan. apol (...).
by Melito Bishop of Sardes; and by S. ATHANASIVS, and all the Synod of
Alexandria, which says, speaking of the Arrians, They fear not that which is
written in the holy scriptures, the false witness shall not remain unpunished,
Ibid.
and the lying mouth slayes the soul. The book of Tobias by the same Saint,
Hier. praef. in Judith.
ATHANASIVS, and the same Synod, which says; It is written, that the mystery
of the King must be concealed. The book of Judith by the Council of Nicea,
which is read (says S. HIEROME) to have reckoned the volume of Judith amongst
the holy Scriptures. The books of Wisdom, Epiphan. Aet. haer. 76.
and of Ecclesiasticus, by S. EPIPHANIVS, who writes against Aetius; Thou must
turn over the two Wisdoms, that of Solomon, and that of the son of Syrach,
and in sum all the divine Scriptures. And finally, the book of the
Machabees, by the three first and greatest Antiquaries of the Greek
Christendom; Clem. Alex strom. l. 1.
Clemens Alexandr. Origin, and Eusebius. For Clemens Alexandr, reporting the
history of the Scriptures, says; In the captivity were (...) Origin. de
Princip. l. 2. c. 2.
and Mardocheus, whose history is current, as that of the Machabees. And
Origin in the second book of the work of Principles; disputing against the
here tickes of the sect of Marcion, who placed matter as coeternall to God; and
willing to prove to them, that God had created the world of nothing, cries out;
And that we may prove it to be so by authority of Scriptures; (...) (...) the
book of Machabees to the mother of the seven martyrs. And in his commentary
Id. in ep. ad Romans l. 4.
upon the Epistle to the Romans, expounding this verse of S. PAVL, None dies
for the just: and disputing against the same Marcionites, who interpreted it of
the God of the old law, he asks; But what will they do? For we find in the
(...) many martyrs, let them read the books of the Macha^bees, And Eusebius
in the work of Evangelical preparation, comparing the points of the doctrine
of Plato, with the divine Oracles of the Hebrews, setts down among the
examples of co^formitie, the place where Plato writes; that the souls of the
just after their death help the living: with the place Eusebius de praep Eua^g.
l. 12 c. 1.
where the book of the Machabees quots, that Jeremy was seen after his death
praying for the people. The twelfth book of the Evangelical preparation
(says Euselius) shall contain the rest of the conformity of the doctrine of
Plato, with the Eusebius. ibid.
oracles of the Hebrews. And a little after, reporting the articles of this
conformity; Plato (says he) writes, that the souls of the deceased, are
endued with a certain virtue, and have a care of the affairs of men, etc. And
in the book of the Machabees it is written, that the Prophet Jeremy after his
departure out of this Origin. de Princip. l. 4 c 2.
life, was seen praying for the people. And from this it does not derogate,
that Origin alleged also in the second book of his work of principles, the
volume of Pastor, which many of the ancient held for canonical: for Orig.
cont. Cells. l. 8.
he adds in the fourth book of the same work, that some despised it, which he
noe were notes of the book of Machabees. Contrariwise in his apology against
Celsus, he cries out; that the history sf the Machabees is testified by the
witness of two whole nations; that is to say, of the Jews and the Christians.
From whence it is also, that the Greek doctors hold it for so au (...) psalm.
43.
the^ticall and (...), as they affirm that the things therein described, the
holy Ghost had long before foretold, by the mouth of David, and the other
Prophets. The Prophet (says S. CHRISOS) has indicted the 43th. psalm not in his
person, but in the person of the Machabees, describing and prophesying the
things that (...) hap in their times. And S. ISIDORE of Egypt time fellow
with the same S. CHRYSOS. says, The Angel that discoursed with (...), 1 sid.
Pelus. ep. l 3. ep. 4
spoke of Antiochus Epiphanes, that he should be manifestly conquered and
dispossessed by the Machabes. And Theodoret contiguous in time to both of the^:
Thodor. in in ep. ad Romans c. 8.
The holy Ghost (says he) has writte^n by the divine David the forty third
psalm of the (...).

The third aduetisment shall be, that not only diverse Greek authors, (...) often
the same Greek authors, in speaking of the Books of the old testament, follow
according to the occasion of their speech, sometimes the primitive computation
of the Jews, and the Rabbinicall tradition of the canon of Esdras, and of the
books enclosed in the Arc, and answerable to the number of the letters of the
Hebrew alphabet, in which the posthumall books of the old testament were not
comprehended; and somtymes the accessory co^putation of the Christians, wherein
they were contained, from whence it appears that from the lesser of these
computations nothing can be inferred against the larger. To prove it so, when
Origin in his co^mentary upon the psalms speaks of the Scriptures of the old
Testament, he follows the canon of Esdras, and the number of the twenty two
Hebrew letters, wherein neither Tobias nor Judith, nor that of Wisdom had Orig
apud Eusebius hist Eccl. l. 6. c. 19.
any place. Yon must not be ignorant (said he) that the books of the
Testament according to the tradition of the Hebrews, are 22. according to the
number of their letters. And when he speaks in his co^mentary upon the book of
Numbers of the volumes of the Scripture, he follows the accessory co^putatio^
of the christians, and the appe^dix of the posthumall books, and sets, down
the (...) of Judith, Tobie and that of Wisdom amongst the canonical Books:
When Orig. in Numb. hom 27.
there is presented (says he to those that are newly Scholars in divine
Studies) any reading of the divine volumes in which there is nothing that
seems obscure, as the book of Hester, or of Judith, or of Tobie, or the
precepts of wisdom they receive it willingly; but if the book of Leuiticus
be read to them, their spirit is presently dulled. And in the same place of
the co^mentary upon the psalms, where he reckons the Canonical Books of the
old Testament, according to the co^putation of the Hebrews, and the number of
the Hebrew letters, he adds; Orig. apud Eusebius. hist. Eccl l. 6. c. 19.
out of this rank are the books of the Machabees, which the Hebrews call
Sarbit Sarbaneell; that is to say, the Scepter of the Prince of the children
of God, By which words he inte^des not to say, that they are not of the rank
of the canonical Books of the old Testament, for then wherefore (having
purposed to speak of the Canonical Books) should he mention the Machabees?
but that they were not in the rank of the canonical books, inserted in the
canon of Esdras. Likewise when S. EPIPHANIVS in the Book of the Hebrew weights
and measure, and in the confutatio^ of the Sect of Epicurus, speaks of the
canonicalll Books of the old Testament, he follows the catalogue of Esdras,
and the cabbale or tradition of the twenty two Hebrew Epiph. de ponder and
men's. Hebraic.
letters, and says, that the Books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, were not
of this number: The Wisdom of Solomon and that of Iesusthe son of Syrach,
are useful and profitable, but are not set down amongst the books enrolled;
(that is to say enrolled by Esdras) And for that cause they are not placed in
the Aron, that is to say, in the Arc of the testimony; for so it must be
read, and not; neither in the Aron, nor in the Arc; as it is read at this day
by the ignorance of the book writers and interpreters, who of the word Aron,
which in hebrew signifies Arc, have made Aaron brother of Moses And when he
disputes against Aetius head of the heresy of the Anomeans, he follloweth the
accessory co^putation of the Church, and setts both those amongst the (...).
contr. Act. (...). 76.
divine and Canonical Scriptures. You must (says he) turn over the twenty
seven books of the old Testament, that the hebrews reckon twenty two and
the four Ghospells, and the fourteen epistles of the Apostles S. PAVL and the
Acts of (...) Apostles made before, and during the same time, and the Catholic
Epistles of James, Peter, John, and Jude, and the (...) of John, and the two
Wisdoms, that is to say, that of Solomon, and that of the Son of Syrach,
and in sum, all the divine Scriptures.

And finally, the fourth and last aduertisment shall be, that there is not
one of all the Greek canons, wherein the Machabees are past over in silence,
(except those that follow the double computation, whereof we now speak) which
is not according to the very judgment of Geneua imperfect, Eusebius. hist. Eccl.
l. 5. c. 26.
and omitts those Books, the Caluinists themselves confess to be canonical.
And to prove it so, in the canon of Melito, the book of Hester is omitted; in
the canon of S. CYRILL of Jerusalem, and in the cano^ of the Cyrill. Hic
rosolym. Cateches. 4.
counsel of Laodicea, the Apocalips is forgoten: in the Synopsis falsely
imputed to S. ATHANAS. the book of Hester is cut of: in the canon laid to S.
GREGORY of Naziazenes charge, (I say, laid to his charge, because Conc.
Laodicen c. 60 Grag. Naz. de Theolog. ora 2. and orat. de fid.
this canon leaves out Wisdom, which S. GREG. of Nazianzene in his true
writings cites as canonical,) the Book of Hester; and that of the Apocalips
are excluded. In the catalogue, attributed to Amphilochius, the book of Hester
and the Apocalips, are called in question. In the catalogue of Josephus (an
author that was an Hebrew by nation, but whose Books are Joseph. contr.
Appion. l 1.
written in Greek) the book of Job is omitted and principally according to
their computation that will have Job to have been before Moses; as Orig. cont.
Cells. l. 6. Merc.
Origin amongst the old Christians, and Mercerus the Caluinist amongst the
modern, and Raby Moses Kimhi amongst the Jews, And in all the Judicial
antiquities Comm. in Job.
of the same Josephus, there is no mention made of Jobs history. By means
whereof, nothing can be concluded from the silence of those imperfect Rab Mos.
(...) in libr. vsar. ling Sanct.
rolls against the volumes by the^ omitted. And indeed, notwithstanding this
catalogue, Josephus leaves not of, (if we give creditt to the Greek text of
the work against Appion) to allege the book of Ecclesiasticus Joseph.
contr. Appion. l. 2.
for one of the pieces of the Jewish law, when he writes; The law says, that
the woeman is in all things worse then man, and that a man's iniquity is better
the^ the good work of a woeman; Nor to insert a great part of the history of
the Machabes into his treaty of the dominion of reason over the senses, yea
with the title of a sacred Book, if we believe the final clause of the
work, which is defective in the Greek text, but is in the ancient latin
translation, acknowledged, and published by Erasmus. For whereas the same Vetus.
verse latin. Joseph. recognit. per (...). and impress.
Josephus distinguishes between the books written before Artaxerxes, when
the Prophets flourished in the Jewish Church; and the Books writ since; so
far of is he from excluding hereby the books of the Machabes from the number
of the books written by the Prophets: that contrary wise, in Basil. 1535.
Contr Appion. l. 1
noting that the books written since Artaxerxes, are not reputed so worthy of
credit as the former, because, the succession of the Prophets has not been
exact, he shows that they were believed to have been written by the Prophets,
but with a belief less assured, and mingled with some uncertainty. Since
Artaxerxes, (says he) eue^ to our time, other things hane been written,
Joseph. contr. Appion. l. 1.
but they are not esteemed worthy of the same credit as the former, becanse
the Succession of the Prophets has not been exact. Now this uncertainty S.
JOHN and S. PAVL seem to take away; S. JOHN, when he reports, that our Lord
assisted at the feast of the dedication of winter, whose institution is
described in the only collection of the Machabees, for the history of the
dedication of winter was a thing necessary to Salvation, since without this
dedicatio^, the ordinary Sacrifices of the Law, could not be lawful, and by
co^seque^ce according to our adversaries, had need of the testimony of a
canonical Scripture; and S. PAVL when he cites in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
the history of the tympanized Martyrs; and that not in matters of things
known by natural light, as when he alleges Aratus; or in manners Hebr.
(...). v. 35.
as when he alleges Menander or Epimenides, but in matter of faith; and to
verify these two theological propositions, that faith is the proof Hebr. 11.
v. 1.
of things not apparent, and; by faith the Saints have Conquered Kingdoms,
Hebr. 11. v. 33.
and wrought Justice. For the history and the word it self of tympanized
Martirs, S. PAVL takes it from the second Book of the. Machabees, as Edit.
Graec
Theodoret has noted, and after him the Ministers of Geneua, who in their 2.
Match. c. 6 v. 19. 18.
annotations upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, have quoted in the Margent Theod
in ep ad Hebr c. 11.
of this verse, the sixth Chapter of the second of the Machabees.

I know well that the Caluinists do shake the Authority of the two Bib. de
Geneu. ann. 1588.
Books, and principally of the second they object five things; first that the
author excuses the lowness of his style: the second, that it is not an
original history, but the extract and epitomy of a more large history the
third, that the primitive author was called Jason which is a pagan and profane
name: the forth that he was a Cyrenian and not a Jewe: the fifth that this
history contains many contrarieties, both to itself, and to profane
histories. But there is none of these objections, but brings his solution with
him; for to the first oppositio^, which is in behalf of the excuse of the
style, we answer; that S. PAVL does yet excuse himself in more express
terms, for the style of his Epistles, when he says, Though I be ignorant as
concerning (...) Corinth. c. 11.
words yet I am not so in knowledge. To the second opposition, which is in
behalf of the quality of the history, which is the abridgment of a larger
history; we answer, that the history of Kings, and that of Chronicles Reg.
15. ver 36. and alibi.
are also of other larger histories of the Kings of Israel and Judah; and that
to make a history Canonical, it is not necessary that the holy Ghost 2.
Cronic. 27. verse. 7. and alibi.
should immediately indite all the matter of the Narration, but it suffices
that he so assist it, that in the composition of the ingredients of the
history, there be noe falsehood mingled with it. To the third opposition, which
is concerning the name of Jason, one of the authors of the original history,
Machab. 2.
which they will have to be a profane name; we answer that the name Jesus
in hebrewe, and the name Jason in greek, the one derived from the hebrewe word
Iesa, which signifies salvation; and the other from the the Greek word Iasis,
which signifies, healing; is one selfsame: From whence it came, that the
priest Jesus brother of Onias, was called Jesus Joseph. antiq. l 2. c. 6.
amongst the Hebrews; and Jason amongst the Greeks as Onias his brother was
called Onias, or Onia^ amongst the hebrews, which signifies the strength
Theodor. in Daniel. c. ^1. and alij.
of the people, and Menelaus amongst the Greeks; and that since, Jason son
of Eleazar, and many other Jews, bore the same name. To the fourth Machab. 8.
oppositio^, which concerns the country of this Jason, who is surnamed,
Jason, Machab 2.
the Cyrenean; we answer, that Cyrene was a province and peopled with Jews,
from whence it is that the Gospel calls him that did help to carry the
cross of our Lord, Simon the Cyrenean; and that S. LVKE calls one of Marc. 10.
the Synagogues of Jerusalem, the Synagogue of the Cyreneans. And finally Act.
6.
to the fifth and last opposition, which is concerning the pretended repugancie
of this history either against itself, or against profane histories; 2.
Chronic c. 21.
we answer that if this gate should be once opened, there were noe Canonical
book whose authority might not be called in question, 2. Reg. c. 2. and 3.
For who knows not, that it is a thousand times more difficult to reconcile,
Matthew 1.
either the history of the Chronicles, which says, that Elias writ 2. Reg. c.
8. 9. 11. 14. 15
to Ioram, king of Judah; with the history of the Kings, which says, that
Elias had been taken up out of the world, eight year before the reign 2.
Chronic c. 22. 23. 24. 26.
of the same Ioram King of Judah: (or saint MATTHEW who writes, that Ioram King
of Judah begat Ozias; and reckons from David to Ozias, fourteen Act 5.
Generations; with the history of the Kings, and the Chronicles, which
tetestifie, Joseph. antiquit. l. 20 c. 2.
that Ioram was the Grandfather of the Grandfather to Ozias; and letts down
from David to Ozias, seauenteen Generations; or the history of the Acts, which
computes the death of Theodas, to be under the Empire of Tiberius; with
Josephus, an author, of that country, and tymel who reckons it under the
Empire of Claudius) then to reconcile all the seeming repugnancies, which are
in the history of the Machabees, either against itself, or against profane
histories. And if it shoud be less, who sees not, that it belongs not, as has
been already said to the matter now in agitation? For the question that is in
dispute in the matter of the collection entitled the sixth Council of
Carthage, is not, whether the books of the Machabees are in their ground
Canonical or not; not whether the other parts of the Church have reputed them
canonical; or not Canonical; but whether the African Church has holden them
for such; and whether the Greek interpreters, in ecclipsing them from the
canon of the African Church, have done falsely or not? Now we prove that they
have done so, both by the Catalogue of the third Council of Carthage, and by
that of saint AUGUSTINE, and by a thousand other authentical testimonies, and
consequently that the latin edition of the African canons, is of better
creditt then the Greek Rapsody, which is that we have obliged our selves to
prove.

Of the difficulty touching the epistles that are at the end of the African
Council. CHAPT. IX.
THERE remains one last difficulty, which is represented Co^c. Carth 3 c 47.
Aug. de doctr. Christ. (...). c. 8.
upon the matter of the Counsels of Africa, touching the Epistles annexed to
the end of the century of the African Canons; to wit, whether the latin text
of these Epistles which we have at this day in our Libraries, have been
translated from the Greek translation, and added to the collection of
Dionisius, the ancient latin original being lost: or whether the ancient
latin text, being come to our hands, it have been corrupted by the
Schismatickes of West the whether it were in the time that the Church of
Aquilea, and that of Grada were in Schism, and that the Popes held for the
Church of Grada, and the Lumbards for the Church of Aquilea or whether it were
afterward. For that it has been familiar with the Schismatickes of the West,
to abuse these Epistles to the fomenting their rebellions, it appears by the
mockeCouncell Contur. 10 cap. de. Syn
of Rheims, holden for the cause of Arnulphus Bishop of Orleans, where the
principal piece that the Schismatickes made use of, was the Epistle of the
Africans to Pope Celestine, I have said, the mocke-Councell of Rhemes, for as
much as the very Centuriators that caused it to be printed, confess it to have
been a tyrannical Council, holden at the instance of Hugh Capet, to oppress
Arnulphus, bastard Brother to the king Lotharius, Legitimate and innocent
Bishop of Orleans; And besides that it was disannulled three years after by
the authority of the Sea Apostolic, Aim. seu (...) (...) Gest. France l. 5
c. 46.
and of Seguin Archbishop of Sens, and with the consent of Hugh Capet himself.
Then whether the Latin text of these Epistles be a translation of the Greek
edition; or whether the ancient latin original being come to our hands, has
been corrupted, be it by the ignorance of the Bookbinders, or by the malice of
the (...), is the thing in question. And the causes of this doubt are, that
whereas in the copy of the African Canons, the latin edition is much more
correct then the Greek, in the copy of the Epistles; contrariwise, the Greek
edition is very correct, and the latin most depraved and corrupt; and the
corruptions are such: as seem to proceed from the ambiguitie, and
misunderstanding of the Greek words: I will allege five patterns.

The first pattern shall be taken from the Epistle to Pope Boniface, where the
Greek text, speaking of the canons that Pope Zozimus had sent into Africa,
under the title of the Canons of the Council of Nicea, says; These things
have been rigistred in the Acts, till the more certain Copies of the Council
of Nicea shall come, in which if they be couched in the same form, as they are
contained in the instruction, that our Brethren have showed us sent by the Sea
Apostolic, and that they be observed in the same fashion by you in Italy, we
will make no more mention thereof, nor further contest of the not suffering
them: which is the true sense of the African Bishops, who had newly before be
sought the Pope, that he would cause them to observe in the like case, what
should be found in the copies of the Counsel of Nicea, which should Edit.
Graec. Co^c. Carth cap. 138.
be brought out of the Eact; And which is the sense also, that has been
followed by the Protestants of Germany in the last impression, that they have
made of the Counsels of Africa. And the latin text contrariwise says; These
things have been inserted into the Acts, until the coming of the more certain
copies of the Council of Nicea, which if they be there contained, so as they
are (...) in the instruction, as our Brethren sent by the Sea Apostolic have
alleged, and were kept in the same form amongst you in Italy, we shall be no
way constrained to tolerate things, such as we will not now call to memory or
to suffer them intolerable. Words that besides the impertinencie of the
construction; in the alternatiue whereof, there is no antithesis, are directly
repugnant to the sense and intention of the Epistle; which is, contrariwise to
say, that if the clauses intended by the Popes instruction, were to be found
in the Conc. dict. Afric. c. 101
copies of the Council of Nicea, which should come out of the East, they would
not so much as open their mouths to speak of it, and would not contest of the
not suffering them: and whereof the corruption seems to proceed from the
ambiguitie of the two Greek verbes whereof the one signifies, to make mention
or to commemorate; and the other, to be constrained and to contest.

The second pattern shall be taken from the exordium of the Epistle to Pope
Celestine, where the Greek text speaking of Apiarius says; For first he has
mainely resisted all the Council, charging it with diverse contumelies, under
pretense of pursuing the privileges of the Roman Church, and willing to cause
himself to be received into our communion, because your Holiness believing
that he had appealed to you, which he could not prove, had restored him to the
communion. Yet this did not succeed with him, as you shall more at large
understand, by reading the Acts; Which is the true sense of the words of the
Epistle; and which also the Protestants of Germany have followed in the last
impression that they have made of the Council of Africa. And the latin text
contrariwise importes, referring these words to Faustinus the Popes Legate.
For (...) how much he has resisted all the Assembly, Charging it with many
(...) under color of pursuing the privileges of the Roman Church, and willing
to (...) him to be received into our communion, because your Holiness
believing he had appealed to you, which could not be proved, had restored him
to the commnnion, which (...) (...) was not lawful, as you shall better
discern by reading the Acts; which are three deprauations, one in the neck of
an other: the first in this that the latin text referrs to Faustinus that
which the Council says of (...), as it appears by these words: For first,
which show that it speaks of him, of whom it had begun and continued to speak
of in the following periods; and by this subsequent clause, when we examine the
crimes that have been objected to him, which could not be understood but of
Apiarius. And this seems to proceed from the ambiguitie of the Greek
pronowne, which being taken in a reciprocal signification signifies, himself,
and obliges the Readers to translate, willing to make himself be received,
which is the sense that the new editions of the Prote. stants of Germany have
embraced; and being taken in a direct signification, (...) Can Council.
Viteberg. 1614.
signifies, him, and obliges the Readers to translate; willing to cause him to
be received. The second in this, that insteede of these words of the Greek
text; Notwithstanding this has not succeeded to him, which are spoken of the
Action of Apiarius the latin text setts down, which yet was not lawful, and
referrs it to the action of the Pope against the credit of this remitment, as
you shall better discern by the reading of the Acts: which shows that the
Council speaks of the issue of Apiarius his cause, and not of the Popes
action; and this seems to have proceeded from the Ambiguitie of the Greek
verb, which signifies to succeed, and to be lawful, And the third in this,
that insteede of the aduerbe, greatly, which is in the greek text, the latin
edition reads, how much, a thing which depriues the construction both of sense
and verb, and makes the speech suspense and defective.

The third pattern shall be taken from the beginning of the request of Conc.
dict. Afric. c. 105.
the same Epistle, where after these words, Premising then the office of a due
salutation, we beseech you affectionatly that henceforward you will no more, so
easily admit to your ears, those that come from these parts, nor restore to
the communion, those that have been excommunicated by us; for as much as your
Reverence will easily discern, that this has been defined by the Council of
Nicea; the (...) text adds, for although it seem, that there should only
mention be made of Clerks and laymen, by how much stronger reason, should
this be observed of Bishops, that those which have been deprived of the
communion in their province, might not appear to be restored rashly and duly
to the communion by your Holiness? And the Greek text contrariwise makes two
diverse clauses of this train, whereof he referrs the first to the Pope, and
not to the Council of Nicea, and distinguishes them by the word, then, which
is an aduerbe of illation, in these terms; For if it appear that he has had
care to extend his caution, even to clerks and laymen, by how much stronger
reason would he have is to be observed in regard of Bishops? Let not those then
that have been suspended from the communion in their own province, appear to
be hastily, and otherwise then is fit, Edit. (...)
restored to the communion by your Holiness. Now that the reading of the
Greek (...). Cartb cap. 138.
edition be the true one, it appears by the branch following, which is;
Likewise also the impudent flightes of priests and inferior clerks, let your
Holiness as a thing worthy of you, reject them; Which supposes, a precedent
prayer to Edit. Joan. (...). 1525. and (...). impress. Paris apud Abrah.
Pacard. 1615.
the Pope particularly made for the Bishops.

The fourth pattern shall be taken from the middle of the same petition, where
the Greek text containing, the grace of the holy Ghost shall not want to every
provision; the latin exemplifiers of the Greek word, which fignifies there,
provision; some of them have made, providence; and other some, province. For
that there it must be read provision, and not province, Edit. or. din.
Co^cilior. ex Isidor Market
it appears by the clause that follows, which says; And principally since it
is permitted to every one if he find himself agreeued at the se^te^ce of the
judges to appeal to the Synod of his province. The fifth pattern shall be taken
from the end of the same Epistle, where the Greek text says; For as for the
wretched Edit (...) (...). Carth cap 138.
Apiarius, having already been for his infamous crimes cast out of the Church
of Christ, by our brother Faustinus, we are no more in care; for as much as by
the means of the approbation and direction of your Holiness, for the
preservation of brotherly Charity, Africa will suffer him no longer: which is
the true sense of the Bpistle, where the Fathers intend to express, that the
Pope will noe longer permit, that Apiarius (to whom by the first judgment of
Faustinus his (...), and of the African Bishops reuiewing the cause with him,
it had been granted to remain in Africa, and so exercise there in any place
he could or would, the office of priesthood, provided it were not at Sicca;
having been by the second judgment, condemned and excommunicated, yea by the
very month of Faustinus his Holiness legate;) should remain in Co^c. dict
Afric. cap. 101. and 105.
Africa, and exercise any priesthood there; which sense also the protestants
have followed, as well in the Greek, as in the latin, of the last impression
of the Counsels of Africa, which they have made in Germany. Edit. Co^c.
vviteberg. Ann. 1614.
And the latin edition contrariwise says, transferring the speech to (...);
For as for our Brother Faustinus, Apiarius having been already cast out of the
Church for his enormious crimes; we are assured saving the probity and (...) of
your Holiness, that brotherly Charity will not permit, that he be (...)
longer borne with, in Africa. Now this translation is both against the Greek
text, which referrs the speech to Apiarius, and not to Faustinus; and against
the express intention of the Council, which might well and conveniently
desire the Pope, not to permit any longer, that Apiarius should remain in
Africa, but not desire him no more to keep a Legate in Africa, and principally
according to the opinion of those that will have it, that the Council of
Carthage where Genetlins presided, was celebrated under the Empire of
Valentinian the third who begun to be Emperor, but the year after the
Consulship of Uictor and Castinus, under the which, according to them, this
letter was written, and that Faustinus the Leo ad Episc.
Popes Legate assisted at it; And against the testimony of Leo the first, who
was created Pope eight years after the death of Celestine, who Afric. ep. 85.
makes mention of a Bishop called Potentius, who was his Legate in Africa. For
as for the clause, we are no more in care of it which wants in the Greek
printed copies, it is in the ancient greek copies commented by Zonara and by
Balsamon; And as for the word probity which is read in the latin text, it may
be it is a deprauation of the Greek word, which signifies, (...), which also
the Germans have retained in the new edition as well Greek as latin of their
Conncells. But it is already a long while since this digression began, to
exceed the proportion of the other parts of my work; And therefore the fear
to abuse the Readers patience, obliges me to conclude and to pray them to
excuse me, if I have suffered myself to be carried beyond what was my purpose
at the beginning of the chapter. The importance of the matter shall recompense
the defect of the proportion, which perchance in these kinds of searches, will
not be displeasing to spiritts curious of antiquities.

Of the Question of Appeals, treated of in the sixth Council of Carthage.
CHAPT. X.
THE fifth instance of Calvin against the Popes authority, is taken from the
dispute that happened about the matter of Appeals in sixth Council of
Carthage; and consists in this, that Apiarius priest of the city of Sicca in
Africa, having appealed to the Pope from a sentence that the Bishops of Africa
had given against him; And the Bishops of Africa having complained of this
Appeal, the Pope sent them the canons of the appeals made in the Council of
Sardica, and directed them to them under the title of the canons of the
Council of Nicea, for as Co^c. Carth Dict. 9. c. 3.
much as the Council of Sardica, was an appendix of the Council of Nicea. By
means whereof the African's not finding these Canons in the Copies of the
council of Nicea that they had with them, deputed some into the East, to see
if they could find them in the copies of the Eastern Churches, and not having
found them there, and besides finding themselves much aggreeued as the frequent
appeals, which those that had badd causes cast in from their Judgments,
besought the Pope, that he would not more so easily receive Appeals from the
churchmen of their provinces. Now this instance has been after many ages,
the principal engine of the adversaries against the Popes authority, as it
appears both by the use that the Schismatickes of the mock-Councell of (...)
Centur. 10. c. 9. col. 494.
made of it to the end to oppress the innocence of Arnulphus Bishop of
Orleans, which the Pope maintained; And by the calumnies where with Zonar as
and Balsamon Greek Schismatickes, unjustly charge the memory Zonar. Comment.
in Co^c. Carth c. (...).
of Pope Zosimus, for having alleged the canons of the Council of Sardica,
under the title of the canons of the Counsel of Nicea: And finally by the
proceedings of the protestants, who in this slander have followed Balsam.
and surpassed them. For not only the first Protestants have caused to be
(...).
published, and republished many times, this sixth Council of Carthage; as a
Storehowse reputed by them very powerful to resist the authority of the Sea
Apostolic, but also have vomited and disgorged with so much impudence, the
venom of their inuectiues against the Popes, under the which, this matter has
been treated of, as the heavens abhor it; calling Aug. contr. duas. Epist.
Pelag. l 1.
Pope Boniface) whom S, AVGVS, calls, Reverend Pope Boniface, and to who^ he
dedicated one of his principal Books, and whom Prosper qualifies, Pope of
holy memory) instead of Boniface Maleface; And Pope Celestine, Prosp. co^tr.
Collat.
whom the General Council of Ephesus, calls new S. Peter; in the Co^c. Ephesians.
part. 2. Act 3.
steed of Celestine Infernal. And yet since these two last years, their
Successors dissembling the learned answers of the Illustrious Cardinals
Bellarmine and Barronius, have caused the same Council to be twice new
printed, once in France, and an other time in Germany, as an insoluble piece
against the Popes authotity. And therefore since the affairedeserues to be
treated with much diligence, and read with much attention, it belongs to me to
contribute the one, and to the readers to the lend the other.

To this instance then, before I undertake to search this history to the
bottomb, I will bring eight observations in form of preservatives and
antidotes: The first observation shall be, that whatsoever the aim and
success of this Council were, nothing could be inferred from it, to trouble
and shake the Popes authority in regard of Appeals. For in the Counsel of
Chalcedon which was holden by six hundred thirty six Bishops, thirty years
after the sixth Council of Carthage, and which was more famous and
authentical, then the sixth Counsel of Carthage, as being a general
Counsel, and one of the first four General Cou^cells; whereas the sixth
Counsel of Carthage, wat but a National Counsel, the Appeals of causes
which co^cerned either faith or the persons of Bishops, continued to go to the
Pope according to the form that had been ordained by the rule of the Counsel
of Sardica The Epistle of the Emperor Valentinia^ the third annexed to the head
of all the copies of the Counsel of Chalcedon, as well Greek as latin, is a
testimony of this, which says; We onght to preserve (...) in our days, the
dignity of particular reverence to the blessed Apoctle Peter, (...) that the
holy Bishop of Rome, to who^ antiquity has granted the priesthood (...) all,
may have place to judge of faith, and of Bishops, etc. For, for this cause
(...) to the custom of the Counsels, Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople has
In Epist. praeambul. Co^c. Chalc.
(...) to him, in the controversy which is moved concerning faith. The law of
the Emperor Marcian annexed to the end of the Acts of the same Council is a
testimony of this, which cries out: The Synod of Chalcedon, by the authority
Lex Marcian. in Co^c. Chalc. part. 3. c. 11
of the blessed Bishop of the city eternal in glory Rome, examining matters
of faith exactly, and establishing the foundations of Religion, gives to
Flauianus the reward of his past life, and the palm of a glorious death. A
testimony of this, is the petition of appeal, sent to the Pope by Theodoret
Bishop of (...). ep. ap Leon.
(...), a city confining upon Persia, and subject to the Patriark of Antioch,
which says; I attend sentence of your Apostolic Throne, and beseech your
Holiness to succor me, appealing to your right and just judgment. A
testimony Co^c. Chalc Act. 1.
of this is the ordinance of the directors of the policy of the Council,
which was; Let the most reverend Bishop Theodoret come in, that he may partake
of the Council, because the most holy Archbishop Leo has restored his
Bishopric to him, and that the most sacred and religious Emperor has
ordained, that he be present at the Council. And finally the relation of the
same Council is a testimony of this, which writes to the Pope, approving the
judgment of appeal, that he had given in the cause of Eutyches Abbot of
Constantinople, and condemning Dioscorus and the false Council of Ephesus, for
presuming to meddle with it, He has restored to Eutyches, the dignity whereof
he was deprived by your Holiness, etc, And after all this; He has Co^c. Chalc
relat. ad Leon.
(...) his felony even against him, to whom the keeping of the vine had been
committed by our Savior, that is to say, against your Apostolic Holiness.
Co^c. Chalc ep ad Leon part. 3. c. 2.


The second observation shall be, that the controversy of appeals, which was
handled in the sixth Council of Carthage, was not of appeals in mayor and
Ecclesiastical causes, that is to say, in causes of Faith, or of the
Sacraments, or of discipline, or of the customs and ceremonies of the Church:
but of appeals in minor and personal causes, that is to say, in the secular
and temporal causes of persons constituted in orders; as causes of adultery,
drunkenes, battery, theft, debt, and others causes, as well moral as
pecuniary, and as well civil as criminal of Ecclesiastical persons, which
the decrees of Counsels, and the laws of Emperors, submitted to the Tribunal
of the Church. This appears both by the quality of Apiarius his cause, for
which this Conc. dict. Afric. can. 138.
question was moved, which was a moral cause, and wherein there were (...) and
infamous crimes handled, and not an Ecclesiastical cause; And by the
remonstrance which the Africans made to Pope (...), Ep. Conc. African. ad
Celest. Pap. in Council.
That the beyond sea judgments could not be assured for the difficulty of
causing witnesses to pass out of Africa into Europe, which often because of
the weakness either of age or sex could not endure sea voyages. And by the
Epistle of Pope Afric. c. 105 Aug. ep. 106 Inter (...) Aug. ep. 93.
Innocent the first, which S. AUGUSTINE calls, worthy of the Sea (...);
wherein these words were contained; And principally whenever (...) of faith
are handled, I conceive that all our brethren and colleagues ought not (...)
them but to Peter, that is to say, to the author of their name and dignity.
And finally by the very proceedings of the Mileuitan Council, and of the
Council of Carthge, holden under the twelfth consulship of Honorius. For not
only the Fathers of the Mileuitan Council, where the prohibition was made to
inferior Clerks not to appeal beyond sea, (...) Conc. Mileuit. c. 22.
the final judgment of Celestius already heard and judged for a cause of
Faith in Africa to Pope Innocent the first, with this acknowledgment, Aug.
epist. 106.
that the Popes authority was of divine right; or to use their own own Aug.
ep. 92
terms, drawn from the authority of the holy Scriptures: but even Pope
Innocent the first being dead before he could hear Celestius in person, and
having only condemned him in general, upon the report of the Counsels of
Africa, the African Bishops reassembled in the Council of Carthage holden
under the twelfth consulship of Honorius, wherein the question of Apiarius, and
the controversy of Episcopal appeals began; caused their acts concerning
Celestius, to be carried to Rome, and procured them to be confirmed by Pope
Zosimus, successor to Innocent. The reverend Bope Zosimus (says S. AUGUSTINE)
pressed Celestius to condemn those things that the Deacon Paulinus (so was he
called that had accused Celestius August. de (...). origin (...). 7.
in Africa) had objected against him, and to give cousent to the letters of the
Sea Apostolic, (...) by his predecessor of holy memory. But he would not
condemn the articles that Paulinus had objected against him, true it is that
he durst not resist Pope Innocents letters: Contrariwise, be promised to
condemn all that, which that Sea should condemn. And therefore after having
been gently fomented, as a frantic person to make him rest; it was
nevertheless, not thought fit, to unbind him from the Bonds of
excommunication, but for the space of two months, attending till they writ
out of Africa, time for repentance was given him, under a certain medicinal
sweetenes of judgment. And again; By the watchfulness of Id ep. 157.
the Episcopal Counsels, the Reverent Prelates of the Sea Apostolic, even
to the number of two, Pope Innocent, and Pope Zosimus, have condemned Pelagius
and Celestius through the whole Christian world, if they do not correct
themselves, and Prosper. in Chronic.
besides that do penance. And Prosper, timefellow and scholar to S. AUGUST.
under the twelfth consulship of Honorius, and the eigth of Theodosius, The
decrees of the Council of Carthage of two hundred and fourteen Bishops, were
carried to Pope Zostmus, which having been approved, the Pelagian heresy was
condemned Id. contr. Collat.
over all the world. And again; Pope Zosimus of blessed memory, added the
forces of his sentence to the decrees of the Counsels of Afric, and to cut
off impious persons, armed the right hand of all the Bishops with the sword of
Saint Pcter. And the Deacon Paulinus him self, in his epistle to Pope
Zosimus; published by the illustrious Cardinal Baronius; I had promised (says
he) not Baron. Ann l. to m. 5. (...) Ann. (...). 413
to fail to appear at Rome, if the judgment had been given against me, and
not for me, but then I could pursue nothing, since he that had appealed to the
Sea Apostolic (he means Celestius, who, as says S, AUGUSTINE, upon the end
Aug. de (...). origin c. 7. and 8.
of the trial at Rome, took his flight) absented him self, he that ought to
have maintained the validity of his appeal.

The third cautio^ shall be, that the Africans did not in this question contest
the euocations, that came from the mere motion of the Pope, but the appeals
that came from the simple motion of the particular men. For that the custom of
euocations proceeding from the Pope has been known in antiquity, and has
had place both before and after the sixth Council of Carthage, it appears
both by the request that Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, and his partakers made
to the Pope, to call the cause of Athanasius, which had been judged in the
Council of Antioch, and in many others Counsels of the East, and to draw it
to Rome; He writ Socrat. hist (...). l 2. c. 11.
(says Socrates) to Julius Bishop of Rome, and besought him to call the cause
to him self. And Theodoret: Julius following the Ecclesiastical law,
commanded them Theodor. hist. Eccl. l 2 c 4.
to present themselves at Rome, and summoned the divine Athanasius in
judgment; and by the constitution of the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian
published a while after the sixth Council of Carthage, which ordaines, That
every Bishop that, (...).
Theodos. tit. 24.
having been called by the Pope, shall refuse to appear, shall be constrained
thereunto by the Governor of the Province. And by the euocation that the Pope
S. Greg.
GREGORY the Great made of all the causes that Adrian Bishop of Mag. l2.
indict. 11. ep 7.
Thebes in Macedonia had, or might afterward have, before John Bishop of
Larissa his Metropolitan, which he ordained to be judged either at
Constantinople, by the Popes Nuncio, if the causes were Minor or at Rome by the
Pope himself if they were mayor causes. And that the Africans contested none
but the Appeals that proceeded from the simple motion of particular persons,
and not the euocations that came of the Popes mere motion; it appears by this
that the Pope having put four Articles into the instruction that he had given
to his Legates, to treat with the Bishops of Africa, amongst which there was
one that Edit Graec. can. 134
imported thus much, To call Urbanus Bishop of Sicca to Rome, or even Co^c.
Carth 6. epist. universe.
to excommunicate him, if he corrected not such things, as ought to be
corrected. The Africans stuck only upon the Articles of Appeal, and Afric.
Synod ad Bonifac. c. 101
as for the Article of euocation, they brought neither scruple nor resistance
against it. Contrariwise, they answered, that Vrbanus had corrected those
things, that ought to be corrected, without any difficulty. Ibid.
And indeed, how could the Africans have contested the euocation, proceeding
from the Popes proper motion, they that but even before, had solicited Pope
Innocent the first, to call Pelagius out of Palestina, where he had been
absolved by Eulogius Archbishop of (...), and by John Bishop of Jerusalem, and
by all the Council of the province, to be heard and adjudged by him at Rome:
It is necessary then Aug. ep. 95.
(said they) either that Pelagius should be called to Rome by they Reverence;
Aug. ep. 90
etc. or that he may have Interrogatories by letter. And elsewhere: We are
assured, that when your Reverence shall have seen the Episcopal Acts, which
are said to have been made upon this occasion in the East, thou will judge of
it in such sort, as we shall all rejoice in the mercy of God. For that Pope
Innocent answers, that Pelagius might be more commodiously heard by the Bishops
here Palestina, he intends with commission from the Sea Apostolic, as he
shows by these words: He ought not to attend to be called by Interiepist.
Aug. ep. 96
us, but ought to come to us, that he may be absolved. And again; But care
Ibidem.
shall not be wanting, if he will give way to remedies, for he may condemn
those things that he has holden, and ask pardon for his errors by letter, as
is convenient for one that returns to us. Now this exception was more then
sufficient, to preserve the mark of Superiority, though the minor Appeals
should have no place. For even in secular Jurisdictions, there is great
difference between making difficulty, that a particular man of his own
Motion, should appeal from any Tribunal to the Prince, or that the Prince of
his own motion should call the cause of a particular man to him. And our
ancient French have often debated Appeals from France to Rome in minor and
personal causes, without pretending for all that to debate, either euocations
or Superiority. And to prove this, when Rothaldus Bishop of Soissons appealed
to Rome under the second race of our Kings, Hincmarus Archbishop of Rheims and
tyme-fellow with Charles the Bald writ to the Pope: God forbid that we should
so despise that (...) (...). Epist. ad Nicol. Pap. 1 apud. Flo doard. hist Eccl.
of the Prime and Sovereign Sea of the Pope of the holy Roman Church, as to
weary your Sovereign authority with all the Processes, and all the
differences of the Clergy, as well of the inferior as superior order; which the
Canons of the Council of Nicea and of the other Sacred Counsels, and the Romans
1. 3.
(...) of Innocent, and of the other Bishops of the holy Sea of Rome, (...) to
be determined in their provinces. And nevertheless to manifest that he
pretended not to touch, upon neither-the superiority, nor Id. ibid.
the euocations, he added; We know all, as well young as old, that our
Churches Id ibid.
are subject to the Roman Church. And a little after, It is fit and just, that
every Bishop, that the Roman Bishop shall send for, to come to him to Rome, if
sickness or any other more grievous necessity, or impossibility hinder him
not as the sacred Canons prescribe, shall do his deuoyre to travel thither,
And elsewhere; (...) Idem. in (...) 55.
yield obedience to the Sea Apostolic, from whence is derived the stream of
(...). l. 35.
Religion, Ecclesiastical ordination, and Canonical judicature. And even to
this day, in the Appeals of minor and personal causes; neither the causes nor
persons of the French Clergy, go to Rome to be judged there; neither does the
Pope send legates from Rome in to France, but names commissaries taken out of
the Province of France, and dwelling in France, to judge them upon the place,
to avoid the costs and other inconveniences, that the length and difficulty
of the way, would bring upon the witnesses and parties, which was that, that
principally did hurt the Africans.

The fourth advertisement shall be, that it was not of set purpose, and of the
first design, that the African Fathers moved the controversy of the
Beyond Sea Appeals of Bishops, but by accident, and in continuance of Apiarius
his appeal. For the Africans had always till then observed this difference
between Bishops and Simple Priests; that Bishops might Appeal beyond the Sea,
and Priests not; as it appears, both by the declaration that saint AUGUSTINE
made, That Aug. ep. 162.
Cecilianus might reserve the definition of his cause, to the judgments beyond
Seas, because he was not of the number of simple Priests, or other inferior
Clerks, but of the number of Bishops; And by the testimony he gives; that
many African Bishops, the Sea Apostolic judging them, or confirming the
judgments of others, had been preserved to the title of their Bishopric
without retayning the exercise thereof. And by the tacit exception of the
order of Bishops, that the Fathers of the Mileuitan. Council had set into the
decree of the Appeals, Council. Mileuit. can. 22.
when they had ordained that the Priests Deacons and other inferior Clerks,
could not appeals to the Provinces beyond the Sea. And therefore, when
Apiarius Priest of the Church of Sicca in Africa, came to appeal beyond Sea,
the African Bishops opposed themselves against it. And from thence by occasion,
the question of Episcopal appeals, took, the original, as an incident set
on the back of an other affair. For upon this opposition, the Pope sent the
Rule of the Council of Sardica concerning appeals into Africa, which
consisted in two articles; whereof one treated of the Appeals of Bishops, and
the other of the appeals of Priests. Now the Pope sent these two Canons in the
quality of Canons of the Council of Nicea, for as Council. Carth. 6. c. 3.
much, as the Council of Sardica was an Appendix, and a supply of the
Council of Nicea. The African Prelates then not finding the Canon of Bishops
Appeals in the copies of the Council of Nicea, that they had with them no
more then that of the Priests Appeals; And besides being much vexed with the
frequent Appeals of Bishops from their provinces, besought the Pope to be
pleased, that they might send into the East, to see if this Rule were to be
found in the copies of the Council of Nicea, which were kept in the Eastern
Churches: and putting in compromise the Title, which was produced to them of
that, which they had till then observed by custom, in regard of Episcopal
Appeals, took occasion also to put the continuance of the custom to
compromise; that is to say, to contest, not only the Priests Appeals, but
also to beeseeche the Pope to reject, or more rarely to receive the Appeals
of Bishops.

The fifth advertisement shall be, that the allegation that Pope Zozimus made of
the Canons of the Council of Sardica, under the title of Co^c. Carth 6. c.
(...).
Canons of the Council of Nicea, was not as shall hereafter appear, by
fraud; or to make an advantage of, seeing contrariwise it had been more
aduantageable to him for the matter then in question, to have alleged them
under the title of Canons of the Council of Sardica, then under the title of
the Canons of the Council of Nicea; for as much as in the Council of Nicea,
there was but one only Bishop of Africa, to wit, Cecilianus; whereas in the
Council of Sardica, there were thirty six Bishops of Africa present, that
subscribed it: but that it was, because it was the custom of the Roman Church
to cite the Canons of the Council of Sardica, under the title of the Canons of
the Council of Nicea, because the Council of Sardica, had been an Appendix of
the Council of Nicea: as it is the custom of the Greeks. to allege the
Canons of the Council Trullian, under the title of Canons of the sixth
General Council, because they pretend the Council Trullian to be an Appendix
to the sixth General Council. And as Gregory of Tours alleadges, and that
with much less reason, the Canons of the Council of Gangres, for Canons of
the Council of Nicea, when he says; Then arriving at the Monastery, I read
over again Greg. Turon. hist. l. 9 c. 33.
the decrees of the Canons of the Council of Nicea, wherein it is contained,
because that if any woeman leave her husband, and she despise the bed wherein
he has lived honestly, saying there is no part in the glory of the Kingdom
of heaven, for him that has been joined in marriage; let her be Anathema: For
these words are the words of the Council of Gangres, and not those of the
Council of Nicea, for as much as the Council of Gangres, was as a branche and
a slipp of the Council of Nicea; and that the same Osius, who had presided at
the Council of Nicea, assisted there, if we believe the ancient Latin
inscriptions of the Council of Gangres, and the report of Eunodius ancient
Bishop of Pauia.

The sixth advertisement shall be, that whereas the African Fathers, did not
perceive that these Canons which they found not in the copies of the Council
of Nicea, were in those of the Council of Sardica, happened from this that the
Donatists had suppressed in Africa, all the copies of the true Council of
Sardica, which had been holden by the Catholic Bishops at Sardica, and had
substituted in their steed the copies of the false Council of Sardica; which
had been holden by the Arrians near Sardica. For in the same time, when the
three hundred Catholic Bishops, which represented all the Catholic Church,
held their Council at Sardica, where they confirmed the faith of the Counsel
of Nicea, and the absolution of S. ATHANASIVS; the seauentie Arrian Bishops
which had separated themselves from the^, held their heretical mock-Councell,
which they falsely and impudently entitled, the Council of Sardica, at
Philippopolis, a city near Sardica, where they condemned the Faith of the
Counsel of Nicea, and the person of S. ATAANASIVS. Now it happened, that in
the address of the Epistle of this false Council of Sardica, the Arrians
amongst the Bishops of their communion, inserted the name of Donatus, Bishop of
the Donatists of Carthage; for as much as this Donatus, besides the heresy of
the Donatists, was Socrat. hist. Eccl l. 2. c. 20. and.
also infected with that of the Arrians. The Donatists then thinking, they
might infer from thence, that their communion had in former Sozom. l. 3. c 10.
times been spread out of Africa, and by this means avoid the reproaches that
the Catholics of Africa made to them, that their Church was imprisoned In
frag. Hilar. p. 6.
within the lymitts of Africa, and consequently was not Catholic; advised
themselves to call in, and supprese secretly in Africa, all the copies of the
true Council of Sardica, which had been brought thither by Gratus, Catholic
Archbishop of Carthage, and to sow in their steedes, the copies of the false
Council of Sardica, which had been addressed to Donatus his competitor, and
wrought so in it, that in the time, of saint AUGUSTINE, and of the sixth
council of Carthage, as it shall be hereafter proved by many places of S.
AUGUSTINE, there were to be found in Africa, none of the copies of the true
council of Sardica, but only those of the false council of Sardica.

The seventh Advertisement shall be, that the African Fathers, never went so
far as to make any decision or any decree upon the Article of the Episcopal
Appeals: contrariwise before the coming of the copies from the East, all
their proceeding was to beseech the Pope, to cause their Council. dict. Afric.
epist ad Bonifac. c. 101.
contents to be observed, with protestation the while to practice what was
set down in his Legates Instructions. And after the copies had been brought
out of the East, so far were they from making any decree upon the Article of
the Bishops Appeals, as they hindered not those of Simple priests. For after
the death of Pope Boniface, under whom the copies of the East were brought into
Africa, Apiarius being fallen into new crimes, for which he was again
condemned, by a Council of Africa, and Pope Celestine, upon a pretense of
Appeal, having again sent Faustinus his Legate into Africa, to cause a new
Council to be holden there, where Apiarius did not only forbear to hinder it,
but also to obey the Popes Bill of Appeal, assembled a new Council, where, in
his Legates presence, Apiarius his cause was again put to trial; and they did
Epist. Council. Afric. ad Pap.
not awake the contention of Appeals, but upon the occasion that was given
them by the subsequent and unexpected confession of Apiarius, Caelest. c. 101.
who vanquished by the remorse of his own conscience, voluntarily discovered
all the infamous crimes, whereof he was accused. This Ibidem.
confession then, having renewed in the spirit of the Africans, the memory of
the greeuances that they received by Appeals, which in steed of serving, as
they ought, for a shield for innocence, when the raynes were let too loose,
served for a Shield for incorrigibilitie and impunitie; they took occasion
from thence to write an Epistle of Ibid.
complaint to the Pope. But yet even then they passed not so far, as to make
any decree of the Episcopal appeals, but contained themselves within the
simple lymitts of complaints, petitions, and Remonstrances. Which the Bishops
of the Council of Constantinople surnamed Trullian, that the Greeks call the
sixth general Council, Conc. in Trull. c. 2.
acknowledged when they said, we receive the Canons made by the holy Fathers
assembled at Sardica and at Carthage; words which showed plainly, that they
believed not the Council of Sardica to have been disabled by the decrees of
the Council of Carthage.

The eight and last advertisement shall be, that the end and issue of the
affair was, that after all these contentions, searches, and proceedings, the
Pope remained in full and entire possession of the Right of the Episcopal
Appeals of Africa, and that the Africans were satisfied, that what they hadnot
found in the Council of Nicea, was contained in the Council of Sardica, whose
Canons upon this occasion, they inserted into the Canon law of their provinces;
and in sum that all the African Church continued and perseuered, in the
practice of yielding Episcopal Appeals to the Sea Apostolic, and in the
communion and obedience of the Pope, as long as Christianity lasted in Africa:
This is the history; Apiarius priest of Sicca, a city of the province of
Numidia in Africa, after he had been condemned, deposed, and excommunicated by
the African Bishops in a cause, that he had against Vrbanus Bishop of Sicca
complained to Pope Zozimus, that he had appealed to him, and that the Africans
would Co^c. Carth 6. c. 3.
not suffer the cause to pass beyond Sea. Pope Zozimus upon this occasion sent
into Africa the rule of the Council of Sardica, upon the matter of Appeals;
which consisted in two Articles; whereof the one contained, that the Bishops
after they had been deposed by the Counsels of their Provinces might appeal
to the Pope: and the other contained that the Priests which had been deposed by
the Council of their Province might have their cause reuiewed, by the Bishops
of the next Provinces, which was the point that concerned Apiarius his
controversy. For whereas the Co^c. Carth 1. c 1 and Co^c. (...) 2. c. 10.
rule of the Counsels of Africa imported, that the Priests should be judged by
the Bishop of their Diocese, and by six Bishops of the same Province, and that
in case they would appeal from it, they might not appeal but to the Primat,
and to the Council of their Province; to the end, that the cause might be
determined within the Lymitts of that particular Province, where it had been
begun: The Council of Sardica ordained, that after they had been judged by the
Primat and the Council Council. Sardic. c. 14.
of their Province, they might appeal to the Primat, and to the Council of
one of the next Province. Which thing being applied to Africa, to wit, that it
might be lawful to every Priest of Africa to appeal from the Primat and from
the Council of his Province, to the Primat and Council of one of the next
Provinces; Apiarius pretended, that it belonged to the dignity and the
Privilege of the Sea Apostolic, that it might be in the power of him that
was a Numidian Priest, to choose amongst the Churches next the Province of
Numidia the Roman Church, although it were out of the continent of Africa,
before any of the rest, because besides the neighborhood that Tertullian
expresses by these words; If thou be a neighbor to Italy, thou have the
Roman Tertul. de praescript. c. 36.
Church, whose authority is near and at hand to us, she has the prerogative
and pre-eminence of dignity above all the rest.

Now it happened that the Pope sent into Africa these canons of the Council of
Sardica under the title of the Canons of the Council of Nicea. For the mention
of the Council of Sardica inserted into some Latin copies of the sixth
Council of Carthage, is a quotation of the copists, which slipped out of the
Margent into the Text, as it appears both by the current of the discourse, and
by the latin collections of Dionisius, and by the copies of the Greek
edition, where it is not to be found. And this he did not to deceive as is
above said, but because it was the custom of the Roman Church, to cite the
Canons of the Council of Sardica, which was an Appendix of the Council of
Nicea, under the Title of canons of the Counsel of Nicea, as it is the custom
of the Greek, to cite the canons of the Council entitled Trullian, under the
title of the Canons of the sixth General Council for that the Council of
Sardica was an Appendix, and a supply of the council of Nicea holden in the
same age, and for the same cause with the council of Nicea, the Greeks, yea
even those that are Schismatickes, are of agreement with us. It pleased (said
Zonara) the two Emperors Zonar. prae: fat. in Council. Sardic.
to cause a Council to be holden to decide those things that had been decreed
in the Council of Nicea. At Sardica then assembled three hundred forty one
Bishops, who made a decree confirming the Synod of the Fathers of the council
of Nicea, and excommunicating those that held the contrary. And Balsamo^; It
pleased the Emperors, that the Bishops should assemble at Sardica, to dispute
Balsam.
about those things that had been decided at Nicea; the asse^bly the^ was made
of Ibid.
three hundred forty one Bishops, and the holy Creed of the Fathers called
at Nicea, Glyc. Annal. l. 4.
was confirmed. And Glycas; By the advice of the Emperors, the Counsel was
assembled at Sardica where there were three hundred forty one Fathers who
confirmed the sacred and holy Creed made at Nicea. From whence it is, that
the Emperor Justinian, who intitles the Council of Sardica; a general
Council; yet nevertheless reckons but four General Counsels, as
co^prehending and confounding the Council of Sardica, under one self same
title with that of Nicea, because the Counsel of Sardica had made noe creed
in chief, like the other General Counsels, but had contented itself, with
confirming Justin. in edict. de fide Orthodox. apud. Leu^claue. l. 8.
and expounding that of the Council of Nicea. Likewise also, that the custom
of the Roman Church, was often to cite the canons of the Counsel of Sardica,
under the title of the canons of the Council of Nicea (as well because the
Council of Sardica was annexed as an appendix to the Council of Nicea, as
because the Council of Nicea and that of Sardica had been set down in the
Latin edition by one self same penn, and brought to Rome by one selfsame
Messenger; to wit, by Osius, who had presided at both, and they were written
one following an other, yea in some copies, where of they say, one is to be
found at Arras, without being distinguished the one from the other.) It
appears from the letters of the Popes Innocent and Leo the first, who allege
the one in his Epistle to Uictricius reported by Charlemaine, and by Hincmarus;
and the other Theod. hist Eccl. l. 2. c. 15.
in his Epistle to the Emperor Theodosius the second annexed to the front of
the copies of the Council of Chalcedon; the decrees of the Council of
Sardica, under the title of the decrees of the Council of Nicea. And indeed,
if this extension of title had been a fallacy, how came it that the Capitul.
Pelagians, which barked with so much fury against Pope Zozimus his Carol.
ashes (who had condemned them) and slandred and defamed him of preuarication,
Magn. addit. 4.
never reproached him of this falsehood? And how could S. Hincmar. in opusc. 55
capitul. c. 6 In ep. praeam.
AUGUSTINE, and Prosper, who undertook the defense of his memory, have
qualified him after his death, Holy, Reverent, and most blessed? And how could
Pope Leo, thirty years after, have fallen into the same crime? And then what
profitt could it have been to the Pope, to allege by fallacy Council. Chalced.
c. 9.
the Council of Sardica, under the title of the Counsel of Nicea;
contrariwise if he had regarded his own particular interest, why had it not
Aug. ep. 157. and contra duas.
been of less advantage to him to conceal the title of the Council of
Sardica, which in regard of general authority, was as authentical, and
Epist. Pelagiani ad Bonisac. l. 2 c. 3. Prosp.
in regard of the particular discipline of Africa, was more authentical, and
more obligatory then that of Nicea? For first, as for general authority,
there were these equalities between the Council of Nicea and the Council
Contra (...).
of Sardica, that they had been holden in times near and contiguous one to the
other, and celebrated, the one for the explication and strengthening of the
other, and that the same Osius, which had presided at the one, had presided at
the other: And that there were like number of Bishops in the one, as in the
other; and that the one was called from all parts of the world, as well as the
other. That it was so, not only saint ATHANASIVS, and after him Socrates and
Sozomene testify, that in the Council of Sardica, there were more then three
hundred Bishops, amongst which were the Patriarch of Alexandria, who was saint
ATHANASIVS Athanas.
himself; the Bishop of Jerusalem, who was Maximus: the Apol. 2.
Bishop of Constantinople, according to Sozomene who was Paul: the Socrat.
hist Eccl. l. 2. c. 20.
Archbishop of Carthage, who was Gratus; and many of the same Bisshops which
had assisted at the Conncell of Nicea, as Osius Bishop of Sozom.
Cordua in Spain; Nicasius Bishop of Dina in Gaul: Protogenes Bishop ibidem.
c. 12.
of Sardica in Illyria; Marcellus Primate of Aneyra, in Galatia: Asclepas
Athan. A. pol. 2.
Bishop of Gaza in high Palestina, Aetias, Bishop of Lydda in Low Palestina;
Paphnutius of Egypt; Spyridon of Cyprus and others: But also saint (...)
affirms that the Council of Sardica was called by the commandment of the
two Emperors of East and West, a thing which appertained only to general
Counsels; and that it was compounded of more then thirty five Provinces, and
in this reckoning counting Africa but for one; Spain, but for one; the Gaul
and Almany but for one; Great Britain but for one; Macedo^ but for one; Thrace
bur for one; Galatia but for one; Egypt but for one; and the three Arabias, and
three Palestinas but for one; as it shall appear in the Chapter following,
where we will treat of deliberate purpose, of the authority of the Council
of Sardica and confute all the objections that the Popes adversaries make
against it. And this is to be said of the equality of the Counsels of Nicea
and (...) as concerning general authority. For to the particular obligation
of Africa, so far of is the Council of Sardica from being less authentical
then that of Nicea, as contrariwise the Council of Sardica had this advantage
above that of Nicea; that in the Council of Nicea there was but one only
Bishop of Africa, to wit, Cecilianus Archbishop of Carthage, as the second
general Council of Constantinople notes in these words: Only Cecilianas
Bishop of Carthage came from all Africa, to the Council of Nicea; whereas in
the Council of Sardica, there were thirty six African Bishops, amongst which
was Gratus Archbishop of Carthage: Of Africa (says S. ATHANASIVS) there signed
at the Council of Sardica, Nessus, Gratus, Magesius Coldeus, Conc. Constable. 5.
Act. 5.
Rogatianus, Consortius, Raphinus Manninus, Cecilianus, Erennianus, Marianus,
Ualerius, Dinamius, Nyronius, Iustus, Celestine, Cypryan, Uictor, Honor at,
Athan. Apo. 2.
Marinus Pantagathus, Felix, Baudeus, Liber Capiton, Minersall, Cosmus, (...),
Hesperion, Felix, Seuerian, Optantius, Hesper, Fidetius, Salustus, Paschasius.
And Osius speaking to the Council of Sardica; Many Bishops make a custom of
travailing to the court, and principally the Africans, that as we have
understood by our well-beloved brother and Colleague Gratus, receive not wholesome
Counsels. And Gratus himself citing in the first Council of Carthage
(concerning Council. Sardic. can. 7.
the credit whereof we are all agreed, and which is alleged by (...)
Archdeacon of Carthage) one of the Canons of the Council of Sardica: I
remember (said he) that in the most holy, Council of Sardica, it was (...),
that none should usurp a man of another diocese for his Clerk. By means
whereof not only the Council of Sardica was of more authority then the Fulg.
Ferand. in Breu. Can. artic. 24. 122. and alibi.
Council of Afric, as Zonarus himself acknowledges, when he says speaking
of the intituling of the Archbishopps: The Council of Chalcedon agreed rather
to the Canon of the Council of Sardica, then to that of the Council of
Africa; but also in regard of discipline was more strong and obligatorie, in
respect of the Africans, then the Council of Nicea. Co^c. Carthag. 1. c. 5.


Now it happened as we have already touched above, that when the Zonar. in
Council.
Pope sent this Rule to the Africans, the Canons of the Council of Sardica
Carthag. c. 42.
were no more to be found in the African Provinces; for the (...) had so
wrought by craft, as they had suppressed and banished out of Africa all the
true Acts of the Council of Sardica, that had been brought thither in the
time of Gratus and of the first Council of (...), and had supposed and slipped
into their steed, the acts of the Anticouncelle of Sardica: that is to say,
the acts of the false Council holden by the Arrians at Philopolis near
Sardica, under the title of the Council of Sardica, because that in the
Epistle of this false Council, the (...) made mention of Donatus, Bishop of
the Donatists of Carthage. This appears by conferring the places of S.
AUGUSTINE with the rest of (...). For S. AUGUST. testifies, that the Acts of
the Council of (...) which were in his time current in Africa, were the acts
of the (...) Council and which had condemned S. ATHANASIVS and the Council of
Nicea. He offered me (said S. AUGUSTINE, speaking of Fortunius Aug ep. 163.
the donatist) a certain Book, where he would show me, that, the Council of
Sardica had written to the African Bishops of the commnnion of Donatus. And a
little after: Then having taken the Book, and considering the statutes of the
Id. ibidem.
same Council, I found that Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, etc. and lulius
Bishop of the Roman Church, no less Catholic, had been condemned by this
Council of Sardica; whereby I was assured, that it had been a Council of
Arrians. And in the third Book against Cresconius the Donatist, who had
alleged the same Council of Sardica: The Council of Sardica (says he) was
Aug. co^tr. Crescon. l. 1. 3. c. 34.
a Council of Arrians, as the copies that we have in our hands do manifest,
principally holden against Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria a Catholic. And
all antiquity contrariwise teaches us, that the true Council of Sardica had
confirmed the Council of Nicea and justified S. ATHANASIVS, and was a most
holy and most Catholic Council. The holy Synod of Sardica (says S.
ATHANASIVS, who assisted there in person) compounded of Athan. ad Solit. vit.
agent.
above thirty five Provinces, received us in our iustifieable proceedings. And
a little after, They declared Athanasius, and those that were with him pure and
free Id. ibid.
from all crime, and their adversaries slaunderers and wicked persons. And
elsewhere; In the great Council of Sardica, our adversaries were deposed as
slanderers, Athanas. de fuga sua apol
and more then three hundred Bishops subscribed to our justification. And
again, The holy council assembled at Sardica decreed, that therein nothing
of faith should be concluded, but that they should content them selves with the
confession of the council of Nicea. And Gratus Archbishop of Carthage, who was
also there in person; I remember (said he) that in the most holy council of
Sardica Conc. Carthag. 1. c. 5.
it was decreed, that none should usurp a Clerk of an other diocese. And the
Epistle of the same Council of Sardica: We have declared our dear brethren
Epist. Co^c. Sardic. apud, Athan.
and fellow-ministers, Athanasius, Marcellus, Asclepas, and others their
adjuncts in the service of God, innocent and blameless. And Socrates; The
Bishops assembled at Sardica condemned before all things the desertion of those
of Philopolis, Apol. 2.
and then deposed the accusers of Athanasius, and confirmed the decrees of the
Counsel Socrat. hist Eccl. l, 2. 20
of Nicea: Sozomene: They answered that they would not separate themselves
Sozom. hist. Eccl. c. (...). 1
from the Communion of Athanasius and Paul, and principally Julius Bishop of
Rome having examined their cause, and not having condemned them, and the
Council of Chalcedon: The fathers assembled at Sardica combated against the
Relics of Arrius. A manifest proof that the Africans in the time of S.
AUGUSTINE, and of the sixth Council of Carthage had no other but the Acts of
the false Council of Sardica holden by the Arrians at Philopolis near Sardica
which had condemned S. ATHANASIVS, and overthrown the counsel of Nicea, and
not those of the true council of Sardica which had justified S. ATHANASIVS and
confirmed the council of Nicea. But let us return to our history.

The Bishops of Africa then finding neither of these Canons in the copies of
the council of Nicea, and not being able to find them in those of the
council of Sardica because they had them not, they stretched out upon the
occasion of the question of the priests, for which at the beginning the
conclusion was moved, even to Bishops; and seeing that the title upon which
that was grounded, which had until then been observed by custom concerning
Bishops Appeals, did no more appear then that of Priests, took their time
and opportunity to complain of the progress of this custom, and of the
greeuances that the Appeals, as well of the one as of there other; that is to
say, as well of the Bishops as of the priests, brought upon them, not by the
fault of the appeals, but by the malice of men which is such as the gate
cannot be opened for Appeals, but there will happen great evils in the
frequent, executions of this remedy, as the contempt of the first Judges, the
delaie and prolonging of justice, the cost and vexation of the parties, the
incommoditie of the transportation of witnesses of all sexes, and all ages: nor
wholly shut it up from them least worse may come of it. And therefore they
writ to Pope Sozimus, whom their letters found already dead; and after to
(...) his successor, an Epistle by which after they had remonstrated to him the
troubles that the past examples of appeals had brought upon them; and had
represented to him that they had not found the rule which was in question in
the Canons of the Council of Nycea, they required time to send into the East
to take Copies out of the original: but with what humility, and with what
respect? Always praying, always beseeching, always protesting to observe in
attending the coming of the copies of the Council of Nicea, that which was
contained in the instruction of the Popes legates: and in case that this Rule
were not found in the Canons of the Council of Nicea, requesting his Holiness
to cause them to observe that which had been decreed by the Canons of the
Council of Nicea: Because (said they) it has pleased God, that of the things
Conc. Afric. ep. ad Bonifac. c, 101.
that our holy Brethren Faustinus our Colleague, and Phillip and Asellus our
fellow Priests have treated with us, our Humility gave answer, not to the
Bishop of Blessed memory Zosimus from whom they brought us commandment and
letters, but to thy Reverence that have been divinely instituted in his steed;
we ought here breefly to insinuate those things which have been determined by
the reciprocal agreement of both parties. And again; We request your
Holiness, that as these Ibidem.
things have been done or decreed by the Fathers of the Council of Nicea, so
you will cause them to be observed by us, and that you will cause to be
prastised amongst you, that is, on (...) side the sea, the points contained in
the instructions. And again, Ibidem.
These things have been registered in the acts until the coming of the more
certain copies of the Council of Nicea; within the which, if they be set
down in the same sort as they are contained in the instruction that has been
showed us by our brethren, sent by the sea Apostolic and observed amongst you
in Italy we will no more make mention thereof (For so is the reading in the
greek text, and so we have proved heretofore that it must be read) nor
further contest of the not enduring it. And presently after speaking of the
Article of the Priests appeals, which was the last article that they came
from reporting, and that which most troubled them by reason of the insolence of
the African Priests, who under pretense of these Appeals despised and shook
of all their Bishops jurisdiction; But we believe with the help of Gods
mercy, Ibidem.
that your Holiness presiding in the Roman Sea, we shall no longer suffer
this typhe (that is to say, this meteor, or this vexation, or this insolence
of Priests despising and shaking of the yoke of Episcopal discipline) but
that those things that brotherly charity (yea though ourselves were silent)
requires to be observed toward us, and which your selves according to the
wisdom and Justice that the most high has bestowed upon you, do know ought
to be observed, shall be observed to us ward, if at least the copies of the
Council of Nicea speak otherwise then your Legates instruction. For that is
intended by the word, typhe, which being taken in his proper and natural
sense, signifies, globe of smoke, or meteor; from whence it is, that the greek
Mariners call the meteors and whirlewindes, short from the clouds in the
form of Globes and rolls of smoke, Typhons, and being taken in the figurative
sense, signifies sometimes vexation, by allusion to the smoke with which bees
are driven; sometimes pride, sometimes insolence, and sometimes fury and
madness: terms all agreeable to the persecution that the Bishops of Africa
received from the insolent appeals of their priests, whereof they Ibidem.
had newly said in Apiarius his case; For as much as many such examples have
caution must be used, that hereafter there may happen none such or yet (...)
And the while to obey the present commandment of the Pope, they restored
Apyarius to the Communion and to his Priesthood, as they testfie Ibidem.
by these words of their Epistle to Boniface; Apiarius craving pardon (...)
Ibidem.
his faults, has been restored to the communion. And again; It has pleased
(...) Ibid epist. ad Celest. cap. 105.
that Apiarius should retire from the Church of Sicca, retayning the honor of
his degree. And by these in their Epistle to Celestine; Apiarius had been
formerlie restored to Priestood by the intercession of Faustinus. And not only
that, but also protested in expecting the coming of the copies out of the East,
to observe Council. Carthag. 6. c. 4.
from point to point what was contained in the instructions of the Popes
legates. We protest (said Alipius) upon the reading of the first article, to
Ibid c 7.
obscrue these things until the coming of the perfest copies. And S.
AUGUSTINE Council. Afric. c. 101.
upon the reading of the second; We protest also to observe this article,
saving a more diligent inquiry of the Council of Nicea. And the Fathers of
the council in the Epistle to Boniface; We protest to observe these things,
until the proof of the Canons of the Council of Nicea, and we trust in the
will of God, that your Holiness also will help us in it. By means whereof,
the appeals remained in the estate contained in the instruction of the Popes
legates until the coming of the copies from the East.

When the copies of the council of Nicea had been brought out of the East
wherein these Canons which also were of the Council of Sardica and not of the
Council of Nicea were not to be found: the African Bishops sent a Duplicat,
thereof to Pope Boniface, nevertheless without innouating any thing in
matter of appeals. When Pope Boniface was dead, who deceased a few years
after, and Celestine created Pope in his place; Apiarius who had retired
himself from Sicca to Tabraca a City of the same Province, to wit; of
Numidia to exercise his priesthood there, fell in to other crimes, for which,
at the instance of the Tabracians he was condemned, and deposed by the Council
of the Province, and from this Council Appealed, or feigned to have Appealed to
Rome to Pope Celestin upon this pretense of appeal, sent Faustin' again, who
had assisted at Apiari his judgment of appeal against those of Sicca, to cause
a new Counsel to be holden in Africa, where the cause of Apiarius against
those of Tabraca, was in the presence of the same Faustinus again put to
trial, and the while restored and reintegrated Apiarius by form of provision
to the Communion. The Africans to obey the Popes commandment, assembled a last
Council, where they remitted Apiarius his cause to examination in the presence
of the Popes Legates, and found themselves so troubled to clear Epist. ad
Celest.
the crimes, for which they had deposed him, which he affrontedly and Conc.
Afric. c. 15.
impudently denied; as, if he had not convinced himself, they despaired of
ever compassing it: God so pressed the impostume of Apiarius his heart, Ibid.
as he broke it, and constrained him to vomitt up by an unexpected confession,
all the filth, rottennes, and infamyes, whereof he was accused, and which he
had denied with so much fraud and impudence. The Africans then pricked and
stung with these infamous and insolent proceedings of Apiarius, and moved with
this, that the Canons of Appeals that had been sent them under the title of
the Canons of the Council of Nicea, were not in the copies of the Council of
Nicea that had been brought out of the East; and not knowing that they were in
those of the Council of Sardica which was the Appendix and the seal of the
Council of Nicea, they took license to write an Epistle to Pope Celestine, to
beseech him no more so easily to receive the Appeals of the Clergy men of
Africa. Now some might call in question the credit of this Epistle, as well
because it is a piece out of the work, and annexed to the continuance of the
sixth Council of Carthage, which had been held three year before, as a
foundling, without any mention of the date or of the acts, or of the history
of the Council where it was written, as, because it was full of clauses, and
cannot be compatible with the discipline of the Africans, for it takes for a
first foundation, that if the Council of Nicea excluded Priests from being to
be adjudged by Appeal out of their Provinces, the Bishops may by stronger
reason be excluded. And the foundation of the Africans contrariwise in the
question that they had against the Donatists was, that Cecilanus after he had
been deposed by the Bishops of Africa might have reserved the judgment of his
Aug. epi. 162.
cause to the beyond sea Churches, for as much as he was not of the number of
Priests or other inferior Clerks; which the Counsel of Nicea (...) Cecilianus
assisted, could not be ignorant of. It takes for a second foundation that
ecclesiasticalls condemned might appeal to the Council of their Province, yea
even to the general Council of all Africa which is manifestly against the
history and discipline of the Counsels of Africa, and principally for the
inferior Clerks, as Priests, deacons and Subdeaco^s. For, the holding of the
anniuersary Counsels of all Africa, had been suppressed twelve years before
Celestine in the Counsel holden under the seventh Consuslhip of Honorius;
where it had been ordained that the universal Counsels of Africa should no
more be ordinary and anniuersary, and should no more be holden but for
extraordinary and universal causes. And that the causes that were not common,
should be Council. dict. African. c. 62.
judged in their Provinces; And that if there were an appeal, the appealant
and the party should choose Judges, from whom it should not be lawful to
appeal. And finally, it takes for a third foundation, that there was no
difference of privilege, between Clerks of the Superior order, in the matter
of passive jurisdiction; and that the same which had been ordained concerning
the one, ought by a stronger reason, to have place Con. Car. 1. c. 1. and
citat. a. Fulg.
concerning the others, which is directly contrary to the African discipline,
which makes so great difference between the one and the other, as to judge
Priests in the second instance, there needed but six Bishops with Ferrand. in
Breu. Can. art. 244.
the Diocesan, and to judge a Bishop in the first instance, there must be
twelve with the Archbishop of the Province. But for as much as this Epistle Et
Conc. Carth. 2. c. 10. and citat. codemart. 55.
is in the collection of Dionisius, whether it have been added since, or
whether it were inserted from the beginning; and that after Dionisius, Pope
Adrian and the Emperor Charlemaine made mention thereof, although there be
ancient copies, where neither of these Epistles are to be Diony. Ex. collect.
Canon. diverse Council.
found, I will not resist it. Only I will say, that S. AVGVSTIN assisted not
at the Council where it was written; as appears, as well because there is
Afric. Prouin. tit. 138.
no mention made of him, neither at the beginning nor end of the Epistle, a
thing which would never have been forgotten, to authorize and fortify the
action, as well as it had been in the Epistle to Boniface, as because Adrian.
Pap. collect ex Synod. and Canon diverse Capit. Carol. Mag. l. 6. c. 287.
those that were after him in order of promotion, and which were wont to be
enrolled after him in public actions, and amongst others The asius (...), and
Fortunatianus, are named in the inscription of the Epistle, and not he. For
that S. AUGUSTINE did use to precede The asius, appears by the forty fifth
and two and sixtith Canon of the council entitled African and that he used to
precede Uincentius and Fortunatianus Collat.
appears by the collation of Carthage where the deputies for the Catholics,
Carthag. page (...).
vere Aurelius, Alipius, Augustinus, Uincentius, Fortunatus, Fortunatianus and
Possidius. Now this Epistle contains two parts, to wit, a narration, and a
supplication, which we report from the Greek text, for as much as the Greek
edition, as we have above showed, is more entire and correct in matter of
Epistles then the latin. The narration then it Our holy brother and colleague
Faustinus coming to us, we believed that he had Paulo post. princ.
been sent with Apiarius, to the end, that as by his means Apiarius had been
formerly restored to his Priesthood; so now by his labor he might be purged
of so many crimes, as had hene objected against him by the Tabracenians, But
the multitude of our Synod running over the crimes of Apiarius; found them to
be so great and in so great number, as they have surmounted the protection,
rather then judgment: and affection of a defender, rather then the justice of a
Judge of the same Faustinus; for first he has thoroughly resisted all the
assembly charging it with diverse contumelies under color of pursuing the
privileges of the Roman Church; and willing to cause himself to be received
unto our Communion, because your Holiness believing he had appealed to you,
which yet he could not prove, had restored him to the Communion. (...) this
succeeded not with him, as you may know better by the verbal process of the
acts; co^trarywise after a laborious inquiry of three days, during which we
examined with much anguish the diverse charges which were objected to him, God a
just judge powerful and patie^t has cut off by a great abridgeme^t, the
delays of our colleague Faust. and the tergiuersatio^s of the same Apiarius,
by which he attempted to hide his infamous villainies, etc. For our God pressing
the conscience of this fraudulent denyer, and his will being to publish to men
the Crimes that his providence condemned, being yet hidden in his heart, as in a
bogge of vices, he has blased out and sufferd himself to fall into a
confession of all the vices, which were objected against him etc. and has
converted our hope by which we believed and desired that he might purge
himself from these so shameful blotts and stains into greef, but that our
grief has been eased by this only confort, that we have been delivered from
the affliction of a longer labor. After the narration marches the
supplication which consists in three requests; The first request is, that the
Pope should noe more so easily receive those that should appeal to him from
Africa. Premised then (said Circamed.
they) the office of a due salutation, we beseech you with all our affection,
that you do no more so easily admit these to your (...), that shall come from
hence, and no more receive those to the Communion, that have been
excommunicated by us, And a while after. That so those that in their own
Province have been deprived of the Communion, may not seem to be rashly and
unfitly restored to the Communion by your Holiness, And this request they
propt up with five reasons. The first, that the Conc. (...). c. 5.
Council of Nicea had forbidden, that those which had been excommunicated in
one Province, should be received to Communion in an (...) Your Reverence (said
they) will easily acknowledge that this has been so defined by the Council
of Nicea; for although it seems to restrain the caution to inferior Clerks
and to lay men by how much stronger reason did they intend it also to Bishops;
A thing that the heat of contention drew from their mouths, and which is
directly against S. AUGUSTINE, who says, speaking of Cecilianus Archishop of
Carthage, who had been deposed by a Council of seauentie African Bishops
assembled at Carthage: He might contemme the conspiring multitude of his
Enemies, because he knew himself to be united by communicatorie Aug. epi. 162.
letters to the Roman Church, in which has always flourisht the principality
of the sea Apostolic, and from the other Countries from whence the Gospel
first came into Africa. And against the Council of Nicea it self which
precisely limitts the words to Priests and Layme^, which having been
excommunicated by their Bishop, could not be received to Communion, by any of
the other Bishops of the same Province. For whereas the African Fathers infer,
that if the Council of Nicea spoke these words of Priests and Laymen, they
must be much more intended of Bishops; this is formally opposite to saint
AUGUSTINES foundation, who says that Cecilianus tyme-fellowe with the Council
of Nicea, might have appealed beyond Sea, because he was not of the number of
Priests and other inferior Clerks, but of the number of Bishops, They did not
handle the cause (says he) of Priests, Deacons, or other inferior Clerks,
but of Bishops, which might reserve their causes to the judgment of the
churches beyond Sea. Id. ibid.
The second that the Council of Nicea committs the causes as Council. Nicen. c.
6
well of Bishops as of Priests, to the Metropolitan; which is true for the
judgment of Priests in the second instance, and of Bishops in the first. But
not for the judgment of Bishops in the last instance, as appears by the
testimony of saint ATHANASIVS, who had assisted in person at the Council of
Nicea, which alleadges for his defense an Epistle, where Pope Julius writes,
that the Council of Antioch, and other Counsels of the East could not depose
ATHANASIVS from the Bishopric of Alexandria, without expecting the decision
Iul. ep. ad Eusebian apud A than. Apol. 2.
of the church of Rome; Are you ignorant (says he) that the custom is, that
they should first write to us and so from hence should proceed the just
decision of causes, and therefore if there were any suspicion conceived
against the Bishop there, that is to say, of Alexandria, they must write to
the Church here; that is to say, to the Church of Rome. The third that the
grace of the holy Ghost shall not be wanting to every provision, or to every
Province, to discern the equity of causes, and that it is not credible that
God should inspire the Justice of the trial, to one only man what soever he
be, and deny it to an infinite number in a Council. A certain proof that
they spoke of the causes of equity and justice, as well civil as criminal,
and not of causes of faith, of which contrariwise they had written a year or
two before to Pope Innocent upon the subject of Pelagius and Celestius his
cause, Aug. ep. 92
which was a cause of Faith. We doubt not with the help of Gods mercy, who
will vouchsafe to hear thee praying, and to guide thee consulting; but those
that hold these perverse things, will more easily yield to the authority of
thy Holiness, derived from the authority of holy Scriptures. And Pope
Innocent, Aug. ep. 93
to themselves: Always, and as often as matters of faith are handled, I
conceive that all our Brethren and colleagues can have no reference but to
Peter; that is to say, to the author of their name and dignity. The fourth,
That it was very hard to assure beyond Sea judgments, because of the
difficulty of causing witnesses to pass the seas: How can (said they) the
Judgments beyond Sea be certain, wherein the necessary persons of witnesses
for the debilitie of sex of age, or many other hindrances interuening cannot
appear? An evident Argument, that they spoke of particular and personal
causes. And the fifth that it had never been taken from the African Church, by
any decree of a Council, that Appeals should go out of Africa, and that to
send Legates from Rome into Africa to judge them upon the place, it was not
constituted by any Council: A thing the ignorance whereof they might well
excuse, forasmuch as they had no more then in Africa, the true copies of the
Council of Sardica, but only as had been above showed those of the false
Council of Sardica, composed by the Arrians, and published by the Donatists,
which gave ground to all this question. The second request was, that the Pope
should no more grante them clerks executioners, so were certain clerks of
the Roman Church called committees, to cause to be executed (with the help of
secular power, and of the imperial forces; that is to say, by the strength of
Vshers, Sergeants, and Soldiers) the judgments of the Pope or of his Legates;
a thing which provoked much murmr in Africa. For although the malice of the
African Poeple, who after they were fastened in the hate of any Ecclesiastical
person would hardly let go their hold, did sometimes make this remedy
necessary; Nevertheless, the abuse of those, which did too violently apply
it, did often convert it into a pretense and occasion of complaint, as S.
AVGVSINE testifies in an Epistle to the same pope Celestine, when he says
speaking of Anthony Bishop of Fussala in Numidia, who had appealed to the Pope
from the judgment Aug. epi. 261.
which the inhabitants of Fussala had caused to be given against him. He
threatens them (says he) with secular power, and with the fury of soldiers,
as if they should come to execute the judgments of the Sea apostolic, in such
sort as the miserable inhabitants being Christians and Catholics feared more
grievous usage from a Catholic Bishop, then they did when they were heretics,
from the laws of the Emperors. For these causes then, the African Bishops
besought the Pope, to grant no more Clerks executors to those which demanded
them; That you will not also (said they) send your clerks for executors to all
those which demand them, nor permit that we should seem to introduce the
typhe or smoky meteor of the age into the Church of Christ, which propounds the
light of simplicity and the day of humility to those that desire to see God.
Calling the force and military violence with which those executors did execute
the judgments of the Sea Apostolic, Secular typhe; for this is that which the
marriage of these two words, Typhe of the age, signifies; to wit, the furious
and violent manner with which the worldly and secular powers were accustomed to
cause themselves to be obeyed; as when the author of the life of Fulgentius,
says; That Fulgentius, commanded nothing with the Typhe of secular dominion.
And as when Author. vit. Fulg. c. 25.
the Council of Ephesus calls the use that John Patriarch of Antioche, had
made of the letters of Dionisius Governor of Syria, to the Captain of the
Garrison and of the soldiers of Cyprus to hinder the Bishops of Cyprus, from
electing to themselves an Archbishop without the permission of the Patriarch of
Antioch, Secular Typhse, and drawing from this particular case a general law,
ordaines, That noe Bishop usurp the Provinces which have not been from all
antiquity Con. Ephesians. tom. 2. c. 4. in appe^dic.
under his predecessors, etc: And under pretense of the execution of sacred
things, introduce not the Typhe of secular power. And a little after; And that
all letters obtained to the contrary, may remain disannulled, and of no
effect. And finally, the third and last request, but expressed in terms of
Confidence and assurance, is that the Pope will not suffer that Ibidem.
Apiarius, to whom by the first Judgment it had been permitted to remain in
Africa, and exercise his Priesthood where he would; provided it were not at
Sicca, should remain any longer in Africa, and that he would not cause him to
be assisted with Secular authority to this effect; Behold the words of the
clause, which contain also the end and conclusion of the Epistle, which I have
translated from the Greek text, because the Greek edition of the Epistles, as
has been above showed, is more correct then the latin. For as for the
wretched Edit. (...).
Conc. Car. c. 138.
Apiarius, having already been condemned for his infamous crimes, by our
Brother Faustinus, we are no more in care for it, as much as by the means of
the approbation and moderation of your Holiness, for the preservation of
brotherly charity, Africa will no longer endure him. Now upon this, what
answer the Pope made them, we have it not, but that it is easy to be judged
by the success, that he satisfied them of the mistaking of the Council of
Nicea, for that of Sardica, and made Leo epist. ad Epise. African ep. 8.
it appear to them, that what they found not in the Council of Nicea, had
been ordained, yea even by their predecessors, in the Council of Sardica. For,
the Appeals of the African, Bishops, to the Pope, continued as before; as it
appears both by the Rule that Pope, LEO; only eight year later then
CELESTINE; made upon the appeal that Lucifrinus a Bishop of Africa had cast
into the Sea Apostolic; and by the care that the Africans had afterward to
insert into their Canon law, the Canons of the Council of Sardica. Fulg. Ferr
in Breu. (...). art 59. (...) 60.
upon the matter of Appeals to the Pope. For Fulgentius Ferandus deaco^ of
Carthage, a little later then S. AUGUSTINE, and tyme-fellow with S. FVLGENTIVS,
registers into the collection that he made of the Canons, these decrees, under
the title of the fixth and sifth Canon of the Council of Sardica: That a
condemned Bishop may appeal, if he will to the sea Apostolic, and that during
the appeals, an other cannot be ordained in his Chair. By means whereof, this
question brought no interruption to the possession wherein the Pope was of
appeals, even in minor causes, and by consequent much less in mayor causes,
as those of Faith were, for which Theodoret Bishop of Cyre, a City near upon
Persia appealed in the same time, to pope (...) and was judged and restored by
Theod. ep (...) Leo n. inter epist Leon post. 60. and in epist. Grae. manuscr.
him, all the General Counsel of Chalcedon, holden a while after the Council
of Carthage, approving and confirming it. For I will not allege the Epistle
of S. AUGUSTINE to Celestine, which is in the supply of S. AVGVSTINS Epistles
imprinted by Plantine where the same S. AUGUSTINE pursues in the behalf of
Celestine, the judgment of the appeal, made by Anthony Bishop of (...), to
Pope Boniface; and represents to Theodor.
Council. Chalced. (...). Aug. ep. 261.
him to justify the sentence of the bishops of Africa who had left him his
title, and deprived him of this Bishops Sea: That there had been many like
(...) in Africa, eue^ the Sea (...) iudgeing it, or confirming the judgment of
others; as particularly of (...), Uictor, and Laurence Bishop of the Cesarian
(...); because it seems, that this Epistle was written before that of the
Council of Africa to Celestine. It suffices that neither the possession of
the appeals from Africa to Rome, were interrupted by this question; neither
Aug. con. duas epist. Pelag. ad (...) (...).
did the Bishops of Africa cease to remain in the same Communion and reverence
of the Sea Apostolic, as they were before, as the words of S, AUGUSTINE to
Pope Boniface written in the current of the difference Epist. (...) lest ad
(...) quae (...) tom 7. bea. August. and citatur a Petro Diaco. lib. de incarn,
and great.
testifies Thou disdainest not, thou which presumest not (...), though thou
presidest highly to be a friend to the (...). And these of Pope Celestine
after the death of S. AUGUSTINE, We have always had Augustine of holy (...)
in our communion, which Prosper cites to justify to the Bishops of the Gauls
S. Augustins doctrine against the Pelagia^s And these of Capreolus Archbishop
of Carthage, and immediate successor to Aurelius, under whom the sixth Council
of Carthage, was holden, writing to the fathers of the Council of Ephesus;
(...) pray you to resist (...), with such constancy, Prosp. con. Collator.
Actor.
at the authority of the sea Apostolic and the seuerltie of the Prelates
assembled in (...), seem not to permit that the doctrine of those that the
Church has long since Conc. Ep. tom. 2. Fulgent de inca (...). and gratia c.
11.
(...) (...); come to be borne again. And these of Eugenius one of the other
successors to the same Aurelius to the Lieutenant of Hunnericus Lord of Africa;
The Roman Church is the head of all the Churches. And these of Fulgentius, and
of the Bishops of Africas the Roman Church which is the head of the world.

Of the Council of Sardica; CHAPT. XI.
I Remember that I promised in the former chapter, to handle in this, the truth
and authority of the Canons of the Council of Sardica; the time summons me
now to perform my promise, and with so much the more need, because the Popes
adversaries have a while ago, caused a Greek Code of Canons to be imprinted,
which they have entitled, A Code of the (...) of the Universal Church: from
whence Just. apud Hadria Beys. (...)
they have ecclipsed and cut off the Canons of the Council of Sardica,
against the credit of all the Greek Canonists Photius, Zonara, Balsamon,
Harmonopolus; and against the Greek impressions, even of Basle Wittenbourg,
and other Protestant Cities; and in sum, against the truth of all the Greek
codes, as well printed as manuscript, of all the western and Eastern
libraries. Then to compass this design with some method, I will advertise the
readers, that there past two things in the Council of Nicea which gave an
occasion soon after, for the holding of the Council of Sardica: the one was
the decree of the consubstantialitie of the Father and the Some; and the other
the decree of Appeals. The first was inserted into the Creed of the faith
published by the Fathers of the Council of Nicea, the second into the original
acts of the Council of Nicea, with which it has been lost; only there
remains to us, some light track of it in an Epistle of Pope Julius reported by
S. ATHANASIVS, and by the Council of Alexandria, where Pope Julius writes to
the Arrians; It has not been without the providence of God that the Bishops
assembled in Iul. apud (...). (...). 2.
the great Council of Nicea have permitted that the acts of a former Synod,
should be examined in an other Synod. For that this decree was not the same
which Con. Nic. c. (...)
is contained in the Canons of the Council of Nicea where it is ordained, that
when a Bishop has excommunicated any Churchman or Layman of his diocese, the
cause of the excommunicated person may be reuiewed in the Synod of his
Province: it appears both by this, that he speaks of the reuiew of the
judgments given in the first instance by the Synods, and inferrs from thence;
that S. ATHANASIVS having been judged in the first instance in the Counsels of
Tire and Antioch, might again have been judged at Rome in a new Council. And
because that he adds; That if this custom being of itself ancient, and having
been renewed and set Iul. (...).
down in writing in the great Synod, you will not permit that it have place
amongst you, such a refusal is indecent, a thing that shows, that this decre
whereof he speaks was resisted by the (...), which cannot be said of the
reuiewe of the sentences of the diocesan Bishops by the Council of the
Province. And therefore it must be supposed, that this decree had been
inserted, not into the catalogue of the Canons of the Council of Nicea, which
contained but the twenty articles which we have; but into the very acts of
the Counsel of Nicea which have been lost. And of this kind of decrees
inserted not into the list of the Can ons of the Counsels, but into the acts
of the Counsels, there are many examples, and in the Council. Anthioch. c. 1.
matter of the Counsel of Nicea it self. For the Epistle of the same Counsel
of Nicea and the Council of Antioch teach us, that the Council of Nicea Am.
ep. 82.
made a decree of the Pasch, and S. AMBRO. teaches us that the Counsel of
Nicea made a decree of the exclusion of these that were in (...) from
Priesthood: and the Caluinists themselves are agreed, that the Council of
Nicea made a decree of the Eucharist; All which decrees are not enrolled into
the Canons of the Counsels of Nicea, but have been necessaryly inserted into
the Acts. Now what the conditions of these following Synods ought to be, which
judged by Appeal of the judgments of former Synods, there is nothing to be
found in Pope Julius his Epistles, only it is left to us to conjecture, that
the subsequent Synods should be greater then the former Synods. But wherein
this Maioritie consisted; that is to say, whether it should be a simple
maioritie of number, as the Arrians had monopolized it in the Council of
Antioch; or whether it should be a maioritie as it seems the third Council of
Carthage requires, when it says, That when there has Co^c. Carth c. 10.
been an Appeal from what Ecclesiastical Judge soever, to other
Ecclesiastical Judges, where there is greater authority, the disannulling of
the former Sentence, hurts not the first judges, there is nothing found in Pope
Julius his Epistle: only we learn from the practice of antiquity, that the
maioritie of Counsels did not always depend of the number of Bishops, but was
often measured by the quality of him, that was the head thereof, although the
number of Bishops were fewer as the Council of the Primat of the Nation, was
reputed greater, then that of the Metropolitan of the Province; and that of the
Patriarch greater, then that of the Primat; and that of the Pope yet greater,
then that of the Patriarch, although there were four Bishops. For in the
Council of Rome, which judged saint ATHANASIVS Ath. de fug. sua Apol (...) ad
Solit.
his cause, after the Council of Antioch, there were but fifty Bisshops,
whereas in that of Antioch, there were above ninety. And in this sense
Balsamon a Schismatic Greek Author, who ranks the Sozom. hist. Eccl. l. 3.
c 5.
Patriarch of Constantinople above the Pope pretends that the title of
Uniuersall Bishop, which in the Council of Calcedon, had been given Council.
Chalced.
to the Pope, should be also communicated to the Bishop of Constantinople; Act.
3. in libell. Cleric. Alex.
for as much as Constantinople, bore the title of second Rome; and will have
it, that the Synod of the Bishop of Constantinople, should Co^c. Constable c. 3 and
Co^c. Chalced.
be esteemed greater, then that of all the other Patriarchs of the Empire of
the East. Although (says he) that the Synod of Constantinople, Act. 15. and
28.
were not universal, for as much as other Patriarchs assisted not there;
nevertheless, it seems to me greater then all the other Synods; and the
Patriarch Balsam in Co^c. Constable 1. c. 6.
thereof is called universal Patriarch. Now it fell out a while after the
holding of the Council of Nicea, that the Arrians made two breaches Theod.
hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 21. and Sozom. l. 3. c. (...).
in these two decrees: The one by abollishing the word, Consustantiall, which
they ecclipsed from all their creedes; And the other, by the resistance that
they gave to the restitution that the Pope made of Athanasius Patriark of
Alexandria; of Paul Bishop of Constantinople: Sozam. hist Eccl. l. 3. c. 9.
of Marcellus Primat of Ancyra in Galatia; Asclepas Bishop of Gaza in
Palestina; and of Lucius Bishop of Adrianopolis in Thrace, deposed a Id. ib. c.
7.
little before by the Counsels of Tire, Antioch, and Constantinople, for
diverse pretended crimes: Some Secular, as Athanasius for the crimes of Treason,
Adultery, and homicide; and other Ecclesiastical. The history of the first
contrauention appears by all the testimonies of Antiquity: And the history of
the second by the report of Sozomene; who Sozom. hist Eccl. l. 3. c. 7.
after he had said; Julius Bishop of Rome having heard the accusations
attempted against Athanasius of Alexandria; Paul of Constantinop le; Marce llus
of Ancyra in Galatia; Asclepas Bishop of Gaza in Palestina; Lucius Bishop of
Adrianopolis in Thrace; and having found them all consenting to the doctrine of
the Council of Nicea, received them to his Communion, and because to him for
the dignity of his Sea, the care of all things apperteyned; he restored them
each one to his Church, and writ to the Bishops of the East, chiding them for
not having observed the right forms in the judgment of these men, and that
they had troubled the Churches with not having kept within the compass of the
decrees of the Council of Nicea, and commanded them to send a small number
from amongst them all, to appear at a day prefixed, and to justify their
Sentence; Adds, These things Julius writ, and Athanasius and Paul, received
each one his Idem. Ibid
Church, and sent the letters of Julius, to those of the East; who finding
themselves sharply touched therewith, assembled themselves at Antioch, and
writ back to Pope Julius an Epistle, adorned with flowers of eloquence, and
composed in an orators style full of many figures, and not free from grievous
threatenings, for although they avouched by their letters, that the Roman Church
obtained the prize of honor from them all, as having been from the beginning
the School of the Apostles, and the Metropolitan of Religion; although the
Doctors of the Christian world, were come thither from the East; Nevertheless,
they did not think, they ought to be put behind; under color that they were
inferior in Greatness and multitude of Churches; since contrariwise they were
much Superior in virtue and election of opinion; that is to say in Arianisme;
And as for Julius they reproached it to him for a crime, that he had admitted
into his communion, Athanasius and his consortes, and were offended at it,
pretending that by that Act, their Council had been iniuryed, and their
Sentence abrogated; a thing that they calumniated as unjust, and repugnant to
the ecclesiastical Rule. For that the authors of that Epistle that Sozomene
argues of ironia, because they fained by their exordium, to confess the
primacie of the Roman Church, which they denied by their conclusion of slander
because they pretended, that the abrogation that the Pope had made of their
Council, was a thing outrageous, and contrary to the law of the Church, and
of impudence, for as much as they set upon him, to whom for the dignity of his
Sea, the care of all things belonged, Athan. apol. 2. Statim. post. epist. Iul.
and alibi.
were Arrians, it appears both by the testimony of S. ATHANASIVS who called
them Eusebians, that is to say, of Eusebius his Sect, the chief firebrand of
the Arrians heresy: And by the reproache that Julius made to the^, that they
had altered the decision of the Council of Nicea; Iul, apud Athan. apol 2.
and by the answer that themselves made to that reproach; to wit, that as for
the things they had done against the decisio^ of those that had been assembled
at Nicea, they Answered nothing; although they signified that they had many
causes to excuse their Actions, but that it was superfluous then to enter into
defense of it, since they were suspected to have violated justice in all
things, by the glory that they attributed to them selves, to be more excellent
in belief then the Roman Church: And Sozo 4. hist Ecccl. l. 3. c.
finallly, by the offer that they made to Julius, to enter again into peace
and communion with him, if he would admit the deposition of S. ATHANASIVS, and
of his co^sortes. And that Sozomene calls them, those Ibidem.
of the East, it is in part, because the principal Seat of the Arrians
heresy was the East; and in part, because they were the Bishops of the
Patriarkship of Antioch, and other Arrians their adherents, who after the
Council of Antioch, holden in the dedication, reassembled themselves at
Antioch, to answer Pope Julius; which Patriarkship of Antioch, was called the
Patriarkship of the East, because amongst the Asian provinces, which
acknowledged the Roman Empire, the division of Antioch held the Cornel. Tacit.
Ammian Marl. 22.
place of the East; from whence it is, that Cornelius Tacitus, and Amianus
Marcellinus, say that Antioch was the head of the East; and that the Council
of Constantinople ordaines, That the Bishops of the East; that is to say, of
the Patriarkshipp Council. (...) Constable. c. 2.
of Antioch, should only rule the East. And that John Patriarch of Antioch
says, in the Schismatic Council of Ephesus speaking of the Bishops of his
Patriarkship: we that are called of the East. And it is not to be said, that
Julius in the Answer that he sent to Danius (it must be read Dianus) and to
Phlacillus (it must be read Placitus) and to Narcissus, and to (...), and to
Maus, and to others which had written to him from the second mock-councell of
Antioch, styles them his Brethren; For he calls them his Brothers because of
the communion of the Episcopal character; Collat. Carth. Act. 3. and breucoll.
p. 3.
As S. AUGUSTINE calls the Donatists his Brethren, because of the Communion of
the charactar of Baptism, but not, but that all those Bishops were Arrians,
and the most impious of all the Arrians, for this Dianius was a Bishop of
Cesaria in Capadocia an Arrian; and this Placitus was a Bishop of the Arrians
of Antioch, and this Narcissus was an Arrian Bishop of Veroniade in Cilisia;
and this Eusebius was Bishop of Nicomedia, Ensigne-bearer of the Arrian
faction, who procured as S. ATHANASIVS Athan app. 2.
notes the second Council of Antioch, and the Council of Sardica and likewise
the others. But let us again pursue the course of our history of Arrianisme;
upon the complaint propounded by the Catholics against the Arrians, of the
wounds made in these two decrees of the Council of Nicea, the two Emperors,
the one Catholic, and the other (...), agreed upon the holding of a General
Council and called from the two Empires to Sardica, a City situate in the
confines of both the Empires, to decide it; Paul and Athanasius (says
Socrates) demanded to have Socrat. hi. Eccl. l. 2. c. 20.
an other Council called, to the end, that as well their cause as that of
faith, might be (...) in a general Council showing that their depositions had
been made with a purpose to destroy the Faith. Then upon their request, a
general Council was published at Sardica; Now of this Council the issue in
regard of Faith was; that the fathers assembled at Sardica, confirmed the
Creed of the Council of Nicea, as Harmenopolus a Greek author and a
schisrnatike Harmeno. in epi. tom. can.
reports after thousand others in these words; By the advice of the Emperors
and of the Bishop of Rome, the Synod of Sardica was assembled, composed of
three hundred forty one Fathers; which confirmed the Council of Nicea, and
published the Canons. For that which S. ATHANASIVS says, that, the Council of
Sardica, would not permit that any thing of faith should be reduced into
writing, ought to be understood, that it would not permit, that there should
be any new Creed made, but ordained that they should hold themselves to that
of Nicea which they amplified, not by way of innovation, but by way of
exposition. And as for the matter of Appeals; they approved the restitution
that the Pope had made of Paul, of Athanasius, and of the other Bishops with
had been deposed in the Counsels of Tire and Antioch, and received them into
their Communion under this title, that the Pope having examined their cause had
not condemned them. They answered (says Sozomene) that they would not (...)
Sozo. hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 9.
the Commnnion of Athanasius and of Paul for as much principally, as Julius
Bishop of Rome having examined, their cause, had not condemned them: and to
prevent the Churches trouble thereafter in like accidents, reduced into writing
three Canons upon the matter of appeals; where of the first was propounded by
Osius, President of the Council, and concluded by all the Council in these
terms. Council. Sar. c. 3.
If any Bishop in any cause in likelihood ought to be condemned and that he
presume to have, not an evil but a good cause to the end the judgment may be
renewed, if it please your charity that we should honor the memory of the
Apostle Peter, let it be written to Julius Bishop of Rome by the same Bishops
that have given the judgment, to the end that if it be needful, it may be
renewed by the next Bishops; and let the Bishop of Rome give the Judges: but
if the affair be such, as there is no need of a new judgment, let not the
things once judged be disabled, but remain firm. The second was propounded by
Gaudentius and authorized by all the Council, in these words: If it seem to
you necessary to add to this sentence full Council. Sar. c. 4.
of sincere charity that you have propounded; That if any Bishop be deposed
by the next Bishops, and say that his affair ought to be judged a new, let
no other be installed in his sea, till the Bishop of Rome have pronounced upon
it, with examinatio^s of the cause. Which Cano^ was made as Balsamon notes, to
disanull the Balsom. in Council. Sardic. c. 4.
Cano^ that the Arria^s had published in the Council of Antioch against S.
ATHAN. which ordained that it should not be lawful for a Bishop after he had
been deposed by all the votes of a Synod to exercise any Episcopal function,
nor to hope for restitutio^; and to condemn the intrusio^ the Arians had made
of Gregory in steed of S. ATHAN. without attending the reuiew of the
process. And the third was again propounded by Osius, and confirmed by all
the council, in these words: It has pleased, that Council. Sardic. c. 5. or. 7.
if a Bishop have been accused, and that he have recourse by way of Appeal,
to the Blessed Bishop of the Roman Church, and that he will hear him, and doe^
esteem it just, that the examination of the affair should be renewed, let him
vouchsafe to write to the Bishops neighboring that province, that they should
carefully and with diligence examine all things, and judge the affair
according to the creditt of the truth: and if any one demand that his cause
should be heard again, and seem to move the Bishop of Rome by his prayer,
that he should send Priests from his own side it shall be in the power of the
Bishops, of Rome, to do what he shall think fit and if he conceive that he
should send to judge with the Bishops, persons having the authority of him
that sends them, let it be so done; and if he think it will suffice, that
those that are already upon the place should examine the affair and the
judgment of the Bishop; let him do what shall seem best in his most wise
judgment. Now these words do so dazzle the eyes of the Popes adversaries as they
cannot supporte their light, and therefore they attempt to resist and weaken
them with seven objections.

The first, that the Council of Sardica propounds the ouerture of Appeals to
the Pope, not as a thing before practiced; but as put to deliberation, and
instituted at that present time, and in words of the future The first objection
against the Canon of appeals to the Pope.
tense; from whence they infer, that the Right of Episcopal appeals, was not
from all Antiquity yielded to the Pope, but only since the Council of
Sardica; and add that the Council specifying the name of Pope Julius and say
ing, let it be written to Julius Bishop of Rome: shows that this institu^tion
began only in the Papacy of Julius, and had no place in his predecessors
times. To this objection then we say, that it is ordinary to ancient
Counsels when they renew unwritten customs, yea even the very written laws
of the Church, to propound them as if they did new institute them, and to take
the notes of the assistants to conclude them, and to declare them, by words of
the future tense: As in the same Council. Sardic. c. (...).
Council of Sardica the prohibition to pass from one City to an other
renewed because of Eusebius of Nicomedia, head of the Arrian faction, who was
past from the Bishoprik of Nicomedia to that of Constantinople: and the
prohibition to a Bishop to receaiue a Clerk from an other Bishop Ibid. c. 16.
excommunicated by him, and others the like, were propounded in future words,
and with receiving the votes of the assistants, although the Conc. Nic. c. 6.
custom were time out of mind in the Church, and that they had been even set
down in writing in the Council of Nicea. And Pope Julius after he had cited
the Canon of the Council of Nicea for the reuiew of the judgments of Synods,
adds: that this Canon had been formerly practiced by custom in the Church, and
after reduced into writing at the Council of Nicea. And the Council of
Constantinople writing to Pope Damasus: Does it not say of the ordination of
Bishops by the metropolitans, It is as you know, both Conc. Constable. 1. ep ad
Damas. and alios Episc.
(...) grounded upon ancient custom, and decision of the Council of Nicea;
For as for the name of Pope Julius, which is specified in the first of the
three canons of the Council of Sardica, besides that it is not found in the
ancient latin Editions, which were produced in the Council of Africa in saint
AUGUSTINES time, where the text says simply as in the other following canons:
The Bishop of Rome, and not Julius Bishop of Rome: By means whereof there is a
Ground for suspicion, that it is a quotation of the exemplifiers, which is
slipped out of the margent into the Text; there can be nothing inferred from it
but this, that the Fathers of the Council of Sardica inserted the name of
Julius there, to show that the Council by this canon, ratified not only in
general Appeals to the Pope, but justified and ratified in particular, the
restitution that Pope Julius had made of saint ATHANASIVS; Paul of
Constantinople; Marcellus of (...) Asclepas of Gaza, and other Bishops, that
the Arrians had deposed in their false Counsels, agreeably to the Answer that
they had made to the Arrians, that they could not reject the comunion of
Athanasius and the other Bishops, deposed by the Counsels of Tire, Antioch,
and Constantinople; because Julius Bishop of Rome having examined their cause,
Soz. lib. 3.
had not condemned them. And indeed if the Council of Sardica had given
beginning to the Right of Appeals, how could Pope Julius many years before
have written to the Arrians; Are you ignorant that it is the custom Iul. apud
Athan. Apol. 2.
that we be first written to, that from hence may proceed the just decision
of things; and therefore if there were any suspicion conceived against the
Bishop there, that is to say, against the Bishop of Alexandria, you should
have written to the church here; that is to say, to the church of Rome? and
how could Socrates Soc. hist. Eccl. l. 2. C. 11.
and Sozomene have said, that Pope Julius, many years before the Counsel of
Sardica, restored (...) Patriarch of Alexandria; Paul Bishop of
Constantinople; Sozom. hist. Eccl. l. 3. C. 7.
Marcellus Primat of Galatia, and other Bishops, deposed by the Counsels of
the East, because to him for the diginty of his Sea the care of all things
belonged.

The second objection is, that the Council of Sardica, grounds the canon The
second objection against the Canon of Appeals.
of appeals to the Pope not upon divine right, but upon the desire of honoring
of saint Peter's memory; from whence they infer that the attributio^ of the
Episcopal appeals to the Pope, is not by divine Right: but who sees not, that
eue^ this is to ground it upon divine Right; for tosaie, that to honor the
memory of S. PETER, it was to purpose to yield Episcopal Appeals to the Pope,
what is it but to say, that the Pope was S. PETER'S successor, and that in this
quality, Appeals ought to be yielded to him, as to him that had the
succession of head of the church, and by this succession was himfelse made head
thereof? And in truth what the Fathers of the council of Sardica express in
their Canon by these words; Epist. Council. Sardic ad Iul. Pap. insert. in fragm.
That we may houor the memory of Peter, let it be written to Julius the
Bishop of Rome; do they not express in their Epistle to the same Julius, by
these? It is very good and fit that from all the provinces, the Bishops have
reference to their head, that is to say to the sea of the Apostle Peter? And
does it not from thence appear, that to honor in the persons of the Bishops of
Rome, the Hilar. and citat. a Nicol. x. in Epist. ad Episcop. Galliar.
memory of Peter, and to ackdowledge the sea of Peter in the persons of the
Bishops of Rome, for head of the Church, is according to the Council of
Sardica, one and the same thing, and by consequent that the right of Appeals
which was implicitly contained in the title of, Head of the Church, had
belonged to the Pope by divine right from all antiquity, although the custom
had been first reduced into an express law but in the Council of Sardica?
For who knows not that all the prerogatives, that are implicitly contained in
any Title, belong to him to whom the Title is given, from the very time it is
given him, though the laws (...) The third objection against the Canon.
are made for the explicit declaration of any of those prerogatives (...)
later? The third objection is, that saint HILARIE and saint EPIPHANIVS, S.
Hilar.
and the second Council of Constautinople, call the Council of l cont.
Sardica the Council of those of the west; From whence Zonara, Hormenopolus,
Constable.
and some other later Greeks and Schismatics, and the Protestants Aug.
Epiphan. haeres. 71. cont.
who join with them conclude, that the Council of (...) was not General. To
this objection then we answer two things; the one, that the word of the west,
did then extend much farther, then it Photinian.
does now, for by the word of the West; the fathers intended not only, all
Council.
Constant. 1 c5.
the Provinces of Africa, of Italy, of Spain, of the Gauls, of England, of
Germany, of Hungaria, of Dalmatia; but also all the Provinces of Greece;
Zonar. in Conc.
as Achaia, Peloponesus, Macedonia, the Isle of Creete; and left nothing for
Constable. 1. c. 5.
the East; but Thrace, Egypt, and Asia. And the other; that their calling the
Council of Sardica, the Council of the west, is not to distinguish it from
the General Counsels, as some late Greeks have supposed, but to distinguish
it from the false Council of Sardica, which was called the Council of those
of the East. For after the whole Council, composed of three hundred Cotholicke
Bishops, and of seauentie six Arrian Bishops, was arrived at Sardica, the
seaue^tie six Arrians separated themselves, Socrat. his. Eccl. l. 2. c. 20 Et
Soz. l. 3. c. 10.
from the Body of the Council, and retired them selves to Philopopolis, a
city near Sardica, where they kept an Anti-councell, which was called the
Council of those of the East; Not that all the Bishops of the East assisted
there, but for two other causes: the one, for as much as the principal Bishops
of this mock-councell, were Steven Patriarch of Antioch, and the other Bishops
of his Patriarkship, which was called the Patriarkship of the East. And the
other, because of the two cities, whereinto this Council was divided, situate
on the two sides of the mountain of Thuscis which was the bound of the two
Empires of the East, and of the west; the city of Sardica wherein the
catholics remained was situat in the western side of the mountain; and the
city of Philopopolis into which the Arians retired themselves, was situate on
the Eastern side. For so far of were all the Bishops of the East from
assisting at this Anti-synod, as the Arrians themselves confessed that held it,
that there were but eighty of them there, and auowed, that the Bishops Decret.
of the Empire of the East, which were present at the true Council of Synod.
Sardica, were an immense number. There came (say they) to Sardica, an
Oriental. apnd Sardic. in fra. Hilar. p. 10.
immense number of wicked and lost Bishops, flowing from Constantinople, and
from Alexandria, whom Osius and Protogenes held assembled with them in their
Conuenticle. And yet even to take the East particularly for the Patriarkship of
Antioch, many of the Bishops of the East, though taken in this sense, assisted
not at the false Council of Sardica. Contrariwise all the Catholic Bishops,
as well of the Patriarkship of Antioch, as of the neighboring Provinces, as
Diodorus Bishop of Asia minors Asterius Bishop of (...) in Arabia; Maximus
Bishop of Jerusalem; (...), Bishop of Lydda; Arius Bishop of Petra in Judea;
Theodosius, Germanus Siluanus, Paul, Claudius, Patrick, Elpidus, Germanus,
(...), Zenobius, Paul, and Peter Bishop of Palestina, assisted and subscribed
with the body of the catholic Bishops at the true Council of Sardica; By
means whereof this distraction, consisting in so small a number of Bishops,
and being made by the Arrians only, could not hinder the true Council of
Sardica, which represented all that were catholic Bishops in the world, from
preserving the title of General which had been imposed upon it at the calling
it; no more then the distraction of those of the East; that is to say, the
Bishops of the Patriarkship of Antioch, which maintained Nestorius, and held an
Antisynod in his favor at Ephesus, hindered the true Council of Ephesus from
being perfectly and absolutely general; and from taking this quality even
then, when those of the East; that is to say, the Bishops of the patriar kship
of Antioch, held their mockcouncell a part. And therefore saint ATHANASIVS, not
only calls it, the Great Council of Sardica; and Socrates and Justinian, a
General Council; but also saint ATHANASIVS, and after him Sulpitius (...),
Theodoret and Vigilius ancient Bishop of Trent, affirm that it was composed
from all the christian Provinces of the Earth. The holy Council of Sardica
(says saint ATHANASIUS) assembled from more then thirty five Provinces,
knowing the malice of the Arrians, received us in our justifiable acts, And
elsewhere, explicating Athan ad Solit vit. ageut.
the list of the same Provinces: In the Great Council of sardica, called by
the commandment of the Religious Emperors, Constantius and Constans; There
subscribed for us more then three hundred Bishops of the Provinces of Egypt, of
Libia Id. de ap
of Pentapolis, of Palestina of Isauria, of Ciprus, of Phamphilia, of Licia, of
Galatia, of Dacia, of Misia, of Thracia, of Dardaniae, of Micedonia, of the
(...), of Thessalia, of Achaya, of Creete, of Dalmatia of Siccia, of Pannonia,
of Horica, of Italy, so they called the Prouostship of Milan, of Picena of
Tuscany, of Campania, of Calabria, Apulia, of Brussa, of Sicilia, of all Africa
entirely, of Sardinia, of Spain, of France, and of the Brittans. And
Theodoret registring the inscription of the same Council: The holy Synod
assembled by the Grace of God at Sardica, from Rome, from Spain, from France,
from Italy, from The odor. hist. Eccl. l. 2. fug. c. 8.
Campania, from Calabria, from Africa, from Sardinia, from Pannonia, from
Misia, from the first Dacia, from Dardania, from the second Dacia, from
Macedonia, from Thessalia, from Achaya, from the Epiruses, from Thracia, from
Rhodope, from Asia, from Caria, from Bithinia, from Helespont, from the first
Phrigia, from Pisidia, from Capadocia, from Pontus, from the second Phrigia,
from Cilicia, from Phamphilia, from Lydia, from the Cyclades Jlands, from
Egypt, from Thebaidis, from Lybia, from Galatia, from Palestina, and from
Arabia. And elsewhere exagerating the obstinacy of Acacius. Archbishop of
(...) in Palestina, one of the heads of the Arrian, faction. The Council
assembled at Sardica, deposed this Acacius (said he) but he obeyed not the
deposition, Id. l. 2. c. 27.
despising so great a number of Bishops. And Sulpitius Seuerus describing the
convocation of the Council of Sardica, first proiected, as he pretends by
Constantine, and after executed by his children; He commanded (said Sulp.
Set. hist. Sacr. l. 2.
he) that from all the world, the Bishops should assemble themselves at
Sardica. And Socrates reporting the history of the Council of Sardica; Paul
and Athanasius demanded, that their Cause and that of faith might be examined
in a general Council. By the ordinance then of the two Emperors, there was a
Socrat. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 20.
General Council called at Sardica. And the Emperor Justinian in the Edict of
faith indicted as Hincmarus notes, by the second Council of Constantinople,
Hincm. opuse. 55. c. 26.
that we call the fifth General Council; They were (said he, speaking of
the Adversaries to the Council of Nicea) anathematized; some whiles they
lived, and some after their death, by Damasus of holy memory, Pope of Apud
Leunclau. l. 8.
old Rome, and by the General Council of Sardica. And Uigilius the old
Bishop of Trent: The holy Bishops (said he) assembled at Sardica; from all
the Vigil. co^tr. Eutych. l. 5.
provinces, that is; from Rome, from Spain, from France, from Italy, from
Campania, from Calabria, from Africa from Sardinia, from Panonia, from Missiae,
from Dacia, from Dardania, from the other Dacia, from Macedonia from Thessalia,
from Achaya, from Epirus, from Thrace, from Rhodope, from Asia, from Caria,
from Bithinia, from Helespont, from Phrigia, from Pisidia, from Capadocia, from
Pontus, from Cilicia, from the other Phrigia, from Pamphilia from Lidia, from
the Islands of the Cyclades, from Egypt, from Thebaides, from Lybia, from
Galatia, from Palestina, and from Arabia, expounded this faith. To which I will
add above my bargain for an over measure, that the title that saint HILLARIE
and saint EPIPHANIVS give to the Council of Sardica, Hilar. l. cont. Con. Aug.
of the Council of those of the West, is so far from abating any thing of
the quality and authority of a general Council, as contrariwise Epiphan.
(...). 71. contra Photinian. Faber praefat. (...). Hilar.
Monsieur le Feure a great Reader and Examiner of saint HILLARIES writings,
causing a new fragment of the works of the same saint HILLARY to be printed,
does iugeniouslie acknowledge the Council of Sardica for a general Council
in the preface of his Edition by these words; Athanasius approved his
innocence in the Synods of Alexandria, and of Rome, and in the General
council of Sardica.

The fourth Objection is, that in the Code of the Canons of the Greek The
fourth objection, against the Canon of Appeals.
church, which was produced in the Council of Chalcedon in the cause of
Bassianus and Steven, the Canons of the Council of Sardica were not contained:
to this objection we bring three answers; the first, that there were two
volumes of Canons produced in the Council of Chalcedon; the one where the
Counsels were set down in heads, and with the inscriptions of their titles
and the particular number of their Canons, as appears by the fourth and
fifteenth act of the same Council of Chalcedon, where the fourth and sixth
Canons of the Council of Nicea were read with the titles of the fourth and
sixth Canons of the most holy three hundred and eighteen Fathers assembled at
Nicea. And the third Canon of the Council of Constantinople, with the title of
Synodicall of the second synod held by the hundred and fifty Fathers at
Constantinople under Nectarius. And the other where the canons were annexed one
after an other under a continued Cipher in the form of a chain and of a
rapsody and without inscription of the titles of the Counsels whence they were
taken, and without distinction of the particular number of the Canons of every
Council, as appears in the fourth and eleventh act, where the third, forth,
sixteenth, and seventeenth Canons of the Council of Antioch were read under a
simple quotation of Canon 84. 85. and 94. and 95. without any mention neither
of the title or of the particular ciphers of the Council from whence they were
taken. Now it is not of the volumes in heads where the Canons of the Counsels
were inserted with inscription and distinction of the titles of their
Cou^cells, but of this rapsodie where the Canons were annexed one at the end of
an other without inscription and distinction of the titles of their Counsels,
that the adversaries to the Sea Apostolic speak: and therefore it is but the
only copy of this rapsodie that raises all this question. The second answer
is, that there is noe proof that even in the copy of this rapsodie, the
Canons of the Council of Sardica are not comprehended with the Canons of the
other Counsels. For that the four Canons which are cited of this copy, which
are the fourth, the fifth sixteenth, and seaue^teenth Canons of the Counsel of
Antioch, are cited under the title of rule, eighty fourth, eighty fifth,
nintie fourth, nintie sixth is good to show, that before those Canons, there
were but the twenty Canons in the same volume of the Council of Nicea, the
twenty of the council of Ansyra: the fifteen of the council of Neocesarea,
the twenty Hincmar. (...) opusc. 55. c. 21.
one of the council of Gangres, and the siftie nine of the council of
Laodicea. And therefore Hincmarus ancient Archbishop of Rheims argues
pertinentlie out of this copy, that the council of Nicea had made but twenty
Canons, but not to conclude that the Canons of the council of Sardica, which
had been made after those of the council of Antioch were not in the same
volume. And the supply of proof which they pretend to draw from Dionisius
Exiguus, is nothing as shall appear hereafter; contrariwise, there are many
proofs that the Council of Chalcedon had both acknowledged and observed the
canons of the Council of Sardica. For not only the first Council of
Constantinople, Co^. Constable. 1. c. 5.
which was alleged in the Council of Chalcedon, confirms the tome of those
of the West, that is to say, (if we believe zonara Con Chal. Act. 1.
and Balsamon,) the Council of Sardica, and not only the Epistle Zonar. in
Conc. Co^. 1. c. 5.
of Ualentinian the third addressed to the Emperor Theodosius the second for
the holding of the Council of Chalcedon, and inserted with the Balsam.
Greek Acts of the same Council of Chalcedon says; That Flauianus Bishop
ibidem.
of Constantinople, had appealed to the Pope, following the custom of
Counsels,, which had principally reference to the Council of Valent. 3.
(...) ad The. in ep (...). Con. Chal. Con. Chal. ep 1.
Sardica, and not only the Senate of Constantinople, deputed to cause policy
to be observed in the Council of Chalcedon, received Theodoret Bishop of Cyre,
who had appealed to Pope Leo, and made him enter and have a seat in the
assembly of the Council; because Pope Leo had restored his Bishopric to
him; a thing which was grounded Con. Sard. c 6.
upon the canons of the Council of Sardica: but also Zonara explaining the
canon of the Council of Sardica, which calls Metropolitans, Archbishops, Zona.
in in Council.
And conferring it with the sixth Council of Carthage which reiects the use of
this word; says that the Council of Chalcedon has Cart c. 42.
retained it; yielding rather to the authority of the Council of (...),
Balsam in Con. Sar. (...). 5.
then to that of the Council of Carthage. And Balsamon, Nilus, and other
Greek Schismatiks, will have it, that the Council of Chalcedon yielded the
appeals of the Eastern provinces, to the Patriark Nil. de primat. (...) l. 2.
of Constantinople, pretending that it was grounded upon the canons of the
Council of Sardica, which gave the appeals to the Pope; and they have
extended this right to the Patriark of Constantinople; for as much as
Constantinople, was a second Rome. For as for the supply of proofs, that the
Popes adversaries pretend to collect from Dionisius Exiguus, it shall be
satisfied hereafter. The third Answer is, that the very copy of this
Rapsodie which was produced in the Council of Chalcedon, was a falsified code,
as appears by the canons thereof, that were produced in the same Council; for
the four canons which were read in the Council of Chalcedon under the title
Sozom. (...). Eccle. l. (...). c. 5.
of, Rule eighty fourth, eighty fifht nintie fourht and nintie sixth, were
four canons of the Council of Antioch, celebrated under Constantius. Athan.
de Synod. Ar. etc.
Now this Council was an heretical Council holden by the Arrians, and at the
instance of Constantius an Arrian, against saint ATHANASIVS. And of these four
canons, that which was quoted under the cipher of the canon eighty fifth that
is to say; under the cipher of the canon correspondent to the fowrth canon of
the Council of Antioch, had been partycularly framed against saint ATHANASIVS.
This appears both by the history of Socrates, which reports, that the
fifteenth canon of this council of Antioch having been produced against S.
CHRYSOSTOM when the Emperor Arcadius Socrat. hi. Ecc. l. 6. c. 18.
would have caused him to be deposed; S. CHRYSOSTOM answered, that this canon
was come out of the shopps of the Arrians, and had been forged by them against
S. ATHANASIVS. John (says Socrates) answered, Sozo. (...). Eccle. l. (...). c.
20.
that this Canon was not of the Church, but of the Arrians: For those that
assembled themselves at Antioch, for the destruction of the faith of
consubstantialitie, published this canon out of hate to saint ATHANASIVS; And by
that of Sozomene, who writes; And for that of the Ecclesiastical Canon, John
refusing it, they received not his apology, but deposed him although he
insisted (for it must be read (...) and not (...)) that it was a Canon of
heretics. And by the Epistle of Bope Innocent the first, to the
Constantinopolitans, reported in the same Sozomene, were Pope Innocent says,
speaking of the canons of the Cou^ncell of Antioch, that were produced against
saint CHRYSOSTOM; These canons ought not to be Soz. hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 26.
received by catholic Bishops for we must not patch up the invention of
heretics, with the canons of catholics. And by the testimony of Paladius a
Greek author, and time mate with saint CHRYSOSTOM, who says Pallad. in vit.
Christ.
in the life of saint CHRYSOSTOM, and upon the subject of the same canons;
Theophilus had sent Canons composed by forty of the Accomplices of Arrius. So
spoke he, because that of nintie Bishops which assisted at the Council of
Antioch, there were but forty or according to the Epistle of Julius thirty
six, which actually comdemned saint ATHANASIVS: but these, forty did so
oppress the rest, by the force and tyranny of Constantius an Arrian Emperor,
who was there present, that they alone caused, to be ordained and published what
they listed. And a little after; Elpidius Bishop of Laodicea and Tranquillus,
Id ibid.
showed the Emperor Arcadius, that these Canons were heretical. And finally
this appeared, by all the authors of saint CHRISOSTOMES life; who say that his
defendors, offered the Emperor Arcadius, to quitt his protection, if his
adversaries would sign, that they held the same Faith with those that framed
these canons. And this is also acknowledged Hic Cano^ in odium and detrime^tum
pij Athanasij factus esse videtur.
by the ministers of Germany, who in the last Greek impression of the canons
of the Council, that they have made at Witenberge, say upon the fourth canon
of the Council of Antioch, which is that that was read in the Council of
Chalcedon, under the name of canon eighty three; This canon seems to be made
in hate and ruin of the pious Athanasius; Et hic Canon contra S. Athan.
compositus est.
And upon the eleventh; This canon was likewise framed against saint
Athanasius. And upon the fifteent; This canon was also undoubtedly made against
the Good Athanasius, to take from him the power of Appealing to an other Synod.
And upon the twenty fifth; This Council of Antioch, not only neglected Et hic
Cano^ haud dubie contra virum optimum Athan. factus est, vt illi appellatio ad
aliu^ Synodum adimeretur Fuit autem Concilium Antiochenum etc.
the faith of the Council of Nicea, touching Christ's divinity, but also
strove cautelouslie to disanull it. By means whereof it is clear, that the
Rapsodie which was produced at the Council of Chalcedon, in the cause of
Bassian, and Steven, where these canons were inserted, was not the true
universal Code of the canons of the Greek Church which had been preserved in
the Episcopal Bibliotheque of Constantinople, since the time of the Council
of Constantinople, to that of saint CHRYSOSTOM, but was the same falsified
code that Cyrinus Bishop of Chalcedon who was an Egiptian by extraction, and
for that cause a partaker which Theophilus, and a cruel adversary to sainr
CHRYSOSTOM; And other Asians Enemies to saint CHRYSOSTOM, Nicen (...) vero
fidem Orthodoxam, defilij Dei diuinitate non (...) neglexit veru^ etiam callide
abolere studuit.
conspiring, and assembled with Theophilus, had produced against the same saint
CHRYSOSTOM, and which remained after the death of Cyrinus in the Episcopal
Bibliotheque of Chalcedon; a thing whereto the fathers of the Counsel of
Chalcedo^ took noe heed, because the canons which were inserted into this
Rapsodie, were there inserted without in scription of titles, and without
distinction of Counsels, and with suppression of the name of the Council of
Antioch. And against this it auailes not to say, that S. HILARIE speaking of
the Synod of Antioch holden in Con. Call. Act. 11.
the dedication, calls it, the Synod of the Saints; for he says it to
accomodate Hylar. de Synod.
himself to the infirmity of Eleusius Bishop of Cyzica and other secret
catholics of the Asian provinces amongst whom he inhabited for foundation
whereof you must know that Eleusius and the other covert catholics of the
Asian, provinces, that were called Demi (...), for as much as to shun the
Emperors, persecution, they communicated with the Arrians, in the Sacraments,
and were different from them in belief, seeing themselves constrained by the
tyranny of Constantius, an Arrian, Emperor, to adhere to some one of the forms
of faith of the Council, that he had caused to be published, rather chose to
adhere to that of the Council of Antioch, then to any of the rest, as being
the least pestilent, and the least, estranged from Catholic, doctrine. For of
all the Counsels, holden by the Arrians, the most moderate in impiety, was
the Council of Antioch, holden in the dedication, whereinto the Arrians had
infused noe other thing of their venom, but that they had taken away the word,
Consubctantiall, which had been inserted into the creed of the Council of
Nicea, and had set in steed thereof, inviolable image of the substance, and
one in concord; without instilling into it any proposition which besides the
omission of the word, Consubstantiall, might not be auowed by the catholics.
For those causes then, when the Arrians, and amongst others Acacius Bishop of
Cesarea in Palestina, would in the Council following, and namely in that of
Seleucia, propound other creedes, wherein they did more plainly express their
impiety; Eleusius and the other covert catholics of the Asian provinces
opposed themselves to it, crying out that they must hold to the creed of the
Council of Antioch. With such words, says Socrat. l. 2. c. 40.
Sabinus, and after him Socrates, Eleusius opposed himself to Acacius, calling
the faith of the Fathers, the faith published in the Synod of Antioch. And
therefore saint HILARIE desiring to suffer the infirmity of Eleusius, and of
the other covert catholics of the Asian provinces, amongst whom he was
confined, and which he maintained against the other Asians, who were complete
Arrians, as himself testifies in Hylar. de Synod.
these words; Except the Bishop Eleusius, and a few others with him, the tenn
Asian provinces amongst whom I inhabit, know not God, truly. And choosing
rather to retain them within the bounds of the Council of Antioch, and to
provoke the rest of the Asians, by their Example, to return to it and to come
one stepp nearer by this means to the catholic doctrine, then to let them
fall into the precipices of the other more impious creedes of the Arrians,
speaks less hardly of the Synod of Antioch and calls it (in comparison of the
other Arrians, Synods) the Synod of the Saints; because there were in this
Synod, some, Catholics for whose respect, (although they were oppressed by the
force and, violence of the Arrians who commanded there, and held there both the
scepter and the pen, and by the tyranny of Constantius the Arrian Athanas de
Synod. Ar. and Seleu.
Emperor, who was there present, the Arrians durst not at the first blow,
vomitt up all their impiety; But not that the Arrians, had not been the sole
masters, authors, and directors of this council, and had framed the draught
and indicted all that was there ordained: for not only saint ATHANASIVS, who was
he against whom the Council Athan ep. de Synod. Arimin. and Seleu.
had proceeded, and who should better know the history, then any other,
witnesses that the Council of Antioch, in the dedication, was an Arrian
Council, and celebrated by the Arrians in the presence of Socrat. hi. Ecc. l.
(...). c. 8
Constantius the Arrian Emperor. But he also affirms, and Socrates after him,
that those that indicted the faith of the Council of Antioch published in the
dedication; that is to say, that whereof saint HILLARY speaks; were Eusebius
Bishop of Nicomedia and Acasius Bishop of Cesarea in Palestina, the two
principal maintainers of Arrian heresy, and their accomplices. The Eusebians
(says saint ATHANASIVS) after they had in Athan. vbi supra.
the Synod of Tire extolled all the perverse doctrine of Arius; and after they
had ordained to receive the Arrians to the communion, and had themselves first
executed it, esteeming nevertheless, that there yet wanted some thing to
their intention, held a new Synod at Antioch, under pretense of the dedication
of the Church of Antioch. And a while after; The Bishops agreeing to the
dedication were Athan. ibid.
nintie under the consulship of Marcellus and Probinus, the impious Constantius
being present. And again; With what face could Eusebius and Acasius Ibidem.
and their Accomplices, after they had used words not formerlie written, and had
(...) that the first of all creatures, was the inuariable image of the
substance, power, Council and glory, murmr against the Fathers, for making
use of words not formerlie written; and that they used the word substance. And
Socrates answering by way of Apostrophe to the same Eleusius of whom S. HILARY
speaks; How (said he) o Eleusius do thou call those that assembled Socrat.
hist Eccl. l. 2. c. 40.
at Antioch, Fathers, and abjure those that had been their Fathers? for the
Bishops that met at Nicea, and decreed consubstantialitie, ought more properly
to be Fathers; as well for having been before them, as because they had promoted
them to Priest: hood then if those that held the Council of Antioch, rooted
out their Fathers, do not they forgett themselves, that following them, they
follow Paracides for Fathers? As little does it avail to say; that John
Bishop of Antioch, and the other Eastern Bishops; that is to say, Syrians
that were with him at the mock Council of Ephesus erected in the face of the
general Council of Ephesus, and amongst others Theodoret Bishop of Cyr,
alleged against saint CYRILL, the same canon of the Council of Antioch which
had been framed against saint ATHANASIVS; and after produced against saint
CHRYSOSTOM; And that Theodoret also in the collection of Counsels that he
has made, insertes the canons of the Council of Antioch, with the canons of
the other Counsels of the Eastern Church. For Malesius Patriarch of Antioch,
in whose branch John Patriarch of Antioch had succeeded, and to whose
Successors Theodoret and the other Eastern Bishops that were at Ephesus,
adhered, had been of the number of the covert Catholics, which communicated
with the Arrians; and even when he was made patriarch of Antioch was joined in
external communion with the Arrians, although he held the catholic doctrine.
By reason whereof to have means to resist the Arrians, under pretense of some
confession of faith authorized by the laws of the Arrian Emperors, under whose
tyranny Asia groaned, they protected and defended the Council of Antioch
against the other Council of the, Arrians, and gave it the greatest authority
they could in their Patriarkshpp; to the end that weak catholics might have
means to shadow themselves under the authority of his Council against the
Arrian Emperors that persecuted them; And from thence it came, that the
liberty of catholic Religion having been restored in the East, this Council
yet remained in authority amongst the covert catholics of Syria, who during
their oppression, had made use of it, as a bulwark against the Arrians, and
other Asian provinces, near the Patriarkship of Antioch. Less avails it, to
say, that in the general Council, of Constantinople, holden under the
Emperor, Theodosius the great, the Council, of Antioch, was approved in these
words; As, for the tome of those of the West, we receive it, and also Council.
Constable. 1. c. 5.
those that at Antioch, have confessed one Deity, of the Father, of the son,
(...) of the holy Ghost. For it is not of the council of Antioch holden in
the dedication and under the Emperor Constantius, that they speak: as it
appears as well because they set it after the tome of those of the West which
was holden long after the Council of Antioch in the dedication; as because
they say, that this Council confessed one and the same deity of the Father,
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; whereas the council of Antioch in the
dedication, calls the unity of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, an unity of Concord: but of an other Council of Antioch, holden in the
beginning of the Empire of Iouian; which conformed the faith of the Council of
Nicea, as it appears both Socrat hist l. 3. c. 25.
by the Epistle of the Bishops of Constantinople, assembled the year after the
general Council of Constantinople, and by Socrates who reports the whole
history, and by S. GREGORY of Nisea; and by Cassianus, and many others. To
think also to escape by saying, that it is from this Council of Antioch
holden under the Emperor Iouian, that the Canons of the Council of Antioch
have been taken, that we have at this day in our hands, is a thing wholly
vain: for these very Canons of the Council of Antioch, that we have, were in
use amongst the Arrians, and Demy-Arrians from before the Council of Seleucia
which was holden under Constantius, as appears by the reproach that Sabinus,
the Macedonian, made to Cyrill of Jerusalem, that against the Ecclesiastical
law; that is to say, against the fifteenth Canon of the Council of Antioch,
he had recourse to the Emperor, Constantius, to appeal to the Council of
Seleucia. It is yet more vain to say, that Fulgentius Ferandus, Yuon,
Gratian; and other latin canonists, have inserted the canons of the Council of
Antioch, in the dedication amongst the canons of the Council received in the
latin Church. For it is certain, that in the time of Pope Jnnocent the first,
and of saint CHRYSOSTOM, the latin Church received them not, as appears by
the Epistle of Pope Jnnocent to the Constantinopolitans, about the matter of
the Canons of the Council of Antioch, which were produced against saint
CHRYSOSTOM, of which Sozomene reports these words above cited, such Canons
are rejected by the catholic Bishops, for we must not patch the inventions
of Heretics with the canons of Catholics. And whereas afterward some latin
collectors have inserted them into their copies, it was in part, because they
were deceived about the Canon of the Council of Constantinople not considering
that the Council of Antioch which was there approved, was the Council of
Antioch holden under the Emperor Iouian, and in part because in those Canons,
there was nothing either against faith nor against the greater part of
Ecclesiastical discipline. Contrariwise in regard of Ecclesiastical
discipline, there were many good things, and which had been taken from the
customs and constitutions of the former Church. And that if there were any
canon that hurt the policy of the church, it had been corrected and medicined
by the Council of Sardica. But above all it is an impertinent thing to say
that the Bishops of the Council of Antioch ordained by the first of their
canons, to observe the canon of the great Council of Nicea, concerning the
day of the celebration of Pasch; and so that they were not Arrians. For this
Counsel of Nicea having been holden as Eusebius testifies for two causes, the
one to decide the controversies of faith, and the other to reconcile the
difference of the Pasch, the Arrians did embrace jointly with the catholics
the decree of the Council of Nicea, concerning the observation of the Pasch
and rejected only that of the Faith: And therefore the ministers of Germany in
the last greek impression of the canons of the counsels, that they have made
at Wittenberg, do justly note, that although the council of Antioch approues
the decree of the council of Nicea, touching the celebration of the Pasch;
nevertheless, that hinders it not from being Arrian. For behold what they say
upon the first canon of the same Council of Antioch, These Antiochian Fathers,
excomcommunicated Hi patres Antiocheni eos excommunicant and deponunt qui in
rebus adiaphoris peccant: eos vero neque excommunicant, neque deponunt, qui
pium and in verbo Dei fundatum Decretum Synodi (...) de Filij Dei aeterna and
and consubstantiali diuinitate conuellere ausi sunt. Sed Ariani (...) damnare
Arianos.
and deposed those that sinned in indifferent things; so spoke the ministers
ignorantly following Socrates his error, and the other Nouatians, who put the
decree of the Council of Nicea concerning the observation of Pasch amongst
indifferent things, and excommunicated not, nor deposed those that have
presumed to reuerse the pious decree, and grounded on the word of God of the
Council of Nicea concerning the eternal and Consubstantiall divinity of the
Son of God: but the Arrians would not condemn the Arrians.

The third objection that the adversaries of the church make against the canons
of the Council of Sardica, is, that they were not contained in the Greek Code
of the Canons of the universal Church, compiled and authorized by the Emperor
Justinian: which objection as it contains two heads; the one that Justinian
compiled and authorized a Code of Canons; and the other, that in this Code, the
canons of the Council of Sardica were not comprehended; so they accompany it
with two proofs, for that the first head; to wit, that the Emperor Justinian
compiled and authorized a Code of canons containing the Body of the canons of
the universal Church, they produce the hundred thirtith one new constitution
of Justinian, where he uses these words, We decree, that the holy
Ecclesiastical Canons, which have been constituted and confirmed by the four
holy Counsels, shall hold the place of a Law. And for the proof of the
second, to wit, that the canons of the Council of Sardica, were not in the
code compiled and authorized by Justinian, they allege the Epistle of
Dionysius exiguus, time-fellowe with Justinian, who says, that to the
translation that he had made of the Greek code, he had added the canons of the
Counsels of Sardica and Afric, which had been framed in latin: To the first
proof then we auswere, that it is a proof, wouen with the threde of a
Cobwebb; for Iuctinian speaks not there of any volume of canons confirmed by
the first four counsels, and intends not to say, that he authorizes as well
the canons that are actually contained in the first counsels, as those which
are there contained but relatiuelie; that is to say, by the confirmation which
is there made in gross of the counsels where they are contained; but that he
authorizes, and erects into the title of a temporal law all the canons
actuallie contained in the four first counsels, as well those that were there
first composed, as those that having been before observed by an unwritten
tradition, have been there confirmed, and reduced into writing: for so
signifies there, this alternatiue, constituted, or, confirmed, which is set
there for as much as the more part of the canons of the four first counsels
had been before observed, by an unwritten law, as the Fathers of the council
of Constantinople Epist, Cocil. Constable. 1. ad Damas. Ambros. and alios.
testify, when they say, speaking of the Economy of the Ecclesiastical
ordinations: It is as you know both a law descended from antiquity, and a
Canon of the Council of Nicea. Now, that this is the intention of Justinian,
to wit, to speak only of the four first general counsels, it appears
both because he says, that he receives their Dogma's, as the holy Gregor. Mag.
l. indict. ep.
scriptures. A phrase since practiced by S. GREGORY upon the matter of the
first four general cou^cells, and which cannot be stretched to any of the
other counsels holden before the Emperor Justinian and by this that he adds,
that he receives their Canons as laws; We receive (says he) the dogma's of
the four Synods above named, as the holy scriptures, and receive their Canons
as laws. And by this that he concludes: For these causes we ordain, that
according to their distinctions, the holy Pope of old Rome, be the first of
all the Prelates, and that the Bles. Bishop of Constantinople the second Rome
have the second place after the Sea Apostolik of old Rome, and be perferr'd
before all the Seas. A thing which evidently shows, that he speaks precisely
of the four General counsels only, where the order of the Patriarchs had
been observed, and not of the particular cou^cells, where there had been noe
concurrence of Patriarchs. And indeed, how could Justinian have pretended to
have given by this constitution, the force of an imperial law to all the
Canons of particular Counsels; he that disanulls and infringes the fifteenth
Canon of the Council of (...)? for the Council of Neocesarea, had made a
Canon by which it ordained, that according to the Book of the acts, there
should be but seven deacons in one city, how great soever it were. Where
Justinian ordaines, that there shall be an hundred Deaco^s in the cathedral
church of Constantinople. And that is not to be reckoned of, which Balsamon
says that Justinian and the council of Trullio after him, interpret the Canon
of the council of Neocesarea, for they do indeed interpret the place of the
acts which they pretend to be evil understood by the Counsel of Neocesarea,
Council. Neocaesar. c. 15.
and that it ought to be expounded, of the dispensers of alms and not, of the
ministers of the Altar; but they correct and abrogate the Canon Act. c 6.
of the council of Neocesarea, as Zonora acknowledges in these terms: Lib. 3.
Im. Constitut. tit. (...).
From before the Council Trullian, the Canon of the Council of Neocesarea was
noe more observed; for Justinian instituted sixty priests, and an hundred
deacons, and forty Deaconesses in the great Church of Constantinople. And
therefore Balsamo^ is constrained to confess, that the Council Trullian
correctes Balsam. in Council. in Trull. c. 16 Zonar. in Conc. in Trul. c. 16.
the Canon of the council of Neocesarea; The present Canon (says he)
interprets, or rather corrects the fifteenth Canon of the Council of
Neovesarea. And then if Justinian in saying; We ordain that the Canons
constituted or confirmed by the four first Counsels, shall hold the place of
a law; had pretended Balsam in Conc.
to mean not only the Canons contained in the catalogues of the four first
counsels, but also those of the other Counsels which they Just. in edi. fid.
Ortho. apud Leu^. clau. l. 8.
pretend to have been confirmed in gross by these four first. What caution
can they give that he did not intend to comprehend the Canons of the council
of Sardica, that he, and the fifth council of Constantinople Conc Co^. 1. c.
5.
call a general council, comprehending it consequently under the title Zonar.
in Conc Co^. 1 c 5.
of the council of Nicea; and whereof the first council of Constantinople
canoniseth the authority in these terms: We receive the Council of those
Bal Ibid.
of the west: that is to say, (if we believe Zonara and Balsamon) the
Council of Sardica. But this is enough for the first head; let us examine the
second.

To the proof then of the second head, which is that Dionisius Exiguus a
Scithian monk, but habituated at Rome, and versed in the Greek and Roman
letters, who lived in the time of Justinian the Emperor, in translating the
Canon of the counsels says; that he has taken the council of Sardica from
the latin edition and has not taken it from the Greek Chr. Inst. apud Adr.
Beys Paris 1610.
text, because it was not in the Greek edition, a proof that has seemed so
strong to the Popes adversaries; that two year since they have caused to be
printed a greek Code of the Canons of the universal church, from which they
have ecclipsed and cut of the council of Sardica against the credit of all
the greek editions of the counsels, both ancient and modern, which are at
this day to be found in the world. We answer that the greek copy that
Dionisius Exiguus had in his hands, was a maimed and defective copy, as
appears, besides many other lamenesses, by the omission of the Canons of the
counsel of Ephesus which are wanting there; for Dionisius Exiguus passes
immediately from the Canons of the council of Constantinople, to those of the
council of Chalcedon, and omitts the Canons of the council of Ephesus; a
thing which manifestly shows, that the greek copy that he had in his
hands, and which he had brought out of Scithia, was lame and imperfect, for as
much as not only the council of Ephesus was the third of the first general
counsels: and that in this quality the canons thereof are inserted into all
the collections and mentions of the greek collections: as in the greek
collection of Theodoret; and into the concordances of John Scholasticus
Patriarch of Constantinople; and into the catalogue of the Council Trullian,
and into the Nomocanon of Photius; and into the greek copies of Zonara,
Balsamon, Alexius, Blestares, Simon Logotheta, Harmenopolus, and others; But
also that the Emperor Justinian quotes and expresses them by name in the law
produced for the proof of the first head which has these words: We ordain
Nouel. Just. 131.
that the holy Ecclesiastic all Canons that have been constituted or confirmed
by the four holy Counsels, shall hold the place of a law; to wit, those of
the Council of Nicea, celebrated by the three hundred and eighteen Fathers;
and those of the Council of Constantinople, celebrated by the hundred and
fifty Fathers; and those of the first Council of Ephesus; and those of the
Council of Chalcedon. And to the end to convert our defense into an act, we
will arm it with seven counterBatteries, which do not only destroy the
proof drawn from Dionisius Exiguus, but also shows expressly, that in the
Emperor Justinians age and long before him, the Canons of the council of
Sardica were acknowledged by the greek church and inserted into the greek
collections of counsels. The first is, that Paladius Bishop of Helenopolis in
Bithinia, an Author greek in style, and Asian in nation, (who lived a thousand
two hundred years years ago; that is to say, a hundred and fifty year
before Justinian, and whom Photius Patriarch of Constantinople, calls Phot. in
Georg. Alex.
a most diligent Writer of the life of S. CHRYSOSTOM;) And George Patriarch of
Alexandria, (who lived a thousand year ago) witness not only, (as has above
appeared) that the Canon of the Council of Antioch that the Schismatickes of
the East produced against S. CHRYSOSTOM, had proceeded from the Shopp of the
Arrians; but also that it had been abrogated with the common voice of the
Greek and Latin Bishops, by the Canons of the Council of Sardica. This Canon
(says Palladius, and after Palladius, George Patriark of Alexandria, and after
Pallad. dial devit. Chris.
George, Patriarch of Alexandria, Photius Patriarch of Constantinople) was as
impious, and the work of impious men, abrogated in the Council of Sardica, by
the Romans, Italians, Illyrians, Macedonians, and Greeks. The second that
Sozomene, an ancient Greek historian, and who lived near an hundred years
before Justinian, reports for the defense of the same S. CHRYSOSTOM, an
Epistle of Pope Innocent the first, to the Constantinopolitans, Sozom. hist.
Eccl. l. 8. c. 20.
where he writes speaking of the canons of the Council of Antioch; We say
not only that they are not to be followed, but also that they must be
condemned with heretic all and Schismatic doctrins, as was done in the
council of Sardica, by the Bishops that have been before us. The third that
Balsamon Patriarch of Antioch and guardian of the charters of the Church of
Constantinople, notes after all them that the (...) canon of the Counsel of
Antioch, was abolished by the fowrth canon of the Council of Sardica; Note
(says Balsamon commenting the fourth Canon of the council of Balsam. in Conc.
(...), c. 4.
Sardica that by this Canon, the fifteenth Canon of the counsel of Antioch,
was abrogated. And comenting the fiftee^th Canon of the council of Antioch;
This Id. In. Co^. Antioch. c. 15.
Canon (says he) was disannulled by the fourth canon of the council of
Sardica.

The fowrth counterbattery is, that the greek edition of the Canons of the
counsel of Sardica, is not a translation of the ancient latin edition, which
was curre^t, whether in the time of Pope Zosimus, or whether since, in the time
of Dionisius Exiguus; but that it is a greek edition, primitive and original,
which was made in the council itself, whereof (as holden upon the confines
between both empires) the Canons were published from the beginning in both
tongues. This appears by many differences which are between the old latin
edition: and the greek edition; nor in substance, but in the order, in the
phrases, forms, and circumstances: and amongst others in the seventh Canon of
the latin edition, which is the fourteenth in the greek; for the latin
edition produced by Pope Zosimus his legates in the sixth council of Carthage,
and inserted into the collection of Dionisius Exiguus, and into that of
Isidorus Mercator has; Con. Cart. 6. c. 6.
Osius says, If a Bishop moved with choler against a priest or deacon of his,
would Con. Sar. c. 17.
cast him forth of the church, it must be provided, that being innocent he be
not condemned or excommunicated; and therefore the excommunicated person, shall
have power to interpeale, the Bishops of the next Province, and procure his
cause to be heard by them. And the greek edition, besides many other
differences, has it thus: The excommunicated person shall have power, to have
recourse to the Bishop Metropolitan of the same Province; and if the Bishop
Metropolitan be absent, to address himself to the Metropolitan of the next
province, and to require that his cause may be diligently examined. A thing
which evidently shows, that the Greek editio^ was not taken from the latin
edition which was curret, be it in the time of Pope Zosimus, be it in the time
of Dionisius Exiguus, but it is the ancient original greek edition of the
council, of which some clauses were lost in the latin edition, from the time
of Pope Zozimus and Dionisius Exiguus.

The fifth counter-batterie is, that not only all the greek editions as that
of Photius, Simon Logotheta, Zonara, Balsamo^, Alexius and other greek
canonists contain the same canons of the council of Sardica; but also all the
other Eastern editions, as well Russian, as Syrian, Armenian, Egiptian, and
Ethiopian, as it appears: for the Syrian editions by the Syriack collections
of the canons which is at Rome in the Bibliotheque of the great Duke Cosmo, yet
living; whither the great Duke Ferdinand his Father made to be brought all the
Syrian books that he could recover in the East; And in regard of the Ethiopian
Edition, by the Code of the Ethiopian canons which is at Rome, in the house of
the Ethiopians, and for the rest by the copies which are to be found in all the
provinces of the East; by means whereof, the canons of the Council of
Sardica, must have been current in the East, long before Justinians time, the
natural Egiptian Churches which we call Cophtichs and Ethiopians, having
separated themselves from the greek and latin churches from the time of the
council of Chalcedon, and have had since the time noe communion with them. And
finally the sixth counterbatterie is, that Theodoret who lived near one
hundred year before Justinian and that John Patriarch of Constantinople, who
lived in the same age with Justinian, inserted into the collection of the
Greek Counsels, the canons of the Counsels, of Sardica with the other canons
of the Greek church, for in the greek Library of Queen Catherine of
Medicis, which was brought from Constantinople to Florence, by Demetrius, Gara,
Lascaris, and other greeks (...) from the sack of Concta^tinople, and which is
now united with the library of the most Christian king, there is found an old
Synagogue a manuscript of the canons, reduced into fifty titles by Theodoret
Bishop of Cyre, under which there is annexed a concordance of the imperial
laws of Justinian with the canons contained in these fistie titles, made by
John Scolasticus Patriarch of Constantinople; in both which works, the canons
of the couu^cell of Sardica are quoted and inserted equally with the other
canons of the Greek church. Now that this Synagogue (which was the name that
they gave to the ancient collections of counsels, as it appears by the report
of Socrates, who cites the collections of Counsels made by Sabinus, under the
title of a Synagogue of the counsels) is truly ancient, and certainly
Theodorets, is not to be doubted. For besides this, that the manuscript which
is very ancient, bears this title; Synagogue of the Canons reduced into
fifty titles by Theodoret Bishop of Cyre; And besides that the style of the
author is wholly agreeable to the style of Theodoret; there are many Socrat l.
1. c 5 and l. 2. c. 13. hist. Ec.
things to show that this collection could not but be made in Theodorets
time, that it is so, first the author testifies in his exordium, that there
were but ten Synods celebrated since the Apostles to his time: There have been
(said he) ten great Synods of the Fathers since the Apostles. And propounding
a while after in the form of a table the canons of the same ten counsels,
whereof his work is compiled, he places that of Nicea first, and that of
Chalcedon last in this order.

1. Of the 318. holy Fathers assembled at Nicea under the Consulship of the
Illustrious Paulinus and Iulianus, the ye are of the death of Alexander 606.
the 19 of the month of Decius; that is to say, the 13. before the Kadends of
June; 20. Canons. 2. Of the blessed fathers assembled at Ancyra, more ancient
then those of Nicea but placed after them because of the dignity, and
authority of a general Council; 25. Canons. 3. Of the holy fathers
assembled at the Synod of Neocesarea, in time also before that of Nicea, and
later then that of Ancyra; but for honors-sake placed after that of Nicea; 14
Canons. 4. Of the fathers assembled at Sardica, after the Fathers of the
council of Nicea: 21. Canons. 5. Of the fathers assembled at Gangres: 20.
Canons. 6. Of the fathers assembled at Antioch: 25. Canons. 7. Of the fathers
assembled at Loadicea in Phrigia: 59. Canons. 8. Of the fathers assembled at
Constantinople: 7. Canons. 9. Of the fathers assembled at Ephesus: 7. Canons.
10. Of the fathers assembled at Chalcedon: 27. Canons.
From whence it appears, that this Author must have written a little while
after the council of Chalcedon, which is the time wherein (...) writ his
dialogues against the Euthycians, and before the fifth general council, which
was holden under Justinian the first: and the sixth which was holden under
Constantine Pogonat: and the council surnamed Trullia^ which made canons under
the name of both the others: and by consequent that he was long before Photius,
and all the other compilers of the greek collections, whose copies are to be
found, be it in the East, or in the west. Secondly he says that he is not the
first that has compiled the canons in a volume, for as much as before him,
there had been some, that had made a collection distributed into sixty titles:
but that he is the first that has distributed them into titles distinguished by
the dates of the matters; A thing that shows, that he is more ancient then the
old Nomocanon reduced into fifty titles, before the time of Photius whereof
Balsamon speaks. Thirdly he inserts none with the Canons of the Counsels,
but only the Canons of S. BASIL: And he says more, that before him they had
never been inserted; which testifies, that he is more ancient, then the
council entitled Trullian: and then all the collections of Photius, and other
later greek copies, wherein there are inserted the canons of many other
greek fathers, and amongst others of S. CYRILL. Fowrthly, he makes noe mention
in his work, of the Canons of the council of Carthage, an evident testimony
that he is more ancient then Justinian, who cites in his edict of faith, the
Canons of the council of Carthage; then the council of Constantinople,
surnamed Trullian: then the Nomocanon of Photius; and then all the other late
greek compilations, in the which the canons of the council of Carthage, are
inserted and incorporated. Moreover he assigns but three Canons to the first
Counsel of Constantinople, which is the number that the old greek and latin
manuscripts co^taine: and that Dionisius exiguus, (who says he has taken his
translation upon the greek original,) assigns to it, and gives but twenty
seven Canons to the Council of Chalcedon, which is the number that the same
Dionisius, and the other antie^t greeks and latins attribute Dionys.
(...) in Cod. Can. Theo. An. ad Calcem hist. Eccle. Theod. in edit. Rob.
Steph. col. l. 1.
thereto, and that the history of the Council as we have above proved
shows, ought to be attributed thereto; for the twenty eight having been
propounded by the fathers of the council, at the instance of Anatolius, the
Popes legates opposed them selves to it, and Pope Leo refused to confirm it,
and the Emperor and Anatolius himself desisted from pursuing it, in such sort
as it began not to take place amongst the Canons of Chalcedon till a long time
after; from whence it is, that S. GREGORY Gre. Mag. l. 5. ind 14. ep. 14.
the Great says: That the synod of Chalcedon had been falsified in one place
by those of Constantinople: And as for the two later Canons they are two canons
made upon particular occurrences, which have been transferred from the fowrth
act of the council, into the catalogue of the canons. By means whereof, it is
necessary that the author of this collection, should be more ancient then S.
GREGORY the Great: and then the council of Constantinople, surnamed Trullian,
in whose times the twenty eigth Canon had already been inserted into the
catalogue of the canons of the Council of Chalcedon: and then the copies
whereof Photius, Zonara. Balsamon, and other later Greeks have made use,
within all which this addition is inserted. Besides he assigns but seven
Canons to the Council of Ephesus, omitting the eigth which had been made
against John Patriarch of Antioch, in favor of the Bishops of Cyprus during
the Schism of the council of Ephesus, and of John Patriarch of Antioch, and
which is inserted in all the greek collections of Photius, Zonara, Balsamon
and others. From whence it appears, that the compiler of this Synagogue was
one of the Bishops of the Patriarkship of Antioch who had during the schism,
taken part with John Patriarch of Antioch against the Council of Ephesus: and
who reunited themselves with the council of Ephesus, when John Patriarch of
Antioch and the Bishops (...) his Patriarkship returned to it. By means
whereof they received not this Canon with the other Canons of the Council, for
as much as it had been made against their Patriarch; and during the schism,
and by contumacie, and upon hearing of one party only. And finally the Author
which has begun this collection, and has illustrated it with conferring the
imperial laws annexing to the end of every title, legal concordances,
answerable to the matter of the titles, had been tyme-fellowe with Justinian
himself, and writ a little after his death, as appears by the preface that he
put before his concordances, which contains these words; To the glory of our
great God and savior Jesus Christ, I have now co^ferred the sacred canons of
the holy and blessed Apostles, and of the holy Fathers, who have followed
their tracks in every Synod, with a choice of texts that I have transcribed
from the sacred new constitutions of Justinian of holy memory, publiht
dispersedly after the Code, the which not only are agreeable to the canons of
the orthodox fathers, but also communicate to them the authority of the
imperial power, with an addition of legal right, and pleasing to God, which
prouides in the imitation of God, what is profitable for every huma^ creature.
And by the end of the work to which are annexed these words, written in greek
breuiatures; The end of the Chapters of the new constitutions, concerning
Ecclesiastical decisions by John Archbishop of Constantinople, which had been
Scolasticus. For this John Archbishop of Constantinople, surnamed heretofore
Scholasticus whom the adversaries of the Popes authority acknowledge for one of
the collectors of the greek counsels, was established by Justinian himself in
the Sea of Constantinople in the steed of Eutychius, and deceased twelve
years after the death of Justinian. And it derogates not from this, that
Balsamon reiects all the Nomocanons; that is to say, all the marriages of
laws and canons which have been made before that of Photius: And amongst the
rest, one Nomocanon, which distributes the laws and canons into fifty titles.
For be it that he speak of that of John Patriarch of Constantinople, surnamed
Scholasticus: be it that he speak of an other later, he reiects it not, for
not having been ancient enough, but for being too ancient, for as much, as
many laws of the Emperor Justinian which are there inserted, have ceased to
be in use having been abrogated by the later Emperors: yet less is this
repugnant to it, that the canons entitled from the Apostles are quoted in this
synagogue, under the number of eigthie five canons; Whereas Doonisius exiguus,
and after him Cresconius report but of fifty. For Dionys.
bsiedes this that the greek code of Dionisius (as has been above noted)
(...) in Co (...) Crescon. in Coll. Can.
was very lame and defective, it is certain, that the Greeks both before
Theodoret, and before Dionisius Exiguus retained eighty five, as appears by
these words of the council of Constantinople surnamed Trullian: We ordain,
that the eighty five canons which have been received and confirmed by the
holy Fathers, who have preceded us, and have been given us by them under the
name of the canons of the holy and glorious Apostles, remain from hence
forward (...) and immovable. And by the council of Constantinople holden
under Nectarius Conc. in Trnll. c. 2.
in the cause of Agapius and of Bagadius more then sixty years before
Theodoret, that the council Trullian canoniseth in these words; We seal
also the canons of the holy fathers, which reassembled themselves anew in this
religious and imperial city under Nectoirius Archbishop of the same city,
and under Theophilus Archbishop of Alexandria. Which counsel holden under
Nectarius in the cause of Agapius and Bagadius, cites the seauentie sixth Canon
of the Apostles: for I will not renew the difference that has been since Pope
Gelasius between the greek and latin church in regard of these Canons
entitled from the Apostles. It suffices to defend the antiquity of this
Synagogue, that from before the time of Theodoret, the Greeks held eigthie
five canons for Apostolical canons: and this may be said, touching the sixth
objection, let us dispatch the two others.

The seventh objection, that the Popes adversaries propound against the
authority of the canons of the Council of Sardica, is that Pope Adrian the
first in the epitomy of the canons that he addresses to Charlemaine, says,
that the Canons of the council of Sardica are not to be found amongst the
Greeks, and that Pope Nicholas the first, in his Epistle to Photius Patriarch
of Constantinople and to the (...), Nicol. 1. ad Phot.
writes, The Council of Sardica which you say you have not. To this obection
then, we answer two things, the one that if Photius who was author of the
schism which lasts to this day between the greek and Latin Church, should
have said by malice, and to cover his intrusion in to the Patriarkship of
Constantinople, which he had usurped upon (...), true and lawful Patriarch,
that the Greeks had not, or received not the Council of Sardica, it were noe
great marvel; no more then that the Bishops of Egypt writ to the Emperor
Leo, to cover their heresy that they knew not the Synod of the hundred and
fifteen fathers: that is to say, the first general Synod of Constantinople,
in the which nevertheless, Timothy the first, their Patriarch, had assisted
and presided. For Photius having intruded into the Patriarkship of
Constanstinople against the Canons of the Counsel of Sardica, which forbad
Layme^ to usurp ecclesiastical charges, there is noe doubt, but he would
willingly have avoided that which condemned him. And the other, that it is a
mistaking in Pope (...), who deceived himself upon the Epitomy of the Canons of
Pope Adrian, who was deceived upon Dionisius his collection For not only the
Council of Constanstinople, surnamed Trullian, that the Greeks entitled the
sixth general Council, and which was more then an hundred and fifty (...)
before Pope Adrian, and more the^ two hundred before Pope Nicolas (...) before
Photius, and that Photius himself canoniseth and registers it in his (...) as
an universal oecumenicall Counsel, writes, We seal also the Council. in
Trull. c. 2.
(...) that have been published by the fathers, assembled at Sardica and
Carthage, and by those which reassembled themselves the second time in this
Religious and imperial (...), under Nectarius Archbishop of this imperial
City, and Theophilus (...) of Alexandria. But Photius himself in his
Nomocanon insertes almost (...) every title, the canons of the counsel of
Sardica, and those particularly of the Episcopal appeals to the sea
Apostolic: and after Photius, Simo^ (...), Zonara, Balsamo^, Alexius
Blastares, Harmenopolus, and other later (...) Canonists. The eigteenth and
last objection, that the adversaries of the church make against the authority
of the canons of the counsel of Sardica (...), that the practices of
episcopal appeals, which are the subject of the third, fourth, and fifth Canon
of the Counsel of Sardica, has been long (...) to the Eastern Church. For
proof whereof they allege six (...); the first is, that Socrates speaking of
Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem Socrat. hist Eccl. l. 2. c. 40.
who had appealed from the Council of Palestina holden under Acacius
Archbishop of Cesarea to a greater judgment, that is to say, to the judgment
of the Council of Seleucia, says that Cyrill practiced the first, and (...)
one of this kind of proceeding, making use against the custom of the
ecclesiastical Canon, of appeals, as in a lay judgment. The (...) that the
first Council of Constantinople, that was called the Council. Constable. 1. c.
(...) general one, ordained that after the Synod of the Province, the (...)
of the Patriarkship might examine in the second instance of the (...) of
Bishops, but that if after the Synod of the Patriarkship any one (...) dare to
importune the ears of the Emperor, or of secular Princes, (...) disquiet the
general synod, that he be no more received to pursue his (...). The third
that the Emperor Iustinia^ says, that from the sentences of the Patriarchs
there is noe appeal, no more then from the sentences of the Prouosts of the
Pretory. The fourth, that the Emperor Justinian ordaines, that if a Clearke
attempt any Cause against his Bishop, (...) be judged by his Metropolitan;
and in case, the one of the parties (...) to obey the judgment, the Patriarch
of the diocese shall end (...). The fifth that the Emperors Leo and Constantine
declared, that the sentence of the Patriarch, was not subject to appeal, as
being the Prince of Ecclesiastical judgments. And the sixth that Photius in
his Nomocanon says, there is noe appeal from the sentence of the Patriarchs.

To the first then of those objections; which is, that Socrates says, that
Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem, was the only and first man, who against the
Ecclesiastical cano^ made use of an appeal; we bring two Answers; the one
that those words, are not the words of Socrates but the words of an
heretical author from whom Socrates reports them; to wit, from Sabinus who to
calumniate saint CYRILL, who although for fear of Constantius the Arrian
Emperor, he did then communicate outwardly with the Arrians, nevertheless was
in doctrine and belief a catholic; reproaches it to him that he had appealed
rom the Council of Cesarta, in Palestina wherein he had been deposed by the
Arrians, and had put in his appeal to the Council of Seleucia holden by the
Arrians, but wherein there were many covert catholics, and which communicated
not with the Arrians, but in the receipt of the Sacraments, and differd wholly
from them in faith. The truth of his Answer appears, both by this, that
Socrates in the beginning of this history says, that he Socrat. hist (...).
l. 2. c. 39.
has abridged it from the collection of Sabinus; Let the Readers, says he,
curious to know things in particular; search them in the collections of
Sabinus, where they are at large set down; we running over them, have but
extracted heads. And by the canon whereto this Author says that Cyrill
contradictes, which was a canon of the Council of Antioch holden in the
dedication; which Council Socrates was so far from thinking it lawful, as
contrariwise, not only in the same history, he makes an Apostrophe against the
memory of Eleusius, who had qualified the Bishops of the Council of Antioch
with the title of Fathers, and asks So crat. hist Eccl. l. 6. c. 18.
him; How, o Eleusius do thou call those Fathers, that were assembled at
Antioch and deniest that title to their Elders? And a little after; that if
those that were assembled at Antioch have rooted out their Fathers, those that
follow them follow Paricides; but also in the cause of saint CHRYSOSTOM he
says, that the canon of the Council of Antioch which was produced against
Socrat. hist Eccl. l. 2 c. 8.
him, had been forged by the Arrians. And in deed, how could Socrates have
held the Bishops appeals for a new thing, and contrary to the canon of the
Church, he that alleges for a reproach of nullitie against the Council of
Antioch, that the law of the Church imported that those things that were done
without the Bishop of Romes consent, were nullities? And who had said, speaking
of Paul Bishop of Constantinople, of Asclepas Bishop of Gaza in Palestina, of
Marcellus primat of Ancyra in Galatia Socrat. ibidem (...). 15.
and other Bishops deposed by the Council of Antioch, and other Counsels of
the East, and yet had had recourse to the Pope, the Bishop of Rome, because of
the prerogative of his Church, armed them with confident letters, and writ
into the East, and restored them every man to his place; and that a long while
before, the action of Cyrill, and of the Council of Seleucia. The other
answer is, that Sabinus himself did not pretend to say by that, that Cyrill
had done a new thing, and contrary to the laws of the Church; or as the words
of Sabinus imported from a less Tribunal to a greater; that is to say, from
the Council of Palestina, to that of Seleucia, in appealing from one Synod to
an other. For the Council of Antioch it self upon which Sabinus grounds
himself, ordaines that a Bishop code^ned may have recourse to a greater Synod.
But for this that he had in his appeal, followed the form of secular
appeals, for as much as he had taken, to speak according to the style of this
time, a relief of appeal from the imperial Chancerie, that is to say, had
taken letters from the Emperor, to oblige the Bishops of the Council of
Seleucia, and particularly the Acacians who being Arrians and favored by the
Officers of the Emperor, who assisted at the Council who were (...), would not
have suffered that the cause of Cyrill who had been condemned by (...) in the
Council of Palestina, should again have been put to trial to receive his
Appeal, and to renew the examination of his cause. This appears both by the
beginning of the history of the Council of (...), Socr. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c.
40.
where it is said that diverse letters of the Emper ors were brought, where of
some ordained that they should first treat of matters of faith, and others,
that they should first handle the causes of accused Bishops: And by the very
words of Sabinus against Cyrill which are; As soon as he had been deposed
having sent a libell of appeals to those that had deposed him, he appealed to a
greater judgment; to which appeal, the Emperor Constantius added his
suffrage, and this Cyrill did only, and the first against the Custom: of the
(...) Canon, making use of Appeals, as in lay judgments. By which words,
Sahinus intended not to say; that Cyrill was the first that appealed from a
lesser Synod to a greater, but that he was the first the used the form of
secular appeals in Ecclesiastical judgment; that is to say that had
recourse to the Emperor to cause his appeal to be accepted. And therefore he
says not that he was the first that used appeals, but that he was the first
that used them as in laie-Iudgments. And this finally appears by the same
Canon of the Council of (...); the transgression whereof (...) objects to S,
CYRILL; which Canon forbids not that we may appeal from a lesser Synod to a
greater, contrariwise ordaines it in express words, but forbids that they
should have recourse to the Emperors authority, and setts down the deffence
in these words. If any Priest deposed by his own Bishop, Conc. Antioch. Can.
12.
(...) (...) Bishop deposed by a Synod, presume to importune the ears of the
Emperor, whereas he should have recourse to a greater Synod, and referr the
right that he (...) he has to a greater number of Bishops, let him not be
received to (...). From whence it appears, that this that Sabinus reprehended
in Cyrill, was not that he had appealed from the Synod of Palestina to a
greater Synod; to wit, to that of Seleucia, which was compounded of all the
East; but for having recourse to the Emperor, and for having obtained letters
from him, to cause his appeal to be accepted, which is that, that he calls to
use appeals, as in lay judgments, for as much as in lay judgments, the Emperor
gave letters to oblige the second Judges to (...) the appeal, and the first
to yield to it,

TO the second instance, which is, that in the first general Council of
Council.
Constantinople it was ordained that those that would accuse a Bishop, Constable.
(...).
should accuse him to the Synod of the Province, and if the Synod of the Can. 6.
Province did not content them, they should have recourse to the Synod of the
Patriarkship, and that after it should noe more be lawful, neither to
importune the ears of the Emperor, nor to disquiet a general Council; we
answer that he speaks of the accusers of Bishops, and not of Bishops accused,
that is to say, that he pretends not to ordain, that it should not be lawful
for a Bishop accused, to appeal from the Patriarkall Synod, to the^ General
Council, or to the Pope, who was the head thereof. and represented it: but
that it should not be lawful for the accuser, after the Cause had been adiuged
in the first instance by the provincial Council, and in the second by the
Patriarchall Coucel, to pursue it elsewhere, no not before a General Council,
as appears by the Conclusion of the Canon, which is, If any one despising the
things aforesaid, shall dare to importune the ears of the Emperor, or the
judgment of the secular magistrates, or disunite the General Council etc:
let him be no more (...) way received in his accusation, Otherwise, how could
saint CHRYSOSTOM, being deposed a while after this Council, by a Council
holden at the instance of the Emperor and the Empress in the (...). hist.
Eccl. l. 8. c. 17.
Suburbs of Constantinople, have appealed to a General Council: And how a
little after, seeing himself deprived of the Pope of a General Council,
because of the obstacle that the Emperor of the East (and the Empress his
wife, without whom a General Council could not be celebrated) gave to it,
could he have appealed to the Pope? And how could the Emporor Ualentinian, have
said, that Flauianus, Bisho of Constantinople; had appealed to the Pope
according to the custom In ep. praeamb Conci. Chalced c. 25.
of Counsels? And how could the Council of Chalcedon, holden at the gates of
Constantinople, have approved of the appeal of Theodoret Bishop of Cyre a
city of the Patriarkship of Antioch to the Pope, and the judgment of
restitution be given by the Pope upon his Appeal?

To the third Instance which is, that the Emperor Justin, ordaines, Council.
Chalced. Act. 1.
that clerks should be first judged by their Bishop, and then by their
metropolitans, and then by the Patriarchs of the Nation, and should obey the
things decided by him as if from the beginning he had been the judge; for as
much as against the sentence of such Bishops, the former Emperors had ordained,
that there should be noe appeal: We answer, that he speaks of the causes of
inferior clerks who in the first instance ought to be judged by their Bishops;
in the second by the metropolitans, and in the third, by the Patriarch; and not
of the causes of Bishops And where as he says, that against: the sentence of
such Bishops, the former Emperors have ordained; that there should be noe
appeal; we say with Balsamon, that the place is corrupted; and thus it must
be reads; against such sentence of Bishops; to wit, against the sentences of
Bishop given in lay matters; and it must be interpreted of the appeal to the
secular Tribunal; as appears by the same law of the Emperors Arcadius,
Honorius and Theodosius; to which that of Justin, remitts the Readers; which
ordaines that the sentences of Bishops, should be as those of the Prouostes of
the Pretory: from whence it is not lawful to appeal. We ordain (said the
Emperors. writing to Theodorus Provost of the Pretorie) that the Episcopal
sentence Cod. l. x. tit. 4. l. 4.
shall remain firm in the behalse of those which have desired to be judged by
the Bishops, add that like reverence be given to their judgments, as to yours,
from whence it is not lawful to appeal. And by the report that Photius made
of the same law in these words: The ninth constitution of the fourth title of
the first book, of the code says; That the Sentences of Bishops, should be
as those of the prouostes of the (...), from whence it is not lawful to
appeal; that is to say, that it is noe more lawful to appeal from the
sentences of Bishops, to the imperial Tribunal; then from those of the
Provost, of the Pretory for the Emperors might well ordain? that for things
temporal, there should be noe appeal from the Bishops to them; but not that
for things sperituall there should be noe appeal from Bishops, to the superior
ecclesiastical Tribunalls.

To the fourth instance, which is that the Emperor Justinian, ordaines, that if
any clerk or layman, attempt an action against a Bishop for what cause
soever, the cause should be judged before the metropolitan, and that if any one
contradict the things judged, the cause should be referred to the Blessed
Archbishop and Patriarch of the diocese, and there according to the laws and
canons he must end it. And a little before, that if two Bishops of one self
Sinod, have a contestatio^ one against the other, the Metropolitan with two of
the Bishops of the Synod; that is to say of the Episcopal societies of the
Provinces, shall judge thereof; and that if one of the parties contradict it,
the blessed Patriarch of the nation shall decide it, without that either of the
parties can contradict it: We answer, that he speaks of the causes of
Bishops, where there interuenes noe deposition, the final deposition of
Bishops, having been aliwaies subject to appeals, be it to the Pope or to a
General Council; as appears by the history of (...), time-fellowe with
Justinian, who says that John, Patriarch of Alexandria, having been deposed at
the instance of the Liberat. in Breuiar. c. 17.
Emperor Zeno, by the Synod of the Province, appealed to the Pope: And by saint
ATHANASIVS, who reports these words out of the Athan. apol. 2. id. ibidem.
Epistle of Pope Julius; They must write to all of us, that by all of us that
may be judged which is just: For those that were disquieted, were Bishops. And
again; Are you ignorant that it is the custom to write first to us, and that
from hence should proceed, the decision of things? And therefore if there were
any suspicion conceived against the bishop there, it must have been written
off to the Church here. And besides we say, thas whereas he ordaines, that
the Patriarch should end causes, he incends he should end them in regard of
secular indgements; that is to say, that after the Patriarch, no secular
judge, should dare to examine it, nor should any of the partles contradict
before any Secular Judge; as when he says in the former Paragraphe; that if
it be an Ecclesiastical cause which is attempted against any clearke, the
secular Judges should not intermeddle in it, but, the Blessed Bishop must end
it: For he intends not hereby to say that there can be noe appeal from the
Bishop, to superior ecclesiastical Judges; but that there should be noe
appeal from the Bishop to the Prince and the secular Magistrate. And it is not
to be said, that the Pope saint GREGORY the first, cites the constitution of
Justinian, whereof there has been above mention in the cause of the Bishop
Steven, who seemed to be accused of a crime meriting deposition; to wit of the
crime of treason; for besides that those that make this allegation, forget to
add to it the train of saint GREGORY'S text Greg. Ma. l. 11. in. d. 6 ep. 54.
which is, That if they say contrariwise, that there is noe Metropolitan nor
Patriarch, it must be answered that the cause ought to be judged and decided by
the Sea Apostolic, which is the head of all the Churches. That S. GREGORY,
alleges this law, it is not to apply it to the meritt of Steuens cause,
but to show that Steven ought to be drawn in judgment before the Council of
his Province, and not before the Council of an other province. And indeed,
how could S, GREGORY have pretended that in mayor causes; that is to say,
wherein there were handled either the final deposition of Bishops, or matters
of Faith, the Patriarks sentences Cre. Mag. l. 4. ep. 82.
not to be subject to appeal; he that cries out; Do not you know, that in the
cause that John the priest had (he means John a priest of Chalcedon who had
been condemned for a matter of faith at Conctantinople,) against our brother
and Colleague, John Bishop of Constantinople, he has had recourse according to
the canons to the Sea Apostolic, and that it has been defined by our
judgment?

To the fifth Instance, which is that the Emperors LEO and Constantine Leo and
con. apud Leu^.
say that the Sentence of the Patriarch is not subject to appeal, and is not
to be retracted by an other Judge, as being the Prince of Ecclesiastical
judgment: We say, that those two Emperors who have written since the Schism
of the Greek Church, speak of the Patriarch by excellency; that is to say
of the Patriarch, of Constantinople, whom they believe to hold the place of
Pope in the East; for they esteemed the sentences of other Patriarchs to be
subject to appeals; but they believed that the sentences of Patriarchs
universal; that is to say, according to them, of the Pope, and of the
Patriarch of Constantinoplee whom they associated with the Pope in the Right of
universal Patriarch, for as much as Constantinople, was a second Rome, and the
Patriarch of Constantinople, for this occasion, according to them, a second
Pope, were not subject to appeal. This appears both by the tenth Article of
the sixth title, were they say, the judgment of all Metropolitanshipps and
Bishoprics, belong to their proper Patriarch; but to him of Constantinople,
it is lawful to confirm, and reform, and determine, the contestations bredd
in other Seas. And by Balsamon who writes upon the fifth canon of the Council
of Antioch, that this comdemnation is meant of Synods not subject to appeal, as
of the Pope, and of the Patriarch of Constantinople.

To the sixth and last Instance, which is that Photius says, that from the
Phot. in Nomocan.
Patriarks there is noe appeal, we answer it is not Photius that speaks,
for Photius inserts not in his Nomocanon, but the only texts of the
constitutions of the Emperors, without mingling any thing of his own; but
that these are the words of the constitution of Iustine, uncle to Justinian,
to which we have above answered, who says alluding to the eighth law of the
fourth title of the code, for against such Episcopal sentences, as it has
been ordained by our elders, there is noe appeal; Of which words, the Greek
Bookebinders or Exemplifiers have made, for against the sentences of such
Bishops; that is to say, of the Patriarks, there is noe appeal. Together that
if Photius the author of the Schism, that still continues between the latin
and Greek Churches had written these words to defend the invasion made upon
the Sea of Ignatius, true and lawful Patriarch then alive. and to hinder the
appeal that Ignatius had put in against Photius, and his pretended Synod, to
the Pope; (...) taking effect, it would have borne noe weight. But so far
(...) it from being so, as not only Photius, but after him Simon Logothetae,
Zonara, Balsamon, Alexios, Blastares, Harmenopolus, and other greek canonists,
insert into their collections, the canons of the Couucell of Sardica, and
particularly the third, fourth, fifth, and by which the Episcopal appeals of
all the provinces, are yielded to the Pope, but also that under the very title
of the retractation of the sentences of Bishops, under which he registers this
constitution of Iustine, he quotes third, fourth, fifth canon of the Council
of Sardica, which ordain that the Episcopal appeals should be remitted to
the Pope. For to this that Zonara. to preserve the Eastern appeals to the
Patriarch of Conctantinople says that the Council of Sardica, in making the
Rule of the Episcopal appeals, intended to yield noe more to the pope, but
the western Appeals, We say besides this, that this exception Zonar. in
con. Sard. c. 5.
defaulketh not Africa, which made a part of the western provinces, and was
subject to the Provost of the Pretory of Italy; it is against the precise
intention of the Council of Sardica, which published this Rule expresselie, to
abrogate the canon of the Council of Antioch, and to justify the restitution
that Pope (...) had made of saint ATHANASIVS Patriarch of Alexandria, and of
Paul Bishop of Constantinople, and of Marcellus primate of Ancyra in Galatia,
and of Asclepas Bishop of Gaza in Palestina, who had been deposed from their
Seas, by the Counsels of Tire, of Jerusalem of Antioch, and other Eastern
Councils: Iuliu^ (says Zosom) received Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria Paul
Bishop of Constantinople Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra in Galatia, Asclepas Bishop
of Gaza in Palestina, and Lucius Bishopp of Andrinople into his communion; and
because that to him for the dignity of his Sea, the care of all things
belonged, he restored to each of them his Church. Sozom. hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 7
And elsewhere speaking of the Fathers of the Council of Sardica they answered
that they would not separate themselves from the communion of Athanasius and of
Paul, and Principally for as much as Id ibid. c. 10.
Julius Bishop of Rome had examined their cause, and had not condemned them.
And therefore Balsamon seeing that this evasion could not subsist, has
invented an other, which is that the council of Sardica had indeed yielded to
the Pope, the appeals of all Bishops, but that Constantinople having since
been erected to the title of the second Rome, the right of appeals has been
divided between the Pope, and the Patriarcke of Constantinople: Those things
(said Balsamon commenting the third canon of Balsam. in Council Sardic c. 3.
the council of Sardica) which are here defined of the Pope, ought also to
be extended to the Patriark of Constantinople, because by diverse Canons (he
means the canons of the council of Chalcedon, and of the conncell surnamed
Id. Ibidem l. 5.
Trullian, by which he pretendes that he Bishop of Constantinople was made
equal to the Pope excepting precedence) he has been honored with privileges
in all things equal to those of the Pope. And again, commenting the fifth
canon of the same council of Sardica; This privilege belongs not to the Pope
alone, that it should be necessary that every condemned Bishop have recourse
Nil. de Prim. Pap l. 2.
to the Sea of Rome, but it ought also to be understood of the Sea of
Constantinople. And Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica; The twenty eight cano^
of the council of Chalcedo^, and the thirty sixth of the sixth synod, honoring
the Sea of Constantinople with the same privileges as the Sea of Rome, yield
also manifestly the (...) to the Sea of Constantinople. And so much for the
Council of Sardica.

CARDINAL PERRONS REPLY TO THE KING OF GREAT BRITAIN. THE FOVRTH BOOK.
THE ESTATE OF THE CHVRCH IN THE EAST. CHAPT. I.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
HAd any one presumed to alter or disguise ever so little the faith approved
by the whole world: it was easy even for a Child to surprise and discover in
his novelty him that should bring in a different doctrine, and the robber of
the truth being surprised, all the pastors of the world if it were needful
roused themselves up, and being once stirred up gave themselves noe rest, till
they had taken away the evil from amongst them, and had provided for the
security of Christ's flock. This was heretofore the designation and
felicity of the Catholic church, but which endured no^t many ages.

THE REPLY.
APPELLES answered one day to one of this Scholars that had painted a Venus
loaded with pearls, carkanets and jewels; because thou could not paint her
fair, thou have painted her rich: so though this description be not adorned
with truth, which is the simple naked and natural beauty of history, it is
eloquent and adorned with rich and magnificent words: But S. BASIL and S.
HIEROM, paint out the estate of Religion in their time, in the east much
otherwise: S. BASIL when he says: To what shall we compare Basil.
Magn.
the state of the present times certainly to a Sea Fight, when Sea Captains
chased with the war, and inflamed to the combat, set one upon an other with a
violent hate, and nourisht with old injuries. And a while after. The troubles
stirred up by the Princes of the earth, swallow up the people more horribly,
then all kinds of (...) winds and tempests, and a dark and sad night
possesses the Churches, the lights that God had placed to illuminate the souls
of men being banished from their Seas And S. HIEROME when he writes; Because the
East striking against it self by the ancient fury of the people, tears in
little morsells the undivided coat of our lord wouen on high, and that the
foxes destroy the vine of Christ in such sort, as Hieron. ad Damas.
it is difficult amongst the dry pitts that have noe water, to discern where
the sealed fouutaine and the enclosed garden is; for this cause I have thought,
that I ought to consult whith the Chair of Peter, and the faith praised by the
mouth of the Apostle. ep. (...).
And a while after; Now in the west the sunn of justice is risen; and in the
East Id. ibidem.
that Lucifer which was fallen, has set up his, Throne above the stars; you
are the light of the world; you are the salt of the earth, you are the vessels
of gold and of Silver: and the vessels of earth or wood, do here attend the
rod of iron and the eternal And the history of the following ages does even
the same. For when (...) rose up, and after he had been judged in the first
instance by Flanianus Bishop of Constantinople, appealed or pretended to have
appealed Leo ep. 8. and in ep. praeamb.
to the Pope, and was again judged and deposed in the second instance by him;
what came of it? The Emperor Theodosius governed Council. (...). c. 4.
by (...) an abettor of Eutyches, caused a Council to be held, under the title
of General at Ephesus, where by force and by strong hand he caused, Dioscorus
the Patro^ of Eutyches heresy to preside; the legates of the Pope for this
cause, quitting the place, fled. In that Counsel Eutyches was restored;
Flauianus deposed and slain, after he had nevertheless appealed from his
condemnation to the Pope and the Eutychian heresy Val ent. epist. ad Theod os.
in praeamb. Co^c. (...) c. 25.
was subscribed by Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, Maximus Patriarch of
Antioch, Iuutnall Patriarch of Jerusalem, and almost by all the Bishops of the
Council, some by their good wills, and others by force. The Pope again takes
the cause of the faith in hand, pursues the holding of a new Council which was
that of Chalcedon, were that heresy is condemned and Dioscorus and Eutyches
and all his abettors deposed and excommunicated, and in Dioscorus steed there
was substituted in the patriarkshipp of Alexandria, Proterius a catolicke and
partaker with the Council of Chalcedon: to Proterius there succeeded Timothy
an (...) and paracide of his Predecessor, who again set on foot the
Eutychian heresy in the Sea of Alexandria and in Egypt, and disannulled there
the decrees of the Council of Chalcedon; a while after, into the Sea of
Antioch, there entered PETER surnamed the Tanner, likewise an enemy to the
Council of Chalcedon, and professor of the heresy of (...). Likewise there
came to Constantinople Acacius, who communicated with Peter Bishop of Antioch:
and there was installed in the Empire Zeno an Eutychian and disannuller of the
Council of Chalcedon; and all the Eastern Church miserably rent by the
factions of those that held, some for the Council, and some against it, and
others, neither for nor against it, whom they called neuters, so long that
after some changes of Patriarks, sometimes Catholics, and some times
Eutychians, all the natural Churches of Egypt, and those of Ethiopia, that is
to say, all that acknowledged the Egiptian Patriarch of Alexandria have
remained and perseuered still to this day in the profession of the Eutychian
heresy. Such was then in the east (under the Emperors, abusing their
authority) the designation and felicity of the Church, and such was the
facility even for Children (except those that cast their eyes upon the
communion of the Roman Church) to know the robbers of the truth, and for
pastors to drive away the evil from among them, For as for the west, the
Patriarshipp of the Roman Church, has always had this particular blessing
that within the (...), of the extent thereof, the Catholic Church,
notwithstanding the infidelity of the Emperors, had been without comparison
more visible and more eminent, (as being the Ensign Colonel, and that where
to the others ought to have regard, and under which they should gather
themselves) then in the other Patriarkships. From whence it is that what S.
HIEROM writes in the form of a history of former times Hieron. ad Damas. ep.
57.
when he says to Pope Damasus. The wicked children having dispersed their
patrimony; amongst you (...) is preserved uncorrupted, the inheritance of the
fathers: Leo ad Marcian. Aug. ep. (...).
S. LEO seems to say it, inform of a prophecy of those that are to
follow, who pronounces, That none of the Patriarchall (...) (saving that of
Rome) shall remain firm and stable.

What the division of the Empire has wrought to the division of the Church.
CHAP. II.
The continuance of the Kings answer,
FOR after the Empire being overthrown, and the form of the common wealth
changed, new governments have risen up, many in number, different in manners,
distinct in languages, laws, and institutions. The division of the Empire has
drawn after it, the division of the Catholic Church, and all those things
that we say now to have served (...) to the preservation of the union and
external Communion of the Catholic Church, have ceased by little and little.

THE REPLY:
THE division of the Empire, has not caused the division of the Church,
especially in the West; for whatsoever multitude of governments have had place
there, under the title of Empire, Kindome, Principality, and Common wealth,
and whatsoever difference of manners, languages, laws, and institutions, that
have reigned there, the Church has been no more visible in the time when the
Empire was one and ruled over all the East and west, then it has been under
this diversity of Princes and governments. Also the unity of the Church was
not foretold by the Prophets, only for the time wherein there should be but one
te^porall monarcke in the world, if ever that title could have belonged to any
Prince, but also for that time wherein there should be several kings and
Administrators of Estates, according to this Prophecy Psalm. 101.
of the Psalmist: The Kings and Kingdoms shall agree in one to serve our Aug.
l. de unit. Eccl. c. (...)
Lord. Which caused S. AUGUSTINE to say, under color that in the whole world,
Kingdoms are often divided; yet for all that, Christian unity is not (...),
for as much as the Catholic Church remains on either part. And indeed, that
the unity of the Church depends not from the unity of the Empire but from the
relation to a visible center of the Ecclesiastical communion, it appeared
sufficiently even in the time of the greatest unity and extent of the Empire,
when the Christians which were under Firmus King of the Barbarians in Africa,
under Mania Queen of the Sarazins; under Cosroes King of Persia, states all
distinct, yea the most part of the time, enemies to the Roman Empire: And
after in Damascus and other neighboring Provinces under the Kings, of the
Agarenians, did all agree in the union and communion of the Catholic Church.
For as for the deuisions which are at this day in the East, every one knows,
that that of Egypt and Ethiopia, has begun from the time of the unity of the
Empire; And that of the Armenians likewise; as appears by the decisio^s made
against them in the Canons of the Counsel holden under Justinian (...): And
that of the Nestorians, and Iacobites which have yet to this day their sect in
Mesopotamia and other parts of Asia likewise. And as for the Greek Church, it
is certain, that although it began to be divided since the separation of the
Empire, nevertheless the cause of the division, was not the division of the
Empire under which it perseuered yet many years in unity with the Latin,
but the Schism between the two competitors of the Patriarkship of
Constantinople, Ignatius and Photius, to which to make it the more lasting,
heresy was added, and which the Emperors, (according as they have been good or
evil) have endeavored themselves to fome^t or stopp, and there have not wanted
general Counsels, even of the two several Churches, to extinguish this
division when they have desired it. For histories are full of these examples,
witness that which was holden at Constantinople under the Emperor Basilius for
the restitution of Ignatius, that which was holden under Pope Innocent the
third which we call the great Council of Lateran, to reunite the Greek
church with the Latin; and that which was holden for the same effect at
Florence under Eugenius the fourth at which the Emperor and the Patriarch of
Greece assisted in person. As also the division of the Empire, and the rule of
the Greek Emperors, and after, of the Mohammedan Princes, did not hinder the
Churches that acknowledged the Patriarch of the Syrian tongue, whom we call
Maronites, from perseuering in the communion of the Roman Church. In such sort,
as this variety and division of sects in the East, can not be attributed to
the defect of the unity of the Empire, since in the time that the Empire was
most united, these troubles and innouations had such place therein, as Socrates
and Sozomene do in the time of the Emperor Constantius, set the mount Tuscis
in Illiria, for a bound between the quiet peace of the Church, and the tempest
and turbulencie of heretics. But it ought to be attributed to the want of
constancy of the Eastern people, or rather to the blessing of God upon the
Roman church, which would show that this prophecy, Thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock, I will Matthew. 16
build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, has had
some more special effect for the Sea of S. PETER, then for those of the other
Patriarchs, according to that oracle of the great Leo: Besides the stone Leo
ep. 52.
that our Lord hatt set for a foundation, noe other building shall be steadfast.

Of the interpretation of these words: Thou art Peter, Rock in French is,
Pierre, in Greek (...) in Syriack Cepha which words in the self same languages
are the name of Peter.
and upon this Rock, I will build my Church. CHAPT. III.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
SINCE that time, the Catholic Church, in truth has not ceast to be, for it
shall allwaies be, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against her, who
is founded on Christ the true stone; and in the faith of PEETER and of the
other Apostles.

THE REPLY.
THat some times the Fathers expound these words; Upon this Rock I will build
my Church, of the Faith of S. PETER, and say that the Church was built upon the
confession of PETER: And that some times they expound it of the person of PETER
and say that the Church has been founded upon the person of PETER, they are
not contrary expositions, the one excluding the other, but conioynt, the one
including the other, for they intend the Church (to speak the School
language) is built causallie upon the confession of PETER; and formallie upon
the ministry of the person of PETER; that is to say, the confession of PETER
was the cause werefore Christ chose him, to constitute him for the foundation
of the ministry of his Church: By that (says saint HILLARIE) the blessed
Confession has obtained his reward: and Hilar. in Matt. c. 16.
that the person of saint Peter, has been that upon which our Lord has
properly built his Church. So as to say that his Church is built upon the
confessio of PETER, is not to deny that it is built upon the person of PETER
Hieron. ad Pammach. aduers error. Ioann. Hierosol. ep 61.
but it is to express the cause wherefore it is built upon him; noe more then
to sale with saint HIEROME, that PETER walked not upon the waters, but Faith,
is not to deny, that saint PETER walked truly, properly, and formallie, upon
the water; but it is to express, that the cause that made him walk there, was
not the actiuitie or natural virtue of his person, but the faith that he had
given to the words of Christ. And therefore, as these two propositions, the
faith of PETER walked upon the waters, and the person of PETER walked upon the
waters, are both true, but in a different sense, for the faith of PETER walked
upon the waters causallie, as the Schooleme sare; that is to say, it was the
cause that the person of saint PETER walked there, and the person of saint
PETER walked there truly, properly, and formallie; so these two propositions
the Church was built upon the confession of PETER, and the Church was built
upon the person of PETER, are both jointly true, but in different sense; for
the confession of PETER is the causall foundation of the Church, that is to
say, it is the cause for which the Church is built upon the person of PETER,
rather then upon that of any other Apostle, for as much as the primacie of
this confession not proceeding nor prevented from or by any humane
instruction, but proceeding immediately from the pure revelation of God, the
other Apostles being silent and not knowing what to answer, was the cause, in
favor whereof Christ chose (preferring him before all others) saint PETER to
constitute him the foundation of his Church. And the person of Peter is the
formal foundation of the Church; that is to say, him upon whose ministry, by
preferring him before all others, Christ has built and edified his Church. But
the differenc of these two expositions is that the one is immediate and the
other mediate; the one direct and the other collateral; the one literal, and
the other moral the one original, and perpetual, and the other accessorie
and temporal; the one consigned from the beginning, and the other introduced
by occasion. For before the Arrians were risen up; that is to say before the
age of Constantine and of the first Council of Nicea, the interpretation that
was current in the Church, was that, not of the confession of PETER, but of the
person of PETER. As when (...) says in his Book of Prescriptions against
heretics; Was there (...) de (...), c. 32.
any thing co^cealed from Peter who was called the stone of the building of
the Church? And ORIGIN: See what is said to the great foundation of the Church,
and the solid stone upon which Christ has built his Church. And elsewhere,
Peter upon who^ the Origeu, in Exodus c. 14 hom. 5.
Church of Christ has been built, against which the gates of hell shall not
prevail. And in the comentarie upon the Epistle to the Romans translated by
saint Orig. apud Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 15.
HIEROME; When the Sovereign authority of feeding the Sheep was given to
Peter, and that upon him as upon a stone, the Church was built, the confession
of any other virtue was not exacted of him, but only that of Charity. And S.
CYPRIAN, Id in epist. ad Roman. c. 6. l. 5.
Peter whom the Lord chose first, and upon whom he built his Church. And
again; God is one, and Christ is one, and the Church is one, and the Chair is
one, built by Cyprian. ep 71.
the voice of our Lord upon Peter. But after the coming of Constantine, when
Idem ep. 4.
the Arrians had lifted themselves up against the divinity of Christ, the
Fathers finding no passage in the scripture, more express to prove unto them
that JESUS CHRIST was the son of God, not by adoption, but Mat. 16.
by nature, then this Confession of saint PETER, Thou art Christ the Son of
the living God, in which they held, that the word (living) had been expressly
inserted, to show that JESUS CHRIST, was the son of God by generation; for as
much as to engender, as say the Philosophers, is proper to living things,
they took care as much as was possible for them, to (...) the dignity of this
confession. And because that in favor thereof, and for it S. PETER had been
constituted, foundation of the Church, they licensed themselves to call it by
Metonimy, that is to say, by translation of the name from the effect to the
cause, the foundation of the Church, that they might have the more occasion to
declaime against those that destroyed it, in reproching the^ that they ruined
the foundation of the Church that is to say, the confession in favor whereof,
and for whose cause he that had made it, had been constituted foundation of the
Church, but nevertheless, to show that they intended not, in doing this to
exclude the person of PETER from being the formal foundation of the Church,
that which the same fathers had said in one place of the confession of PETER,
as causall foundation of the Church, they said it in an other, yea often times
in the same place, of the person of PETER, as formal foundation of the Church.
This appears by saint HILARIE, who Hilar. de Trinit. 1. 6
disputing in his works of the Trinity against the Arrians, after he had
said, This faith is the foundation of the Church, by this faith the gates of
hell are disabled against her; this faith has the keys of the heavenly
Kingdom: Adds immediately after, to declare that this should be intended of
the says of saint PETER causallie and meritoriouslie, but of his person
formallie; that is to say, that this confession has only been the meritorious
cause, for which saint PETER has received these things, but that it is the
person of PETER, that has properly and formallie received Ibidem.
them: This is he, that in the silence of all the other Apostles,
acknowledging beyond the capacity of human infirmity, the Son of God, by the
Revelation of the Father (...) (...) by the Confession of his blessed faith, a
supereminent place. And a little after. He has confessed Christ to be the
Son of God, and for that he is called blessed, This is the Revelation of the
Father, this is the foundation of the Church; this is the assurauce of
eternity, from hence he had the keys of the Kingdom of (...); from hence his
earthly judgments become heavenly. And a little before; After the confession of
the Sacrament, the blessed Simon is submitted Ibidem. 10
to the edification of the Church, receiving the keys of the heavenly
Kingdom. And in his comentaries upon the very place of the words of JESUS
Hilar. in Matt. c. 16.
CHRIST, The confession of Peter has received a truly worthiereward. Id.
ibidem.
And a little after: in the title of a new name, blessed foundation of the
Church, and worthy Stone of her edification, that destroyed the laws of
(...), and the gates of the deepes, and all the prisons of Death: O blessed
Porter of heaven, to whose arbitrament, the keys of the eternal entry are
delivered, whose judgments on earth have authority to preiudge in heaven. And
elsewhere. Christ had so great a zeal to suffer for the Salvation of human
kind as Peter the first Confessor of the Son of God, the foundation of the
Church, the Porter of the heavenly kingdom, the judge of heaven upon earth,
dissuading him, he called him by the name of Satan! And so saint CHRYSOSTOM
Id in Psalm. 13.
interprets it; that is to say, sometimes of his faith, Upon this stone (said
he) that is to say, upon the faith of this confession: And sometimes Chry so.
in Matt. c. 6.
of his person: He promises (says he) to make a fisherman more solid then
any kind of stones. And upon the fiftith Psalm, hear what he says to
PETER. That Pillar, that foundation, and therefore called Peter as made a Rock
by faith: And again, that Pillar of the Church, that basis of Cyrill. de
Trinit. l. 4
the faith, that be ad of the Apostolic flock. And saint CYRILL does even the
same, sometimes of his faith, He has (said he) called the immutable faith of
Peter his disciple, a Rock, and sometimes of his person, he foretold him he
should noe more (...) called Simon but (...); signifiing most aptly by that
word, that upon him, as upon a (...) and a steadfast stone he should build his
Church. And this may be said of the first point of this Article, which is of
building of the Church, upon the faith, or upon the person of PETER: Let us
pass forward to the second which is of that of the other Apostles. The Church
says his majesty, is founded upon the Confession of PETER and the other
Apostles. Here it is needful to distinguish the diverse uses that this word,
foundation of the Church, receaues in the Scripture; for it is one thing to be
the foundation of the faith of the Church, and an other thing to be the
foundation of the Ministry of the Church And again, the foundation of the
faith of the Church, is of two sorts, for there is an obiectiue foundation of
the faith of the Church, and a suggestiue foundation of the faith of the
Church. I call that an obiectiue foundation of the faith of the Church, which
is the first object that the Church is obliged to know and embrace for
doctrine, of faith; and that is Christ, of whom S. PAVLE says, None can (...)
any other foundation besides that which 1. Corinthians. c. 3. verse. 11
is already laid, that is Chrict. For the first thing that enters into the
object of the Christian faith, as it is Christian, is Christ God and Man
crucified for our Sins; And all the other doctrins of Faith have noe other
place then as superedifications and accessories to that. I call that a
suggestiue foundation of faith of the Church upon which the Church grounds and
assures the belief of those things which she holds for doctrines of faith,
and this again is double, the one principal and original, to wit, the holy
Ghost, of whom our Lord says; He shall suggest to you all things that I
Joan. 14. verse. 26.
have told you, and the other isntrumental and organicall; to wit, the voice
and pen of those, that he has chosen to declare unto us the mysteries of
faith, with certain and infallible authority. And in this sense, not only all
the Apostles and Evangelists, but also all the prophets, are foundations of the
faith of the Church according to this Apostolical sentence; We are edified
upon the foundation of the Prophets and of the Apostles. And Ephesians. 2. verse. 20.
in this same sense saint PAVL said in the second to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. c.
That he had been nothing inferior to the most excellently great of the
Apostles. 11. verse 5. etc. 12. verse. (...).
And in the Epistle to the Galatians, That he had not received his Gospel
from men, but from God: And that those that seemed to be something; that is to
say, those that for the more particular familiarity that they had with our
Lord, it seemed they should be more eminent in the doctrine of Faith, and
should be the Pillars of Faith, had taught him nothing. For to be something
according to the style of those (...) the east, is a word not of contempt, but
of great and extraordinary estimation.

I call him foundation of the ministry of the Church, that has the
superemine^ce and superintendencie of the government and ministry of the
Church, which I have distinguished from the fou^datio^ of the Faith, not but
that the primitive and original Ministry of the Church, comprehends the
Office of revealing the Faith; and that the perpetual and ordinary ministry
of the Church, comprehends the office of preseruiug and propagating the Faith,
from whence it is that saint PAVL calls the 1. Timoth. c. 3. verse. 15
Church, The pillar and foundation of faith: But because the foundation of the
Ministry extends further; and many, as saint LVKE amongst others, have been
foundations of the Faith of the Church, who nevertheless have not been
foundations of the Ministry of the Church. Now it is of this kind of
Foundation, to wit of the Foundation of the ministry of the Church, that is
treated off in these words of our Lord: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I
will build my Church; as it appears by what follows of the keys, and of the
power to bind and loose. This quality then of foundation of the government
and ministry of the Church to dispute; whether since it have been extended and
communicated to the whole Body of the Apostles, it is an other point. For what
S. PAVL says: If they be ministers of Christ, I am so more then they, is to be
2. Corinthians c. (...). verse. 23.
understood of the excess in the labor of the Ministry, and not in the
authority. But at the least, when our Lord pronounced these words, Matthew 16.
verse. 18.
Thou art Peter and upon this Rock I will build my Church: It is certain that
in that instant and in those words, it was conferred to none but to saint
PETER; for the words are all pronounced in singular terms, Ibid. verse. 19.
and excluding plurality, Blessed art thou Simon Son of (...), and I say
unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church: and
I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Which saint AMBROSE
declares, who after he had said, This man to wit, PETER when he had heard; but
Ambros. de incarnat. Sacram. c. 4
(...); what say ye that I am? presently not forgetful of his place he made
the primacie, adds to it, It is then this Peter that answered before the rest,
but for the rest, and therefore he is called Foundation. Which saint CYPRIAN
likewise acknowledges Cypr. de unit Eccl
in these words: Upon him being one, he built the Church. And it is not to be
said, that the Condition of Foundation of the Church having been given to
saint PETER in favor and for recompense of his Coafession, all the other
Apostles that had part in his Confession, ought also to have their part
therein. For the quality of foundation of the Church was not given to saint
PETER in favor of his Confession simply, for then it should be common to all
the faithful; but in favor of the primacie of his Confession, wherein the
other Apostles had noe actual part, but only by consent and non repugnancie,
for as much as saint PETER only answered, as illuminated immediately from God,
the others being silent and not knowing what to say, and learning it but my
the means of saint PETER'S Answer: He was (says saint Hilar. in Matt (...)
16. Cyrill Catech. 11.
(...) made worthy of first knowing what there was of God, in Christ. And
(...) CYRILL of Jerusalem: All the other Apostles being silent, for this
doctrine was above their reach, Peter the Prince of the Apostles, and the (...)
(...) of the Church, not of his own invention, neither persuaded by human
reason, (...) (...) in his soul by God the Father said to him thou art Christ
the Son of the living God. And saint ATHANASIVS many years before them:
(...) (...) Father revealed to Peter those things whereof our Lord demanded
him, Athan. contr. Arian. Orat. 4.
(...) (...) is not doubt but the same Lord who inquired, as if he had first
revealed to (...) those things that he had known from the Father, he asks him
humanly, to (...) in inquiring carnally that Peter that should tell them knew
them (...).

FOR that in the sixth of S. JOHN, S. PETER answers in common for all the
Apostles. We believe and know, thou art Christ the Son of the living God,
besides that the Latin editions have not the word, living, We say it was a
later thing, for as much as when saint PETER answered, We believe and know
that thou art Christ the Son of the living God, he had been already
constituted head and Prince of the other Apostles, and in this quality he
answered alone for all the Cyrill in Joan. lib. 4 c. 28.
rest, as saint CYRILL testifies in these words; By one that presided, or
that was preeminent, all answered: and had already received the promises of
our Lord, that upon him he would build his Church. As S. CYPRIAN declares in
these words. Peter speaks here upon whom the Church had been built. And
therefore as the Apostles had part in the primacie Cyp. ep. 69
of this confession only by adherence and non-repugnancie, so our Lord gave
them part in the authotitie he had given to S, Peter by adherence and
communication with S. PETER; that is to say, under condition of communicating
and adhearing and remaining in unity with saint PETER. And yet this part that
he promised and gave them in the rule and ministry of the Church, was
afterward, to wit, as in right in the eighteenth of saint MATTHEW; What ye
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. And as the installment into the
possession in the twentieth of saint JOHN Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins
ye forgive, shall be forgiven, to the end to shewthat to saint PETER only the
co^ditio^ of being a Rock, that is to sa, rule and foundation of the building
of the Church had been principally and originally given; and that afterward
it was extended to the other Apostles, it was by aggregation and association,
and by communicating and adhering with him, and as having relation and
correspondence to him, as to the Center and middle form of the verity of the
Church. For as God gave first his spirit to Moses, and after took of the
Spirit that he had given to Moses, and gave thereof to the seven tie two
Elders, not that God took away from Moses any portion of the spirit that
he had given him, not that the spirit of God was diuisible, but to the end to
establish and show a relation of unity, dependencie, and adherencie of the
seauentie two Elders to Moses. So in some sort (for I compare not the two
histories wholly) our Lord gave first the whole authority of the ministry and
the Chair Apostolic, to saint PETER alone; I intend as in right, and not in
actual possession, which he received not till after the Resurrection, and
after (...) it to all the twelve Apostles in common, to the end to show the
relation of dependencie, unity, and adherence, that they ought to have with
Match. hom 26.
saint PETER, whom upon this occasion Macharius an ancient Egiptian divine,
calls the successor of Moses; Afterward (said he) to Moses, succeeded Peter,
to whom the new Church of Christ and the true priesthood has been committed.
Which has caused the Fathers to say, that there was but one Chair, which was
the Chair of PETER; but that in this Chair all the Apostles were placed, to
wit, by the adherence, communion, and unity that they had with S. PETER. In
the Episcopal Chair (says saint OPTATVS Mileuitanus) there is set the head
of all the Apostles Peter, from Opt Mileuit. contra Parmen l. 2.
whence he also has been called Cephas, to the end, that in this only Chair,
unity might be preserved in all, least the other Apostles should attribute to
themselves, every one his Chair a part, but that he might be a Schismaticke
and (...) that against this only Chair, should erect an other. And therefore
also the surname of PETER, by which this Condition of being the foundation of
the rule of the Church is designed, has been given to him only to bear it in
the title of a proper name, and not to any other Apostle, to show that to him
by excellency and eminency over all the rest, appertained the thing whereof
he alone bore the name. For since our Lord should by the word PETER design the
condition of being the ministerial foundation of the Church, for what cause
should he affect it to Peter alone to bear it in the title of a proper and
ordinary name, and not give it to any other, if he were not to bea foundation
of the Church in an other manner then the rest? Which S. BASIL has in such
sort acknowledged, as desiring to show the difference which is between the
substance and the hipostaticall proprieties of any subject, he alleges for
example of the substance, the substance of humanity, which is common to PETER
and PAVL: although (said he) the appellations be different, yet the substance
of Peter and Basil. contra Eunom l. 2.
Paul, and of all men is one; and alleges amongst the examples of the
hypostaticall individual and incommunicable conditions of PETER, that is to
say, which are particular to him only, and are not common to him with saint
PAVL, nor with any other, the condition of being Id. ibid.
the foundation of the Church; Because, said he, the names of men signify not
their substances, but the proprieties whereby each of them is designed in
particular. From thence it is, that when we hear the name of Peter, we
understand not his substance, etc. but conceive the sense of the proprieties
which are particular to him. For as soon as we hear this word, we
understand Peter the Son of Jonas, he that was of Bethsaida, he that was
Brother to Andrew; he that of a Fisherman was made an Apostle, he that (...)
reason of the supereminencie of his Faith, received upon him the edification of
the Church.

AND for this same cause to saint PETER only there has been conferred
singularly separately and apart, the authority of the rule of the Church, and
to all the rest only in common and jointly with him to the end to show, that
he was the original, the source the center and the beginning of the unity of
the Church, and that no other out of his Communion could exercise the rule and
ministry thereof, but that the rest had right to exercise it, it is only as
associated, and aggregated with him, and as grafted and inserted upon him. For
our Lord never said singularly to any of the Eleven; Thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock I will build my Church, and I will give thee the keys of the
Kingdom of heaven; nor, I have prayed for thee that thy faith shall not fail:
And finally, Thou being converted, confirm thy Brethren, nor, love thou me
more then these? feed my sheep: But only has said in general to all the
Matt. 18. verse. 18.
Body of the Apostles, saint PETER being Colleague, present, and comprehended
therein, that which he had said before Joan. 20. verse. 23.
to saint PETER alone, as to the head, That which ye shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven, and they whose sins ye forgive, shall be forgiven.
Which has moved saint CYPRIAN to say, that Christ has instituted saint PETER
the original of unity: PETER (says he) upon whom Christ has built his
Church, Cypr. de unit. Eccl. Id. ep. 40.
and instituted him the original of unity. And again, One chair built upon
Peter by the voice of our Lord. And for this occasion as although in a tree,
there be but the stock, and the body of the tree only that succeedes, and is
tied by direct continuance with the root, nevertheless the other branches are
tied to it by oblique and collateral succession and continuance. So though
there be but only the Bishop of Rome that is saint PETER'S successor in direct
succession, nevertheless all the Bishops are esteemed in some sort to be set
in saint PETER'S Chair, and to be in a manner saint PETER'S successors; to wit
by oblique and indirect succession, because of the communication that they have
with the Chair of S, PETER. But the Bishops are never said, neither in their
whole body, nor separately to be successor to any other particular Apostle;
but are said either in general to be the Apostles successors, or in
particular, successors to S. PETER, as to him that for being the head of the
Apostleship, contains in virtue all the Apostolic Body, so as never any
one Bishop has called himself, successor to any other Apostle, except those
that have succeeded locallie to any one of the other Apostles; as the Bishops
of Jerusalem are in title successors to saint JAMES.

BUT against this exposition, the adversaries to the Primacie form thriteen
oppositions; the first, that our Lord adds presently after, speaking to Peter,
Got behind me Satan. The second that he cries out; If any one amongst you
desire to be greatest, he shall be the least. The third that S. PETER forbids
from domineering over the flocks. The fourth that the Apostles sent PETER: and
JOHN into Samaria. The fifth that S. JAMES voted last in the Council of
Jerusalem. The sixth that S. PAVLE, names S. JAMES before S. PETER. The
seventh that the same S. PAVL says, that the Gospel of the Gentiles was
committed to him, as that of the circumcision to PETER. The eighth that he
says S, PETER walked not right in the Gospel. The ninth that he says he
resisted him to his face, because he was reproueable. The tenth that S. CYPRIAN
writes, that the other Apostles were the same that Peter was. The eleauenth
that EVSEBIVS reports out of S. CLEMENT Alexandrinus, that PETER, JAMES, and
JOHN contested not amongst themselves for the honor but made JAMES Bishop of
the Apostles. The twelfth that Saint CHRYSOSTOM writes, that the other
Apostles yielded the Throne to JAMES. And the thirteenth, That the same S.
CHRYSOSTOM writes, that the Principality was committed to JAMES. To the first
then of Matt. 16. verse. 23.
these objections, which is, that our Lord said a while after to S. PETER, Go
behind me Satan; We answer. S. HIEROME has solued it in these Hieron. in
Matt. c. 16.
words: This blessing, beatitude, and edification of the Church upon Peter, is
promised to Peter in future times, and not given to him in time present. I will
build (said he) my Church upon thee. To the second which is, that our Lord
Matt. c. 20 verse. 26. and Marc. c. 10. verse. 43.
cries elsewhere; If any one amongst you desire to be greatest, let him be the
least, We answer, he does there forbidd the desire, and not the effect of the
Primacie; the Ambition, and not the thing, the (...), and not the (...), witness
this train that follows, as the Son of man is come into the world, not to be
served, but to serve; By which he pro pounds himself to his disciples for an
example not of an Anarchy, but of Superiority accompanied with humility. To
the third Which is that S. PETER (...) Petr. c. 5. verse 3.
writes; not domineering over the flocks, We answer, that the Greek word
Match. 20. verse. 25. and Marc. 10. verse. 24.
signifies a violent Dominion, (such as that whereof our Lord said: The kings
of the nations domineere over them, And such as S. HIEROME represents it in
these words: The Princes of the Churches are wont to oppress the Hieron. 16 in
Ezech. c. 18.
People with arrogance, of whom it is written, they have constituted thee
Prince, be not puffed up, but be amongst them, as one of them: And not a
presidencie and fatherly direction, such as was that of Samuel over the
people of Israel, who after he had exercised the Government of Israel, and
judged Samuel apud (...) ren. l. 4. aduers haeres. c 44
the people many years, justified himself in the end, saying: I have conuersed
with you from my youth to this (...); answer me in the presence of God, and of
his anointed, if I have taken any man's bullock or his Ass, or if I have
commanded by force and oppressed any one of you. And such as that whereof
saint PAVL said, Obey your prelates and be subject to them. Hebr. 13. verse. 17.
And elsewhere; Let him that presides, preside in all diligence. And our Lord
himself, which is the wise and faithful servant, that our Lord has
constituted Romans (...). verse (...).
over his family? It is Peter (says saint AMBROSE) chosen by the judgment
Matthew. 24 Ambr. de fide l. 5. c. 1.
of our Lord to feed his flock, who has merited to hear, feed my lambs,
feed my sheep. To the fourth which is, that the history of the Acts
testifies, that the Apostles when it was in agitation to form the Church of
Samaria, sent thither PETER and JOHN: we answer, it was a mission of request,
as that when the Israelites sent Phinees their high priest, and the princes of
the tribes, and not a mission of authority. To the fifth which is, that S.
JAMES voted last in the Council of (...): We answer, that in Counsels,
contrary to the order of secular companies, those that preside vote first. And
namely saint HIEROME says, that saint PETER, from whose words S. JAMES Hieron.
ad Aug. ep. 89
took his Rule; was the Prince of this decree. To the sixth, which is, that S.
Paul writes, that James Cephas, and John, seeing the grace that God had
conferred Galat. 2.
upon him, gave to him and to Barnabas the right hands of fellowshipp: We
answer, that the greek edition of Complutum and many several Readings,
Greek and Latin have it Cephas, James and John. Witness S. CHRYSOSTOM, who
in his comentarie upon the Epistle to the Galatians; reads Cephas, James, and
John; and Theodoret, who in his comentarie upon the fifteenth chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans, alleging this passage, reports it in these words: The
Apostle teaches this manifestly in the Epistle to the Galatians, for he says;
Peter James and John, who seem to be the pillars, gave the right hands of
fellowship to me and to Barnabas: And saint AUGUSTINE who as well in the text
as in the comentarie reads, Cephas, James, and John, And saint HIEROME, who
not only Hieron de script. (...) cc. in Paulo.
both in the text and the comentarie reads Cephas, James and John but even in
his writings against Heluidius, cites the text of saint PAVLE in these words:
Cephas James and Ishn. And moreover elsewhere speaking of saint PAVLS Ordination
to the Apostleship says. Paul was ordained Apostle of the Gentiles, by Peter,
and James, and John. And therefore when it is found written in any place;
James, Cephas, and John, as in the poem of Theodoret upon the Epistle to the
Ephesians; and in that of the Epistle to the Hebrews; we say that this order
is to have reference to the prioritie of the knowledge that James received of
the fruits of the grace of saint PAVLE: for as much as when Paul and Barnabas
came the first time from Antioch, into Jerusalem they found but only saint
JAMES because Act. 12.
saint PETER was in prison. And indeed not only throughout the scripture where
saint PETER is named with the other Apostles, he is first named; or if he be
last named, it is in increasing and rising by degrees: 1. Corint. 9
As when saint PAVLE says; The other Apostles and the brethren of our Lord,
and Cephas. But also, when there is question of making the General catalogue
of the Apostles, saint PETER is always first placed, and Judas last, and all
the rest without order, or at least without the title of second or third to
show that there was not only handled simply primacie of order, but of
dignity; and he is not only set down first, but he is set first with the
expression of the word first. The first (says S. MATTHEW) Matt. 10.
is Peter; which Beza finds so to press him, as he charge falsehood upon
this place of the Gospel. I suspect (says Beza) that this Beza in Matt. c.
10.
word (FIRST) has been added by some one that would establish the primacie of
Peter; for that saint ANDREW was called before saint PETER, because Ep iph
haeres. 51.
saint ANDREW (as saint EPIPHANIVS says) was the eldest. From whence it is,
that Bethsaida, is called the city of Andrew and of Peter. Idem ibid
This was in the first vocation described by saint JOHN, and before our Lord
had said to saint PETER; Thou shall be called Peter; in which word contained
implicitly, the promise to make him VICAR of the true Rock, and to constitute
him, ministerial head of the Church; and not in Matthew. 16.
the second vocation described by saint MATTHEW, and made after the Epiph. vbi
supra.
imposition of the name of Peter; in the which as S. EPIPHANIVS says; Galat.
2. verse. 7.
Peter preceded his brother.

To the seventh which is that saint PAVL writes, That the Gospel of the
circumcision had been committed to PETER and the Gospel of the uncircumcision
to him: We answer, this clause is not a division of the authority of
ministry, but a more especial testimony of the blessing of God upon S. PETER
to persuade the Jews, and upon saint PAVLE to persuade the Gentills? otherwise
S. PAVLE, had been excluded from preaching the Gospel to the Jews; and
nevertheless wheresoever he came, addressed himself first to the Jews: and
saint PETER from declaring the Gospel to the Gentiles, yet nevertheless, it
was by his ministry, that God first opened the gate of the Church to the
Gentiles; as appears both by the history of the conversion of Cornelius, and
by the protestation that he made to the Council of Act. 10. v. 3.
Act. 15. v. 7.
Jerusalem in these words: You know that God from the days of old has
willed to call the Gentiles by my mouth. To the eighth which is, that the same
Galat. 2. v. 14.
S. PAVLE says: that saint PETER abstayning to eat with the Gentiles Tertull.
de prescript. c. 23.
upon the coming of the Jews, walked not with right stepps in the Gospel:
We answer, that it was, as Tertullian says; a vice not of doctrine, but of
conversation, and which consisted more in the occasion, then in 1. Cor. 9.
the thing; since saint PAVLE himself; made himself, after ward a Jew Act. 16.
Act. 12.
to the Jews, and a Gentile to the Gentiles, that he might gain all; and
Gal. 2.
circumcised Timothy, and purified himself in the temple. To the ninth which
is, that he adds, that he resisted S. PETER to his face, or in his presence,
which is a phrase which we are accustomed to use, to express a resistance to
any more eminent person because he was reprouable, or according to the Greek
and S. HIEROME, reproved: We answer, Hieron. in epist. ad Galat. c. 2.
this resistance was not a reprehension of authority, but a reprehension of
charity, as those of Iethro to Moses, or of S. BERNARD to Pope Exodus 18.
Eugenius, that is to say, a reprehension that excluded not the superiority
Bernard. de considerat l. 4.
of the reproved over the reprouer: Witness these words of saint Aug. you see
what saint Cyprian says, that the holy Apostle Peter, in whom there shined
August. de baptism. cont. Donat. l. 2.
so great a grace of the Primacie, being reproved by saint Paul, did not
answer that he had the Primacie, and would not be reproved by new men later
then himself. And again, The Apostle PETER has left a more rare example of
humility to posterity, in teaching men not to disdain reproof from their
inferiors, then Paul in teaching the meaner to resist the greater, sauiug
charity for the defense of the truth. And these of saint CHRYSOSTOM, giving
Chrysostom. in ep. ad Galat. c. 2.
the reason of the humility that S. PETER showed in this action And from hence
it coms (says he) that Paul reproues, and Peter bears it; to the end, Cypr.
de unit. Eccl.
that while the Master reproved holds his peace, scholars may change their
opinion.

TO the tenth objection which is, that S. CYPRIAN says, that the other
Apostles were the same that Peter was, endued with like authority and power.
It is true but saint CYPRIAN speaks there of the internal and essential
power of the Apostleship, and of the external and accidental power to the
Apostleship, that is to say, that they were equal as concerning power, but
not concerning the order of the exercise of the power: for the understanding
whereof it must be known, that there are two things requisite to exercise the
Apostleship lawfully, the one to exercise it with authority: for those that
exercise it without power, as the false Apostles were usurpers, and
sacrilegious persons, witness this sentence of saint PAVL, None attributes honor
to himself, but he that is called like Aaron. Hebr. 5.
the other to exercise it in unity. For those that had exercised it out of
unity had been schismatics, although they had true commission Opt. Mileuit.
contr. Parm. l. 2.
and authority to exercise it. At Rome (says Optatus Mileuitanus:) there has
been placed a Chair for Peter, that unity might be preserved by all, least
the other Apostles should attribut to every one his own. And again; he
repeateth the knowledge that saint PETER had of the divinity of the Son of
God; the promise that he had made him, to die with him; and how he had thrice
denied him; And adds: yet nevertheless, for the good of unity, he had not
merited to be separated from the number of the Apostles. And a little after:
They remained all innocent, and a Fisherman received the keys, that the
negotiation of unity might be formed, etc. without which thing, unity which
is so necessary, could not be. Now to preserve that unity, in which the
internal and essetinall authority of the Apostleship ought to be exercised,
it was necessary first to have a subject, which should be as the center, the
head, and root, of this unity, and by relation and adherence whereto all the
college of the Apostles, and all the Body of the Church might be manitained
in unity. For the things which are plural by themselves, and are not one
with local unity, cannot without loosing their undivided plurality, be
reduced to a visible unity, unless by relation to some thing, which by it
self may be visiblie one. And secondly, to maintain this unity it is
necessary further, beside the internal authority, essential to the
Apostleship, there should be an other external authority, and accessory to
the Apostleship, which might have the superintendencie over the care of the
preservation of unity, to cause the Apostles to exercise their Apostleship in
unity. And as the office of the cause is to rule his effect, he that should be
the beginning and original of this unity, should likewise have the
superintendencie over the rest, for what concerns the preservation of unity;
and by consequence, that to him should belong, the supereminent jurisdiction
over things necessary to the maintenance of unity; that is to say, over
things necessary to prevent schism, and hinder the disorder and confusion of
the exercise of the ministry; as are the distinction, and distribution, either
mediat or immediate ofiurisdiction; the suspension and limitation of the
exercise of the ministry, and other such like. Not that the Apostles for their
maintenance in unity, had need that the effect of this Authority should be
practiced so evidently over them as over their sucessors, because of the
assistance that they had every one in particular of the Spirit of God; but to
the end to propound to the Church a form and a model of the order that she
should keep after their decease: (...) as although there were noe need of a
Council in the time of the Apostles, to decide questions of Religion whereof
every particular Apostle might be informed with all fullnes and certainty;
nevertheless the holy Ghost would that they should use this form in the
matter of legal things, to leave it for a pattern to the Church of the
succeeding ages in like occurrences. It was then the internal authority, and
essential to the Apostleship, which consisted in the power of revealing
matters of faith, with assurance of infallibility to make canonical writings,
to institute the first mission of pastors, remitt sins, to give the holy
Ghost, and other the like, that saint CYPRIAN spoke of when he said, that all
the Apostles were endued with equal authority, and not of the external
authority and accidental to the Apostleship, which was instituted to cause it
to be exercised in unity.

THIS appears first because he touches before and after the original Cypr.
(...) unit. Eccl.
of unity: The Lord, (says he) buildes the Church upon him being one, and
commands him to feed his sheep. And although he conferr like power after his
Resurrection unto all his Apostles, and said to them. As my Father sent me, so
send I you, etc yet to manifest unity, he constitutes the Chair, one, and
disposes by his authority, that the original thereof shall take beginning
from one. That certainly that Peter was, the other Apostles were also, endued
with a like share of authority and power; but the original takes his
beginning from one, that the Church and the Chair may appear to be one. And a
little after, according to the ancient manuscripts, Idem ibidem.
and the citations of Iuon and Gratian, He that abandons the Chair of Peter,
upon which the Church is built, can he be confident of being in the Church?
And elsewhere. Peter upon whom one God has built the Church, and from whom he
has instituted the original of unity. This appears secondly because he Id.
ep. 55.
calls the Roman Church, the Chair of Peter, and the principal Church from
whence Sacerdotall unity proceeds. This appears thirdly because saint
HIEROME after he had repeated the same sentence of S. CYPRIAN Hieron (...).
(...). l. 2.
in these words: Thou will tell me that the Church is built upon Peter, though
the like be done in an other place upon others, and that the fortitude of the
Church, do lean equally upon all: Adds; but amongst twelve, one is chosen,
to the end, that a head being appointed, the occasion of Schism might be
taken away. To teach us that in all other things, the Apostles, were equal to
saint, PETER, except in those that had regard to the prevention of Schism, and
the preservation of unity, for the consideration whereof he had been
constituted head of the Apostles. And finally because Optatus Mileuitanus
countryman to the one; to wit, saint CYPRIAN; and timefellowe to the other; to
wit saint HIEROME, cries out. Thou can not deny, but that at Rome, the
Episcopal Chair has been placed by the Apostle Peter; etc. in which the
unity was observed by all; to the end, that all the Apostles should not
attribute to themselves, to each one his Chair, but that he should be a sinner
and Schismaticke, who against the only Chair, should erect an other. And a
little after: from whence is it then, that you would usurp to yourselues, the
keys of the Kingdom, you that by your presumptions and audacious sacriledges,
combat against the Chair of Peter?

To the eleventh objection, which is that Eusebius, ill translated by Russinus
reports from Clemens Alexandrinus, that Peter, James, and John, established
James, brother to our Lord, Bishop of the Apostles: We answer, that it is
from a faulty Grammar, a faultie-diuinitie. For the greek text says, of
Jerusalem and not of the Apostles. Peter, (says he) James, and John contested
not for glory (or opinion, for greek word signifies Opt. Mileuit. contr. Parm
l. 2.
either) but vnanimouslie constituted James brother of our Lord Bishop of
Jerusalem; that is to say, James, and John, did noe more stand upon it to
dispute for honor with S. PETER, as they had formely done, but united
themselves with him, to consecrate James, Bishop of Jerusalem; whereto the
words of CHRYSOSTOM agree, about the jealousy that James and John formerly
had of the Primacie of S. PETER; Harken (said he) how this same John that
lately demanded these things, afterward wholly yields the primacie to Peter.

TO the twelfth objection, which is that S. CHRYSOSTOM upon the proposition
made by S. PETER in the first of the Acts, to substitute an other Apostle in
steed of Judas, writes; See the modesty of James, he had been made (the
greek says, he has been made) Bishop of Jerusalem, yet he says not a word
upon this occasion. Consider also the singular modesty of the other disciples,
how they yielded the Throne to him, and debated not more among themselves.
Eusebius. hist. Ecc. l. 2. c. 1
We answer, that this objection is Andabates fence. For this concession of a
Throne, has reference not to S. JAMES, but to S. PETER, who whilst he spoke,
S. JAMES was so modest, (as although he were so excellent, that he was after
made Bishop of Jerusalem) he opened not his mouth, and the other Apostles as
James and John, So^ns of Zebedeus, which had formerly been jealous of S. PETER,
debated the Primacie with him noe longer, but yielded him Presidencie. This
appears as well by the text of the history where there is noe tracke of
respect given to S, JAMES but to S. PETER only, as by the time wherein S.
JAMES was created Bishop of Jerusalem. For the first act that the Apostles did
after the Ascension of our Lord, was the substitution of MATHIAS insteede of
(...), in the history whereof saint CHRYSOSTOM says these words. And
Clemens Alexandrinus and Eusebius testify, that the promotion of saint James
to the Bishopric of Jerusalem, happened afterward. By means whereof the
Apostles could not in that action; that is to say, in the election of MATHIAS
yield Preside^cie to saint JAMES because of the Bishopric of Jerusalem. And
the same is confirmed both by this that saint CHRYSOSTOM had written upon the
twentieth chapter of Chrysostom. in Matt. ho 66.
saint MATTHEW: Mark (said he) how this same John that lately made, such
demands, after wholly yeeldes the Primacie to saint Peter. And by this that he
adds presently after the place objected: This man (says he, speaking of Id.
in Act. Apost. hom 3.
saint PETER) first constitutes a doctor, and says not, we are enough to
teach, far was he from vain glory. And a little after; he takes the first
authority of the affair, Id. ibid.
as he that had all other put into his hands, for to him Christ had said: And
thou being once converted confirm thy brethren. And by this that he protests
in the beginning of his discourse: Peter, (says he) both as full of (...),
and as having received from Christ the flock into his keeping, and as the
first of the College, always first beginns to speak.

To the thirteenth objection which is, that saint CHRYSOSTOM writes upon the
fifteenth of the Acts, that the principality was committed to James; It is
true, but he speaks there only of the Principality of the Hierosolomitan
Church; if indeed the greek word do in that place inte^d principality and
not beginning, and that the sense be not, that JAMES had been established from
the beginning; that is to say, that he was of the ancient Apostles, and not of
the new, as saint PAVL; and nevertheless, that he took noe exceptio^s to S.
PAVL, for speaking between S. PETER and him. For what soever that Greek word
signifies, it is certain it can signify nothing but the principality of the
particular Church of Jerusalem, and not the principality of the universal
Church; which S. CHRYSOSTOM himself testifies elsewhere to have been granted to
saint PETER, in these words: For if any one ask me (said he) how did James
Chrysostom. in Ioah. 21. hom. 87.
obtain the Sea of Jerusalem? I will answer that Christ has constituted
Peter Master, not of that Sea but of all the world. And again, Christ had
foretold Peter great things, and had put the whole world into his hands, and
had pronounced martyrdom to him, and she wed him greater love then to the
rest. And indeed S. CHRYSOSTOM alleges not this principality, to show the
modesty of saint James in this, that he was not offended that saint PETER had
spoken before him, but to show the modesty of saint JAMES in this, that he was
not offended, that saint PAVL, spoke between saint PETER, and him: A manifest
proof, that he treates not of the universal principality, but of the
principality of the particular Church of Jerusalem, of which he makes mention
in this place because those that had moved the trouble for which the Counsel
was holden, were the Jews and Pharisees of Jerusalem converted to
Christianity; who were jealous to see that the Gentiles were received into the
Church, without obliging themselves to the observation of the law; And because
saint JAMES had more especial credit in their behalf, because he was not only
their Bishop, but Bishop of the City, which but a while before was
Metropolitan of the law, and consequently it seemed he should be touched with
a more strict interest to the observation of the law, then any other, and
also that he had not gone about with saint PETER and saint PAVL to receive
the Gentiles into the Church, and by this means had not lost his (...) in the
behalf of the legalists: It was (says saint CHRYSOSTOM) a profitable
providence, that those things were done by those that were not to reside in
Jerusalem, and that he that taught the Hierosolomitans was not refusable, and
that his opinion might not be departed from. For these causes then saint JAMES
had by accident a greater authority in the behalf of the authors of this
Scandal, then the other Apostles; to preserve the which he did (says saint
CHRYSOSTOM) that which those ought to do, that are constituted in great
authority; that is to say, he suffered saint PETER to speak more severely,
and himself spoke more gently. But that compared simply with saint PETER, he
was either equal or superior in jurisdiction, saint CHRYSOSTOM is so far,
from having ever thought it, that contrariwise he cries out a loud; Peter was
Chryso. in Joan. hom. 87.
the Prince of the Apostles, and the mouth of the disciples, and the head of
the College, and for this occasion Paul went up to visitt him, letting the
rest alone. And a little after; Christ put into his hands, the Prouostship of
his brethren, Id. ibid.
and vpbraids him not with his denial of him, nor reprocheth him with what was
past; but says to him, if thou love me, be president of they brethren, and
the same love that thou have in all things showed to me, and whereof thou have
boasted show it now; and that life that thou have said, thou would lay down
for me, lay it down for my sheep. And in the homily thirtith three upon
saint MATTHEW; The first and the Corypheos of the Apostles, was a man ignorant
and without learning. And in the homily fifty fifth, Not only the Apostles
were Scandalized, but also the Corypheos, (that is to say, Sovereign) of them
all, Peter. Chryso. de sacerd. l. 2.
And in the second book of the Priesthood; Christ committed the care of his
sheep to Peter, and Peter's Successors. And in this do all the rest of the
Fathers agree as well Greek, as latin. Thou see (says saint GREGORY Greg.
Nazianz. orat. 26.
Nazianzene) amongst the disciples of Christ, all sublime and worthy of
election that one of them is called the Rock and that the foundations of the
Church are committed to him; and the other is more beloved, and leanes upon the
bosom of Jesus, and the rest suffer the difference. And saint AMBROSE, The Lord
(said he) by Ambros. in Luc. l. 10. c. 24
these words, love thou me more then these, asked the question not to learn
but to teach, being ready to be himself exalted into Heaven, which was he whom
he would leave to us for the Vicar of his love. And a little after; And because
that of them all he only protests, he is preferrd before them all. And
elsewhere.

With a full flood of tears the Churches Rock; Hoc ipsa petra Ecclesiae
canente culpam diluit.

Did cleanse his Crime, at crowinge of the Cock.
And S. EPIPHANIVS; Christ has appointed Peter to be the guide, and leader of
his Disciples. And Optatus Mileuit. In the Roman Chair there is set Peter,
the head of all the Apostles. And again; Against the gates of hell, we read
that Peter Optat Mileuit. co^tra Parm. l. 2. Cvrill. Alexandr in Joan. l. 12.
c. 64.
our Prince, has received the wholesome keys. And S. CYRILL of Alexandria:
Peter as the Prince and head of the rest, first cried out, thou art Christ the
son of the living God. Even until then, it was a thing so well known unto
antiquity, that saint PETER was the visible head of the Church, and of
Christian religion, as the very Pagans, and Porphirius amongst the rest, as
saint HIEROME reports it, reproched it to Christians, that S. Paul had Hiero.
August. ep. (...).
been so rash, as to reprove. Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, and his
master, And they fained, (as says saint AUGUSTINE) that the Oracles of their
false Gods, having been inquired of, concerning Christian Religion, answered
August de Ciuit. Dei c. 53.
this blasphemy: that Chrict was innocent of the imposture of the Christians
but that Peter who was a Magitian, for the love he bore to his Master, had
invented Christian Religion. And this may be said of the comparison between
PETER and the other Apostles, for I will not now treat of the other frequent
marks of the prehemine^ce and authority of S. PETER, which are in the
Evangelical and Apostolic history: As that our Lord commanded him to pay
the tribute for himself, and for him: that he undertook Matt. 17.
Act. (...).
the care of the replacing of an other Apostle in Judas his Act. 2.
steed, all the College of the Apostles suffering themselves to bend Act 5.
and to be lead by his words: that he is nominated as for pre-eminence, and
ranked a part, Peter and the Eleven: that they bore the sick into the Apostles
way, that Peter's shadow might pass over them: that Act. 10,
that he alone, judged Ananias and Saphira to death: that to him alone is
revealed the introduction of the nations into the Church, and other the like:
for as much as it is not my purpose, to examine the other places of scripture;
but only those that his majesty has alleged; and to examine those, not by
scripture, but by the Fathers, whose objection me thinks, I have sufficiently
satisfied. And as for Orige^s interpretation which Origin in Matt. c 16 Tract.
1.
extends this text to all Christians in general, and says, that whosoever
confesses that Christ is the Son of God, is made a foundation of the Church,
it is an interpretation morallized from this passage, to bring it into sense,
although strained and wrested, whose fruit may be applied to all the hearers,
and not a serious and litterall interpretation as the same Origin that makes
use of it testifies, when he expounds it expressly and literallie of the person
of Peter. There remains the third point, which is, that the Church is built
upon Christ: now in this point we are all of accord with his Majesty: but yet
we grant not that S. PETER leaves to be the visible and ministerial
Foundation of the Church; for the Philosophers teach us, that things
subordinate combat not one an other, but embrace and presuppose one and other;
and therefore to say that Christ is the foundation of the Church, and to say,
that S. PETER is the foundation of the Church, are not repugnant propositions,
but unanimous and compatible. For we do not pretend, that they are
foundations of the Church after one and the same sort; but we hold, that Christ
is the foundation of the Church by himself, and by his own authority, and S.
PETER only by commission, no more then to say with Moses, that God only was
the guide of the people of Israel in their passage from Egypt to the land of
Chanaan; and to say with S. STEVEN, that Moses guided the people in Exodus
(...).
the Wilderness. This was he (said he) that was with the Church in the desert:
Act. 17.
Are not things incompatible, for god was the guide of the people of Israel by
his proper virtue; and Moses by commission and lieuetenancie from God.
Likewise to say that the Viceroy of Ireland, is the foundation of the
government and policy of Ireland, And to say that the excellent King of
Great Britain, is the foundation of the state and policy of the same
Ireland, are not things incompatible, for the excellent King of Great
Britain, is so by his proper authority; and the Viceroy is so by
commission, lieuetenancie, and representation. Although notwithstanding that
the literal intention of this passage, Upon this Rock I Matt. 16.
will build my Church, is no way to design by the word, Rock the person of
Christ, but that only of Peter, as it appears by six evident reasons.

THE first, that our lord having foretold to S. PETER, that he would change his
name, not by the attribution of a simple Epithete, as he did to Marc. 3.
the Sonns of Zebedee, whom he called the Sonns of thunder: but by the
imposition of a name ordinary and permanent, in saying to him, Thou shall be
called (...), puts him nowhere in possession of this promise, nor explaines
to him nowhere, the cause of the imposition of this name, Joan. 1.
but in this passage; Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church, Now this passage cannot explain the sense of the word Peter, if in the
second part of the passage, the word, Rock, be not taken in the same sense, and
for the same subject for which it is taken in the first: and by consequence
this clause, upon this Rock I will build my Church, cannot there be interpreted
of the person of Christ, but on the only person of S. PETER.

The second that our Lord means in this place, to render an exchange for the
words that S. PETER spoke of him, as may appear by this preface; And I tell
thee, which for this cause Beza has translated into these words, And I tell
thee reciprocallie. Now S. PETER in his proposition had done two things; the
one to declare the appellatiue name of our Lord, which is Christ, and the other
to explain the sense and energy of the same name of CHRIST, in saying, Thou
art Christ the Son of the living God. And therefore the law of the
Antithesis and correspo^dencie wills, that not only our lord should declare the
name that he had promised to give him, in saying to him; Thou art Peter, but
also should explain the sense and energy of this name in saying to him; and
upon this Rock I will build my Church. Which could not be unless by the word
Rock in this second clause there were literally understood the person of S.
PETER, and not that of CHRIST.

THE third, that it had been a thing extremely from the purpose, to have made
mention of the name of Peter, for the language that our Lord meant to speak to
S. PETER, if by this clause, and upon this Rock, he had not intended to speak
of the person of Peter. For the word Rock has no metaphorical relation to the
keys, but to the building.

The fourth, that it had been an inconstant grammatical consequence, and evil
knitt, to say, And I declare to thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock
which is my self, I will build my Church: and I will give to thee the keys of
the Kingdom of heaven. The fifth, that the connection of the pronowne (this)
with the repetition of the word (Petra) before expressed, shows that it is a
relative pronowne, and whose relation is determined to the antecedent already
expressed; by means whereof this pronowne could not be diuerted from the
natural use of the relative, that the repetition of the antccedent gives it to
an use of a demo^stratiue pronowne, but by the application of an external
gesture of demonstration, either expressed in the text of the history, or by the
very explication of the historian. As when our Lord after he had spoken of the
Jewish Temple, said, Destroy, this temple, and within three days I will build
it up again; The Evangelists to hinder the pronowne from being taken for a
pronowne relative, as the repetition of the word Temple already before
expressed would have informed the auditors, adds: this he spoke of the Temple
of his (...) a thing which is not in this passage.

AND the sixth and principal, that it is most certain, that our Lord in these
words: thou art Peter, and upon this Peter or Rock intended to allude to the
name of S. PETER. Now all allusions which are made to names, are either
allusions of confirmation, or allusions of correction. I call allusio^s of
confirmation, those which are made to confirm or approve the imposition of the
name which had been first given; As when Uopiscus called the Emperor Probus,
truly Probus; that is to say, truly an honest man; and Carus; Epist. in
Prob. imp.
truly Charus; that is to say, truly dear. And saint ATHANASIVS, called
Osius, truly Osius; that is to say, (...) holy. And the Council of
Constantinople Id in Car. imp.
holden under Menas, called Agapet, truly Agapet; that is to say, (...) Athan.
ad imperat.
beloved. I call allusions of correction, those which are made to correct and
reprehend the imposition of the name first given, to show that the effect
Constant. apolog
of the name agrees not with him that bears it. And these allusio^s of
correction Conc. Co^st sub Men.
again are of two sorts; the one are made by simple negation (...)
antithesis, as when Noemi said, Call me no more Noemi that is to say,
Agreeable, Act. 1.
but call me, mara, that is to say, bitter. And the other are made by
translation; as when the name that has been first imposed upon any one, is
transferred to an other: As when saint (...), speaking of Absalon, whose name
signified, the peace of the Father says; That the true Absalon is Jesus
Christ; it is an allusion of translation, and consequently of correction by
which he transferrs the name of Absalon to Jesus Christ, and shows that it had
not justly been imposed upon Absalon, From whence it arises that if our Lord
in saying; Upon this Rock I will build my Church, intended by the word Rock,
the person of saint PETER: he meant to make an allusion of approbation, but if
he intended his own, he meant to make an allusion of translation, and
consequently of correction. Now besides that it must be impertinent, that our
Lord should make an allusion; of correction upon a name imposed by himself, it
is manifest that in honorable names, allusions of approbation and confirmation
are in steed of complements and gratifications, and allusions of correction
are in steed of reprehensions and chasticemets, Then to know whether our Lord
did there mean to make an allusion of approbation, and by the word Rock intend
the person of S. PETER, or to make an allusion of correction and translation,
and by the word Rock intend his own, there needs but to see, whether he meant
by these words to cherish, gratify, and recompense S, PETER, or to shake him
up and chastise him. For if by the word Rock he understood the person of S.
PETER, he meant to cherish, and recompense him, but if there by he understood
his own, he meant to be rough with him, and to correct him. Now both the
foregoeing confession of S. PETER; Thou art Christ the Son of the living God;
and the preface of our Lords words; Blessed art thou Simon the Son of Iona,
and this mark of Bez. in Matt. 16.
recompense, and reciprocal vicissitude of title and elogie, translated by
Beza himself into these words, I say reciprocallie to thee, cannot without
sacrilege suffer a doubt, but that he intended not in that place to be harsh
Hilar. in Matt. c. 16
with him, and to chastise him, but to gratify and recompense him, The blessed
confession, (says S. HILLARIE) has received the reward, nor conseque^tlie but
that our lord intended to make an allusio^ of confirmation not of correction,
that is to say, that he designed by the word Rock not his own person, but the
person of S, PETER. And against this ought not to be objected that S. PAVL
writes, The Rock was Christ. For metaphorical names, are not taken always in
the sams se^ce, nor for the same things, but vary their significatio^s
according to the several relations whereunto they are employed: which has
caused S. THOMAS to say, that in metaphors there is not so much regard to be
had from whence they are taken, as to what they are taken: and therefore
although the word Rock sometimes signifies, Christ in the scripture, it would
nevertheless be a blind (...), to will that wheresoever the scriptures uses
it, it should be intended of Christ. For sometimes the word Rock is employed
according to the relation that the Rock of a quarry has to the morcels of
stone that are drawn out of it. And in this sense, Abraham is called Rock:
Look (says Esaie upon the Rock from whence you have been cut; upon Abraham
your Father; sometimes it is employed according to the relation of the dryness
and barennes that rocks Esa. 51.
have to the seed that is cast upon them; and in this sense hard and Luc. 8.
indocile parts are intended by the word Rock: Part of the seed (said our
Lord) fell upon the Rock. Sometimes it is employed according to the relation of
the stedfastnes and soliditie that Rocks have in the buildings which Matt. 16.
are founded upon them; And in this sense our lord says to S. PETER, Vpo^this
Rock I will build my Church, alluding to the custom of a^tiquitie, who used
when they were to build temples, to choose to build them upon Rocks for their
firmnes, rather then upon other places. From whence it is, that the place where
upon the Temple of Delphus was built, was called the Delphian Rocks: and that
the men of a certain City of Asia to be preferred in the building of a
Temple to the Emperor Tiberius, represented to him, that their city was
situate upon a Rock. And therefore our lord intending to build his Church upon
S, PETER; said to him according to the Hebrew, and the Syriacke; Thou art a
Rock, and upon this Rock I will build my Church. Sometimes it is employed,
according to the relation that Rocks have to the sources and fountains that
spring from them; and in this sense the Apostle says, They drank of the
spiritual Rock which followed them, and that Rock was Christ. By means
whereof, to infer from this, that in these words, the Rock was Christ, when it
is spoken of the Rock referred to the water (...) sprang from it; Christ was
intended by the word Rock; that here, where it is spoken of the word Rock
referrd to the metaphor of the ministerial building of the Church, it should
be necessary to understand it of the person Christ, and not of of that of
saint PETER, were an inconsequent consequence. And it is not to be said, that
in the parable of the man that built his house upon the rock, by the word
Rock; Christ is understood, for the litterall sense of the word Rock in this
place is noe other then to signify a good and firm foundation; and that this
is expounded of Christ, it is by allegory. Now there is great difference
between the litterall sense of places mingled with metaphorical terms, and
the allegorical sense. For from the litterall sense of places, mingled with
metaphorical terms arguments may be made, and consequences may be drawn from
one passage to an other; and from the allegorical sense, not. And then if
saint PAVL had said even according to the relation, to the ministerial
building of the Church, the Rock was Christ, has not our Lord usually
communicated his names to his ministers? And did not Jacob anoint the stone in
Bethell in the figure of Christ, as prefiguring that Christ ought to be the
stone whereof God prophesied by the mouth of Esaias: Behold, I will set up in
Sion a Rock well founded: And nevertheless does not the same Jacob say, that
Joseph was the Pastor and the Rock of Israel, making use of the word Even in
both of them? That is to say, does he not communicate by word, the same word
Rock of Israel to Joseph, that he had communicated by figure to Christ? And if
they stagger about the difference which is between the word (Even) and the
word (Tsur) or Petra, which signifies Rock, although Beza do not distinguish
it, when he translates; Thou shall be called Cephas. which is interpreted,
lapis. Does not Tertullian write according to the use even of the word, Tsur,
or Petra, He has given to the dearest of his disciples to Tertul. aduers.
Mareion. 1. 4. c 13.
Peter, the name of one of his figures: And does not S. HIEROME write upon the
same place of S. MATTHEW, As our Lord who is the light, has given to his
Apostles, that they should be the light; so to Peter believing in the
Rock-Christ, Hieron. in Matt. c. 16.
he has given to be the Rock. And therefore according to the metaphor of
Rock, it Basil. hom. de (...).
is said to him with good right. I will build my Church upon thee. And
elsewhere, Not only Christ was the Rock, but he has given to Peter, that he
should also be the Rock. And saint BASIL: Although Peter be also the Rock,
nevertheless he is not the Rock as Christ, but he is the Rock as Peter; for
as much as Christ is essentiallie the immovable Rock; and Peter is so by the
Rock; for our Lord gives his dignities without dispoyling himself of them,
etc. He E piph, l.
Anacorat.
is the Rock, he makes the Rock. And saint EPIPHANIVS; He has made the first
of his Apostles the firm Rock, whereupon the Church is built. And again; It
is he that has heard from him, Peter, feed my lambs: and to whom the
keeping of the Flock has been committed, And Prosp. de vocat gent. l. 2. c.
(...).
PROSPER: This most strong Rock, has received from the principal Rock
commmunication both of virtue and name. For whereas saint AUGUSTINE after he
had interpreted in many places the Rock of the person of PETER, as in these
words of the comentarie upon the sixty ninth Psalm. Peter who is in this
confession, had been called the Rock upon which the Church should be built. And
in these words of the Psalms against Donatus his party, Reckon the Prelates
from the Sea of Peter, And in this order of the Fathers, see who have succeeded
one an other, this is the Rock, Aug. In Ioa. tract. 11.
that the proud gates of Hell cannot overthrow. And in these words of the
comentarie upon saint JOHN, Peter this Rock answered in the name of all; and
in those words of the Epistle eighty six. Peter the head of the Apostles, the
Porter of heaven, the foundation of the Church: remitts it finally in his
retractations to the readers choice, whether of these two interpretations he
thinks to be most probable, to wit, either to interpret it of the person of
PETER, or to interpret it of the person of CHRIST, moved with this, that the
Latin text has: Tues Petrus, and not, Tues Petra. This is a grammatical
error partly proceeding from the defect of knowledge in the Hebrew and the
Syriack tongues, in which there is noe difference between Petrus and Petra:
But the text has it throughout. Thou art Cephas and upon this Cephas, that is
to say in Latin, Tues Petra, and supra hanc Petram, and in French, Tu es
rocher, and sur ce rocher, Thou art a rock, and upon this rock: and partly for
want of experience in the practice of the greek Arsen in Eurip.
tongue, in which the words (...) and (...), signify one selfsame thing;
from whence it is, that many Greeks have called the Sun (...), that is to
say stone, by allusion to the doctrine of Anaxagoras, who held that the Sunn
was a stone. By means whereof the Greek interpreter of S. MATTHEW has
pretended to put noe difference in sense, but only in kind, between these
words (...) and (...) and meant to say no other thing Basil. vbi supra.
but what we understand in French by these words; Tuesroc, and sur ce rocher,
ie bastiray mon Eglise. And therefore also saint BASIL produces the first
part of the clause in these words: Thou art the Rock, (...) having regard to
the words of our Savior, in which the condition of the Hebrew and Syriake
tongues permit not to make the distinction of gender, as S. Hieron. in epist.
ad Galat. c. 2.
HIEROME notes in these words: Not (says he) that Petrus, and Petra, signify
differing things, but because that which in latin we call Petra, the hebrews
and Syrians, because of the affinity of their tongues, call it Cephas, And
this Beza; though an enemy to the true sense of this passage, is constrained
to confess in these words: The Lord speaking in Syriack, has not used
diversity of Beza in Matthew. c. 16.
name, but in both places has said Cephas; as in our vulgar French the word,
Pierre, is said as well of the proper, as of the appellatiue. And for this same
cause, he translates the place of the first Chapter of saint John into these
terms: Thou shall be called Cephas, which is interpreted Petra, that Tu
vocabe (...) Cephas quod decla ratur Petra Bez. ibid.
is to say, Rock, or stone. And not so much as the doctors of the jews but
do acknowledge, that our Lord in calling Peter, Cephas, did intend to call him
Rock, and to constitute him for the foundation of the Church: as appears by
these words of Rabbi Helias in his Tisbi, upon the exposition of the word
Cephas: Jesus, the Nazarean (says he) called Simon son of Bariona, Cephas,
which signifies fortitude: for the interpretation of the Hebrew word sela, is
Cepha, which signifies in many places, fortitude, meaning that he was the head
and fortitude of his religion, and therefore he called him Cephas. And to this
there do agree all the famous editions of scriptures, in what tongue soever,
as well printed, as manuscripts. For not only the Hebrew editio^ of the
Gospel of saint MATTHEW published by Munster, says, Thou art Cepha, and upon
this Cepha; Thou art a Rock, and upon this Rock. And the Syriack published by
Moses of Merdin in Mesopotamia, and republisht by Tremellius: Thou art Kipho,
and upon this Kipho, thou art a Rock, and upon this Rock. But also the Arabicke
has it, Thou art Ascara and upon this Ascara: thou art the stone, and upon
this stone. And the Persian, Thou art zeng, and upon this zeng: thou art the
Rock, and upon this Rock. And the Armenian, thou art Vimi, and upon this Vimi:
thou art the stone, and upon this stone. And the Ruthenian, Egiptian, and
Ethiopian, even the same. Nevertheless, though the want of the Hebrew and
Syriack tongues, suffered S, AUGUSTINE to fall into this mistake, to think
that the primitive word Rock, was not there attributed to saint PETER, but
only the deriuatiue, and that Petrus signifies not Rock, but Rockey or Stony,
he has always acknowledged, be it by virtue of the other places of the
scripture, or be it by virtue of the perpetual tradition of the Church the
same thing that we conclude out of this passage, to wit, the Primacie of
saint PETER. For interpretating a while after these words; And I will give
thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven: of the donation of the keys made to
the Church in the person of PETER, he says the Church did then receive in the
person of PETER the keys, because PETER figured the Church. And yielding
elsewhere a reason, why the person of PETER figured the Church; he declares
that it is because of his Primacie. He bears (says he) by a figur atiue
generality, the person of the Church, because of the primacie he had amongst
the rest of the disciples. By which word, Primacie, he intends according to the
style of the scripture, the superintendencie and principality, as it appears
by these words of Wisdom. I have had Primacie Eccl. c. 2.
in all nations, And by these words of the same saint AUGUSTINE Peter
denominated from the Rock happy, bearing the figure of the Church, holding the
principallitie of the Apostleshipp. And again. who knows not, that this
Principallitie Epist-162.
of the Apostleship, ought to be preferred before whatsoever other Bishopric.
And elsewhere; in the Roman Church has always flourisht; the Principality of
the Sea Apostolic.

Of the indiuisibilitie of the Church. CHAP. IV.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
BUT it has begun to diminish in luster, as being divided into many parts,
as for external Communion, wholly separate one from an other.

THE REPLY:
Two Opuntine Brethren divided the inheritance of their Father with such
rigor, as they divided even to a cupp and to a Coat. It is in a sort, thus
with the heretics, they do indeed divide the Chalice that our Father has
left us by Testament, and where of David sings. The Lord is the portion of my
inheritance and of my Chalice; Psalm. 15
that is to say, they do indeed divide the Sacraments of Christ; but the
coat of Christ, which is his Church, they cannot divide, for it is alone and
indivisible. When the reign of Israel, says S. CYPRIAN, should Cypr. de
unit. Eccl.
be divided, the Prophet Achias divided his Raiment: But because the poeple of
Christ cannot be divided, his coat woven of a piece, and keeping it self
whole, was not divided by those that possessed it. The coat of Christ
indiuisibly united preserving itself whole, showed the indissoluble Concord of
our poeple, of us, who have put on Christ. By the Sacrament and sign of his
coat he has declared the unity if his Church, Who then is he so impious, so
faithless, and so disturbed with the fury of discord, that believes that the
unity of God, the Coat of our Lord, the Church of Christ, can be divided, or
dare to divide it? Not but that the multitude of the persons whereof the Church
is compounded, and which analogicallie is in steed of matter to it, may be
divided; but this division is but a material division of the Church, and not a
formal division; no more then the division that the false mother would have
made of the Child, had been a formal division; for as much as the being, and
the form of the whole had not remained in either of the parts, but a
material division.

For the Church as well as natural organicall bodies, may be materiallie
divided, but formallie it cannot be divided; that is to say, the members and
parts may indeed be separated from their whole, but after the separation, they
are noe more members and parts of the Church, but (...), and by abuse of
language, even as the members and parts of a Body endued with a life animal
and sensitive, when they come to be separated from their whole, are noe more
members and parts but equiuocally; forth as much as they participate noe more
of the form of the body, which cannot be possessed but in unity, nor reside
but in one only mass united and continued. By means whereof the Church after
the division of the external communion, resides only in one of the parts; to
wit in that from which the others have divided themselves, and not in the
others; for the Church is either one or none. My Dove Cant. 6.
(says the Spouse) is an only one. And David: Jerusalem that is builded as
Psalm (...).
a City, whose participation is in unity. And saint PAVL: One body and one
Ephesians. 4.
Spirit as you are called in one hope of your vocation. and Optatus
Mileuitanus; Optat Mileuit. (...).
There is one Church which can not be at once amongst you and amongst us. It
rests then, that it be in one place. And saint CHRYSOSTOM; The Parmen. l. 2.
name of the Church, is not a name of division, but a name of union and
agreement. Chrysostom. in c. ad Corinth c. 1. hom. 1.
And saint AUGUSTINE; He is one, the Church is unity; nothing answers to one
but unity. And elsewhere; Let every other inheritance be deu^ided amongst Aug
in ps. 101.
coheires; the inheritance of peace cannot be divided. And therefore when the
Idem.
Fathers say, that heretics, and Schismatics divide the Church; they intend,
either that they divide it as much as lies in them, that is to say, that they
endeavor to divide it, or that they divide it materiallie and not formallie,
that is to say, that they make thereof many Societies, but not many Churches.

Of the effect that division brings to the Church. CHAPT. V,
The continuance of the Kings answer.
AND also which is principally to be lamented, it is happened by this
dissipation, that there is less force in the separate parts then there was in
the whole to resist the enemy of mankind, who as Christ teaches us, is a
wake and attentive upon (...) occasion, to mingle the good seed with darnell
and tares.

THE REPLY,
AFTER the division of the external communion, all the soul, the form and
essence of the Church rests in one only of the societies, which remain after
the division, and not in the others which are no more truly parts of the
Church, but only equiuocallie, even as when a member is separated from a living
and sensible Body, all the essence, the Soul, and form of the creature,
remains in the Body, from whence that separation has been made, and not in
the part that has been separated from it, which is noe more a part of the
Body but equiuocallie and inproperlie. And therefore after the separation of
heretics, all the same strength, vigor, and virtue, which was in the Body of
the Church before the separation, remains in the part from whence the
separation is made, as she that inherits the condition of all, and not in the
others; in such sort, as she has noe less force to resist the corruption that
the enemy of mankind would bring in, but contrariwise oftentimes more, for as
much as the constancy of the Charity of those which remain in the Church, is
made the more united and the more eminent by the separation of the rest
according to this sentence of saint PAVLE; There must be heresies that the Good
may be manifested. And therefore saint AUGUSTINE writes, That the Church makes
use of (...) for the approbation of her doctrine; and of schismatics, for the
demonstration of her stedfastnes. And elsewhere; That those that go forth from
the Body of the Church are as euili humors, by whose purgation the Body is
eased. By means whereof his Majesty ought not to pretend that the alienations
of the parts which are separate from the Body of the Church, have left in her
from whom they are separated, the less vigor to resist the enemy of mankind,
and to maintain her self uncorrupted, then there was in the whole Body
before; but contrariwise to presuppose that the same virtue which resided in
the whole Body, is reunited in the part that succeedes it.

As when one of our eyes has. lost his former light
His splendors fair effect, shines in the other sight
And th'extinguisht beam, adds to the cleere-eyes store
Who sees alone as much, as both could see before.
Also it cannot be found, that since the separation of the Roman Church and the
Greek faction quoted by his Majesty, which is the greatest separation that
ever was made, the Roman Church received any doctrine which was not holden by
all the Body of the Catholic Church when this division happened; and noe more
till then, since the separation of the Egiptians and Ethiopian Provinces.

Of the pretended corruption of the Church, CHAPT. VI,
The continuance of the Kings answer.
AND what we now see with our eyes to be happened, yea and handle it with our
hands; it is a ridiculous thing, and more then absurd to dispute, if
heretofore it could be, or now can be done.

THE REPLY.
THere was never any age wherein those that separated themselves from the
Church, have not believed that they saw clearly and evidently that she was
corrupted and full of palpable and Cymerian darkness, otherwise they had not
separated themselves from her. The figure of this preiudication, preceded in
the rashness of Oza, who believed that the Arc was about to fall, and upon that
belief, put out his hand to lift it up, for which he was punished with death:
And followed in the incredulity of the Apostles, who while our Lord slept,
thought that the Bark wherein they were with him, was about to perish; in
indignation whereof he chidd them for their little faith, and taught them, that
he that keeps Israel, does neither slumber nor sleep: and the history since
has continued in all the pretended Reformers of the Church. For as Pentheus,
in seeing his children, thought he had seen Bears, Tigers, Serpents, and
other wild beasts, and did not perceive that the evil was not in them, but in
his sight: So the heretics in all ages, in seeing their mother; that is to
say, the Church, thought they had seen a troop of Dragons, Lions, and
wild-beasts; and upon that occasion have put themselves to flight, not
discerning that the evil was not in the Church, but in their eyes. And that it
is so; did not the Luciferians say, That the Catholic Church had been
converted into a brothell, and was Hieron. aduers. Luciferian.
become the whore of Antichrist? And did not the Donatists, call the
Apostolic chair, the chair of Pestilence? And did they not cry out, that
the Catholic Aug. contr. liter. Petil. l. 2. c. 51.
Church was become the shield of Romulus? And says not saint AUGUSTINE of
them, I justly persecute him that detracts from his neighbor, wherefore shall
I not more justly persecute him that publicly blasphemes the Church etc. when
he Idem cont. Crescon. c. 13
says she is a whore? And the Pelagians when there was alleged to them, the
number and the multitude of the Catholics, did they not answer, that to find
any thing, a multitude of blind men auailed nothing? And nevertheless, who
knows not at this day, that they were the blind men, and not the Church; And
then this pretended corruption of the Church being the theme of the question
debated by us, to cause that to pass, as a thing granted, it is to put for a
principle, that which his majesty ought, if it please him to reserve to be
judged at the end, and not presuppose at the beginning of the disputation. For
to say that there is no thing but is altered and corrupted by age, this
argument is good for those things that are preserved by ordinary and natural
faculties, but not for those that are assisted by extraordinary and
supernatural help; and to whom these words of David may be applied, Thy youth
shall he renewed as the youth of an Psalm. 102
Eagle. Now the Church, is of this number, for our Lord says of her without
exception of time, Thou art wholly fair, and there is noe spott in thee, and
Cantic. x.
Ibidem.
she sings and will sing to the end of the world. I am black, but I am fair;
Aug. cont^.
that is to say, I am black in manners, but fair in doctrine. And therefore
Faust. Manich. l. 22. c 28.
S. AUGUSTINE compares her to Sara, who when she was old, left not to be fair.
And for this same cause, saint HIEROME citing these words of Solomon, that
the eye that mockes his Father, or despises the age of his Prou. 30.
mother, the Crows of the valley shall pull it out, interprets them of
heretics Hieron. in Prou. c. 30.
who despise the age of the Church: As Soon (says he) as the eye of the
heretics mocks the creator his father, or despises the age of the Church his
mother, the cursed and unclean birds shall peck it out.

Of the exclusion of heretics from the Body of the Catholic Church. CHAPT.
VII,
The continuance of the Kings answer.
THE Roman Church then, the Greek, the Antiochian, the Egyptian, the Abyssine,
the Musco uite, and many others, are members more excellent in truth, in
doctrine, and sincerity of faith, the one then the other: but yet members of
the Catholic Church whereof the Masseand contexture, as for external form,
is already long ago dissolved and disassembled.

THE REPLY:
AND what shall then become of that his majesty lately said, that the
specificall form, and essential mark of the Church is truth of doctrine, and
that there is noe communion between light and darkness, and between Christ and
Belial. And that he that leaves Christ who is truth it self; leaves the Church
which is the foundation of truth: if not only the Greeks, Antiochians, and
Muscouites, (...). Tim. 3. and Hieron. in Zach. l. (...). c. 3
who are heretics in the point of the processio of the holy Ghost, which the
most excellent King does with us hold for an article of Faith and which in this
quality is inserted into ATHANASIVS his Creed, and into the Creed of the
Counsel of Co^sta^tinople, as it is read in the western Church, which his
majesty professes to embrace; but also the Egiptians and, Ethiopians (which
follow the sect of Eutyches anathematised and cast out Co^c. Chalced Act. 1.
and in relat. ad Leo.
of the Church by the Council of Chalcedon, near twelve hundred years ag
oea^d (...) in the doctrine of the person of Christ, which is the fundamental
doctrine of the Church, and that whereof S. PAVLE says, (...). Corint. 3.
None can lay (...) other foundation besides Christ,) are Churches and parts
of the Catholic Church? A Lacedemonian answered an inhabitant of the Isle of
Delphos, who told him that the women were not delivered of Child in their
Isle, but traveled out of it to be brought to bed, and that their dead, were
not buried there, but that they were carried forth of it to their Sepulcher:
And how then is it your country, said he, if you be neither borne nor buried
there? So, how is it, that the Sect of heretics, and namely those of the
Egiptians, and Ethiopians, with whom the Counsel Co^c. Chalced. vbi sup 2
Joan. v 7 Ibid. v. 12
of Chalcedon forbidds us to communicate upon pain of Anathema, and of whom
saint John himself tells us; If any one confess not that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh, he is a seducer and Antichrist. And again, If any one bring not
this Doctrine, receive him not into your howses, and say not to him, well be
it with thee; for whosoever says unto him, well be it with thee, communicates
in his wicked works; should obtain the being and title of the Church, that is
to faie, of the Spiritual country of the Faithful, if to be borne in the
grace of God, and to breathe, their first air of spiritual, life; we must,
first go forth of their Society; and if to obtain Salvation, and to rest in
peace after death, we must, first renounce their communion. God said to the
Church, by the mouth of Solomon; Thou art wholly fair, and there is noe spott
in thee; that is to say, as for doctrine and conditions of communion. And by
the mouth of Esaie; None incircumcised or unclean, shall any more pass
through thee; that is to say, None that publicly profess a polluted or
impure doctrine. He says by the mouth of Ezechiell, describinge the future
state of the christian church: I will establish an allia^ce of peace Ezech.
(...).
with my sheep, and will cause the evil beasts of the Earth to cease: Which
the Aug. contr.
Sibilla seems to have expressed in these words, repeated by Virgill; and
Faust. (...). l 13. c. 1.
that saint AUGUSTINE says, might fitly be applied to the Church.

Serpents shall cease swollen up with th'impure blood,
Of poysenous herbs, in their deceiptfull bud.
And how then should the mock Counsels of heretics, which saint Hier. in
(...). l. 8 c. 27 and in Esai l. 7. c. c. 22. and l. 2. in Ose. c. 7.
HIEROME calls, Denens of wilt beasts; and whose doctrine he calls, the wine of
(...) mingled witd the gall of Aspes, be Churches and parts of the Church? or
how should the Church to whom God has spirituallie given the same prerogative,
thar the historians attribute corporally to the Isle of Creete, to wit, that
it can suffer noe venomous beast in it; that is to say, noe Hieron in Esai l.
2. c. 5 and l. (...). c. 58.
dogmatizing heretic, communicate her name and society with the venomous
sects of heteticks? He says by the mouth of Osea, I will espouse (...) in
faith: And by that of Saint PAVLE; the edification of God is in faith. And the
most Excellent King himself protests, that the essential form of the
Church is faith. And how then can the sects not only of the Egiptians, and
Ethiopians, but of all the heretics which makes, as says S. PAVLE, a
Shipwreck of faith, be Churches, and in the Church? He says by his own
mouth; the gates of hell shall not have victory over the Church. And S.
EPIPHANIVS and S. HIEROME Ibid.
Matthew. 16. Epiph. l. Anacor.
interpret those Gates of Hell to be heresies. And how then can it be, that the
heretical societies into whose communion we cannot enter without yielding our
selves tributarie to the gates of hell, should Hieron. in Matt. c. 16.
be Churches, and parts of the Church? For though vices in manners belong also
to the powers of hell, nevertheless because the vices are but in the persons
of those that committ them, and not in the communion of the Church, for as much
as the Church exacts not from any of her members, the condition of being
vicious to receive them into her communion, they shall but conquer those
particular persons that are spotted therewith, and not the Church, of the which
God has said by the Prophets: Jerusalem shall be called the city of truth,
and the mountain of the Lord of Hosts Zach. (...).
and the sanctified hill. And by an other, the house of Israel shall noe more
from Ezech. 43.
(...) forward be foiled, whereas heresy infects the communions of the
Society where it remains, none being to enter into any heretical society
without obliging themselves to the doctrine where of she makes profession, and
under whose condition she receaues men into her communion, and by consequent
makes the gates of Hell victorious over the congregation wherein she remains.
He co^mau^ds us to hold those that hear not the Church, for Heathens and
Publica^s, he forbidds us then, from accounting the societies of heeticks,
which hear not the Catholic Church, for Churches and parts of the Church,
but for Societies of (...) and Heathens. He says to us, That whosoever gathers
not with him, scatters: the heretics then that gather not with him, gather not
but scatte, and so their assemblies are noe more Churches, but dispertions. He
cries out to us by the Organ of saint PAVLE, That whosoever declares against
what we have received, should be an anathema. He wills then that heretics
should be held by the Church for anathema, and consequently excluded from the
communion both internal and external of the Church. He teaches us by the
same Oracle, that the Church is our mother, and not our mother as the first Eve
was, who engendered her children dead to Salvation, but as the second Eve, who
engendered her children living: From whence it is, that saint AMBROSE and saint
HIEROME Amb l. 2. lucae c. 3.
call the Church the true Eve, mother of the living. And how then is it that
heretical sects, who amongst the conditions under Hier. in Ezech. l 5. c.
(...). and in Amos. l. 3 c. 9.
which they receive men into their communion, oblige them to hold killing
doctrines, should attribute to themselves the title of a Church? He teaches
us that the Fathers of the Earth, will not give their children a Scorpion for
an egg, or a Serpent for a Fish. And how then is it, that the Church should
give hers poison insteede of wholesome food? or that heretical sects, whose
wine, says saint HIEROM, is the fury of Dragons, and the incurable fury of
Aspes, should be Churches? He teaches Hier l. 2. in Esai. c. 11
us that the Church is the Way, the Gate, and Entry into the Kingdom of
Heaven; yea for this cause himself often calls it, the Kingdom of Heaven; it
is then of the Essence of the Church, that Salvation might be therein obtained,
and the way how to come to the Kingdom of Heaven; and consequently, that
amongst the conditions, under whose obligation she receives men into her
communion there be none repugnant to Salvation. Now contrariwise it is of the
Essence and of the definition of heretical and Schismatic Societies, that
amongst the conditions under which they receive men into their communion, there
are conditions repugnant to Salvation: otherwise they could not be heretical
and Schismatic: And so it is of the Essence and of the definition of the
Church, not to be heretical: and it is of the Essence and of the definition of
heretical Societies contrariwise, not to be Churches, nor parts of the
Church, and they cannot be called Churches, nor members of the Church, but
falselie and equiuocallie, as a dead member that is cut off from the Body, is
noe member but equiuocallie and by abuse of speech; of as a dead man, or a man
either formed in picture, or raised in a Sculpture, is noe man but equiuocally,
and by abuse of speech. By means whereof, it is to err against the Essence
and definition of the Church, to hold them for Churches, or to reckon them in
the totalitie of the catholic Clem. Alexandr. stromat. l. 1 Cypr. ad Julian
ep. 73.
Church and to this all the Fathers agree. Heresies (says Clemens
Alexandrinus) are equiuocallie called Churches. And saint CYPRIAN: Nouatianus
does as Apes do, who would seem to be men, though they be not so: so will he
seem to have a Church, though he have none. And again; When the Nouatians
demanded; Conc Elibert c. 22.
beleeuest thou the remission of sins by the holy Church? they lie in their
Interrogatorie, for they have noe Church. And the Elibertine Council; If any
one pass from the Catholic Church unto heresy and return again to the
Church, Conc. Sard ep. ad omnes Episc.
etc. And the Council of Sardica: We cast out of the limtts of the Catholic
Church those, that affirm Christ to be God, and not very God. And saint
HIEROME: Heretic, make in their Church by false appellation, that which they
made when they were yet heathen. And again: Noe heretical congregation can be
called Id. aduers.
the Church os Christ. And elsewhere: In what Church has he believed? in that
Luciferian
of the Arrians; but they have none. And in the same work: If thou hear in
Id. ibid.
any place of men denominated from any other then from Christ, as
Marcionites. Ualentinians, Montagniers, or Campites, know that there is not
the Church of Christ. And Optatus Mileuitanus: Out of the only Church, which
is the true Catholic Church, others amongst heretics, are esteemed to be, and
are not. And again. There is one only Church, which cannot be amongst you and
amongst us; it remains then, that she must be in one place. And S. AUGUSTINE:
you are with us in the creed, and in the other Sacraments of our Lord, etc,
but you are not with us in the Catholic Church. And again; There is one
Catholic Church, upon which other (...) impose other names, although
themselves be all called by particular names which they dare not disauowe: From
whence it appears, in the judgment of Judges not preoccupate with favor, to
whom the name of Catholic, whereof they are all ambitious, ought to be
attributed. And elsewhere: The Church of the saints, Id. id Psalm. 149.
is the Catholic Church: the Church of the Saints, is not the church of
Heretics: She has been predesigned before she was seen, and has been
exhibited that she might be seen. And in the Book of Faith and of the
creed: Neither do; the Heretics belong to the Catholic church because she
loves God; nor the Schismatickes because She loves her neighbor. And in the
Book against the Fundamental Epistle: In this Church finally, the name of
Catholic detaines me, which this Church alone, amongst so many and so great
heresies, has so preserved, as when a stranger asks where they assemble to
the Catholic Church; there is noe heretic dare she we his Temple or his
house. And in his Treatise upon saint JOHN: Id. de fid. etc. Symbol. 10. c
Contr. Ep. quam etc. Fund. c. 4.
All heretics and Schismatics are gone out from us; that is to say, are gone
out from the Church. Faustinus was not President to a Church, but to a faction.
The holy Ghost has not glorified Christ with a true glory, but in the
Catholic Church: for elsewhere adds he; be it amongst heretics, be it
amongst Pagans, his true glory upon earth cannot be. And upon saint MATTHEW,
Ib. tract (...). de cap. 16. Id. de verb.
Jews, and all other heretics which do indeed confess that there is a holy
Ghost, but deny that he is in the body of Christ, which is his only Church,
no other certainly but only the Catholic, are without doubt, like the
Pharisees, who though they Dom. in Euang.
did confess, that there was an holy Ghost, yet denied him to be in Christ.
And in Matthew. sermon. 11.
the Book of the method to cathecise the not instructed, We must, says he,
garnish and animate the infirmity of man against temptations and scandalls,
Id. de Catech. ru. c
be it without, or be it within the Church; (...), against Gentiles, or (...)
or heretics, and within against the Straw in the Barn of our Lord. And Id.
c. 27.
again, Let not the Enemy seduce thee, not only by those that are without the
Conc.
Church, whether Pagans, or Jews, or Heretics; but even by those that thou
see Carthag. 4. c 71.
in the Church evil livers. And in the fowrth Council of Carthage, where he
assisted in person: Let not the Conuenticles of Heretics be called Churches,
Cod. l. 1. tit. 5. de heresi. l. 5. and Cod.
but mock-Councells. And the very law of the Emperors: Heretics rashly
presume to call their Conuenticles, Churches. Now if this have place in other
Theod. l. 16. l. 2.
heresies; to wit, that the being and title of a Church, is denied to them,
how much more in that of the Eutychians; that is to say, of the Egyptians, and
Ethiopians, which destroy not the walls, the roof, and the covering only,
but the foundation of the Edifice of Faith, upon the which all the other parts
of the doctrine are built; to wit, Christ the corner stone, and maintain that
in Christ there is but one Nature; that is to say, confound and steep the
Essence of the humanity in that of the divinity? Does not saint AUGUSTINE
cry out. Those that believe Aug. devnit. Eccles. c. 4.
not that Christ is come in the flesh, etc. and that he is risen again in the
same Body wherein he has been crucified and buried, although they should be
in all the countries over the which the church is spread, are not in the
Church. How can then the true Church have communion with this Sect? and how can
this Sect, be a member, and a true part of the Church? And how can it be,
that of the Roman Church which holds the contrary doctrine, and of this Sect,
there should be framed one common Body of the (...) Church? and to go about
to join them together, in one selfsame Society of a catholic Church, and
more to add unto them all other heretical and schismatic sects; How is it
any other thing, then to go about to join like Mezentius dead bodies with
living bodies, and to make of the spouse of Christ, and of the dove of Christ
which is the only catholic Church, a monster, and a Prodigy compounded of
all the impious horrible and contradictorie heresies, that have rent the Coat
and mystical Body of Christ, and to putt communion between Christ and
Beliall, and between light and darkness? The Catholic Church then, is not a
Mass and common Society which contains in it, the confusion of all Sects,
and of all the multitude of those that are called Christians; but it is a
particular Society amongst all those Societies, which bears the name of
Catholic or total Church; not because it contains in deed all the rest: You
will (says Optatus Mileuitanus to the Donatists) be alone all the whole,
(...) Optatus Mileuit. cont. Parm l. 2.
are not so much, as in the whole. And saint AUGUSTINE: Whosoever defends a
part separate from the whole, cannot usurp the title of a Catholic: but
because she contains them in right, and holds habituallie the place Aug. (...)
vtilit. crede^t c. 7.
of the whole, in regard of them. For the Church holds the place of the whole
habituallie in regard of heretical and schismatic Sects, and by her
eminency; for as much as none of the other, considered every one a part,
equals her in number and in multitude. Howbeit (says Saint AUGUSTINE,) that
there are many heresies of Christians which would be all called Catholics.
There is nevertheless one Church, if you cast your Eyes upon the extent of the
whole world, more abundant in multitude; and because unto her alone, belonges
the prerogative of being successively spread over the whole earth, in beginning
from Jerusalem, whereas none of the others has the privilege; but that the
most part of them (like that kind of Ape which the Greeks call Callithrix)
cannot live but in that climate, and under the same influence, wherein they
were bredd: And beyond this, because all the rest having gone forth from her,
and she having as saint AUGUSTINE says, still remained in her stock and root,
holds the places and right of the whole, in regard of all the rest; noe more
nor less, then that part of the tree in which the life stood, and root rests;
holds the place of the whole habituallie in regard of those that have been
separated from Aug contr.
(...). l. 13 c. 1 2.
it: They under st and not (says he) that amongst the Sects of the Christians
there is one true and wholesome, and in sort Germinall and radical Christian
society, from whence they have separated themselves. And finally, because all
the rest are obliged, if they will obtain salvation, to reinsert and
reincorporate themselves into the body of the Catholic Church; Hold most
steadfastly (says FVLGENTIVS) that noe heretic or schismatik, if he be
Fulgent. de sid. ad Petr. c. 39
not reconciled to the Catholic Church, before the end of his life, can be
saved. Otherwise, if all the heretical and schismatic Societies which
profess the name of Christ, might justly enjoy the title of the Church, and
were actuallie parts of the Church, wherefore had the Fathers employed these
sentences against heretics and schismatics, That (...) Conc Carthag. 4. c. 1.
of the Church there is noe salvation: that out of the Church there may be had
the faith and Sacraments and all things else, Salvation excepted: that August.
de gest. cu^ Emerit.
who has not the Church for his Mother, cannot have God for his Father: that
he that communicates with the universal Church, is a Catholic, and Cypr. de
unit. Eccles.
he that communicates not therewith, is an heretic and Antichrist. And how
could the excellent King himself have protested, That he believes without
color or fraud, that the is one only Church, in deed and in name Catholic
and universal, spread over the whole world, out of which there can be (...)
Salvation hoped for; and condemns and detests those, that heretofore or since
have separated themselves, either from the Faith of the Catholic Church, and
are become heretics, as the Manichees; or from her communion, and are become
Schismatickes, as the Donatists, if the Catholic Church did comprehend all
the Heretics and all Schismatics, among, which there was never any more
pernicious, then those that destroy the human nature of Christ, the only organ
of our Salvation, as the Egiptians and Ethiopians do? For whereas his majesty
auowes that the frame and contexture of the Church is already long ago
dissolved and dissasse^bled between the^ and us, but adds, in regard of
external form S. JOHN 2. (...).
in saying to us; If any one bring thee not this doctrine, say not so much to
him as, well be it with thee; for whosoever shall say to him, well be it with
thee, shall communicate in his wiched works; forbidds us all communion, as well
internal as external with the^. And elsewhere, we have already showed, that
when external and Sacramental communion is interdicted on both sides; that is
to say, where there is a reciprocal excommunication and an erection of Altar
against Altar, there cannot be unity either internal or external. If we be
in unity (said S. AUGUSTINE) what makes two Cypr. ad Pupp.
Altars in the City: And Saint CYPRIAN The Church which being Catholic
Gellius l. 9 c. 2.
is one, maintains herself whole, and is joined together, with the cement of
Prelates adhering to one another-

But against these decisions of the scripture and Fathers, there do arise
four objections: The first that the word Church, does grammaticallie signify
assembly, and consequently that all assemblies are Churches, and so all
Christian assemblies, are Christian Churches, Now this objection is good in
gramar, and to interpret profane authors, but not in divinity, nor to
interpret christian Authors, amongst who^ the word Church has noe more this
vast and large Grammatical signification as it had before. For as when
Hormodius and Aristogiton, had freed the common wealth of Athens from the
slavery of the thirty tyrants, the Athenian Senate to consecrate their names
and to make them reverenced to Posterity, ordained that from thence forward,
they should never be imposed upon, or communicated to any other. So after our
Lord had given to his Church, the privilege to conquer Hell, and to deliver
mankind from the tyranny and oppression of the devil, that name is become
consecrate and affected to her alone, and it has been forbidden to communicate
it, any more to any other Society, either Paga, heretical, or
Schismatic. Let not the Conuenticles of heretics (says the fowrth Council
of Carthage) be called Churches, but Mock-Councells. And the very law of
Conc. Carthag 4 c. 71.
the Emperors, That the Donations made to heretical Conuenticles which they
presume rashly to call Churches, be applied to the reverend Catholic Church.
Codic. l. 1. tit. 5. de haeret c. 5.


THE second, that S. PAVLE writing to the Galatians, and to the Corinthians,
calls their Societies, Churches; and nevertheless the Galatians erred in faith
embracing the circumcision with the Gospel; and the Corinthians in not
believing the Resurrection; but the snare here is manifest. For there is great
difference between the doctrine of a Church, and the doctrine of any
particular person, which is divided from the doctrine of the same Church. The
doctrine of a church is that which is held by the body of that Church, and
under the codition whereof either express or tacit, she receives men into her
comunion, and not the doctrine which every particular man straying fro the
common doctrine of the same church holds against the opinions of the Body. Now
it cannot be found that the Society of the church of the Corinthians did ever
hold that the dead did not rise again, nor that she had exacted that belief
from those that entered into her communion; but only that amongst the
Corinthians there were some that did not believe the resurrection of the dead:
If Christ, (says S. PAVLE) be preached to have risen again from the dead, how
is it that there are some amongst you that say, there is no resurrection of
the dead? And that S. PAVLE, made his remonstrance in common, it was to hinder
them from being seduced by them which spoke this language; Suffer not your
selves (said he) to be seduced; evil words corrupt good manners. But not
that he supposed they believed it; contrariwise he exhorts them to remain
firm in that which they believed, And therefore my Brethren (said he) be
steadfast and immovable. And for the Galatians, so far off was it, that that
error which saint PAVL cried out against was the doctrine of the Church of the
Galatians, as it was the doctrine of those which rebelled against the faith of
the Church of the Galatians; which doctrine saint PAVL disputes as if all the
Galatians had embraced it, not that they did do so, but to hinder them from
doing so; as he testifies to them in these words: I have this confidence of
you in our Lord, that Ibid. c. 6.
you will have noe other belief, but that he that troubles you shall bear his
judgment whosoever he be. And again, If a man be found in any crime, do
you which are spiritual, instruct him in the spirit of mildness. And that
this is Aug. ep. 48
the true intent of saint PAVL, saint AUGUSTINE teaches us when he writes
to Vincentius Rogatist: Thou might say even as well that many of the
Churches of Galatia were not when the Apostle cried out. O foolish Galatians
who has bewitched you: And a while after; The Canonical Id. ibid.
scriptures have been wont to make their reprehcnsion in such sort, as it may
seem the word is addressed to all and nevertheless it concerns but some few.

THE third is that saint AUGUSTINE disputing against the Donatistes, Aug. de
baptism. co^tr
writes, That the Church begetts all Christians by Baptism from whence they
would infer, that all those then that are baptized, as well Catholics (...) l.
1. c 14.
as heretics, are in the Church, but he bringes with it expressly this
distinction, either in her self, or without her self; to show that the
Church begetts none but Catholics only in her self, as Sara begat but
Isaac only in herself; and that the rest the Church begets without her
self: For although Ismael were not begotten in the Body of Sara but in the
body of Agar, yet he was in a sort begotten by Sara, for as much as he was
begotten by her that belonged to Sara and was Saras nuptial right; to wit, by
the seed of Abraham. So then the heretics be begotten by Baptism out of the
Church, nevertheless it is the Church that begetts them even out of the
Church, for as much, as the baptism whereby they are begotten, and which those
that baptize them have carried out of the Church, belonges to the Church, and
is of the conjugal rightes of the church, and not heresy. By which means,
when they return to the church, there is noe need that the church should
baptize Aug. vbi supra.
them again; The Church (says he) begetts all Christians by baptism be it
in her-selfe, that is to say, in her bowels or without her self, that is to
is to say, of her husbands seed, be it in her self, or in the bond-woeman.
Whereby so far is he from teaching, that heretics are in the church, as
contrariwise he plainly affirms hereby: that they are out of the church,
For the thing wherein catholics and the Donatists were at agreement was, that
heretics were out of the church, and the thing where about they disagreed was,
that the Donatists held, that Baptism could not be out of the church, and
consequently, that heretics could not have it: And catholics contrariwise
maintained, that Baptism might to be out of the church: and consequently, that
heretics though they were out of the church left not to have it. The Church
(says saint AUGUSTINE) compared to Paradise, teaches us, that Baptism
August. de baptism. contr. Donatists l. 4. c. 1.
may be had without her, but the Salvation of the beatitude none can receive or
have out of her, for the floods of the fountain of Paradise rann abouudantlie
forth of it And in the Book following: What is (says he) this doctrine that
an heretic is pretended to have noe baptism, because he has noe Church. And
again. It is a wonder that there are some that say, that baptism and the
Church cannot be separated and divided, the one from the other, And elsewhere,
But of the Church and against the Church they have holden the sacraments of
Christ, and as in a civil war they have fought, bearing our own Banners
against us. From whence we may discover the impertinencie of those that
conclude, that because heretical Sects have baptism, therefore they are
Churches.

THE fowrth (...) is, that saint HIEROME speaking in the person of the Church,
says to Hilarie a Luciferian Deacon, I am a harlott, but yet I am thy mother,
I committ adultrie with Arius, and I did so before with Praxeas, (...),
Cerinthus. But it shall be hereafter manifested that this is a ridiculous
equivocation; by which they attribute that to S. HIEROME as spoken in his own
sense, which he spoke according to the sense of his adversary; that is to say,
according to the sense of the heretic against whom he disputes. For to this
that some add, that a lying man, leaves to be truly a man although he be not a
true man; that is to say, a veritable man, and then that a Church, leaves not
to be truly a Church, although she be not a true Church, it is a Sophisme of
the truth of the essence to the truth of the word, and of the word verus, to
the word Verax, there being none so young a scholar, but knows that to speak
vniuocallie; whosoever is truly a man, is a true man, for as much as being, and
truth, are conuertible, from whence it is that saint AMBROSE uses these
words, true Israelite, and truly Israelite, as terms equivalent. And that
saint AUGUSTINE says; Every soul is by that a soul, by which it is a true
soul. And therefore as the Fathers affirm, that there is none but the
Catholic Church, that is a true Church. From thence, says saint AUGUSTINE,
it appears, that the true Church is concealed from noe body. So they also
say, that there is none but the Catholic Church, that is truly a Church. If
you did teach (says saint AUGUSTINE to the Manichees) that marriage were good,
but virginity better, as does the Church, which is truly the Church of
Christ, the bolie Ghost had not predesigned you. And whereas it is replied,
that a man for being less or more sound, leaves not to be a man: and so that
a Church for being less or more pure, leaves not to be a Church, it is an
other manifest Sophisme, for health is not the essential form of a man, nor
sickness the privation of the essential form of a man, but an accident which
consequently may receive more and less, whereas purity of faith according to
his majesty's own confession, is the essential form of the Church; and the
impuritie of Faith, the privation of the essential form of the Church. By
means whereof noe Society can hold among the conditions of her Communion and
doctrine impure in Faith, and contrary to salvation, but she loses at the
same time, the being and title of a Church. And therefore the diversity of the
communions, whereinto the Church was divided when Luther rose, must not be
alleged for a pretense to be ignorant where the true Church then was. For
since the Church ought to be perpetually visible and eminent, and that then
there were noe Christian communions visible in the world but ours, and that of
the Grecians, under which are comprehended the Muscouites, and the Antiochians,
and that of the Egiptians, and Ethiopians, which is but one, and that of the
Armenians, and that of the Nestorians; and that it is of the essence, and of
the necessirie of the Church, that she should be pure and impolluted in faith;
and that all those others by the common confession of us and of the
Protestants, are heretics, and corrupt; it is not needful to go to Delphus
to learn, that either the Church was perished, which (as we have above
showed) could not be, or that it was our communion which was the Church.

Of the quality wherein the Catholic Church attributes to herself the name of
the whole. CHAP. VIII.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
AND therefore the most excellent King is much amazed when he sees the
Churches which have been members of the whole Body, draw to themselves, all
the right of vniniuersalitie,

THE REPLY:
IT has already been above showed, that by the Catholic Church, the Fathers
never intended the Mass and total conclusion of the multitude of Christians:
but a special society, distinct from the belief, and from the communion of
all heretical and schismatic sects, and which in regard of the Mass, and
general confusion of all the multitude of Christians, held actuallie but the
place of a part, and held only the place of the whole actuallie, in regard of
the particular Churches which were comprehended in deed in her communion. For
there was never any age since the apostles built the church, but there have
been some heretics, which have gone forth from the Body of the Church,
nevertheless making profession of the name of Christ: They have 1 Joan. 2.
Epist. Iud. verse. 11
gone forth from us (says S, JOHN) but they were not of us. And S. IVDE,
Cursed be they, for they perish in the contradiction of Chore, people which
separated them selves, men, animalls hauiug not spirit. And S. AUGUSTINE: All
heretics and Schismatics are gone forth from us, that (...) to say (says
he) are gone sorth of the Church. But amongst this difference of societies,
making profession of Christian Religion, there was always one more eminent in
multitude then the rest, which has always remained in her stock and root,
and from whence all the rest are gone forth, to whom also the name of
Catholic nath been preserved, not because she held actuallie the place of
whole in regard of the rest; but only of all habituallie as the stock, in
regard of the boughs which have been plucked off; for as much as in all the
separations. she remained in the same estate wherein all the Body was before
the separation, and consequently has justly inherited the name of total
Church, and succeeded only in the right and application of the whole, as
being she alone that represents it. The Church. (says S. AUGUSTINE:) Combating
against all heresies, may be resisted, but she cannot be overthrown: Aug. de
Symb. ad Catech. l. c. 5.
all heresies are gone forth from her, as unprofitable branches cut off from
their vine, but she remains in her root, in her vine, in her charity, the
gates of hell shall not prevail against her. Which amazeth me, that is
majesty should be amazed, that the Churches which have heretofore been members
of the whole Body, should draw to themselves all the Right of the
universality. For the word Catholic, was never common to all Christians, but
only to a part of Christians; to wit, to that wherein there remained the
actual totalitie of that which rested in the just possession of the title of
the Church, and which in regard of the parts separated, retained noe more the
effect, but only the right of the whole, as representing her, that before each
separation, was the whole. And therefore, so far was S. AUGUSTINE from
extending the totalitie of the Catholic Church, to the multitude of all the
sects of Christians, as contrariwise, after having reported the opinions of
the eighty eight heresies, he adds, What the Catholic Church holds against
all these things, is a superfluous demand, since it is sufficient for to
know, that she holds the contrary to these things. And a while after, There
may also be, or be made other heresies, besides these which are reported in
this work of ours whereof who shall hold any one, shall be noe Catholic
Christian. And elsewhere; The Catholic and the heretic, are divided the one
against the other. And again. They cannot beginn to be Catholic, till they
have left to be heretic. And therefore when the heretical Sects separate
themselves from the Catholic Church, and divide themselves from the part that
consents not to heresy, they hinder not the title os Catholic, nor the Right
of universality from being preserved in her alone, and from belonging to her
alone, noe more then when in a common weal, the factious part, and which
separated it-selfe from the state, and reuoltes against the true preseruers of
the Estate, come to be divided from that which remains in the lawful
administration of the Estate, this division hinders not the part which restes
united with the Estate from preserving the right and title of the
vniuersallitie of the commonwealth, and those things which are done by it
alone, from being accounted to be done by the whole Body of the commonwealth;
Whose whole being is preserved in this part alone, the other by the desertion
thereof, having lost all the part it had in the name and effect of the
commonwealth.

Of the sense wherein the Roman Church is called Catholic. CHAP. IX.
The continuance of the Kings answer,
TO attribute to themselves the title of Catholic, as proper to themselves
alone.

THE REPLY,
WHEN we use this train of Epithetes, the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman
Church, we intend not by the word Roman, the particular Church of Rome, but all
the Churches which adhere and are joined in communion with the Roman Church,
even as by the Jewish Church we intended not the tribe of Judah only, but the
lines of Leui and Benjamin, and many relikes of the lines which were joined
therewith. For S, JOHN BAPTIST, was of the tribe of Leuy, and saint PAVL of
that of Benjamin, and Anna of the tribe of Aser, and nevertheless they were
all of the people of the Jews, and of the Jewish Church; but they were called
Jews and Jewish people because of the adherence and communion that they had
with the principal Tribe, which was that of Judah. So all the other Churches
which communicate with the Roman in what soever part they are constituted, are
comprehended under the common word of the Roman Church, when we say the
Catholic Apostolic and Roman Church, because they hold the Roman Church for
the center and original of their communion. And in this sense saint AMBROSE
says that his brother inquired if the Bishop of one of the cities of Sardica,
where he desired to be baptized, consented with the Catholic Bishops, that is
to say, added he, with the Roman Church. And in this sense, saint HIEROME
says, that the Church of Alexandria, glorifies her self, that she
participates with the Roman Faith; And in this sense John Patriarch of
Constantinople writes to Pope Hormisdas; We promise not to recite amongst the
sacred mistiries the names of those which are separate from the communion of
the Cathoick Church, that is to say, that consent not in all things with the
Sea Apostolic. And in this sense Beda uses these words: Our mother the Roman
Church. In this same sense they comprehend under the Greek Church not only the
natuaall Greeks, but the Russians, and Muscouites, although they be distinct
in nation, and in language from the Greeks, yea, even have their Service in a
tongue quite different, for as much as they adhere to the Creek Church. Not
that the particular Roman Church, may not also in a certain regard, be called
Catholic. For the word Catholic is taken in three sorts, to wit, either
formallie, or causallie, or participatiuelie. Formally the only universal
Church, that is to say, the Society of all the true particular churches,
united in one self- same communion, is called catholic. Causallie, the Roman
church is called Catholic for as much as she infuseth universality into all
the whole body of the Catholic church. That it is so, to co^stitute
universality, there must be two things, one that may analogicallie be
insteede of matter thereto, to wit, the multitude; for where there is no
multitude there can be noe universality: And the other to be in-steede of
form thereto, to wit, unity; for a multitude without unity, makes noe
universality: Take away (says saint AUGUSTINE) the unity from the
multitude, and it is a tumult, but bring in unity, and it is the people. And
therefore August. de verb. Domin. secundum Luc. sermon. 26.
the Roman Church, which as center and beginning of the ecclesiastical
communion, infuseth unity, which is the form of universality into the
Catholic Church; and by consequent, causes universality in her, may be
called catholic causallie, though in her own being, she be particular: noe
more nor less then the Galley, to which all the other Galleys of a Fleet have
relation of dependancie and correspondencie, is called the General, although
she be but one particular Galley, because it is she, that by the relation that
all others have to her, gives unity to the total and general body of the
Fleet. And finally particular Churches are called Catholic,
participatiuely, because they agree and participate in doctrine and communion
with the catholic Church. And in this sense the Church of Smyrna addresseth
her Epistle: To the Catholic Church of Philomilion; and to all the Catholic
Churches which are throughout the world.

Of the causes wherefore the Roman Church, has cut of the rest from her
communion. CHAP. X.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
AND to exclude from their communion, all the rest which dissent from them in
any thing, or refuse the yoke of slavery.

THE REPLY.
THE most excellent King, may be pleased to remember two things, one that
ancient authors have written, that oftentimes for one only word contrary to
Faith, many heresies have been cast out of the body of the Church: And the
other, that the societies of the Egiptians and Ethiopians have not been
excluded out of the Church, for refusinge that which his majesty call the
yoke of slavery; that is to say, the Superintendencie of the Roman Church,
but for having embraced the Sect of Eutyches, who with all his partakers, was
cut off from the Church by the Council of Chalcedon; and that even to this
day, they are all ready, and have often offerred, to acknowledge the Pope,
whom they confess to be the Successor of the Prince of the Apostles, if they
might be received into the communion of the Roman Church, without obliging them
to anathematize Eutiches and Dioscorus. And as for the division of the Greek
Church; the true cause thereof has been, the Schism fallen out between
Ignatius, lawful Patriarch of Constantinople, whom the Pope preserved in his
communion; and Photius intruded into the Patriarkship by the favor of the
Emperor; to which Schism the Greeks added for an obstacle of reunio^, as the
crabb cast the stone into the oyster, to hinder it from shutting itself
again; the difference of the procession of the holy Ghost; and of
Schismatickes became flatt heretics. This was the true cause of the
separation of the Greeks, and not the yoke of slaueries of the Roman Church;
of the which neither Jgnatius, nor any of his Catholic Predcessors, had ever
complained.

Of the sense wherein the heretics belong not to the Catholic Church. CHAP.
XI.
The Continuance of the Kings Answer.
AND so on the sudden to pronounce presumptuouslie, that they belonged not,
in any thing to the Catholic Church.

THE REPLY.
This denial is intended in deed, and not in Right; for we do not deny, but
that the heretics belong by right to the Church; that is to say, that the
Church has to exercise her authority over them, and to judge, censure, and
excommunicate them: but we say that they belong not in deed, to the
Catholic church, that is to say, that they are not actually comprehended and
contained in the catholic Church, and are not members and parts thereof: And
it is not we that say this, but saint AUGUSTINE who writes it in these words:
And therefore neither the heretic, belongs to the Catholic Church, because
she loves God; nor the Schismatic, because she loves her neighbor.

Of the proceeding of the other sects. CHAP. XII.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
AND it is not you alone, that attribute to yourselues this right, others also
do the same for at this day, a word the king cannot speak without groaning,
there are many particular Churches, which believe themselves only to be the
particular people that they call the Church, if you give them strength like the
Romans, they would already have done, as that has done, and would judge the
rest no less severely.

THE REPLY.
WHAT those are, we are not to Answer, let the dead bury their dead; only we
may say, their conclusion would be good, if their hypothesis were true, for
if they were true churches, every Society which should be excluded out of
their communion, should be excluded from the title of the Church, and from the
right of being able to call themselves a part of the Catholic Church, for as
much as the Church as has been above said, is either one, or none.

Of the persuasion, that the other sects pretend to have, of the truth of their
Church by scriptures. CHAP. XIII.
The Continuance of the Kings Answer.
WHAT shall I say more, that there are at this day, many sects which are
celebrated, the sectaries whereof are most steadfastly persuaded, that they
alone see some thing into holy writ, and, as says the Poet, that they alone
are understanding, and that the rest hunt after a shaddowe.

THE REPLY.
HARPASTE, (...) domestical fool, having lost her sight, would not believe it
was she that was become blind, but persuaded herself, that it was grown
dark: It is just so with all heretics, they think it is the Church that is
become dark and full of obscurity, and not themselves which are become
blind. To find any thing answered the Pelagians to saint AUGUSTINE, when he
alleged the multitude of Authors for the Catholic Church, A multitude Hier.
co^tra Lucit.
of blind persons serve to no use. And by that only his majesty may judge, how
necessary it is not to abandon nor prostitute the exposition of the scripture
to the judgment of every particular person, since there is not that man that
when he will make himself judge of it, does not believe himself only clear
sighted, and that the rest as Homer says; embrace nothing but darkness. For the
Scripture consisting, according to saint HIEROME, not in the reading, but in
the understanding, and men not being able to assure themselves of the
understanding of the Scripture by their particular Spirit, for as much as,
says saint PETER, as the exposition of the 2. Petr.
Scripture is not made by private interpretation: it is necessary to determine
the differences that are bredd by the interpretation of the Scripture to have
besides the Scripture a Judge external, and interposed between that and us,
who may secure us of the true sense thereof, and that this judge should have
other marks, and be notable by other external means, then by that of the
doctrine contested, since it is from that judgment, that we ought to learn
the decision of the true sense of Scripture in points disputable; otherwise
questions in Religion, could never be determined, no more then differences in
civil controversies, if we should leave the deciding of the sense of the
words of the law, to the preoccupated understanding of the Advocates and
parties, and that there were noe judge ordained above them, and set between
the law and them, to interpret it.

Of the sense wherein heretics have disputed the word Catholic. CHAP. XIV.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
IT is very true, that there has been noe age, wherein there has not been
conuenticles to raise Sects and parasynaxes, which have bragged of the name of
the Catholic Church, and have drawn ignorant persons to them by this
allurement.

THE REPLY,
THAT the ancient Sects and Parasynaxes of heretics have effected the title
of Catholic, it was not to pretend in good earnest, that it belonged to them,
nor to draw ignorant persons to them by that allurement, but to dispute it
with the catholic Church, and to hinder least by the possession of this name,
she should preserve her menbers from being defrauded and seduced by heretics.
And even so not to dispute it with her in that sense wherein she attributes it
to herself to wit, as an Epethete of communion, but to dispute it in the
quality of an Epithete of doctrine. For heretics have always sufficiently
known, that this taken in the true sense, could neither be given nor
maintained to their Sects. And therefore they spoke not of this word, but
either in seeming to mock and scorn at it, as when Sympronion says to saint
PACIAN, that none under Pacian. 2d Sympron. (...). 1.
the Apostles were called Catholics. And when Fulgentius the Donatist said,
that the word Catholic was an human fiction. And that the Donatists according
to the report of Vincentius Lirinensis, cried out to the Catholics: Come,
come, o you miserable madd people, commonly called Catholics: or in
disguising Vincent.
the sense of the word, and applying it to signify the quality of doctrine,
Lirin. cont. here is. c. 26.
and not the communion of the Church, as the Donatists which called themselves
Bishops of the Catholic truth; and to whom S. AUGUSTINE said, you are those
that hold the Catholic faith not from the communion of Aug. ep. 48
the whole world, but from the integrity of the divine Sacraments. For when
they suffered it to be admitted in a true se^ce, they were as speedily as
shamefullie driven from it. I asked him (says S. AUGUSTINE, speaking of
Fortunatus the Donatist) if he could give letters co^municatory, which we
called formed Aug. ep. 163
whither I would, etc. But because the thing was manifestly false, they
shifted from it by confusion of language. And elsewhere. We must (says he)
hold the Aug de vera Relig. c. 7.
Christian Religion, and the communion of that Church which is called
Catholic, not only by themselves, but by their Enemies. For whether the
heretics themselves, and the foster children of schisms, will or nil not,
when they speak not with those of their Sects, but with others, they call the
Catholic Church, noe otherwise then Catholic. Neither could they be
understood if they did not discern it by that name, by which the Aug cont.
(...). fund. c. 4
whole world calls it. And again. This Church alone; amongst so many and so
great heresies, has so maintained this name, as when a stranger asks an
heretic, where they assemble to communicate in the Catholic Church, none of
them dares to show his Temple or his house. And the reason the title of
catholic was not an allurement wherewith heretics drew ignorant persons to
them, but the firm bond by which the true Church drew to her, and retained in
her communion all the true faithful, called to the hope of life eternal, and
amongst other this Eagle of doctors S. AUGUSTINE, who says, Id ibidem.
That I omit this sincere wisdom which you believe not to be in the
catholic church. There be many other reasons which do most justly retain
me in her lap: the consent of people and nations retains me, the authority
begunn by miracles, (...) by hope, increased by charity, confirmed by
antiquity, retains me, the succession of Prelates, even from the Sea of
Peter, to whom our lord committed his sheep to be fedd Ibidem.
after his resurrection, until the present Bishop, detaines me: And finally,
the very name of Catholic, retains me. And a little after; these so many
and so great most dear bonds of the Christian name, do justly detain
faithful men in the Catholic Church, although for the slownes of our
understanding, of the defect of meritts in our lives, truth does not yet show
her, else with manifest evidence.

Of the cases wherein the Communion in vow with the Catholic Church, may be
imputed as actual. CHAP. XV.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
BUT this notable calamity is particular to the last times, whereto we are
arrived, that the Catholic Church which must be communicated with, either
reallie and by effect, or at the least voluntarily and in vow, is (...)
illustrious at this day then anciently she was, and less exposed to the view
of men and more subject to be contested.

THE REPLY.
ARISTOTLE, that great Philosopher, which steeped his pen, say the Greeks, in
sece, in steed of ink; teaches us, that the city Arist. Politic. c. 2.
is before the citizen; to wit, not in prioritie of time, for a co^mon-weale
can not be without a citizen, but in prioritie of nature; that is to say,
that the being of the citizen dependes from that of the city, and not the
being of the city, from that of the citizen: from whence it appears, that
the form that gives being in the first place to the city, and then by
participation to the citizen, must reside in the city, in the most perfect
manner that it can reside, and not in the most imperfect. And so although it
suffice to preserve to a citizen the being of a cittize^ that in default of
being able to participate actuallie in the communion of the common- wealth; as
when he is hindered by any local obstacle, either of being in a strange
prison, or remaining in a strange country, he commnicate there habituallie,
and in desire, which is an imperfect manner of communicating; it suffices not
that the communion where by the common wealth is framed and preserved in being,
should be a simple habitual communion and in vow; but it is necessary that
it should be a true and actual communion. For when a Citizen is hindered by
any local impossibility from communicating actuallie with his Common wealth,
he leaves not to preserve the being of a citizen, provided that he
communicate therewith habituallie, that is to say in vow and in desire, and
communicate not in a politic communion with any contrary society. But when
the communion of the body of a commonwealth comes to be dispersed, and that
there is noe more any comerce or actual communion in the estate, then the
common wealth is extinct and has noe more being; and the communion that is
habitual and in desire of the citizens dispersed, and noe more communicating
one with an other, cannot preserve it. Now even that ought to be said ofthe
Church, whereof the Psalmist singes propheticallie; Jerusalem which psalm. (...)
is built as a city, whose participatio^ is in unity: to wit, that although
the communion habitual and in vow, sussice for a particular person in case of
impossibility for the actual, to make him imputatiuelie a member of the
Church, that is to say, to cause this imperfect communion to serve him to
salvation, in default of the other: Nevertheless the Church cannot be framed
nor preserved, in the being of a Church, by a communion only habitual and in
vow, but by a real and actual communion: The which as soon as it comes
wholly to cease and to perish in the Church, the Church perishes, and cease
to be. And therefore this distinction of actual communion, and communion in
vow, serves well to show, that any one may be imputatiuelie in the Church
without participating actuallie in the visible communion of the Church;
provided, that this defect come from an imposibilitie of participating therein
actualie: but not to show, that the body of the Church can subsist, and
preserve the being and true title of a Church, without visible and actual
communion. For contrariwise, that this imperfect manner of being in the Church,
serves to his salvation that is hindered by any local obstacle from being able
to be there actually, it is because the true and actual communion which as in
the Church, is imputed to him by the desire that he has to participate
thereof, which could not be imputed to him, if it were not reallie some where;
and besides, this desire of participation must be stripped from all other
impediments, saving that which proceeds from loand corporal imposibilities,
in such sort, as all those which are not withheld by distance of place, or
other like obstacle inevitable to them, from participating in the actual
communion of the Church cannot be said to communicate there in vow, nor to be
there imputatiuely. For nothing dispenceth with men for communicating with the
Catholic Church only in vow and in will, and not reallie and by effect, if
it be not the exclusion of time and place, and besides in the article of death;
noe more then any thing can excuse a man from being baptized only in vow and
in will, and not reallie and by effect; but the condition of being excluded by
the impossibility of time and of place, and also in the Article of death from
the means how to be baptized. And because, when the obstacle proceeds from
external impediments only; and that if there were local or temporal
commodity, he that communicates with the Church in vow, would communicate
therewith actuallie, this desire of communion, may be imputed for true
communion, and called a communion in vow. But when the obstacle proceeds from
internal impediments from him that pretendes to communicate there in vow, as
of repugnancie to the belief, and to the discipline, and the laws, under the
conditions whereof, the Catholic Church receives into her communion those that
she receaues thereinto, in such sort, as all corporal obstacles being taken
away, and he being in place where he may assist at the Catholic Church,
and communicate with her, he will not do it; this conditional desire of
communicating with her, in case she would change the conditions of her
communion, cannot be called communion in vow, but discommunion; otherwise
there would be no heretics that would not communicate with the Catholic
Church, for there is noe heretic but would offer to communicate with her,
provided she would change the clauses and conditions of her communion, and
would reform her self to the conditions of his Sect. To communicate then in
vow with the Catholic Church, is not to be hindered from communicating
reallie therewith, by any obstacle proceeding from him that communicates
therewith in vow; nor by any condition that he reproues in the Catholic
Church, nor by being united in communion with any other Sect, whose communion
is repugnant to the doctrine of the Catholic Church. For whosoever
co^municates with another sect, wherewith the catholic Church communicates
not, can not be said to communicate in vow with the Catholic Church. And
therefore S. AUGUSTINE speaking of some good people, who sometimes are
unjustly excommunicated and cast sorth of the Church, affirms that they cease
not to enjoy the friute of the communion of the Church; that is to say, that
they are reputed to communicate with the Church in vow, when there is on their
part noe obstacle from communicating actuallie therewith, and that they make
noe congregation of (...) out of the Church: Often times also (says he) (...)
(...) permitts that honest people should be cast out of the Christian
congregation by some over turbulent sedition of carnal men, which (...) to
them done, when they (...) it patiently, for the peace of the Church, and
attempt no innovation of Schisms, nor of (...), they teach men with how true
affection, and with how great sincerity, and charity, God must be served. Of
such men then, the purpose is either to return the tempest being ceased, or if
they be not permitted, whether because the same tempest continues; or whether
least by their return, there may arise the like, or one more cruel; they yet
preserve the will to serve even those to whose motions and perturbations, they
have given (...), defending without any congregation of Conuenticles to the
death, and helping by their testimony, the faith which they know to be
preached in the Catholic Church: Those the Father which sees them in secrett,
will crown in secret. From whence it appears, that those which communicate
with any other Society separate from the Church, and hold any other
doctrine, but that which is held in the Catholic Church and who are hindered
from communicating with the Catholic Church by obstacles proceeding on this
part, and by repugnancie to the conditions under the obligation whereof people
are received into the Catholic Church; cannot be said to communicate in vow
with the Catholic Church.

Of the equivocation of terms diminutiue employed for negatiues. CHAP. XVI,
The continuance of the Kings answer.
BOTH less exposed to the view of men, and most subject to (...).

THE REPLY:
THE Poets feign, that the Cyanian or Simplegade Islandes, which are two Isles
in the Mediteranean Sea, do sometimes meet together, and join themselves in
such sort, as they seem to be Theocrit. Concurre^tia Saxa. iuuenal, Cent. l.
c. 4 Vide Staplet, l. x. c. 7
but one; therefore Homer calls them, wandering, and Pindar, animated, because
they are described so moveable and vagabond. The same may be said, of the
visible and invisible Church of the Protestants; to wit, that sometimes they
propou^d them as two Churches distinct, and separate and sometimes they draw
them together, and make them communicate together, and compound of them one
selfe-Bodie and Society. For when the oracles of the Prophetts and Apostles
are produced to the^, touching the perpetual purity and integrity of the
Church; and that they are demanded where all these promises have been
fulfilled since so many and so many ages; their (...) refuge is to frame
two Churches; the one visible, and the other invisible, and to say, that the
purity of Religion has always been preserved in the invisible, which has
remained exempt from the contagion and from the abominations of the visible,
but that it has been extinguished and abolished for a long time in the
visible. And then as this eclipse according to them is ceased, and that they
come to cast their eyes upon any company which begins to hold visible, that
which they believe their invisible Church invisibly to have held, then they
constitute noe more but one Church and one communion of the visible Church, and
of the invisible Church. Now what other Protestants do under the term of
invisible Church, his majesty is brought to do it under these words less
exposed to man's view, and more subject to contestation: by which noe other
thing can be seriously understood, but that when Luther came into the world,
the true Church was wholly invisible, and not only that she was wholly
invisible, but that she was wholly perished. For if when Luther came into the
world, amongst many Societies that contested for the title of the Church,
there had been one less illustrious and eminent then she had anciently been,
but yet visible, which ought to be discerned from the rest, by this essential
mark, that in the points wherein she differed from them, she has for her the
word of God. Where did that Church reside? Let them give it to us, that we
may give ourselves to it. But if she, were invisible, and that before the
coming of Luther there were a flock unknown in the eyes of men, but known to
God, which held the same doctrine that Luther brought; besides that I will ask
how the members of that Church could be saved, not making any profession of
their Faith; since our Lord says, who shall deny me before men, I will deny
him before God my Father: And saint PAVL; We believe with our hearts to
justice, but we confess Matt. 10.
with our mouths to Salvation. This Church then when Luther, Romans 10.
rose up had no need to receive any change in the points which are at this
day in controversy, nor to take any instruction from Luther or his
disciples, but only to declare her self, and with her Gyges Ring, to make
herself from invisible, visible. And to cry out, this is my belief, this was
the doctrine that I held before Luther spoke. Now this is so far from benig
so, as Luther, protests, that none before him ever discovered the truth (...)
the doctrine that he has declared: And all those that came thither persuaded
by the preaching of him and of his disciples, and without ever bragging of the
precedent possession of the same doctrine; neither had this sufficed, for the
same Church must have said, Luther has not yet passed forward enough he is
not yet arrived to the whole sum of my doctrine. For we know how much (...),
and Zuinglius, have added to the doctrine of Luther. And so there not being,
when Luther, came into the world, a Society, neither visible, nor invisible,
which held Luthers doctrine, and much less Caluins, in the (...) controuerted
between them and us, it must necessarily follow, that the Church was then
perished, for since the excellent King, will have it that the only assured
mark to discern which, either of the Church which he calls, English, or of
ours, is the true Church, be it that which is the essential form of the
Church, and that he pretends to be doctrine; it is necessary that he suppose
that the difference, which are between the Church that he calls, English, and
ours, be questions which take away the essential form of the Church, and
destroy the being of a Church: And by consequence, that that of the one or
other Society, which errs in these points, shall be deprived of the
essential (...) of a Church, and destitute from the being of a Church. And
then if when Luther came into the world, there were noe Society neither
visible nor invisible, which held that that the English Church holds at this
day in the points disputed between her and us, it follows there was then
noe Church.

Of the authority of the work entitled imperfect. CHAP. XVII.
The Continuance of the Kings Answer.
AND therefore the excellent King thinks, that he ought with so much the more
Care in Aug. in psalm. 124
so great a flood of different opinions, withdraw himself into the mountains
of the holy Scripture.

THE REPLY.
WHEN Nauplius King of the Island of Euboea now called Negrepont, would at the
return from the Seige of Troy, cause the fleet of the Greeks to be
shipwrackt, to revenge the death of his Son Palamides, he set by night,
torches in form of a beacon upon one of the mountains of his Island, at the
foot whereof, the Sea was full of banks, cliffes, and rocks, so to draw
their ships by the hope of a safe haven, to runn, hazard and perish in those
shores. So whenantient heretics, whom saint AUGUSTINE calls, mountains for
Shipwreck, would cause the Catholics to make shipwreck in Faith, the more
their doctrines have been pernicious and mortal, the more they have adorned
and illustrated them, with texts and lamps of the scripture: This appears in
the heresy of the Arrians, who painted and colored their error with more then
forty passages of the Bible, and by this art attempted to call men back from
the external and sensible marks of the Church, which could not be pretended
by false ensigns, by those who had them not, to reduce them to the only mark
of the scripture, the interpretation whereof, by their subtletie they made
subject to as many deceipts as there were words. But above all this is
verified in the writer, from whom his Majesty borrowes this language, who was
one of the most passionate Champions of the Arrians, For though he cites these
words without naming the Father, nevertheless, both the terms wherein they
are couched, and the tracke of those who have alleged them before him; to
wit, Calvin in some of the prefaces to his institution, and the author of the
Book of the Eucharist, in the preface to his work, cannot suffer us to doubt,
but that they were taken from the author of the work entitled Imperfect;
falselie attributed to Saint CHRYSOSTOM. Now that this Author was not only
an open Arrian, but one of the most eager and violent Champions of the Arrians;
it appears by this, that he calls the Trinity; triangular impiety and the
doctrine of the homousians (that is to say, Author oper imperf in Matthew. hom.
19.
of those that held the Consubstantialitie of the Father and the son)
Heresy. Not but that I knew well, that he is sometimes alleged even by
Catholics, with the title of saint CHRYSOSTOM, under whose name he had been
first printed at Basle. But because it is one thing to allege him in places
where he disputes not against the Church, wherein he is excellent, and above
all in the discourse of manners, and an other to allege him in the places,
where he combats with deliberate purpose against the doctrine of the
Catholic Church of his age, as he does in that, from whence the words are
taken which his majesty produces. For behold the express terms of the
passage; When you shall Author. oper. imperf in Matthew. hom. 49.
see the impious heresy, which is the army of Antichrist set in the holy
places of the Church; then let them which are in Judea, fly into the
Mountains; that is to say, let them that are in the christian Society; have
recourse to the scriptures. And a little after; The Lord then knowinge, that so
great a confusion of things should arrive in the last days; for this cause
commands that the Christians, who are in the Christian Society, being willing
to receive the stedfastnes of the true faith, should have recourse to noe other
thing but to the Scriptures; otherwise, if they cast their eyes elsewhere, they
shall be scandalized and perish, not discerning which is the true Church. Now
that by this impious heresy, and by this Army of Antichrist, he intends the
Catholic Church, and the communion of them, which believe the equality of
the Father and the son, he plainly shows when he says in the same
Homily; that the great spiritual evils which have come upon the Church have
happened in the time of Constantine and Theodosius, and that the army of
Antichrist is the heresy and the abomination of desolation, which has since
them possessed the holy places of the Church; that is to say, the Basilickes
that Theodosius commanded to be delivered up to the Catholics; And when he
says in the former Homily, that the heresy of the Homousians (that is to
say, of those that hold Christ to be consubstantiall which his Father) Fights
not only against the Church of Christ, but even against the other heresies
which hold not the like. And in the nineteneth Homily, when he calls the
worshippers Enseb. de vit. Constable. l. 3.
the Trinity; Those that honor the triangular impiety. Whereby it appears,
that this passage if so far from giving favor to his Majesty's Author oper.
imperf hom. 48.
intention, as contrariwise it manifestes how dangerous a thing it is to seek
to reduce the marks of the Church, to the only doctrine drawn from the
scripture by the interpretation of every particular person, since the Arrians
in the point which of all others should be most express in the scriptures for
the catholics; to wit, in the point of the divinity of Christ; for if there
be any thing cleree in a Testament, it should be the quality of the testator;
refused all the other marks of the Church, and all the other ways of
disputation, and burnt with desire to fight by the only texts of the
Scripture, disarmed from the traditions of the Church.

Of the understanding of these words of S. Augustine to seek the Church in the
words of Christ. CHAP. XVIII,
The continuance of the Kings answer.
AND to seek (according to the Council that S, AUGUSTINE heretofore gave to
the Deuatists) the Church in the Words of Christ.

THE REPLY:
WHEN S. AUGUSTINE said in the book, of the unity of the Aug. devnit. Eccles.
c. 21.
Church, there is a question between the Donatists and us, where the Church
is; what shall we the^ do: shall we seek her in our own words, or in the
words of her head, our Lord Jesus Christ: I think we ought rather to seek
her in his word, from him that is truth, and well knows his own Body: And a
while after: I would not have the Church demonstrated by humane instructions,
but by divine or acles. And again: Let us then seek her in the canonical
scriptures. He did not intend, that to seek the Church in the scriptures,
(...) c. 3
between the Catholics and the Donatists, was to seek the doctrine of Ibidem
the Church in the scriptures; that is to say, to examine by the scriptures the
point of doctrine, which was contested between the Church and the Donatists;
but to seek the marks, and external and visible characters of the Church in
the scriptures; to the end, that the Church being discerned by those marks,
the truth of the doctrine contested, might be after known by the disposition
of the Church. For the understanding whereof it must be noted, that there were
two questions between the Catholics and the Donatistes; the one, of the
Body of the Church, to know on what party either of the Catholics, or of
them, the true society of the Church resided: The other, of the doctrine of
the Church; to wit, the which they, or the Catholics held the true doctrine,
concerning the Baptism of heretics. The first question then, which is, of
the Body of the Church, saint AUGUSTINE wills it should be judged by the
scripture alone for as much as in the precise controversy, wherein the
question was, which of the two societies was the Church, the voice of the true
Church cannot be discerned. But the second question, which is that of the
doctrine contested between the Catholics and the Donatists, he would have it
decided by the only deposition of the Church, as a faith full guardian and
depositarie of the Apostolic tradition. To seek then according to saint
AUGUSTINE between the Catholics and the Donatists the Church in the
Scriptures, was not to search the doctrine of the Church in the contentious
points of Faith in the Scripture, but to seek the visible marks and notes by
which the Church ought to be exteriorly discerned in the Scripture. For the
Donatists to prove that their Church was the true Church, and not the
Catholic Church, alleged human acts, and human proofs, to wit, that the
Catholic Church had received into her communion, without any expiation, and
purgation of preceding penance, those that had deliured the holy Books to be
burnt, and had sacrificed to the false Gods in the time of persecution; and
therefore that she was polluted with their contagion, and was perished: And then
that the only faction of Donatus which had remained pure from this contagion,
was the true Church. And saint AUGUSTINE contrariwise says, that against all
these words, which were human proofs and words; for if he that ordained
Cecilianus, had delivered up the holy Books in persecution time, it was a
thing to be proved by human testimonies, that is to say, by acts of notaries
and clerks even profane; the Catholics had the words of Christ, wherein
the works of the Church were described, to wit, that she ought to be visible,
eminent, universal, perpetual, and that to examine the Church according to
these marks it was to seek her in the words of Christ: and to examine her
according to the production of the Donatists, it was Aug. de unit (...) c. 2.
to seek her in humane words, What are, says he, our words wherein we must
not seek her; etc. All that we object one against an other of the delivery
Ibid. c. 3.
of the holy Books, of the sacrificing to Jdolls, and of the persecutions;
those are our words. And a while after; I would not, that the Church should be
demonstrated by human instructions; but by divine oracles: for if the holse
Scriptures have designed the Church to be in Africa, alone, and in a small
number of Roman inhabitants, making their conuenticles in Rocks and mount
(...), and in the house and territory of a certain Spanish Lady; then
whatsoever records can be produced, there are none but the Donatists that have
the Church. If the Scripture assign it to a little number of Mauritanians, in
the (...) province; you must go to the Rogatists. If in a small troop of
Bizacenians and Tripolitans and prouincialls, the Maximinianists have met with
her. If those of the East alone, we must seek her amongst the Arrians,
Macedonians, Eunomians, and others, if there be others; for who can number the
heresies, as proper and particular of every particular Province? But if by the
divine and most certain testimonies of the Canonical scriptures, she be
designed in all nations, whatsoever they produce, and whenever it be produced
by those that say, there is Christ, if we be (...), let us (...) hear the
voice of our Shepherd saying, believe them not. For every one of those is not
to be found, but this which is over all, is to be found in the self same
places, where the others are. And therefore let us seek her in the holy
Canonical scriptures. The places the of the scripture, where S. AUGUSTINE
would have the Donatists to seek the Church, are these. In thy seed, all the
nations upon the earth shall be blessed, The children of the forsaken Ibid. c. 7.
and 19. and ep. 165.
shall be in (...) (...) number, then those of her, that has a husband. This
Gospel must be declared over the whole world, and then the end shall be. I
am with you to (...).
the consummation of ages: And other such like. And the arguments that he Ibid.
c. 15. and ep. 165. and ep. 48.
bringes to manifest the Church by the Scriptures are these: The city of God,
says he, has this for a certain mark, that she cannot be hidden: she is
the^ Idem in (...) tract. 102. and contra litter. Petil. l 3. c 50
known to all nations; the sect of Donatus is unknown to many nations, then
that is not she. Item. You have the Church which ought to be spread over all,
and to grow till the harvest. You have the City, whereof he that built it
has said, the City built upon the mountain cannot be hidd. It is she then
that is most evident, Aug. contr. litt Petil l. 2 c 104.
not in any one part of the world, but over all. And other the like. But as
for the point of doctrine; I say again, and I say it boldly, Idem de unit.
Eccl. c. 26.
that saint AUGUSTINE never intended, either that the question of the Church
between the Catholics and the Donatists, should be tried by the doctrine,
nor that the article of the doctrine contested between the^ should be decided
by scripture, but that the point of the Church, should be examined by the
external and visible marks, that of the external and visible marks, by the
Scripture, and the difference of doctrine, by the report of the Church, that
is to say, by the tradition of the Apostles is to deny, that in disputatio^s
against other heresies, when points are handled which are here esteemed to be
expresselie treated of by the canonical Scriptures, but that he often called
upon their judgment. For who doubts but that where the Scripture is clear and
express, we must have recourse thereto? But we said that he never thought,
neither in general that all things belonging to Religion, were treated off in
scripture, nor in particular, that the contention between the Catholics and
the Donatists; concerning Baptism, was of that quality. And we maintain,
that for so many years, wherein he combated with them about this article
when there was que^stion of Searching the cause to the bottom, he never
produced one proof out of Canonical scripture. Indeed, he has often
alleged places of Scripture, to make some approaches to it, and to beat
down certain defenses, to solue by scripture the arguments that the Donatists
brought out of Scripture, to maintain that the custom of the Church in the
point contested was according to Scripture, in as much as (According) signifies
not against the Scripture, to establie general theses and preparatiues, to
prove the propositions that had some simpathy and affinity with that which he
disputed. As for example, he does indeed prove by scripture, that what is
sound Aug. de Bapt. contr Donat. l. 2. 7.
and entire amongst heretics, must not be repeated again, when they return
to the Church; but that Baptism is sound and entire amongst them, he does noe
were prove by Scripture. He proves indeed by Scripture, Augu. de gust. cum
(...). and cont. Cresc l. 1. c. 30.
that there may be ecclesiastical things out of the Church, but that Baptism
is of that number, he nether does nor can prove by Scripture. He proves indeed
by scripture, that it is against the commaun dement Id. de Bapt. contra Do not.
l. 4. c, 6. and alibi
of God, if heretics have received the Baptism of Christ in their own
party, to rebaptise them; for we also read that our Lord answered Saint
PETER. He that is wholly washed, need wash but his feet: But that heretics
receive the Baptism of Christ in their Sects, and not (...) polluted and
profane washing, which is all the knott of the question, he noe were proves by
scripture. For as Aug. contr. Cresc. l. 1. c 31.
he notes elsewhere, Peter of whom this is written, had not been baptized by
heretics, he proves indeed by scripture, that they Idem de unit. Eccl. c.
18.
who are out of the interior and Spiritual unity of the Church as Judas and
wicked Catholics, do not for that leave to conferr true Baptism, but that
they who are neither inwardly nor outwardly in the Church, who are out of the
unity of the profession of Faith, and of the communion of the Sacraments of
the ecclesiastical body, can conferr it, he proves nowhere by scripture.
And in Sum, the things which belong to the Solutions of arguments to
probable and coniecturall preparatiues, to shows of possibility and non
repugnancie, to soften and dispose the spirit of the Readers, he does indeed
prove by scripture, but the impression of the last form, the assumption and
hypothesis of the sillogisme, the proof of this precise and special point,
that Baptism whereof Saint JOHN cries, None may receive any thing except it
be given him from heaven; That Saint PETER says to be administered into
remission Act. 2.
Ad tit. (...)
of Sins, That Saint PAVL calls the washing of regeneration, and the
renewing Ephesians. 4.
of the holy Ghost, and whereof he writes, One faith, and one Galat. 3.
Baptism, And again; All they that are baptized have put on Christ, That this
Sacrament I say, may be conferred out of the Church, which is the fullnes of
Christ, which is the sealed Fountain, which is the only dwelling of the holy
Ghost, which is she alone that has received the keys, and the authority, to
remitt sins, that this can subsist amongst heretics, who have neither faith
nor gift from heaven, nor the holy Ghost: you can never find that in so
maine years as saint AUGUSTINE the principal opposite and overthrow of this
heresy has contested her, he has never manifested, nor could he, nor he
has not pretended to prove by any passage of Scripture, but by the only
unwritten traditions of the Apostles, and the general practice and universal
attestation of the Church. We must (says he) observe in these things what
the Church of God observes; The question now between you and us is, which of
yours or ours, is the Church of God. And again; Wherefore, although in truth
there be noe example to be produced of this out of the (...) Scripture, yet we
leave not to maintain even in this case, the truth of the Scriptures, when we
observe what has been approved by all that Church, that the authority of the
canonical Scripture recommendeth. And in an other place; This is neither
openly nor evidently Idem de unit. Eccl. c. 19
read neither by you nor by me etc. But if any one endued with wisdom and
recommended by the testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ, were to be found in the
world and that he had been consulted by us upon this question, we ought noe
way to doubt to do what he should tell us, for fear of being judged
repugnant, not so much to him, as to our Lord Jesus Christ by whose testimony
he had been recommended; Now he gives testimony to his Church. And in the
work of Baptism against the same Donatists: The Apostles (says he) have
prescribed nothing in this matter, but Idem de Bapt. contr Donat. l. 5. c. 23.
this custom ought to be believed to have taken the original there of, from
their tradition, as there are many things which the universal Church
observes, and which are therefore, not without cause believed to have been
commanded by the Apostles, although they be not written. From whence, the
contrary appears to what his majesty pretends to infer from this passage;
to wit, that the scripture only destitute of the unwritten Apostolic
tradition, cannot decide all points of Faith, nor refute all heresies. For the
point in agitation between the Catholics and the Donatists concerning the
truth and realitie of the baptism given by heretics, was a point of faith,
and wherein obstinate error would make an heresy. The proof of this is, first
that the doctrine of Baptism importes so much to the faith, as where there is
noe true baptism, there is noe true Church: S, PAVL teaching us, that Ephesians. 5.
God cleanses his Church through the washing of water in the word. Now there
where the Church is destroyed, there is destroyed this article of the Faith of
the Creed; I believe the bolie Catholic Church. And secondly, that the
unity of Baptism belonges so to faith, as S. PAVL says; there is one faith,
and one Baptism. And that the creed of Co^sta^tinople setts amongst the
Ephesians. 4.
Articles of the Confession of the Faith: We (...) one baptism in the
remission of sins: in such sort as if the Donatists erred in disanulling the
baptism Co^c. Constable 1.
of heretics, and rebaptizing them, they destroyed the faith of the unity of
baptism, and anathematised the character of Christ, which had already been
imprinted in the baptized by baptism. And if the Catholics err in approving
the baptism of heretics, and in not rebaptisinge them when they came to
them, they sinned against the Faith of the necessity of Baptism for the
constitution of the Church, and consequently had noe Church. And nevertheless,
neither could this point of Faith be proved, nor the contrary heresy confuted
by Scripture, only destitute of the help of tradition. And although Optatus
Mileuitus in the beginning had attempted it; nevertheless, the success has
made saint AUGUSTINE (who has gone further in this question) see and confess,
Aug. contrlit. Petil. l. 3 c. 6.
that to compose it, there was a necessity of having recourse to the unwritten
Apostolic tradition. And what saint AUGUSTINE alleges in general against
Petilianus must not be objected against this, If any one of Christ, or of the
Church, or of ought belonging to the faith or to life, declare (...) then this
that you have received in the legal and Euange licall scriptures, let him be
anathema. For himself declares elsewhere, as it shall appear hereafter that
this word of S. PAVL further, signifies against, or to the prejudice of: The
Apostle (faith he) has not said, more then, but, further, for if he had said,
more then, he had condemned himself, He that desired to come to the
Thessalonians to supply what was wanting in their Faith. Now he that
supplies, adds that which was not in the thing, but takes not away what was
therein before.

Of the understanding of the words of S. Chrysostom in the thirty third
homily upon the Acts. CHAP. XIX.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
EVEN so S. CHRYSOSTOM, as well elsewhere as of deliberate purpose in the
thirty third homily upon the Acts, handling this question, how the true
Church may be discerned amongst many Societies, which attribute this name to
themselves, does teach that there are two instruments to judge and decide this
question: First the word of God, and afterward the antiquity of the doctrine,
not invented by any late body, but always known since the beginning of the
Church, when she was but breeding.

THE REPLY.
THERE are four (...) to be made upon this Article; the first, that saint
CRYSOSTOME gives not this Rule to discern the true Church from all societies
that differ from her in what point soever; but only to discern her from
those, that differ from her, in the point of Christ's divinity; wherein it is
noe wonder if the scripture be more clear and express then in any other. The
second, that this mark to discern the Church, he gives not to those, that are
already preoccupated with the opinion of any of the Christian sects but to
the Pagans which were not anticipated with passion, for any of the parties
that combated about the points of Christ's divinity, and for this reason might
seem to judge the more impartiallie. The third, that saint CHRYSOSTOMES aim
is not to treat seriously there, of the marks of the Church with the Pagans,
but to stopp their mouths; and to show, that whereas they said, that they
would turn Christians, but that they knew not on which part to range
themselves: these were but pretenses, and not true language. The fowrth, that
he stopps not there, but acknowledging that this means, because of the
subtletie and shifts of heretics, is not sufficient, requires and exactes an
other, that is to say, that he reduces in the last instance, all the sum
of the question, to this point; that, that is the true Church which has
remained steadfast and immutable in her communion, and from whence all the
others are gone forth, and that came forth from none. A Pagan (says he) comes
and says, I would turn Christian, Chrysostom. in Act. ho 33.
but I know not to whom I ought to adhere; for there are amongst you many
strifes, seditions, and tumultes, I know not which opinion I should choose, nor
which I ought to prefer; every one says, I follow the truth; whom shall I
(that am utterly ignorant in the Scriptures) believe, seeing both sides, (as
well the Catholics, as the Sects of the Arrians, as it shall appear
hereafter) protest the same thing? That certainly answers he, makes much
for us; for if we say we must believe reasons, thou shall not without cause
be troubled; but if we say, we must believe the Scriptures, and they be
simple and true, it is easy for thee to judge thereof; if any one conform
himself to them, he is a Christian; if any strive against them, he is far
from this rule. But what will become of it, says the Gentile, if the other
coming also, say the scripture affirms this thing, and thou say it
affirms an other thing, and that you wrest the scripture into diverse parts
each drawing the understanding of the words thereof to his own side? etc.
Then, says S. CHRYSOSTOM, we will inquire of the Pagan, if what he says, be
pretenses and excuses, and ask him, ifhe condemn the Gentiles? He must say
some thing, for he will not desire to come to us, till first he condemn them;
we will ask him then for what cause (...) condemns them; for he will not
condemn them without cause. It is manifest that he will say, because their
Gods are Creatures, and are not the uncreated God. This (...) well answer we,
for if this (...) found in other heresies (a clause which evidently shows,
that he spoke only of those heresies which opposed, the (...) of Christ, which
were those where with the East was afflicted) and we affirm the contrary,
what need more words? We all confess that Christ is God, but see who combats
against it, and who combats not against it; we call him God, and pronounce of
him things worthy of God; that he has power, that he is not servile, that he
is sree, that he does all things of himself; and they the contrary. And then
finally, seeing that this attempt succeeded not sufficiently; It is not
possible, says he, but he that hears without preoccupation, should be
persuaded; For as if there were a Rule according to which all things should be
squared, there were noe need of great consideration, but it would be easy to
discern him that should make wrye lines; Even so is it now: But wheresore
then, would he say, do they not see it? Preiudication and human causes do
many things: that replies (...), they say also of us. And how can they say
it? for we have not separated ourselves, nor have made noe schism, nor
division Chrysostom.
in the Church; We have noe heresiarchs, we name not ourselves after the
ibidem. (...)
name of any man, we have noe leaders as to one Marcion, to another
Manicheus, to an other Arius, to an other, an other heresi-founder. But if we
take the appellatio^ of any particular, it is not from those that began any
heresy, but of those that preside over us and govern the Church: We have noe
doctors upon earth, God forbid, we have one alone in heaven. This also will
he say, the others likewise affirm it, but the name that they bear
(answers he to wit, of Marcionites, or of Manichees or of Arrians)
conuinceth them and stopps their mouths. By which words it appears, that the
last analysis and resolution of the question, is all determined in this point;
that, that is the true Church, which has remained immovable and steadfast in
her communion, and from whom all the others have gone forth, and is gone forth
from none; which is also the mark that S. AUGUSTINE (...) it when he says.
The Catholic Church August. de Symbol ad Cathec. l. 1 c 5.
combating against all heresies, may be opposed but she cannot be overthrown,
all (...) are come forth from her, as unprofitable branches cut off from their
Vine, but she remains in her vine, in her root in her Charity. And S. PACIAN
Bishop Pacian. ad Sympron. ep. 3.
of Barcelona before him, when he writes. Now to know whether she has been
principally built upon the foundation of the prophetts, and of the Apostles in
Jesus Christ the corner stone: Consider whether she began before thee, whither
she has grown before thee: if she be not withdrawn from her first
foundation: whether in separating herself from the rest of the Body, she have
not constituted to herself her Masters and her particular instructions: if she
have argued any thing vnaccustomedlie: if she have formed any point of new
right, if she have declared to her Body the divorce of peace, then let her be
esteemed to be departed from Christ, and to be constituted forth of the
prophetts and Apostles. And therefore, although the point of the assentiall
deity of Christ, deserve to be more cleerelie expressed in Scripture, then any
other, as the quality of the Testator, ought to be more cleerelie expressed in
the Testament, then any other; nevertheless, for as much as the heretics by
their malice and subtletie, shift off the places of Scripture alleged to this
purpose; the Fathers after they had tried all their strength to bring them
back to reason by Scripture, were constrained (seeing they could not make them
yield up their weapons by that way) to cha^getheir battery, and have recourse
to the authority of the Church. Behold (says saint ATHANASVS) we have showed
the succession of our doctrine from father to son; you new Cayphas Athan. in
Decret.
what Progenitors of your phrases and your terms, will you bring us? And
saint Synod. Nicen. contr. Arian.
HILARIE: Let us consider so many holy fathers; what will become of us if
we anathematize them? for we bring things to this point, that if they have
not (...) Bishops, we are none, since we have been ordained by them. And the
same Hilar. de Synod.
saint ATHANASIVS: It is sufficient that these things are not of the Catholic
Church, and that the Fathers were not of that belief. From whence it Athan.
ep. ad epitect. contra haeret.
appears, that if the point of Christ's divinity had never been expressed in
Scripture, they held the light of the perpetual testimony of the Church for a
sufficient proof of this article. For whereas saint CHRYSOSTOM compares the
Scripture to a Rule, according whereto all things should be squared; besides
this that, according signifies there not against, he inteds that Scriptures
rule all things either mediately, or immediately; that is to say, either by
it self, or by the means whereto it remitts us, as he testifies himself in
these words; From whence it appears, Chrysostom. in 2 ad Thessal. c. 2.
that the Apostles delivered not all things in vriting, but also many things
unwritten: Now either of these are worthy of equal credit,

Of the Rules to judge admitted by saint Chrysostom and S. Augustine. CHAP.
XX.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
THese two Rules to judge, the King with the English Church embracing them with
an earnest desire. pronounces that he acknowledges that doctrine final ie
both to be true, and also necessary to salvation, that running from the
Spring of the holy Scripture by the consent of the ancient Church, as by a
channel has been derived down to this time.

THE REPLY.
NEither do saint CHRYSOSTOM and saint AUGUSTINE restrain the means to
judge of all the doctrine of the Church to these two only means by exclusion
of the third, to wit, of Apostolic Tradition, since saint AUGUSTINE says,
this Augu. de unit. Eccl. c. 19.
is plainly read neither by thee nor by me. And again, The Apostles have
prescribed nothing in this, yet the custom opposite to Cyprian ought to be
believed to Idem d: de baptism contr. Donat. l. 5. c. 23.
have taken original out of their tradition, as it is in many things that
the universal Church, does observe: And for this cause indeed well believed
to have been commanded by the Apostles though they have not been written; And
that saint CHRYSOSTOM says that from thence it appears, that the (...) have
not given all things in writing, but some also without writing; whereof both
sorts, are in like manner worthy of creditt. And elsewhere; It is not in
vain, that the Apostles have given it by tradition, to offer sacrifice for the
dead; they know how much advantage and profitt increases to them thereby.
Neither is the question in the disputation which is now handled between his
majesty and us, of the examination of the right, but of the examination of the
fact, that is to say, we are not to inquire by conferring the conclusions of
Faith with their principles, which of the English doctrine or ours, is the
truth, which is a question of right, whose trial, besides that it must be
long, goes out of the listes, and from the state of the question that we treat
of. But to inquire by the continuance and co^formitie with the ancient
Catholic Church, whether our Church be the same Church as was in the time of
S. AUGUSTINE and of the four first Counsels, which is a question of fact; in
which must be handled, not what ought to be believed, but what has been
believed. For his majesty being of agreement, that there was an obligation of
communicatio^ with the ancient Catholic Church, which flourisht in the time
of the four first Counsels, and that whosoever was separate from the
communion of that Church, was an heretic or a Schismaticke: And the question
is whether I might except from the praises of his majesty the title of
Catholic, which is the first cause of this comparison consisting in the
knowing not whether the Church of those ages, had believed well or evil, which
is a question of right; but whether the Church of the last ages, from which his
majesty, or those that have been before him, have separated themselves be the
same Church by an uninterrupted succession both of persons and of doctrine, as
that was in the time of S. AUGUSTINE, which is a question of fact, and capable
of being proved by history alone, so as the subtletie of spiritts can find
noe shift for it now, to leapefrom the question of fact, to the question of
right; And in steed of examining, whether the Catholic Church of this time,
had the same belief in the points controuerted between us and our
adversaries, as the Church in the time of the four first Counsels had: to
dispute whether the Church of those ages has believed well, and with what
reseruations and mollifications her belief must (...) received, it is to go
forth from the state of the question, and to change the order and means of the
disputation.

Of the application of the Thesis of this observation to his Hipothesis. CHAP.
XXI.
The continuance of the Kings answer
THen to make an end of this discourse, the king answers to the first
observation, that it can not be applied to the Hipothesis proposed, without
many defects. For so far is this English Church from having departed from the
faith of the ancient Catholic Church, which she honors and reuerences, as
she is not so much as departed from the Faith of the Roman, Church, in as much
as she consents with the Catholic Church.

THE REPLY:
I Appeal from Phillip to Phillip; that is to say, from the most excellent
King, to himself: for what does my first observation import; yea, according to
the abridgement that this majesty has made of it, but that the name of
Catholic does not only denote faith, but also communion with the Catholic
Church; and therefore, that the ancient writers, would not suffer those to be
called Catholics, who had separated themselves from the communion of the
Church, although they retained the Faith thereof: Now, how then is it, that the
most excellent King alleges to show, that this observation cannot be
applied to his Hypothesis, without many errors, that he is not departed,
neither he nor his Church, from the faith of the ancient Church? For the
observation wherein it is handled being, that to be Catholic, it is not
sufficient not to be separate from the Church of the Catholic faith; but also
not to be separated from the communion of the Catholic Church: is it not
fussicient to apply it to the Hipothesis, and to except the most excellent
King from the title of Catholic, that his Majesty has separated himself,
not from the Faith, if so be he had not done so but from the only communion
of the Catholic Church? And if the most excellent King says, that she from
whom he has separated himself, is not the same Catholic Church as she was in
the time of the Fathers, and of whom the Fathers said, that out of her
communion the title of Catholic, nor the reward of salvation could not be
obtained must he not show that there is an alteration happened in things which
are of the essence of the Church, and without which the very being of the
Church cannot be preserved: and besides this, that he must find out and cause
to appear, an other society wherein the succession of the doctrine and of the
ministry, both of the communion and of the prerogatives of the ancient
Catholieke Church has continued, and whereto he has ranged himself; to the
end that adhering thereto, he may say, that he has not separated himself
from the communion of the ancient Catholic Church, but is returned into it?

Of the personal suceession of the Bishops. CHAP. XXII.
The Continuance of the Kings Answer.
IF we seek for the succession of persons, we have in being the name of
Bishops, and the succession uninterrupted from the first.

THE REPLY.
IT suffices not to constitute the personal succession of Bishops that some
are entered, in the steed of others; but they must be entered with the same
form, and with the same conditions essential to a Bishopric, that their
predecessors entered withal. Noe more then it suffices to make the Priests of
Ieroboa Successors to the true Leuiticall Priests that he had driven away that
they came into their places, not being come in with conditions necessary to
succeed the^. And therefore whether the mission of the Bishops which are at
this day in England, be a true ecclesiastical mission, and made by
ecclesiastical authority, and with the just ecclesiastical forms, or rather
a politic mission, I forbear to dispute. Only I will say, that there are
two kinds of successions in the personal continuance of a Bishops Sea, the
one, the succession of authority; and the other, the succession of the
character. Whereof it is (...), that the English according to the principles
common to them and us, have not the one; and it is evident, that according to
their own particular principles, they cannot have the other. For there do
meet together or concur according to us, two conditions in Episcopal
mission; the one concerning the collation of authority, the other concerning
the impression of the character, which comes from the part of the sacrament of
order, which we conceive to imprint a Seal, which cannot be blotted out. Now
the condition which concerns the character, which we will here call
sacramental mission, may well be preserved out of the Church, for as much as
the character cannot be blotted out, and consequently may be given, though
unlawfully, yet reallie out of the Church, by them that have carried it out of
the Church. But that which co^cernes authority, which we will call,
notwithstanding the barbarism of the word, authoritatiue missio^, although it
cannot be given in the Church without the other, yet it cannot be carried away
nor given with the other out of the Church, and may be taken away by the
Church from them, to whom she has given it, when she shall judge it necessary
to depose or degrade them. As the Council of Sardica deposed Narcissus,
Menophantus, and others, who notwithstanding, left not to preserve the
character of the sacrament even as the officers of a prince, when they join
themselves with a faction of rebels, may carry with them the Seal and the
character of the Patent of their offices, and preserve it out of the state, and
out of the common wealth; but they cannot carry (...) the authority of their
office with them. And therefore, when they that have been degraded by the
Church, or ordained out of the Church return to the Church, the lawful
authority to exercise their function must be restored to them, either by a
particular rehabilitation, or by a public declaration that the Churches makes
to receive them into her communion with the exercise of their charges, which
serves them for a general rehabilitation: As when the Arrians returned to the
Catholic faith, the Church restored to their Bishops, the lawful authority
to administer the Bishop ricks whereof the ecclesiastical laws had deprived
them, and rehabilitated them all at once, by the public declaration that she
made to admit them with the function of their charges. From whence it
appears, that they that are ordained out of the Church, and by an other
society then by the true Church, although they be indeed Bishops as for the
Character of the Sacrament, nevertheless, they are not Bishops, as for the
function of authority; and as many times as they shall pretend to use their
authority without being rehabilitated by the Church, so often they commit
sin and sacrilege. Let us consider, (says S. HILARY, speaking of the Fathers
of the Counsel of Nicea) what we do do, we that anathematize them, etc,
For if they have not been Bishops Hilar. de Synod.
we ca^ be none. And S. ATHANASIVS; It is impossible that the ordination of
Secu^dus as made by the Arria^s, should have any force in the Catholic
Church. And Athan. Apol. 2.
S. HIEROME; There are at this day noe Bishops in the world saving those that
Hier. contr Lucifor.
were ordained by the Synod. And the law of the Emperors, speaking of the
Bishops of the hereticks'; It is unlawful that they should make ministers, who
are none themselves. Whereby they do not intend, that the Bishops of heretics
who have drawn their character from the Church, be not Bishops, as for the
impression of the character, but that they are none as for the imposition of
the authority. By means whereof, the English Bishops can pretend noe
Episcopal succession from the Church of the ancient Fathers, as for the
succession of authority, for as much as if the Catholic Church which was in
England and in other places, when king Henry the eigth came to the crown, were
not the true Catholic Church, the Bishops of the Catholic communion, were
not true and lawful Bishops, as concerning authority, but only as concerning
the character; and by consequence neither had themselves the succession of
Episcopal authority, nor could transmitt it to those that have taken it from
them. By what right (says saint ATHANASIVS speaking of the Arrians) can they
be Bishops, if they have been ordained by those men, which themselves do
slander with heresy? And contrariwise if the Church that was at the beginning
of King Henry the eigth throughout Europe, and in many other parts of the
world, were the true Church, this selfsame Church, having disannulled the
episcopal authority in those from whom the English at this day pretend to
have had their mission, and having deposed and anathematized them, they had no
more lawful episcopal authority and by consequence could not co^ferr it to
others. And besides, if that Church were the true Church, the English Church at
this day which is gone out from her communion, can not be so, nor preserve in
her the succession of Episcopal authority, which cannot be transferred out of
the Church. And for the succession of the character, the English, according to
their doctrine, can in noe sect pretend to it; for they hold not (and if they
would hold, they cannot do it; for as much as they make profession to agree in
the faith and in the sacraments with the Protestants of France) that order
conferrs any other thing then authority, nor that it imprints any
sacramental character, which is that only, which in mission can be transferred
and given out of the Church. And so if by their doctrine they could have the
succession of the character, they are fallen from the right of making use
thereof. For they communicate with the Puritans of France, and hold their
sheep for true sheep, and so their pastors for true pastors, and for their
colleagues and fellow brethren. Now the ministers of France, are not ordained
by any Bishops, and so are noe Bishops, For he (says saint Cypr. ad Magn.
ep. 76
CYPRIAN) cannot be a Bishop, who succeeding no body, has been ordained of
himself: And not being Bishops have noe Church, since as says the same saint
CYPRIAN, The Church is in the Bishop, and the Bishop in the Id. ad Florent.
Pupp. ep. 69.
Church, and who is not with the Bishop is not in the Church. By means whereof
the English which communicate with them, and hold them for their colleagues and
fellow brethren, inuolue themselves into the crime and contagion of all their
ecclesiastical defects: and consequently fall from all the rightes whereof
those with whom they communicate, are deprived. I add to that, that to show a
Church to be successively and representatiuely the ancient Catholic Church,
it suffices not to show that a part of that Church deriueth the personal
succession of her Bishops from the missio^ of the antien Catholic Church but
all the Church that will pretend the inheritance and succession of the tittle
of catholic, must have the successio of her Bishops derived from the (...) of
the antie^t catholic Church, For the Bishops Sea is one, as says S, CYPRIAN,
whereof every one holds his portion vndiuidedly: And elsewhere: The Church is
one, bound together by Id. de unit. Eccl.
the cement of Bishops, adhering the one to the other. Now the English do not
Id. ad Pupp ep 69
pretend alone, to co^stitute all the communion of their Church, nor to be all
the true and pure visible Catholic Church, but do comprehend into their
communion the Protestants of France, as parts of the Body of their Church.
And therefore they cannot say, that the Catholic Church to which they adhere,
and wherewith they communicate, to be by succession and personal
representation, the same visible Catholic Church which was in the time of the
four first Cou^cells. Contrariwise from this that the other parts of the
communion to which the English Church adheres, communicate not by succession of
persons with the mission of the ancient Catholic Church, and consequently are
at the least schismatikes; it issues that the English which communicate with
them, cannot communicate with the ancient Catholic Church for none, except in
error of fact, can communicate with the Catholic Church and with
Schismatickes together. And finally I say, that since in all questions of
Schisms we must mount up to the original, following these words of saint
AUGUSTINE to the Donatists: The question between you and us is, where the
Church of God should be; we must then begin at the original, why have you
made a schism: The account that the English Church will yield of the
succession of her Bishops, ought to be brought to the original of the Schism.
Now thereupon I will ask his Majesty, where the first, after the rising up of
Luther and Calvin began in England to separate themselves from the Catholic
Church, to embrace other form of Religion which they now hold, where was this
Society, wherein there was together to be found, both the succession of
Bishops uninterrupted from the first, and the succession of doctrine? For to
go out from the Church, then entitled Catholic, they must range themselves
to an other Church, which must have true doctrine, and true ministry by
adherence ad communion, to the which they might preserve the title of
Catholic, and transmitt it to those that should come after them. Now where
was then this Society endued with the true doctrine, and the true succession
of Bishops, when the English first separated themselves from the Church
entitled Catholic? For I will not inquire who is the first, from whom she
says that the English Bishops can show their uninterrupted succession, if it
be not S, AVGVSTIN Bishop of Canterbury, whom S. GREGORY sent thither: Nor
will I demand for the preaching of what doctrine S. GREGORY sent him thither,
if it were not for the preaching of the same doctrine that was there before the
last separation,

Of the succession of doctrine. CHAP. XXIII.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
IF the succession of doctrine be demanded, let us mako trial of it.

THE REPLY:
THERE is great difference between similitude of doctrine, and succession of
doctrine: Similitude of doctrine is a simple report of agreement between one
doctrine and an other; but the succession of doctrine properly taken, is a
deriuation of doctrine continued by a perpetual vnintermitted chine of
teachers, and persons taught. And therefore, the Arrians which are at this day
in Polonia, or in Transiluania, may well pretend similitude of doctrine without
the ancient Arrians, which were in the time of the Council of Nicea, but not
Succession of doctrine; for as much as their doctrine has not been tra^smitted
by a living perpetual chain of teachers and P^^^^ons taught from the ancient
Arrians, to them. For as the fire of the high places, was indeed one in
similitude with that which came down from heaven to serve for a beginning to
the fire of the mosaicell sacrifices, but not one in unity of Succession,
there being but the only fire preserved for this effect in the Altar of
Jerusalem, whicb was one in unity of Succession with that: So a subsequent
doctrine, may well be one in unity of Similitude with a precedent doctrine
without any flux of continuance to have been between them: but a Subsequent
doctrine cannot be one in unity of Succession with a preceding doctrine if it
have not been derived from it by a perpetual channel of instruction, and by
an uninterrupted train of teachers and persons taught, which is that, that the
Fathers as we have elsewhere showed; call consanguinitie or genealogy of
doctrine; to wit a propagation of doctrine, derived without interruption from
Father to son, as by a tree of consanguinitie; even as children are derived
by a perpetual train of generation, from their Fathers, from their
Grandfathers, and from their great Grandfathers blood. And in this Sense, S.
ATHNASIVS after he had combated the Arrians by the Scrptures, and acknowledged
that their obstinancie made them indocill to his arguments made use of the
Succession of doctrine: Behold (said he) we have proved the Succession of our
doctrine delivered from hand to hand, from Father to Athan. in decret.
son, you new Jews, and children of Caiphas, what Predecessors can you show
for Synod.
your words: And saint PACIAN against the Nouatians: I holding myself assured
Nicen. contra.
upon the succession of the Church contenting myself with the peace of the
ancient Arian.
congregation, have never studied discord. And so whether she which is at this
Pacian. contra
day called the English Church, have similitude of doctrine with the Fathers
Parm. ep. 3.
of the first four Counsels, in the points which are in controversy
between her and us, is that which is in question, and which we deny that she
can prove; but that she has succession of doctrine with the Church of the
first four Counsels, is a thing which, cannot be so much as Challenged. For
there is noe man that dare say, that the doctrine that the English Church
holds at this day in the points co^tested between her and us, is come by a
perpetual and uninterrupted chain of teachers and persons taught from the
Church in the time of the first four Coucells unto her; seeing, that without
goeing higher, in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the eigth she held
directly contrary to what she holds now I omit to say that besides the
succession of the ministry and the succession of doctrine, there is an other
third succession, which is that of communion, by which from age to age the most
Ancient in the Society of the Church received into their communion, those that
came in after them; and by this continuance and chain of communion, the
faithful of subsequent ages communicated with them of preceding ages; a thing
which can not be between the members of the ancient Catholic Church, and the
members of her which at this day calls her self the English Church, because
their Predecessors have excluded, disinherited and excommunicated them. For not
only in the more ancient ages, the general Body of the Catholic Church,
had excommunicated by retaile those which held some one point; other some an
other of this Rapsodie of doctrines, which the Puritans call reformation, but
particularly the English Church excommunicated in the time of Henry the eigth
those, that held the doctrine, that she which is called the English Church now
holds.

Of the holding of a Council. CHAP. XXIV.
The Continuance of the Kings Answer.
GIVE us a free Council, and which shall not depend of the will of one (...).

THE REPLY.
IF by the word (alone) his majesty intends the Pope, what Counsel was ever
more free in this regard, then the second Council of Nicea, which was
celebrated in Bythinia, a Province of Asia, out of the West, and out of the
Patriarkshipp of the Roman Church, and in an other Empire, and where there were
none of all the Latin Church, but only two Priests, which represented the
Popes person? Or what Council was ever more free in the same regard, then the
Council off, Constance, wherein then when the differences of Faith were
treated of because the Papacy was in question, not only the Pope did not
assist there, but even all the three pretended Popes, where deposed? For what
was practiced against John Husse and Hierome of Prage, after they had again
fallen into the doctrine that they had abiured, was done, the Pope and his
competitors in the Papacy, being absent, and while they proceeded in
contumacie against him; even when they published the decrees of the Superiority
of the Council above the Pope. Or what Council finally was ever more free,
then the Council of Florence; whereat there assisted the Emperor of the East,
and the Patriarch of the Greek Church, and a great number of Greek Bishopps,
who all had liberty to determine and give their voices; and even those that
gave them against the common opinion of the Council, persisted in their
obstinancie, as Mark of Ephesus returned safely into their country? And
nevertheless, in those three Counsels, there were decided almost all those
things, which are at this day questioned in Christian Religion. For if to make
a Council free, it must be holden in the state of a Prince which favors
neither party of the contestors, what Council can be exempt from calumny? For
do not the Arrians put it amongst the reproaches of the Council of Nicea, and
of the first of Constable: that they were holden under Constantine and Theodosius,
who were abettors of their own party, and whose authority prevailed there?
And did not the Eutychians reproach the Council of Chalcedon for the
authority of the Emperor Marcian, that had there favored (say they) their
adversaries? From whence, even to this day, they call those that hold the
opinion of the Council of Chalcedon Melchites; that is to say, Rogalists or
Imperialists? but if his majesty intend by a free Council, a Council where
the Pope neither assists personalie nor representatiuely; how can it be, that
in a time wherein there is no Schism in the Papacy, a Council shall
perfectly represent the universal Church, if the visible head of the Church,
be neither there personally, representatiuely, or confirmatiuely? And what
will become of those ancient Maxims, That it is not lawful to rule the
Churches, or call the Counsels, without the Bishop of Rome? And again; that
the ecclesiastical law anulls all decrees made without him in Cou^cells. And
then when the conditions requisite for the liberty of a Council shall be
resolved upon, what fruit ca^ be drawn from it if it be not agreed before it
be assembled, that all that is decreed there, must be holde^ for infallible?
For if after such a Council shall have been celebrated, it rest still in the
choice of every particular person to judge, whether the Council shall have
judged conformablie to the word of God; who knows not, that this is not to
submitt their judgment to a Council, but to submitt a Council to their
judgment, and so to (...) things noe further advanced after the celebration of
a Council, then before? Now how is it that those who hold that the universal
Church may err, should hold that the authority of a general Council should
be infallible, which has noe authority of infallibillitie but in as much as
it represents the universal Society of the visible Church, where of it is the
voice and organ, and of all the pastors, where of it bears with it the tacit
deputation? And how can those hold that the universal Church, should be
infallible and cannot err, that hold, that indeed she has erred, and that
after so many ages there was noe visible part of the Church, which has not
been plunged in a pit of errors repugnant to salvation, and contrary to
faith? But whether his majesty's offers, ought to be examined in a formal
Council, or in a verbal conference, we are ready to assist at it, and to
show that the English, Church in points contested between us and her, has
neither Succession, nor Similitude of doctrine with the Church of the time of
the first Counsels.

Of the reduction of the Disputation, to the State of the Question. CHAP. XXV
The continuance of the Kings answer
THe English Church is ready to yield an account of her Faith, and to prove by
effect, that the design of the Authors of the Reformation, undertaken in this
Province, has not been to build any new Church, as the ignorant and malicious
have slandered her, but to re-establish her that was fallen, in the best manner
that might be.

THE REPLY.
IT is not the question in the proceeding that we have framed, to know
whether the aim of the Authors of the Reformation of England, has been to
make a new Church; or to restore that, which was fallen, and to set it up
again in a better form; although the subsequent words of his majesty where
he says, that the action of the English, Church, has been a return to the
ancient Catholic Faith and a conuerfion to Christ the only master of the
Church: testify that it has been a new refection and re-edification of the
Church. For noe it has been a new refection and re-edification of the Church.
For noe Society in whose faith there is an auersion from Christ, and from the
ancient Catholic belief, can possess the being and the name of a Church.
But in Sum, howsoever it be, it is not that, that is the question in the
proceeding that we have framed; but only to know whether the Catholic
Church, when the English portion separated it self from her, had so
degenerated from the ancient Carholicke Church, which was in the time of the
first four Counsels, in things importing the ruin of Salvation, and the
destruction of the being of the Church, as she was noe more the same Church as
she had been in the time of those ages. And consequently, that it was noe more
necessary to obtain the title of Catholic, and the participation of
Salvation. to communicate with her but contrariwise was necessary to be
separated from her and not to commnnicate with her. It is that, that is the
question, it is, that whereabout we must combat, and to show some condition,
some doctrine, or custom, holden in the Catholic Church at this day; that
may be pretended to be repugnant to salvation, and which destroys the being of
the true Church, that has not been in the Catholic Church, in the time of
the four first Counsels.

Of the invention of order, in the justification of the reformation before the
proof of the Deformation. CHAP. XXVI.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
NOw they have judged amongst the best that which had bane given by the
Apostles to the breeding Church, and which had been in practice in the age
nearest them.

THE REPLY.
NEither is it the question of what they have judged, but of the change that is
happened between the ancient Catholic Church and the morderne, and of the
importance of this change; that is to say, whether there be happened any
change between the estate of the ancient Church, and the estate of the Church
of the last ages, of such importance, as for that people might be permitted to
separate themselves from her communion. Which cannot be, if some thing have
not been taken away from the form of the ancient Church, which was necessary
to salvation, or added thereto which was repugnant to salvation. For if the
modern Catholic Church, were yet the same Church in matters of Faith and
salvation, as it was in the time of the four first Counsels, whatsoever
reformation they have pretended to make, having separated themselves from her,
they cannot possess the title of Iren. adu. haeres. l. 4 c. 62.
Catholic whereof the question is; nor obtain salvation. for as much as
says S. IRENEVS; No reformation can be made that is of such importance, as the
crime of schism is (...). Besides It must be first determined, whether the
Catholic Church were deformed in matters of faith and salvation, before the
English Church can be thought to be reformed in being separated from her. For
the English Church could not separate herself from the Catholic Church
whereunto before she was joined in communion, if first it did not appear to
her by proofs necessatie and demo^stratiue, that salvation could not be
obtained in the Catholic Church: that is to say she could not proceed to
reform her self, in separating herself from her whole, till it must first
appear to her: that the whole from whence she separated her self, were
deformed and with a deformation incompatible with salvation. Now that could not
appear, that between the ancient Catholic Church of the time of the first
four counsels (which we on both sides grant to be the true Church, and
whereof there remains to us monuments sufficient to instruct us of the
integrity of her doctrine, and of her Sacraments and ceremonies) and the
Catholic Church of this time, there had happened opposition in matters
importing gain or loss of Salvation. And therefore it is to that time, that
we must co^front the state of the Church of this time, and not leave the ages
of the four first Counsels, of whose estate we have more light and
monuments, then of the preceding ages, to go up to those of whose estate we
(...) recourse, not to find therein more conformity but to find therein
less instruction. For as for the Church in the time of the Apostles, besides
that antiquity affirms, that the Apostles have given many things by
tradition unwritten to their disciples, his majesty himself testifies that he
is far from their opinion that believe the universal history of the
primitive Church to be all contained in the sacred, but only little Book of
the Acts of the Apostles.

Of the indefectibilitie of the Church. CHAP. XXVII.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
THE King Confesses, that his Church has separated her self in many points,
from the faith and discipline, that the Roman Bishop does at this day hold and
defend with might and main. But the King and the English Church (...) not
interpret that to be, a defection from the ancient Catholic says, but rather
a return to the ancient Catholic faith, which in the Roman Church had been
admirablie deformed in many kinds, and a conversion to Christ the only master
of the Church.

THE REPLY.
AND even this confirms our intention, to know that there is at this day noe
Catholic Church; a thing directly against Gods promises, or that this that
we have, is she. For there could be noe other Catholic Church, but her that
was in the time of the first (...) Counsels. Now she, if she have been
interrupted (and she has been so if ours which has succeeded her, have been
wanting in faith and in union with Christ, without which a Society cannot be a
Church) the English Church which succeedes her not, by an uninterrupted
continuance, cannot be the same Church. For what Aristotle says of
Commonwealths, may also be said of the Church; to wit, that when a
commonwealth has interrupted the successiue continuance of her being, it is
noe more one common wealth in number, but an other commonwealth. So if the
ancient Catholic Church has interrupted the successiue continuance of her
being, she is noe more one, and not being one, she is noe more a Church, for
the Church is one or none. And therefore the Fathers cry out, that if the
Church be once perished, she can noe more, be borne again. If in S. CYPRIANS
time (says saint AUGUSTINE) the Church perished; from what Heaven it Donatus
fallen? from Aug, de bapt. con.
what Sea came he forth? what earth has sprunge him up? For to say that the
English Church accounts not her separation from the faith and from the Donat.
l. 3. c 2,
discipline of the Pope, a defection from the ancient Catholic faith, but a
return to the ancient Catholic faith, and a conversion to Christ, is not the
question, viz. whether the English Church be converted to the ancient
Catholic Faith. For as it has been above showed, the name of catholic, is
not a name of simple belief, but of communion. By means whereof, the English
Church might have all Faith: even to the removing of mountains, yet if she
communicated not with the Catholic Church she could neither obtain the title
of Catholic, nor the reward of life eternal; but should be schismatic,
and excluded from salvation. And therefore the state of the question in this
which is presented, is not whether the English Church be returned to the true
faith, but whether the Church which possesses at this day the name of the
Catholic Church has lost the being of the Catholic Church; which she
cannot have done if in things important to salvation, and constructiue or
destructive to the being of a Church, she have not varied from that of the time
of the four first Counsels, which we on both sides confess to have been the
true Church, that is to say, if she have not taken away from the practice of
the Church of those ages some thing necessary to salvation, and without which
salvation cannot be obtained; or if she have not added to the practice of that
Church something repugnant to salvation, and with which life eternal cannot be
obtained. From whence it appears, that the office of the English Church in
this question, is to show, not that she has returned to the ancient Faith,
which would always exact the necessity of a preceding dispute, to wit that
the Church from whence she went out, has diuerted her self from it; for the
proof of the auersion should precede the proof of reuersion: but that the
Church which we at this day entitle Catholic has so diuerted her self
from the faith of the Church of the time of the four first Counsels, which
both they and we hold to have been the true Church, as she has lost being and
the just title of a Church, and that salvation can noe more be obtained in her.
And our office is contrariwise to maintain, that the Church which is at this
day, differs not in any thing that can destroy salvation, and make her loose
the being and the title of a true Church, from the ancient Catholic Church,
and that all the points that our Adversaries object against us, as such, and
for which they take occasion to separate themselves from us, under pretense
that in our communion Salvation cannot be obtained, have been holden by the
ancient Church.

Of the sense wherein the Fathers have intended that their doctrine had been
holden from the beginning. CHAP. XXVIII.
The continuance of the Kings answer
AND therefore, if any one in consequence of this observation Will infer from
thence, that the English Church, because she reiects some of the decrees of the
Roman Church, is departed from the ancient Catholic Church, the King Will not
grant him that, till he have first proved by solid reasons, that all things
that the Roman, teach, have been approved from the beginning, and ordained by
the ancient Catholic Church: And that noe man can do this, now nor in the
time to come, at the least that till now noe body has done it is a thing e
as certain to the king, and to the Prelates of the English Church, as that the
Sunn shines at noone days:

THE REPLY.
NEITHER is it the question, as I have already many times said whether the
English Church, have departed from the doctrine of the ancient Catholic
Church; but whether our Church be so far strayed from the doctrine of the
ancient Church, as she can noe more be reputed one felfe same Church with the
ancient Church and that we can noe more communicate with her, without loss of
Salvation. For if she be still the same Church, and that amongst the
conditions. under the obligation whereof, her communion is participated, there
be noe doctrine nor custom which is opposite to Salvation; it is certain,
that out of her Society, though one should have Faith sufficient to remove
mountains, yet they can neither possess the Salvation, nor title of the
Catholic Church. Neither is it the question to know whether all things that
the Roman Church holds, and principally those which she holds to be
necessary for Salvation, have been holden by antiquity, and in this quality,
which would be a long and thornie disputation, because of the diversity of
the acceptions of the word (necessary) under the ambiguitie whereof, there
would always remain a thousand cauills and shifts. But whether all things
that they object to us as repugnant to salvation, and as occasions sufficient
to cause separation from our communion, have been holden by the Catholic
Church from the time of the first four Counsels. For in case they have been
so, it is clear that it is sacrilege in them, to separate themselves for
their occasion from our communion. Not but that if this point were once
cleared, it would be easier for us then his majesty conceaues, to prove that
all things that the modern Catholic Church holds as necessary to
salvation, have been holden for such, and in the same rank of necessity by
the ancient Catholic Church in the time of the first four Counsels: but
because the laws of disputation, do not permit us to engage our selves to
the trial of this point, before the clearing of the other, for fear of goeing
out of the listes of the question, and of confounding the order (...) the
conference. For whereas his Majesty adds, that they have been approved and
ordained from the beginning, it has been manifested in the third observation
of our Epistle, that to convince, that a thing have had place from first ages,
it is sufficient, because of the four writings of of that date that
persecutions have suffered to come down to us, to prove that it has been
holden by the Church of the first four Counsels, and that the Fathers that
then lived testify to have received it, not as a thing of a new institution,
but as a thing derived to them by an uninterrupted succession from the age of
the Apostles to the Church of their time, and that none of the preceding
authors say the contrary: His Majesty's own self being agreed with us in
this, as has often already been repeated, that the only little Book of the
Acts of the Apostles, is very far from containing all the history of the
primitive Church.

Of the exceptions that the King produces to show that he has not separated
himself from the Church. CHAP. XXIX.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
Finally the King adds, that it is a great crime, to separate ones self from
the Church but that he has any thing common with that crime, either he or
his Churchh ee (...) denes: for says his majesty we fly not, but we are
driven away.

THE REPLY.
AND why then do Ministers so earnestly exhort their hearers rather to endure
all kinds of death, then to communicate in our Synaxes? And why then when they
would dehort those of their party from marrying with Catholics, do they
allege those words of saint PAVL: What communion is there of the faithful,
with an Infidel. And join also in their prayers, the Turks, Papists 2. Cor.
6.
and other Infidells? And why then does his majesty allege for a reason not
to communicate with us, these words of the revelation: Go forth of Babylon my
people, for fear of communicating with her sins? For to offer Apoc. 18.
to communicate with us, when we shall have corrected those things that our
Adversaries pretend to have been deformed in our Church; who sees not; that
that is not to offer to return to us, but to desire that we should return to
them? And what sect has there been in the world that has not offered to
communicate with the Catholic Church; provided, that the Catholic Church
would renounce those points for which they were at difference; that is to
say, so she would loose the condition of being the Catholic Church.

Of the demands made for Reformations since the five last ages; Chapt. XXX.
The continuance of the Kings Answer.
AND your illustrious dignity knows, as he that is well informed thereof, how
many and, how great personages in piety and doctrine have desired at least
for this last five hundred years, the reformation of the Church, in the head
and in the members How many grievous complaints of good kings and princes,
have there been heard deploring the estate of the Church in their ages? But
what has it auailed? For we see not, that hitherto there has been any one
of those things corrected which were esteemed, before all others, to be fit
for correction.

THE REPLY.
THOSE demaundes of reformation in the head and in the members propounded
before the last deuisio^s of the Church have been demaundes of reformation, not
in the doctrine of Faith and of the sacraments, or universal ceremonies of the
Church, but in manners and in the practice of ecclesiastical discipline, which
even these words of reformation both in the head and members, principally used
in the time of the Counsels of Constance and of Basile testify. Now as there
is great difference between complaining of the personal practice of Justice,
and of the exercise of the Officers of a Kingdom, and desiring the reformation
thereof, and between complaining of the laws, ordinances, and constitutions
of the state: so there is great difference between complaining of the
conversation and manners of Ecclesiastical persons, and between complaining
of the doctrine and institutions of the Church. For when the corruption (to
speak by hypothesis) is in the doctrine, or in the sacraments, or universal
ceremonies of the Church, none can remain in the communion of the Church,
without participating in that contagion; but when it is in the manners and in
the practice of discipline, those only that committ the faults are culpable
therein, and not the rest who tolerate them as saint AUGUSTINE says for the
good of Augu. ep. 162
unity, that which they detest for the good of equity. And to whom the more
frequent and foul such scandalls are, by so much the more is the meritt of
their perseverance in the communion of the Church, and the martir-dome of their
patience, as saint AUGUSTINE calls it. For this only Sacrifice of choosing
rather to support the remaining in communion with such persons, then to rent
the coat of Christ, and to separate themselves from his Church to avoid their
Society, is the most pleasing Sacrifice that can be offered up to God. Now the
Church has always, not only since the last ages, but from all antiquity,
been filled with such like complaints. For while she shall remain in this
world, she shall always singe this verse of the Canticle; I am black, but I am
lovely, That is to Cantic. 1
say, black in manners, (...) lovely in doctrine; our Lord having deferred
till his second Coming, the making her glorious and without sport. And not only
so, but every one in his time, has always believed himself to be in the
worst age of the Church for manners and for the practice of discipline, because
they saw the evils of their own time, and did but hear the history of
other times; whereof the relation does not so lively touch the ears, as the
sight touches the eyes. But nevertheless, neither the evil has always gone
on increasing, nor the good always diminishing; but according to the
diversity of the ages, the Church has been either more or less pure in
manners. For, as for those, that in the beginning of these last divisions
either persuaded in some points by the innouators, or joined to the party of
the innouators themselves, have attempted to seek out some accommodation in
matter of doctrine, and of the universal Religion of the Church, to come to a
reunion, persuading themselves, that as the Poet says.

-- -- -- all men do Sin,
Without the walls of Troy, and (...) within.
It will be always easy for us to show, that the desire of reconciliation
rather then the knowledge of antiquity and truth, has caused them to speak
this language.

Of the agreement or disagreement of the English reformers, with the Donatists.
CHAP. XXXI.
The continuance of the Kings answer
AND therefore the English Church fears not, that she can seem in the
judgment of sincere arbitrators, to have done any thing like to the (...) in
this separation, They out of a iollitie of heart, and without any cause
abandoned the Catholic (...), approved by the consent of all nations, whereof
they could neither blame the faith, nor the discipline.

THE REPLY.
NEITHER was the Catholic Church then actuallie approved by all nations, for
these prophecies, In thy seed shall all nations be (...); and, This Gospel
must be preached over all the world: shall not Genes. 28. Matt 24.
be fully acco^plisht as S. AUGUSTINE notes till the end of the August. ep.
165. de sermon. Dom. in Mont. i. 2.
world: But it might well be said by (...), and in regard of other Christian
sects, to be spread over all nations, because the extent thereof, was more
eminont as it is now, then that of any other Christian Society; Neither was
she approved by (...) men of all the Christian nations: For who knows not how
great the multitude of other heresies was, when the sect of the Donatists
sprange up; and how much greater then, when the passages of the Fathers, cited
in the beginning of this observation, were pronounced against them? Of one side
the Arrians possessed almost all the East: of the other side the number of the
Donatists was such in Africa, as they held all at a time Counsels of three
hundred Bishops: yea eue^ in the time of S. AUGUSTINE, there where whole
nations that professed christianity, which did not acknowledge (...) Catholic
Church; as that of the Goths and Vandalls. And in brief elghtie or an hundred
other sects of Christians; which were then in the world, divided like Sa^psons
Foxes by the heads, but tied together by the tails, did all agree to reprove
the Catholic Church. And whereas the excellent king adds, that the
Donatists could blame neither the faith nor discipline of the Catholic
Church; if by blaming, his majesty intend to blame with reason, that is not
particular to the Donatistes, for never any Sect, either Schismatic or
heretical could blame with reason the faith or discipline of the Church. But
if by blaming he intend, accusing and slandring her, and believing that they
had just occasion to do so, who ever blamed the faith and discipline of the
Catholic Church, more then the donatists? who called themselves the Bishops
of the^ Catholic truth; and objected to the Catholics, that they erred in
faith, in believing that the holy Ghost, resided out of the Church; and in
holding that Baptism, which cannot be administered but by the operation of the
holy Ghost, might be conferred out of the Church, and in the Society of
heretics; who reprocht it to them, tha^t they violated these oracles; One
Ephesians. 4.
faith, one Baptism. It is lawful to be baptized, if thou do believe; be
ye every Act. 8.
one of you baptized in the remission of Sins. Christ purges his Church, by
the Act. 2.
Ephesians. 5.
washing of water in the word. Who hears not the Church, let him be as a
publican Matthew 18.
and as a heathen. Baptism is the washing of the regeneration of the Ghost.
The Ad Tit. 3.
Church is the close Garden, and the sealed Fountain. Who gathers not with
Christ Canti c. 4.
Luc. 11.
scatters. And other such like alleged by them in so great number, as Vincent.
Vincentius Lyrinensis cries out; But perchance this new invention (that Lirin.
in commonit
is to say, the heresy of the Donatists) will want defenses; nay she was
assisted with so great strength of spirit; with so many floods of Eloquence,
with so great a number of protectors; with so much likelihood, with so many
oracles of divine law, but expounded in a new and naughty manner, that it
seems to me, that such a conspir aice could never have bene^ destroyed, if
this same embraced this same defended, this same extolled profession of
novelty, had not in the end, left the cause of so great a motion alone and
abandoned. And as for the discipline of the Church; did not they blame it, who
taxed, the discipline of the Church, to have received without expiation of
preceding penance, those that in the persecution time, had denied Christ, and
communicated in the sacrifices of the Pagans, and consequently to have been
polluted with the contagion of the Pagans; who accused her, for having received
converted heretics into her communion, without giving them true Baptism,
which could not be given, according to them, but in the Church; and
consequently, to have polluted her communion with the contagion of unbaptized,
or uncircumcised spirituallie? and so to have lost the being of the true Church
which could not subsist without the true use of the sacraments? Who made
profession in manners of a conversation of life much better ruled, and more
reformed, then that of the Catholics; from whence it is that S. AUGUSTINE
forbidds the catholics, to reproach the Donatists with any other Idem cont.
lit. Petilian l. 2. c. 99.
thing, but that they were not Catholics. Who called themselves, the little
flock of the lord, the two tribes of the Kingdom of Judah; who said; we having
nothing, and possessing all things, we account our soul to he our riches, and
by our pains and our blood, we purchase the treasure of heaven, And in breese,
who supposed themselves to have such reason for their separation, as they
reputed the Catholics not to be worthy of so much as the name of Christians,
as having lost the true use of Baptism, whereby men are made Christians and
when they spoke to them they said, Caius Seius: Caia Seia (O man (...) thou be
a Christian? O woeman will thou be a Christian? And cried to them. Idem.
Come o ye ignorant and wretched people, who are commonly called Catholics
Vincent.
Lyrin. co^tr haeres. c. 26
And called the Chair of Rome the Chair of pestilence: and called the
Catholic Church, an Harlott, and an Adulteress: and chose rather to suffer
all kinds of persecutions and false Martirdomes, then to communicate with her.
If I persecute (says Saint AUGUSTINE) justly him that Augu. concion. sup.
gest. cum Emerit, Idem ibid.
detracts from his neighbor, why should I not persecute him, that detracts
from the Church of Christ? and says, this is not she, but this is an hatlott.
And again, If the punishment and not the cause made Martyrdom, heaven should
be full of your martirs; And against whom contrariwise, the Catholics in
matter of doctrine, had not one passage of scripture for them, but only the
Apostolical unwritten tradition, as S. AUGUSTINE himself confessed in these
words: The Apostles (says he) in truth have prescribed nothing of this, but
this Custom ought to be believed to have taken original from their tradition;
August. de Bapt. contr Donat. l. 5. c. 23.
as there are many things that the universal Church observes, which art with
good reason believed to have been given by the Apostles, although they be not
in writing. Was this to pretend to separate themselves from the Church, out of
iollitie of heart and without any cause, and neither to blame the faith nor
discipline of the Church.

Of the authority of the rest of the Christian people, which denied to the
Church the title of Catholic. Chapt. XXXII.
The continuance of the Kings Answer.
THE English have separated themselves by a cruel necessity from that Church,
that infinite Christian people (that I may speak as modestly as I possibly
can) do not (...) to be the true universal Church.

THE REPLY.
THat the English Church has been justly forced by a cruel necessity, to
depart from the Catholic Church (wherein alone the stock of unity does
reside, as our very adversaries dare not say, that the body of Catholic
unity was to be found in any other Society, when the English nation divided
themselves from her) saint AGVSTINE will not avow, who says, that there is no
just necessity to divide unity: And less S. DIONISIVS of Alexandria, Aug.
contr. ep. Parm. l. 2. c. 11
who was much antienter then saint AUGUSTINE, who writes; Thou ought rather
to suffer all kinds of death, then to divide the Church of Christ. Dionys.
Alexand. ep. ad Nouat. apud Eusebius hist. Eccl. 6 c. 45,
For whereas his majesty adds, that an infinite number of Christian people do
not grant her to be the true and universal Catholic Church if these people
can show that there was an other, to whom this title belonged when Luther came
into the world, we will confess her not to be so, but if it be not in their
power, not only to show, but to feign an other, then this must be she. For
the Catholic Church is perpetual, and their contradiction that are departed
from her, can not raise any doubt of her title, more then the contradiction of
the ancient Arrians, and other heretics, could cause the ancient Catholic
Church, to loose this title. For in that only that they have departed from her,
and cannot show that she has departed from any of all the other Societies
which are in being, they testify that she only is the true Catholic Church,
that is to say, the true stock and original root of the Church, from whom
all others by their Schisms and divisions, are departed and gone forth.

Of the testimonies of our writers. CHAP. XXXIII.
The continuance of the King answer.
AND that manie^ of your writers themselves, have a long while ago,
ingeniouslie^ confessed, to have much varied from the ancient in the dogm'as,
and in the form of discipline and to have patched and tacked together many
new things to the old, many evil things to the good.

THE REPLY.
THOSE writers have been such as I have above described, as Erasmus, Cassander,
and others, who partly in presumption, and partly in ignorance of antiquity,
and partly to gratify those Princes, in whose favor they have taken penn in
hand, have written things which would confound their faces if they were to
maintain them before any that were versed of purpose in the study of
Antiquity.

Of the begging of the principle contained in this hypothesis. CHAPT. XXXIV.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
WHICH is already so known to all the world, as it is noe longer in the power
of any to deny it, or to be ignorant of it.

THE REPLY.
THIS is to take for a principle of disputation, that which is the subject of
the controversy: for not only all Catholics, but also all the Christian
Societies in the world, more ancient then the authors of this division, and who
have noe interest, neither for the one part nor for the other, and if they had
any, would have it rather against the Church from which they are separated,
then for her, do maintain that all the principal points that the pretended
reformers calumniate in the Roman Church, are of the true faith, and of the
true discipline of the ancient Catholic Church.

Of the temporal causes of the separation of England. CHAP. XXXV.
The Continuance of the Kings Answer.
ADD to this, that the Church of England had found the yoke of the Roman
Bondage so hard upon her for some ages past, being incrediblie tormented from
day to day with new vexations, oppressions, and unheard of exactions, as (...)
only cause before just judges, may seem to be able to free her from suspicion
of Schism, and (as S. AUGUSTINE says, speaking of the Donatists) wicked
dismembring. For sur ely the English have not separarated themselves for
iollitie of heart, from brotherly charity as the (...) did.

THE REPLY:
IF it may please your majesty to call again to memory the history of the
Schism of England, you will find, that all those things which were alleged
for pretense of the Churches division, have noe way been the cause thereof:
contrariwlse that the English Church was more flourishing when this separation
happened, and the King of England and his clergy more affectionate to
maintain the Faith and communion of the Roman Church, then ever they had been
before, as appears by the Book that he made in defense of the Church against
Luther; the original whereof he sent to Rome with these verses, such as they
are, addressed to Pape Leo written with his own hand; Henry (...). King of
England, sent this work to Leo the tenth as a witness both of his faith and
friendship.


Harrie the English King, at once does recommend,
This work Leo to thee, which public proof shall lend,
To show which way his faith, and friendship both do bend:
But that it was the amorous passion of that King, who to satisfy the appetite
which transported him, would cause a just marriage to be broken, and marry her
that he loved, his first lawful wife, and by whom he had issue being yet
living; to which the Pope conceived, that he could not with a safe conscience,
give consent: This was the true and only cause of all this Iliad of evils.
Hincillae lachrymae.


From hence gusht all these tears. Of the comparison of the English Church,
with the Judicial. CHAP. XXXVI.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
NOT for fear of the (...) which was eminent, but did not yet press them like
the tenn tribes of the people of the Jews, but after having suffered many
ages after the (...) of unspeakable greeuances, they have finally shaken from
their shoulders, that insupportable burden which neither their strength was
longer able to bear, nor would their conscience permit them to do it.

THE REPLY:
HERE I might content myself with saying, that what was ordained and approved
by God, in the separation of the ten tribes of Israel from the Kingdom of
Judah, was the only di uision of State, and not that of Religion. For God (as
saint AVGFSTINE says (commands neither Schism nor heresy. And by
consequence, what pretense soever is added of present and not future evil,
there can be noe consequence drawn from this example for the desertion of the
Catholic Church, God (says saint AUGUSTINE) bad that these tribes should be
separated, not to divide the Religion, but the Kingdom, and that (...) this
means, vengeance might be taken upon the Kingdom, of Judah. But for as much as
the ordinary refuge of those that separate themselves from us, is to have
recourse to the Symptoms of the Jewish people, and to infer from thence, the
same conclusions of possibility of error, and license of separation for the
Christian Church, and that to contradict this, we have not only promised to
show that there never happened any accident to the visible Jewish Church,
wherefore they either ought or could separate themselves from her communion,
but also that if any such thing had happened, the consequence thereof could
not be applied to the Christian Church, which is grounded upon other
contracts, and upon other prerogatives. It is best for us here to quitt us of
our promise, and to search the question to the bottom, both concerning the
Thesis, and the Hypothesis. In regard then of the Thesis, the adversaries (...)
Catholic religion set this foundation, that the Church in all times is subject
to the same Symptoms, and to the same accidents, and there upon argue thus:
The visible Church has had three periods, the first under nature: the second
under the law, and the third under Grace. Now under the two first she has
been corrupted, and consequently under the third she may be so. Which is as if
one should say, there are three periods in the progress of the generation of
man. The first during the which man lives only the life of plants, and is yet
touched with noe other instinct then simple appetite, which the Philosophers
call natural, common to herbs and trees, which seems to correspond to the
condition of the first period of the Church, wherein she had yet noe law or
rule, but the simple law of nature. The second, during which he lives an
animated and sensitive life, which is proportioned to the state of the people
of the Jews; because as man in this second progress, harh noe other knowing
faculty but that of the sense, which is common to him with beasts; so all the
objects which were manifestly propounded to the Jews, and all the promises
which were literallie made to them, were of sensible things. And the last,
wherein man takes possession of the life truly human and reasonable, and is
adorned and enobled with intellectual knowledge, which has analogy with the
state of the Christian Church, where the faithful are consecrated to God by a
perfect and lawful form of religion, and stick noe longer in terrestrial
and material obiectes; but exalting their thoughts and their hopes, do
nourish and intertaine themselves with spiritual and incorruptible promises.
Now under the first and second of those periods, the imperfect soul of man,
which we call an Embricn, is subject to perish, corruptible and mortal; the
soul of man therefore under the third period, is not incorruptible and
immortal. For to preduce for a reason of exception and dissimilitude, that the
form of a man during all the three periods of this progress, is not one
self, same form, the reason of the (...) is void, for as much as the
diversity of Gods promises, where it so falls out, has noe less power to
vary the Symptoms of the Church during the three periods of her being, then
the diversity of forms, to vary the conditions which accompany the three
periods of the generation of man. Now that Romans 4.
the promises made to the Church under the last period, which has been
established, as S. PAVL says, upon better promises then the former, be wholly
different both in eminency and perpetuity from those that have been made to
her under the two first, what Christian can call it in question? God first in
regard of eminency and multitude, did he not say to Abraham; in thy Genes. 22.
Galat 3.
seed; that is to say, as S. PAVL expoundes it, in Christ, shall all
generations Genes. 22.
be blessed: And again, thy seed shall be as the stars of heaven, and as the
sands of the Sea? And Aggeus describing the future estate of the Church under
the Enigma of the re-edification of the temple, does he not say: The glory
of Agg. 2.
Cantic. 8.
this last house, shall be much greater then that of the first? And the Spouse
in the canticles, speaking of the Jewish Church; does she not singe: our Sister
is little, and she has yet noe breasts; that (...) to say, is not yet in
state to bring forth, and nurse up children? And does not (...) cry out:
Rejoice thou barren Esai. 54. verse. 1.
woman, that bear not children, and thou that art no mother, cast forth
Ibidem. v. 2
cries of joy. For the children of the forsaken, shall be much more in number
then hers that has a husband? And a while after: Lengthen the cords of thy
pauillions, and settle their posts, for thou shall penetrate on the right band,
and on the left, and thy Esai. 49 v. 18.
seed shall inheritt the nations. And again; Cast thine eyes about thee, and
behold all these are assembled for thee, they are come for thee: thy sonns
shall come from far, Aug. Vinc. ep. 48.
and thy daughters shall be borne upon shoulders. And does not S. AUGUSTINE,
disputing against the Donatists, cry out, Fear you (...) (...) the Jews
should ask you, where is that accomplished that your Paul has (...) of your
Church; rejoice thou barren woeman that thou bear not, and cast out cries of
joy that thou have noe children; for, the children of the forsaken are more in
number, then hers that has a husband? Preserring the multitude of the
Christians before that of Hieron. aduers.
Jews; if your little number be the Church of Christ. And S. HIEROME against
the Luciferians, Where are these too Religious, or rather too profane persons,
that Luciferian
affirm there are more Synagogues then Churches? And therefore does not the
same S. AUGUSTINE elegantlie compare the history of the different times of the
Church, to that of the birth of Jacob, for as much that as Jacob in his Birth,
thrust forth first one arm, and then his head, and then all his Body, so the
Church before she was borne, first thrust forth one arm that is to say, a
little part of her society, which was the Synagogue, and then her head, which
is Christ, and then all her Body, which is the Christian Church? But against
that, the adversaries of the multitude of the Church allege, that our Lord
calls his Church A little flock; and co^mau^ds Luc. 12. v. 32. Matthew. 7. v. 14.
to enter into the straight gate it is true. but it makes nothing for them, for
that our Lord calls his Church a little Flock, it is in regard of her birth,
at the time where of she was the least, the basest, and most contemptible of
all societies, and not in regard of her progress which himself compares to
that of a grain of mustard-seede; which being at the beginning the least of
all seeds, becomes in the increase, the greatest of all plants. We are Aug.
in Psalm. 68.
borne in that age (says S. AUGUSTINE) and associated with the people of God
in that time, wherein this plant, bredd from the grain of mustarde-seede, has
already Matthew. 22. v. 14.
stretched forth her branches. And that he says: Enter in at the straight
Ibidem. v. 10.
gate: it is in respect of the conversation of manners, and not of the
profession of doctrine, as appears by these words, Many called and few
chosen, And by these: and the marriage chamber was full of invited persons; that
is to say, of those that were called. For though the number of the chosen be
little, in regard of the (...); nevertheless, considered in it self, it is
Aug. ep. 48.
(...) great. It is this Church (says saint AUGUSTINE) of the little number
whereof in comparison of the multitude of the wicked, it is said, that the way
that leads to life, is straight and close, and that those that walk it, are
few in number. And yet it is she again, of whose multitude it is said: Thy
seed shall be as the stars of heaven, and (...) the sands of the sea. For the
same faithful, holy and good, in comparison of the great multitude of the
wicked, are a little number, and considered in themselves, are many; for it is
said, that of the children of the forsaken, are in greater number, then hers
that August. (...) unit. (...); c. 8.
has a husband. And elsewhere: Wherefore is it, o ye heretics, that you
glory in your small number; if Christ died to the end to possess the
multitude for his inheritance? But if the prerogatives of the Christian Church
be much other as for eminency and multitude, then that of the Church of the
Jews, how much more in regard of lasting and perpetuity, which are as often
promised to the Christian Church, as denied to the Church of the Jews; for who
is ignorant that the Jewish Church had not received the same promises of
lasting and perpetuity, as have been made to the Christian Church?
contrary-wise, if any promises of lasting and perpetuity, have seemed to be
literallie addressed to the Jewish Church, they were made to her
conditionally, and not absolutely; (...) if any have been made to her
absolutely, they were made to her only in shadow and in figure; but the
truth, like the truth of the promises of eternity made to the Reign of
Solomon, belonged to him of whose Reign Salomons was the Hier. c. 31.
figure. Hieremie says and saint PAVL after him. that the days would come,
wherein God would knitt up a new alliance with the family of Judah, and with
the family of Israel; not according to the alliance that he contracted with
their Fathers, when he took them by the hands and drew them out of the land
of Egypt: Ibidem, v. 36. and 37.
Hec adds, that if this contract once perished from before the eyes of the Lord
then all the seed of Israel should fail for ever; and there should be noe
more people before him (...) any age, but that the heavens on high should
(...) (...) measured, and the foundations of the earth below be sooner
sounded: Then finally he concludes Ibidem v. 4.
with these words; the sanctuary of the eternal, shall noe more be plucked
up, and shall never more be destroyed and desolate in any time to come.
EZECHIEL says, Ezec. c 37. v. 26. 27. and 28.
I will make a treaty of peace with them; I will have an eternal confederacy
with them, I will build them and multiply them, and establish my
sanctification in the midst of them for ever: my tabernacle shall be amongst
them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people, and the Nations
shall know that I sanctify Israel, when they shall see my sanctification in
the midst of them for perpetuity. ESAIAS cries out. As in the days of Noe I
swore, that I would noe more power down the waters upon the earth, so I have
protested, that I will noe more (...) Esai. c. 54. v. 9.
angry with thee, and that I will noe more look upon thee in my wrath. The
mountains shall be moved, and the hills shall shake, but my mercy Ibidem v. 10
shall not estrange it self from thee, and the peace of my alliance, shall
never Idem c. 59. v. 19. 20.
be transported from thee. And in an other place; When he that is driven with
the spirit of our Lord, shall become as an impetuous flood, and that the
Savior shall arrive at Sion, to turn away the iniquities of Jacob; behold the
alliance that shall be between them and me says our Lord; my Spirit which is
thy mouth and the words which I have put in thy mouth, shall never depart from
thy mouth nor from the mouth of they posterity; nor from the posterity of thy
posterity, says our Lord, from this time forth, for ever more. And a (...)
(...), I will contract a perpetual confederacy with them, and the people
shall know their posterity and their lineage shall be manifest in the midst
of the Nations; and all that shall see it shall know, that this shall be the
seed cherisht and favored by our Lord. Now to what purpose were all these
(...) of contracts and alliances, all these mentions of preheminencies and
prerogatives, if the Sincops and interruptions of the Church of the Jews ought
to make the law, and president for the Christian Church? To what purpose are
all these Esa. 45. Idem c. 60
clauses; that the Gates of the Church should be continually open; that they
shall be shutt neither day nor night, that the multitude of nations may be
brought in? That whereas she has been abandoned and odious, and that none
frequented her, she shall be made the glory of the wourld, and shall become
the delight of generations? That she shall noe more be called the forsaken, and
that her land shall noe more be called the desolate, but her name shall be the
fauoritie of our Lord, and her land shall be peopled and inhabited? If the
Christian Church should be exposed Esai 62
to the same ruins and desolations as the Jewish, which never received any
promises of perpetuity; or if any promises of perpetuity may seem to have
been made to her literallie, they have been made to her only in shadow and in
figure, but their truth belonged to the Christian Church? To what purpose were
all these promises of our Lord? Both by the mouth of Esaie: As in the days of
Noe I swoare, I would noe more bring the waters of the flood again upon the
earth; so I have sworn that I will noe more be angry Esai. 54.
with thee. And by that of Zachary. I will noe more do to this people, as I
Zachar. 11.
have done in times past. And by his own: The city built upon a mountain
can Matthew 5.
not be hidden: the gates of hell shall never prevail against her; This
Gospel of the Matthew 16.
Matthew. 24
Kingdom must first be preached over all the world, and then the end shall
come. I Matthew. 28.
am with you to the consummation of ages, and other the like, if the Christian
Church have not quite other prerogatives then the Jewish Church not only in
eminency and multitude, but also in lasting and perpetuity? Philosophers
teach that passion is a way tending and leading to corruption, and that what
is incorruptible, is also reciprocallie impassible and inalterable, what wonder
is it then, that the wayfarring preparation of the Religion of the Jews, which
was corruptible and subject to perish, before it came to the term of
corruption, have tried many passions, many accidents, many changes? that
before it perished, it have undergone many weaknesses, Sincopes, and faintings:
that this ancient and decrepite house which was one day to be ruined (as the
Apostle speaking of the old law teaches us that that which wears and grows
old, approaches to ruin.) have somes times been amazed and shaken? that this
light, that was finally to be extinguished and buried under a profou^d night
and in perpetual darkness, have sometimes been obscured and dimmed, and have
suffered defects and ecclipses? And contrariwise, that the state of the
Christian Church that the scriptures declare and prophecy to be incorruptible,
and not subject to perish, should be freed from all the passions, preserved
from all these accidens, and dispensed withal and warranted from all these
interruptions?

But we have insisted too long upon the thesis, let us now come to the
hypothesis, which is of the estate of the Church under the two first periods:
and principally, under that of the Jewish law. For in regard of the defects
of the Jewish Church, the adversaries to Christianity, make nine notable
objections, which we will confute in order one after an other. The first is
taken from the history of Aaron. Aaron, say they, founded the Idol, after
which the people Idolatrized. It is true Aaron, not yet invested with the high
Priesthood, founded the golden calfe, after which the people, that (...) to
say, by Synecdoche, a part of the people, Idolatrized, for Philo the Jew does
particularly say, that the malady had not seized them Exodus 32.
Phil. Ibid.
all: But neither Moses, who was the visible head of the Israelites Church,
and in whose only person resided till then the high Priestood; nor the whole
body of the Leuiticall tribe, destined to the future guard of the Temple, and
to the ordinary ministry of the law were touched with Exodus 32
this crime. For as soon as Moses cried; If any one belong to our Lord,
let him join with me: All the tribe of Leui gathered to him, to root out the
Idolaters. From whence it is, that Moses gives these praises to Leui; (...)
It is he that has said of his Father, and of his mother, I have not seen
them: And who has not acknowledged his Brothers, and has noe more known his
children; for they have kept thy words; And that God himself says by the
ministry of Malachy; The law of truth has been in the mouth of Leui, and
(...). 2
in his lips there was noe forwardnes; he has walked with me in peace and
equity: And that Philo the Jew, searching wherefore the Towns of refuge had
been taken of the tribe of the Levites, says, that one reason was, because the
Phil. Iud.
Leuiticall tribe destined to guard the temple, had slain the worshippers of
the l. de Profug.
golden calfe. And therefore saint PAVL citing the same history, reduces it
to the number of some; To the end, says he, that you become not Idolaters, 1.
Cor. 10.
as some amongst them were; to show that this act was not universal. For that
the sin was imputed in general to all the people; it was not because they had
all participated in it, but because they had not endeauored to revenge and
punish it in the act. And yet this action was not a iudiciarie action of the
Church, or a rituall custom of the Synagogue, but a tumultuary sedition of the
people, which was extinguished the same day, and consequently could not be
reckoned for an interruptio^ of the Jewish Church for as (...) as the brute of
the tumulte of the Idolators was raised, Moses came down from the mountain
to remedy it. Now what proportion is there between the tumulte of a day, and
such like clouds of the Jewish Church (whose longest lasted, but the twentieth
part of an age, and by consequence, gave noe occasion to say of the Jewish
Church that, that Cornelius Tacitus says of the commonwealth of Rome under
Tiberius, Who is he that has seen the commonwealth) and the pretended
ieterruptio^ of the Catholic Church, which according to the co^putation of
her Adversaries, has been ecclipsed in faith, and erred in salvation above
four hundred then years, and as they say of Epimenides, that he fell into a
sleep young, and awaked old; so she fell a sleep young, to wit, i^mediatly
after the death of the apostl, and awaked old, that is to say, upon the end,
and in the last wave of the world.

The second objection is taken from the history of the symptoms, which
hapened to the Jewish church, between the time of Moses, and that of David
where it is said, one while that Micheas made an Idol, and that six hundred
Iudic. 8. v. 27
men of the tribe of Dan, having taken it; placed it in Lais, a city of the
Sydonians, possessed by them; an other while, that Gedeon made an Ephod in
Iosue 1. v. 11.
Ephra, and that all Israel went a whoring after it: An other while, that
Israel transgrest, and abandoned the Lord. An other while, that in the time of
Hely the word of God was precious: that is to say, rare: An other while, that
in the 1. Reg. 3. v. 1.
time of Saul, the arc had not been required, that is to say, according to
the innouators gloss, God had not been consulted in his word. But for the 1.
Paral. 13. v. 3.
history of Micheas so far is it off, that from the act of Micheas, which
was but a particular act, noe more then that of the six hundred Israelites of
the tribe of Dan, there can be any inference drawn, that the visible service
of God, was the extinguished in all the people of Israel; as Luther affirms,
that this history fell out, either at the latter end of Joshua; or under the
government of Othoniel, an excellent servant of God, wherein none can pretend;
that the true service was extinguished in Israel. And the historian noting that
this idol remained in the city of Lais, as long as the house of our Lord
remained in Silo, testifies that the house of God, and the seat of the true
service of God, was then in Silo. And whereas the people of Israel took
occasion to go a whoring after the Ephod of Gedeon; and that the history of
Judges says; All Israel went a whoriug after it, it must be understood of the
Israelites of the city of Ephra, native place of Gedeon, and others near to
it; and that it is written in diverse places of the same history, that Israel
preuaricated and served false Gods; it is to be understood by Synecdoche, of a
part for the whole, following this sentence of S. AUGUSTINE. The scripture has
this fashion of reproof, that the Aug. ep. (...) Iosue. 1. v. 11
word seems to be addressed to all, yet concerns but some of them. And
indeed in the history of Josua, not only the scripture says; The children of
Israel violated the commandment, and took of the Anathema: But God himself
pronounces; Ibidem.
Israel has sinned, and has transgressed against my alliance they have taken
of the anathema; and have, stolen it and have lied and have hidden it amongst
their stuff, and Israel cannot subsist before his enemies, but shall fly
before them, for he is polluted with the anathema. And notwithstanding there
was but one only man in all Israel, and he yet unknown, that had committed
this crime to wit, Acham. And whereas it is said in the first of Samuel, that
in the time of Eli, the word of God was precious, that is to say, rare; the
author speaks not there in any sort of the law, or of the written word, but
of the oracles and visible predictions, that God had accustomed to give by the
prophets, as by these words, And there was noe manifest vision, may appear.
And whereas it is said in the first to the cronicles, that in the time of Saul
the Arc was not required, that is to say, according to the innouators gloss,
that God was not consulted with, in this word. This is a wrong interpretation
of the word, requisiuimus, which intends not there, inquired of, but required,
and has not reference to the word of God, but to the Arc and signifies noe
other thing, but that in the time of Saul, they had not yet required the Arc
from the city of Kiriath Jearim.

The third objection is taken from the complaint of Elias. Elias (said the
Adversaries of the Church) complained to God, that his Altars were beaten
down, and his prophetts slain with the sword, and that he was left alone, and
they likewise sought him, to put him to death; And God answered him, that he
had reserved to (...) seven thousand. Whereof Elias conceived he had known
none. And this when God could not be served visible, but in Judea, the Church
as they conclude, was then invisible. But how long will they stu^ble at one
(...) stone, and not learn to distinguish between the kingdom of Israel,
were was the seat of schism and heresy, and the kingdom of Judah, where was
the seat of the true Church? It is written that the herb called Eringus, has
this hidden property, that if amongst a company of Goats there be any one
that takes a leaf of it between his teeth, that Goat will immediately stopp,
and with him all the Flock; so as it is not possible to make any one of the^
go forward, till first the leaf be plucked out of his mouth. So after one of
the adversaries of the Church has apprehended any falsehood or absurdity, all
the rest as by a certain charm, do so stopp and stumble at it, as it is not
possible to make them go forward, unless you call back the first author, yea
out of his grave to contradict himself and to recant publicly. Melancton being
inquired off (...) the Church was twelve or thirteen hundred year ago, since
from that time by his account our communion was corrupted with Idolatry and
impiety, had recourse to the history of Elias, to whom said he for a while,
the true Church was unknown and iuuisible. After this all those that have
handled the same question, without inquiring whether this solution were true or
false, without taking care to examine the place, have so tied themselves to it,
as at this day, it is their only and common refuge in this extreamitie. It
does not importe us answer they to know where the residence of the Church was
in the ages whereof you inquire. Elias who was a prophet, was also ignorant for
a time, where she subsisted; we then may well be ignorant of it, who are
neither Prophets, nor the children of Prophets; For he complained, that he was
left alone: but of whom did Elias speak when he said, They have (...) thy
Prophets with the sword? Was it not of Achab and of 3. Reg. 19.
Iesabel? and where was it that he said he was left alone? was it not in the
Kingdom of Israel? Now if saint AUGUSTINE speaking of the Christian Church it
selse, has had reason to say, what an absurdity is it Aug. de ciuit. Dei, l.
18. c. 52.
not to consider, that the Church, increasing and multiplying over all the
world, might suffer persecution by the kings of some Nations, when she did not
suffer it by the rest? wherefore may not we cry out, What an absurdity is it
to transferr what belo^ges to the Kingdom of Israel, where the true Church was
persecuted, to the Kingdom of Judah where she was visible, flourishing, and
eminent? For so fart of was the Church then from being tied and restrained to
the Kingdom of Israel, as contrariwise, the true Seat, the only seat, the
sovereign seat of the service of God, and of the visible exercise of Religion,
wherein only sacrifices might be lawfully celebrated, the center of union and
ecclesiastical communion, the heart, if I may say so, and root of the
Church, was Situate out of the jurisdiction of Israel. Nay more then so, all
the sacerdotall order, all the (...) of Leui, all the highpriests, priests and
ministers, to whom only belonged the dispensation of the mysteries and
ceremonies, all the magistrates and officers of the Church, all the Pastors and
ordinary Doctors, without which she could not be visible, nor retain her just
marks and Sacraments, then made their residence out of the Kingdom of Israel.
And to prove this, threescore years and more before Elias began to prophecy,
the Kingdom of Israel had been divided into two Kingdoms, the one containing
the tribe of Judah, which was without comparison the greatest and most
principal, and that of Benjamin, to which was also joined the lineage of Leui
all entire, with infinite particulars of the other Tribes, who desired to serve
God purelie, holding the title of the Kingdom of Judah, under the dominion of
Roboam, the true and natural heir; the other co^prehending the rest of the
tribes possessed by Jeroboam, a rebel and an usurper, and possessed under the
restrained name of the Kingdom of Israel. By means whereof, these two peoples
have always had their estates and their kings aparte; yea, their religions
also for the more part divided. For to Jeroboam succeeded Nadab; to Nadab
Baasa; to Baasa, Ela, to Ela, Zambri; to Zambri, Amri; to Amri Achab; All not
only schismatickes, but Idolators and infidells. Elias then as subject to Achab
complained, that these Relickes of the Church, which remained in Israel, these
few of the faithful which were left in the territory of Achab, and which
were wont every year to go up to profess and to exercise their Religion in
the Kingdom of Judah, where the Temple and Priesthood was, had been rooted out
by the tyranny of Queen Iesabel. And from the departing from thence there are
men which conclude without scruple of this fear, there was the^ noe visible
Church, in the world. But hear the history of the seperatio^ of these two
kingdoms: He reigned (says the history of the chronicles, speaking Chronic.
11.
of Roboa^) over Judah, and over Benjamin. The Priests also and the Levites
which were under the jurisdiction of Israel, came to him out of all the cities
which had been given to him for their habitation, leaving their possession and
their inheritance, and passing and inhabiting in Judah and in Jerusalem;
because Ieroboa^ had driven them out he and his Successors, least they should
attend to the service of our Lord, having appointed priests of the high places
to sacrifice to the devils and to the calves that he had caused to be set up.
From other places also of all the tribes of Israel, those that set their
hearts to seek the God of Israel, went up to Jerusalem to offer their
sacrifices before the Lord God of their Fathers. Whereto Josephus adds these
words, as Joseph.
pronounced by Hieroboam in form of an oration to the people of Israel:
Antiquitat.
Iudaic. l. 8.
I think, said he, none of you are ignorant, that there is noe place where
God is not and that he reserues not to himself, any appointed seat, but that
every where he hears those that pray to him, and casts his eyes upon all that
serve him. For this reason I have not thought fit, to suffer you to go so
far to worship, and with so much pains, and also in an enemy city, as
Jerusalem is. The temple that is there was built by a mortal man, neither more
nor less then myself. Therefore I have consecraced for you, two Calves of
Gold, the one in Bethel, and the other in Dan, that goeing thither, according
to the ease and opportunity of the neighborhood, you may there worship God
more commodiouslie. Besides, you shall want noe priests and Levites, whom I
will establish from amongst you, that you may have noe more need of the tribe
of Leui, nor of the family of Aaron. Behold then, that the Church was then so
far from being confined to the Kingdom of Israel as the Metropolitan Seat of
the religion and service of God, which was Jerusalem, the place where
sacrifices ought to be celebrated, which was the temple, the sovereign
tribunal of the adoration which was the Altar, the succession of David from
whom the Messiah was to come, the high priest, and all the sacerdotall and
Leuiticall Estate, which administered and represented the universal Body of
the Church, did remain following the election and institution of God, in the
parts of the Kingdom of Judah, and out of that of the Kingdom of Israel.
Which the holy Ghost had long before declared by the mouth of the Psalmist in
these terms not only historical but also prophetical: He Psalm. 77. v. 60.
ct. 61.
has, (says he) rejected the tabernacle of Joseph, and has not chosen the
tribe of Hieron. in Hierem. c. 31.
Ephraim; (that is to say, the kingdom of Israel, which was called Ephraim
for as much as Jeroboam as says S. HIEROME who first reigned there was of the
tribe of Ephraim;) but has chosen the tribe of Judah, and the mountain of
Ezech. 27.
Sion, which he loved. And after by that of Ezechiel in these, Son of man
(says the Lord) take a piece of wood and write upon it, Judah and the children
of Israel which are united to him and of his fellowshipp: and take an other and
write upon it; The word of Joseph which is in the hand of Ephraim, and all the
families of Israel, and of all those which are united to him. And therefore the
history of Tobie says, that when all those of the tribe of Nephthali went to
the golden calves that Jeroboam king of Israel had made, Tobie only fled the
company of all the rest, and went into Jerusalem to the temple of the lord,
and there worshipped the Lord God of Israel, offering all his first fruits and
his tithes. And therefore our Lord, when the Samaritan said to him, our Fathers
worshipped in this mountain; (that is to say, in the mountain of Samaria and
of Gerassim) and ye affirm that in Jerusalem is the place where we ought to
worshipp, answered, that Salvation was on the Jews side. And for this same
cause, S. PAVL alleging his extraction from Abraham according to the flesh,
notes particularly that he was issued from the family of Benjamin, as
signifiing that he was extracted from the society of those, in whose communion
resided the true Body of the Church. The tribe of Judah (says S. AUGUSTINE)
and the line of Benjamin, had remained in the society of the Temple, the Tribe
of Leui which Tob. 1.
August in Psalm. 75.
was that of the Priests, the tribe of Judah which was the royal line, and the
line of Benjamin. Those only stayed on Hierusalems party, and in the communion
of the Temple of God, when the separation had been made by the revolt of
Salomons servant. Do not then imagine, that it is of little weight, that the
Apostle adds, issued from the tribe of Benjamin, For it is as if he should have
said, communicating with Judah, and not being deprived of, and separated from,
the temple. But behold yet more; which is, that the complaint of Elias, is so
far from verifying this pretended interruption, and this general eclipse of
the Jewish Church, as contrariwise it appears, that at the same time at the
same hour at the same moment, that Elias lamented the persecution of Achab,
the true Religion florisht in Judea with more glory, purity, and splendour,
then ever she had done since the first Solomon, which was the figure of her
true spouse, and the author of the material Temple, till the other that was
declared to be greater then Solomon; that is to say, until our Lord who built
the spiritual Temple of the Catholic Church. For in the same time, that
Achab and Iesabell, persecuted Elias, Iosaphat son and Successor to Asa,
reigned in Judah. And to prove it so the history bears; that Josaphat came to
the crown of Judah, the fowrth year of the Reign of Achab King of Israel. Now
thete were six years and more of Achabs government expired, when Elias, made
his lamentation. For the great drought whereof, the hebrews assign the
beginning to be in the third year of Achab, and which lasted three years and
six months, according to the report of S. JAMES was then precisely finished;
so as the complaint of Jacob. 5.
Elias, not only falls out in the time of Iosaphat, but meets exactly with the
revolution of the third year of his Empire, which was just the same (...),
wherein he celebrated that famous circuit, and if I dare so style it, that
walking Parliament, and those great days of Religion, where the most notable
Princes of his estate and the principal priests and Levites, were appointed to
travel, through all the cities of his Kingdom. Behold the (...) wherein
Elias complaint happened. Now what Iosaphat was from the beginning to the end
of his life, how he walked entirely in the way of Asa his Father, without
turning from it in any thing, but doing what was pleasing to the Lord; how
the Service of God was holily celebrated and administered under his authority,
how the Almighty was with him, because he trod in the stepps of David his
Predecessor, and trusted not in Idols, but in the God of his Father, walking
in his precepts, and not according to the sins of Israel; how the priests and
Levites visited all the cities of his Kingdom, having the law of God in
their hands, and instructing the people: and how there were judges of the
Sacerdotall order established in Jerusalem for ecclesiastical causes; that
when any controversy should be presented concerning religion, the
commandments the ceremonies, the iustifications, the people might be
instructed not to sin before the Lord; both histories as well of the kings,
as of the chronicles, do testify. For the rest, with what temporal (...) God
favored Chron. 16
him, how much he abounded in glory and in treasure, how much he exceeded
Israel, how dreadful he was to the neighboring nations, how the terror of the
lord, said the scripture, was spread over all the Kingdoms Ibidem
of the (...), which were round about Judah, so as they durst not make war upon
Iosaphat how the Philistines paid him tribute, how he received pe^sion and
homage from the Arabians, how Idumea acknowledged him, what ordinary forces he
entertained for war: to wit three hundred thousand chosen men under the
charge of Edna, two hundred and four score thousand chosen soldiers under
that of Iohanna, two hundred and fourscore thousand me^ of war under the
conduct of Amazia, two hundred and fourscore thousand Archers with Eliada, and
an hundred and fourscore thousand light horsemen who followed (...), the
history and collectio^ of the chronicles exactlie declares. Yet this fearful
number which amou^ted unto eleaue^ Ibidem.
hundred and threescore thousand me^ of war, did not comprehend (says the
scripture) the garriso^s that he had in walled cities throughout his kingdom,
neither were reckoned, an inestimable number of persons unable to bear arms,
as of old me^ woeme^, and children, nor the tribe of Leui which exempt from the
military state, which nevertheless was accustomed to people and possess
forty eight cities. Now thereupon I demand, if there be any appearance to
conclude, that the Jewish Church was then invisible and if it be not flatly to
mock the readers, to allege Elias to that purpose? For I will not say, that
in Israel it self, if not the image, yet at least the memory of piety, was not
so blotted out and extinguished, but that the examples thereof were still
fresh. And that this is so, the history 3. Reg. 18.
recites, that when Iesabel put the prophets to death, Abdias governor of
Achabs house, saved one hundred in two several caves, as the same Abdias had a
while before reported to Elias: And that the very Ibidem
day before Elias flight, the general states of Israel, (called by Achab, at
the instance of Elias upon mount Carmel, to see the conclusion of Baal's
priests) after they had kneeled down, and cried out, the Lord is God, the Lord
is God, had fallen upon the four hundred and fifty false prophets, and had
cut them in pieces, Achab seeing it, and consenting to it: As little will I
tell you, that Elias. when he pronounced this lamentation, was not in the
Kingdom of Israel, nor amidest the light and communication of men, but retired
into a cave, in the mountain of Oreb forty days journey from Samaria, the
Metropolitan of Israel, where he spoke not according to the exact knowledge of
what was happened since his departure, but by a form of indulgence to humane
fear and frailty, imagining, what the wrath of Iesabel, new kindled by his
occasion, might have effected against his Brethren in his absence: By means
whereof, this multitude of faithful Israelites, expressed by the number of
seauentie hundred a finite number for an infinite, was not unknown to those,
that inhabited in Israel. Only I will say, that the general extirpation of
true godlynes in the territories subject to king Achab, did not conclude
therefore, that it was rooted out from all the tribes comprehended under the
first division of Israel, since there were an infinity of Israelites as has
above appeared, withdrawn in the form of a voluntary exile into Jerusalem
and into Judah. For besides those that removed thither in Roboams reign, the
scripture testifies, that Asa father to Iosaphat, near twenty year before
this persecution, had gathered together the people of Judah and of Benjamin, and
all the strangers of the tribes of Ephraim, of Paralip. 15.
Manasses, and of Simeon, because many of them, says the same scripture, had
come to him for refuge, seeing that the Lord their God was with him Moreover,
the cities of the mountain of Ephraim, conquered by the same Asa, upon the
Kingdom of Israel; those of Bethel, Iesana, Ephron and others recovered by
Abia his Father, after the battle that he wan against Jeroboam, communicated
in the true Religion with the people of Judah, and the remnant of this medlie of
Israelites, either subdued or sheltered, and dwellinge amongst the Jews, and
communicating with them, Luke 2. v. 36.
lasted even until the Birth of our Lord. In whose time saint LVKE still
notes, that the Prophetess Anna, who also was perpetually in the Temple, was
of the line of Aser. But whatsoever the Kingdom of Israel were, it suffices
that when Elias made this complaint, the Jewish Church flourisht with so much
purity and splendour in that of Judah, as (...) was never more pure, nor more
visible. Which Elias could not be ignorant of, since he was not only obliged
with an express obligation he and all the rest of Gods servants which remained
in Israel, to go up every year to certain Feasts in Jerusalem, to
communicate in the Temple, and in the sacrifices; but also had but then, newly
passed by Berscha, that bounded upon the Kingdom of Judah, as he fledd from the
tyranny of Iesabel.

The fourth objection is taken from the history of Vria, who by the
commandment of Achaz King of Judah, set up a prophan Altar before the Temple.
But besides this, that neither Ezechias Son and heir to the Kingdom of Judah;
nor Esai prince of the blood of Judah, and Prophet, who by his extraordinary
Mission, and prophetical authority, a Succor promised in the old Testament,
did supply noe less truly the defect of the duty of the ordinary Mission in
the person of Vria, then the Poets fained fabulously that in the games of
(...), the Grasshopper had supplied the defect of Eunomius string; neither the
Body of the sacerdotall and Leuiticall order, did participate in this
sacrilege, but that all the Sacerdotall college, rather chose to suffer
exile, then to consent to it. From whence it is, that when Ezechias, the first
month of his reign, caused the Delphicke oblations to be made in the behalf
of the people, he was constrained to make use of the Levites, to help to flea
the beasts, because of the small number of Priests which were then about him,
for as much says S. HIEROME and the Hebrew gloss, as they had bee^ dispersed
in the time of King Hieron. ad Vital. ep. 132.
Achaz and were not yet returned: And secondly so far were the people of Judah
from approving it, as contrariwise they did for this cause so abhor Achaz, as
being dead, although his own son succeeded him, they did not (...) him in the
sepulcher of his Fathers.

THE fifth objection is taken, from the four hundred Prophetts that Achab
caused to come and prophecy before Josaphat, who were all found false
prophetts, and Micheas alone, a true Prophet. But neither did this 3. Reg. 22.
fall out in the kingdom of Judah, where was the seat of the Church, but in
the kingdom of Israel, neither were those Prophets, of the college of the
Prophetts of Baal, and of the quality of those of whom before Elias had said:
Take all the Prophetts of Baal, and let not one man escape. And of whom
afterward Elias said to Ioram son of the same Achab; What is there 3. Reg. 18.
4. Reg. 3. 3. Reg. 22
between me and thee? Go to the Prophets of thy Father and of thy mother. And
therefore when Iosaphat would cause Micheas to come; he asked him, is there
not here one Prophet of the Lord; to distinguish him from the Prophetts of
Baal, by this word, of the Lord; which is the same difference, which Iehu
afterward used, when being desirous to put Baal's Priests to death, he said.
Take beede least there be any of the servants of the Lord amongst you, but
let the servant of Baal be only here. 4. Reg. 10.


The sixth objection is taken from the history of Manasses an Idolatrous
Prince, and who caused all manner of abominations and false worshipp to be
practiced in Jerusalem and Judah. But besides this, that he came afterward to
repentance, and then drove away all the Idols and all the false Gods from
Jerusalem, and commanded the people of Judah to serve God even then when he
exercised his greatest impieties, the church and the multitude of Gods true
servants, were not for all that invisible. Contrariwise the scripture says,
that he shedd so much innocent blood, as Jerusalem 4. Reg. 21.
was filled there with even up to the throat. By means whereof, although
there had then been no solemn assemblies in the Synagogues of Judah, and that
all public exercise had been suspended there, yet the slaughter of the
faithful yet warm and still breathing, and the voice of their blood which
smoaked and cried for vengeance, as that of Abel before heaven and earth,
permitied not that the true Religion should be unknown and invisible there.
For as many executions and martirdomes as there were so many sacrifices of
praise and sweet smell were they, so many professions of Faith, so many
sermons, so many seals and sacraments of the true belief, which refresht and
confirmed the memory of the doctrine of salvation, even in the spiritts of
those, that persecuted it: for as much as all men knew, and themselves
protested, the cause wherefore they were banished, pursued and martyred. For the
Church is not only illustrated by her Lillies, but also by her roses; that is
to say, she is not only evident by her quiet and peaceable exercises, which
are the congregations to hear and adore the word of God, and to communicate in
the sacraments: but also by her military exercises dyed in blood, which are
the martyrdomes and the executions suffered for the defense of the Faith which
do often no less increase her fame and renown in the times wherein she is
oppressed, then in the seasons wherein she enioyes more calm quiet, and
fulfills without hindrance her ordinary and accustomed works. So as S.
AUGUSTINE says, she is then eminent in her most steadfast Aug. ep. 48
champions.

THE seventh objection is taken from the transmigration of Babylon, during
with time, they pretend that the visible communion of the Jewish Church, was
interrupted. But who knows not, that the Jews during this exile, had the true
external exercise of their religion, wherein they wrought their Salvation, and
performed the visible observation of all their worships, services, and
ceremonies, except of the Sacrifice alone, which could not be offered but in
the Temple, and were evidently distinguished from other nations; witness these
words of Aman to Assuerus: There is a (...). 3.
people (...) over all the Provinces of thy Kingdom, and divided into many
parts, that practices new laws and ceremonies, And these of the historian,
Many other nations and sects joined themselves to their religion, and to their
ceremonies. For that this history fell out in the time of the transmigration,
it appears by this, that it is said, that Mardocheus was one of those that had
been transported from Jerusalem in the time of Nabuchodonosor, and of
Iechonias. And it is not co^tradictorie to this that Assuerus writes: that Ama^
was a Macedonian, and would have betrayed the Empire to the Macedonians: For
the copy of the same epistle reported by Josephus sixteen hundred years
Joseph antiquit Iudaic. l. 11. c 6.
a gone, has it Allophilus; that is to say, a stranger: And that the Greek
and Latin Edition says; a Macedonian, it proceeds from the Syriacke
translation of the same Epistle, made after the death of Alexander: after which
all strangers in Asia, were called Macedonians: as at this day all those of
the west, are called Frankes there: From whence it is, that the Syriacke
edition says: that Assicerus was clothed in a Macedonian habit: that is to
say, in the habit of a stranger.

THE eight objection is taken from the writings of the Prophetts, who often
deplored the dessolation of the service of God in their people. But either they
spoke of the portion of the Kingdom of Israel divided from that of Judah: and
of the faction of the schismatic Israelites, who were no more the Church,
and to whom God protested by the mouth of Jeremy, that he had given the libell
of divorce: Or if they spoke of that of the Ierem. 3. v. 8.
Kingdom of Judah, S. AUGUSTINE teaches us, that they spoke prophetically, and
by an analogy of time, of the future Estate of the Jewish people, such as they
should be after the death of our Lord: Or if they spoke by Synecdoche and
according to the style of preachers, who censure the vices of particular
persons in general terms to the end to reprove, as S. AUGUSTINE says of S.
HILARY, the more severely that which they reprove more universally: that is
to say, that they spoke of certain particular persons, who either abandoned
the Religion of their Fathers, some to follow, that of the Pagans that
sacrificed to Idols, some to follow that of the Schismatickes who sacrificed
in the high places: or if they remained in the true religion and communion,
lived wickedlie there as concerning manners. They collect (says S. AUGUSTINE
speaking of the Donatists he might have added the Caluinists to them) either
ignor antlie or fraudulently the places of Scripture, which are spoken either
of the wicked, which are nimgled with the good, until the end, or of the
destruction of the first people of the Jews; and would wrest them against the
Church of God; that she may seem to have failed, and to be perished from the
whole earth.

The ninth and final objection, is taken from the comdemnation that the Jewish
Church, made of the Savior of the world. But who sees not, that this was in
the time wherein (...) contract was expired, and that of the Christian Church,
did begin? The law and the prophetts, says Luc. 16. v. 16.
our Savior, Until John; And saint PAVLE, Blindness is partly Romans 11. v. 25.
fallen upon Israel, that the fullnes of the Gentiles might be introduced. Now
the lease that God had made of his vine to the Jewish Church, having been but
for a time; what wonder is it, that when this lease is come to expire, the
prerogative that she had, by virtue of her contract, should cease; and that the
master of the vineyard should let forth his Vineyard to other (...)? and this
fufficeth for the comparison of the Christian Church with the Jewish. For to
ascend to the time before the law of Moses, and to allege the little
mention that is made there of the continuance of the Church, it is clear, that
it had been a thing superfluous for the Scripture, to have represented
particularly, the estate of the Church of those ages, the knowledge of the
succession of the Church, not having been necessary, but after the last
institution of the law, for the service whereof she is established as to the
Jews after the institution of the law of Moses; and to the Christians after
the institution of the Evangelical law. Although both before and Genesis (...).
after the flood, there are many monuments of it. For both before the flood
this, that the sonns of God knew the daughters of men, shows that there was an
especial people, which boar the title of the children of God: which title the
interpretors would have to be taken by the posterity of Seth, to distinguish
themselves from the posterity of Cain, when Seth had begotten Enos; and that
they began, says the Scripture, to all chemselues Genesis 4.
by the name of the Lord: And the universal corruption which fell out in the
end; upon all the other families, descended from Seth, except that of Noe, was
a corruption of manners, and for which if we believe saint HIEROME, all those
that perish with a temporal death in the flood, Genesis 9.
perished not with an eternal death; And after the flood, that Noe lived Genesis
(...).
almost to the sixtith year of Abraham, And Sem the Son of Noe, whom Luther
calls the Pope of his Age, till after the death of Jacob: And that Genesis 14.
Melchisedech king of Salem was priest of the most high, and in his quality
Genesis 25.
blessed Abraham: and that Rebecca wife of Isaach, went to enquire of God upon
the mystery of her children, shows, that eue^ the^ the true worship and
visible service of God had place both before, and elsewhere, the^ in the
family of Abraham. Butto conclude, grant all the hypothesis to be such as the
Protestants pretend and that the Church had been interrupted, both before the
law and under thelawe: what would that make against the christian church, to
who^ Esai. 54.
Christ held this language: As in the days of Noe I swore, that I would never
again bring the waters of the Flood upon the Earth, so I have sworn, that I
will Esa. 26.
noe more be angry against thee: Thou shall noe more be called the forsaken. I
will noe Zach. 8.
more do to this people as in former days. I will contract a new alliance
with them, Agg. 2. v. 10.
not according to the alliance I contracted with their Fathers, when I brought
them out of the land of Egypt: The city of the Lord, shall noe more be pulled
up, nor destroyed: The glory of this second house shall be much greater, then
that of the first: Matthew 5.
Matthew 16.
The city built upon the mountain cannot be hidden: The gates of Hell shall
not Matthew. 28.
prevail against my Church. I am with you to the consummation of ages. This
Gospel Matt. 24.
of the Kingdom must be preached through the whole world, and then the end
shall come. He has placed in his Church, the Apostles, Prophetts, Pastors,
and Doctors; etc: till we all shall meet in the unity of faith. The Church
is the firmament of truth: and other such like.

Of the comparison of the Charity of the ancient African Church and the
modern Roman Church. CHAP. XXXVII.
The continuance of the Kings answer
AND surely, the ancient Church to recall the Donatists, that were refractory,
to her communion had accustomed by an admirable Charity to provide, even for
the te mporall commodities of the Bishops that should be converted and of
others also. And the Roman Church, to knitt again the love and good will,
between her and the English Church, has first employed the thunderboltes of
Bulls, and afterward of force, sometimes openly, and sometimes underhand.

THE REPLY.
THE ancient Catholic Church of Africa, offered for the good of Charity, and
of the Ecclesiastical communion, to yield up the Bishoprics of Africa; not
to those Donatist Bishops, which still remained on Donatus his party, but to
those that would return to the communion of the Catholic Church. And the
Roman Church has excommunicated by her Bulls, not those that will return from
the English division to the Catholic communion, but those that after many
admonitions, are obstinate still to remain in the separation, And therefore
there is in this, no Antithesis between the proceedings of the ancient
Catholic Church, and those of the modern. For as concerning this word, the
thunderboltes of Bulls by which some think to make the Popes censures the more
odious, his majesty may remember if (...) please, that it is an ancient phrase
of speech that the Grecians use, who called the condemnations, even of secular
judgments, thunderboltes and to express, that one was condemned in judgment,
they would say, he was Thunder-strucken.

Of the innocence of the Church in the matter of conspiracies against his
majesty, CHAP. XXXVIII.
The continuance of the Kings answer.
TRAITORS manifestly culpable of the paricide undertaken in this province, she
has received into her lapp, and still wholly protects them: those that have
suffered judgment for the same cause, she Inrolles in the Catalogue of
martyrs, and propugneth from day to day their innocence, against all laws,
divine and humane.

THE REPLY.
IF any of those that were partakers of the abominable co^spiracie, proiected
against his majesty be received at Rome it is an error of fact, and not of
Right, founded upon a false information, that is to say, upon the belief,
that they have imprinted there, that they are not culpable of that attempt, as
Princes are accustomed to receive in the quality of innocent persons, those
that have recourse to them out of other Provinces, if the verbal process of
the crime be not sent to them, that they may inform themselves of the truth or
falsehood of the imputation. And this law is a law of resuge and freedom
common to the Estates of all Princes. But to believe that the Pope protects
them in the quality of being culpable of this conspiracy. I know to well how
much I have heard him detest it with his own mouth. For as touching those that
have been excluded in England, that that is (for whose innocence not with
standing diverse write) is always grounded upon the fact, and not upon the
right; that is to say, pretending they were not accomplices nor consenting
thereto, and not maintayning the action to be other then damnable and
detestable. Contrariwise that they are justified by this way, be it true be it
false (for it is hard in such a case to impose a law upon the suspicion of
absent persons) it is a manifest testimony, that the action is abhorred, and
comdemned. And when as his majesty adds, that the Roman Church, enrolls them
in the catalogue of martyrs, if any pariicular men defend their supposed
innocence hyperbolically, it is always upon this supposition whether true or
false, that they were not accomplices in the fact. But as for the Roman Church, I
never yet heard tell, that she has canonized any martyr of the seventeenth
age.

Of the writings of the illustrious Cardinal Bellarmin. CHAP. XXXIX.
The continuance of the King answer.
THe Cardinal Bellarmine himself, I will say it against my will, but I say
truth, amongst the protectors of the Paricides, holds the rank of the head
of a faction who newly again to the end to allure the excellent King has
employed this argument of wondrous efficacy, to persuade that the Kingdom of
England belonges to the Pope, and that the king of England is subject to the
Pope, even in temporal things, and in his Feodary. I omit the other
complaints of the king, and the English Church, as well old as new, which
now have noe need of commemoratio^.

THE REPLY.
THE protestation that I have made, non to handle any thing in this work, but
what is purely spiritual, obliges me not to undertake the defense of the
Illustrious and most learned cardinal Bellarmine, but in cases of this
quality. It suffices me for the rest to say, that himself aduertises the
Readers that what he propounds os the indirect authority of the Pope in
temporalls, he propounds it not as a doctrine of faith, and whereof either side
must be held under the pain of excommunication or anathema by means where of
this question should not hinder the reunion of those who desire to return to
the Church. For as for the annual present that it is written, England waswont
to make to the Sea Apostolic, if his majesty's Predecessors would by any
mark of public acknowledgment testify their particular devotion toward
saint PETER'S Sea that could bring noe more dimunition to their temporal glory,
then the submission of Alexander the great brought to him when he prostrated
himself before the high Priest of the (...) law; or that of the Emperor
Justinian the second, when he prostrated himself in Asia before Pope
Constantine, making this acknowledgement not to men but to God, who says by
the mouth of Esaias to his Church, whereof saint PETER in his Successors, is the
head and visible figure: Kings shall worship thee with their face on the
ground. Contrariwise it will be found, that the kings of England, have been
more esteemed and feared since then, then ever they were before, Jointly, that
whenever it shall please this great king to make so fair a present to the
Church, as to give her his heart and person, I assure my self, the Pope will
show (if these temporal acknowledgements be displeasing to his Majesty)
that it is himself as S. PAVL says, that he desires, and not the things that
belong to him.

The end of the first Part.

