DAY'S DYALL OR, HIS TWELVE HOURS THAT IS, TWELVE SEVERAL LECTVRES BY WAY OF
CATECHISM, AS they were delivered by him in the Chapel of ORIELL COLLEGE in
Oxford, in the years of our Lord God 1612, and 1613.

IOH. 11.9. Are there not twelve hours in the DAY?

Cyp. de Orat. Domin. Quomodo Solei, and Dies non est, cui Sol and Dies
Christus est.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1614.

TO THEIR PARENTS HOPEFVLL, and fairest Branches, the (...). Eurip. Iphig. in
Taur.
Pillars of their several Families, the GENTLEMEN COMMONERS of Oriell
College, Fellow-Commoners, and the rest: as also to the POOR SCHOLARS of
that House, Proficiency in both Learnings, Secular, and Celestial.
GEntlemen, and you the rest, no less beloved in the Lord. That most memorable
Ioh. 21.15.
saying of our Savior (...), Feed my Lambs: or as it is doubled in the
Vulgar, Pasce agnos meos, Pasce agnos meos: Feed my Lambs, Feed my Lambs,
spoken personally to S. Peter, but in him to all us, who have to do with the
Flock of Christ: has made me a many times to bethink my self how I for my
part might best perform it to you that are those very Lambs, and in some sort
belonging to me. It is now some two years since, when opportunity was offered
me never better. For being chosen by your Superiors to be your Catechism
Reader for a year, a many of you may remember, how I performed that Task in
Twelve Lectures. Since which time, considering with my self the slender
benefit that might accrue to some of you, by hearing only those my Lectures
without some farther help, I thought it fit by way of Printing to present them
to all and every of you, and so much the rather for that the Eye is a surer
Friend unto the Memory, then the Ear can possibly be, and you know whose
Horat. de Art^ Po^^^
saying it was, Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem
Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus: and quae
Ipse sibi tradit spectator.
Besides, that Speech (especially my Speech) has not the benefit that Printing
has, of quoting Authors at large, a principal part of these my Lectures,
which I could not then in a many respects deliver unto you so exactly. But my
cheifest Motive of all of committing these unto the Press, is the continual
flowing unto us of such as you are, some going, others coming and every Year
some New ones, who since they are to belong to me in respect of my Pastoral
charge, feign would I show my love unto my Savior, by feeding those New ones
in this sort. A way perhaps some what chargeable, but God that has given
ability to compass this, has given a will too (in humility be it spoken) to
contemn a world of Wealth toward the furtherance of a Soul. Concerning these
my Lectures the^, lo they offer themselves unto you, that which comes unto you
so slightly, let it not be as slightly but regarded.

One Schioppius Gasp. Schioppii Alexipharm. cont. Plessaum.
tells us of late, of Paul the fifth now Pope, how little he answered his
expectation in a matter not much unlike hereunto. If that Gift, says he, were
bestowed upon his Fatherhood indeed, perhaps he no more attentively, or
curiously observed it, then he did an excellent Book of a certain Divine,
which I my self brought unto him, to the end and purpose to bring the Author
of it in favor with him. Non modo ab eo non lectum, sed neque certo loco, vbi
reperiri, mihique restitui pesset, positii fuisse comperi. Schiop. Ib. p. 76.
Col. 1.
For after a few days I repairing unto him again, and asking of him how he
liked the Book, I found that he had not only not read it, as I expected, but
could not tell where in the world he had laid it. Indeed the Pope of Rome has
other gates matters then Books in his head, and therefore Schioppius there
adds Virg. Aen. l. 6
Tu regere Imperio Populos Roman memento Paul the fifth who is a Roman by
birth, should remember he was to Rule. True: and me thinks Schioppius should
have added withal, that he should remember to forget that which our Savior
said about Ruling: Reges Gentium dominantur eorum. Vos autem non fic, Luke
22.25. But how soever they (it seems) are not altogether of our Saviors
mind, and therefore Schioppius commends the Pope, howsoever he neglected that
Book: yet you, Beloved, should you do the like, are not sure of such an Homer
as Schioppius is, and therefore is it best for you not to follow the Popes
example. Martha, Martha, Luke 10.41.
says our Savior, thou carest, and art troubled about many things. But one
thing is needful. It were happy perhaps for his Holiness, if he were but
troubled as Martha was, but you, if you please, may be the Mary's. That One
thing so needful, lo here in these Lectures.

Concerning my Method therein I go not (I confess) the beaten way, and it
may seem (I grant) above the pitch of Catechizing; what has been here
delivered by me, but presupposing you grounded before in the ordinary course of
Catecisme; I mean Mr Dr Nowels, best approved of in our Church, I thought it
my best way to acquaint you in this sort with matters of this weight,
especially reading as I did in a College, and to Youths such as you are. Such
they are as you, whom our Adversaries like wyly Foxes go about to inveigle
with a show of all Antiquity: you shall have somewhat here in store out of
Antiquity it self, to confront that Brag of theirs, as also to teach you to
hold your own.

And now Beloved what shall I more say? You see my care toward you, my love,
and what not? 1. Cor. 3.22.
Whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, even al are yours, and ye Christ's,
and Christ Gods. Courage then, Dearly Beloved, and valiantly march on, who
have so many Helps toward the saving of your Souls. And above all remember
the Earth and the Soil you now tread upon is not vulgar or ordinary, but such
for all the world, as the ancient Fathers of the Church did tread on in their
days. That which Midden dorp de Acad l. 2. p. 95. Edit. 1583. Vid. Cent. 4.
Magdeb c. 7. p. 510.
Nicomedia was to LACTANTIVS, Mid. Ib. p. 142
Carthage to TERTVLLIAN, Mid. l. 3. p. 455
Millan to S. AMBROSE, Mid. Ib.
Millan and Mid. l. 2. p. 142
Carthage to S. AUSTEN, Mid. ib. p. 203
Constantinople to DAMASCEN, Mid. ib. p. 88.
Antioch, and Mid. ib p 183 Vid. Naz. M^n^d.
Athens to NAZIANZEN, Mid. ib. p. 88.
Antioch, B. Iuels Defense of the Apology. p. 430.
Athens, and Mid. l 2 p. 202
Constantinople to S. CHRYSOSTOM, Mid. Ib. p. 88.
Antioch, and Mid. ib. p. 102
Alexandria to S. JEROME, Mid. ib. p. 88.
Antioch, Mid. Ib. p. 102
Alexandria, and Mid Ib. p. 92.
Caesarea to Origin, Mid Ib. p. 88.
Antioch, Mid. Ib. p. 102
Alexandria, and Mid. ib. p. 183 Vid. Naz. Monod.
Athens to S. BASIL, B. Iuels Defense of the Apol. p. 430.
Athens and Mid. ib. p. 102
Alexandria to S. GREGORY, that for all the world is Oxford unto you. Those
were the places in their days, where their Minds had the first tincture of
Secular Vt ii qui combibi purpuram volunt sufficient prius lanam medicamentis
quibusdam: sic literis talibusque doctrinis ante excoli animos, and ad
sapientiam concipiendam imbui and praeparari decet. Cicero. Vid. Lips. Var.
Lect. l. 2. c. 10 p. 45.
Learning, that so they might be the more ready for that deeper die of
Divinity. Thus Nazianzen Naz. Monod in vit. Basil. Mag.
tells us of S. Basil (brought up as I said before in those famous
Universities, Antioch, Alexandria, and Athens) how expert he was in Grammar, in
Rhetoric, in Natural, and Moral Philosophy, in Astrology, Geometry,
Arithmetike, Arts and Sciences for the which our University has been so
famous heretofore, as it has caused them to show their Bounty therein, who
were themselves brought up in other places.

When Caius of Cambridge did Caius de Antiq. l. 1. p, 152. Edit. 1574. of my
FATHERS Printing
twit us in the teeth with some of our Founders here in Oxford that had been
themselves Cambridge Men, as Richard Fox the Founder of Corpus Christi
College, Thomas Rotheram the Fou^der of Lincoln College, and William Smyth
the Founder of Brasennose: At vnde precor ( Examen iudicii Cantabrigiensis
cuiusdam quise Londinensem dicit nuper de Origin vtriusque Academiae lati Cui
praefigitur ad ciusdem Prohemium Apologia. Exam. 20. A Book not yet printed,
but of M. Keys own handwriting, and in the custody of our learned Antiquary
M. Thomas Allen, and copied forth by my kind and loving Friend M Miles Windsor
a true Lover of our Mother the University.
says our worthy Key again, who fully answered that Book) tam singularis
erga nos animi affectus? ac multo qua^ in vestra^ Academia^ mayor, nisi quod
magis hic arridere^t illis omnia, Doctrina, Mores, Iuventutis educatio,
Instituta, Pietatis cultus, Ritus, Consuetudines, (...), and Externae
Ceremoniae, ipsaque demum Oxoniensis Nominis celebritas, vt alia multa non
commemorem, quam apud vos, quos alioqui vel ipsius naturae impulsu haud dubie
praetulissent. Surely Beloved the great renown of the Name of Oxford has
raised up three Worthies I mean a BODLEY, a BENNET, and a WADHAM, to do more
then they did. Though what do I speak of three only? His excellent MAJESTY
now Regnant, his Reverend CLERGY, his Honorable NOBILITY, and GENTRY of
the Land, do al concur even in our days, to the ennobling of this Place, and
shall not we to that great Renown our Oxford has had in former Ages join
Doctrine, and Manners, and Breeding up of youth, and keeping of Statutes, and
Religion, and Rites, and Customs, and Discipline, and outward Ceremonies, etc?
Shall the whole world (in a manner) concur to do us good, and we be wanting to
our selves? Shall God himself be at a Non plus for being ofm ability (as it
were) to do more unto us, What could I have done any more to my Vineyard that I
have not done unto it. Esa. 5 4.
and we bring forth wild grapes? But it is not Beloved unto you, that these
lines of mine do appertain, only I am afraid, least you for whom these
pains, and much more has been taken, should be carried hereafter an other
way, when you are of riper years, with the stream of the world. At what time
think on him yet, who has bin painful for you as you see, and more truly
tendereth your Salvation, then any Popish Priest or Jesuit whatsoever.

He that accounts himself a true Debtor to you, whether you be of the Richer,
or Poorer sort, JOHN DAY
From my Study in that College whereof your selves are all Members. October. 17.
1614.
THE SEVERAL ARGVMENTS, with the several Texts of Scripture, of every
several Lecture in this Book.
1 The Preamble. Psalm. 34.11. Page 1. 2 Of Gods Essence Exodus 3.14. p. 23. 3 Of
the Trinity. 1. Ioh. 5.7. p. 39. 4 Of the Attributes of God. Exodus 34.6. p.
59. 5 Of Gods Works. Act. 17.24. p. 79. 6 Of the Church, and how distinguished
from Paganism, Iudaisme, Turcisme, and Papisme. Act. 2.42. p. 101. 7 Of the
Articles of Belief, commonly called, The Apostles Creed Mark. 16.16. p. 127. 8
Of our Church's Tenets, against the Church of Rome wherein are comprised the
forty Articles of 62. where unto Beneficed men, and Graduates in Oxford do
usually subscribe. Act. 24.14. p. 157. 9 Of the ten Commandments. Mat. 22.37.
p. 211. 10 Of Prayer. Mat. 6.9. p. 251. 11 Of Fasting. Mark. 2.19. p. 281. 12
Of Alms. Ephesians. 2.10. p. 305.
My Lord of London on Jonas Lect. 40. p. 551.

Other men as they list. Let them esteem the light of Antiquity no better
worth then to be hid under a Bushel, and quite suppressed, that they may set
their own upon a Candlestick, and cause it to blaze to the view of the whole
House: Ego vero illos veneror, et tantis nominibus semper assurgo: Senec.
Epist. l. 8. ep. 65.
but for mine own part I have them in great reverence, and honor the very
Names of the Fathers.

THE PREAMBLE. Lect. 1. December. 17. 1612.

I am come this first time a Mourner hither: I trust I shall return from
hence, when at length from hence I shall return, full of joy and ghostly
comfort. They are the words of the Prophet Psalm. 126.7.
David, He that now goes on his way weeping, and hears forth good seed,
shall doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaues with him.

When first I was contented to be put to this task, I little thought it should
have been so long ere I should have said somewhat at the lea^t. It was in
truth my chief desire to have been a frequent speaker unto you, and therefore
was I the more willing to be easily entreated to these pains. But I no sooner
bethought me of putting my self to the pains indeed, when that heaviest news
was brought me of the greatest loss I ever had. True it is, it was our
Saviors answer to him that asked leave to bury his father: Follow me, and let
the dead bury their dead, Mar. 8.22. But he spoke it of Parents dead in soul,
qui fide sunt destituti, says Pelican in Mat. 8 So S. Austen, Certe mortuos
sepulcuri non sun^ corpore mortui, quia si hec esse^t, mortua corpora sepeltri
non possent Tamen mortuos eos vocat, vb^^ris^ intus in anima? Aug de verb: Dom.
Ser. 18. p. 51.
Pelli^an, quae vita est animae such as as were destitute of faith which is the
life of the soul: of Christian Parents, and to Christian Children he would
have said no doubt as Toby did, Toby, 4.3. My son, after that I am dead bury
me, and despise not thy Mother, but honor her all the days of thy life, and
do that which shall please her, and anger her not. Remember my son how many
dangers she sustained when thou wast in her womb. And when she dies bury
her by me in the same grave. And indeed to say the truth, Est aliquod humanis
affectibus in calamitate solatium, says that excellent Erasm Vid. Christ. Op.
Tom. 5. p. 604.
Hollander, assedisse morituro, excepisse voces vitimas, dedisse novissimum
osculum, dixisse vale aeternum, clausisse morientis oculos, praestitisse
funeris supremum officium: It is some kind of comfort to us to have borne our
friend company in his sickness, to have been partaker of his last words, to
have give^ him our last farewell, to have cloased up his eyes, and to have
performed the last office of following him to his grave. But I was bereaved of
all these. It was not my hap to perform unto her this last office of following
her to her grave, nor of cloasing up her eyes, nor of taking my last farewell,
nor of being partaker of her last words, no not to be as much as present with
her in her sickness. When Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon
the head of Ephraim who was the younger Brother, and his left hand on Manasses
who was the elder, it displeased him says the Genesis 48.17.
Scripture, and he would have removed his Fathers hands. Would God I might
have enjoyed but her left hand only, her least blessing at that time had been
enough, so should I have meditated oh my God, all the days of my life after,
of all thy blessings bestowed on me, and Eccles. 3.10.
established by that hand. These things while I pondered with my self, and
could in no wise be comforted, no not with that of the Prophet David, When my
Father and Mother forsake me, Psalm. 27.12. behold in the neck of this, an
other grief, an other sorrow. PRINCE HENRY.
The death of him, even his death whereof whosoever heard that was a true lover
of Religion, and of the Gospel amongst us, his two ears did 1. Sam. 3 11.
tingle. Dead he is, alas he is dead, the Lord has Ier. Lam. 2.1.
darkened the daughter of Syon, and cast down from heaven unto the earth the
beauty of Israel. And which is most remarkable, and should cause all and every
of us to lay it thoroughly to our hearts, even then, and at that time, when not
many years before he had bestowed on this our Israel the greatest blessing
that ever was. I say then and at that time, to show unto us, atque vtinam
daretur in vnius speciem Concionis tota Anglia contracta, oratione hac vti, and
Britannici in generis audientia collocari, to alter a little the words of
Arnab. adver. Gent. l. 1. p. 139
Arnobius, would God all England might now hear me, eve^ this whole I Will of
great Britain, to show unto us, I say, that if we of this Kingdom go on, as
we have done pretily well since that time, in Romans 13.13.
gluttony and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness, in strife and
envying, in Popery and Impiety (and indeed what not?) he both can, and will
turn, our feasts into mourning, and all our songs into lamentation, Amos,
8.10. But to return unto my purpose.

Clavus clavu^ pellit, mayor minore^. As one nail drives out an other, the
greater the less: even so did this, my former sorrow. It made me call to mind
those excellent words of Esdras, who when a woman appeared unto him weeping for
her son, and would not be comforted, because he was not: Thou foolish woman
above all other ( 2. Esd. 10.6.
says he) see thou not our heaviness, and what comes unto us? For Syon
our Mother is all woeful, and is soar afflicted, and mourns extremely.
Seeing we be all now in heaviness and make our moan (for we be all
sorrowful) art thou sorry for one son? His conclusion V. 15.
there is: Now therefore withhold thy sorrow in thy self, and bear constantly
that which comes unto thee. For if thou allowest Gods purpose, and receiuest
his counsel in time, thou shall be commended therein. Go thy way then into
the city to thine husband. Thus far Esdras.

My former sorrow thus abated then, and having in this sort recovered my self
(if yet I may be said to have recovered my self, who am often hereafter to
meditate not only of my private loss, but of our public calamity too) what
remains, but I now resume my first and foremost resolution of speaking unto
you in this kind, that so long at the least as this shall happen of speaking in
this kind here unto you, my thoughts may be somewhat settled, and not always
intentive on HER, for loss of whom I cannot but see a sea of crosses to my
self, or not always intentive on HIM, for loss of whom I well may fear a
world of crosses to our Kingdom.

Come we then to the matter in hand, and first by way of Preamble, let me this
first time entreat unto you of certain words of the Prophet David's, as they
are written in his four and thirtieth Psalm, the eleventh verse of that
Psalm. The words are these: Come ye children and harken unto me, I will
teach you the fear of the Lord. In which words for my better proceeding, let
me observe unto you these four points. First an Invitation, Come: Secondly,
the parties invited, ye children: Thirdly, the duty to be performed on their
parts, harken unto me: Fourthly, and lastly the duty on his part who did
invite them, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. I will be very brief in
all four; and first in the invitation Come, which is (you see) but a word, and
therefore but a word shall you see to be said of it, Come.

Memorable is that in S. Lukes Gospel of one that made a great supper, and
bade many, and sent his Servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden,
e Come: for all things are now ready. Luk 14.17.
You are not ignorant of the excuses were made by a many of them at that time,
nor in how little steed those excuses then stood them, nor of the just anger of
the Master of the house conceived thereupon. I, says he, say unto you, that
none of those men which were bidden shall taste of my supper. As if he had said:
they should not have a bit of it to save their lives, no not to save their
souls. So that in this one only word, Come, is comprehended all this: First,
God himself inviting us: Secondly, inviting us by his servants: Thirdly, no
excuse to serve the turn: Fourthly, his indignation and wrath, if so be we
come not: Fifthly and lastly, if we come, his welcomming all and every of us.
And thus you see how briefly I have entreated of this first word, Come.

I will not be much longer in the two next, the Parties invited, Children: and
which applies it to your selves, ye: ye Children. I know Children may be taken
in this place for all inferiors of what age soever, and the children here meant
were no doubt the Children of Israel. I, an old man may be a child, Puer
centu^ annoru^ was Esaies phrase, Esa, 65.20: and, The honorable age is not
that which is of long time, neither that which is measured by the number of
years, but wisdom is the gray hair, and an undefiled life the old age, Wisd.
4.9. Howbeit speaking now to you, and it being your age I only aim at at this
time, I am to instance only in your selves, and to tell you that you are the
children here meant, you are the Parties invited hither. It is good for a man,
says Ier. Lament. 3 27.
Jeremy, that he bear the yoke in his youth. What? will you say, so soon?
Terent. Heau. Act. 2 Sc. 1.
Ilico nasci senes, neque illarum affines esse rerum, quas fert Adolescentia?
I, Beloved eve^ so soon, and therefore that old proverb, Pueros Angelicos in
Satanam verti vbi co^senuerint: young Saints, old Devils: ego (says a good
Erasm Coll. Pietas pueril.
Author) ab Authore Sathana natu^ arbitror: I am of opinion it was devised by
the Devil himself. Sure I am it is contrary to that of Solomon: Teach a child
in the trade of his way, Prove. 22.6.
and when he is old he shall not depart from it. What? should we not begin
betimes? And why was Circumcision then commanded the eight day, and the
sacrament of Baptism permitted on any day, be we never, never so young, that
as Hercules in his cradle, Senec Herc. Fur. Act. 2.
Monstra superavit prius quam nosse posset, so we might at the Font even
vanquish the Devil, before we know so much as the name of a Devil what it
means. Should we not even in our youth be instructed in the Scriptures? And
why was Timothy the^ permitted to know those Scriptures of a child? Continue
thou says the 2. Tim 3.14.
Apostle, in the things which thou have learned, and art persuaded thereof,
knowing of whom thou have learned them. And that thou have known the holy
Scriptures of a child. How came Origin afterward being a child to learn
them to? Iam tum etia^ says Eusebius hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 2. p. 72.
Eusebius, haud modica doctrinae fidei argumenta praeiecerat, in divinis
scriptis adhuc puer exercitatus. Even then in his tender age he showed no small
tokens of the doctrine of faith, being but a child as he was, and exercised in
holy writ. How came our Savior before them both being but twelve years old,
to be found in the Temple amidst the Doctors Luk 2.46.
hearing them, and asking them questions? Samuel was but young when as he was
consecrated to the Lord: when his mother had weaned him, says the 1. Sam. 1.24.
Scripture, she took him with her, and brought the child to Eli. And she
said, oh my Lord as thy soul lives, my Lord, I am the woman that stood with
thee here praying unto the Lord. I praid for this child, and the Lord has
given me my desire which I asked of him. Therefore also I have given him unto
the Lord: as long as he lives, he shall be given unto the Lord. And he
worshipped the Lord there. Howbeit these will some man say, were destinated
afterward to be Teachers themselves, and therefore no marvel if so be they
began betimes. Go we then unto the other Sex that is utterly bard from public
1. Tim. 2.12.
teaching, and were not infants of that sort brought up in the Scriptures too?
I will content my self at this time only with a couple of them, Paula the
daughter of Laeta, and Pacatula the daughter of Gaudentium, both of them young,
both of them Virgins, and concerning both with the counsel of Jerome for the
bringing of them up. First concerning Paula writing to her Mother Laeta:
Hieron. ad Laetam de Instit Filiae.
Reddat, x says he, tibi pensum quotidie de scripturarum floribus carptum:
Enjoin her as a daily task to gather you some flowers every day out of the
garden of holy Scriptures. And again a little after, Progemmis and serico,
says he, divinos codices amet: Instead of preticus stones and silks, teach
her to love the holy Scriptures. And again after that, showing what order she
should observe in reading those Scriptures: First, says he, let her learn
the Psalter, then the Proverbs, the^ Ecclesiastes, then Job, then the Gospels,
then the Acts of the Apostles, then the Epistles. After these the five books
of Moses, the books of Kings, of Chronicles, of Esdras, of Hester; Last of all
let her learn the Canticles. And writing to Gaude^tium concerning her daughter
Pacatula, Hieron. ad Gaudent de Infantulae educat.
Cum autem virgunculam rudem and edentulam septimus aetatis annus exceperit,
discat memoriter Psalterium, and vsque ad annos pubertatis libros Solomonis,
Evangelia, Apostolos and Prophetas sui cordis thesaurum faciat. When she comes,
says St Jerome, to be seven years of age let her learn the Psalter by heart,
and till she be twelve, let her make the treasure of her heart, the books of
Solomon, the Evangelists, the Apostles, and the Prophets. It had been strange
in those days to have heard Christians, I, and learned Christians, either of
the one sex or the other, to profess they were Illic. trepidaverunt timore vbi
non erat timor, Ps. 14.9.
afraid to read the Scriptures, to say, that Ignorance was the Mother of
devotion, that it was not fit for girls and boys to be meddling therewith: nay
maxi-me pueris, Chrysostom in Ephesians. Hom. 21.
says S. Chrysostom; est enim plurimum insipientiae in illa aetate. It is most
necessary, says S. Chrysostom, for worldly men to know those things which
are to be taught out of the Scriptures, but especially for children for so much
as that age is most repleat with lack of wisdom and discretion. And again a
little after: Let us bring them up, says he, in instruction, and information
of the Lord. Let us give them example our selves, facientes eos a primaeva
aetate Scripturarum lectioni vacare, causing them from their young and tender
years to apply themselves to the reading of the Scriptures. But I have been
longer in this second point then I purposed to have been: I come unto the
third, namely the duty to be performed on their parts, Come ye children and
harken unto me. [And harken.]

For is it enough to come? nay, for when we are come, we may fairly fall
asleep. Who so tells a fool of wisdom, Ecclus. 22.10.
says the wisdom of Jesus the son of Syrach, is as a man which speaks to
one that is asleep: when he has told his tale, he says what is the matter?
We may sleep and fall, as did Act. 20.9.
Eutychus from the third loft, and be taken up for dead. We may come and be no
wiser then we were before we came, like them in the Acts of the Apostles, Act.
19.32.
the more part knew not wherefore they were come together. We may come as the
Genesis 19.11.
Sodomites did to Lots door, have our eyes perhaps broadwaking, and yet
secundum quid, in regard of the matter in hand, be as blind as Beetles too. It
is not enough you see to come then, but you must come and harken. Come ye
children and harken. Here then we are all and every of us to bid Philosophy
adue. The Eye in this case as excellent a sense as it is, yet it is not the
most excellent, the Ear is far to be preferred before it. Plus, says Lact.
Instit. l. 3. c. 9.
Lactantius, est in auribus quam in oculis situm, quoniam and doctrina, and
sapientia percipi auribus solis potest, oculis solis non potest. There is more
in the ears of man, says he, then there is in his eyes, for that learning and
wisdom may be obtained by the ears only, by the only eye it is impossible.
Thus, says a worthy D. Hackwell Vanity of the eyes, c. 21. p. 101
Divine, do we judge by the hearing only of the temper of metals, the
soundness of timber, the emptiness of vessels, the deepnesse of waters. And
we have heard, says he, of many blind men who have become famous for wisdom
and learning, but of deaf men we have not heard of any. I, Faith it self, as
speaks the Apostle, is not that by hearing? How shall they call on him, Romans
10.14.
says he, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of
whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? his
conclusion V. 17.
there is, then faith is by hearing, as if he had said, No Ear, no Faith: no
hearing, no believing. Add hereunto the commodity that Hearing has above all
other senses whatsoever. For how many things must we see, and what books must
we read, before we shall attain to the knowledge of that which we may learn
by hearing one Lecture. We receive and understand in half an hour, that which
our Master or Tutor who teaches us, has not prepared perhaps for us but in a
long time and season. This Woolsey the Cardinal made good use of, in regard of
his private good, for whereas the rest of the Council in those days called
often upon K. Harry to acquaint himself with matters of state by resorting to
the Council Table, and affourding his presence at their deliberations: he
would advise him to follow his pleasures, and let Council matters alone to
him, assuring him that at night he should have as much of him in one quarter of
an hour as if he had been present all day at those tedious and wearisome
consultations. By this trick, says my B. Godw. his Catal. of Bish. page 487.
Author, he won himself such authority with the King, as he did even what he
listed a long time after. But to return unto my purpose.

As we are to come and harken to, so is there danger also in hearing. For as
our Saiuour said in S. Marks Mark. 4.24.
Gospel: Take heed what you hear, and as S. Luke Luke 8.18.
relates it, Take heed how ye hear: so must we take especial heed not only
what, and how, but also whom we hear. For as the Apostle Philip. 3.18.
says to the Philippians, Many walk who are the enemies of the cross of
Christ, whose end is damnation, and so forth: so may it be said now a days
that Many talk who are the enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is
damnation, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is to their shame, which
mind earthly things. And the same Apostle in an other place, Moreover Act.
20.30.
says he, of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse things to draw
disciples after the^. And S. Peter to this purpose: These are wels without
water 2 Pet. 2.18.
says he, and clouds carried about with a tempest, to whom the black
darkness is reserved for ever. For in speaking swelling words of vanity, they
beguile with wantonness through the lusts of the flesh, them that were clean
escaped from them which are wrapped in error. And would you the^ know whom to
harken to? It follows, Come ye children and harken unto me. Venite filij,
audite me. Me your Prince, Me your Prophet, for he was in truth a very mixture
of both. In the one hand as it were his Sword, in the other the Word, suppose a
Book, and in both this Motto, Haec docet, Haec terret, This hand teaches, This
terrifies. For as Aug. Ep. 48.
S. Austen like a Father, Si terrerentur and non docerentur, improba quasi
dominatio videretur; If those that err should be terrified only and not be
taught, it might seem a kind of Tyrany: so the same Father in the self same
period but like a Judge, sed rursus si docerentur and no^ terrerentur,
vetustate consuetudinis obdurarentur, and ad capessenda^ viam salutis pigrius
moverentur; but again if they should be taught and not terrified to, custom
would harden them, and make them pace but slowly to the way of eternal life.
Howbeit this is an argument that befits not our Meridian. I speak not now to
Magistrates; I speak only unto you, and therefore come unto the last point
namely the duty on his part who does invite here, and what the Parties invited
might expect at his hands, Come ye children and harken unto me, I will teach
you the fear of the Lord. [I will teach you the fear of the Lord.]

Concerning Fear, in holy Scripture it is taken diverse and sundry ways. It
is taken first of all for the thing or danger feared, as Prove. 1.26, I will
laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear comes. It is according
unto that, Psalm. 2.4, He that dwells in heaven shall laugh them to scorn:
the Lord shall have them in derisio^. Which is not, Beloved, to be so understood
as if the Lord were made of our metal, petulanti spleen, as speaks the Pers.
Sat. 1.
Poet, set (as we say) on a merry pin: God forbid we should ever think so
basely of our God, but for the Prophet would intimate to us (as Calvin observes
on that place) that when the whole world is up against him, he needs no
munitions, no fortifications or rampires against them, but can as easily and
instantly bridle them, as a man is said to laugh who laughs by nature.
Secondly, Fear is taken for the Person which is feared, as Genesis 31.42. Except
the God of my Father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac had been with
me, surely thou had sent me away now empty. They are Jacobs words to Laban
alluding, as Tremellius thinks, to Genesis 27.33, when as Isaac his father was
stricken with a marveilous great fear whereby God as it were bridled him,
least he should recall again the blessing he gave. Thirdly Fear is taken for
a free voluntary revere^ce, which Inferiors show to their Superiors, making
them careful to obey and fearful to offend, as Romans 13.7, Tribute to whom ye
owe tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear. And that fear there
spoken of is fearfulness to offend, not formidine poenae (as speaks the
Poet) because of punishment ensuing, but virtutis amore, for love of goodness.
You know whose saying it was, Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore: Horat.
Epist. l. 1. ad Quintiu^.


Tu nihil admittes in te, formidine poenae. Fourthly Fear is taken for an holy
affection of the heart awing us and making us loath to displease God by sin in
respect of his gracious goodness and mercies, and for a love we bear to
righteousness, as Psa. 130.4. There is mercy with thee, therefore shall thou be
feared. Now this is that Alpha and Omega, that beginning and end of wisdom so
much spoken of in the Scriptures. The beginning, as Psalm. 111.10. The fear of
the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: The end, as Eccles. 12.13. Let us hear
the end of all, Fear God, and keep his commandments. Very excellent things
throughout the Scriptures are spoken of this Fear. As Psalm. 25.11. What man is
he that fears the Lord, him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose:
and Psalm. 145.19, He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: and
Psalm, 115, 13, He shall bless them that fear the Lord both small and great.
I but lentum est dabit, dat says the Senec. Herc. Furens Act. 3. sc. Vtrumne
vi sui.
Poet: it may seem to long a coming, He will do it: why then he does it in
the present tence, and therefore, Psalm. 33.17. The eye of the Lord is upon them
that fear him, and Psalm. 103, 11. Look how high the heaven is in comparison
of the earth: so great is his mercy also toward them that fear him: and in
the 13. verse of that Psalm, Like as a father pitieth his own children, even
so is the Lord merciful to the^ that fear him: and again in the 17. verse,
The merciful goodness of the Lord endures for ever and ever upon the^ that
fear him: and in the 9. verse of this Psalm, They that fear him lack
nothing. Si hoc quoque est lentu^: if this may seem to slack to, for it is
but even a doing, why the^ lo he has done it already, and that in the
praeterperfect tence perfitly past, He has given meat unto them that fear
him, Psalm. 111.5. I omit Psalm. 112.1. and Psalm. 128.1. and Psalm. 147.11. and
Prove. 19.23. and Tob. 1.21. all decyphering unto us the benefit of this Fear,
and I will say with the son of Syrach, The fear of the Lord is a pleasant
garden of blessing, and there is nothing so beautiful as it is, Ecclus. 40.27.

I have reckoned unto you four ways how Fear is to be taken. There is a
fifth, and a sixth way to, of both which in a word. Fifthly then Fear is taken
for a terror in the heart of the wicked dreading God as a Judge, and fearing to
offend him only in regard of punishment that may ensue. Of this the Apostle S.
John speaks. 1. Ioh. 4.18. Fear says he, has painefulnes, or as it is in
our new Translation, Fear has torment. And I say only in regard of
punishment, for that the Godly in regard of punishment may be fearful to
offend, but not in regard of punishment only. In this case Aug. Tom. 9. in 1.
epist. Joan. p. 436.
St Austen compares Fear to the bristle which is on the shoomakers thread,
quando aliquid suitur, says he, seta prius intrat, sed nisi exeat non succedit
linum: when soever the shoemaker seweth a shoe the bristle first enters but
unless it go out again the thread can in no wise enter, so the fear of Gods
vengance first goes before, and then brings in after it the long thread of
Gods mercies. Sixthly and lastly Fear is taken for the whole worship of God as
Esaias 29.13. for that which God himself there said, Their fear toward me was
taught by the precepts of men: our Savior interprets in S. Mathewes Gospel
by the name of worship: In vain says he, they worship me teaching for
doctrines men's precepts. Mat. 15.9. And thus may Fear be taken here in this
place, Come ye children and harken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the
Lord: that is, afford me but your presence, come and harken unto me
diligently, and I will teach you how to worship the God of heaven. I will
instruct you aright in his service, least taking your selves without good
instruction, or to the right hand, or to the left, Gentilisme, or Superstition;
Virg. Aentid. lib. 3.
Dextrum Scylla latus, laevum implacata Charybdis Obsidet, The Scylla of
Superstition being on one side, the Charybdis of Gentilisme on the other; you
utterly miscary in this life, and consequently also in the life to come. Come
ye children and harken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

The application is soon made. Such an invitation as was that, lo herein
every respect. The Parties invited are your selves. The duty on your parts to
be performed, you are not ignorant what it is, if so be you did but harke^ to
this one word Harken. The disproportion is in my self. I am not I confess the
J, here spoken of in this place. I may say as he in Ambros. de Paenitent. l. 2.
c. 10. page 220.
St Ambrose in another case, Ego non sum ego: Ambros. de Paenitent. l. 2. c.
10. page 220.
I am not I. I am nor Prince, nor Prophet, no nor yet the son of a Prophet, as
Amos spoke of himself, Amos, 7.14. and yet by the grace of God I am that I am,
1. Cor. 15.10
and that God that against my expectation has called me to this task, and
made me not unwilling to accept of it, will I hope direct me therein; and to use
Q. Elizabeth's words of blessed memory, Slow Chronic. edit. 1601. page 1076.
I trust God who has hitherto preserved, and led me by the hand, will not now
of his goodness suffer me to go alone. And yet as speaks the c Apostle, that
I may boast my self a little, 2. Cor. 11.16
as the Teacher here in this place was Prince, and Prophet both, and had in
that respect two strings (as it were) to his bow: so am not J without two
strings neither, even bound unto you in a double bond to tender the welfare of
your souls; the one in regard of a particular calling of late by your
Superiors to this place; the other of being before, and still remaining your
Pastor. Both command, both constrain me, and I submit my self to both, and
say with Aug. Tom. 10. Ser. 16. p. 49.
St Austen, Domino iubente loquor, quo terre^te non taceo: The Lord commands
me, and therefore I speak, he threatens if I speak not, and therefore I dare
not hold my peace.

Jf so be in my whole carriage, or managing hereof in any particular, any like
Michol shall be ready to mislike at what may seem amiss, the answer that
David gave shall be as ready: 2. Sam. 6.21.
It is before the Lord; and vilior fiam plusquam factus sum, and ero humilis in
oculis meis; I will yet be more vile then thus, and will be low in my own
sight. Totum enim decet quicquid defertur Religioni, vt nullum obsequium quod
proficiat ad cultum and observantiam Christi erubescamus. All, says St
Ambrose, is decent that is given unto Religion, Ambr. de Poenit. l 2 c. 6. page
213.
nor are we to blush at any office performed on Christ's behalf. If any on the
contrary think these pains of mine unfitting for you that are but Youths,
and that they might better here be spared, and be bestowed elsewhere, I will
oppose to him the words of St Ierom which he wrote to Laeta concerning Paula
her daughter whom I mentioned before, Ipse si Paulam miseris, Hier. ad Laeta^
de Instit. filiae.
says he, and Magistrum and Nutritiu^ spondeo. Gestabo humeris, balbutientia
senex verba formabo, multo gloriosior mundi Philosopho, qui non Regem Macedonum
Babylonio periturum veneno, sed ancillam et sponsam Christi erudiam, Regnis
coelestibus offerendam. If says S. Jerome, you send me your daughter Paula, I
vow unto you to be her Master, and Foster-father both. I will bear her in my
arms, and as old as I am, I will teach her even to speak. And herein my glory
shall be greater the^ was Aristotle's that great Philosopher of the world, who
shall instruct not a king of Macedon shortly after to be made away by some
Babylonish poison, but a handmaide and spowse of Christ destinated hereafter
for the kingdom of heaven. If he so said but of one only, and she of the
female sex to, what may I of so many of you as hear me this day, who as you
are a many indeed, and of the more honorable and noble Sex, so who knows
whether there are Ioh. 1.26, 27
among you, whose sho-latchets an other day I may be unworthy to unloose. And
so much the rather should my care be over you now in this kind, for there is
even now a days a Scilla, and a Charibdis to. You shall no sooner settle your
selves to be truly religious indeed, but who so ready at hand as or Popery on
the one side, or Puritanisme on the other. When wise king Solomon had given
that good counsel, Pro. 4, 25. Let thine eyes behold the right, and let thine
eye lids direct the way before thee. Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all
thy ways be ordered aright: he immediately adds withal: Turn not to the
right hand, nor to the left, but remove thy foot from evil. Gregory Naz.
orat. 26. page 446.
Nazianzen makes a question here why king Solomon having spoken of Right
before, should so soon give us counsel not to turn to the right hand: and
his solution there is, that in the former place king Solomon meant that which
was Right in very deed, but in the latter that which did but appear to be
right, but yet notwithstanding was not so. Popery in this age having so much
been beaten as it has, nothing now unto a many seems so right, as that which
is most opposite and contrary thereunto. But we ought not to turn to this
right hand neither, no more then to the left.

Ovid. Met. l. 2
Altius egressus coelestia tecta cremabis,
Inferius terras: medio tutissimus ibis.
Popery aims at a celestial Hierarchy, I will ascend above the height of the
clouds, and will be like the most High, Esaias, 14.14. That which we call
Puritanisme, at a popularity or parity, saying to Moses and to Aaron, ye take
to much upon you, seeing all the Congregation is holy, every one of them, and
the Lord is among them: wherefore the^ lift ye your selves above the
congregation of the Lord, Numb. 16.3.

Inter vtrumque tene. A mean betwixt both does well so it be a true mean and
this is that my self shall aim at, to have you instructed in hereafter, Come
ye Children and hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

And here had I thought to have ended for this first time, howbeit before we
part it shall not be amiss to make you acquainted with my manner of method I
mean to observe unto you, that viewing as it were in one Card the several
coasts we are to arrive at, we may when we are to set forth, launch out with
much alacrity in hope of enriching our souls with abundance and store of
treasure.

Being to teach you then the Fear of the Lord, and that Fear being here taken
for the whole worship of God: I shall entreat God willing of all that
worship throughout my whole year. First and foremost then forasmuch as
Divinity entreats chiefly of two points, of God, and of the Church. I also
will entreat of God and of the Church. Concerning God I shall show unto you
first his Essence, then his Attributes, then his Works. Concerning the Church
I shall also show, first what the Church is, secondly what she is to Believe,
thirdly what to Practice. In showing you what she is I shall distinguish her
first from Paganism, and Iudaisme, the two grand Religions of the old world:
secondly from Turcisme, and Papisme, the two smoking Esaias 7.4.
firebrands of this world. In her Belief I shall discourse, first of the
Articles of our Faith commonly called, the Apostles Creed: secondly of all
those Tenets which our own Church holds against the rebellious Church of
Rome. In her Practice I shall discourse, first of the Ten Commandments;
secondly of Prayer; thirdly of Fasting; fourthly of Alms. Thus you see what I
have proposed: God I hope has disposed it to, wherefore to end with the words
of my Text, Come ye children and harken unto me, I will teach you the fear of
the Lord.

The same Lord so bless us and the seed that has been sown, that with you of
the poorer sort the Man. 13.22.
cares of this world, with you of the wealthier the deceitfulness of your
riches, with either of you of either sort the lusts of other things, grow not
up like thorns and choke it. GODS ESSENCE. Lect. 2. Ian. 21. 1612.

I MAY seem to have kept a good decorum in being so long a coming hither
since my former being in this place, considering the matter I am to speak of.
I am at this time to speak of GOD, and you know the story of Tully de Nature.
Deor. lib. 1.
Symonides, when he was to speak of that argument. He still doubled and
trebled the time that was given him to pawse upon it. True it is he was a
Heathen, and had not the way to find him out as afterward Christians had, I
mean the benefit of his Word; but did Christians afterward so find him as
that they could perfectly know him indeed? Let us hear themselves speak. Dei
natura, Naz. Orat. 34 page 538.
says Nazianzen, nullis quidem verbis explicari potest: animo autem atque
intellectu comprehends multo minus potest. The nature of God cannot be
explicated by any manner of words whatsoever: much less can it be comprised or
in our thoughts, or understanding. And again in the same Ib. page 548.
Oration, Quid tandem Deus natura sua and essentia sit, nec hominum quisquam
vnquam invenit, nec invenire potest. What God is in nature and essence neither
did any man ever find, neither possibly can he find. And again a little after:
In hac mortali vita quic quid ad nos vsque perting it, aliud nihil est, quam
exiguus quidam riuulus ac velut parvus magnae lucis radius. Whatsoever
concerning God happens to be known of us in this mortal life we here lead, is
but a river in respect of a sea, and a little beam of that great light. And
therefore Aug de Verb. Dom Ser. 38. So Tertullian, Mayor est mente ipsa nec
cogitari possit qua^tus sit; quia si poterit tagitari, mente humana minor fit
oportet qua concipi possit. Tertul. de Trin. page 494.
S. Austen, Quid mirum si non comprehendis? si enim comprehendis non est Deus.
What marvel is it if thou can not comprehend God, for if so be thou
could, then were not he God. So Arnob. adues. Genesis l. 8.
Arnobius, Magnitudinem Dei qui se putat nosse, minuit. He that thinks he knows
Gods greatness, does diminish the greatness of God. If any man think, says the
1. Cor. 8.2.
Apostle, that he knows any thing (how much more this thing?) he knows
nothing yet, as he ought to know. The thoughts of mortal men, says the Wisd.
10.13. Corpus a prima creatione hominibus non idcirco datum est vt Deo
cognoscen do sit impedime to P. Martyr Loc. Com. cap. 1. l. 4. 19,
Author of the book of Wisdom, are fearful, and our forecasts are
uncertain, because a corruptible body is heavy to the soul, and the earthly
mansion keeps down the mind that is full of cares. What? and shall we here
then set down our selves and rest us? nay, shall we despair of going farther?
For that we know nothing as we ought to know, that is, we can know nothing,
shall we endeavor therefore to know no more then we yet do; and pitching up
our pillars with Hercules, say as he did in another case, Non vltra, Now no
farther? God forbid. Nay the same Apostle that said even now, that he knew
nothing as he ought to know. And in another place, that he knew but in part,
and prophesied in part, and that he saw but through a glass darkly: Natal.
Comes Mytholil. 3. c. 19 p. 274. Vi d^eund. l. 7, c. 1. p. 689.
prayed yet for the Ephesians. 3.17.
Ephesians that being rooted and grounded in love they might be able to
co^prehe^d with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height; and to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, 1. Cor. 13.9
that they might be filled with all fulness of God. Here then must be our
endeavors eve^ to know what may be known, but yet to have still before our eyes
that good caveat given by Prove. 25.27. vulg.
Solomon; Qui scrutator est maiestatis opprimetur a gloria, He that pryes too
far into the majesty of God shall be overwhelmed with his glory. Est in Deo,
Hilar. de Trin. l. 1^. p 2^9.
says S. Hilary, quod percipi potest: est plane si modo quod potest velis.
Sicut enim est in Sole quod videas, si hoc velis videre quod possis, amittas
autem quod potevidere, dum quod non potes niteris: ita and in rebus Dei habes
quod intelligas, si intelligere quod potes velis: caeterum si vltra quam potes
speres, id quoque quod potuisti posse non poteris. There is, says he, in God
that which may be perceived by us: doubtless there is if so be thou endeavor
that which may be. For as there is in the sun that which may be seen, if thou will see what thou may, but thou loosest even what thou may see, if thou
endeavor to see more then thou may: right so in matters concerning God,
somewhat thou have that thou may understand, if thou will understand what
thou may, but if thou hopest beyond thy ability, then that which thou were
able once to do, now thou can not do. And indeed this similitude of the
Sun is brought by diverse, as namely by Radium quoque solarem non possumus
aperte cognoscere, and ta men propter hoc cu^ ipsum maxim admiramur. Ita etiam
de Dei cognitione. Chr. in Ps. 138. Edit. Paris. 1556. p. 1023.
S. Chrysostom, Si tanta claritas est Solis vt oculis in eu^ corporalibus no^
valeamus inte^dere quanta est illius claritas qui fecit Solemn Greg. in Psa.
Poenitent. p 148. col 2.
St Gregory, Neque hoc Lumi nare magnum (Solemn loquor istum que^ quotidie
vides) vidisti tamen aliqua^ do sicuti est, sed tantum sicut illuminat, verbi
causa aerem, montem, parietem. Bernard. sup Cantic. Ser. 31. p. 147. Col. 1.
St Bernard, and Si ad Solis aspectum oculorum nostrorum acies hebescit, ne
orbem ipsum obtutus inspicial obviorum sibi superatus fulgore radiorum hoc idem
mentis acies patitur in cogitatione omni de Deo, and quanto ad considerandum
Deum plus intenditur, tanto magis ipsa cogitationis sua luce coecatur. Tertul.
de Trin. p 494.
Tertullian. But I stay too long from that parcel of Scripture which I have
chosen concerning GOD, and whereof God willing at this time I purpose to
entreat. It is written in the book of Exodus, Exodus 3.14. The words are these:
And God answered Moses, I am that I am. Also he said, Thus shall thou say unto
the children of Israel, I am has sent me unto you.

Which words depending wholly upon the premises that went before, which
premises were a kind of Dialogue between God and Moses, we will first seek
out the occasion of them, and that was this.

After some backwardness on Moses part about the embassage the Lord of heaven
did purpose to employ him in, concerning the freeing the children of Israel
from Egypt the house of bondage, as it is in the eleventh verse of this
Chapter, Who am I that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring the
children of Israel out of Egypt? And the Lord replying as it is in the twelfe
verse, Certainly I will be with thee, and this shall be a token unto thee that
I have sent thee, and so forth: I, says Moses, but when I shall come unto the
children of Israel, and shall say unto them, the God of your Fathers has sent
me unto you: If they say unto me, what is his name? what shall I say unto them?
The answer to this question is the words of this my Text, wherein the Lord (you
see) vouchsafes to show to Moses what he is. And God answered Moses, I am that
I am. Also he said, Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, I am has
sent me unto you. (...)
True it is, it is in the original, I will be that I will be in the future,
and not I am that I am in the present tence, whereupon some have been of
opinion, Illyr. Clau. Script. de nomine Iehova Tract 6. p. 615 Vid. Zanch de
Natura Deil. 1. c. 14. p. 48. col. 1.
Illyricus by name, that his coming in the flesh was here signified, and the
redemption of his people by his death and passion, howbeit forasmuch as the
Hebrews use the future tence for the present, as that which notes a
continuance, and perpetuity of time, hence it is that that conceit may well be
dispelled hence, and the word translated as here it is, howsoever Illyricus
find fault with it, Ego sum qui sum, I am in the present tence.

Now for these words, I am, how aptly and significantly they express the
nature of God we shall the better conceive if so be we consider, first how they
are added to those notions that Moses had before of God: secondly, if so be we
mark their sense and meaning.

The notions are twofold: the first, from God himself: the second, Moses his
illation and inference thereupon. That which was from God himself was that in
the 6 verse of this Chapter, God styleth himself in Moses his hearing, The God
of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob three but sylly men to speak of, and yet was not God ashamed of them to
be called their God as it is in the Epistle to the Heb. 11.6.
Hebrews. Let me instance even in Isaac of whom what have we in the book of
Genesis that God should name himself his God. See Mr Bunnies Head Corner stone
l. 1. c. 5. 5. p. 65.
He lived some hundred and foureskore years, and yet are there scarce six
several points remarkable that are recorded of him: as first when he was to be
sacrificed how he knew so well (and yet it seems then he was some Funccius
makes him 26. Func. Chron. ad Annum mundi 2074.
thirty years of age) what appertained to the service of God that himself
espied what was wanting therein: secondly, he went out on an evening to Genesis
24.63.
meditate, or to pray in the Parsons makes him but a child at this time: I, a
little child, and yet he was at that time upon forty years of age, Vid. Mt
Bunnies brief Answ. unto the idle and frivolous quarrels of R.P. against the
late edition of the Resolution p. 152.
field, perhaps he did it usually, but that is more then the Text averres:
thirdly, he openly built an altar and worshipped the Lord: fourthly, though he
were much inclined to Esau at the first, yet when he saw that God had turned
that to Jacob which he himself meant to Esau, he would not then alter the
same: fifthly, he gave special charge unto Jacob as touching the choice of his
wife, and then did he bless him too. Behold the principal and total sum of
some hundred and foureskore years. Nor is it likely he did perform much more
then these related, considering the diligence of Moses in reporting matters of
him that are of less moment and consequence then these. But this it is that
may comfort us as many of us as now are, or shall be hereafter of the holy
Ministry, that albeit we can by no means show such fruits as a many do in
the Service of our God (and indeed all have not all talents, Virg Egl. 8.
Non omnia possumus omnes) yet if we endeavor to do what we can, and to do
syncerely what we do, it is at true in this case as it is in Alms: 1. Cor.
8.12
If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has, and not according to that he has not. He that accepted of Exodus 25.4
Goats hair in the building of the Tabernacle, caused St Iudes one Epistle to
be no less accepted of for the building of his Church, then fourteen of the
Apostle St Paul's. Obadiah in the old Testament was as Canonical as Esaias, Aggey
as Jeremy, and yet Obadiah has but one Chapter, Esaias three score and six,
Aggey has but two, Jeremy fifty and two. But to return unto my purpose.

The second notion is Moses his illatio^ and inference upon the style which God
here gave himself of being the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, namely
that therevpo^ Moses terms him The Lord; as in the words immediately
following, and in the seventh verse of this Chapter, Then the Lord said. It is
in the original Jehovah, and translated in the former translation of the
Bible, as also in the last the Lord, for so did the Septuagint translate it to,
as Zanch. de not Dei, seu de divine Attrib. l. 1. c. 17
Zanchius observes. True it is Illyr. Clau. script. tract. de Rat cognosc.
sac. Lit. Tract. 1. p. 45. Vid Ib. De nomine Iehova Tract. 6. p. 622.
Illyricus mislikes it, and says that it does obscure the nature of his name
indeed, howbeit since the Apostles themselves, as Calvin. Instit. l. 1. c.
13.. 20.
Calvin does observe translated Iehova by this name too, their example in this
case may be sufficient warrant for this Translation. Now whereas in our last
Translation it is always set down in capital letters and those only four:
that I take it, is or to show that it is a word in the original consisting of
four letters commonly called (...), or in imitation of the German Translation
which has the word Heyr in such capital letters, as Illyr. Clau. sc. tract.
de Rat. cognosc. sac. Lit. Tract. 1. p. 45.
Illyricus shows unto us. It may be they had an other meaning too, namely that
whereas Zanchius does wittily observe that al Nations in a manner do write the
name of God with four letters, and makes instance in the Hebrews, the
Romans, the Spaniards, the Italians, the French, the Germans, the English (for
so he Supposing by like that we wrote God with a double D. as the Germans did
Gort with a double T.
takes it) the Chaldaeans, the Syrians, the Arabians, the Aethiopians, the
Egyptians, the Assyrians, the Persians, the Magi, the Dalmatians, or Illyrici,
the Turks and the New found world, esteeming it not to be done without the
singular and especial providence of God himself; as if he had meant to show to
all Nations that he was not the God of the Jews only, but of all the world
besides: forasmuch as Zanchius (I say) observes this, and we indeed do not so
write it, it may be perhaps they would have the word Only for often I have
observed Esaias. 30.15. Lord is in small ^^tters.
LORD to supply that defect, least in this case it might be said of us as was
spoken in another, Virg. Ecl. 1.
Et penitus toto divisos orb Britannos. But to return to my purpose again.

LORD is a name of relation, and you know in what predicament it is: Omnia quae
ad aliquid sunt reciprocantur, velut servus, Domini servus, vicissimque.
Dominus, servi Dominus esse dicitur. This word Lord does intimate to us, that
there is a mutual consequence, or a kind of dependence between God and us.
Sieur non potest esse Servus, says S. Aug. de Trin. l. 5. c. 16. Vid. Damasc.
Orth. Fid. l. 1. ^. 12. and Zanch. vbi sup. c. 10. p. 28. col. ^
Austen, qui non habet Dominum, sic nec Dominus qui non habet Servum. As he
cannot be a Servant that has not a Lord: so cannot he be a Lord that has not
a servant. Howbeit here we are to note that our relation unto God is real,
Gods relation unto us is duntaxat rationis, nominall only, and intentionall.
Not that there is any change at all in him, the change is in our selves. Before
the mountains says Psalm. 90.2.
David, were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were made thou art
God from everlasting and world without end. He that would see more in this
case, I refer him to Za^chius in his first book De Natura Dei, the
thirteenth chapter; where handling this question, seeing God is eternal and
immutable and nothing chances to him a new: whether there be any names,
which so belong unto him in time, that they could not belong unto him from
everlasting: his answer is, That those names which betoken a relation between
God and his Creatures as the name of Creator, of Lord, of Savior, of Redeemer,
and the like, are so spoken of God in time and not from everlasting, that
notwithstanding no new thing happens unto him, neither is there hereby in him
any change at all. And thus much of these two notions which you see content
not Moses concerning the knowledge of God, namely that he is the God of
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, and that he styles him here the Lord, so that
he is ignorant of him still, wherefore now of that which is added, I am, that I
am: And, I am has sent me unto you. Wherein first I shall consider the addition
it self, secondly the meaning of the words.

Concerning the addition it is more then usually has been granted in like
cases. When Manoah in the book of Judges asked the Angel of his name, the
Angel said unto him, why ask thou thus after my name which is secret?
Judge. 13.18. So likewise Jacob when he had wrestled with the Angel in Genesis,
saying, Tell me I pray thee thy name: the Angels reply was, wherefore now do
thou ask my name? And it follows there in that place, And he blessed him
there, Genesis 32.29. Hic Angelus says Calv. Inst. l. 1. c. 13.. 10.
Calvin speaking of the former, Iehova fuit. Et iste Iehova fuit, speaking of
the latter, and of this latter he there prooveth it partly by Hosea, Hosea,
12.5, partly by the words of Jacob Genesis 32.30. So Agur in Salomons Prove. 30.4.
Proverbs, what is his Ex quo effectum est, vt nec nomen Dei proprium possit
edici, quoniam non possit nec concipi Idenim nomine continuetur quicquid etiam
ex naturae su^ condition c^mprehenditur No men enim significantia est eius rei
quae comprehendi po^uit ex nomine. At qua^ do id de quo agitur tale est, vti
condign nec ipsis intellectibus colligatur: quomodo appellationis digne
vocabulo pronunciabitur. Tertul. de Trin. p. 496.
name, and what is his sons name if thou can tell? If thus then it were
said to Jacob, thus to Manoah, as also by Agur long after, how much more might
the Lord in this place have thus spoaken unto Moses, especially the Lord in
some sort having declared himself unto him before. Nor was Moses now at this
time a Puny in Religion. They are special great testimonies which the Apostle
to the Hebrews gives him. By faith, says the Heb. 11.24.
Apostle, Moses when he was come to age refused to be called the son of
Pharaos daughter, and chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God,
then to enjoy the pleasures of sins for a season, esteeming the rebuke of
Christ greater riches the^ the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the
recompense of the reward. By faith he forsook Egypt, and feared not the
fiercenes of the king: for he endured as he that saw him which is invisible.
Now if Moses did all this, and all before this time, as no doubt indeed but he
did it all, how might the Lord have here answered him as did our Savior S.
Phillip, Ioh. 14.9. I have been so long time with you, and have thou not known
me Phillip? Right so in this place: I have bin so long known unto thee, and
do thou now Moses ask my name? Thou when thou were come to age did refuse
to be called the son of Pharoes daughter: thou did choose rather to suffer
adversity with the people of thy God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sins for
a season: thou did esteem the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the
treasures of Egypt: thou had respect unto the recompense of the reward: thou
did forsake Egypt, and did not fear the fierceness of the king: thou
did endure as he that saw me which am invisible, and do thou not yet know
my name? But it pleased the Lord of heaven not to deal with Moses in this
sort. He rather satisfies his desire, and adds unto that which he had said
of himself before, and so I come unto the meaning of that which he now says,
I am that I am, I am has sent me unto you. And God answered Moses, I am that I
am. Also he said, Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, I am has
sent me unto you.

This other name he gives himself is (as I told you) in the Hebrew Eheie, and
M Bunny his Head Corner stone^ 1. c. 6.. 3. p. 115.
signifies two points, first as ever being of himself: secondly being he of
whom all others have their being. I know there Zanch. de Nature. Dei. l. 1. c 14
are that suppose there is signified hereby his two essential Attributes,
Eternity and Immutability, but forasmuch as that opinion concerns the future
tence only, and we here read it in the present, I will at this time entreat of
these points only of being of himself and being unto others: of those his
other Attributes God willing at some other time.

First then for his ever being of himself, or his own absolute manner of
being, it is that which the Scriptures declare unto us, I, the very Heathen.
The Scriptures they tell us that before the mountains were brought forth, or
ever the earth and the world were made, he was God from everlasting, and world
without end: so David as I told you before, Psalm 19.2, or rather Moses who
has his name in the forefront of that Psalm. And again in an other Psalm.
102.24
place: O my God, take me not away in the midst of mine age: as for thy years
they endure throughout all generations. Thou Lord in the beginning have laid
the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the work of thy hands. They
shall perish but then shall endure: they all shall wax old as does a garmen^;
and as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: but thou
art the same; and thy years shall not fail. So likewise the Prophet Esaias, or
rather the Lord in the Prophet: Before me there was no God formed, neither
shall there be after me. I, even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no
Savior, yea before the day was, I am, Esaias. 43.13. This the Heathen perceived
also, and therefore Vid. Zanch. de Not. Dei seu de Divin. Attr. l. 1. c. 13. p
38. col 2
Plato he calls him (...), that which is: and in his Timaeus reprehendeth those
which attribute unto him or the future, or the preterperfect tense, forasmuch
as neither of those tenses did seem to agree with him, but the present tense
only. Hence it was that upon the doors of the Temple of Delphos the
inscription was in capital letters E I: veram, says ^^ut. Moral. Part. 1. de
E I apud Delphos.
Plutarch, certam, solamque soli convenientem ei appellationem qua esse dicitur
tribuentes; giving him thereby a true, a certain, and an only appellation of
being and existing alone.

Now that of him also all other things have their being what more pregnant
proof, then the words of David in another of his Psalms: The eyes of all, Ps.
145.15.
says he, wait upon thee O Lord, and thou give them their meat in due
season. Thou openest thy hand, and fillest all things living with
plenteousnesse, And again in another Psalm. 104.24
place, O Lord, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them al,
the earth is full of thy riches: so is the great and wide sea also, wherein are
things creeping innumerable both small and great beasts. There go^ the ships,
and there is that Leviathan, who^ thou have made to take his pastime therein.
These wait all upon thee, that thou may give them meat in due season. When
thou give it them they gather it, and when thou openest thy hand they are
filled with good. When thou hidest thy face they are troubled: when thou take
away their breath they die, and are turned again to their dust. So the Apostle
to the Romans 11.36.
Romans, Of him, and through him, and for him are all things; to him be glory
for ever, Amen. Go we unto particulars, and in the eight and thirtieth Chapter
of the Book of Job; does not the Lord instance in a many of them as in the
Earth, the Sea, the Light, and Darkness, Snow, Hayle, Rain, Dew, Ice and so
forth? And in the nine and thirtith Chapter of the same Book does he not
instance likewise in the wild Goats, the Hynds, the wild Ass, the Unicorn,
the Peacock, the Ostridge, the Horse, the Hawke, the Eagle? And in the fortith
Chapter in Behemoth, that is the Elephant as some suppose and in the one and
fortith Chapter in Leviathan that is the Crocodile as Beza in Ioh. Praef. in c.
38. p 231.
Beza is of opinion? If all this content us not for there is not in all these
Chapters any mention at all of Man, go we then to the Acts of the Apostles and
shall we not there find that in him we live and move, and have our being,
Act. 17.28? Go we from thence to the Book of the Psalms, and shall we not
there find the very manner of making and framing us? I will give thanks unto
thee, says Psalm. 139.11.
David, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: mavelous are thy works,
and that my soul knows right well. My bones are not hid from thee: though I
be made secretly, and fashioned beneath in the earth. Thine eyes did see my
substance yet being imperfect, and in thy book were all my members written,
which day by day were fashioned: when as yet there was none of them. My bones,
says he, are not hid from thee: though I be made secretly, and fashioned: it
is in the original Ruccamthi, (...)
accordingly whereunto it is in our new Translation, when I was made in secret
and curiously wrought, of Racam, he wrought with a needle, as if every of us
had been wrought in tissue, or in imbrodered work by a cunning and expert
hand. Return we at length to the Book of Job again, and there shall we find
it delivered to us in country terms: Have thou not powered me out as milk,
says Job. 10.10.
Job, and turned me to curds like cheese? What then? and are country folk
only made after this sort, Gentle and Noblemen after that other? those like
milk, these like tissue? nay those and these both like to milk and like to
tissue, God, says the Apostle that made the world, and all things that are
therein has made of one blood all mankind, Act. 17.26. We see then the name
here given unto God, we see it given unto him by himself, we see the meaning
of it too, namely how it signifies an absolute being of himself, and a cause
of being unto others. I will end this point with that of Damas. Orth. Fid. l. 1.
c. 12.
Damascen: borrowed it seems from Naz Orat. 38. p. 615.
Gregory Naziazen Videtur principalius omnium de Deo dictorum nominum esse, Qui
est. Totum enim in se ipso comprehendens habet ipsum ESSE: veluti quoddam
pelagus substantiae infinitum and interminum. It seems this name, I am, is
the chiefest and most principal of all the names of God. For this very word
TO BE has in it all whatsoever is comprehended in it self as it were a
substantial Ocean infinite and boundles.

Having thus then seen the principal name of God (...), as Damascen speaks,
we might now hope out of the premises to go a great way farther, and to make a
definition of God, and so to know his very essence: but all Divines will tell
us that that is impossible. He had need says M. Cartwr. Catech. p. 3.
one, to have the art and Logic of God himself, that should give a perfect
definition of him. And, Definiri non potest, says Fayi Enchirid These. 1.. 8 p.
1.
another, cum sit superior omni genere and differe^tia: It is impossible he
should be defined, since he cannot be comprised under those two terms of
Logic, Genus and Differentia. And, As fish, says (...) Naz. orat. 34. p. 538.
Nazianzen, that swim in the water, they see nor Sun, nor stars, but only a
shadow of them: right so do men behold but as it were a shadow of God. Dum
sumus in hoc corpore, says the 2. Cor. 5.6.
Apostle, peregrinamur a Domino: whilst we are in this body, we are strangers
from God: now Strangers in another country are ignorant for the most part of
what is there done. Hence that of Cleophas to our Luke 24.18.
Savior; Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and have not known the
things which are come to pass therein in these days? And indeed as S. Aug. de
Trin. l. 1. c. 1.
Austen tells us, Quo intellectu Deum capit homo, qui ipsum intellectum suum quo
eum vult capere nondum capit: with what understanding can Man possibly conceive
God, who cannot conceive his own understanding. Howbeit, for there is to be had
some knowledge of God, and the Lord himself says in the Prophet Ier. 9.24.
Jeremy, Let him that glories glory in this, that he understands and knows
me, let us endeavor to define him, yet so as we always have that of Arnob. in
Ps. 91.
Arnobius before our eyes, De Deo loqui etiam vera, quia periculosissimum est,
timeamus: Let us fear to speak even that which is true concerning God, for
that there is danger even in that.

GOD then is an Perkins on the Creed. p 27.
ESSENCE SPIRITVALL, SIMPLE, JNFINITE, MOST HOLY. I say an ESSENCE to show (as
I showed you before) that he is a thing absolutely subsisting in himself and
by himself, not receiving his being from any other. I say SPIRITVALL to show
that he is not any kind of Body, nor has the parts of a Body and therefore
the Scripture when it assighneth such parts unto him, as the eye, the hand, the
feet, and so forth, The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, Psa.
33.18. The Lord vpholdeth a good man with his hand, Psalm. 37.24. I will
glorify the place of my feet, Esaias 60.13. It is but for our capacities sake
who otherwise are not able to conceive his watchfulness over us meant by his
Eye: his providence meant by his hand: his readiness to help us meant by his
feet. It follows that he is SIMPLE, not simple as we take Simple in our
usual phrase of speech when as we say a simple man, a simple body, and so
forth, but Simple that is not Vid. Zanch. de Not. Dei, seu de Divin. Attrib. 2.
c. 2. p. 78. col. 1.
compounded of several parts, nor of matter nor of form, nor of subject, nor
of accident, as every other creature is. Again, Angels and the Souls of men
they I grant are simple to, and they are, as God is, simple essences, but it is
but in respect, as namely of the Elements. Even so the Elements are simple to,
but only in respect of those things which are compounded of them: the
simplicity that is in God that is most absolutely simple. It follows that he
is INFINITE. Vid. Zanc. Ib. p. 77. Col. 1.
Infinite in time, infinite in place. Infinite in time, for he is without
beginning, and without end: Infinite in place, for he is every where, and in
every place. The Prophet David speaking of the former of them, O my God Ps.
102.24. vid. Ps. 90.2.
says he, take me not away in the midst of mine age, as for thy years they
endure throughout al generations. Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the
foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the work of thy hands. They shall
perish but thou shall endure, they all shall wax old as does a garment; and as
a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: but thou art the
same and thy years shall not fail. And speaking of the other, whither Psalm.
139.6.
says he, shall I go from thy spirit: or whither shall I go from thy
presence? If I clime up into heaven thou art there: if I go down to hell, thou
art there also. If I take the wings of the morning, and remain in the
uttermost parts of the Sea: eue^ there also shall thy hand lead me, and thy
right hand shall hold me. So the Lord himself in the Prophet Ier. 23.24.
Jeremy, Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him says
the Lord? Do not I fill heaven and earth? I will conclude this point with that
which a late Writer has, concerning this word Infinite, Try it when y^u will
Treatise of the Nature of God. p. 80.
says he, and Infinitenes you shall find to be the right Philosophers stone
which turns all metals into gold, and that one dram of it being put not only
to an Angel, or to an wh^l^ Element, but eve^ to the least fly in the world,
or the least moat in the sun is of force to make it true and very God. Howbeit
it can in truth Beloved no more be added or put unto the hugest Elephant that
is, then it can be unto a fly: no more to the world it self, then but to a
moate in the Sun. It is peculiar and proper to God alone, he only is infinite,
God is an infinite essence. It follows in the last place that he is MOST
HOLY, and hence it is that the Prophet Esaias does treble this word Holy as Esaias,
6.1. I saw the Lord says he sitting upon an high throane, and lifted up. The
Seraphims stood upon it. And one cried to an other and said, Holy, holy, holy
is the Lord of hoasts: the whole world is full of his glory. A passage that as
S. Ambrose did borrow of that Prophet, so we in our Church Service have
borrowed of S. Ambrose. You know what we daily say throughout the year: To
thee all Angels cry alowd, the heavens and all the powers therein. To thee
Cherubim and Seraphim continually do cry, Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath,
Heaven and Earth are full of the majesty of thy glory. And hence it seems
has come the custom of singing or saying Psalms, and other parts of common
prayer, wherein the People and Minister answer one an other by course. But for
this I shall refer you to those most excellent lines of Mr Hooker in his fifth
book of Ecclesiastical Polity, the nine and thirtieth section. I return
unto my purpose.

God is Most Holy two manner of ways. First for that he is Most Holy in
himself: secondly for he makes others Holy, and causes them so to be. Of
the former Moses speaks, Exodus 15.11. Who is like unto thee O Lord among the
Gods? who is like thee so glorious in holiness? Of the latter the Lord
himself, Exodus 31.13. Keep ye my Sabbaths for it is a sign between me and
you in your generations, that you may know that I the Lord do sanctify you:
that is, do make you Holy.

I will conclude all this concerning the definition with that of Cyp^siue Russ.
in Symb. Apo^. p. 358.
S. Cyprian, or rather Ruffinus upon the Creed, Deu^ cum audis says he
substantiam intellige, sine initio, sine fine, simplicem sine vlla admixtione,
invisibile^, incorporea^, ineffabilem, inaestimabilem, in qua nihil adiunctum,
nihil creatu^ sit. Sine authore est enim ille qui author est omniu^. When as
thou hear God named unto thee understand thou a substance without beginning,
without end, simple without commixtio^, invisible, without body, unspeakable,
inestimable, whereunto nothing is added, wherein nothing is created. For he
has no Creator who is himself the Creator of al.

And thus have you heard in some so^t of the Essence of God, good God how f^r
from that which he is in very d^ed. You have heard his definition. I know
others define him otherwise. God says M, Cartw. Catec. p. 3.
one, is a spirit, which has his being of himself. He is the center says an
Fa^i Enchir. These. 1.. 15. p. 2.
other, from which all things issue, and whereunto they return again. Quid
est Deus says a Senec. Not. Quaest. l. 1. Praes.
third? Quod vides totum et quod no^ vides totum: God is all we see, and all we
see not. But when all that can be possibly, has been spoken, that of Aug. de
Temp. Ser. 190. So Tertul. Quid de eo condign dicas, qui est sublimitate omni
sublimior, and altitudine omni altior, and profu^do omni profundior, and omni
luce lucidior, and omni claritate clarior, omni splendore splendidior, omni
rohore robustior, omni virtute viritior, omni pulchritudine pulchrior, veritate
omni verior, and fortitudine omni fortier, and maiestate omni mayor, and omni
potentia potentior, and omnibus divitiis ditior, omni prudentis prudentior, and
omni benignitate benignior, omni bonitate melior, omni iustitia iustior, omni
clementia clementior. Minora enim sint necesse est omnium genera virtutum, co
ipso qui virtutum omniam and Deus and parens est. Tertul. de Trin. page 494.
S. Austen may well serve as a conclusion: Certe hoc est Deus quod and cum
dicitur non potest dici, cum aestimatur non potest aestimari, cu^ comparatur
non potest comparari, cum definitur ipsa definitione crescit: quia coelum manu
sua cooperit, pugno omnem mu^di ambitum claudit, quem totum omnia nesciunt and
metuendo sciunt. Doubtless God is that entity which when it is spoken of,
cannot be spoken: when it is esteemed, cannot sufficiently be esteemed of, when
it is compared, is beyond comparison, when it is defined, our grows the limits
of a definition, for that he covers heaven it self with his hand,
compriseth the compass of the whole world within his fist, whom al things
know not, and yet by fearing him know him to.

And thus much of Gods Essence namely what God is, how the same God is in
Persons inseparably, and without confusion, distinguished into the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons and one God, if the same God so will at my
next return to this place. In the meame time HE s^ bless us, and the seed
that has been sown, etc.

THE TRINITY. Lecture 3. March. 18. 1612.

IF much against your expectation, and my own intent and purpose too, I have
failed you now these many weeks in performance of this exercise, imagine the
cause to be not so much in my self (who cannot yet excuse my self wholly and
altogether) as in diverse and sundry lets occasioned by others. Among the rest
suppose one to be (and indeed so it was) the death of that great MECAENAS, Sr
THONAS BODLEY, who died Ian. 28. 1612. Stylo Eccles. Angl.
then whom we of this place could hardly have had a greater loss. If ever
there might be just cause of silence to these Exercises, what greater cause
then that, when he that gave new tongues both to Divines, and Physicians, and
Lawyers, and the Arts, himself lies speechless now, and bereaved of his life.
I may use concerning him the words of Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 33. p. 178.
S. Austen, Discedente anima qui ambulabat iacet, loquebatur tacet, oculi lucem
non capiunt, aures nulla voce patescunt, omnia membrorum officia conquieverunt,
non est qui moverat gressus ad ambulandum, manus ad operandum, sensus ad
percipiendum. And again a little after: Discessit qui non videtur, remansit
quod cum dolor videatur. The soul, says S. Austen, departing from him, he
that walked lies along, he that talked holds his tongue; his eyes receive no
light, his ears no sound, all his members fail in performance of their
several duties. He that moved his feet to walk, his hands, those blessed
hands of his continually to work, his senses to perceive, is not. He which is
not seen is gone, that remains behind which may be seen indeed, but with
grief and sorrow. What then, and shall we still grieve? shall we lament and
sorrow still? Nay let us harken rather to the same S. Austen, who upon like
occasion of loss of friends, Lacrymas istas, Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 32. page
277.
says he, cito reprimat fidei gaudium qua credimus Fideles quando moriuntur
paululum a nobis abire, and ad meliora transire. Let the joy of faith repress
these tears of ours, by which faith we believe that the Faithful when they die
step from us apart indeed, but to be possessed of a better place. That which
every day we say as a parcel of our Grace, it being a passage of one of the
Ps. 111.6. vulg.
Psalms, let us call to mind this day. In memoria aeterna erit iustus. Ab
auditu malo non timebit. Dispersit, dedit pauperibus. Iustitia eius manet in
saeculum saeculi. The Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. He
will not be afraid for any evil tidings. He has dispersed abroad and given to
the poor. His righteousness remains for ever. Now what says Aug. de Verb.
Apost. Ser. 33. page 278.
S. Austen is this Auditus malus, these evil tidings here spoken of, Ab auditu
malo non timebit; but when it is said to them on the left hand, Ito in ignem
aeternum, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire? Ab hoc auditu malo
iustus non timebit; Erit enim ad dexteram, and so forth. The Righteous shall
not be afraid of those ill tidings: for he shall be on the right hand among
them to whom it is said. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the
kingdom prepared for you. And thus shall it be (I nothing doubt) with that
Right Honorable KNIGHT I now speak of, of whom to have said nothing at all had
been liable to a kind of Ingratitude, to say more then has been spoken
might prove prejudicial to that time, which is allotted me to speak of God to
whom himself is now gone. To come at length then to the matter in hand.

It was a worthy saying of Bernard de Consid l. 5. p. 260. Col. 4.
S. Bernard, Solus est Deus qui frustra nunqua^ quaeri potest, nec cum quidem
inveniri no^ potest. God it is, and God alone, that can never be sought in
vain, no not then when it is impossible to find him out. Justin Martyr gives
the reason; Quamvis natura divina, Justin Mart. de Trinit. graece p. 177. lat.
p. 198
says he, sit incomprehensibilis, non debemus tamen in totu^ ab ea quaerenda
desistere, and per ignaviam vitam consumere: sed pro sua quisque portione
acceptae a Domino scientiae strenue rem examinet, certus non quidem exact se
percepturum, profecturum tamen aliquantum per huiusmodi contemplationem
accedendo ad illum propius. Howsoever, says he, the divine nature be
incomprehe^sible, yet ought we not wholly to desist from the searching out of
the same, consuming our lives in sloth and idleness. Wherefore let every one,
according to that portion of knowledge he has obtained of the Lord,
industriously endeavor to seek it, assuring himself he shall not exactly and
perfectly find it out, howbeit that he shall profit notwithstanding thereby,
forasmuch as by this means he shall more nearly approach unto him. Experience
whereof we had at my last supplying this place, when not finding out what God
was, we heard notwithstanding of his Name, we heard also of his Nature. The
Name was such as he gave himself. Concerning his Nature we defined him to he,
An essence spiritual, Simple, Infinite, Most Holy, and every of these terms
were explicated unto you. It remains now to be declared concerning the
farther knowledge of this his Essence, how the same God is in Persons
inseparably, and without confusion distinguished into the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, whereof God willing at this time. And to this purpose have I made
choice of a passage of one of the Epistles of S. John, namely the seventh
verse of the fifth Chapter of of the first of his Epistles. The words are
these; There are three which bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. And there are three which bear record
in the earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood, and these three agree
in one. For the better considering of which words let us first observe the
scope of the Apostle in this place: secondly the words themselves and
consequence thereupon.

The Zanch. de Trib. Eloh. l. 1. c. 1. p. 4. Col. 2. vid. Ib. p. 3. Col. 2.
scope of the Apostle in this place was to prove, that JESUS was the true
Son of God, and the same Christ, and Messiah of whom the Prophets foretold
long before, and therefore he upon whom alone our faith and the faith of every
one ought to rely. For whereas others did deny that Jesus was that Christ, our
Apostle here in this place stiffly maintains that he is, to the end the
Faithful might know that they had eternal life, and that they might believe
in his name, as it is in the thirteenth verse of this Chapter. All which he
proves by two manner of witnesses, six in all, namely by witnesses in Heaven,
and witnesses in Earth. The witnesses in heaven are three, the Father, the
Son, and Holy Ghost: the witnesses in Earth are three too, the Spirit, the
Water, and the Blood.

First concerning the Fathers witness that appeared at two several times,
unto both which it is likely the Apostle alludes in this place. The first was
at our Saviors Baptism when as the Father spoke these words, Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: The second at his
Transfiguration, when as the same words were spoken again, but with this
addition, (...), hear him. Mat. 17.5.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: hear him. Where by the
way we are to note why the Father in both places should say of this his Son
IN WHOM I AM WELL PLEASED. We may say in this case as Pharaoh's chief Butler
did in another, Genesis 41.9.
I call to mind my faults this day. Right so these words may put us in mind of
the iniquity of Mankind that has bin in former ages. You shall read in the Book
of n Genesis that it was so great, that it repented the Lord that he had made
Man in the earth, and how he was sorry in his heart; you shall read in the
Book of Genesis 6.6.
Psalms how the wrath of the Lord was so far kindled against his People;
Psalm. 106.39.
as that he abhorred his own inheritance: but these words here in this place
are like the Olive leaf that Noah's Dove had plucked. Genesis 8.11.
Noah knew by that, that the waters were abated from of the earth; and we by
these that the wrath of God is abated toward us and all Mankind. God 2. Cor.
5.19.
says S. Paul, was in Christ, and reconciled the world to himself, not
imputing their sins unto them. And thus much of the first witness.

The second witness was the Son, and his witness appeared throughout the
whole course of his life, partly in preaching, partly in working miracles,
confirming his preaching thereby.

I, but some will say, if the Son bear witness of himself what kind of
witness is that? This was objected to him by the Pharisees: Ioh 8.13.
Thou bear record of thy self, thy record is not true. It is as if they had
said, Thou bear record of thy self, therefore thy record is not true. I,
our Savior himself of himself, Ioh. 5.31.
If I should bear witness of my self, my witness were not true. True it is,
he so faith, but he speaks there in that place according to the opinion of
his Adversaries, as if he should have said: Musc. in hunc locum.
You suppose I seek not the glory of God, but my own, and to be a boaster of
my own praises rather then a publisher of the truth of God; and so of my self
to speak thus, and thus, without the sufficient testimony of others besides.
Indeed were I such an one, you might worthyly suspect me, and all that I have
ever spoken: but you are deceived, it is not so, there is one that testifies
of me, and so forth. So that our Savior as I said speaks there according to
the opinion of his Adversaries, for otherwise he says of himself, and said it
to the Pharisees that did object it against him: Ioh. 8.14.
Though I bear record of my self, yet my record is true; for I know whence I
came, and whither I go. And again, a little Verse. 18.
after, I am one that bear witness of my self. One, because such an one, and
such an one; for the law of truth was in his mouth, and there was no iniquity
sound in his lips, Malach. 2.6. I proceed.

The Holy Ghost is the third witness, and his witness appeared both before
his death, and after. Before his death at his Baptism, when as he descended on
him like a Mat. 3.16.
Dove: after his death, and resurrection, and ascension into heaven, when as he
descended on his Apostles in the shape of fiery Act. 2.3.
tongues. Whereupon S. Gregory has this good note, In columba super Christum,
Greg in Evang Hom. 30. fol. 120. col 3.
says he, apparere debu^t Spiritus qui non veniebat vt peccata iam per zelum
percuteret, sed adhuc per mansuetudinem toleraret: at contra super Discipulos
in igne debuit Spiritus Sanctus demonstrari, vt hi qui erant simpliciter
homines atque ideo peccatores, eos contra semetipsos spiritalis feruor
accenderet, and peccata quibus Deus per mansuetudinem parceret, ipsi in se per
poenitentiam punirent. It was convenient that the holy Spirit should appear
upon Christ in the likeness of a Dove, forasmuch as he came not then at that
time to punish sin through zeal, but through meekenes to bear with it: but
upon the Apostles it was co^venient that co^trarywise the Holy Ghost should be
showed upon the Disciples in Fire, that they which were simply men and
consequently sinners, a spiritual heat should inflame themselves against
themselves, and those sins which God forgave through the bounty of his mercy,
they through repentance should punish in themselves. S. Austen has an other
not much unlike: Audivimus columbam super Dominum, Aug. in Evan. Joan. Tract.
6, p. 34.
says he, has linguas divisas super discipulos congregatos: ibi simplicitas,
hic feruor ostenditur. And again a little after, Ne spiritus sanctificati
dolum habeant, in columba demonstratum est: ne simplicitas frigida remaneat, in
igne demonstratum est. We have heard, faith S. Austen, that a Dove descended
upon our Lord, and cloven Tongues upon the Disciples gathered together: in the
Dove simplicity, in the Tongues fervency and vehemence are understood. The one
shows that they that are sanctified by the Spirit should be without guile:
the other that want of guile should not have a numbnes of spirit in it. But
thus much of the heavenly witnesses; come we now to the terrestrial, the
witnesses in earth.

The witnesses in earth are three too, the Spirit, and Water, and Blood; which
three what they are, several men are of several minds. An opinion there is
that is indeed very probable, how by Spirit is understood The knowledge of God
the Father, by the testimony of the holy Ghost, whereof the Apostle to the
Romans, Romans 8.6, as also to the Corinthia^s, 1. Cor. 1.30. Secondly that by
Water is understood our Regeneration, the types whereof in the Law were the
legal purifyings, the accomplishment thereof in the Gospel the Sacrament of
Baptism. Thirdly, that by Blood is understood the Righteousness of Christ,
which by his blood is purchased for us, consisting in two points, First in the
remission of our sins, Secondly in the imputation of Christ his Righteousness.
Howbeit I for my part shall rather commend unto you the opinion of Zanch. de
trib. Eloh. l. 1. ^. 1. p. 4. col. 2.
Zanchius for this point, namely that these three witnesses in earth are as it
were three kinds of Prophesies foreshewed and fulfilled in our Savior Christ
Jesus, as first that he was a Prophet, secondly a Priest, thirdly a Prince. His
teaching us as a Prophet the Scriptures very often compare unto Water, as Deuteronomy.
32.6. Esaias, 11.9. Ezech. 47.1. Job. 29.22. Amos 7.16. His coming as a Priest
may be compared unto Blood by reason of his death and passion. So Esaias
prophesied of him, Esaias, 53.5. and David when as he said, They pierced my hands
and my feet, Psalm. 22.17. Lastly his coming as a King with power and Majesty
vanquishing his enemies and triumphing over them, that is intimated by the
Spirit. Hence that of the Apostle in his epistle to Timothy, 1. Tim. 3.16.
Iustificatus est in spiritu, Justified in the Spirit, that is, by his power
and virtue, whereby he wrought miracles, whereby he rose again, whereby he
vanquished his enemies, and overcame the world. So S. Peter, 1. Pet. 3.18.
Christ, says he, was quickened in the spirit, by the which also he went and
preached unto the spirits that are in prison. So our Savior of himself, if I,
Mal. 12.28.
says he, cast out Devils by the spirit of God, then is the kingdom of God
come unto you. So that the Apostles words in this my Text may thus be resolved:
He who first came unto us as a Prophet by Water, that is, the doctrine of the
Gospel, and spreads the same over the world: secondly he that came as a high
Priest by Blood, who came indeed by his own blood, for he dyed such a death as
was foretold he should die, and that for other folks sins: thirdly he who
came as a Prince by his Spirit, that is, by his power in working miracles, in
rising again from the dead, and in vanquishing of his Enemies, he no doubt is
the true Messiah: but so came our Savior Christ; and therefore was Christ the
true Messiah. And this was the Apostles scope. Virg. Aeneid. l. 1.
Huc cursus fuit. Hither it was he meant to sail, and here indeed he did
arrive with as prosperous a gale of wind as heart could wish. And thus much of
the scope of the Apostle in this place, come we now to the words themselves,
and consequence thereupon. There are three which bear record in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. And there are
three which bear record in the earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the
Blood, and these three agree in one.

First concerning the FATHER, we are first of all to consider that the name
Father in holy Scripture is M Perk. on the Creed p. 44.
ascribed either to God indefinitely, and so by consequence to all the Persons
in Trinity: or particularly to the first Person alone. As it is ascribed to God
indefinitely, and by consequence to all three Persons, God is a Father properly
and principally; earthly Parents are but images and resembla^ces of him, and
therefore our Savior Christ, Mat. 23.9.
Call no man your Father upon the earth: for there is but one, your Father
which is in heaven. Now God is termed a Father both in respect of Nature, as
also of Grace. Of Nature because he created, and governs all things,
whereupon he is called, Heb. 12.9.
The Father of spirits, and Adam is called, Luke 3 38.
The son of God. Of Grace, for that we are all of us regenerate by him and
accepted to be his Sons by adoption through the merits of our Savior Christ.
And in this respect the second Person as well as the first, is called a Esaias. 9.6.
Father, and said to have Esaias. 8.18. and 53.10.
Seed, or Children. But when the name Father is particularly given to the first
Person alone, it is because he is a Father by nature to the second Person,
begetting him of his own substance before al worlds, Ex vtero ante Luciferum
genui te, as it is in the Ps. 109.21
Vulgar, though it be in our english Vulgar: The dew of thy birth is of the
womb of the morning, or as it is translated in our Ps. 110.3.
New, from the womb of the morning, thou have the dew of thy youth. Aug. in
Ps. 106
Quid est ex vtero, says S. Austen? what is meant here by the womb? Ex
secreto, ex occulto: de meipso, de substantia mea, hoc est ex vtero. In secret,
in hidden wise: of my self, of my substance, that is from the womb, Esaias.
53.8.
quia generationem eius quis enarrabit? For who shall declare his generation?

Secondly concerning the WORD, we are first of all to note who it is, is meant
thereby: secondly why and wherefore he is so called, who is indeed, thereby
meant. By the Word is meant in this place not the Scripture as Illa
interpretatio nomine Patris intelligi Deum, nomine (...) Doctrinam, seu
Scripturam sanctam: Spiritus autem, Sancti nomine, ipsa Christi miracula, etc:
coacta est nec cum Apostoli verbus coharet. Zanch, de Trib. Eloh. l. 8. c. 4 p.
306. C. 1.
some would have it, but our Savior Christ Jesus, the second Person in
Trinity, the only begotten Son of God, who as he is styled by S. John according
to his humane Nature by the name of the Lamb, as Ioh. 1.29. and again, Ioh.
1.36, Behold the lamb of God, and oftentimes in the Revelation; so according
to his divine Nature is he styled by the name of the Word, as in the first
words of his Gospel no less then three times in one period: In the beginning
was the word, and the word was with God^, and that word was God. Now our
Savior Christ is called the WORD Barth. Traheron. upon John c. 1. B. 8. b.
partly for he is the image of his Father, representing all that is in the
Father; partly for he flows and issues from him; partly for he is conceptus,
the conception (if I may so speak) of the mind of God; partly for he is Gods
virtue and power whereby God utters himself; partly for he is Gods wisdom
whereby he once made and now governs the whole world and all therein.
Gregory Greg. Naz. Orat. 36 p 590 Vid. Zanch. de Trib. Eloh. l. 6. c. 2. p. 240.
Nazianzen alleges three similitudes between the Son of God, and the Speech
of man in regard whereof our Savior Christ may be called the WORD. His words
be these: Verbum ita se habet ad Patrem, vt sermo ad mentem, non modo propter
generationem passionis omnis expertem, verum etiam propter coniunctionem ipsius
cum Patre, vimque enunciatricem. So is the word unto the Father as speech is to
the mind, not only in regard of generation which is without all passion
whatsoever, but in regard also of his conjunction which he has with the
Father, and power pronunciatiue. As if he had said: Three similitudes there are
between the Son of God and the Speech of man in regard whereof he may be
called by the name of the WORD. First for that our Speech which is the
conception of our mind, is begotten by the mind and that without any passion
or of that which does beget, or of that which is begotten; so is the Son, of
God the Father. Secondly as our conception remains Quodcunque cogitaveris,
sermo est; quodcunque senseris, ratio est: loquaris illud in animo, necesse
est: and dum loqueris coniocutorem pateris sermone^ in quo inest haec ipsa
ratio, qua cu^ co cogitans loquaris, per que^ loquens cogitas etc: Tertull.
advers. Praxeam. p. 317.
always in the mind, and with the mind, of which it is begotten, insomuch
that though it be sent forth or pronounced, yet never cease to be with the
same; so is the Son with the Father, and indeed inseparable from him. Thirdly
as by our Speech pronounced, the counsel of our mind, as also our will is
manifested to the world, so is the Father, and the Father's will declared by the
Son. So that we are not here in this place to take the WORD for sonus
percussionis, as speaks Tertull. de Trin. p. 515.
Tertullia^, aut tonus coactae de visceribus vocis, for a word sounded or
pronounced which vanishes in an instant: our Savior Christ is no such Word,
but he is an essential Person subsisting and abiding in God. And here it may be
thought as Barth. Traheron upon S. John c. 1. p. 8. 8 a.
some are of opinion that the Apostle here in this place has reference to the
first Chapter of Genesis, where it is not said simply by Moses that God made
all of naught, but that he spoke, and so made all things; that is, he made all
things by his word. So the Prophet David, Ps. 148.4.
He spoke the word, and they were made, he commanded and they were created,
speaking of the Heavens: and in another place of the Earth, He spoke, says he,
Ps. 33.9.
and it was done, he commanded and it stoodfast.

Thirdly concerning the HOLY GHOST it is as much as if the Apostle had here
said, the Holy Spirit, and then seeing the Father, and the Son are Holy both,
and both are Spirits, a question might be asked how this title Holy Spirit
comes so peculiarly to be appropriated only to the third Person. The answer is
hereunto that the Father, and the Son are in respect of their M. Perkins on
the Creed p 565
natures as well to be termed Holy indeed, as is the third Person in Trinity,
the Holy Ghost. Howbeit the third Person is called Holy, for that besides the
holiness of nature, his office is to sanctify the Church of God, to whom it
agrees in special manner, and after a peculiar sort so to do. For where the
Father sanctifies by the Son, and by the Holy Ghost; the Son from the
Father, and by the Holy Ghost; the Holy Ghost sanctifies from the Father and
from the Son by himself immediately, and in this respect is the third Person
termed Holy. Again, he is termed a Spirit not only because his nature is
spiritual (for in that respect both the Father, and the Son are Spirits too)
but because he is spired or breathed from the Father and the Son in that he
proceeds from both, howsoever the Vid Zanch. de trib Eloh. l. 7. c. 8
Greeks at this day mainly err in this point. But thus much of the words, now
of the consequence thereupon.

The Consequence thereupon is this, that howsoever there is but One God as
appears by these words, And these three are one: yet is there a Trinity in
this One in regard they are Three to, according to the self same words. For if
it may be said, and said truly, These three are one, then may it be as truly
said, and so it is of all true Christians, This one is three. It remains then
to be declared how they are one, how three, according to that of Athanasius in
our Church Liturgy, The Catholic faith is this, that we worship one God in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity: neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing
the substance.

That God is One we have many places in holy Scripture for proof thereof, as
Deuteronomy. 4.35, Unto thee, says Moses, it was showed that thou might know,
that the Lord he is God, and that there is none but he alone. Deuteronomy. 6.4, Hear
O Israel, the Lord our God is Lord only: or as it is in our new Translation,
The Lord our God is ONE Lord. Deuteronomy. 32.39, Behold now for I, I am he, and there
is no Gods with me. Malachy 2.10, Have we not all ONE Father? has not ONE God
made us? Esaias, 45.5, I am the Lord, and there is no other, there is no God
besides me. And again V. 18, I am the Lord and there is no other. And again
V. 22, I am God and there is no other. 1. Cor. 8.4, We know, says the
Apostle, that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that there is none other God
but ONE. For though there be that are called Gods whether in heaven or in earth
(as there be many Gods, and many Lords) yet unto us there is but ONE God, which
is the Father of who^ are all things, and we in him: and ONE Lord Jesus Christ
by whom are all things and we by him. I omit for the Old Testament, Ios. 2.11.
Ps. 18.32. 1. Sam. 2.2. 1. King. 8.23. 2. King. 5.15. 1. Chron. 17.20. Ier.
37.16. and 41.4. and 44.6. and 45.5. and 46.9. and 48.12. And for the New
Testament, Mat. 4.10. Romans 3.30. Ephesians. 4.6. 1. Tim. 2.5. I omit the Fathers,
Greek and Latin, cited by Zanchius for this point: Ignatius, Justin Martyr,
Clemens Alexa^drinus, Tertullian, Arnobius, Minutius Foelix, Cyprian,
Lactantius, Eusebius of Caesarea, and St Austen. I omit the Poets, and
Philosophers cited by him too, Orpheus, Homer, Sophocles, Pythagoras, Plato,
Aeschylus, Philemon, Euripides, Mena^der. I omit also his several Reasons, you
shall find them with the premises in his first Book de Tribus Elohim
throughout the third Chapter, and I hasten to the TRINITY.

The Lord our God, M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 51. p. 106.
says Reverend Hooker, is but one God. In which indivisible Unity
notwithstanding, we adore the FATHER as being altogether of himself, we
glorify that consubsta^tiall Word which is the SON, we bless and magnify
that coessentiall Spirit eternally proceeding from both, which is the HOLY
GHOST. Now that in this Unity of one God, there is this Trinity comprehended,
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the places in holy Scripture are no less
frequent then the former to prove it, howsoever the word Trinity it self be
not there to be found at all. But we say of that as speaks S. Austen of the
word Persons that the Church does use to signify the same: Aug. de Trin. l. 7.
c. 4.
Licuit loquendi and disputandi necessitate tres Personas dicere, non quia
Scriptura dicit, sed quia Scriptura non contradicit. Lawful it is for us
through a necessity of speaking, and disputing, to call them three Persons, not
for the Scripture so speaks, but for it contradicts not them that so speak.
Indeed as the self same Austen Dictum est a nostris Graecis vna esse^tia, tret
substantiae: a Latinis autem vna essentia vel substantia, tres personae. Aug.
Ib. Aliter enim Graeci accipiunt substantiam qua^ Latini. Lombard 1. Sent.
did. 23. cap. Qua necessitate.
observes in that place, the Graecians called this Deity, one Essence, three
Substances: the Latins, one Essence or Substance, three Persons, which name of
Persons we hold to this day. And therefore before we come to muster up such
places as declare unto us these Persons, let us first of all define what a
Person is.

St Thomas out of Boethius defines it thus: Th. Aquin. 1. Part. Sum. Theol. qu.
29. Art. 1.
Persona est rationalis naturae individua substantia: A person is an individual
substance of a reasonable nature. Tertullian as Calvin quotes him, defines it
thus: Tertul. advers. Praxeam, cita^te Calvino, Instit. l. 1. c: 3. 6.
Persona est quaeda^ in Deo dispositio vel oeconomia quae de essentiae vnitate
nihil mutet: A person is a certain disposition or distribution in God, which
yet changes nothing of the unity of the essence. Zanchius thus: Zanch. de
Trib. Eloh. l. 1. c. 2.
Persona est substantia individua, intelligens, volens, incommunicabilis. A
person is an individual substance, that has intelligence, and will, and
cannot be communicated with any other. Calvin thus: Cal^. Inst. l. 1. c. 13.. 6.
Personam voco subsistentiam in Dei essentia quae ad alios relata proprietate
incommunicabili distinguitur. I call a Person says he, a subsistence in the
essence of God, which having relation to the other is distinguished from them
by an uncommunicable propriety. It mattereth not much which we take of all
these, only the two last are somewhat larger the^ the former. Howbeit this we
must carry in mind, that we are not to take a Person here as the Person of a
man is taken, it is St Austens note hereupon. Personas in Patre, et Filio, and
Spiritu Sancto Aug. de Temp. Ser. 189 p. 725. Vid. Aug. de Trin. l. 7. c. 4.
says he, non dico quasi personas hominu^, personam Patris dico quia Pater
est, and Filij quia Filius est, and Spiritus Sancti quia Spiritus Sanctus est.
Concerning the Persons in the Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, I
call them not Persons in that sense, as if I should say the Persons of men:
but I call the Person of the Father, because he is the Father, the Person of the
Son because he is the Son, the Person of the Holy Ghost because he is the
Holy Ghost. So that there are three Persons, but one Godhead, according unto
that of Athanasius in our Church Service: There is one Person of the Father, an
other of the Son, and an other of the Holy Ghost. But the Godhead of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all one: the glory equal, the
majesty coeternall. We have seen what a Person is, it remains that we muster
up the places which in holy Scripture declare unto us, that the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, are three such Persons.

And first that the Father is such a Substance subsisting by himself, a many
are persuaded who will not acknowledge so much or in the Son, or Holy Ghost.
De Patre nemo inficiatur, says Zanch. de trib. Eloh. l. 1. c. 4. p. 14. col. 1.
Zanchius, No man makes doubt of the Father. Concerning the Son then, and
Holy Ghost, let us see what the Scriptures say both Old and New.

First then concerning the Son, king Solomon himself intitles him by the
name of Wisdom. He to whom the Lord had given a wise and an understanding
heart, so that there was 1. King. 3.12
none like unto him before him, neither after him should arise the like, he
acknowledges this Wisdom: and Prove. 8.11, brings him in speaking thus, By me
kings reign, and Princes decree justice, and ver. 22. of that Chapter, The
Lord says he, has This is the word which the Septuagint mistaking in the
Original, translated creavit^ne and so Ecclus in imitation of the Ecclus.
24.12. Qui creavit me, and v. 14. Ab initio and ante saecula cr^ata sum. Whereof
see more in D Rain. Lectures, Prelect. 75. p. 883.
possessed me in the beginning of his way: I was before his works of old: and
concluding at the length, ver. 33. of that Chapter, Blessed is the man says
he, that hears me, watching daily at my gates, and giving attendance at the
posts of my doors. For he that finds me finds life, and shall obtain favor
of the Lord. But he that sins against me hurts his own soul: and all
that hate me love death. By wisdom Lovater in hunc locu^ Vid. eundem in cap.
1. p. 9.
says Lavater, some understand the knowledge of God which we have by his word;
and indeed the word of God it self. Veteres Theologi ipsum Christum
intelligunt, says he, But as for the ancient Fathers they understand our
Savior Christ. And indeed he of God is made unto us 1. Cor. 1.30.
Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption, as speaks the
Apostle to the Corinthians. I omit sundry other places brought by Zanchius
concerning the Godhead of the Son, out of Genesis, Exodus, Numbers, Joshua,
Judges, the books of Samuel, the Psalms, the Proverbs, the book of Job, the
greater Prophets, the lesser, some fifty six in all, and I come unto the New
Testament.

By him says the Coloss. 1.16
Apostle in his Epistle to the Colossians, were all things created which are in
heaven and which are in earth, things visible and invisible: whether they be
Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, al things were created by
him and for him, and he is before all things, and in him all things consist.
Now if all things consist in him, shall not he himself much more consist?
Esaias 66.9.
Shall I cause to travail and not bring forth? shall I cause to bring forth,
and shall be barre^ says the Lord? You know the old rule Iauel Epit in. l 1.
de Gen et cor. Tom, 1. p. 236. col. 2.
Propter quod vnumquodque, and illud magis: so the cause be efficient, and
vnivocall. So the Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 1.10. when he had said before
in the eight verse of that Chapter, But unto the Son he says, O God, thy
Throne is for ever and ever etc: he alleges also this testimony out of the
hundred and second Psalm, the five and twentieth verse, and applies it to our
Savior, Thou Lord, in the beginning have established the earth, and the
heavens are the works of thine hands. So Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday
says he, and to day, the same also is for ever. Yesterday that is from the
beginning of the world: To day, that is, for this time present: For ever, that
is, to the end of the world. The meaning is, that the same Christ that saves
the Faithful now at this time, and reconciles them to his Father, and renues
them by his Spirit, and now governes them, did so from the beginning of the
world with all the faithful that ever were, and so shall do to the worlds end.
Thus Ioh. 8.58.
himself of himself, Verily, verily I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am.
And praying an other time to his Father: And now Ioh. 17 5.
says he, glorify me thou Father with thine own self, with the glory which
I had with thee before the world was.

Concerning the Holy Ghost that he also is a Person subsisting by himself,
witness that very verse of the word of God, Iuuenal. sat. 10.
voluitur a primoqui proximus, which is the second in number. The earth Genesis
1.2.
says Moses, was without form, and void, and darkness was upon the deep,
and the Spirit of God moved upon the Waters. What? as the Ships do there move,
or as there is that Leviathan who takes his pastime therein, Psalm. 104.26? No
but cherishing and sustaining the^, vt foventur pulli ab incubantibus matribus,
as young ones by their dams, so Tremel. in Genesis 1.2.
Tremellius on that place. What need I here produce a clowd of Scriptures to
this purpose, as how he appeared, how he descended, how he rested on our
Savior in the likeness of a Dove, upon the Apostles in the similitude of fiery
Tongues: how to one he gives the word of wisdom, to an other the word of
knowledge, to an other faith, to an other the gifts of healing, to an other the
operation of great works, to an other prophecy: to an other the discerning of
spirits, to an other diversity of tongues, to an other the interpretation of
tongues, and which is most remarkable, how he works all these things
distributing to every man severally as he will. I say most remarkable for that
I told you before out of Zanchius, a Person was an individual substance that
has intelligence, and will. Thus is Judgment also attributed to him, Act.
15.28. Knowledge: 1. Cor. 2.11. Hearing, and speaking, and foreshewing things
to come, Ioh. 16.13. Rule and Dominion over the faithful, Act. 13.2.
Anointing and sending, Esaias 61.1. Lastly the creating of the humane nature in
Christ, Luke 1.35. But these you will say, are several Scriptures for the
several Persons in several. I grant they are so, yet as these Scriptures are
in several, so there want not others to, that comprehend them all in general,
I will instance in a few.

When as God the Father said in Genesis 1.26.
Genesis, Let us make man in our image according to our likeness: Quomodo vnicus
and singularis Tertull. adversus Praxeam. p. 320.
says Tertullian, pluraliter loquitur? Being one only, and singular, how comes
he to speak in the plural number? Shall we say as did the Jews that he spoke
unto the Angels? But Man was not made to the image or likeness of Angels, but
to the image and likeness of God. Thus God Genesis 1.27.
says Moses, created the man in his image: and he repeates it again, In the
image of God created he him, he created them male and female. So likewise not
long after: Behold, Genesis 3.22.
says God, the man is become as one of us. Fallit aut ludit Tertull. loc.
citato.
says Tertullian, vt cum vnus, and solus, and singularis esset, numerose
loqueretur: were he one only, and sole, and singular, should he thus speak
plurally, he should either deceive us, or delude us. It may be thought our
Savior also alluded hereunto, who when he had said to Nicodemus, Ioh. 3.11.
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, speaking in the singular, he immediately
annexeth withal that which follows in the plural, We speak that we know,
and testify that we have seen: but ye receive not our witness. Where See M.
Math. Saunders Se^m. on the Cons^r between Christ and Nico^. Se^. 10. p. 239.
passing on the sudden from I, to [wee] and so to [our] what did he but
intimate to Nicodemus in teaching our Regeneration, that he was One of that
plural of whom Moses spoke in the Creation. But to return unto my purpose.

Another Scripture that comprehends all three Persons in general is that of
the Prophet Esaias, Esaias, 6.3. where having beheld in great glory and majesty
God the Father, and hearing the Seraphims singing, Holy, holy, holy, is the
Lord of hoasts; the whole world is full of his glory: he afterward heard this
message, Esaias, 6.9.
Go and say unto this People; ye shall hear indeed but ye shall not
understand, ye shall plainly see and not perceive. Now to whom does S. John
apply these words, does he not apply them to God the Son, Ioh. 12.41? and to
whom does S. Paul apply them, does he not apply them to the Holy Ghost, Act.
28.25? So it is, it is even so, and I conclude with Athanasius as we usually
say it in his Creed, The Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity in Unity is to
be worshipped. He therefore that will be saved must thus think of the Trinity.

And thus much of the Trinity and by consequence of the Trinity in Unity,
namely that these three Persons; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are so truly
and really distinct each one from other, that each and every of them subsisteth
by himself, so that the Father is not the Son, neither is he the Holy Ghost:
the Son is not the Holy Ghost, nor yet the Father: the Holy Ghost is neither
the Father, neither is he the Son, and yet is every of them True God, and yet
all of them together but Vid. Zanch. de trib. Eloh. l. 8. c. 1.
One God only. If this be too too hard, and intricate to be understood, the
marvel is not great, we might well expostulate with our selves, and complain
of our dullness in this point, if ever mortal wit could have possibly
comprehended it. It is Sphinx Theologica, Philosophica, ex hist. de August. c.
2 p. 40
storied of S. Austen how he on a time endeavored to sound it. He walked abroad
to that purpose, and came at length to a river side, musing with himself and
laboring to conceive it. At length not far off a little child appeared unto
him very busy on the Bank. He had made forsooth a little hole and with a
spoone which he had in his hand, was lading of the water into the foresaid
little hole. S. Austen drew presently near him, and demanded of the child
what it was he meant to do. Father, quoth he, my purpose is to unlade this
whole river into this little hole you here see. Why quoth S. Austen, that is
impossible, thou will never be able to do that: no more will you, quoth the
Child, be ever able to bring that to pass which you are about, and with that
the Child vanished. This story of S. Austen whether it were true, yea or no, I
for my part cannot affirm. The rather for that neither S. Austen himself, nor
Possidonius, or Possidius (as Raynold. These. edit. vlt. Epist. ad Archiepisc.
some call him) that wrote his life, do either of them make mention of it.
Howbeit the thing it self namely that it is as impossible for us to conceive
the blessed Trinity, as with a spoon to unlade a river, or to unlade it into so
little a hole, sure I am that that is a truth. For if so be it be true your
Aristotle Arist. Metap. l. 2. c. 1.
says, that as the eyes of Bats are in respect of the Sun so our
understanding is to those things which are (...), most manifest by nature: what
is it unto this point that is of difficult things the most difficult, the very
riddle of riddles, and (if I may so speak) the Sphynx of Divinity. Diverse and
sundry I grant are the Vid. Zanch. de trib. Eloh l. 8. c. 6. p. 313.
Similitudes which the ancient Fathers, and new Writers use in their Books to
express it in some sort: as first from the similitude of the Sun and his
Beams, so Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Cyprian, and Lactantius: From the
similitude of the Fountain, Flood, and River, so Tertullian again, and
Cyprian, and Lactantius: from the similitude of the Root, and Stem, and Bough
of a tree, so Tertullian again: from the Mind, Conceit, and Memory, so
Tertullian and Cyprian: from the Understanding, Memory, and Will, so S. Austen:
from the three faculties of the Soul, Rational, Irascible, and Concupiscible,
so others: from the Deity, Soul, and Body of Christ, so Zanchius himself. I
say to express it in some sort, for that to explicate the thing it self, that
they al acknowledge to be impossible, only they endeavor to show that it is
not impossible, nor absurd, that there should be Three Persons, whereof every
one should be God, and yet not Three Gods, but one God only. Our duty in this
case when ever we meditate hereupon, and have cause to think on this Trinity,
is to say with Gregory (...) Naz Orat. in Sanct Bap. Orat 40 p 668.
Nazianzen, and to do as he did: I no sooner think of One, says he, but
immediately I am surrounded with the brightness of all Three, and when I meditate
on all Three, I am presently brought to One again. I conclude with that of Aug
de Temp. Ser. 189 p. 725
Auste^, Multa sunt quae dici possunt, sed sufficiat Fidelibus pau^a de
mysterio. Trinitatis audisse. A many things might be spoken, but let it suffice
the Faithful to hear but a few things concerning the mystery of the Trinity.
And so much the rather, for it follows in that place; In die iudicij non
damnor, quia dicam nescivi naturam Creatoris mei: si autem aliquid temere
dixero, temeritas poenam habet, ignorantia veniam promeretur. In the day of
judgment I shall not be damned, if so be I should say, I knew not the nature
of my Creator: but if so be I speak of it rashly, rashness deserves
punishment, ignorance pardon. And thus much of the Essence of GOD, next of all
God willing of that I proposed next, namely his Attributes.

In the mean time God so bless us, and the seed that has been sown, etc.

GODS ATTRIBVTES. Lecture 4. April. 15. 1613.

THE Arrow, they say, that is l^ng in the Bow, does never light well. And yet
says M Aschams School of Shooting. l. 1. fol. 30.
Toxophilus the worthy School-maister of Shooting sometimes to hold a shafte
at the head, does more good with the fear of it, then if so be were it shot,
it should do with the stroke of it. The Arrow I have brought with me now, and
intend at this time to shoot among you, as also an other that is to second it
(but they are like 1. Sam. 20.20.
Ionathans Arrows to warn, not to harm) have been Sunt ali qui q^^^um
fructus quia n^mis propere, minus prespere oriuntur. Bernard. S^rm. de S
Benedict. p. 26. Col. 3.
long I confess in the Bow, and I fully purposed the last Term to have quit
my self of the same; that so having done with the Attributes of God, as also
with his Works, I might now have discoursed at this time of that which is next
to follow them, The Church. But what in one respect, and what in an other, what
in regard of one let, and what of an other, I could the^ at that time go no
farther the^ to the Blessed Trinity; Gods Attributes, and his Works, I was
feign to defer till this time. Now then of his Attributes: of his Works God
willing hereafter, when I shall the next time come thus unto you.

Howbeit before we begin to set forward on our journey, we are first of al to
learn, what Attributes are: secondly their several sorts Vocantur Attributa
Zanch. de Attrib. l. 2. c. 1. p. ^1.
says Zanchius, quia ea sibi attribuit Deus nostra causa. Hence it is they are
called Attributes for that God does attribute them unto himself in regard of
us, and for our sakes, namely that by them we the better might conceive what he
is. Now Attributes are of two sorts: Some so proper and peculiar unto God, that
they can by no means be communicated with the Creatures, as Simplicity,
Eternity, Immensity, etc: Some other there are that howsoever simply and as
they are in God they cannot be communicated unto us, as Highest Wisdom,
Chiefest Goodness, Greatest Power, etc: yet in part and by way of similitude
and resemblance they may. I omit the former as having aimed at them in some
sort in the definition I gave of God, and I come unto the latter, and the Text
I have chosen to this purpose is the Speech of God himself, as it is related
to us by Moses, Exodus, the four and thirtith, the 6, and 7, verses. So the
Lord passed before his face, and cried, The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful,
and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth: reserving
mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity; and transgression, and sin, and not
making the wicked innocent, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the
children, and upon childrens children unto the third and fourth generation.
Concerning which words, let us first of all see the occasion of them: then the
words themselves. The occasion of them was this.

Moses in the Exodus 33.18
chapter before had requested of the Lord that he would show unto him his
Face: that is, that he would declare unto him fully, and perfitly, his glory
and his majesty. The Lords answer unto him was, that he could not gratify him
therein by reason that the performance of such a request would prove his
destruction, V. 20.
for there shall no man see me, and live, says he, Ovid. Met. l. 3
Corpus mortale tumultus haud feret aethereos. Furthermore he said, Thou can
not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and live. Which least Moses
might have taken to heart, and not have thought himself so deeply in Gods books
as in very deed he was, the Lord immediately yields somewhat to him, somewhat of
his request. Thou shall see Exodus 33.23
says he, my back parts: but my face shall not be seen. The kind of
similitude there used is taken from me^ whom if we see behind only, and only
their backs toward us, we know them to be men indeed, but whether such or
such a man, such or such a friend, that we know not. So that the Lord in these
his words promised the knowledge of himself indeed, but an imperfect kind of
knowledge, and he confirmd it with this sign: Behold Exodus 33.23
says he, there is a place by me, and thou shall stand upon the rock: and
while my glory passes by, I will put thee in a cleft of the rock, and will
cover thee with my hand whylst I pass by. So that the word also of Passing by,
does signify noe less. For as on those whom we see as they pass only, we
cannot fasten or fix our eyes, unless they stand to us face to face as did St.
Peter to the Creeple, Act. 3.4. or Elisha unto Hazael 2 King. 8.11. noe more
could Moses here in this place; no though the Lord had stood still, how much
more when he was in transitu, and only passed by. But thus much of the
occasion, now concerning the words themselves. So the Lord passed before his
face and cried, The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious; slow to
anger, and abundant in goodness and truth, and so forth.

In which words as we have a beadrol of the Attributs, and Properties of God,
so may we reduce the^ all into three several Heads: Gods Power, Gods Goodness,
and the Justice of God. The Power of God is explicated herein one word: his
Goodness in seven: his Justice in twain. Strong, there is his Power: Merciful
and Gracious, Slow to anger, and Abundant in goodness, and truth, Reserving
mercy for thousands, Forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin, there is his
Goodness. And not making the wicked innocent, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children, and upon Childrens Children unto the third and
fourth generation; there is his Justice. And to these three several heads may
not only these Attributes here specified be reduced, but all his other
whatsoever, I mean the Attributes of the later sort, as we shall see
hereafter in the handling of them. First then to begin with his Power,
explicated here in one word, and that is Strong: So the Lord passed before his
face, and cried, The Lord the Lord, (...)
El, that is, Strong.

Deus fortis, says Tremellius; though the Vulgar omits Fortis, and our new
Translation too: but our old Translation has it, and it being backed therein by
Tremellius, we will the rather not refuse it. The Lord is Fortis then, Strong.
He is Job 9 4.
says Job, mighty in strength. Who is the king of glory? says the Ps. 24 8.
Psalmist, It is the Lord strong and mighty, even the Lord mighty in battle.
Nor is he F^rtis, Strong only in the positive degree of Strength, but Fortior
Stronger. The waves of the Sea are mighty Ps. 93.5. Tremel.
says the Psalmist and rage horribly; magnificentior est in alto Iehova, but
yet the Lord that dwells on high is mightier. Do we provoke the Lord to
anger 1. Cor. 10.22
says the Apostle, are we stronger then he? Nay but the weakness of God is
stronger then men, 1. Cor. 1.25. Nor is he Fortior, Stronger, but Fortissimus
in the Superlatiue; for so himself of himself, Ego sum fortissimus D^us
patris tui, though it be not so englished, Genesis 46.3. Hence that of Moses unto
him, Deuteronomy. 3.24. Domine Deus tu coepisti says he, ostendere servo tuo
magnitudinem tuam, manumque fortissimam etc. O Lord God thou have begun to
show to thy Servant thy greatness, and thy mighty hand: for where is there a
God in heaven, or in earth, that can do like thy works, and like thy power?
Now as his Power is exceeding great, so is it especially toward them that
believe, and therefore was it S. Paul's prayer in behalf of the Ephesians. 1.19.
Ephesians, That the eyes of their understanding might be lightened, that they
might know among other things, what was the exceeding greatness of his power
toward them that did believe. In Arithmeticke, says a worthy M Gossens
Trumpet of war p. D. 3. b.
Divine, set one against ten, ten against an hundred, an hundred against a
thousand, a thousand against ten thousand, although there be great o^des, yet
is there some comparison, but if you could set down an infinite number, then
there could be no comparison at all, because the one is finite, the other
infinite: so is it, says he, between the power of God and Man; I, between
the power of God and all things else. Set all the Princes of the Earth in
opposition against God, set all the world besides and they are nothing unto
him: The Earth, Ps. 104.32.
says David, shall tremble but at the very look of him: if He but touch the
Hills they shall smoke.

To this his A^tribute of Power may be referred his Omnipotency which is said
to be two manner of ways: M Perkins on the Creed p. 57.
First because he is able to do whatsoever he will, secondly because he is able
to do indeed more then he will. Of the first the Prophet David: As for our God
Ps. 115.3. and Ps 135.6.
says he, he is in heaven, he has done whatsoever pleased him. And Tertul.
adver. Praxeam, p. 320.
Tertullian to this purpose, Dei posse velle est: and non posse nolle, quod
autem voluit, and potuit, and ostendit. The power of God is to will, and not to
be powerful to do a thing, not to be willing to it, howbeit what he would,
that was he powerful to do, and also did it. Of the other S, John Baptist, God
Mat. 3.9.
says he, is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. So
likewise our Savior to S. Peter, when S. Peter had drawn his sword, and
thought by his manhood to have defended him, and freed him from the rout (a
piece of service that a world of Soldiers could not have performed at that
time) Put up thy sword, Mat. 26.32.
says our Savior, into his place, for all that take the sword shall perish
with the sword. Either think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and
he will give me more then twelve legions of Angels? So Tertul. vbi supra.
Tertullian again, Potuit ita salvus sim, Deus pennis hominem ad volandum
instruxisse, quod and milvis praestitit, non tamen quia potuit, statim and
fecit. God could, says he, have given to man feathers to fly withal, as he
has given unto the kite, but though he could have done it, yet he did it not.
Here might I take occasion to speak of our Adversaries argument concerning Gods
Omnipotency which they use about the Sacrament, but for I have far to go, and
we may have occasion some other time to speak more plentifully of that, I shall
at this time only commend unto you those three excellent Theorems of a worthy
Writer in our age concerning an Argument drawn from Gods Omnipotency. The
first is this: We ought not to argue in Divinity from the Omnipotency of God,
unless the will of God go before, plainly manifested unto us by his word.
The second is this: We ought not to argue in Divinity from the Omnipote^cy of
God to confirm that thing the contrary whereof is extant in his word. The
third is this: We ought not to argue in Divinity from the Omnipotency of God
to confirm that point that contains in it a contradiction. Whosoever will see
more hereof, and how these three Theorems are confirmed, I refer him to
Anton. Sadeelis Opera Theol. page 272. edit. 1593.
Sadeels Treatise De Sacramentali maducatione corporis Christi, the third
Chapter of that Book. But thus much of the Power of God, the first of the
Attributes here mentioned, or rather the first Head.

The second Head whereunto these Attributes may be referred, was (as I told
you) The Goodness of God, and that in these seven, Merciful, and Gracious,
Slow to anger, and Abundant in goodness and truth, Reserving mercy for
thousands, Forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin. And of every of these
in their several order, and first of his Mercy: [Mercifull]

(...)
It is in the Original Racum: Nomen, says Zanch. de Attrib. l. 1. c. 18. Vid.
Bart. Scheraei Itinerarium in Psalter. Davi d^ Hebraeum Numero Radicum 1018
Zanchius, a visceribus deductum, a name first fetched from the bowels within.
It is such a kind of affection as Parents are fraught withal when they hear
of, or see their Children in any extremity. Such was the love and affection of
the true Mother toward her Child, when King Solomon had commanded that it
should be divided in twain. Her compassion, 1. Kin. 3.26.
says the Scripture, was kindled toward her Son. It is in our new
Translation, Her bowels yearned upon her Son. By this the^ the Lord does
signify that he is of such a nature, that though he scourge us for our sins,
yet does he pity us too as a Father his children. It is an excellent passage of
David, Ps. 103.8. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy: long suffering and
of great goodness. He will not always be chiding: neither keeps he his
anger for ever. He has not dealt with us after our sins: nor rewarded us
according to our wickedness. For look how high the heaven is in comparison of
the earth: so great is his mercy also toward them that fear him. Look how
wide also the East is from the West, so far has he set our sins from us.
Yea like as a Father pitieth his own children: even so is the Lord merciful
to the^ that fear him. So S. Austen to this purpose, Filio quem diligit trasci
potest pater, Aug. Hom, 5. p. 288.
says he irascitur and amat potest dici^odit and amat non potest dici. A
Father may be angry with his Son whom he loves: that he is angry and loves
him too, may well be said, that he hates him and loves him too, that by no
means may be said. And as the same S. Austen in Aug. Hom. 27. p. 331.
another place, In quibuscunque peccatis non perdit viscera pia matter Ecclesia,
Our dear Mother the Church loses not her bowels toward us in regard of any
sins we do commit, so we repent us of the same; no more does God above, the
Husband of the Church, and the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort,
2. Cor. 1.3. It follows, And Gracious.

That is, Zanch. vbi supra.
says Zanchius, ad gratificandum paratus, ready to pleasure, or confer a
benefit upon us. Praised be the Lord daily, Ps. 68.19.
says David, even the God which helps us, and powers his benefits upon us.
It is in our new Translation, who daily loadeth us with benefits. The
Scriptures are full of proofs concerning this point, and that of our Savior is
most remarkable, how he makes his Mat. 5.45.
Sun to arise Imbres etiam and soles suos peraequante Deo justice and
iniustis. Tertul. de Anima c. 27. p. 567.
on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust.
All things, Eccles. 9.2.
says the Preacher, come alike to all: and the same condition is to the just,
and to the wicked, to the good, and to the pure, and to the polluted, and to
him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is
the sinner, he that swears, as he that fears an oath. True it is, it will
not be so hereafter, it is thus only here in this world, and therefore S.
Austen, Placuit divinae providentiae, Aug de Civ. Dei l. 1. c. 8. p. 7. So in
another place, Permixta ista temporalia Deus esse voluit quia si Bonis solis ea
daret, putarent and Mali propter haec colendum Deum. Rursus si ea solis Malis
daret, timerent Boni infirmi converti, ne ista illis forte de essent. Aug. in
Ps. 66 p. 472.
says he, praeparare in posterum bona justice, quibus non fruentur iniusti, and
mala impijs, quibus non excruciabuntur boni. Ista vero temporalia bona and mala
vtrisque voluit esse communia, vt nec bona cupidius appetantur, quae mali
quoque habere cernu^tur, nec mala turpiter evitentur, quibus and boni plerumque
afficiuntur. It has pleased the divine Providence to prepare for hereafter
such good things for good men, as the wicked shall not partake of, and such bad
things for the wicked as the good shall not be tormented with. As for these
temporal good things and bad things both, those would he have common both to
the bad and to the good, that even these good things should not be sought
eagerly after, which we see the wicked to enjoy too, nor these bad things
basely avoided, wherein good men commonly have a share. It follows, Slow to
anger.

Vbi notandum, Zanch. vbi supra.
says Zanchius, Deum non dicere se esse sine ira, quasi nunquam peccatis
irascatur, sed tantum se tardum esse ad iram. Irascitur ergo: sed neque cito,
neque facile, neque temere. It is to be noted, says Zanchius, that God does
not say that he is altogether without anger, as if he were never angry with
sin at all, but only that he is Slow to anger. Angry then he is, our God is
angry, but nor quickly, nor easily, nor rashly, or unadvisedly. Some, says
Lact. de Ira Dei. l. 1. c. 1.
Lactantius, are of opinion that God cannot be angry, because so divine a
Nature is to be gentle, benign, and gracious only, Quorum error, says he,
quia maximus est, and ad evertendum vitae humanae statum spectat, coarguendus
est a nobis. Whose error for it is so great an one, and touches the very
overthrowe of the whole state of humane life, is therefore to be confuted by
us, and so he confutes it indeed in a whole Treatise to that purpose. Howbeit
here we are to know that Anger in God is not as it is in us a sudden
perturbation, or an affection of the Soul, Nam Dei Natura, Ambr. in Ep. ad
Romans c. 2.
says S. Ambrose, ab ijs passionibus immunis est. For the nature of God is
free from such kind of passions. And again in Amb. in Ps. 37
another place, Deus passioni non patet vt irascatur, cum sit impassibilis: sed
quia vindicat, videtur irasci. God lies not open to the passion of anger,
forasmuch as he is not touched with any perturbation, but in that he does
punish, he seems to be angry. So Thomas Aquin. 1a 2ae, qu. 47. Ar^. 1. ad 1m.
Aquinas, Ira non dicitur in Deo secundum passionem animi, sed secundum
iudicium iustitiae, prout vult vindictam facere de peccato. Anger is not said
to be in God according to the passion of the mind, but according to judgment,
and to justice, whereby he wills that sin should be punished.

To this his Attribute of Slownes to anger may be referred his Patience, when
as he spares and bears with Sinners to the end they should repent. The Lord 2.
Pet. 3.9.
says S. Peter, is not slack concerning his promise (as some count
slackenesse) but is patient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but
would all men to come to repentance. Agreeable whereunto is that of the Angel
unto Esdras, 2. E^d. 8.59.
God would not that man should perish: but they after that they were created,
have defiled the name of him that made them, and are unthankful unto him which
prepared life for them. This it is the Apostle to the Romans calls the (...).
Ro^. 2.4
Riches of his Patience: Despisest thou says he, the riches of his
bountifulnes, and patience, and long sufferance, not knowing that the
bountifulness of God leads thee to repentance? And well may he term it
Riches, for as S. Austen speaking of Riches, Ecce vndique lucra confluunt Aug.
de Temp Ser. 50. p. 484.
says he, and more fontium nummi currunt: behold gains flow in on every side,
and money like flowds of water abounds continually: right so his Patience to,
Horat. Ep. l. 1. ad Lollium.
Labitur, and labetur in omne volubilis aevum, flow it will for ever and ever,
and they are but Rustickes in Divinity, that dream of the dryness of it. True
it is, Ps. 7.13.
If a man will not turn, he will whet his sword: he has bent his bow, and
made it ready. He has prepared for him the instruments of death: he
ordeineth his arrows against the Persecutors. And yet even in this, may we see
the Patience of God to. For as there is mention here made of two Vid. B. Pil.
kingt or Nehem c. 4. p. 61,
sorts of weapons that in the battles of old time did the greatest hurt to
the Enemy, The Sword, and the Bow, the Sword when he was at hand, the Bow when
he was far of, as if God should use them both; yet see in this his Anger how
he forbeares a long time. He first threatens, and warnes, and that diverse, and
sundry times. Then takes he a time to prepare himself to battle. It asks no
doubt sometime to whet his Sword which is (as it were) rusty and blunt, to
ordain his Arrows, or to make them ready, which are all (as it were) out of
order or sealed up among his Deuteronomy. 32. v. 23. and 34.
treasures, and yet sometime to when so he has done, he perhaps puts them up
again, or not smiting at al, or in wrath remembering mercy: For in my wrath I
smote thee says the Lord, but in my mercy I had compassion on thee, Esaias
60.10. I will end this of Patience, with an excellent passage of S. Cyprians
which he has to this purpose. What manner of Patience is it for quality Qualis
vero in Deo and quanta patie^tia quod in contumeliam suae maiestatis and
honoris instituta ab hominibus prophana templa, and terrena figmenta, and sacra
sacrilega patientissime sustinens, super bones and malos aequaliter facit diem
nasci and lumen sol^^ ^boriri, and cum imbribus terram rigat, nemo a beneficiis
eius excluditur, quo minus justice similiter and iniust^s indiscretas pluvias
largiatur. Videmus inseparabi^^ aequalitate patientiae nocentibus and noxiis,
religiosis and impiis, gratias agentibus and ingratis Dei nutu tempora obsequi,
elementa famulari, spirare ventos fontes fluere, grande^^ere copias messium,
fructus mitescere vinearum, exvberare pomis arbusta, nemora frondescere, prata
florere Et cu^ crebris imo continuis exacerbatur offensis Deus, indignationem
suam temperal, and praestitu^um semel retributionis diem patienter expectat.
Cumque habeat in potestute vindictam, mavult ^^u tenere patientiam, sustinen^
scilicet clementer and differens, vt, fi fieri potest, multum malicia protracta
aliquando mutetur, and homo in errorum and scelerum contagione volutatus vel
sero ad Dominum convertatur. Cyp. de Bo^^ Patient. p. 97. Edit. Basil. 1530.
says he, and how great in quantity is that which is in God, who pacie^tly
suffers profane Temples of the Heathen, worldly inventions and execrable
sacrilege to be committed by men in contempt of his Majesty and Honor, and yet
notwithstanding causes the day to show forth, and the Sun to shine as well on
the evil as the good. He waters the ground with showers, and excludes no
man from his benefits, but bestows his reign in due season, to the profit
and commodity as well of the Unjust as the Just. We see again with what an
inseparable equality of Gods patience the times obey, the Elements serve, the
Corn abou^dantly does grow, the fruits of the Vine do ripe in season, the Trees
abound with apples, the Woods spring, and the Meddows flowrish as well to the
use of the sinful as of the virtuous, as well to the wicked as to them that
fear God, and as well to the unthankful as to the giver of thanks. And
whereas God is provoked with our many, or rather continual offenses, yet does
he temper his indignation, and taryeth patiently for the Day that is appointed
for every man's reward. And whereas vengeance is in his own power, yet does he
not use it, but rather keeps long patience; mercifully forbearing and
deferring to the intent that man wallowing in the contagion and error of sin,
may, if any remedy will serve, through delay of his displeasure, change at
some time or other, and at length be converted unto God. Thus far S. Cyprian,
and a great deal farther to this purpose, but I hasten to the other Attribute,
And abundant in goodness. [In goodness.]

Like as Arist. Moral. ad Eud^m. l. 7.
Aristotle distinguishes Bonum, namely into that which is simpliciter bonum,
and that which is Alicui tantum, aut Aliquibus: Good simply, and in it self,
and Good to some one, or unto many: so may we distinguish the Goodness of God,
namely so far forth as he is Good simply, and in himself, or Good unto
others. He is Good, simply and in himself, nay Goodness it self in the
abstract, for that he is of that perfection, that sufficiency in himself, as
that there is nothing wanting in him, nothing at all to be desired. He is in
this respect not only Summum Bonum, the chief Good, but indeed the only Good,
according to that of our Savior, Luk 18.19.
why call thou me good? none is good save one, even God. Hoc sensu Zanch. de
Attrib. l 4. c. 1. p. 409. Col. 1.
says Zanchius, etiam Christus qua homo non est bonus: In this sense Christ as
he is man is not good. A speech that might make us startle, the rather for he
said a little Zanch. Ib. p. 404. Col. 1.
before, Etiam Diabolum quatenus res. est cre ata, and varijs donis ernata,
dicimus esse bonum. We say the Devil himself is good as he is a thing
created, and adorned with sundry gifts. But those are Zanchius words, Hoc
sensu etiam Christus qua homo^ non est bonus, but he adds immediately after,
Ac proinde and ipse quatenus Deus, solus est bonus: And therefore he again as
he is God, is only good. The reason says he, is, because as he is man he is
finite, and whatsoever good he has, he has it from God, and consequently from
his Deity. And though he has it says he, most perfectly in respect of other
things created: yet has he it imperfectly in respect of God. But to return
where I left. It is chiefly in regard of the other Goodness that God is named
Good here, namely as he is Good not in himself, but unto others. Eve^ as we
say A good Prince, not if he be good to himself only, or do no man any wrong,
or live retiredly, and so forth. But if he be gentle, courteous, debonayre,
liberal, a Protector of others, in a word such an one as under whom we may
live in pea^e and plenty, in goodness and all godliness, according to that of Si
iusti imperant, si inter linguas sublimiter honorantium, and obsequia nimis
humiliter salutantium no^ extolluntur, sed se homines esse meminerunt: si suam
potestatem ad Dei cultum maxim dilata^dum, m^iestati eius famulam faciunt. Si
Deu^ timent. diligunt, colunt; si plus amant illud regnum, vbi non timent
habere co^sortes: si tardius vindicant, facile ignoscunt: si eandem vindictam
pro necessitate regendae tuendaeque Reip. non pro satur andis inimicitiarum
odiis exerunt: si eandem veniam non ad impunitatem iniquitatis, sed ad spem
correctionis indulgent: si quod aspere coguntur plerumque decernere,
misericordiae lenitate, and beneficiorum largitate compensan^: si luxuria tanto
eis est castigatior, quanto posset esse liberior^si malunt cupiditatibus
pravis, quam quibuslibet Gentibus imperare. Et si haec omnia faciunt, non
propter ardo^em inanis gloriae, sed propter charitatem faelicitatis aeternaetsi
pro suis peccatis, humilitatis, and miserationis, and orationis sacrificum, Deo
suo vero immolare non negligunt. Aug de Ciu Dei. l. 5. c 24. And englished for
the most part most excellently by M. Hooker. Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 76. p. 226.
St. Austen, If they have virtuously reigned, if honor has not filled their
hearts with pride, if the exercise of their power has been service and
attendaunce upon the Majesty of the most High, and so as follows in that
place. God is Good then in himself, Good also unto others, I, so Good that it
is the Burden (as it were) of the hundred and seventh Psalm, or like that
Carme^ amaebaeum in Virg. Egl. 8.
Virgil, Incipe Maenalios mecum mea tibia versus, or,
Ducite ab vrbe domum mea carmina ducite Daphnim,
It being Verse. 8. and 15. and 21. and 31.
four several times repeated there, O that men would therefore praise the
Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the children of
men. It follows, And truth. [Aboundant in goodness, and trueth]

As he is in Goodness, so in Truth, Abundant in both, and truly abundant in
Truth, for that God is Truth Zanch. de Attrib. l. 3. c. 3. p. 282. Col. 1.
three manner of ways. Truth in himself: Truth in his works: Truth in his
words. Howbeit Truth here in this place is taken the last way, and so
accommodated unto words, as those words of God are Promises whether for
temporal things, or things eternal. They are thy promises Promissa tua sunt,
and quis falli timeat cum promittit Veritas. Aug. Confess. l. 12. c. 1.
says St. Austen, and who will fear to be deceived when Truth it self does
promise. Now God being Truth it self, Logic will help to inform us what
Truth is in the abstract. Omnis creatura Fulgent. de Fid. Orthod. p. 596.
says Fulgentius, quoniam opus est veritatis, est quidem creatura vera non
tamen est veritas. Sola autem naturaliter est veritas, quae naturaliter est
vera Divinitas. Every creature says he, forasmuch as it is the work of truth,
is in truth a true creature, howbeit it is not Truth. That alone naturally is
truth and verity, that naturally is true Divinity. God then being Truth in the
abstract, it will necessarily follow thereupon that no falsehood whatsoever can
take hold of his word. For can Vid. Zanch. de Attrib. l. 3. c. 3. p. 283. Col.
1.
whitenes it self be black? or Knowledge it self be ignorant? A thing that is
white indeed may be black, and a man of knowledge may be ignorant, I, the most
of that we know (knew we more then who knows most) is but the least of that we
know not, howbeit Knowledge it self cannot be ignorant, neither Whiteness it
self can ever be black. Right so it is in this case. God is Truth it self,
God is not as man Number. 23.19.
says Balaam, that he should lie: has he said, and shall he not do it? And
has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it? Or if according to the
Plutarch. de Auditione.
Spartan fashion we would hear the same in effect out of a better man's mouth
then Balaa^ was, It is impossible says the Apostle, that God should lie, Heb.
6.18. Besides, God is abundant in truth, that is, in keeping promises, by
reason he is Omnipotent, whereupon In Dei promis sit nulla est falsitas, quia
in faciendis nulla omnipotenti est difficultas. Fulg^it. de Prae did. l. 1 p 24
Fulgentius again, There is no falsehood at all in the promises of God, because
in the performance of them there is no difficulty at all to him that is
Omnipotent. It follows, Reserving mercy for thousands.

Of Mercy we spoke before, we are now also to speak of Mercy again. The truth
is, there are almost none of all Gods Attributes, but has Mercy as an
ingredient. Without question Treatise of the nature of God. c. 4. 5. p. 107.
says one, if any humane affection may be truly said to be in God, it is this
of Pity, or Mercy, the which of all other is most excellent, and commendable,
proper to gentle, noble, and royal minds; as nothing on the contrary is so
base and savage, as is unmercifulness and cruelty. But what is this Reserving?
Who are these Thousands here thus specified? First concerning Thousands we
read in the Rev. 7.5.
Revelation: Of the Tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand. Of the Tribe of
Ruben were sealed twelve thousand. Of the Tribe of God were sealed twelve
thousand, and so of all the Tribes of the Children of Israel ( Dan only
excepted for ca^ses best known to God and to S. John) but are they the
Thousands only here meant in this place? No, for it follows there: After
these things I beheld, and so a great multitude which no man could number of
all Nations, and kinreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throane,
and before the Lamb, clothed with long white roabes, and palms in their
hands. So the^ they are the Elect that may be meant by these Thousands. I but
who (will you say) are the Elect? It is I confess a hard question. I may say
as Elias said to Elisha, 2. Kin. 2.10.
Rem difficile^ postulasti: Thou have asked an hard thing: howbeit I describe
them thus. Vid Zanch. de Attrib. l. 4. c. 4. p. 461. Col. 2.
Such as fear the Lord, Psalm. 103.13. Such as put their trust in God, Psalm.
32.11. Such as call upon him, Psalm. 86.5. Such as are his Servants, Deuteronomy.
32.36. Such as love him, and keep his commandments, Exodus 20.6. For of Such,
and Such is it said, how he shall repent toward the^; how he shows his mercy
unto them: how he is merciful unto them al: how he is good, and gracious, and
of great mercy. Go, and do thou likewise, Luke 10.37.
says our Savior in an other case, so I in this, fear the Lord, put your
trust in him, call upon him, be his Servants, love him and keep his
comma^dements, and you shall be of these Elect. But now concerning the word
Reserving: [Reserving mercy for thousands.]

It is as if he had said, he does treasure it up for us in stoare, and when he
sees his time we shall have it in abundance. Perhaps he tries us here by Heb.
11.36.
mockings, and scourgings yea moreover by bonds, and prisonment. It may be he
suffers us to, to wander up and down in sheep skins, and in goat skins, being
destitute, afflicted, and tormented. I, to wander in wildernesses, and
mountains, and dens, and caves of the earth. But what says the Scripture of
those many Thousands even now spoken of, and of that great multitude which no
man could number of all nations, and kinreds, and people, etc? These are they
Rev. 7.14.
says the Angel there, which came out of great tribulation, and have washed
their long roabs, and have made their long roabes white in the blood of the
Lamb. And again, a little V. 16.
after, They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, nether shall the Sun
light on them, neither any heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the
throne shall govern them, and shall lead them unto the lively fountaine^ of
waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. Reserving mercy for
thousands. It follows, Forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin.

When so much Mercy goes before, no marvel if Forgiveness of so much
iniquity, and transgression, and sin does follow after. They are both of them
indeed inseparable companions, Mercy and Forgiveness: and no more can they be
one without the other, then Fire can be without heat, the Sun without his
beams. Now to them that do repent (who only are meant here in this place) what
Sin so great either in quantity or quality (and all are Zanch. de Attrib. l. 1.
c. 18. p. 58. Col. 1.
comprised in these three, Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin) but God forgiues
it unto us freely, and remembers it no more? What fault Quid gravius peccatori
aegro quam Medici interfectio? quid gravius potest aeger facere, quam si
Medicu^ suum occidat? cum hoc dimittitur quid non dimittitur? Aug in Ps. 45. p.
287
says S. Austen, more grievous to be committed by a Sinner the Patient, the^
the murdering of his Physician? What greater offense can the sicke-man make,
then if so be he should slaughter him? When such a sin as this, so great an
offense is for given, what is it, that is not, that cannot be forgive^? He
alludes to that of S. Peter, who telling the Jews how they crucified and slew
Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among them with great works, and
wonders, and signs, and so forth: yet said unto them notwithstanding, Act.
2.38.
Amend your lives, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ
for the remission of sins; and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.
And thus much of the Goodness of God, the second Fountain, or Head I told you
of. Now concerning his Justice, which I told you was the third Head, and
comprehending these twain: And not making the wicked innocent, visiting the
iniquity of the Fathers upon the children, and upon childrens children, unto
the third and fourth generation. First of the former [And not making the wicked
innocent.]

He that justifies the wicked, Prove. v. 17.15.
says Solomon, and he that condemns the just, even they both are abomination
to the Lord. If the Lord speak thus of Magistrates (for of Magistrates he there
speaks) who represent him more especially then other sorts and states of men
whatsoever, well may he say in this place concerning the wicked as he does,
especially being to give them example by himself. Besides that it follows
well here, And not making the wicked innocent, in regard of the premises that
went before. For least upon the hearing thus of sins forgiven, the wicked
should sooth up themselves, that theirs should be forgiven too, and as it is in
Deuteronomy. 29.19.
Deuteronomy, he should bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have
peace, although I walk according to the stubbornness of my own heart, thus
adding drunkenness unto thirst: there is a Supersedeas for all such, The Lord,
Deuteronomy. 29.20.
says Moses, will not be merciful unto him, and likewise another here in this
place, And not making the wicked innocent. I, but who are the wicked here meant
in this place? and as we asked, and answered before who are the Elect, so let
us ask and answer now, who are the wicked. No man describes them better then
does the Prophet David, and the Apostle S. Paul out of him, from top to toe. He
tells us of their Throats, he tells us of their Tongues, he tells us of their
Lips, he tells of their Mouths, their Eyes, their Feet. Their THROAT, Romans 3.13.
says S. Paul, is an open Sepulcher, they have used their TONGVE to deceit:
the poison of Aspes is under their LIPS, whose MOUTH is full of cursing and
bitterness. Their FEET are swift to shed blood. Destruction and calamity are
in their ways. And the way of peace they have not known. The fear of God is
not before their EYES. I will conclude this point of not making the wicked
innocent, with that of the Prophet David, Ps. 11.6. The Lord allows the
righteous: but the ungodly, and him that delights in wickedness, does his
soul abhor. Upon the ungodly he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone,
storm and tempest: this shall be their portion to drink. And so I come to the
latter Attribute, and consequently to the last of al: Visiting the iniquity of
the Fathers upon the children, and upon childrens children, unto the third and
fourth generation.

I may say of this later Attribute as speaks the Poet in an other case, Qui
venit hic fluctus, fluctus supereminet omnes; Ovid. Trist. l. 1. Eleg. 2.
and indeed of all the waves that went before, none is comparable unto this.
Begin we with the word it self Visiting, and how harshly does it sound not to
the worst sort of people, Scholars. Scholasticus est Plin. 2. Epist. l. 2 Ep.
3.
says Pliny, quo genere hominum nihil aut simplicius, aut syncerius, aut
melius: Isaeus says Pliny is a Scholar, then which kind of men none more
honest in their dealing, none more sincere, none better. And yet even among
such should a Visitatio^ be had, how would every man blush thereat, that in any
wise respects the credit of his College. And yet you know who Diog. Laere. l.
6. in Diegene.
said it, Magni fures paruum ducunt, The Judge may be worse, then the Felon
that stands at bar. It is not so with God and us. Come we to the matter that is
visited, and that is iniquity. Si iniquitates observaueris Domine Ps 130.3.
says David, Domine quis sustinebit? If thou Lord wilt be extrea^e to mark
what is done amiss: oh Lord who may abide it? But this is not all nether, for
come we to the manner here, and it seems not our own Iniquity, but the
Iniquity of the Fathers upon the children, I, and upon childrens children, even
unto the third and fourth generation. See Beloved, the greatest affliction that
can in this world happen to man. Many an one there is no doubt that is reachles
of himself; come rack, come rope, the words were Vid. D. Fulck against the
Defense of the Censure. p. 138.
Campians, he cares not, he fears not, he will do it though he die for it a
thousand deaths: but when he sees his children in hazard, and that his
posterity shall rue his fault, Virg. Aeneid. l. 3
Et nati natorum, et qui nascentur ab illis, that is, as here is said, His
children, and his childrens children unto the third and fourth generation, then
will he be moved to remorse, that had not many days before a world of
wickedness in his heart. Let me instance in that dishonorable knight Sr Everard
Digby, one of those hellish Powder-rowt, who combining himself with that
cursed crew and most desperate Catelines of our age, what little reckning did
he make of the whole State of this our Land. Of his most excellent MAJESTY, a
king not to be paraleld in the world, his Gracious Consort our Sovereign
QVEENE, the worthy Successor of Queen Elzabeth, that worthy PRINCE too too
worthy to live any longer amongst us, his HIGHNESS that now lives, and grant oh
God, he may live Dan. 3.9.
even for ever, the Reverende PRELATES, the worthy NOBLES, the whole KINGDOM
it self, when as they were all of them designed to a perpetual destruction.
Did he not hope, and those his Accomplices, to see our 2. Esd. 10.21
Sanctuary laid wast, our Altar broken down, our Temple destroyed: our
Psalterion to faint, our Song to cease, our Mirth to vanish away, and the light
of our Candlestick to be quenched, and the Arc of our Covenant taken away,
and our Holy Things defiled, and the Name that is called upon over us,
altogether dishonored, and our Children put to shame, and our Priests burnt,
and our Levites carried into captivity, and our Virgins defiled, and our Wives
ravished, and our Righteous men spoiled, and our Children destroyed, and our
young me^ brought into bondage, and our strong men become weak: And which is
the greatest of al, Syon the seal to loose her worship, and to be delivered
into the hands of them that hate us? And yet The proceed ngs against the late
Trayters. p. L. 3. b.
HE in the peril of his private and domestical estate, how did he presently
put on the bowels of Nature, and Compassion, making petition forsooth for his
Son, that he (with his Majesty's leave) might have the benefit of an Entaile,
and so to succeed him in his Lands. Non me fugit Tully Epist. ad Brutum. Ep. 12.
says Tully, quam sit acerbum Parentu^ seclora Filiorum poenis lui. Sed hoc
praeclare legibus comparatum est, vt charitas liberorum amiciores Parents
Reip. redderet. I am not ignorant how hard it is that Children should be
punished for their Fathers treasonable facts. But full well did the Laws
provide it should be so, that the love which Parents did bear unto their
Children, might make those Parents more respective to the Commonweal. Now if
so be the love of Children, and fear of their miscarrying, might indeere the^
so far to the love of the Commonweal which could but kill their bodies
only, as Mat 10.28.
speaks our Savior, how ought they to fear him which is able to destroy
themselves, their Children, and Childrens Children, unto the third and fourth
generation, both Souls and Bodies in hell.

Oh but thou will say: what? and shall I be punished then for that which was my
Fathers fault? Genesis 18 25
Shall not the Judge of all the world do right? Or shall we renew that ancient
Proverb again, Ezech. 18.2
The Fathers have eaten sower grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge?

Virg. Aen. l. 1
Tantaene animis coelestibus irae? Nay Beloved, mistake me not.

Virg. Aen. l. 6
Nullae hic insidiae tales: absiste moueri:
Nec vim VERBA ferunt.
For it is not to be so understood, that if the Parents be wicked, and the
Children be godly, he will punish the Children for the Fathers sake: no, God
forbid. But if so be the Child follow a wicked Fathers steps, and his Child
his, and so along, then will he shower down plagues on that house, and root
out that Family from the Earth; there shall not be one left that makes water
against a wall. Thus was it prophesied of Jeroboam: Behold 1. Kin. 14.10
says the Lord, I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut of
from Jeroboam him that pisseth against the wall, as well him that is shut up,
as him that is left in Israel, and will sweep away the remnant of the house
of Jeroboam, as a man sweepeth away dung, till it be all gone. But thus much
of the Attributes, or Properties of God, my next care is to be, to entreat of
his works; wherefore of his Works Godwilling the next time.

In the mean time HE so bless us, and the seed that has been sown, etc.

GODS WORKS. Lecture 5. April. 22. 1613.

FOrasmuch as there is no end of the Greatness of God Quia magnitudinis Dei
non est finis, and cum qu^m non capimus laudare debemus: tanquam deficientes in
eius magnitudine vt reficiamur eius bonitate, ad Opera respiciamus, and de
Operibus laudemus operantem, de conditis conditorem, de creatura creatorem.
Aug. in Ps 144.
says S. Austen, and we ought to praise him whom we for our parts cannot
conceive: for we are utterly deficient in his Greatness, to the end that we may
be refreshed by his Goodness, let us view and consider his Works, and in
regard of th^se his Works, let us praise him the Worke-man, in regard of those
things made, let us praise him the Maker, in regard of the Creature, let us
praise him the Creator. Having formerly declared to you, First the Essence of
God whereby to know him, secondly his Attributes, or his Properties, and in
both of them coming too too short of conceiving his Greatness indeed, what
remains in the last place, but that we now come unto his WORKS: that so
refreshed with his Goodness, and taking a view of those his Works, we not
only praise the Workman, and Maker, and Creator of them, as speaks S. Austen,
but fully finish also, and make an end of that one point of Divinity proposed
in the beginning, and in my first Division, concerning GOD. To this end and
purpose have I chosen at this time, a passage of the Apostle S. Paul's, who in
the 17. Chapter of the Acts, the 24, 25, 26, and 27 verses, speaks on this
wise.

God that made the world, and all things that are therein, seeing that he is
Lord of Heaven, and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands. Neither is
worshipped with men's hands as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to
al life, and breath and all things. And has made of one blood all mankind, to
dwell on all the face of the earth, and has assigned the times which were
ordained before, and the bounds of their habitatio^, that they should seek the
Lord if so be they might have groped after him, and found him, though
doubtless he be not far from every one of us. I shall not need to acquaint you
here with the occasion of these words, that would now be to little purpose, and
as little suitable at this time to the matter I have in hand. I come to the
words themselves which first entreat of Gods Works: secondly of the
Powerfulness of those Works to make us to seek after God. Now the Works of
God are named here, partly in general; partly in particular. Those which are
in general are the World, and All things that are therein: that which is in
particular; is the Creation of Man. Of both in their several order, and first
of the Works of God here named in general: God that made the World and all
things that are therein, etc.

Great is the commendation that Matrob. Saturn. l. 5. c. 1. p. 506.
Macrobius gives unto Virgil for a certain hemistichium of his.

Vis audire says he, illum tanta brevitate dice^tem, vt arctarimagis and
contrahi brevitas ipsa non possit?

-- Et campos vbi Troia fuit. Ecce paucissimis verbis maximam civitatem hausit,
and absorpsit: non reliquit illi nec ruinam. Speaking immediately again of the
same Poet, and how he handled the self same matter in an other place, after a
most copious kind of manner, when as he had rehearsed some nine of his verses
to that purpose, Venit summa dies, and ineluctabile fatum
Dardaniae, and so forth;
(where yet it is in Virgil, and ineluctabile tempus) Quis sons, says he, quis
torrens, quod mare tot fluctibus, quot hic verbis invndavit? He praised him
before for his Brevity, for that in those words, -- Et Campos vbi Troia fuit,
Brevitie it self could not have been comprised more briefly. He swallowed up,
says Macrobius, in the fewest words that could be, the greatest City that ever
was: he left it not so much as any rubbish to be seen. Which Virgil, says he,
in another place speaking again of the self same City passes both
Fountains, and Rivers, and Seas in plenty of words. That which Moses says in
so many words in the first Chapter of Genesis (and Moses as (...). Theodoret.
Ad Graec. Infid. Ser. 2. p. 29.
speaks Theodoret was the Ocean of Divinity) our Apostle guided here by the
self same Spirit that Moses was, compriseth in these few: The world and all
things that are therein. Look we back unto Moses, and consider his words of
the creation, and Quis fons, quis torrens, quod mare tot fluctibus, quot hic
verbis in vndavit? what Fountain, what River, nay what Sea can abound with so
many waves, as Moses there does with words? But come we again unto the Apostle
here, and consider we these words; The world, and all things that are
therein, and Quam multa, quam paucis, as Tully Tull. Epist. Fam. l. 11. p. 24.
speaks, in how few words, how many diverse and sundry things may we see
contained! As the creation of the light; the creation of Heaven; the creation
of the Earth; the Sea, Herbs, and Trees; the creation of the Sun and Moon,
and Stars; the creation of Whales, and Fishes, and fethered Foul; the
creation of the Beasts of the Earth, and Cattle, and every creeping thing of
the Earth, as also of Adam and Eve, from whom our selves first came. In a word
nothing now whatsoever within the whole compass of this world, but was created
then at that time, if not in the Individuum, yet doubtless in the Species of
it. Excellent and most eloquent is that passage of Tertullian to this purpose,
I will english it as I Sic censeo. Venere propria, quasique nativo cuiusque
linguae decore foveri sententias quasdam, subnixasque certis, vt ita dicam,
idiotismi fulluris sustinevi: quam in alia^ quasi Coloniam si deducas: iide^
sane sint cives: gratiam pristinae commendationis non retinebunt. Card.
Exercit. 294. p. 871.
may. The rule of Truth, Regula exigit veritatis vt primo omnium credamus in
Deum Patrem and Dominum omnipotentem, id est, rerum omnium perfectissinum
conditorem, qui Coelum alta sublimitate suspenderit, terram deiecta mole
solidaverit, maria soluto liquore diffuderit, and haec omnia propriis and
condignis instrumentis and ornala and plena digesserit. Nam and in solidamento
coeli luciferos Solis ortus excitavit, Lunae candentem globu^ ad solatium
noctis incrementis orbis implevit, Astrorum etiam variis radiis fulgoribusque
micantis lucis noctem accendit and haec omnia legitimis meatibus circumire
totum mundi ambitum voluit, humano generi dies, menses, annos, signa, tempora,
vtilitatesque factura. In terris quoque altissimos mo^tes in verlicem sustulit,
valles in ima d^ieci^, campas aequaliter stravit, animalium greges ad varias
hominum servitutes vtiliter instituit. Sylvarum quoque robora humanis vsibus
profutura solidavit, fruges in cibum elicuit, fontium or a reseravit, and
lapsuris fluminibus infudit. Postea vt ipsis quoque delicias procuraret oculis,
variis florum coloribus ad voluptatem sectantium cuncta vestiuit. In ipso
quoque Mari, quamvis esset, and magnitudine and vtilitate mirabile, multimoda
animalia, nuac mediocris, nunc vasti corporis finxit, ingenium artificis de
institutionis varietate testantia. Quibus non contentus ne forte fremitus and
cursus aquarum cum dispendio possessoris humani alienum occuparet elementum,
fines littoribus inclusit: quo cum fremens fluctus and ex alto sinu spumans
vnda venisset, rursum in setediret, nec terminos concesses excederet, servans
iura praescripta: vt divinas leges tanto magis homo custodiret, quanto illas
etiam elementa servassent. Post quae hominem quoque mundo praeposuit, and
quidem ad imaginem Dei factum: cui mentem and rationem indidit, and prudentiam
vt Deum posset imitari: cuius etsi corporis terrena primordia, co^lestis ^ame^
and divini halitus inspirata substantia. Tertul. de Trin. p. 493.
says he, exacteth at our hands, that first of all we believe in God the
Father and Lord Omnipotent, that is, the most absolute Maker, and Creator of
all things, who has builded the Heavens on high, and fixed the Earth beneath,
and bespred the Sea with moisture, and has trimmed, and dressed every of these
with all such necessaries as are behoofull for them. For first concerning
Heaven, he has caused therein the bright-some rising of the Sun, the shining
globe of the Moon he has filled with augmentation to lighten the night
withal, as also with the many beams, and brightness of the Stars, all
which he would that with orderly proceedings they should compass the whole
world, making for the benefit of mankind both days, and months, and years,
and signs, and times, and commodities. Secondly concerning the Earth, he has
made therein the Hills, and Mountains of an excessive height, the Vallyes and
Dales he has depressed as low, the Meddowes and Pastures he has smoothly
spread in carpet wise, he has ordained the herds of Cattle for the sundry
services of men. He has made stable, sure, and strong, the bodies of Oak and
Timber, for the service of Man too, he has brought Corn out of the earth, and
made it fit for meat, he has unclosed the heads of Fountains, and powered
forth the same into the glyding Rivers. Afterward that he might procure
delight unto the eye, he has clothed the Earth with sundry kinds of flowers.
Thirdly concerning the Sea, howsoever it was exceeding admirable both for
quantity and vtility, yet has he formed and framed therein diverse and sundry
kinds of Beasts, some of less, some of a greater Bulcke, all testifying unto
us the wisdom of their Maker in respect of the variety of their making.
Wherewith not yet contenting himself, least happily the ruffling and raging
thereof should to the hurt and loss of Man the owner, incroach on the other
Element, he has appointed bownds unto the shore, whereunto when the roaring
stoods, and boisterous waves are once come, they should back again with heave
and hoe, neither should they exceed the limits granted unto them, but keep
themselves within their set bowndes, all to teach Man to observe Gods Laws,
seeing the Elements themselves are so obedient thereunto. After all these
things rehearsed he has placed Man over the world, made in truth at first to
the similitude of God: to whom he has given a mind, and reason, and wisdom,
that he might imitate the same God. Whose Body howsoever it had an earthly
beginning, yet was a substance inspired into him of a divine and heavenly
breathing. Thus for Tertullian. Whose words since I cannot give them the true
perfection they should have, you may find them in the Author himself, and
they are very well worth your looking over. But to come unto my purpose.

All these things thus specified as they could have been made in a moment, so
is it not amiss for us to consider in what space of time they were made. Moses
informs us of Six Birth-daies that all these Things had, and indeed they were
no less that went to the dispatching and finishing of them. In the first of
them was made Materia prima: The Prime Mother of all things being, as also
Light and Darkness. In the second, the Heavens, those celestial Orbs above.
In the third, he brought the Sea into his own peculiar compass, and making the
Dry Land to appear, he caused it to bring forth both Herbs, and Plants, and
Trees. In the fourth, he made the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars in the
Firmament. In the fifth, he made the Fishes of the Sea, the Fowls, and every
creeping thing. In the sixth he made the Beasts of the field, and all Cattle;
and at length he made Man. Musc. Loc. Comm. cap. de Creat. p. 12,
Musculus has concluded all this in four only verses which he would have
young men to have by heart. The verses are these: PRIMA Dies luce^; Coelum
ALTERA; TERTIA Terram;
Sydera QVARTA; SEQVENS Piscem habet et Volucrem:
SEXTA Animal quodvis, Hominemque ex pulvere terrae
Protulit: at SABATHVM septima lux tenuit.
They may in homely wise be englished thus.

FIRST Day had light: the SECOND Heaven:
the THIRD the Earths round bowl:
The FOVRTH the Sun, and Moon, and Stars:
the FIFTH both Fish, and Foul:
The SIXTH bruit Beasts, and Cattle eke,
and brought forth Man withal,
SEVENTH Day had rest, and that it is,
which we the Sabbath call.
Here if a doubt arise concerning the Angels, why Moses in describing the
creation of all other Creatures omitted them: I for my part am of Zanchius his
opinion, that Moses has not omitted them altogether, but has comprehended
them, though in secret wise, in the first words of his Book. For where he
said, Genesis 1.1. (...)
In the beginning God created the Heaven, and the Earth, In nomine coelorum,
Shammaijm, Zanc. de Oper. Dei. l. 1. c. 2. p. 13. Col. 2.
says he, Angelos comprehendi non dubito, quorum seeds coelum est supremum. I
nothing doubt but under the name of Heaven the Angels are comprehended, whose
seat is the highest Heaven. Whosoever desires to see more hereof, and on what
day it is probable, that they were created, and why Moses speaks not of them
in as direct terms, and as roundly, as he does of Things visible, I refer
you unto Zanchius, as also to a M. Salkeld his Treatise of Angels. c. 3. p. 16.
Treatise of Angels set forth not long ago. To return then where I left.

Having thus much spoken in general of the Creation of the World, and all
things therein contained, it will further our knowledge herein; if so be we do
consider, First, of what he made this world; Secondly, how he made it. Of what
this world was made is intimated unto us in the Hebrew word, Bara signifying,
Creavit. (...)
Now for the Latin word Creavit, how soever sometimes it is truly spoken of
many things as Men, and other Creatures, which are borne by propagation: as
Live. Decad. 1. l. 1.
Livy speaking of Sylvius the son of Ascanius, Is, says he, Aeneam Sylvium
creat: is deinde Latinum Sylvium: Sylvius begot Aeneas Sylvius, and Aeneas
Sylvius, Latinus Sylvius: yet proprijssime Zanch. de Oper. l. 1. c. 2. p. 9.
Col. 1.
says Zanchius, and simpliciter tum aliquid dicitur creari, cum ex nihilo
aliquid fit, simply and most properly that is said to be created, when
something is made of nothing. Now this particle Ex, Ex nihilo, Of nothing, as
the same Zanch. Ib. c. 3 p. 31. Col. 2.
Zanchius well observes, sometimes signifies the material cause, whereof
somewhat is made, sometimes order only, as when we say, Ex mane fit dies, and
ex die meridies: of the morning day is made, and of the day Noone-tide: that
is, after the morning comes the day, and after the day has begun, Noone-tide.
So likewise in this place, All things are made of nothing: that is, when as
nothing at all was at first, afterward whatsoever was, the same was made. This
I confess was gibberish to Aristotle, who doated on Nature so much: but as one
said in the Virg. Egl. 1.
Poet, Quid facerem? neque servitio me exire licebat,
Nec tam praesentes alibi cognoscere Divos,
What would you have me do? Neither could I put of my service wherewith at
first I was so fettered, nor once suppose that there were elsewhere so
favorable Gods: right so in this case was it with Aristotle, sworne-man he was
to Nature, neither ever dreamt he of the true God. Where in let us see yet how
he himself, and the crew of Philosophers that followed his steps, stumbled (as
it were) at strawes and leapt over blocks: how many Argoes eyes they had
abroad, and were at home as blind as Beetles. The Intelligences, and Souls of
Men they could not be ignorant how they were made, without praevious, or
precedent matter at all, for even by their own confession they are
immateriall, they are not logd and clogd with Matter. Now God that could this
do, and does it daily even by their confession (I mean concerning the Souls
of men) could not he at first have made this World, and all things therein
contained without any help of Matter at al? was the Lords hand so Esaias. 50.21
shortened? Or had he then forsooth no power? Does he as much in a manner now,
and could he not do it at the first? Indeed could God have done no more then
Nature, it had been somewhat they had said: for true it is in Nature, Ex
nihilo nihil fit: of nothing naught is made. Art does imitate Nature, wherefore
as Nature must needs have somewhat to work on, so of necessity must Art to,
and therefore the Potters art Theod. Div. Decret. epit. l. 5. p. 985. Col. 1.
says Theodoret, that requires clay: the art of building stones and brick: the
Carpenters and Shipwrights, wood and timber: the art of Weaving, woole: of
Tanning and Currying, hides and skins: of Painting, colors. But it is not so
with God, he calls those things which be not, as though they were, Romans 4.17,
And through faith, says the Apostle, we understand that the world was ordained
by the word of God, so that the things which we see are not made of things
which did appear, Heb. 11.3. I conclude this point with that of Musculus; if
so be Musc. Loc. Com. Cap. de Creat, p. 11.
says Musculus, it be demanded whence God created al things, our answer is,
that he created some things of nothing, some things of the earth, some things
of the water, and some things of flesh. He created of nothing the Heaven, the
Earth, and Sea. Of the earth he created Adam our first Parent, and Beasts, and
Plants, and Herbs of every kind. Of the waters he created Fishes, and Fowls
of the air. Of flesh he made Eve the first Mother of mankind. All which
notwithstanding (as Vrfin. Catech. Angl. edit. 1611 p. 311.
one observes) were either immediately, or mediatly made of Nothing, forasmuch
as the prime matter of all at the first had a beginning from Nothing. And thus
much of the first point, namely of what he made this world: I now come to the
Second, namely how he made it.

How God did make the World we need no better Instructor the^ that excellent
Singer of Israel David the Prophet, who shows us in a many places that the
World was made by the Word. As Psalm. 33.6. By the word says he, of the Lord
were the Heavens made, and all the hoasts of them by the breath of his mouth:
and again in the 9 verse, For he spoke, and it was done: he commanded and it
stood fast: And Psalm. 148.5, For he spoke the word, and they were made, he
commanded, and they were created. For the better proceeding wherein we are to
observe Vrsin. Ib. 9. 310.
five kinds of operations. The first of things which work according to the
quality and force of their own nature, not being guided by any proper
understanding or will of their own. Such is the operation of Fire, Water,
Herbs and precious Stones. The second is of those which follow Nature in
working to, but not without some proper appetite, or desire of their own,
though the rule of reason be wanting. Of this sort are the operations and
actions of bruit Beasts. The third is of Men, and Devils, who also work
according to the quality of their nature, namely by reason, deliberation, and
freely, but corruptly. The fourth is of good Angels who likewise as Men work
by reason and will, but not corruptly. The fifth is the highest, and supreme
kind of working, which according to the nature of the first Agent flows from
an understanding, and will, and that most pure, most perfect, and most right,
neither is it subject to the pleasure, and disposing of any higher cause. And
therefore this Agent, who is indeed God himself, is most wise, most good, most
free and most infinite, who has no need of any deliberation to go before, but
without motion, at his beck and commandment only, works and guides all
things, both what he will, and as he will. Ps. 148.5.
He spoke the word, and they were made, he commandeded, and they were created.
Howbeit here we are to know that the Word of God is taken in the Scriptures,
generally and specially. Generally, and so it is taken either for every thing,
as Luke 1.37: or for the doctrine of God, as Ioh. 8.47: or for things that have
been done, as Luke 1.2. Specially, and so is it taken or for the promise of
God, as Ephesians. 5.26: or Gods decree, as Esaias 45.23: or for the commandment of
God, as Deuteronomy. 4.2: or for condemnation, sentence, and judgment, as Esaias, 28.
14: or for the Son of God the second Person in Trinity as Ioh. 1.1: or
lastly for his beck only as Heb. 1.3, Bearing up all things by his mighty
word, and so it is in this place. By the word of the Lord, Ps. 33.6.
says David, were the heavens made, and all the hoasts of them by the breath
of his mouth. And thus much of the second point, and consequently of the Works
of God, that are named here in general: now of that One that is named here in
particular, and that is Man. And has made of one blood all mankind to dwell
on all the face of the Earth, and has assigned the times, that were ordained
before, and the bownds of their habitation.

Being to speak, Beloved, of MAN, I may say as did Tiberius the Emperor, when
he wrote to the Senate of Rome. Tacit. Anal. l. 6. p. 189.
Quid scribam vobis P.C. aut quomodo scribam, aut quid omnino non scribam hoc
tempore, Dij me Deaeque peius perdant, qua^ perire quotidie sentio, si scio.
What it is I should write unto you Fathers of the Senate, or how I should write
unto you, or what at this time I should not write, the Gods and Goddesses more
afflict me, then I feel my self to be every hour, if I for my part, can now
tell. Right so, Beloved, set the execration aside, or this of Tiberius, or that
of Iezabels, The Gods do so to me, and more also, 1. King. 19.2. and what to
say, or not to say, to speak or write of Man, I for my part know not. Shall I
tell you of the excellency, and nobility of his Birth, how God wrought him with
his own hands (as you heard not Lect. 3. p. 33.
long ago out of Job. 10.9.
Job, and out of Ps. 139.14. and Ps. 119.73.
David) how he is Iavel. Epit. in lib. Metaph. Tract. 1. c. 1. Tom. 1. p. 357.
Col. 1. Vid. Conimb. in 2. de Coelo, q. 2. Art. 2 p. 184. So Picol. Copula and
bymenaeus mortal. and aeternor. Picolom. Ethic. l. 2. c. 32. p. 174. Again,
Mortalium finis, permanentium and flux ilium copula Mundique Epil^gus. Piccl.
Ib. c. 39. p. 184.
Nexus Dei, and Mundi, as some call him, as others, Horizon inter corporea and
incorporea; A fastening or knitting together of God and the World: The Horizon
between corporeal things, and things incorporeall? In a word how he is placed
here in this world by God that made him, to be the Ps. 8.6. So Tertui. Omnia
famula sunt hominis, omnia subiecta, omnia mancipata. Tertul. de Anima. c. 15.
p. 552.
Monarch of the same? That were the next way, Terent. Eunuch. Act. 2. Sc. 2.
ex stulto insanum facere: with pride and self conceit, to set him quite
besides himself. Shall I with Principium iure tribuitur Homin^, cuius causa
videtur cuncta alia genuisse Natura magna and saeva mercede contra tanta sua
munera: vt non sit satis aestimare, Parens melior homini, an tristior Noverca
fuerit. Ante omnia vnum animantium cunctorum, alienis velat operibus: caeteris
varia tegumenta tribuit, testas, cortices, ceria, spinas, villos, setas, pilos,
plumam, pennas, squamas, vellera. Truncos etiam arboresque cortice, interdum
gemino, a frigoribus and calore tutata est. Hominem ta^tum nudum and in nuda
humo, natali die abiicit ad vagitus statim and ploratum, nullumque tot
animalium aliud ad lachrymas, and has protinus vitae principio. At Hercule
rifus praecox ille and celerrimus, ante quadragesimum diem nulli datur Abhoc
lucis rudimento, quae ne feras quidem inter nos genitas, vincula accipiunt, and
omnium membrorum nexus: itaque feliciter natus iacet, manibus pedibusque
devinctis, flens, animal caeteris imperaturum: and a suppliciis vitam
auspicatur, vnam tantum ob culpam quia natum est. Heu dementiam ab iis initiis
existimantium ad superbiam se genitos. Prima roboris spes, primumque temporis
munus Quadrupedi similem facit. Quando homini incessus? quando vox? quando
firmum cibis os?? quamdiu palpitans vertex, summae inter cuncta animalia
imbecillitatis indicium? Iam morbi, totque medicinae contra mala excogitatae,
and hae quoque subinde novitatibus victae. Caetera sentire naturam suam, alia
pernicitatem vsurpare, alia praepetes volatus, alia vires, alia nare: Hominem
scire nihil sinc doctrina, non fari, non ingredi, non vefci: breviterque non
aliud naturae sponte quam flerc. Plin. Nature. Hist. l. 7. Prooem. p. 105.
Pliny then tell you of his miseries, and how of all other living Creatures,
Nature has brought him forth altogether naked, and afterward when he is
clothed, clothing him yet with the bounty, and riches of others? how to all
the rest she has given sufficient to clad them according to their kind, as
Shells, Hides, Shag, Bristles, Hair, Feathers, Quils, Scales, and Wool? I how
the very truncks, and stems of Trees, and Plants, want not their Bark and
rind, yea and sometimes double too, to defend them against the injuries both of
heat and cold: Man only poor wretch, how even upon his birthday she has laid
him naked on the Earth, there to pule and cry from the very first hour that he
is borne, so that no creature whatsoever is subject to shed tears, and weep
like him? Shall I tell you how when he is borne, he is immediately fast bound,
having no part or member at liberty, a thing, (as Pliny notes) not practiced
on the young whelps of the wildest Beast that is? Shall I tell you how long it
is ere he can afterward go alone? how long it is before he can prattle and
speak, feed himself, and chew his meat? how long the mould and crown of his
Head continues to beat and pant before his brain be well settled, the undoubted
mark, and token, says Pliny, that bewrays his exceeding great weakness
above all other Creatures whatsoever? Shall I tell you of his infirmities and
sicknesses that seize upon his feeble Body, besides the new diseases that
happen unto him continually, able to check and frustrate all provision of
Physic, and skill of the most expert Galen that is? shall I tell you how
among all other Creatures there is not one, but by a secret instinct of nature
knows his own good, and whereto he is made able: some make use of the
swiftness of their feet, some of their wings, some are strong of limme, others
apt to swim, Man only knows nothing unless he be taught, he can neither
speak, nor go, nor eat, otherwise then he is trained to it, and to be short
how naturally he is apt and good at nothing but to pule and cry? Surely this
were even enough to make us bid defiance to Nature, and under that pretense to
blaspheme even God himself. Whether then shall we turn our selves? To which
of these two ways shall we betake us? we will venture on the former, and so
much the rather on that, for that if in consideration of our Excellency we be
puffed up too too far, we are like to have day by day Monitors enough to put us
in mind of our Mortality. He that said of our Betters, I have said ye are
Gods: and ye all are children of the most highest, Psalm. 86.1.
said with one and the self same breath: but ye shall die like men.

Concerning our Creation the^ it appertains to consider: Vid M. Bunnies
Corner Ston l. 1. c. 1. 6. p. 7.
First of the making of our Bodies, and then how they are endued with a living
Soul. Concerning our Bodies we are to note the Vid. Cyril. Catech. 4. Edit.
Paris. 1608. p. 88. and Catech. 9. p. 195.
wonderful composition, and connection thereof, the just proportion,
convenience, and beauty of every part. This it was that caused Galen to write
that excellent Book De Vsu Partium, wherein he describes with admirable
cunning, the knitting together, the proportionable agreement, the beauty and
use of every member, and among others has this passage: Admire not, Galen. de
Vsu Part. l. 3. c. 10.
says he, the Suns beauty, nor the beauty of the Moon: nor that the
multitude of the Stars are so well digested in such good order. Nor let their
greatness, or beautifulness, or restles motion, or compass, and circuits,
that they continually use, strike thee with admiration, as if those things
which are here below in comparison of them should seem but small and base to
be accounted of, and to want indeed their luster and excellency. For thou shall
find that even in these things (he means the several Parts of Man) the
wisdom, and virtues, and providence of the Creator does show and declare it
self, and that the workemans art and cunning is as much in these, as in any of
those whatsoever. The more wicked and absurd were the Manichees of old (with
who^ another day this very Mat 12.42.
Heathen shall rise in judgment and condemn them) who held that the Body
Alfons. de Castr. advers. haer. l. 4. p. 269.
of Man was evil by Nature, and that the Devil was the Maker of it. Nor shall
they be quit of al their punishment who held this Heresy but by halfes, I
mean the Paterniani, and Venustiani, who said as much of the lower parts, as
did the Manichees of all. I cannot now stand about them, only I will say with
S. Austen: Caro igitur opus Dei est. Cum formatur, opus Dei est: cum conditur,
opus Dei est: cum prodicitur, Dei opus est: cum regeneratur, opus Dei est: cum
signatur, opus Dei est: cum curatur, opus Dei est. Quid debet Diabolo totiens
opus Dei? Aug. de Verb. Apost. ser. 26. p. 260. So Tertull. Corpus istud
Platonica sententia carcer [(...) qu. (...)] ceterum Apostolica, Dei Templum
cum in Christo est. Tertul. de Anima c. 30. p 573. Vid. David's Desire. Ser, 4.
p. 19. and Ser. 2. p. 91.
The flesh when it is formed, it is the work of God: when it is made, it is
Gods work: when it is brought forth it is God's work too: when it is
regenerated it is Gods work: when it is signed, it is Gods work: when it is
healed, it is Gods work. What trow we has the Devil to do at all, with that
which is so oftentimes and so many ways Gods work. But thus much of the Body,
now as touching the Soul.

As touching the Soul we are to note two principal points. First and foremost
whence it is, then the Nature or Excellency of it. Whence it is we are so much
the rather to make enquiry, for that Vid. M Bunies Corner stone l. 1 c. 1.. 6.
p. 9
Diverse by such likelyhoods as they have conceived, have taken the Soul to be
nothing else in effect but only some Elementary Concretion, and so consequently
both to follow the temperature of the Body, and to be but Mortal also. Whereas
in truth as it was first of all breathed into Adam, so is it (though not in
that manner) into al and every of us that come of him, that being most true
which In medio hominis (alluding to that of Zachary Zach. 12. 1. Spiritum
hominis in m^dio eius fingit, according to Vatablus) creando infunditur, and
infundendo creatur, Zanch. de Oper. Part. 3. l. 2. c. 5. These. 3. p. 559. Col.
2.
Tertullian, and Gregory Nyssen, cited by Colerus. Quaest. Theol. and
Philosoph. Number. Anima sit ex traduce. p. 5.
Zanchius has, that the Soul in the midst of man is infused by creating, and
by infusing is created. So that we have not our Souls Ex traduce, by
Propagation as we have our Bodies, though there are I confess great men and
some of the s Fathers to, that hold this opinion. Concerning the state of the
Soul Hieron. Epist. ad Marcel. and Anaps.
says S. Jerome writing to Marcellinus, and Anapsychias, I remember your
question very well, nay indeed the Churches question, WHETHER it came from
Heaven, as Pythagoras the Philosopher, and all the Platonists, and Origin
thinks: or, WHETHER it be of the proper and peculiar substance of God, as the
Stoics, the Manichees, and the heretical Priscillianists of Spain suppose:
or, WHETHER they are reserved in Gods treasure made a long time before they
came, or descended, into the Body, as some Ecclesiastical Persons foolishly are
persuaded: or, WHETHER daily they are made by God, and so sent into the Bodies,
according to that in the Gospel, My Father works hitherto, and I work: or,
WHETHER it be ex traduce, as Tertullian, Apollinarius, and the greatest part of
the West are of opinion, that as the Body is borne of the Body, so the Soul
should be borne of the Soul, and be of like condition, as are the Souls of
bruit Beasts. Whereupon S. Jerome: What my opinion is I remember I have
delivered in my works against Ruffinus. Now his opinion there was this. When
Ruffinus had said that he for his part held nothing positiuely, and
definitiuely in this Question, but left the truth thereof to God himself, and
to whomsoever he would reveal it: What! Per tanta sacula tibi nullus videtur
dignus fuisse, cui de hac quaestione Dominus revelavit? Non Patriarcha, non
Propheta, non Apostolus, non Martyr? Ne tibi quidem quando in carceribus, and
exiliis morabaris, huiusmodi sacramenta patuerunt? Dominus in Evangelio: Pater
inquit revelavi nomen tuum hominibus Qui Patrem revelavit, de animarum statu
tacuit? and miraris si contra te Fratrum scandala concitentur, cu^ id n^scire
te iures quod Christi Ecc^esiae se nosse fateantur? Hieron. advers. Ruf. Apol.
2.
says S. Jerome, throughout so many ages seems no man worthy in your eyes, to
whom the Lord has revealed the truth of this Question? Not any of the
Patriarks? nor of the Prophets? nor of the Apostles? nor of Martyrs? Why, man,
were not these mysteries made most apparent to you your self when you were in
prison, and in exile? Father Ioh. 17.6.
says our Savior in the Gospel, I have revealed thy name unto men. He that
revealed the Father, was he silent in this case concerning the state of Souls?
And now Sir do you marvel, if you give scandale to the Brethren, when as you
protest you know not that which all the Churches of Christ profess they know?
But thus much of the former point whence the Soul is.

Concerning the Nature, or Excellency of it as it partly appears hereby in
that it is made by God himself: so is it evident by the effects also, which it
works in the Body. For where before the coming thereof the Body in some sort
is like those Idols of which the Psalmist Ps. 115.5.
speaks: They have mouths and speak not: eyes have they and see not: they
have ears, and hear not: noses have they and smell not: they have hands and
handle not: feet have they and walk not: neither speak they through their
throat: the Anima moves corpus, and conatus eius extrinsecus foris po e^t. Ab
illa est enim impingi and pedea in incessum, and manus in contactum, and oculos
in conspectum, and linguam in offalum, velut sigillario motus superficiem intus
agitantem. Tertull. de Anima. c. 2. p 528.
Soul does no sooner come, but the Body has a power to perform all this, and
therefore in tract of time it speaks, it sees, it hears, it smells, it
handles, it walks, it performs, what not? And therefore Tull. Some. Scip.
Tully in this respect very truly, Men's cuiusque is est quisque: The Mind or
Soul of Man is all in all. By reason of this it is that he has the knowledge
of numbering, a point peculiar to himself: that he understands not things in
particular only, but in a generality and universality: that he inventeth and
disposes Arts, discerns Vice from Virtue, things honest from dishonest, and
rules (as it were the world) both Land and Sea. By reason of this it is that
though he has not as bruit Beasts either Feathers, or Wings to fly with, or
Swiftnes or Nimblenes of foot, or Finnes whereby to swim, or extraordinary
Strength, etc: yet has he that which French. Acad. Part. 2. c. 73. p. 407.
Vid. Lact. de Opific. Dei. c. 2. and 3. Senica de Benefic. l. 2. c. 29.
recompenceth and makes amends for all these. For though he has not Feathers
to fly with, and mount aloft as Birds do, yet how many means has he to
ascend, and descend, to go and come, even when and whither he will? If he want
himself the Swiftness and Footemanship of Beasts, yet how many Beasts are
there with whose swiftnes he may help himself? Though he has not Finnes
whereby to swim, and so to pass along the Seas, yet has he Boats and Ships to
help himself, and by reason of those helps, how is he conversant in that
Element? As for Strength which he may seem to want to bear burdens a far
of, we daily see how that is recompensed by the service of Beasts unto his use.
So that whatsoever he wants in himself, he has dominion yet over such as have
it, he is Lord Paramount (as it were) of the World, and al therein are at his
service. I will not here speak of our Vid. Calv. Inst. l. 2. c. 15.. 3.
Creation in the image of God: that is, of the integrity that Man had when as
he was endued with a right understanding, when he had his affection framed
according unto reason, and al his senses governed in good, and seemly order,
and when in Excellent gifts he did truly resemble the excellency of his
Creator. Alas we may now say, Fuimus Troes, we were when time was: Virg. Aen.
l. 2.
Fuit Ilium, and ingens
Gloria Teuerorum:
Paradise, and Calice, were once ours. But now, now we may say as Tull. de
Senect.
Milo did: At hi iam mortui sunt: our arms are not our own: and add what
follows there to, Non vero tam isti, quam tu ipse, nugator. Triflers as we
are, nay Traitors to God above, not our Arms so much, that is our Bodies, as
Souls and Bodies both. O Adam 2. Esd. 7.48.
says Esdras, What have thou done? For in that that thou have sinned, thou
art not fallen alone, but the fall also redou^deth to us that come of thee.
True it is, there are some relics in us of that Image whereunto we were
formerly created, but whether they are in respect of our Bodies only, or only
of our Souls, or in respect of both, Body and Soul both together, I will not
now dispute the case, I refer you unto Zanch. de Oper. Dei. Part. 3. l. 3. c.
1. p. 609. 610 etc. Omnis Anima eousque in Adam censetur, donec in Christo
recenseatur. Tertul. de Anima. c. 22. p 559.
Zanchius, who is likely to resolve you in this point no man better. Nor will I
here describe unto you that excellent consort and apt proportion which is
between the Heavens above, and the Body and Soul of Man: what correspondence
there is between Man and the Sun in the Firmament: between Man again, and
the Moon: Man and the other Planets: Man and the Stars: Man and those
celestial Orbs that are above, it is done already to my hand by an excellent
Plutarch in this kind Harm. coelest. corp. and human. per Anton. Mizald.
Monluciarum. Edit 1550
Antonius Mizaldus by way of Dialogue. I will end this point of the Nature and
Excellency of the Soul with that of S. Bernard: Bernard. super Cantic. Ser.
83. p. 184. Col. 3.
Quid non tute audeat apud Deum cuius se insignem cernit imagine, illustrem
similitudine novit? Quid inquam vereatur de maiestate, cui de origin fiducia
datur? What may not the Soul safely dare to do with God, by reason of whose
image she is so beautiful, whose similitude makes her so glorious? What need
she to fear that Majesty, who by reason of her birth may have such
confidence? It is that in effect which the Apostle has to the Hebrews, Heb.
4.16.
Let us go boldly to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find
grace to help in time of need. And thus much of the Works of God as here they
are named in general, and one of them in particular. Now of the Powerfulness
of these his Works to make us to seek after God: That they should seek the
Lord if so be they might have groaped after him, and found him, though
doubtless he be not far from every one of us.

As it stood with good congruity in the building of Babel that their tongues
should be confounded, and they should not understand one another, and so
perforce be every of them driven to leave of their intended work: so was it
necessary in building the Church that the Builders thereof should so speak as
that they should not only understand one an other, but be understood by their
Hearers to. This it was that was the cause of the first miracle that was
wrought by our Saviors Apostles after the Ascension, of whom it was said by
their Hearers, who were Ferus in Act. c. 2.
some of them of Asia, some of Afric, some of Europe the known parts of the
world at that time, Behold, say they, are not all these which speak of
Galile? How hear we every man our own language wherein we were borne? Act. 2.7.
Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the inhabitants of Mesopotamia, and of
Iudaea, and of Cappadocia, of Pontus, and Asia, and of Phrygia, and Pamphylia,
of Egypt, and of the parts of Libya, which is beside Cyrene, and strangers of
Rome, and Jews, and Proselites, Except I know the power of the voice, I shall
be unto him that speaks a Barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a
Barbarian unto me. 1. Cor. 14 11. Barbarus hic egosum quia non intelligor
ollis. Ovid, Trist. l. 5. ^leg. 10.
Cretes, and Arabians: we heard them speak in our own tongues the wonderful
works of God. Indeed as it is noted by a Calv. in Ps. 19
worthy Writer, and experience shows the same, the difference of tongues is
the cause that mutual communication betwixt diverse Nations does utterly
cease. And though one be most eloquent in his own language, yet if he come
among Strangers he must be feign to be mute and hold his peace, or if so be he
will needs speak, every one that is by, will account him but barbarous. Nay had
he the knowledge says Calvin of all the tongues in the World, yet could he not
speak at once to two sundry kinds of Men, as to a Greek, and a Roman to,
but as soon as he turned his speech or to the one, or to the other, the one or
other should not conceive him. Well fare a language then that goes throughout
the whole world. That not Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the
Inhabitants of Mesopotamia only, in a word not those of Asia, and Afric, and
Europe, can know and understand, but those of America to: nor only the learned
and profound, but he also that cannot a letter of the Book, even he that
says, as it is in Esaias, I cannot read, Esaias 29.12. And would you know what
language that is? It is the language of the Heavens: It is the language of the
Day and Night. And yet I am deceived too, for as I take it, it is no language
No, but it is a voice then, it is a sound, they are certain words; of which we
may much better say, then did the Pythagoraeans of Heavens harmony, Tull Some.
Scip.
Quis est, qui co^plet aures meas tantus and tam dulcis son us? witness the
Prophet David, who speaking of those heavenly Creatures (whereby he meant no
doubt the rest of the Creatures too) The Heavens, says he, declare the glory
of God: and the Firmament shows his handy Works. One day tells another:
and one night certifieth another. There is neither speech nor language: but
their voices are heard among them. Their sound is gone out into all lands: and
their words into the ends of the world. In the beauty of Heaven and Earth, In
pulchritudine coeli and terrae quaedam sunt paginae ad omnium oculos semper
patentes, and Autorem suum nunquam tace^tes, quarum protestatio doctrinam,
imitatur magistrorum and eloquia Scripturarum. Ambros. Epist. l. 10. Ep. 84. p.
263.
says S. Ambrose, there are as it were Leaves and Pages that always lie open
to every man's eye, and never are silent of their Author, the open protestation
and declaring whereof imitates the teaching of a Master, and speech of holy
Scripture. Hence it was that S. Anthony gave that excellent answer to a
Philosopher, who demanded of him how he could possibly spend his time in the
Wilderness, seeing he was destitute of Books: Meus liber O Philosophe,
Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 18. p. 294.
says he, est Natura rerum a Deo conditarum: quae quotiescunque animo lubitum
sit meo, libros ipsius Dei ad legendum suppeditat. O Philosopher, says St
Anthony, my Book is the Nature of all things created by God, which when I
please I can pervse, and read, notwithstanding that I want the sacred Volumes
of God. That, Beloved, is a Book indeed wherein all things are wrote in
Capital letters, insomuch that who so reads it, may not only run, as Hab. 2 2.
speaks the Prophet but do many things else besides. This is the Book that
taught the Heathens (to the shame of Concerning this point, and of Atheists,
see more in that Reverend Prelate on Jonas. Lect. 4 p. 61. and French Academy.
Part. 2. c. 98.
Atheists be it spoken) that there was a God at least. Who when concerning the
Heavens they perceived such aequabilitie of motion, such turning and trolling
of them, such distinction, such vtility, beauty, order, both of the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars, and what not? What did they but gather thence that what was
done, was not done by chance, but that there was a Supreme Power that did
dispose and order all. As if one, Vt si quis in Domum aliqua^, aut in
gymnasium, aut in ferum venerit, cum videat omnium rerum ratione^, modum,
disciplinam, non possit ea sine causa fieri iudicare: sed esse aliquem
intelligat, qui praesit and cui pareatur. Multo magis in tantis motibus,
tantisque vicissitudinibus tam multarum rerum atque tautarum ordinibus, in
quibus nihil vnquam immensa, and infinita vetustas mentita sit, statuat necesse
est, ab aliqua mente tantos Naturae motus gubernari. Tull. de Not. Deor. l. 2.
says Balbus in Tully, should come into some house, or into a School, or into
a Fair or Market place, and seeing the order of all things there, the whole
manner and discipline, he cannot suppose that any thing there is done without
cause, but he well understands there is some One who does command and is
obeyed. Much more in so great motions, in so interchangeable courses, such
orders of so many several things, and things so great, that have never failed
for so long a time, he must needs determine with himself that so many motions
of Nature are not altogether masterlesse, but that they are governed, guyded,
and ruled by some Intelligence. Lo the Powerfulness of Gods works to make us
to seek after God. And so much the rather when we shall consider with our
selves his admirable Workma^ship, as is Vt Creatorem non in Coelo tantum
miramur, and Terra, Sole, Oceane, Elephantis, Camelis, Equis, Bubus, Pardis,
Visis, Leonibus, sed in minutis quoque animalibus, Formica, Culice, Muscis,
Vermiculis, and istiosmodi genere, quorum magis scimus corpora, quam nomina,
candemque in tunctis veneramur solertiam: ita men's Christo dedita, aeque and in
maioribus and in minoribus intenta est, sciens etiam pro ocioso verbo reddendam
esse rationem. Hier. ad Heliod. Epitaph. Nepoliani.
noted by S. Hierom, not only in those greater works the Heavens and Earth,
Sun and Sea, Camels and Elephants, and so forth, but in the least kind of
Creature that is, the Gnat, the Fly, the Flea, and such like, Tantus Artifex in
modicis, Tertul. de Anima. c. 4. p. 531
says Tertullian, quantus and in maximis: As skillful in working these least
littles, as in the hugest things that are. Nay Pliny does admire him more in
little things then in great, in a whole Chapter to that purpose, only he
misnames him and calls him Nature, but you shall have his words at large. In
bodies of any bigness, In magnis corporibus, aut certe maioribus, facilis
officina sequaci materia fuit. In his tam parvis, atque tam nullis, quae ratio,
quanta vis, quam inextricabili^ perfectio? Vbi tot sensus collocavit in Culice?
and sunt alia dictu minora. Sed vbi visum in eo praetendit? vbi gustatum
applicavit? vbi odoratum inseruit? vbi vero truculentam illam and portione
maximam voce^ ingeneravit? qua subtilitate pennas adnexuit: praelongavit pedum
crura? disposuit ieiuna^ caucam, vti alvum? avidum sanguinis, and potissimum
humani, sitim accendit? Telum vero perfodiendo tergori, quo spiculavit ingenio?
Atque vt in capaci, cum cerni non possit exilitas, ita reciproca geminavit
art, vt sodiendo acuminatum pariter, sorbondoque. Fistulosum esset. Quos
teredini ad perforanda robera cum sona test dentes affixit? potissimumque e
ligno cibatum fecit? Sed turrigeros Elephantorum miramur humeros, Taurorumque
colla, and truces in sublime iactvs, Tigrium rapinas, Leonum iubas, cum rerum
Natura nusquam magis, quam in minimis tota sit. Plin. Hist. l. 11. c. 2.
says he, or at least wise in those of the greater sort, Nature had no hard
piece of work to procreate, form, and bring all parts to perfection, by
reason that the matter whereof they be wrought, is pliable and will follow as
she would have it. But in these so little bodies (nay pricks and speckes
rather then bodies indeed) how can one comprehend the reason, the power, and
the inexplicable perfection that Nature has therein showed? How has she
bestowed all the five Senses in a Gnat? and yet some there be less Creatures
then they. But I say where has she made the seat of the eyes to see before it?
where has she set and disposed the taste? where has she placed and inserted
the Instrument and Organ of Smelling? and above all, where has she dissposed
that dreadful and terrible noise that it makes, that wonderful great sound I
say in proportion of so little a body? Can there be devised a thing more finely
and cunningly wrought then the wings set to her body? Mark what long shanked
legs above ordinary she has given unto them; see how she has set that hungry
hollow concavitie instead of a belly: and has made the same so thirsty and
greedy after blood, and man's especially. Come to the weapon that it has to
prick, pierce, and enter through the skin; how arteficially has she pointed
and sharpened it? And being so little as it is (as hardly the finenes thereof
cannot be seen) yet as if it were of bigness and capacity answerable framed
it she has most cunningly for a twofold use: to wit, most sharp pointed, to
prick and enter: and withal, hollow like a pipe for to suck in and conveigh
the blood through it. Come to the Wood-worme, what manner of teeth has Nature
given it, to bore holes and eat into the very heart of hard Oak? who hears
any sound that she makes whiles she is at her work? and yet in wood and
timber, is in a manner all her feeding. We make a wonder at the monstrous and
mighty shoulders of Elephants, able to carry turrets upon them. We marvel at
the strong and stiff necks of Bulls, and to see how terrible they will take up
things and toss them aloft into the air with their horns. We keep a
wondering at the ravening of Tygres, and the shag manes of Lions: and yet in
comparison of these Insecta, that is, Creatures that have no flesh, nor blood,
nor sinew, there is nothing wherein Nature and her whole power is more seen,
neither shows she her might more then in the least Creatures of all. And
thus, Beloved, have you heard concerning the WORKS of God. You have heard of
the Powerfulness of those Works to make us to seek after God. It is no small
comfort that the Apostle gives us here in this place that doubtless he is not
far from every one of us. I will end with that of Esaias. 55.6.
Esaias, Seek ye the Lord while he may be found^ call ye upon him while he is
near. For whosoever asks, says our Savior, receives: and he that seeks
finds, Mat. 7.8. But forasmach as there is no seeking of him (as I mean
seeking now at this time) much less calling upon him as he is near unto us,
unless we be of the Church of God my next care and pains shall be to entreat
Godwilling of the Church.

In the mean time, God so bless us, and the seed that has been sown, etc.

THE CHVRCH. Lecture 6. April. 29.1613.

I am come at this time according to promise to speak of the Church of God,
and it is no little joy unto me, that I am come so soon unto you to speak
thereof. Had the distance been so great between my last being here, and this
time, (as it has been many times heretofore upon none of the least and
lightest causes) it might happyly have given occasion to some to think,
especially had they been popishly affected, such as I hope none are here, that
I made so long delay, and took so large a respite, in regard of a bad cause
which I was to undertake, or for I meant to fall to a Nonsuit. But thanks be
unto God that has given us so soon this opportunity, me of speaking, you of
hearing, and concerning you, that I cannot say as did the Author of that
Treatise, De arbore scientiae boni and mali, in S. Austens 9 Tome, Debitum cure
solve^e sermon sed pristinos meos non invenio creditores. Aug. Tom. 9. p. 813.
I for my part am careful to pay the debt of my speech, but I want my old
Creditors, and therefore now Beloved, of the CHVRCH. But soft, did I name the
Church? Do I intend moreover to speak of it? And are we not all of us then
like 1. Sam. 25.37
Nabal, or like to Niobe in the Ovid. Met. l. 6
Poet, Nec flecti cervix, nec brachia reddere motus,
Nec pes vt ire queat, sit and intra vt viscera saxum?
that is, our hearts to die within us, and we to become like to stones. Audito
nomine Ecclesiae, hostis expalluit Camp. Rat. 3.
says Campian, and he spoke it even of us whom he took for the Churches
enemies. Imo erubuit Campiane, Whitak. in Camp. Rat. 3.
says Whitaker: They whom you mean, were not wanne, as you say, but it makes
them rather blush, when they see so chaste and holy a Matron so impiously, and
insolently abused by you. Indeed they are strange Woers. Quid tibi Pisandrum,
Polybumque Medontaque dirum, Eurymachique avidas, Antinoique manas, Atque alios
referam? Ovid. Epist. Penelope Vlyssi.
Eurymachus, Pisander, Antinous Medon, Polybus, and the rest of that whole crew
of Penelopes woers were not half so boisterous. But I say with her Husband in
the Senec. Troas, Act. 3. Sc. Matris quidem.
Poet: -- Non vacat vanis diem
Conterere verbis, anchoras Classis legit.
I will not stand wo^ding it with our Adversaries, Time, and Tide, tarry no
man. I come unto my Text.

And the Lord added to the Church from day to day, such as should be saved. The
words are the words of S. Luke, in the second chapter of the Acts, and part of
the 47 verse. For the better understanding whereof we will first of all speak
of the Premises: then of the words themselves.

The Acts of the Apostles Actus Apostolorum nudam quidem videntur sonare
historiam, and nascentis Ecclesiae infantiam texere: sed si noverimus
Scriptore^ eorum Lucam esse Medicum cuius laus est in Evangelio,
animadverterimus pariter omnia verba illius animae languentis esse medicinam.
Hier. Prol Galeat. ad Paulin.
says S. Jerome, do seem to show unto us a bare and naked history, and to
declare the Churches infancy, but if so be we shall take notice once that the
Writer thereof was Luke the Physician whose praise is in the Gospel, we shall
find that all his words are physic and medicine to a sick and feeble Soul.
Indeed of all other we are most beholding to S. Luke for this his History of
the infancy and propagation of the Church. That our Savior would build his
Church, the Evangelist S. Matthew tells us, and he tells it in our Saviors
words, who when S. Peter had confessed that he was Christ the Son of God:
Blessed Mat. 16.17
says our Savior, art thou Simon the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has
not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. And I say also
unto thee that thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and
the gates of Hell shall not overcome it, S. Mark Mark. 16.20
tells us, how after the Lords ascension into Heaven, the Apostles went forth
and preached every where. And how the Lord wrought with them, and confirmed the
word with signs that followed. But this is all, nor does he so much as name
the Church. No, nor S. John neither in his Gospel, only he tells us Ioh. 21.15.
there how our Savior bade Simon Peter three several times feed his Lambs,
and his Sheep, not a word how he fed them afterward, or how the Stock did
increase. True it is in his Revelation he discourses of the Church at large.
But of that Book we may say as S, Jerome did Hier. vbi supra.
Tot habet Sacramenta, quot verba. It has as many mysteries, as words. And S,
Denis to like effect, The matter Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 24.
says he, of this Book is far more profound the^ my wit can reach unto, and
I doubt not but almost in every sentence of it, there lies hidden a certain
sense exceeding mystical and marveilous. S. Luke the Evangelist deals more
plainly, who though in his former Treatise he does not so much as name the
Church, yet in this later he does, and for three and twenty years together
declares unto us how it began, how it increased, how it continued in the World.
In the first chapter of all then having declared to Theophylus, and in him to
all us, partly a recapitulation of what he had entreated of before, and that
by showing generally the Subject of his former Book, namely our Saviors
(...), his Deeds, and his Doctrine, and that in the first verse, more
specially his Conversing with his Disciples, and Ascension into Heaven, and
that from the second to the eleaventh verse: partly a Narration of the state of
the primitive Church as then it stood at that time, and a pretty good while
after that, in the rest of that first chapter, and part of this second I have
in hand: he comes at length to show the fruit of a certain Speech S. Peter
made upon an occasion that was offered him by some of the Jews. Now the fruit
and effect was, partly Special, partly General. The special fruit thereof
was partly in the Jews that dwelt in Jerusalem: partly in their Adversaries
that saw the wonders and signs that were done by the Apostles. The general
fruit thereof was partly the community of such things as the Faithful enioied
one with an other, as it is in the four and fortith, and five and fortith
verses: partly the praises of God, and favor with the People as it is in the
six and fortith verse: partly Gods adding daily unto the^ such as he purposed
at length to save, as it is in the seven and fortith verse. And of this seven
and fortith verse now at this time, and of these three points therein handled:
namely Gods Addition to the Church: Gods daily Addit^on to it: and Salvation of
such as should be added: And the Lord added to the Church from day to day such
as should be saved. [And the Lord added to the Church.]

Being to speak of this addition, and augmentation of the Church of God, (I
mean the Visible Church, for of the Church Vid. M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 3.
1. p. 126.
mystical we have now at this time no cause to speak.) We are first of all to
define what the Church of God is. Concerning the true definition, and right
description of the Church, much has been said by a many, and diverse and
sundry are the Volumes that yet are extant to this purpose. It was well
observed by the Eccles. 12.12
Preacher that there is no end in making many books, and much reading is a
weariness of the flesh. Doubtless in making books of this argument, there
has been no end as yet, and a reading over but of some of them, what a
wearines would it prove to your tender years? I, if you please, will save you
some labor, and as Laelius said to Cato, in behalf of himself and his friend
Scipio, both of them young in years, Cato some fowrescore and four, Quartum
annum ago and oc togesimum, Tul. de Senect.
Volumus sane, nisi molestu^ est, Cato, tanquam aliqua^ viam longam confeceris,
qua nobis quoque ingrediendum sit, istuc quo pervenisti, videre quale sit. We
would feign know of you o Cato as of one that has made that long iourny, which
we also are to go, what it is you are now come to, and hold concerning this
point. I for my part have read somewhat indeed, but when I have oftentimes
called to mind the best of that which I have read either in Protestants or
Papists concerning this point, I must needs say I never met with more
judicious lines about the Church, then those which our worthy Hooker has left
to all Posterity. You shall have them in full measure: and howsoever they may
seem long, yet remember that of Martial. Epig. l. 2. Ep. 77.
Martial, Non sunt longa, quibus nihil est quod demere possis; Where there is
not an idle word, that in no wise can be long. And join unto it that of Aug.
Retract. l. 1. p. in Prolog.
Austen, Absit vt multiloquium deputetur, quando necessaria dicuntur,
quantalibet sermonum multitudine, ac prolixitate dicantur. God forbid that that
should be accounted too too many words, when necessary things are spoken, be
the speech it self never so long.

CHVRCH then, M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 68. p. 184.
says Reverend Hooker, is a word which Art has devised thereby to sever and
distinguish that society of Men which professes the true Religion, from the
rest which profess it not. There have been in the world from the very first
foundation thereof but three Religions: PAGANISM, which lived in the
blindness of corrupt, and depraved nature; IVDAISME embracing the Law which
reformed Heathenish impiety, and taught Salvation to be looked for through one
whom God in the last days would send and exalt to be Lord of all; Finally
CHRISTIAN BELIEF which yields obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
acknowledges him the Savior whom God did promise. Seeing then that the Church
is a name which Art has given to Professors of true Religion; as they which
will define a Man are to pass by those qualities wherein one Man does excel
another, and to take only those essential properties, whereby a Man does
differ from Creatures of other kinds; so he that will teach what the Church
is, shall never rightly perform the work whereabout he goes, till in matter
of Religion he touch that difference which severeth the Churches Religion from
theirs who are not the Church. Religion being therefore a matter partly of
contemplation, partly of action, we must define the Church which is a religious
Society by such differences as do properly explain the essence of such
things, that is to say, by the object, or matter whereabout the contemplations
and actions of the Church are properly conversant. For so all knowledges, and
all Virtues are defined. Whereupon because the only object which separateth
ours from other Religions is JESUS CHRIST, in whom none but the Church does
believe, and whom none but the Church does worship, we find that accordingly
the Apostles do every where distinguish hereby the Church from Infidels, and
from Jews, accounting them which call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ
to be his Church. If we go lower we shall but add unto this, certain casual
and variable accidents, which are not properly of the being, but make only for
the happier and better being of the Church of God, either indeed, or in Men's
opinions, and conceits. Thus for that worthy Hooker, and no whit farther then
victorious Truth marching before, himself like a faithful Soldier step by
step followed after. So that these things thus considered, we may without more
ado define the Church in this wise: Vid. M. Hookers Learned Discourse of
Justification, and Works, etc. p. 13.
A COMMVNITIE OF MEN SANCTIFIED THROVGH THE PROFESSION OF THAT TRVETH, WHICH
GOD HAS TAVGHT THE WORLD BY HIS SON CHRIST JESUS. First whereas I say A
community of Men, I exclude not Women from the Church. No more then does that
Creed which immediately follows the Gospel, and is called Epinicium by In
Epinicio quod post Arianos prostigatos canere coepit Ecclesia, lumen de lumine,
Deum verum de Deovero, etc. Eras. in 1. Cor. 7. p. 423.
Erasmus, that is, a song of Triumph in regard of Victory over the Arrians)
when speaking of our Savior, it says, Who for us Men, and for our Salvation,
came down from Heaven. It being a ruled case in the Gal. 3.28.
Apostle that there is neither Jews, nor Grecian: there is neither Bond nor
Free: there is nether Male nor Female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.
Secondly, by Sanctification, I mean with M. Hooker a separation from others
not professing as they do. Otherwise (as he observes) true Holiness, that
is, Sanctification does not consist in professing, but in obeying the truth of
Christ. Thirdly and lastly, that Truth which God has taught the world by his
Son Christ Jesus, I mean that Faith which the world has been taught,
whether by Christ himself at the first, or his Apostle after him. Concerning
which Faith Tertullian speaking in a certain Treatise, Regula, Tertullian. de
Virg. Veland. p. 385.
says he, illius vna omnino est, sola immobilis and irreformabilis. The rule
is one alone, only immouable and not to be framed anew. What Rule that is, he
shows in that place by rehearsing the Articles of Belief. Which Belief as
you shall know hereafter is the Epitome of all that which the Church is to
believe: and the Epitome again of that Belief is that of the Apostle St.
Paul: 1. Tim. 3.16.
God is manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up in Glory.
So that the Church as I defined it before is, A community of Men sanctified,
that is, separated, from all other whatsoever, through the profession of this
truth. And this definition as it is Logical, and according unto rules of an
Art but mean, so may it be compared very fitly to the Iaw-bone of that silly
Beast, wherewith there were made by Judge. 15.16.
Sampson such heaps upon heaps. For if we must thus define a Church by that
which a Church essentially is, and not by those qualities wherein one Church
may excel another, what mean the Papists in general, the Jesuits in
particular, the great Vid. D. Dr Prideaux Castigat. Andreae Eudaemon Iohannis.
c. 5.. 6. p. 139.
Logicians of the world, and Nonesuch of our days, to forget themselves so
far in defining of the Church. Let me instance in Cardinal Bellarmine, who
amongst Jesuits bears the bell. Ecclesia, Bell. de Eccl. Militant. l 3. c. 2.
says he, est caetus hominum eiusdem Christianae fidei professione, and
eorundem Sacramentoru^ communione colligatus, sub regimine legitimorum
Pastorum, ac praecipite vnius Christi in terris Vicarij Romani Pontificis. The
Church is a Community of Men tied together by the profession of the same
Christian Faith, and participation of the self same Sacraments, under the
government of their lawful Pastors, and specially of the only Vicar of
Christ on the Earth, the Bishop of Rome. Which Definition puts me in mind of
that merriment in the Horat. Art. Poet.
Poet, Humano capiti cervicem Pictor equinam
Iungere si velit, and varias inducere plumas,
Vndique collatis membris, vt turpiter atrum
Definat in piscem mulier formosa superne:
Spectatum admissi risum teneatis Amici?
which till some one of you english better, the rest in the mean time may
content themselves with this: If to a Woman's head, an Horses maine
A Painter would annexe: and then again
Deck every limb with Feathers to and fro,
And lowest parts like Fish themselves should show,
My Friends, were you minded to this sight,
Could you refrain? would you not laugh outright?
Now such a Picture as that should be, such a Definition this is. It puts me in
mind of Nabuchadnezzars Dan. 2.32.
Image, whose Head was of Gold: his Breast and his Arms of Silver, his Belly
and his Thighs of Brass, his Legs of iron, and his Feet were part of iron,
and part of Clay. A community of Men, there is the Gold: Tied together by the
profession of the same Christian Faith, there is the Silver: And participation of
the self same Sacraments, there is the Brass; and as Bellarmine understands
Sacraments it is Brass indeed, or rather Copper: Under the government of their
lawful Pastors, their's the iron: And specially of the only Vicar of Christ on
the earth the Bishop of Rome, their's party per pale, part of iron and part of
clay. It puts me in mind of that of the Eccles. 10.1
Preacher, Dead flies cause to stincke, and putrify the ointment of the
Apothecary: so does a little folly him that is in estimation for wisdom and for
glory. Surely this is not a little folly in him that is in such estimation for
wisdom and for glory to make us such a Definition. What? No more Church
there, where the Bishop of Rome is no more? Must we participate of your
Sacraments, your Pastors, your Pope, or shall we not else be of the Church?
Indeed Job. 12.2.
says Job to his three friends, because that ye are the people only, wisdom
must die with you. Because you forsooth are the only Catholics, the Pope the
only Vicar of Christ, the Church must die with you. I will not say Beloved, as
Ver. 3.
follows: But we have understanding as well as they, and are not inferior
unto them. Comparisons be odious. But as Campian comes upon us, when we speak
of the mystical Body of Christ, which is his Church too: Camp. Rat. 3.
Quae Scripturae, quae sensa, qui Patres hoc penicillo depingunt Ecclesiam? So
let us be bold to ask of Bellarmine, what Scriptures? what sense of
Scriptures, which of the Fathers trow we describe the Church in this sort? The
Church is termed by the witness of Jesuits themselves, doubtless of Senserat
in Scripturis tum Propheticis, tu^ Apostolicis, vbique honorificam Ecclesiae
fieri mentionem: vo' cari civitatem sanctam, fructi feram vineam, montem
excelsum, directam viam, columba^ vnicam etc. Camp. Rat. 3.
Campian, A fruitful, vinyard, a high Hill, a direct Path, the only Dove. What?
and was that Vineyard then, that Hill, that Path, that Dove, when all that was
first spoken, under the government of the Bishop of Rome, when as himself was
not extant then, and yet the Church then was? Afterward when there was the
East Church, as also the West, and the Eastern Churches for causes best known
unto themselves, did separate themselves from the West Church and refused the
Bishop of Romes jurisdiction, came so many millions of Souls presently, and so
great a part of the whole world, not to be so much as of the Church? Paulum
Apostolum profera^, quem quotiescunque lego, videor mihi no^ verba audire, sed
tonitrua. Hieron. adversus Iovin. Apol.
You O Romanists that hear S. Paul asking the question to the Romans, nay
thundering it out unto them Romans 14.4.
Tu quis es qui iudicas alienum servum? Who art thou that iudgest an other man's
Servant? Dare you not judge only, but condemn, I, and damn to the pit of
hell, so many millions of Gods Servants, and all for they are not under the
regiment, and rule of the Bishop of Rome?

q Tantane vos generis tenuit fiducia vestri?
I am coelum terramque, DEI sine numine, venti
Miscere, and tantas audetis tollere moles?
Dare you oh you Romanists? dare you do thus, and thus? But what do I speak to
them that hear not, or care not what is spoken? I return unto your selves.

Bellarmine you see is at a point to acknowledge no Church at all, to be a
Church unless forsooth it be under the Regiment of the Bishop of Rome. Even so
is Vid. Sadeel. Oper. edit. 1593 p. 504, Col. 1.
Turrian, and so are others, and therefore frame they their Definition of the
Church accordingly. More like a Scholar yet Sr Thomas More, who howsoever he
loved the Pope and his Supremacy no man better, ( Greater love then this, has
no man Ioh. 15.13.
says our Savior, when any man bestows his life for his friend) yet never
brought either of the^ into the Churches definition, whether because he would
not entangle the matter with two questions at once, as Sr. Th. Moore against
Tyndal. l. 5. oper. Aug. p. 615.
he himself would make us believe: or which is more likely in very deed
(though he himself say not so much) for he saw such a definition so
disagreeable to the Church when it was equally governed by four Patriarchs. He
then Tr Th. Moore Dial. l. 1 c. 21. Oper. Aug. page 148.
defines it thus: Gods Church is a Congregation of People gathered into his
Faith. And Faith says he, is the first substantial difference discerning
christian men from heathen, as Reason is the difference dividing Man from all
kind of bruit Beasts. Mark I pray you, The first substantial difference, and,
As Reason. And why not the only substantial difference then, if as Reason, and
so should there need no more seconds to the essence of the Church, then there
does to Reason, his own instance there given, toward the definition of a Man?
But thus far yet were not much amiss, and as it is, it is far beyond the
definition of Bellarmine. But here is the spite again that Sr Thomas like a
right Being very Englishmen, never ceasing pidling about their bow and shafts,
when they be well, but either with shorting and pyking their Bows, or else
with new feathering, peecing and heading their shafts, can never have done,
until they be stark naugh^. Asch. School of Shooting. l. 2. p. 41. b.
Englishman not letting it alone while it is well, will be still tampering
more and more with it, till at length he mar all. For had he meant by Faith
the Twelve Articles of the Creed only which are indeed the Sum of Faith, and
as S. Austen Fidei Catholicae fundamentum super quod aedificium surrexit
Ecclesiae constructu^ manibus Apastolorum and Propheta^um. Aug. de Symb. ad
Catac. Tom. 9. p. 770.
speaks: The foundation of the Catholic Faith whereupon the Churches frame
does arise, built by the hands of the Apostles, and also of the Prophets: we
might indifferent well agree with him, and the question were near at an end.
But when he is still pidling with it, and tells us how he means by Faith, that
we should forsooth believe that Moore. Ib. p. 665.
Matrimony is a Sacrament, that the Sacrament of the Altar is the very body of
Christ, that Priests may not wed Nuns, or to speak in his own merry phrase
that Moore. Ib. p. 619.
Friar Tucke may not marry Maid Marian: who sees not the good pale of milk
he gave us even now, turned down again with his heels. I perceive that of
Jeremy is too too true, Ier. 13.23.
Can the black More change his skin? Or the Leopard his spots? St Thomas has
only his Teeth white, all is else as black as coal. Now then having seen what
the Church is by our own definition given, and that our own definition is by
all likelihood so much the better, for that that of our Adversaries is so bad,
let us now come unto those three points I told you of at first: the first and
foremost whereof was, of Gods addition to the Church. And the Lord added to the
Church.

How the World stood affected at that time, was intimated unto you before, when
I told you from Mr Hooker, of Pagnanisme, and Iudaisme, and Christian Religion.
Indeed the two former Paganism, and Iudaisme, were when time was the two
graund Religions of the world; Paganism which lived in the blindness of
corrupt, and depraved nature: Iudaisme embracing the law which reformed
heathenish impiety, and taught salvation to be looked for through the Messiah
that was to come. Howbeit when at the length the Messiah indeed was come, and
God had Gal. 4.4.
sent forth his Son made of a Woman, and made under the law that he might
redeem them which were under the law, and they despised him when he came, Ioh.
1.11.
He came unto his own, and his own received him not, then as there was long
war 2. Sam. 3.1.
says the Scripture, between the house of Saul, and the house of David, but
David waxed stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker: right so was it in
this case, though not by dint of Sword, as that was, yet by virtue of the Word,
which is lively Heb 4.12.
says the Apostle, and mighty in operation, and sh^^per indeed then any
(...).
Sword, and enters through even unto the dividing asunder of the Soul and the
spirit, and of the ioints, and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts,
and the intents of the heart. So the Apostle to the 2. Cor. 10.4
Corinthians, The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God to cast down holds, casting down the imaginations, and every high thing
that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ. And thus were many of the Jews
brought into this captivity, and a many more of the Gentiles, Senec. Troas Act.
4. Sc. Quicunque hymen.
Quos singulos hic casus excelso magis
Solio reponit: profuit multis capi.
who had they not thus been captivated, had never been truly free. It was
our Saviors own Ioh. 8.36.
saying, If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed: and you
know it is a passage in one of our daily Prayers, Communion Book Collect for
Peace.
whose service is perfect freedom. But to return unto my purpose.

First concerning the Jews, how they were to be added to the Church, diverse
and sundry are the testimonies, which the Prophets have to that purpose, I will
content my self with some few. First the Prophet Esaias. 44.1.
Esaias, Hear o Jacob my servant, and Israel whom I have chosen. Thus says the
Lord that made thee, and framed thee from the womb; he will help thee. Fear
not O Jacob my Servant, and thou righteous who^ I have chosen. For I will power
water upon the thirsty, and stoods upon the dry ground: I will power my Spirit
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy Buds. And they shall grow as among the
grass, and as the Willowes by the rivers of waters. One shall say I am the
Lords: another shall be called by the name of Jacob: and another shall
subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and name himself by the name of Israel.
And again in another Esaias, 46.3.
place, Hear ye me O house of Jacob, and all that remain of the house of
Israel, which are borne of me from the womb, and brought up of me from the
birth. Therefore unto old age I the same, even I will bear you unto the hoary
hairs: I have made you, and I will also bear you, and I will carry you, and I
will deliver you. And again in a third Esaias. 51.22.
place: Thus says the Lord God, even God that pleads the cause of his
people; Behold I have taken out of thy hand the cup of trembling, even the
dregs of the cup of my wrath: thou shall drink it no more. So also the Prophet
Joel: Joel. 2.23.
Be glad ye children of Sion, and rejoice in the Lord your God; for he has
given you the rain of righteousness, and he will cause to come down for you
the rain, even the first rain, and the later rain in the first month. And
the Barnes shall be full of wheat, and the Presses shall abound with wine, and
oil. And again a little V. 27.
after: Ye shall also know, that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am
the Lord your God, and none other, and my people shall never be ashamed. And
afterward will I power out my spirit upon all flesh: and your Sons, and your
Daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your young
men shall see visions. And also upon the Servants, and upon the Maids in those
days will I power my Spirit. All which and that which follows there to have
been spoken of the Jews, witness S. Peter in this Chapter, at the nine and
thirtieth verse. I omit sundry other places throughout the Prophets concerning
this purpose; such as are willing to see more, I refer them to Imprinted
1612. p. 72. and 159. and 195.
Vrbanus Regius, of Christ his Sermon going to Emaus.

Secondly concerning the Gentiles (for so the Jews called all the world except
themselves) the Prophesies were as many, or rather a many more then were
concerning the Jews. The Prophet Esaias has not a Chapter almost, but it
entreareth more or less of the vocation of the Gentiles: as the 2, the 9, the
11, the 18, the 42, the 45, and a many besides. I will content my self with a
place or two. For what need we endeavor, Nec enim oportet, quod solet dici,
vniuersum ebibere mare, eum quive. In discere quoniam aqua eius falsa est.
Irenaeus advers Haer. l. 2 c. 34.
says Irenaeus, to drink up the whole Sea to see whether the water thereof be
salt or no seeing a very few drops will serve the turn. First then the
Prophet Esaias Esaias, 54.1.
says, Rejoice O barren that did not bear: break forth into joy, and
rejoice thou that did not travail with child: for the desolate has more
children, th^n the married wife, says the Lord. Enlarge the place of thy
tents, and let them spread out their curtains of thy habitations: spare not,
stretch out thy cords, and make fast thy stakes. For thou shall increase on the
right hand and on the left, and thy seed shall possess the Gentiles, and dwell
in the desolate Cities. And again in another Esaias 42.6
place, Is it a small thing says the Lord, that thou should be my Servant to
raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the desolations of Israel: I will
also give thee for a light of the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto
the end of the world. This it was that our Savior himself said in the Ioh.
10.16.
Gospel of S. John, Other sheep I have also which are not of this fold: them
also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one
sheepfold, and one Shepherd. Whereupon the Apostle to the Ephesians, speaking
of the Ephesians when as they had been Gentiles, Ye were, Ephesians. 2.12.
says he, at that time without Christ, and were aliens from the Commonwealth
of Israel, and were strangers from the covenant of promise, and had no hope,
and were without God in the world. But now in Christ Jesus ye which once were
far of, are made near by the blood of Christ. For he is our peace which has
made of both one, and has broken the stop of the In osculum recipit vtrumque
parietem de diverso veniente^ Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 13. p. 216.
partition wall, in abrogating through his flesh the hatred, that is the law of
Commandments which stands in ordinances for to make of twain one new man in
himself, so making peace. His conclusion Ephesians. 2.19.
there is, Now therefore you are no more strangers and forrainers, but Citizens
with the Saints, and of the household of God, and are built upon the foundation
of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner
stone, in whom all the building coupled together grows unto an holy Temple in
the Lord. And of this rank we are, English, Irish, Dutch, Danes, French,
Italians, and whatsoever Nations else have put on this robe of Christianity.
Of a truth, Act. 10.34.
says S. Peter, I perceive that God is no accepter of Persons, but in every
Nation, he that fears him and works righteousness is accepted with him.
The Court of Heaven, Et de Hierosolymis, and de Britannia aequaliter patet aula
coelestis. Hieron. ad Paulinum de institutione Monachi.
says S. Jerome, lies as open to Great Britain, as it does unto Jerusalem.
And again a little before. The Earth is the Lords, Domini est terra and
plenitudo eius. Postquam siccato Iudaeae vellere, vniversus orbis coelesti rore
persusus est, and multi de Orient and Occidente venientes, recubuerunt in sinu
Abrahae: desiit notus esse tantum in Iudaea Deus, and in Israel magnum nomen
eius: sed in omnem terra^ exiuit sonus Apostolorum, and in fines orbis terrae
verba e^rum. Hier. vbi supra.
says he, and all that therein is. After that the fleece of Jury being dry,
the whole world besides was wet with heavenly dew, and many coming from East
and West, and rested in Abraham's bosom, the Lord left to be known in Jury
only, and to have his name great in Israel, but the sound of the Apostles went
out into all lands, and their words into the ends of the world. Such as are
desirous to see more concerning the Vocation of the Gentiles, I refer them
again to Vrbanus Regius his excellent Printed long ago, and again reprinted,
1612 See it more especially, p. 115. b. and p. 128. b. and p. 159. b.
Treatise to this purpose englished by Mr Hilton sometime Schoolmasters at St
Anthonies. And thus much of the first point, of Gods Addition to the Church: I
now come to the second, and third, Gods daily addition to it, and the Salvation
of such as should be added thereunto. I shall be very brief in both, and all
for I have already been so long about the First. And the Lord added to the
Church from day to day, such as should saved. [From day to daie]

Our Savior that said in S. John's Ioh. 6 44.
Gospel, of God his Father, No man can come to me, except the Father, which
has sent me, draw him, Ioh. 12.32.
says in the same Gospel of himself, I, if I were lift up from the earth,
will draw all men unto me. What this lifting up was, he had showed long before.
As Moses, Ioh. 3.14.
says he, lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be
lift up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal
life. That our Savior thus had been lifted up, that is upon the Cross, and
afterward lifted higher, that is, into heaven, when as S. Luke wrote these
words, the Apostle S. Peter declares partly in the four and twentieth, partly
in the three and thirtieth verses of this very chapter we have in hand. It
remained now that like a lodestone he should draw the world unto him, and in
very deed he so did. His populous inheritance by that drawing was promised unto
him Vid. M. Fentons answer to Alab. Motives Mot. 4. p. 20.
Psalm. 2.8, discovered by Daniel to replenish the Earth, Dan. 2.44. survayed by
Esaias from the East to the West, Esaias 49.12: possessed by the Apostles from
Jerusalem to the worlds end, as the effect has declared. For, Virg. Aen. l. 1.
Quae regio in terris horum non plena laboris? What Region? what Coast? what
quarter of the World? nay what nooke did not ring of their labors? It was our
Saviors commission to them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature, Mark. 16.15, and as much in effect by S. Paul was
acknowledged to have bin done, I thank my God, says he, through Jesus Christ,
because your faith is published throughout the whole world; Romans 1.8.

Where by the way, Beloved, we are to note, that all that has been spoken
concerning Adding to the Church, is not so to be taken, as if the Church should
at once, in any one age, enjoy these large Dominions, no not in the most
flourishing age, but only in succession of times. Not at once like the Deluge
Vid. M. Fenton vbi supra.
says a worthy Divine of our days, covering the face of the Earth, but as the
waterflowds in course, winning ground in one place, and loosing it in an other,
dried up at Jerusalem, and Samaria, before it have watered the ends of the
earth: though in some ages full bancke, in some at a lower ebb, specially when
it is pestered with heresies, and schisms, prophesied to come in the later
days. But thus much briefly of the second point. I come unto the third, namely
the Salvation of such as should be added to the Church. And the Lord added to
the Church from day to day such as should be saved. [Such as should be saved]

It was even Balaam's desire, that Balaam of whom St Peter 2. Pet. 2.15.
tells us, how he loved the wages of unrighteousness, and our Savior in the Rev.
2.14.
Revelation that he taught Baalac to put a stumbling block before the children
of Israel, that they should eat of things sacrificed unto Idols, and commit
fornication: it was I say even Balaams desire, that he might be saved in the
life to come. Let me die the death of the righteous Moriatur anima mea morte
iustorum, and fiant novissima mea borum similia. Number. 23.10.
says he; and let my last end be like his. Unwilling he was to live the life
of the Righteous, yet would he feign have died their deaths. He knew belike the
effect of that which the Preacher Eccles. 11.3.
said, If the tree do fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place
that the tree falls there it shall be. Indeed the desire of immortality, M.
Hookers Learned Discourse of Justification, works etc. p. 30.
says Reverend Hooker, and of the knowledge of that whereby it may be
obtained, is so natural unto all men, that even they who are not persuaded
that they shall, do notwithstanding wish that they might know a way how to see
no end of life. And because natural means are not able still to resist the
force of Death; there is no People in the earth so savage, which has not
devised some supernatural help, or other to fly unto for aid and succor in
extremities against the enemies of their lives. A longing therefore to be saved,
says he, without understanding the true way how, has bin the cause of all the
superstitions in the world. We, Beloved, as we may long with others, so which a
many others have not, we may (if so be we will) have our longing saved. How? By
being joined to the Church of God, and by harkning unto such as truly show us
the way of Salvation. Concerning whom we need not now the testimony of a Damsel
possessed with a spirit of Divination, who yet spoke the truth, Act. 16.17, These
men are the Servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of
salvation: but we have the testimony of S. Luke himself, who, as I noted unto
you out of Ierom, howsoever he seems to write a bare and naked history, yet so
sets down his words, as that they are Physic and medicine to a sick and
feeble Soul. Now among al his words to that purpose, these no doubt of
salvation by being added to the Church, are not the least to be accounted of:
for this doubtless as it is the way, so there is no other way but this. And
therefore we say not with No^ habentes pro Nave Ecclesiam, pro Gubernaculis
Crucem, pro Gubernatore Christu^, pro Prora Patrem, pro Vents, Spiritum
Sanctum, pro Velo gratiam, pro Nautis Apostolos, pro Navigantibus Prophetas,
pro Mari vetus Testamentum and novum committamus nos Pelagi profundo ad
perquirendam in Scripturis divinis margaritam latentem. Chrysostom. Tom. 3. Hom. de
Cruce Dominica Edit. Bas. 1547. p. 837. Edit. Paris. 1556. p 757
S. Chrysostom only that the Church is a Ship, whose Tackle is the Cross;
whose Master, our Savior; whose Foredecke, God the Father; the Gale of Wind,
the Holy Ghost; Grace, the Sails; the Apostles, the Mariners; the Prophets,
the Fraught; the Old and New Testament, the sea wherein it sails: but a little
more fully with one of our M. Gossen his Trumpet of War. p. F.
own, that she is a Man of war, and in this World a very sea of troubles,
under sail. Whose Master is Christ; whose Mast, his Cross; whose sails, his
Sanctimony; whose Tackle, Patience, and Perseverance; whose Cast Pieces, the
Prophets, Apostles, and Preachers; the sound of who^ has been heard Rom 10.18.
over all the whole world; whose Mariners be the Angels singing their
Celeusmata, Luke 2.14.
Glory be to God in the high heavens, and peace in earth, and toward men good
will, whose F^aught is, as the Souls of just Men, of Women, and Children; so
the rich Gifts, and Donations bestowed upon Churches, and Colleges, bound up
in bags that shall never Luke 12.33.
perish, or wax old; whose Rudder, is Charity, for all the motions, and actions
of the Church are 1. Cor. 13.1.
wrought in love; whose Anchor, is Heb. 6.19.
Hope; whose Flag in the top of her is Faith, and the word written in it,
PREMIMVR NON OPPRIMIMVR, that is, 2, Cor. 4.8.
we are cast down, but we perish not. We say again it is the Arc of Noah,
and all without this Arc what is it else, Humfred. in Camp. Rat. 3. p. 208.
says a good old Doctor and sometimes a worthy President of one of our
Colleges, nifi pontus, and aer, imo aeris, and lucis, and vitae privatio,
Water and Air, nay a depriving of us quite both of air, and light, and life
it self. Howbeit here we are to note with Reverend M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l.
5.. 68. p. 185.
Hooker, that howsoever the privilege of the Visible Church of God, is to be
herein like the Arc of Noah, that for anything we know to the contrary, all
without it are lost Sheep, yet in this was the Arc of Noah privileged above
the Church, that whereas none of the which were in the one could perish,
numbers in the other are cast away, because to eternal life our profession is
not enough. Many things exclude from the kingdom of God, although from the
Church they separate not.

And thus, Beloved, have you heard of the Church. You have heard of Gods adding
to it, of his adding to it daily, and of the Salvation of such as are added
thereunto. My Lect. 1. p. 29.
promise was when I showed you my Method, which I meant to observe, how when I
came to speak of the Church, and to show what that was, I would distinguish
her first from Paganism, and Iudaisme, the two grand Religions of the old
world: secondly from Turcisme and Papisme, the two smoking firebrands of this
world. It is requisite I now perform it, and though it be a labor of many
Leaves, yet shall you see I will absolve it not in over many Lines.

First then concerning Paganism, you are to know that the word Pagans properly
signifies Country People, and therefore, Pers. in Satyr. Prol.
said Persius of himself, -- Ipse semipaganus
Ad sacra vatum carmen affero nostrum.
Semipaganus, Joan. Britan. in Pers. p. 326. Vid. Joan. Baptist. Ib. p. 329.
says an Interpreter, that is, Semirusticus, and rudis Poeta. And Pagans,
says he, comes of Pagus a Village: Pagus from the Greek word (...), that
signifies Springs, or Fountains by reason that about such Springs Villages
commonly were first placed. You know how necessary water is where any dwelling
is to be. And we read of the Daughter of Caleb, how when she came unto her
Father, Give me a blessing, Josh 15.19. Judge. 1.15.
says she, for thou have given me the South Country: give me also Springs of
water. But to return unto my purpose.

Pagans properly signifying Country People, when Religion first of all took
place in Cities, Paganus in common Vid. M. Hooker. Eccles. Pol. l. 5. 80. p. 250
speech, came to be used for Infidels, and Unbelievers, such as are usually
called the Heathen. Now the Religion of the Heathen was to worship their Gods
in Stocks and in Stones, and therefore the Prophet David, As for the Images of
the Heathen, Ps. 135.15.
says he, they are but Silver and Gold, the works of men's hands. They have
mouths, and speak not: eyes have they, but they see not. They have ears, and
yet they hear not: neither is there any breath in their mouths. They that
make them are like unto the^, and so are al they that put their trust in them.
Had you taken upon you to tell the^ thereof, and what stupiditie it had been,
reasonable creatures as they were, to fall down before unreasonable, nay to
worship such base stuff, Stocks and Stones, their answer would have been as
S. Austen, and Arnobius relate it to us: Non ego illum lapidem colo, nec illud
simulachrum quod est sine sensu: no^ enim Propheta vester potuit nosse, quia
oculos habent and no^ vident, and ego nescio, quia illud simulachru^, nec
animam habet, nec videt oculis, nec audit auribus. No^ ergo illud colo, sed
adoro quod video, and servio ei quem no^ video. Quis est iste? Nume^ quodda^,
inquit, in^isibile quod praesidet illi simulachro. Aug. in Ps 96. p. 748.
I worship not that stone, neither that same Image that is without sense: for
neither could your Prophet know, that they have eyes, and see not, and I my
self be ignorant that that Image has no soul, nor sees with the eyes, nor
hears with the ears. Wherefore I do not worship that, but I adore what I
see, and serve him whom I see not. And who, will you say, is that? A certain
invisible Power, that has the tuition of that Image. And again in another
Videntur sibi purgatioris esse religionis qui dicunt, nec simulachrum, nec
daemonium colo, sed per effigiem corporalem eius rei signum intutor, quam
colere debeo. Aug. in Ps. 113. p. 898.
place: They seem to be of a more refined Religion which say, I worship nether
the Image, nor the Spirit, good, or bad, but by a corporal shape and
similitude I behold the sign of that which I ought, and am bound to worship.
So Neque nos era, neque auri ar^entique materias, neque alias quibus signa
confiunt, eas esse per se Deos, and religiosa de^e^nimus numina: sed eos in his
colimus, eosque ^eneramu^, quos dedicatio infert sacra, and fabrilibus effici^
inhabitare simulachris. Arnob. advers. Gentes. l. 6. p 199.
Arnobius: Neither do we worship Brass, nor the matter of Gold or Silver,
neither any other matter, wherewith images are made, do we esteem the^ by
themselves to be either Gods, or religious Oracles, but in these things we
worship and reverence those, whom a sacred consecration has thither brought,
and made as it were to inhabit th^se images of the workman. Now Lactantius
tell^ us in the Churches behalf, that she has no Images: Non est dubium,
Lactant. Divin. Instit. l. 2 c 19.
says he, quin religio nulla sit, vbicunque simulachrum est. Doubtless there
in that place is no Religion at all where ever there is an image. And Arnobius
or Minutius Felix rather, to the self same purpose: Quod simulachrum, Arnob.
aduer. Gent. l. 8. p. 229
says he, Deo fingam, cum, si recte existimes, sit Dei homo ipse simulachrum?
What image shall I make to represent God thereby, since if we take it aright,
Man himself is God's Image? Paganism and the Church then no better agree then
Fire and Water, Heat and Cold, when they are both of them in extremity. They
were the Apostle S. Paul's 2. Cor. 6.15.
questions, What concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has the
believer with the Infidel? and what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols?

Iudaisme comes somewhat nearer, the^ does Paganism, to the Church, in regard
of that it has been. For if we respect the time past, of every Forest of the
earth, and of all the trees thereof it was the only 2. Esd. 5.23.
Vineyard, and of all the lands of the world the only Pit, and of all the
flowers of the ground, the only Lilly, and of all the depths of the sea, the
only River, and of all builded Cities, the only Sion, and of all the sowles,
the only Dove, and of all the cattle, the only Sheep, and among all the
multitude of people, the only People: and yet now at this time, this Vineyard,
it is destroyed, this Pit is filled up, this Lilly is faded, this River is
dried, this Sion decayed, this Dove, this Sheep, this People slaughtered, and
they that are now left, they are Virg. Aen. l. 1
Reliquiae Danaum: the relics and remnant of a People, whom God in time may
call; it is the Apostle S. Paul's Romans 11.23
Spero. In the mean time it may be said of them as Jacob said of Ruben: Genesis
49.3.
Ruben mine eldest Son, thou art my might, and the beginning of my strength,
the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power. Thou wast light as
water: thou shall not be excellent, because thou wentest up to thy Father's
bed: the^ did thou defile my bed, thy dignity is gone. I, as the case now
stands, we are to have so little corespo^dence with them for all they are our
elder Exodus 4.22.
Brethren, that the Apostle S. Paul Gal. 5.2.
tells us plainly, that if so be we be circumcised (a point they glory in,
nothing more) Christ shall profit us nothing.

Turcisme is a mingle-mangle of Iudaisme, and Heresy. Mahumet their great
Prophet was Act. and Mon. p. 736. Col. 2.
borne in Arabia. His Father was a Syrian, or a Persian, his Mother an
Ismaelite, which Ismaelites being a people of Arabia, were called then Agarens:
which term Mahumet afterward turned to the name of Sarace^s. It is thought
that Sergius a Nestorian was a great doer with Mahumet in contriving of his
Alcoran. At length this kingdom of the Saracens began to be Act. and Mon. p.
124 Col. 2. and p. 737. Col. 1.
conquered by the Turks. Which Turks after they had overcome them, and made
their power large and mighty both in Asia and Europe, began to divide their
Kingdoms and Countries amongst themselves. But when they could not agree, but
with deadly war contended for the bounds of those kingdoms and Dominions, in
the mean time four of the principal Families conquering and subduing all the
rest, parted the whole Empire amongst themselves. And yet they also not so
contented, fell to such cruel hatred, contention, war, and slaughter, that
there was no end thereof, until the remnant of the ancient Turks was utterly
rooted out. So that there are few now remaining which are Turks indeed by
birth and blood, but the state of their great Empire is vpholden by the
strength and power of Soldiers, which have been Christians, and now are
turned to Mahumets Religion. It would ask a long time to tell you of those
points that are contained in their Alcoran, but it is needless now at this
time; and therefore whosoever will see more of them, as also of their Religion,
I refer them to M. Purchase his M. Purchase Pilgrim. l. 3. c. 10.11.12.13 and 14.
Pilgrimage, who tells of their opinions, their religious places, their
Monasteries, their Liturgy and Circumcision, their Sepulchers, Funeral rites,
and Opinions touching the dead, their religious Votaries, and their Saints,
their Priests and Hierarchy.

There were of the Popish W. Raynolds, W. G fford, Both Williams, and yet none
of those hundred and ten Knights, all Williams, and alone Table, at Henry the
Duke of Normandye's Feast in France. Montaignes Essaies. l. 1. c. 46.
Catholics, Sons of Zerviah, Simeon and Levi, Brethren in evil, the
instruments of Genesis 49.5.
cruelty are in their habitations, whose fingers were Psalm. 57.5.
spears, and arrows, and their pens sharp swords, that would make these
Turks and us in a manner all one; and therefore framed a Book whose Title
forsooth was, Calvino-Turcismus, but they got nothing by that bargain. For a
worthy M.D. Sutcliff.
Hector of ours having answered that Book, every Chapter of it, every Leaf,
prefixed another thereunto, and to give them an Oliver for a Rowland, or rather
(as speaks our Mat. 7.2.
Savior) with what measure they meated, to measure to them again, he on the
contrary called his Treatise, Turco-Papismus, which for ought we can hear of,
goes unanswered to this day. But now of Papisme.

I call Papisme all that filthiness and corruption of Doctrine, which the
Church of Rome, under the authority of the Bishop of Rome their Pope, and other
factious Heads among them, has gathered together these many years, and now
maintains at this day against the Ancient, Apostolical, and truly Catholic
Church of Christ. The kingdom of heaven, Mat. 13.24.
says our Savior, is like unto a man which sowed good seed in his field. But
while men slept, there came his enemy and sowed tares among the wheat. Doubtless
these Tares have been sown as in a many Christian Churches, so especially in
the Church of Rome; which are now grown to that head, that they have overtopt
all the other seed, and seem to bear the sway alone. For nether does that
Church now teach the Faith purely: or administer the Sacraments sincerely, or
Pray religiously, and above al, is Idolatrous. For First concerning the Faith
of Christ, how impurely do they teach it? Vid. D. Ram. These. Angl. p. 729.
Planting Superstition instead of Religion; Pride instead of Modesty; Doubting
instead of Trusting; a Pharisaical Vanity instead of Christian Piety, that is
(in a word) Unfaithfulness instead of Faith. Concerning the Sacraments, how
have they been increased by the^ in number, impaired in virtue, depraved with
errors, polluted with ceremonies? Concerning Prayers, how irreligiously, like
Parrats and Popiniayes do they pray? praying likewise for the Dead who need
not their Prayers? and to be delivered out of Purgatory who in truth were never
there. But praying unto Creatures, yea to dombe creatures, as oil, stones,
crosses, images, that is most Idolatrous. They that in Jeremy, Ier. 2.27.
said to a Tree, Thou art my Father, and to a stone, Thou have begotten me,
were I am half persuaded more righteous the^ these. And yet while I thus
speak of them, I deny them not utterly to be a Vid. M Hookers learned
Discourse of Iustific. Works etc p. 45. Heretics have justly been hated as
branches cut of from the Body of the true Vine, yet only so far forth cut
of, as their Heresies have extended. M. Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. ^.. 68. p. 185
Heretics are not utterly cut of from the Visible Church of Christ. If the
Fathers do any where, as oftentimes they do, make the true Visible Church of
Christ, and Heretical companies opposite, they are to be construed, as
separating Heretics not altogether from the company of Believers, but from the
fellowship of sound Believers, Hooker Ib. l. 3 1. p. 130. That which separate^h
utterly, that which cutteth of clean from the Visible Church of Christ, is
plain Apostasy, direct denial, utter reiectio^ of the whole Christian Faith.
Hooker l. 5. 68. p. 186.
Church: I grant the Church of Rome to be a member of the Church, though not
a sound one. I suppose, says Acne mihi longis rationibus disputandum sit^^s
Pauli auctoricate contentos esse decet, qui Antichristu^ in Templo Dei sessurum
pronuntiat. Quanquam and hoc ra^ionibus satis validis me probasse puto,
Ecclesiam licet semiruptam, imo si lubet diruptam ac deformem, aliquam tamen
man^re in Papatu. Calvin. Lelio Zozino Italo Ep. 104.
Calvin, that in the Papacy some Church remains, a Church crazed, or if you
will, broken quite in pieces, forlorn, misshapen, yet some Church. His reason
is, Antichrist must fit in the Temple of God. I deny her not the name of a
Church, says Si de Christi officio, and quarenda in Christo salute agatur, quo
tanquam iugulo corpori caput, Ecclesiae Christus coniungitur: sic meritis
Hominum and Sa^ctorum, indulgentiarum sord bus, and infinitis blasphemiarum
machinis pars haec doctrinae labefactata est, vtiam a tenui filo vita Ecclesiae
penderet, eoque mox abrumpendo (quae suit Antichristi in agendo sedulitas) nisi
tempori Dominus qui eum compescerent, Servos suos emisisset. Quamdiu vel ten
illud filum reliquum manes, Ecclesiae nomen non denegamus, vt nec ei^ qui morbo
contabescit, nomen hominis quamdiu vivit. Mornaeus Tract. de Ecclesia. cap. 2.
page 43 Vid. Ibid. p. 22.
Mornay Lord of Plessie, no more then to a Man the name of a man, as long as he
lives, what sickness soever he has: His reason is, Salvation in Jesus Christ
which is the Neck which joins the Head with the Body, Jesus Christ with the
Church, is made so feeble, and weak, by Merits of men, by Merits of Saints, by
Pardons, and such other wickedness, that the life of the Church holds by a
very little thread. So that the life of the Church holds then. Zanchius has
these words: I acknowledge the Church of Rome, even at this present day for a
Church of Christ; such a Church as Israel was under Jeroboam, yet a Church. His
reason is this: Every man sees says he, except he willingly hoodwinke
himself, that as always so now, the Church of Rome holds firmly and
steadfastly the Doctrine of truth concerning Christ, and baptizeth in the name
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, confesses and avoucheth Christ
for the only redeemer of the world, and the Judge that shall sit upon quick
and dead, receiving true believers into endless joy, faithless and godless
men being cast with Satan and his Angels into flames unquenchable. I speak not
this, Beloved, to court the Church of Rome, or to play the prancke of that
unjust Steward of whom our Savior tells the story. Who when his Master gave him
warning to give up his accounts and Stewardship, What shall I do? Nescio que
singulari Dei beneficio, hoc adhuc boni in Romana Ecclesia servari nemo non
videt, nisi qui videre non vult: quod ^imirum sicut se^per, fic nunc etiam
constan^ and firma in vera de Deo d^que persona Domini nostri Jesus Christi
doctrina persistit: and baptizat in nomine Patris, et Filii, et Spiritus
Sa^cti: Christumque agnoscit and praedicat pro vnico mundi Redemptore,
futuroque vivoru^ and mortuorum iudice: qui veros fideles secum in aeterna^
vitam recepturus, incredulos autem and impios in aeternum ignem cum Diabolo and
Angelis eius, eiecturus sit: quae causa est, cur Ecclesiam hanc, pro Ecclesia
Christi etiamnum agnosca^: sed quali? qualis and ab Osea aliisque Prophetis,
Ecclesia Israelis sub Ieroboamo and deinceps fu sse describitur: nunquam enim
resipu^t a suis fornicationibus. Atque haec de Ecclesia Romana. Zanch. de
Relig. Christiana. Epist. ad Vlyssem Martinengum Comitem Barchensem Oper. Tom.
8. p. Vv. ii. post. page 451.
says he: I cannot dig and to beg I am ashamed I know what I will do, that
when I am put out of the Stewardship, they may receive me into their houses. So
if Religion should alter. I would gloss with Papists betimes by holding the^ of
the Church: no God forbid I should once have as much as a thought that way, but
only to meet with the Harry Hot-spurs of our Age who by their intemperate
zeal in not holding what they should, have caused perhaps a many to do
otherwise then they would, have done, even utterly to forsake our Church,
which being but of yesterdaies growth in respect of the Church of Rome, suppose
that if so be they be a Church, we by no means may be, unless we be as they
are. I, for my part would instill other gates Learning into you, and teach you
to know the true difference which is betwixt them both. If once we give Priest
or Jesuit that advantage against us, to hold them no Church at all, that is
that they Luke 16.4.
would have fulfaine, Tusc. Quest. l. 1.
Quia diserti esse possent, si contra ista dicerent. Here are they in for a
year and a day.

Virg. Aen. l. 2.
Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur Atridae. They had rather then all the
Shoes in their shop, we would all of us hold this Tenet. I will end with
that excellent M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. li. 3. 1. p. 130.
passage of Reverend Hooker, worthy to be written in letters of Gold: So far
as lawfully we may, we have held, and do hold fellowship with them. For even as
the Apostle does say of Israel, that they are in one respect enemies, but in
another, beloved of God: In like sort with Rome we dare not communicate
concerning sundry her gross and grievous abominations, yet touching those
maine parts of Christian Truth wherein they constantly still persist, we
gladly I acknowledge the Roman Church to be our Mother Church, although defiled
with some infirmities, as the Jews were when they crucified Christ. His
excellent MAJESTY in his Speech in the upper House of the Parliament. March
19. 1603.
acknowledge the^ to be of the Family of Jesus Christ, and our hearty prayer
unto God Almighty is, that being conjoined so far forth with them, they may at
the length (if it be his will) so yield to frame and reform themselves, that
no distraction remain in any thing, but that we may all with one Heart, and
one Mouth glorify God the Father of our Lord, and Savior, whose Church we
are. The same God so bless us, and the seed that has been sown, etc.

THE CREED. Lecture 7. May, 6. 1613.

WHenas I acquainted you, Beloved, at the first with my manner of Method I meant
to observe in this my intended course of Catechism, I told you, that being to
teach you the Fear of the Lord, that is, the worship of God, I would entreat
of all that worship in the residue of my year. Now for that the whole Corpse of
Divinity compriseth principally two points, God and the Church, I told you I
would entreat also of God, and of the Church. What has been said already
concerning God, you have heard in diverse and sundry Lectures, as also in the
last of all concerning the other point, the Church. Wherein being to show unto
you, First, what the Church is; secondly, what she is to Believe; thirdly,
what to Practice: and in my last Lecture having declared what the Church is, it
remains that I now show unto you, what she is chiefly to Believe.

The Text I have chosen to this purpose is in the sixteenth chapter of St
Marke's Gospel, the fifteenth and sixteenth verses. The words are these.

And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to
every creature. He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: but he
that will not believe, shall be damned. In which words is comprehended the
Justification of the Apostle's Ministry; in theirs, of all such Pastors as
should succeed them to the worlds end, and consequently of our selves. So that
first of all we have in these words the efficient cause, and Author of it, who
is our Savior Jesus Christ. And he said unto them. Secondly, the parts of that
their Ministry, as also of our own, and they are two, Doctrine and
Administration of Sacraments: Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every Creature: there is the Doctrine. He that shall believe, and be
Baptized; under which as Analysis Typicae Mosis Pflacheri S. Theol. Doct. p.
452.
some are of opinion, the other Sacrament is comprehended by way of Synecdoche,
there is the Administration of Sacraments. Thirdly, we have the Effect here, and
that is twofold, Salvation, and Damnation. The one to Believers: He that shall
believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: the other to Unbelievers, But he that
will not believe, shall be damned. In the Doctrine I note two points: First who
they are that are to be taught: Secondly what. The Parties to be taught, Every
creature, not Bruit Beasts to whom St Francis is said to have preached as it is
in his D. Fulcks against the Defense of the Ce^sure p. 262.
Legend, but Jew and Gentile, Bond and Free, and therefore a repealing of that
which he said unto them before, Mat. 10.5, Go not into the way of the Gentiles,
and into the cities of the Samaritanes enter ye not. Paul and Barnabas Act.
13.46.
give the reason, It was necessary that the word of God should first have been
spoken unto you: but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy
of everlasting life, lo we turn to the Gentiles. That which is to be taught,
is Evangeliu^ the Gospel, which St Matthew Mat. 28.20.
relates in these words, Teaching the^ to observe all things, whatsoever I
have commanded you.

I will not now meddle either with the Efficient cause, or with the Effect, nor
yet with the Persons that are to be taught; my intent and purpose is to speak
of the Doctrine only they were to reach. And he said unto them, Go ye into all
the world, and preach the Gospel, etc.

The word Gospel in the Original is (...): and Evangelium, Illyr. Clau.
Script. Verbo Evangelium.
says Illyricus, is a Greek word, and signifies with them either a reward
given to him that brings glad or good tidings, or a Sacrifice to the Gods in
regard of those good tidings: or it signifies sometimes the good tidings it
self. In the first signification (...) Homer. Odyss. x
Homer uses it. in the second O suaves Epistolas tuas vno tempore mihi datas
duas, quibus (...) quae reddam nescio, deberi quidem plane fateor. Cic. ad
Artic. l. 2. Ep. 12.
Tully, and (...). Isocr. Areop.
Isocrates: in the third Plut. in Pomp.
Plutarch, and Aristoph. Plut.
Aristophanes. Now of this last signification it is that it comes to be spoken,
Beza Annol. in Mat. 1 v. 1.
says Beza, of that true Doctrine of Salvation, which was not invented by Men,
but was brought unto us from Heaven. And the first that used this word was the
Angel in S. Lukes Gospel, that appeared to the Shepherds upon the birth of
our Savior Christ. Behold, Luke 2.10.
says the Angel, (...), I bring you tidings of great joy: and indeed great
was the joy, that was annexed to such tidings. She, Quae peperit and Matter and
virgo est, quem peperit and insans and verbum est. Me^ito Coeli loquuti sunt,
Angeli gratulati, Pastores laetati, Magi imitati, Reges turbati, arvuli
coronati. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 5. p. 402.
says S. Austen, that bore, was a Mother, and a Virgin both: he that was
borne, was both an Infant, and the Word. Wherefore it was not without cause
that the Heave^s spoke, the Angels rejoiced, the Shepherds were glad, the wise
men iournied, Kings were troubled, Children crowned.

Now the Angel though there in that place delivered his message in this sort,
Luke 2.10.
Behold, I bring you tidings of great joy, that shall be to all the People,
that is, that unto you is borne this day in the City of David a Savior, which
is Christ the Lord: yet he employed no doubt withal, (and so much the rather
for he calls him a Savior) al those parcels and particulars concerning the
Salvation of Mankind. All which particulars it pleased, (some say, the twelve
Apostles) doubtless Antiquity to reduce to twelve Heads, that which we
commonly call the Apostles Creed, whether the Apostles indeed themselves were
the Authors of it at first, as Arbitror illam duodecim Artifi^um operatione
conslatam Duodecim enim Apostolorum symbolo fides sancta concepta est, qui
vel^t perin Artifices in vnum convenientes, clavem suo consilio conslaverunt.
Ambros. Ser. 38. p. 326. Vid. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 115 and 181.
some are of opinion, or for it Vid. Calv. Instit. l. 2. c. 16.. 18.
summarily contains therein that which they delivered or by word of mouth, or
else by writing. It mattereth not much whether of these two ways we now take:
howbeit it contains the Gospells Epitome indeed, and the Gospel is that
Doctrine which our Savior commands here in this my Text, that it should be
preached to every Creature; it shall be my whole care at this time to entreat
of the same unto you, and briefly as my manner is, to explicate unto you each
particular. First then of the Creed in general: secondly of every part and
Article thereof.

Concerning the Creed in general it Vid D. Rain. These. Angl. p. 710.
contains two Parts: One of them instructs our Faith touching God; the
other touching the People of God, that is, the Church. Touching God it teaches
us to believe in him who is one God in nature, distinct in three Persons; the
Father, the Creator; the Son, the Redeemer; the Holy Ghost, the Sanctifier.
Touching the People of God it teaches us to believe, that they are a Church,
Holy and Catholic, which has Communion of the Saints, to whom their Sins
are forgiven, whose Bodies shall be raised up from death, and being joined with
their Souls shall live everlastingly. I am not ignorant how others frame their
Division otherwise. Card. Bellarmine among the rest; The first part of the
Creed, Bellar. Christ. Doct. Translated out of Ital. by Ric. Haddock p. 58.
says he, belongs unto God: the second unto the Church the Spowse of God.
And as in God we believe, says he, one Divinity and three Persons: so in the
Church we believe that there is one only Church, and that it has three
principal graces; the first in the Soul, which is remission of sins,
another in the Body which shall be the Resurrection of the Flesh, and the third
in the Soul and Body together, which shall be life eternal. A Division I much
dislike not. Howbeit, seeing the Communion of Saints is a prerogative of the
Church, and the Cardinal in this Division of his has quite and clean left it
out, I for my part like the former rather, others like as they please. Thus
much then of the Creed in general, come we now to every part and parcel of it
in particular. And first of the first word Credo. Credo, I believe.

It is an usual custom in some of our Colleges (perhaps in all) that when
the Party chosen into it comes first to be admitted, or to a Probationers
place, or to a Fellows, he is asked by the Party admitting him, who is the
Governor or his Substitute, before the rest of the Fellows present, Quid
petis? What is it, that you entreat at our hands? And his answer pesently is,
if to be a Probationer, Eleemosynam huius Domus: but if to be a Fellow, Domus
huius Perpetuitatem. Some such So S. Peter (as it may be thought) alluding to
the Questions in Baptism. 1. Pet. 3.21 says, The baptism which saves us is
not (as legal purifications were) a cleansing of the flesh from outward
impurity, but (...), an interrogatiue trial of a good conscience toward God Mr
Hooker Ecclesiast. Polit. lib. 5.. 63 p. 152.
ceremony there was in the Primitive Church of old when any one was co^verted
or from Gentilisme or Iudaisme to the faith of Christ Jesus, and was to be
baptized. (...), Cyril. Catech. Mystag 2. p. 519 vid. M. Perkins on the Creed
p. 7
says S. Cyril, Every of them was demanded, whether he believed in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Wherevpo^ they eft-soones
made, says he, (...), a saving confession: meaning that forthwith they
repeated this, or the like Creed. So that hereby we may perceive in what form
this Creed was pe^ned, namely in the form of an Answer to a Question. The
Priest, or Minister asked the question in the face of the Congregation, and the
Party to be baptized made answer by the Creed.

Now concerning the word it self, Credo, I believe, it is as much as if he had
said, that I am fully persuaded, that these things I am now saying unto you,
are true beyond all comparison, I; so true that there is no evidence in the
world comparable unto them. The greatest assurance generally with all men, M
Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 2. 7. p. 117.
says Reverend Hooker, is that which we have by plain aspect, and intuitiue
beholding. Where we cannot attain unto this, there what appears to be true
by strong and invincible demonstration, such as wherein it is not by any way
possible to be deceived, thereunto the mind does necessarily assent, neither
is it in the choice thereof to do otherwise. And in case both these do fail,
then which way greatest probability leads, thither does the mind evermore
incline. Now Scripture, says he, with Christian men being received as the word
of God, that for which we have probable, yea that which we have necessary
reason for, yea that which we see with our eyes, is not thought so sure, as
that which the Scripture of God teaches; because we hold that his speech
reveals there what himself sees, and therefore the strongest proof of all,
and the most necessary assented unto by us (which do thus receive the
Scripture) is the Scripture it self. Thus far he. So that now we see the
force of this word Credo, I believe. For all the sequels that follow after,
being grounded on those Scriptures, which we assuredly believe to be the finger
(as it were) of God, and Oracles from him partly spoken by himself, Vid. M.
Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 3.. 8. p. 146. Reasons to prove the Scriptures to be of
God. vid Calv. Inst. l. 1. c. 7. 4. and 5.
partly dictated unto them who delivered them from him, hence it is concerning
these points, that every of us faith Credo, I believe.

I, but some will say, why say we not in the plural number, Credimus, we
believe? like as we say in the Lords Prayer Pater noster, our Father, and Panem
nostrum, our bread, and Da nobis, Give us etc. The cause is twofold: M Perk on
the Creed, p. 24.
partly for in the Primitive Church this Creed was made to be an answer (as I
told you) to a question demanded of every one in particular that was to be
baptized: partly for that howsoever we are to pray one for another, and
therefore to use the plural number, yet when we come to years (and so were
they come who were commonly baptized in those times) we must have a particular
Faith of our own, according to that of Hab. 2.4.
Habacuk, Iustus in fide suae vivet. The just shall live by his faith. And as
the Prophet says Fide sua, so says our Savior Fides tua, Thy faith has made
thee whole, Mat. 9.22. But thus much of the first word Credo, I believe, which
therefore I have been the longer in, and handled it apart, for it is
particularly to be applied to every Article here following. And so I now come
unto those Articles, the first and foremost whereof is, I BELIEVE IN GOD THE
FATHER ALMIGHTY, MAKER OF HEAVEN AND EARTH.

There are that make two Articles of this, which is the first, and say that St
Peter, he should say, I believe in God the Father Almighty, and St John, he
should add, Maker of Heaven, and Earth. But I rather follow them that make it
but one only, and so I purpose now to intreare of it at this time.

First then where it is said, I believe in God the Father: Deus est Aug. de
Temp. Ser. 119.
says St Austen, and Pater est, Deus potestate, pater bonitate. God he is, and
Father both, God in power, Father in goodness. Of God the Father I have spoken
before, as also his Omnipotency expressed here by the word Almighty, and of his
making Heaven and Earth, and therefore will I show you now what it is to
believe in him. To believe in this God is thus much in effect. M. Perk. on the
Creed. p. 298.
First to know and acknowledge him as he has revealed himself in his word:
Secondly, in particular to believe him to be my God: Thirdly, from my heart to
put all my affiance in him. Concerning the phrase of speech here used Credo in
Deu^, I believe in God; I know it to be S. Austens note thereupon, Credere Deo,
and Credere Deum, and Credere in Deum, and of a great deal of difference
betwixt them: but I am loath to commend it to you, the rather for that the
Hebrew as also the Greek do seem to take it away. For howsoever these phrases
I believe in God, I believe in Jesus Christ, I believe in the Holy Ghost, be
most effectual and carry with them great force, yet are they not so Vid. B.
Iewe^ Def. of the Apol. Part. 2. c. 1. Divis. 1. p. 90. (...)
peculiar and special to God alone; nor so precisely used as some do imagine.
And therefore is it said, Exodus 14.31. according to the Hebrew, The People
believed in the Lord and in his servant Moses: and God himself said unto Moses
according to the Hebrew to, Exodus 19.9. Lo I come unto thee in a thick cloud,
that the people may hear, (...)
whiles I talk with thee: and that they may also believe in thee for ever. So
Basil. de Spiritu Sanct. c. 14.
St Basil, (...): They were baptized in Moses and believed in him. And Arius
the great heretic, and Euzoius in Socrat. hist. l. 1. c. 19. ex versione
Joan. Jacob. Grynaei.
Socrates his Story (herein it should seem according to the custom of those
times) Credimus in vnam Catholica^ Ecclesiam Dei, ab vna orbis terrarumora ad
alteram vsque se porrigentem. We believe in one Catholic Church of God
spreading it self from one end of the world unto the other. But thus much of
the first Article. The second is this: AND IN JESUS CHRIST HIS ONLY SON OUR
LORD.

Jesus Aug. de Temp Ser. 181.
says St Austen, signifies a Savior, and he is called also Christ of the
Greek word Chrisma, because that as Kings in the old time had sacred oil
powered on them, so our Lord Jesus Christ, was filled and replenished with the
infusion of the Holy Ghost. Indeed concerning his former name the Angel gave
it unto him, and he gives that very reason: Thou shall call his Name Jesus Mat.
1.21.
says he, for he shall save his people from their sins. And concerning the
name Christ, it is true that St John Ioh. 3.34.
says, that God gave him not the Spirit by measure, and therefore of his
fullness have all we received, and grace for grace, Ioh. 1.16. But why is he
called his Son here, I, and his only Son? And why is he called Lord, I, and
our Lord? First he is called his Son for he is of the Father alone: not made,
nor created, but begotten, I, and begotten of his Father Christi nativitas
genuina illa and prima, ac deitatis ipsius propria, silentio colatur Imo magis
cogitationibus nostris imperemus ne illa inquira^t, neque curiose seru tentur.
Vbi enim non tempus non seculum in tercessit, non modus excogitatus est, non
spectator adsuit, non est qui enarret, quomodo imaginetur meus ipsa? Quomodo
vero lingua ipsa mentis intelligentiae inserniet? Sed and Pater erat and Filius
na^^ est. Ne dixeris quando? sed praetereas hanc quaestionem. Ne inquisier is
Quomodo? Impossibilis enim est respensio. Nam Quando, temporale est. Quomodo
autem lapsum inducit ad corperales modos, Basil Hom. sine Conc in sancta^
Christi Nativ. p. 246.
before all worlds. He is therefore Aug. de Temp. Ser. 181.
says St Austen, his only Son, because he has no comparison, nor similitude
with any creature. Men indeed are called the Sons of God by grace, he alone
is his Son begotten by nature: sine foemineo partu Aug. de Temp. Ser. 12. p.
414.
says the same St Austen, vnicus Patri, sine virili complexu vnicus Matri. The
only Son of his Father, as not borne by humane birth, the only Son of his
Mother, as not needing man's help. He is therefore called Lord, for that he is
as St John Rev. 17.14.
styles him, Lord of Lords, and king of kings, and he is therefore called our
Lord, for that we and all the chosen when we were Mr Perk. on the Creed p. 204.
bond staves under Hell, Death and Condemnation, he paid the ransom of our
redemption, and freed us from the bondage of Sin and Satan. Not with
corruptible things, as 1. Pet. 1.18.
speaks St Peter, as silver and gold, but with his precious blood, as of a
Lamb undefiled; and without spot. Thus the four Beasts, and the four and
twenty Elders in the Revelation of St John, Thou art worthy, Rev. 5.9.
say they, to take the book, and to open the seals thereof, because thou wast
killed, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and
tongue, and people, and nation, and have made us unto our God Kings and
Priests, and we shall reign on the earth. Tu Domine; Domine, Aug in Psalm. 139.
p. 1107.
says St Austen, id est, tu verissime Domine, non quales Domini homines, non
quales Domini qui emunt saccello, sed qualis Dominus qui emit sanguine. Lord,
Lord, says St Austen that is most truly Lord, not such a Lord as Men are, not
such a Lord as buys his Vassal by the penny, but such a Lord as pays down
right his most precious blood for him. It follows: WHICH WAS CONCEIVED BY THE
HOLY GHOST, BORNE OF THE VIRGIN MARY.

The third Article: and it compriseth the Incarnation of our Savior, and that
Incarnation is here expressed by two sundry and several parts: Vid Mr Perkins
on the Creed. p. 220.
First his Conception, Secondly his Birth. The Conception of Christ is here set
down with his efficient cause the Holy Ghost; even as the Angel said to
Joseph, Joseph the Son of David, Mat 1.20.
says he, fear not to take Mary for thy wife, for that which is conceived in
her is of the Holy Ghost. Which Conception St Austen makes more plain unto us
by this Similitude. As a worm Sicut vermis calefaciente sole de puro lime
formatur: sic Spiritu Sancto illustrante and sanctificante cor Virginis, caro
Christi de s^la carne Virgin^s nulla sementina carnis origin operante concepta
est. Vnde severmi comparans per Psalmistam dicit (Ps. 22.6) Ego sum Vermis and
non Homo, id est, non conceptus more humano. Aug. De Temp. Ser. 181.
says he, through the heat of the sun is formed and made of mud and slime
alone: so the holy Ghost illightning and sanctifying the heart of the Virgin,
the flesh of Christ was co^ceived of the flesh alone of the Virgin without any
work or overture of Flesh by way of seed. Whereupon co^paring himself to a
worm, I am a worm says he, and no man, that is, not conceived after the
manner of men. But of the Conception we may say as did St Bernard: Bernard.
super Missus est. Hom 4. p. 8. Col. 2.
Nec potest doceri, nisi a donante; nec potest addisci, nisi a suscipiente.
Neither can it possibly be taught but by the Spirit himself, that so gave
himself, neither possibly be learnt, but by the Party that did receive him. I
come unto his Birth, concerning which we are first to note the Birth it self,
^hen his Mother recorded here, Borne of the Virgin Mary.

The Birth of our Savior Christ to the^ that have Chrian Hearts is the comfort
of all comforts, and the sweetest balm and confection that ever was. Behold
Luk 2.10
says the Angel, I bring you tidings of great joy, that shall be to all the
People, that is, that unto you is borne this day in the City of David, a
Savior which is Christ the Lord. And there estsoones joined with that Angel an
Army (as it were) of other Angels (for they are V. 13.
styled, Heavenly Soldiers) praising God, and saying, Glory be to God in the
high Heavens, and peace in earth, and toward men goodwill. And indeed
according to this sacred hymn, how were all these things fulfilled? For by
reason of this his Birth, First, what Glory was given to God, nor only then at
that time, but after, and ever since? Secondly, what multiplicitie of Peace in
earth? Peace with God, Peace with Angels, Peace with our selves, I mean in our
consciences, Peace with our Enemies, and in a word, Peace with all the
Creatures of the world besides. And indeed it was convenient such Peace should
be, since this our Melchisedec was then borne, King of Salem, that is Heb 7.2.
King of Peace. Thirdly, what great Good will was toward men, seeing God by
this his Son's Birth was Vid. Lect. 3. p. 42. and 49.
reconciled so unto us? But I come to the Mother of Christ.

The Mother of Christ is here described by her Quality and by her Name. By her
Quality, for she was a Virgin. Neque sit incredibile Aug de Temp Ser. 181.
says St Austen, quod ipse natus de Virgin, qui Adam de Virgineo pulvere, and
primam mulierem potuit de costa formare. Let it not seem incredibile to thee
that he should be borne of a Virgin, who formerly was able to frame and fashion
Adam out of the Virgin dust of the Earth, and the first woman that ever was,
but only of a rib. Quantulus est qui natus est Aug. Hom. 32 p. 340.
says the same St Austen in an other place, sed quantus est qui de Virgin
natus est? Seems he little unto thee when he was, or because he was borne? I,
but consider how great he was, that was borne of a Virgin. The name of the
Mother of Christ is added here in this place, partly to show that he came of
the lineage of David, and therefore that he was the Messiah, that was prophesied
of before: partly that as her self prophesied al Ages should Luke 1.48.
call her BLESSED so her Name should be registered in that Brief, which was to
have passage over all the world. I am loath to go besides my way, but it shall
not be much amiss to relate unto you one story concerning this Name. It is
Montaigne his Essays l. 1. c. 46
reported that at Poitiers in France, our Ladies Church there had this
beginning. A licentious young Gallant having his dwelling house in that very
place, whereas the Church now stands, caused on a night a Damsel to be
brought him, with who^ he thought to do, Quod Templo dicere non est, that that
is not to be spoken in this place. He was no sooner about to wrap himself ( in
illos recessus cloacarum, it is Scaligers Scaliger in Card. Exercit. 299. Number.
2. p. 891.
phrase of that high Delight) but by chance asking her name, and hearing it to
be Mary, was so suddenly struck with an awful respect to the sacred name of
the VIRGIN MARY, that he not only immediately put her away from him, but
reformed the remainder of his life ever after. It had been well we might have
heard of Her reformation too, that we might have said, as Ovid. Met. l. 8
Ovid did, Illa vetus, dominis etiam casa parva duobus
Vertitur in Templum.
But howsoever that was, the report was, that in consideration of this miracle,
there was first erected a Chapel in the place where His House then stood,
consecrated to that holy Name, and afrerwardes the fair great Church which yet
continues to this day. But I come to the fourth Article: SVFFERED UNDER
PONTIVS PILATE, WAS CRVCIFIED, DEAD, AND BVRIED.

The mention of Pilate here, Mentio Pilati ad temporis significationem, non ad
personae illius pertinet dignitate^. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 181.
says S. Austen, is to signify the time when as our Savior suffered, it is
no honor unto him at al. And therefore the poor simple man, of whom it is M.
Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. 71. p. 200.
reported, that he was fully persuaded, that if Pontius Pilate had not been a
Saint, the Apostles would never have suffered his name to stand in the Creed,
was by all likelihood one of that rank of whom Mr White M. Whites way to the
true Church. Epist. to the Reader. Creezum zuum, etc. p. c. 2.
tells us in his Way to the Church. But to return unto my purpose.

We have in these four words, Suffered, Crucified, Dead, and Buried, the
estate of our Saviors humiliation: namely that condition of his in which he
abased himself even to the death of the Cross: that by that means he might
perform the office of a Priest in making satisfaction for us to the Justice of
his Father. All this is confirmed by our Savior himself; as first his
sufferings, O fools, Luke 24.25.
says he, and slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken!
ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
Secondly his Crucifying, As Moses, Ioh. 3.14.
says he, lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be
lift up. And again in another Ioh. 12.32.
place, I, if I were lift up from the earth, will draw al me^ unto me. And the
Evangelist there V. 33.
adds, Now this said he, signifying what death he should die. Thirdly, his
Death, Tristis, Mat. 26.38.
says he, est anima mea vsque ad mortem. My soul is very heavy, even unto the
death. Fourthly his Burial: Let her alone, Mark. 14.8.
says he, why trouble ye her? she has wrought a good work on me, she has
done that she could: she came aforehand to anoint my body to the burying.
What? will you say? and did our Savior then, did he suffer such extremities?
was he Crucified? did he Die? was he at length Buried? He that was God did he
suffer? nay could he suffer? could he be Crucified? could he Die, and be
Buried? yes, but not as God. S. Austen does explicate it by this similitude. A
man, Sicut homo, verbi gratia, Philosophus non vtique nisi secundum animam
dicitur, nec ideo tamen absurd, sed congruentissima, and vsitatissima
loquutione dicimus Philosophum caesum Philosophum mortuum, Philosophum
sepultum, cum totum secundum carne^ accidat, non secundum illud quod est
Philosophus; ita Christus Deus, Dei filius, Dominus gloriae, and si quie^
huiusmodi secu^dum verbu^ dicitur; and tamen recte dicitur Deus crucifixus, cum
hoc cum secundum carne^ passum esse, non secundum illud quo Dominus gloriae
est, non habeatur incertum. Aug. Epist. 10^ p. 295.
says he, is not called a Philosopher, but with corespondence to his soul,
and yet we say most usually a Philosopher is beaten, a Philosopher is dead, a
Philosopher is buried, when as all this happens to him in regard of his Body
only, not as he is a Philosopher: so Christ who is God is called the Son of
God and the Lord of glory, and by some other titles besides such as belong unto
him as he is the Word, and yet we truly say that God is crucified, when it is
certain he so was according to the flesh, not as he is Lord of glory. It
follows, HE DESCENDED INTO HELL, THE THIRD DAY HE ROSE AGAIN FROM THE DEAD.

I am not ignorant that this particle, He descended into Hell, is annexed by
Some to the Article that went before, as if it were part of the estate of our
Saviors humiliation. And Vrsin. Caetec. Angl. Edit. 1611. p. 509.
they make this Hell to be the unspeakable distresses, torments, and terrors
of his soul, into which he was plunged both before, and then especially when
he hanged on the Cross, and much even in these late days has been written
of this argument to and fro. I must needs say that in this point, I differ from
them who were dearer to me in their life time then ever Plato was to Aristotle.
True it is that all that which those Articles have concerning this point
whereunto we do all The Articles agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops in
the year 1562. and confirmed again 1571.
subscribe, is only this: As Christ dyed for us, and was buried, so also it is
to be believed that he went down into Hell. But forasmuch as by the worthy
Prelates of our Church that point is a little more explaned unto us, I would
wish you to take them for your Pilots in this case. I will show you their words
briefly, you may have recourse unto them when you please. As Christ in his
body, says Reverend M. Eius ad inferos descensus quam habet sententiam? A.
Quod Christus, vt corpore in terrae viscera, ita anima a corpore separata ad
inferos desce^dit, parite^que mortis tius vis ad mo^tuos inferosque adeo ipsos
vsque eo permanavit, vt and animae incredulorum tristissimae, ipsorumque
incredulitati maxim debitae condemnationis sensum perciperent, ipseque Satanas
inferorum princeps tyrannidis suae, and tenebrarum potentia^ omnem afflictam,
profligata^, and ruina opppressam esse animadverteret: e contraria vero part
mortui, qui vivi Christo confidebant, redemptionis suae opus iam perfectum esse
perspicerent, eiusque vim and effectum se^ tientes, dulcissimo perpetuoque
solatio fruerentur. Alex. Now el. Christ. Pietat prima Institutio edit. 1386.
Vid. M D. Field of the Church l 5. c 19. page 72. where he shows the ends of
Christ's descent more perspicuously, namely, to fasten condemnation to the Devil
and his Angels, to triumph over the Principalities of darkness: to secure us
from being surprised by the^, and to prevent our coming thither.
Nowel, descended into the bowels of the earth which was his Grave, so in his
Soul severed from the Body, he descended into Hell. The ends of Christ's
descent he makes to be three. And withal says he, (that is, together with
his Soul) the virtue and force of his Death so pierced to the dead, and even
to Hell it self; that first the souls of the unbelieving felt their most
painful and just damnation for infidelity: Secondly, Satan himself the
Prince of Hell, felt that all the power of his tyranny and darkness was
weakened, vanquished, and fallen to ruin: Thirdly, the dead, who while they
lived, believed in Christ, understood that the work of their redemption was
now finished, and perceived the effect and strength thereof, with most sweet
and assured comfort. Here is as much says that worthy B. Bilsons Survey of
Christ's sufferings for Man's redemption. p. 677.
PRELATE of ours, who wrote so much in defense of this Article, as I desire,
grant this, says he to his Adversary, and I urge you no farther. Now that
Christ after death descended into Hell, is a point that all the Fathers so
taught with one breath, that St Austen is bold to say, Aug. Ep. 99.
Quis nisi infidelis negaverit fuisse apud inferos Christum? Who but an Infidel
will deny that Christ was in Hell? That a many of the ancient Creeds wanted this
particle, is no just exception against it, for they want also diverse other of
the Articles besides, that are in the Apostles Creed. I might instance in the
Vid. B. Bilson of the full redempt. of Mankind. p. 415.
Council of Nice, the Council of Constantinople, the Council of Ephesus, but
I hasten to that which follows here, our Saviors Resurrection.

Concerning his Resurrection I say, as did St Austen, Si credidisti de Christo
quod dedecoris est, creed quod gloriae est. Si credidisti quod mortis est,
creed quod vitae est. Aug de Temp. Ser. 181.
If concerning Christ thou have believed that which is a reproach unto him, in
any wise believe that which appertains to his glory. If thou have believed
that that does concern his Death, believe that also that does concern his
life. Indeed this is a point proper and peculiar to us Christians. That he
Suffered, and was Crucified, and Dead, and Buried, the Jews will believe so
much. Mat. 28.12.
They gathered them together with the Elders, and took counsel and gave large
money unto the Soldiers, saying, say his Disciples came by night, and stole him
away while we slept. But that the third day he roase again, or that he roase
again at all, nor Jew, nor Gentile, nor any will believe, that is not first
become a Christian. Besides that upon this point al our Religion does depend.
For if so be Christ 1. Cor. 15.14
says the Apostle, be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith
is also vain. And we are found also false witnesses of God. Grievous
consequences no doubt, and yet the Apostle goes on. If Christ V. 17.
says he be not raised, your faith is vain: ye are yet in your sins. And so
they which are asleep in Christ are perished. More grievous consequences then
the former. They concerned the living only, these the living and the Dead. But
will you see the Superlatiue, that that touches us that are living nearest of
al? V. 19.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all me^ the most
miserable. You know what Tully says in his Paradoxes concerning Fools, Omnes
stultos insanire, and Stultos omnes, servos. Surely it were happy with us
Christians that we were such Fools, but if Christ were not risen we should be
worse far, Frantic fools, and Slaves should be far above us, we, poor we,
should be of all men the most miserable. But they were our Saviors own words,
Ioh. 2.19.
Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up again. They
destroyed it, and according to promise he raisd it up again in three days,
and did withal what after follows: HE ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN, AND SITS AT
THE RIGHT HAND OF GOD THE FATHER ALMIGHTY.

It is the sixth Article, and specifieth farther to us our Saviors exaltation
into glory. He ascended into Heaven Aug. de Te^p. Ser. 181.
says St Austen, that is, the condition of our nature which he took by being
borne of a woman, he placed above the Heavens at the right hand of God his
Father. The causes of his Ascending were diverse: as first of all to lead
Ephesians. 4.8.
captivity captive that is Sin, and Satan, and Death, and the 1. Cor. 15.55
Grave. These they were that captivated us, these they are that are led
Captives by our Savior. Secondly, to give Ephesians. 4.8. 1. Cor. 12.29.
gifts and graces unto men, the gift of prophesying, the gift of teaching, the
gift of doing miracles, the gift of healing. Thirdly, to prepare a place for
all that should believe in him. Ioh. 14.2.
In my Fathers house are many dwelling places: if it were not so I would have
told you, I go to prepare a place for you. Fourthly, to send the Comforter
down unto his Church. Ioh. 16.7.
It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away the Comforter
will not come unto you, but if I depart, I, will send him unto you. Lastly, to
Heb. 9.24.
appear in the sight of God for us, I, to intercede for us. Who Romans 8.34.
says the Apostle, shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God
that justifies. Who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead. Yea or rather
which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request
also for us. So the Apostle St John, 1. Ioh. 2.1.
We have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ, the Just: and how he offers
there our Prayers to God he shows in his Revelation, Rev. 8.3. Then says St
John, another Angel came, and stood before the Altar, having a golden censer,
and much odours was give^ unto him that he should offer with the prayers of all
Saints upon the golden altar, which is before the throne. Now that this Angel
was our Savior, Mr D. Rainolds proves at large, in his 62. Lecture, p. 695.

Concerning his sitting at Gods right hand you are to remember what you have
heard Vid. Lect. 2. p. 35.
before concerning such Parts of a Body, as the Scriptures assign to God.
Tertullian has an excellent passage to this purpose: which makes Ex hoc loco
Tertulliani luce meridiana clarius est non fecisse Deum corporeum, quem illi
(benignius tamen) errorem impingit D. Augustinus c. 86. l 1. de Haeresib. B.
Rhenanus in hunc locu^ Tertul.
some to wonder, why St Austen should lay to his charge that error of making
God to be corporeal. His words be these: Efficaciae divinae per membra
monstrantur and so forth. Efficaciae divinae per membra monstrantur: non
habilus Dei, nec corporalia lineamenta ponuntur. Na^ and cum Oculi
describuntur, quod omnia videant exprimitur: and quando Auris, quod omnes
audiat, proponitur. Et cum Digitus significantia quaedam voluntatis aperitur;
et cum Nares, precum quasiodorum perceptio ostenditur; et cum Manus, quod
creaturae sit omnis author probatur. Et quando Brachium, quod nulla natura
contra robur ipsius repugnare possit, edicitur. Et quando Pedes, quodimpleat
omnia, nec sit quicquam vbi non sit Deus, explicatur. Neque enim sunt ei aut
membra, aut membrorum officia necessaria, ad cuius solum etiam tacitum
arbitrium and serviunt and adsunt omnia, Cur enim requirat Oculos, qui Lux est?
aut cur quaerat Pedes, qui vbique est? aut cur ingredi velit, cum non sit quo
extrase progredi possit? aut cur Manus expetat, cuius ad omnia instituenda
artifex est and silexs voluntas? nec Auribus eget, qui etiam tacitas novit
voluntates. Aut propter quam causam linguam quaerat, cui cogitare iussisse est?
etc. Tertul. de Trin. p. 497. Vid. Eund. advers. Marcion. l. 2 p. 157.
Divine virtue, strength and efficacy are declared to us by these Members, not
the feature and fashion of God, nor yet his corporeal lineaments. For when his
EYES are described, it is meant that he sees all: when his EAR, that he
hears all. When his FINGER, the meaning of his will is manifested to us: by
his NOSTRILS is meant the receiving of our prayers as of so many sweet smells.
By his HANDS that he is the Maker of every creature whatsoever. By his ARM,
that no strength can possibly withstand his Power. By his FEET, that he fills
all things, and that there is no place where this Divine Majesty is not. Much
more he has to that purpose which I here omit for brevities sake. So that
concerning Gods Right Hand here the Truth indeed is that God is a Spirit, and
has nor Right hand nor left. Behold my hands and my feet Luke 24.39.
says our Savior, for it is I my self: handle me and see, for a Spirit has
not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. The words then are metaphorical, and
are taken from Kings and earthly Potentates whose usual custom is to place
such on their right hands as they purpose extraordinarily to advance. So did
king Solomon his Mother, 1. King. 2.19. and David prophesying of the Church,
Kings Daughters Ps. 45.10.
says he, were among thy honorable women: upon thy right hand did stand the
Queen in a vesture of gold wrought about with diverse colors. The meaning
then of these words, And sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty
is: that our Savior Christ God and Man after his Ascension into heaven, is
advanced to such an estate, as that he has therein fullness both of glory, and
power, and Majesty, and authority in the presence of God his Father, and of all
the holy Angels and Saints in Heaven. It follows: FROM THENCE HE SHALL COME
TO IVDGE THE QVICKE AND THE DEAD.

The last point in this Creed that we are to believe concerning our Savior:
and it is as touching the last Judgment. And it is thus much in effect: that
Christ shall come in the clouds of heaven with exceeding great glory, and
unspeakable Majesty waited on and accompanied with Legions of holy Angels. And
at the horrible sound, and dreadful blast of Trumpet, all the dead that have
lived from the creation of the world to that day, shall rise again with their
Souls and Bodies whole and perfect, and shall appear before his Throne, to be
judged, every one for himself, to give account of their life, which shall be
examined by the righteous and severe Judge according to truth. All this, Totum
hoc quod vocatur humanu^ genus, omnis ista Massa mortalitatis, ventura est ad
libram, appendentur ibi opera hominum. Aug. in Ps. 72. p. 548
says S. Austen, which we call Mankind, this whole Mass of Mortality, must
hereafter come to trial, it must come unto the Balance, there the works of
Men shall be weighed every of them. And whereas there were in his time such as
St Peter speaks of, 2. Pet. 3.4. Where is the promise of his coming? (God
grant they be not in ours) he endeavors in a many his Sermons to beat this
point of Belief into them, the effect whereof is this: Of all the De omnibus
rebus quae in Scripturis divinis promissa sunt, vna tantu^modo remansit. Deus
autem qui nobis in ta^tis rebus verum dixit, in vna nes fallit? etc. Aug. de
verb. Dom. Ser. 20. p. 62. Vid Eund De verb. Dom. Ser. 31. p 84, and de Temp.
Ser. 109. p 600. and De Temp Ser. 245. p. 810.
promises that God has made us in holy Scripture, one only is behind, and God
that has been so faithful in all the rest, will he fail us in this one? I
cannot relate the rest unto you, I have far to go. Howbeit before I go from
this point concerning Judgment to come, a question here arises about the
Quick and Dead. For since it is appointed unto men that they shall once dye
(as Heb. 9.27.
speaks the Apostle) and after that comes Judgment, how comes it to be said
in the Creed here, that Some shall be Quick, that is, alive? The same Apostle in
1. Cor. 15.51 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
other places resolves us of this doubt, who teaches, that they which then
shall remain alive, shall suddenly be changed and made a new; so that the
corruption of their Bodies being taken away, and mortality removed, they shall
put on immortality. Now to them this change shall be instead of death, inasmuch
as the ending of a corrupt nature shall be the beginning of a nature that shall
be incorruptible. It follows, I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST.

Of the Holy Ghost I have spoken Vid. Lect. 3. p. 49. and 54.
before, and how he is the third Person in Trinity, and why he is called Holy
Ghost, that is, Holy Spirit, seeing the Father and the Son are Holy both, and
both of them are Spirits. That which concerning this third Person is thus
briefly delivered here, was more largely declared afterward to the whole
Church of God in the Creed of Athanasius, as also in another Creed in the Synod
of Vid. M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 42. p. 86.
Constantinople, and which in the Book of Common Prayer follows immediately
the Gospel. The particulars concerning the Holy Spirit in Athanasius his Creed
are these: First that there is one Person of the Father, another of the Son,
and another of the Holy Ghost; but the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost is all one, the glory equal, the Majesty coeternall.
Secondly, that such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the Holy
Ghost, namely uncreate, incomprehensible, and eternal, and yet not three
eternalls, but one, not three incomprehensibles, but one, not three uncreated,
but one. Thirdly that as the Father, and the Son are both Almighty, both
God, both Lord; so likewise the Holy Ghost, and yet not three Almighties but
one, nor three Gods but one, nor three Lords but one. Fourthly that the Holy
Ghost is of the Father, and of the Son, neither made, nor created, nor
begotten, but proceeding. Lastly, that there is one Holy Ghost, not three Holy
Ghosts, and that in this Trinity none is before, or after other, none is
greater or lesser then another; but the whole three Persons be coeternall
together and coequal. That which was declared in the Council of Constantinople
was this: I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who
proceeds from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the Son
together is worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the Prophets. And thus much
of the first part of the Creed instructing our Faith concerning GOD. Now as
touching the other Part concerning the PEOPLE OF GOD, that is, his CHVRCH; the
first whereof is this, THE HOLY CATHOLIC CHVRCH.

When I spoke unto you the last time of the Visible Church of Christ, Lect. 6.
p. 104.
I told you that of his Mystical Church we had then no cause to speak.
Irenaeus advers. haer. l. 4. c. 18. and l. 5. c. 13. Clem. Strom. l. 7 Greg.
Moral. l. 28. c. 9. Ambros. in Ep. ad Ephesians. c. 3. Bernard. in Cant. Ser. 78.
Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 11. c. 1. and l. 15. c. 1. and de Catech. Rud. c. 20. and
de Baptism. cont. Donat. l. 5. c. 27.
No more indeed we had, for we were then to speak of the Visible only, such as
the Christians in those times, and we in these are to join our selves unto.
Howbeit now we are to speak of the Church Mystical or Invisible, forasmuch as
the Holy Catholic Church here mentioned, is that Mystical Body of Christ. The
Church then in this sense is taken for the whole company of Gods Elect, and
that by the testimony of these six Fathers Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, St
Gregory, St Ambrose, St Bernard, and St Austen. I spare to quote their words;
you shall see them, with much more to this purpose in D. Rainolds D Rainoldi sex
These. de Script. and Eccles. These. 4.. 25. p. 117. Edit. 1602.
Theses concerning the Church. In this respect it is termed of us, a Body
Mystical. A Body, because it contains a huge multitude not from Abel to
Zacharias only, Mat. 23.35. but from Abel to the last man that ever shall be
saved. Mystical, for that the mystery of their conjunction is removed
altogether from sense; for albeit their natural Persons be visible to the
world, yet discern we not whereby they are infallibly of that Body. And this
is the Catholic Church here meant in this place. Whereunto since the Mother
Church of Rome, like the Mother Frog in the Horat. Sermon. l. 2. Sal. 3.
Poet, that she may be as big as She, puffes up her self so much, Horat. Sermon.
l. 2. Sal. 3.
Quantane! number tandem, se inflans, sic magna fuisset,
Mayor dimidio, number tanto! cum magis, atque
Se magis inflaret:
would, some of her little Frog-lings would put her in mind of that which
follows, -- Non si te ruperis, inquit,
Par eris.
For to say the very Truth the name Catholic (as they mean it) does not
appertain to this, or that Church, but to the Church Universal, continued
through all Nations, Ages, and Provinces, from Adam unto us and our Posterity:
as the Catech. Trid. in expos. Symb. Vid. D. Raynol, These. p. 30. Edit 1602.
Council of Trent in their Catechism, and the Andrad. Defens. Fid. Trid. l.
2. Pet. a Soto cont. Confess. Wirtenb. c. de Eccles. Al there cited by M. Dr
Rayn. in his These. in Engl. p. 673.
Expounders of the Council Andradius, and Petrus a Soto (such is the force of
Truth) do plainly confess. But thus much of the CHVRCH. Come we now to those
Prerogatives, which this Church partly has, partly is to have hereafter, and
they in this Creed are named Vid. D. Rain. These. p. 131. Edit. 1602.
Four, two in this life, and two in the life to come. The Communion of Saints,
The forgiveness of sins, there is the former two: The Resurrection of the
Body, and The life everlasting, there is the two later. First of the two former
which make the Tenth Article, THE COMMUNION OF SAINTS, THE FORGIVENES OF
SINS. [The Communion of Saints]

The word Saints so often used throughout the New Testament, as well for the
living as the Dead, as Romans 1.7. To all you that be at Rome beloved of God,
called to be Saints: and 1. Cor. 1.2. Unto the Church of God which is at
Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, Saints by calling: and
Philip. 1.1. To all the Saints of Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, etc: will
intimate sufficiently to us, what Communion of Saints here is meant. For since
a Communion does signify to us that fellowship, concord, part, and agreement,
when diverse join and partake together in one thing, as, 2. Cor. 6.14, What
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has
light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part has
the believer with the Infidel? and what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? Forasmuch I say as Communion here signifies this fellowship, this
concord, this partaking, this agreement, and God has had the^ that worship him
purely and sincerely, tum doctrina, tum moribus, in all Countries and places,
and in all Times and Ages, what does it signify but that these All, though so
much severed in time and place, in regard they are knit together to one and the
self same Body, whereof Christ is the Head, have both Communion with Christ
the Head, as also with one an other. Of their Communion with Christ, the
Apostle St Paul tells us, 1. Cor. 1.30. and again to the Ephesians, Ephesians.
5.30. Of their Communion with one an other, as also with Christ the Head, the
Apostle St John, 1. Ioh. 1.4. That which was from the beginning, says he,
which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked
upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life; that I say, which we have
seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye may also have fellowship with us,
and that our fellowship also may be with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. So that it may seem by these places and the like (as touching one an
other) that they all of them have a communion in Spirit, a communion in Faith,
a communion in Sacraments, a communion in Prayers, a communion in Love, a
communion in Concord, a communion in Unity with one an other, not perhaps in
that perfection while here they live in this world (as were indeed to be
wished) howbeit that which is now wanting shall doubles hereafter be supplied.
Paul and Barnabas that were so Act. 15.39.
stirred, that they departed asunder, are now good Friends in Heaven, where well
they may wonder at one an other for their former falling out. But I come to the
second Prerogative.

The second Prerogative I told you of, was the Forgiveness of sins, and this
as it is the Churches in general, so is it each ones in particular that does
belong to this Church. Vbi peccatum (...). Chrysostom. ad Pop Antioch Hom. 5.
says St Chrysostom, ibi procella: where sin is, there is a storm. And
therefore Hesiodus corrects Platoes speech, who said that Punishment does
succeed sin, and follows it at heels, he affirms that Punishment is rather
borne at the self same instant. And indeed S. Austen has an excellent saying
that matcheth both speeches together; Montaignes Essaies. l. 2. c. 5,
Peccatum quod inultum videtur Aug. Tom. 4. de Continent. p. 995.
says he, habet pedissequa^ poenam suam, vt nemo de admisso nisi aut
amaritudine doleat, aut coecitate non doleat. Sin which seems unpunished
has a punishment that waits upon it, so that there is no man that does commit
sin but he weeps bitterly for it, and that's a punishment, or he cares not,
and that is his blindness, and that's a greater punishment. But most significant
is that of God himself unto Cain, If thou do well Genesis 4.7.
says he, shall thou not be accepted and if thou do not well, sin lies
at the door. Peccatum Tre^el. in buns locum.
says Tremellius, id est, poenae peccati, sin, that is, the punishment of
sin: and if that lie so near as at our very doors, you know how oftentimes in
a day it is like to have us by the throat. And doubtless so it would, were it
not for Forgiveness here. Not a day goes over our head but every minute thereof
we sin, and yet asking forgiveness, and not asking it, we are oftentimes
forgiven to. There is one remission of sins Remissio peccatorum vna est quae
semel datur in sancto baptismate, ali^ quae quamdi^ vivimus hic datur in
Dominica Oratione Aug. Hom. 4^. p. 362.
says St Austen, that is given us at once in holy Baptism: there is an other
that as long as we live here is given us in the Lords Prayer; meaning when as
we say it either at home or elsewhere. Mergimur Aug. Confess. l. 13. c. 7. p.
156.
says he, and emergimus. We are many times plunged over head and ears, and
yet we get out again. And whenever we are broken and bruised, and we are
full of soars for sin, our heavenly Physician is omnipotent, he can so
cunningly cure us, as that he will not leave a skarre behind. They are Medicus
noster omnipotens est, and sic consucvit plagas nostras curare vt nec
cicatricum vestigium post ipsius medicamina remancat. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 1. p.
388.
St Austens own words. I should here discourse unto you how the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost do work this forgiveness in us, sometimes immediately by
themselves, sometimes by the Service and Ministry of Man; as first of the
Apostles, and afterward of all such as have been their Successors ever since,
but it is enough our Savior Ioh. 20.23.
said, whosoever's sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and Mat. 28.20.
lo, I am with you always, until the end of the world. But I come to the
eleaventh Article, The resurrection of the Body, that which In nulla re sic
contradicitur fidei Christianae, quam in resurrectione carnis. Aug. in Ps. 88.
p. 678.
S. Austen tells us is most contradicted of al others, THE RESVRRECTION OF THE
BODY.

The same day, Mat. 22 23.
says St Matthew, the Sadduces came to our Savior which say that there is no
resurrection. And Tertullian speaking of some of the Heretics of his time
Saturnus, Basilides, Valentinus and the like, Nunc, Tertul. de Resurrect. p. 2^.
says he, ad alios Sadducaeos praeparamur, partiarios sententiae illorum. Ita
dimidiam agnoscunt resurrectionem, solius scilicet Animae, aspernati carnem,
sicut and ipsum Dominum carnis. We are now in these days to make head against
other Sadduces, that are copartners with the former. For they grant the
Resurrection by halfes, namely the resurrection of the Soul alone, despysing
the Flesh, as they do in very deed even him that is Lord thereof. Howbeit we
that are true Christians must not thus misbeleeue. We must believe of the Body
also, as well as of the Soul; and so much the rather for the Apostle S. Paul
has such excellent passages concerning that. To him that says, How are the
dead raised up? and with what body come they forth? O fool, 1. Cor. 15.36
says he, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it dye. And that which
thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare corn as it
falls, of wheat, or some other grain. But God gives it a body at his
pleasure, even to every seed his own body. So also is the resurrection of the
dead, V. 42.
says he. The body is sown in corruption, and is raised in incorruption. It
is sown in dishonor, and is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness, and is
raised in power. It is sown a natural body, and is raised a spiritual body.
And V. 53.
again, This corruptible, must put on incorruption: and this mortal must put
on immortality. So when this corruptible has put on incorruption, and this
mortal has put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying
that is written, Death is swallowed up into victory. So that our very Bodies
(you see) shall rise again, and therefore was it said in the Vrsin. Catech.
Angl. Edit. 1611 p. 628.
African Churches, Resurrectionem huius carnis, I believe the resurrection of
this flesh, that is, a recollecting and gathering of the same matter, whereof
our body was first composed, and which after our death was scattered, and
severed into all the Elements: Nec in bestias, says Tertul. de Anim c. 15 p.
552
Tertullian, sed in sua corpora revertentibus animabus, Our Souls returning
not into the Bodies of Beasts, as some were of opinion, but into their own
Bodies. St Ambrose gives the reason, why the Bodies should thus rise. For this,
Haec est series and causa iustitiae vt quonia^ Corporis, Animique communis est
actus, quae Animus cogitavit corpus afficit, vtrumque in iudicium veniat,
vtrumque aut paenae dedatur, aut gloriae reservetur. Ambros. ser. 3. de Fide
Resurrect. p. 44.
says he, is the order and cause of Justice, that because the actions of the
Body and Soul are common to both, the Body executing that which the Soul
decreed, both of them should likewise come unto judgment, both of them be
either delivered up to perpetual punishment, or both reserved to eternal
glory. And so I come to that glory, AND LIFE EVERLASTING.

This Article, Vrsin. Catech Angl. edit. 1611 p. 633.
says Vrsinus is placed last, partly for it is fulfilled perfectly after the
rest: partly for it is the effect of all the other that went before. For in no
wise must we forget that parcel of my Text, He that shall believe, and be
baptized shall be saved. Now what this Life everlasting is may justly seem
inexplicable, seeing not only the Prophet Esaias. 64.4.
Esaias, but the Apostle 1. Cor. 2.9.
St Paul also after him determinately set down, that they are the Things which
Eye has not seen, neither Ear has heard, neither came into man's Heart: and
Quid quaeris vt ascendat in linguam, quod in cor non asce^dit. Aug. in Ps. 85.
p. 650.
S. Austens inference is thereupon, And how should it then come into the
tongue of man, that could never as yet come into the heart of man. Howbeit
since we cannot possibly know what it is in very deed, let us go by analogy
and proportion, and first consider what Life is, as Philosophers entreat of it.
Life in Creatures possessed with living Souls, is properly the being of living
Creatures. Now life is taken both for the first act, that is for the very
living, and being: as also for the second act, that is, for the operation of a
living thing. So that we may define it to be, An aptitude of a living thing to
work the operations proper and peculiar thereunto, which is the operations
also themselves, by reason of the union of the Body with the Soul. Now the
life that we have here has diverse and sundry terms: when we are Infants, In
infantiae speratur pueritia and in pueritia speratur adolescentia, and in
adolescentiae speratur inventus, and in inventute speratur gravitas, and in
gravitate speratur senectus, senectus autem aliam aetatem quam speret no^
habet. Aug. Ep. 110.
says St Austen, we hope to come to Child's estate, when we are Children, to be
Striplings, when we are Striplings, to be young Men, when we are young Men, to
be ripe in years, when we are ripe in years, to be old: but old age has no
age to hope for after. When once we come to be too ripe, you know what
follows. It is not so in Life here spoken of: this has no such commaes, or
colons, or periods. Why? for it is Everlasting. Now Everlasting is taken three
manner of ways: First for that which has neither beginning nor ending, so God
is everlasting: Secondly that which has no beginning and yet has an ending,
so the Decree of God: Thirdly that which has a beginning, but never shall have
end, and such are the Souls of Men. And in this third sense it is, that Life
is called here Everlasting, that is, a Life that has a beginning indeed, but
that shall never afterward have end. And this is that endless life so often
promised in holy Scripture, not as was promised by the Poet, who when he had
Virg. Aen. l. 6
said in one place, His ego nec metas rerum, nec tempora pono,
Imperium sine fine dedi,
Virg. Georg. l. 2.
says in another notwithstanding, -- Res Romanae, perituraque Regna. Peritura
veritate non tacuit Aug. de Verb. Dom. Ser. 29. page 80.
says St Austen, semper mansura adulatione promisit: he told them their Empire
should perish when he told them the truth, but when he told the^ it should ever
last, he did but flatter them: no the Scriptures are still constant and hold an
even course, and are like those heavenly Orbs above that never alter or
change their course, but run continually their wonted rounds. Nay they as
Ps. 102.26.
says the Prophet shall perish too, they all shall wax old as does a garment,
and as a vesture shall God change the^, and they shall be changed, but the word of
the Lord 1. Pet. 1.25.
says St Peter, that endures for ever; and this is that word upon which here
in this place Everlasting Life is grounded.

And thus, Beloved, have you heard the whole exposition of that Creed, which is
as Ambr. Ser. 38. p. 326. vt supra, p. 129. in marg.
speaks St Ambrose, the key of our Christian Faith. Of this Creed it is that St
Austen speaking, Symbolum didicistis Aug. de Te^p. Sermon. 135.
says he, vbi est regula fidei vestrae brevis, and grandis: brevis numero
verborum, grandis po^dere sententiarum. You have learnt your Creed, wherein is
the rule of your faith, little and large: little in regard of the small number
of the words, large in regard of the weight of matter therein contained. Of
this Creed Tertullian speaking as you heard the last time, Regula quidem fidei
Tertul. de Virg Veland. p 385.
says he, vna omnino est, sola immobilis, and irreformabilis. The rule of
Faith, is one alone, only immovable, and not to be framed anew. Of this Creed
in effect Irenaeus speaking before them all, The Church (...) Irenaeus advers.
Haer. l. 1. c. 2. p. 34. Col. 2.
says he, though scattered through the world unto the utmost borders of the
earth, has from the Apostles, and their Disciples received this Truth, that
is, Belief. The parts of which Belief he also having recited, This fatih,
(...). Irenaeus advers. Haer. l. 1. c. 3. p. 39. Col. 2.
says he, the Church being spread far and wide preserves, as if one house
did contain them all; these things it equally embraces, as though it had even
one Soul, one Heart, and no more; it publishes, teaches, and delivers these
things with uniform consent, as if God had given it but one only tongue
wherewith to speak. And (...).
again a little after. He which amongst the Guides of the Church, is best able
to speak, utters no more then this, and less then this the most simple does
not utter when he makes profession of his Faith. Not to believe all and every
point of this Creed, is as much as our Souls are worth, there is such a
connection between all and every part: Ita res rem sequitur, as Lact. Divin
Inst l. 1. c. 16.
speaks Lactantius in another case, so one Article, one particle is joined
with another, as mar one, and mar all. An example whereof we have in
Cassianus, who defending the Incarnation of the Son of God against Nestorius;
If thou do, Cassian. de Incarnat. Dom. l. 6. c. 16.
says he, deny our Lord Jesus Christ; in denying the Son thou can not choose
but deny the Father: for according to the voice of the Father himself, He that
has not the Son, has not the Father. Wherefore denying him which is
begotten, thou denyest him which does beget. Again, denying the Son of God
to have been borne in the flesh, how can thou believe him to have suffered?
Believing not his passion, what remains, but that thou deny his Resurrection?
Whereupon it follows, that thou also deny his Ascension into Heaven, the
Apostle affirming, that he which ascended, did first descend. So that as much
as lies in thee, our Lord Jesus Christ has neither risen from the depth, nor
is ascended into Heaven, nor sits at the right hand of God the Father,
nether shall he come at the day of the final account, which is looked for, nor
shall judge the quick and dead. Nestorius confessed all the Articles of the
Creed, but his opinion did imply the denial of every part of his Confession. By
this you see how each Article is linckt with one another. And therefore as the
same Cassianus speaks in the self same Book, This, Haec ratio Ecclesiastici
Sacramenti and Catholicae fidei est, vt qui parte^ divini sacrame^ti negat,
partem non valeat confiteri. Ita enim sibi connexa and concorporata sunt omnia,
vt aliud sine alio stare non possit, and qui vnum ex omnibus denegaverit, alia
ei omnia credidisse non profit. Cass. de Incarn. l. 6.
says he, is the State of Christian Faith, that he that denies one part thereof
cannot possibly hold the other. For all, says he, are so annexed, and so
incorporated to one another, that one without the other cannot possibly
consist, and he that shall deny one of all (his meaning is, if he obstinately
stand in denial of it) it shall not profit him a whit to believe all the rest.
What remains the^ but concerning this Creed we take every of us special
care, and follow St Austens advise and Counsel: Quotidie dicite, Aug Hom. 42
p. 364.
says he, quando surgitis, quando vos collocatis ad somnum. Say it every day
when as you rise, and also when you go to bed. And Commemora Fidem tuam,
inspicete^ fit tanquam speculum tibi Symbolum tuum. Sint divitiae tuae, sint
quotidiana ista quodommodo indumenta mentis tuae. Aug. Ib.
again a little after, Make rehearsal of thy Faith, consider thy self
thoroughly: let thy Creed be thy looking glass. Nay let it rather be thy
treasure, let it be the daily apparel of thy mind. And again in another
place: Write it in your heart, In cordescribite, and quotidie dicite apud vos,
antequam dormiatis, antequam procedatis vestro Symbolo vos munite. Aug. Tom. 9.
de Symb. ad Catech c. 1. p. 752.
says he, and every day say it to your selves before you sleep, before you
walk abroad, see that you arm your selves with your Creed. But as you say it,
Beloved, daily, and arm your selves with it, so your care must be withal to
know the meaning of it too: otherwise Cardinal Ascanius had a Popiniay that
could repeat it (they say) by roat, and that (not as a many Papists do at this
day, Creezum zuum Patrum onitentem, and so forth: whereof see more in M. Whites
way to the true Church. Epist. to the Reader. p. c. 2.
Mr White) but articulatissime, says my Cael. Rhod. l. 3. c. 32.
Author, continuatis perpetuo verbis, perinde ac vir peritus: treatably, and
distinctly from point to point, as an expert and skillful man could possibly
have done. I will end all this with that good Constit. and Can. Eccles. Aw.
1603. Can. 18.
Constitution of our Church concerning the standing at it, and saying it
audibly with the Minister, as also the Confession, and the Lords Prayer,
following that. And indeed if it be true which St Austen has, that this our
Creed is both Tunica and Lorica too, a Coat, and also a Harness; what better
ceremony and gesture to testify our Christian resolution, then by Standing at
the saying of that, for the least jot whereof (if need be) we are to spend our
dearest blood.

And thus, Beloved, have you heard of the Articles of our Faith, commonly
called, the Apostles Creed. The next point I The Preamble Lect. 1. p. 20.
promised you to handle, was all those Tenets which our own Church holds
against the rebellious Church of Rome, whereof I had thought the next Thursday
to have discoursed unto you at large. But forasmuch as that will be the
Ascension day, and is therefore to call to mind elsewhere, that particular
meditation of our Saviors Ascending into Heaven, and the Causes of his
Ascending thither, partly to lead Captivity captive, partly to give Gifts and
Graces unto men, partly to prepare a place for all that should believe in him,
partly to send down his Holy Spirit: partly to appear in the sight of God,
and there to intercede for us as you have heard this day, I shall defer this
my next labor until the next Term. In the mean time, God so bless us, and
the seed that has been sown, etc.

OUR CHVRCH'S TENETS against the Church of Rome. Lecture 8. June, 6. 1614.

THey were the words of Hieron. Tom. 2. Epist. ad Pa^mach. adver. errores
Ioannis Hierosolym. p. 162.
St Jerome, Nolo in suspicione haereseos quenqua^ esse patientem; I would have
no Man Patient in the crime of Heresy. Patient, as I take it says Reverend
Hooker, we should be always, Mr Hookers learned Discourse of Justification,
works, etc. p. 67.
though the crime of Heresy were intended; but silent in a thing of so great
consequence I could not, Beloved, I durst not be, especially the love that I
bear to the truth of Christ Jesus being hereby somewhat called in question. Thus
spoke that worthy Man of himself by reason of an Adversary, who had sometimes
been his Psalm. 55.15.
familiar friend, and afterward kicked up the heel against him.

Who so reads the Books of our Adversaries which they pester the world so
much with, shall hardly find a page where there is not somewhat at least
against us concerning Heresy, and how we are Heretics, no men worse. Let us
see what Bristow says, one for all, and -- Virg. Aeneid. lib. 2.
Crimine ab vno
Disce omnes:
by the length of his foot, take we a scantling of all the rest. Our
Protestants and Puritans Brist. Motives Motiu. 4.
says he, for this their unmerciful opinion (about infants) are not
Catholics, they are contrary to the Apostle, they condemn the Universal
Church of God, they are to be detested as corrupters of our Faith, as
Heretics, as Pelagians: and indeed s^^^ worse then Pelagians. And a little
after, O unmerciful and cruel Heretics!

-- Virg. Aeneid. l. 6.
Ne saevi magne Sacerdos. Or if he like Gretzer. de iure and more prohibendi
lib. maios l. 2. c. 7.
Gretzers words better, Placiae, Papista, placide. Prove but by one example of
old Heresies most undoubted, prove most plainly that we are Heretics, Nomina,
aut frontem exporrige, vt Calumniatorum nota inuratur. I cannot now stand to
disprove the two examples alleged by him, neither need I in very deed; it is
done already to my hand by one of the worthies of our Church, he that answered
such a Rastel, Feckna^, Allen, Heskins, Riston, Hosius, Sanders, Bristow,
Stapleton, Martial, Frarin, Defense of the Censure, and the Rhemish Testament.
Populus superantur ab vno.
rabble of them, Doctor Fulkes Rete^tiue against Bristowes Motives, p. 15. and
p. 101.
Doctor Fulke. But you see in the mean time how spightfully they speak, nay
how spightfully they wright of us, and yet Bristow was Nobody to Weston, and
others, that came after, nor Weston unto those that now come after him. But it
is not their words that ca^ affright us, no they shall not make us loose so
much as Patience. Silent indeed in a thing of so great consequence, we cannot,
Beloved, we dare not be, and therefore now of those heresies which they lay so
mainly to our charge. The Text I have chosen to this purpose is a parcel of
the words of the Apostle St. Paul, as they are related unto us by St. Luke,
Act. 24, 14. The words are these.

But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call Heresy, so
worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the
Law, and the Prophets. In which words we see first of all a grievous crime laid
to the charge of the Apostle St Paul: Secondly, the Apostles Apology or
Defense for the same. The crime laid to the Apostles charge was Heresy: and
Heresy indeed is a crime so heinous, that unless it may be seen Iuel. Apol.
p. 18.
says our worthy Iuel, unless it may be felt, and in a manner may be holden
with hands and fingers, it ought not lightly to be judged, or believed, when it
is laid to the charge of any Christian. For Heresy as he says, is a forsaking
of Salvation, a renou^cing of Gods grace, a departure from the body and spirit
of Christ. So St Austen, Let a member Contingit us in corpore humano, imo de
corpore aliquod praecidatur me^brum, Manus, Digitus, Pes, nunquid praecisum
sequitur Anima? Cum in corpore esset vivebat, praecisum amittit vitam. Sic and
homo Christianus Catholicus est dum in corpore vivit, praecisus Haereticus
factus est, membrum amputatum non sequitur Spiritus. Aug. Tom. 10. de Temp.
Ser, 186. p. 722.
says he, be cut and parted from the Body, be it the Hand, or Finger, or
Foot, when it is cut of, does the Soul follow that part that is cut of? When
it was in the Body it lived indeed, but being cut of it loses his life. Right
so a Christian is a Catholic, while he is in the Body, but being once out,
and made an Heretic, he is as a member clean cut of, the Spirit does not
follow him. Howbeit the Heresy here laid to the Apostles charge in this place,
was indeed no Heresy. He was accused by Tertullus that he was of the Sect, or
the Heresy of the Nazarites (for howsoever before this time the Disciples were
called Christians, Act. 11.26. Yet were they called also Nazarites of Jesus of
Nazareth) but he was accused by Tertullus, that he was of the Sect or Heresy
of the Nazarites, Certainly Act. 24.5.
says Tertullus, we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a moover of
sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a chief maintainer of
the Sect of the Nazarites. Now the Apostle St Paul here in this place does not
only not deny this point of his Accusation, but freely confesses that if so be
that were Heresy, then was he an Heretic indeed, but yet he worshipped (he
Act. 24.14.
said) the true God, and believed all that was written in the Law and the
Prophets, which was the word of God, and therefore did he put it to their own
consciences, whether he were an Heretic, or no.

An excellent pattern of our selves, who are accused as he was, and may excuse
our selves as he did. Only they have us not now (God be thanked) as Tertullus
had Paul before a Tribunal Seat. Those days are past and gone, their power
and might is much abated, though their hatred and malice be never a whit. But,
Been est Hieron. Tom. 2. Apol. advers. Ruffin. l. 2 p. 223.
says St Jerome, quod malicia non habet tantas vires, quantos conatus.
Perierat innocentia, si semper nequitiae iuncta esset potentia. It is well that
Malice has not so much might as it has spite. Innocence were undone, if
wickedness and powrefulnes were still in one Predicament. Senec. Troas. Act. 1.
se. Quicunque
Troia iam vetus est malum: Eighty eight is an old soar. They have given us of
late occasion to say with Israel in the Psalm. 124.1.
Psalm, If the Lord himself had not been on our side (now may Israel say) if
the Lord himself had not been on our side, when Romish Catholic rose up
against us, they had swallowed us up quick; when they were so wrathfully
displeased at us. And that which V. 5.
follows a little after; But praised be the Lord, which has not given us
over for a pray unto their teeth. Our Soul is escaped, eve^ as a bird out of
the snare of the fowler: the snare was broken, and we were delivered. But to
come unto my purpose.

To show that we may excuse our selves as the Apostle here did, I hold it my
best way to rehearse all those Points we are accused of by the^, and to
confirm them very briefly, both by the Scriptures, and by Fathers. Which that
it may the better be brought about, I can think of no better course then to
rehearse here before you all those Tenets which our Mother the Church of
England holds concerning Doctrine and Discipline. I mean those Articles
concluded in a Articles, where upon it was agreed by the Archbishops and Bishops
of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy. In the Convocation holden at London in
the year of our Lord God. 1562
Synod of hers in the year 62, whereunto we al of us subscribe at the taking
of our Degrees. And by this means shall you reap a double benefit: First you
shall hear what you are to subscribe unto, and not go blindefold to work, as
too too many have done heretofore, and have afterward been a Prove. 10.1.
heaviness to our Mother the Church by kicking the heel against her:
Secondly, you shall have somewhat also in store against the Dictates of our
Adversaries, who employ so much pains to inveigle such as you are, and to make
them their Vt faciatis vnum Proselytu^. Mat. 23.15.
Proselites. I know to perform all this will be somewhat above your
capacities, especially now at this time being so young as you are, a many of
you; howbeit as our Savior Ioh. 13.7.
said to St Peter when he washed his Feet, What I do thou know not now, but
thou shall know it hereafter: right so say I in this case, that which by
tenderness of years you cannot now so well skill of, you shall Godwilling
hereafter, if in the mean time you lay up all these sayings in your hearts, as
did the Blessed Virgin our Saviors, Luke 2.51. Our Saviors Parents, Luke 2.50.
says S. Luke, understood not the word that he spoke unto them, and yet, V. 51.
says he immediately after, his Mother kept all those sayings in her heart.

As touching the order I shall observe, forasmuch as the Articles are many
(some thirty or forty of them in all) and some there are about which there is
little or no difference at all between our Adversaries and our selves: those
about which there is none at all, or at least wise very little, those will I
barely read unto you, the Rest about which there is, I will first read them,
then prove them both by Scriptures, and by Fathers. I shall be at this time
somewhat long, but your patience may be the greater, partly for I have not yet
been over tedious unto you at any time, partly for I shall hereafter be the
breefer in those points that are hereafter to be handled. I come to the first
Article.

There is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body, parts, or
passions; of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness; the maker and preserver of
all things, both visible and invisible. And in unity of this Godhead, there be
three Persons, of one substance, power, and authority, the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost. The Son which is the Word of the Father, begotten from
everlasting of the Father, the very, and eternal God, of one substance with
the Father, took Man's Nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin, of her
substance: so that two whole and perfect Natures, that is to say, the Godhead
and Manhood were joined in one Person, never to be divided, whereof is one
Christ, very God, and very Man: who suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried,
to reconcile his Father to us, and to be a sacrifice, not only for Original
guilt, but also for all actual sins of Men. As Christ died for us and was
buried: so also it is to be believed, that he went down into Hell. Christ did
truly arise again from death, and took again his body, with flesh, bone,
and all things appertaining to the perfection of Man's nature: wherewith he
ascended into Heaven, and there sits until he rereturne to judge all men at
the last day. The Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father, and the Son, is of
one substance, majesty, and glory, with the Father and the Son, very, and
eternal God. Hitherto have we and our Adversaries gone hand in hand, no whit
varying each from other, but now lo begins the breach, and first in the sixth
Article.

Holy Scripture contains all things necessary for salvation: so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or
be thought requisite and necessary to salvation. In the name of the Holy
Scriptures we do understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New
Testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church. The names and
number of them are these: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numeri, Deuteronomium
Iosue, Judges, Ruth, The 1. Book of Samuel, The 2. Book of Samuel, The 1.
Book of Kings, The 2. Book of Kings, The 1. Book of Chronicles, The 2. Book
of Chronicles, The 1. Book of Esdras, The 2. Book of Esdras, The Book of
Hester, The Book of Job, The Psalms, The Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, or the
Preacher, Cantica, or Songs of Solomon. The 4 greater Prophets, The 12. less
Prophets. And the other Books (as Hierome says) the Church does read for
example of life, and instruction of manners: but yet does it not apply them to
establish any doctrine. Such are these following. The third book of Esdras. The
fourth of Esdras. The book of Tobias. The book of Judith. The rest of the
books of Hester. The book of Wisdom. Jesus the son of Syrach. Baruch the
Prophet. The Song of the three Children. The story of Susanna. Of Bell and the
Dragon. The Prayer of Manasses. The 1 Book of Maccabees. The 2 Book of
Maccabees. All the Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly received,
we do receive and account them Canonical. So that we have in this Article two
points to prove. First, that the holy Scripture contains all things
necessary (to be known and believed) for the Salvation of man. Secondly, that
all the Books in the volume of the Bible are not Canonical, as for example,
Toby, Judith, Wisdom, the Son of Syrach, the Machabees, etc.

For the former we have both Scriptures and Fathers. Scriptures, as Deuteronomy. 4.2,
Ye shall put nothing to the Word, which I command you, neither shall ye take
ought there from. And Deuteronomy. 12.32, Whatsoever I command ye take heed you do
it: thou shall put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom. So Joshua, 1.7,
Be thou strong and of a most valiant courage, that thou may observe and do
according to all the law which Moses my servant has commanded thee: thou shall
not turn away from it, to the right hand, nor to the left. I omit the Prophet
David, in whom there are not many more Psalms then there are testimonies of
the sufficiency of the Law (chiefly the 19, Roffensis himself that wrote
against Luther, calls the Holy Scripture Conclave quoddam omnium veritatum And
again veritatu^ omnium Pelagus Aflert. Luther. confutatio, Art. 37.
and the 119) which Law delivered to the Israelites whatsoever was necessary to
their salvation. I omit also that of the Apostle S. Paul, 2. Tim. 3.16 The
whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to
improve, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may
be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works. I come to the Fathers.

First Tertullian: Adoro, Tertul. advers Hermog. p. 123. Edit. Par. 1545
says he, Scripturae plenitudine^. And again a little after: Scriptum esse
doceat Hermogenis officina. Si non est scriptum, timeat vae illud
adijcientibus, aut detrahentibus destinatum. I adore, says he of himself, the
fullness of the Scripture. Let Hermogenes School show that it is written. If
so be it be not written, then let him fear that curse appointed for them,
which add or take away. And this was the place of Tertullian against
Hermogenes, that so puzzeld Campian at the first ( Campian that great Goliath
that challenged all and every of us from the highest to the lowest) that he did
not A doubty challenger he was, and an hot shot, that knew no better what
Books the Fathers had written. See more of his whole carriage in that
Disputat^on in D. Fulle Against the Defense of the Censure. Ep. to the Reader.
p. 34.
think there was any such Book in all Tertullian. And yet see the boldness
of the Jesuit, he had no sooner denied there was such a Book, but when he
saw he was deceived, he took presently upon him to Conference at the Tower.
The 4 days Confer. p. C c. 2. b.
discourse of the Argument of it. But I proceed. Credimus Hierom. Tom. 2.
advers. Helvid. p. 13. Edit. Basil. 1537.
says St Jerome, quia legimus, no^ credimus quia non legimus. He in the
Controversy which he had with Helvidius turns the reason in and out. We
believe it because we read it, and because we read it not, therefore we believe
it not. So St Basil, Manifesta est elapsio a fide Basil. Ser. de Confess. Fid.
p. 438. Edit. Basil. 1540.
says he, and superbiae crimen, aut reprobare quid ex his quae scripta sunt,
aut superinducere quid ex non scriptis. He affirms it to be a manifest
revolting from the Faith, and a spice of pride, either to disallow any thing
that is written, or to bring in any thing that is not written. And more over
concerning the Authority of Scriptures, that they should be the Judge of
controversies in religion, there is, says D. Humfrey, a most excellent place
in Chrysostom, Humfred. in Camp. Rat. 5. p. 507.
que^ nullus locus cummunis Iesuitarum, nulla Topica, Logica, Philosophica,
Theologica, possunt demoliri. No common place books of the Jesuits, none of
their Topics, Logic, Philosophy, Theology, could possibly demolish. They used
says he, the Sword not of Hercules, but of the Printer, and left it out quite
and clean. I take it he means a Tunc cum vi^deritis abominationem
desolationis stantem in loco sancto, id est, cum videritis haeresim impiam,
quae est exercitus Antichristi flantem in locis sanctis Ecclesiae, in illo
tempore qui in Iudaea sunt fugiant ad montes id est, qui sunt in Christianitate
conferant se ad Scripturas. And a little after Montes autem sunt Scripturae
Apostolorum aut Prophetarum, etc. And again a little after: Quare iubet in hoc
te^pore omnes Christianos confer se ad Scripturas? Quia in tempore hoc ex quo
obtinuit Haeresii illas Ecclesias, nulla probatio potest esse verae
Christianitatis, neque refugium potest esse Christianorum aliud, volentium
cognoscere fidei veritatem, nisi Scripturae divinae, etc. Chrysostom. Tom. 2, Op.
impers. in Mat. Homil. 49. Edit. Basil. 1547. p. 1088.
place in Opere Imperf. in Mat. Hom. 49. you shall find it in S. Chrysostom in
his 2. Tome. I return unto my purpose. And before we have done with this
point, there is a maine objection to be answered concerning the Premises. For
it has oftentimes been demanded, how the Books of holy Scripture contain
in them all necessary things, when of things necessary the very chiefest is to
know what Books we are bound to esteem holy, which point is confessed
impossible for the Scri^ture it self to teach. Whereunto it may be answered,
that albeit Scripture do profess to contain in it ^ll things which are
necessary unto Salvation, yet the meaning cannot be simply of al things that
are necessary but all things that are necessary in some certain kind or
form; as all things that are necessary, and either could not at all, or could
not easily be known by the light of natural discourse: all things which are
necessary to be known that we may be saved, but known with presupposal of
knowledge concerning certain Principles, whereof it receives us already
persuaded, and then instructs us in all the residue that are necessary. In
the number of these Principles one is the sacred Authority of Scripture. See
more hereof in Reverend Mr M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 1.. 14. p. 86. and l. 3..
8. p. 146.
Hooker. I come to the second point concerning Books Canonical.

That they only are Canonical which our Church accepts of; and that the rest
are Apocrypha, it is sufficient to have the testimony of Antiquity only, and so
have we. First the Council of Laodicea, which framing the catalogue of Books
Canonical, Non oportet libros quisunt extra canonem legere (in Ecclesi^^) nisi
solo^ canonic^s novi and vit^ris Testamenti. Quae autem oporteat legi, and in
authoritatem recipi haec sunt. Genesis Ex. Levit. Nu. Deuteronomy. Ies. Naue Iudicum,
Ruth. Reg. lib. quatuor. Paralip. libri duo, Esdre, lib. Psalm. numero 150.
Proverb. Solom. Eccles. Cantic. Ca^ticor. Job. Hester. Duod. Proph. Libri id
est Ose and Amos, Joel, Abdias, Jonas, Micheas, Nahum, Abacu^, Sophonias,
Aggaeus. Zach. Malach. Esai. Ier. Ezech. Dan Novi Test. id est, Evang. sec.
Mat. sec. Marc. sec. Luc sec. Joan. Act Apost. Canonicae Epist. 7. Iacobi vna,
Petriduae, 1a and 2a. Ioannis tres 1a 2a and 3a. Jude vna, Epistolae Apost.
Pauli numero 14. Ad Romans ad Cor. 1a and 2a ad Gal. ad Ephesians. ad Philippenses
vna, a^ Colos. vna. ad These. duae 1a and 2a. ad Timoth. duae 1a and 2a. ad
Titu^, ad Philem. ad Heb. Conc. Laod. Ao. D. 364. vel 368. Can. 59 sive vlt. p.
227. Edit. C^lon per Petrum Quentel
omitteth these in controversy betwixt our Adversaries and us. Secondly, the
testimony of Melito the Bishop of Sardia of whom you shall read in Meliton
Gnesim^ fratri salutem etc In Orientem reversus, and eo loco constitutus vbi
ista sunt and praedicata and gesta veteris instrument ilibros diligenter
cognitos in ordinem subieci, and ad te misi: quorum haec sunt nomina. Quinque
libri Mosis, Gen Ex Levit. Nu. Deuteronomy. Deinde Jesus Nave, Iudices, Ruth, Regum.
quatuor libri, Paralip. duo Ps. David. Proverb Sol. Sapientia. Eccles. Cantic.
Canticor. Job. Prophetae Esaias, Ieremias. Duod. Prophet. lib. vnus. Daniel.
Ezechiel. Esd. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 25. ex verse. Grynaei Basil. 1587.
Where for Sapientia is named, and thereby it seems that the Book of Wisd. is
made Canonical, Vid. D. Rainolds Lectures Praelect. 14. p. 116. how that is to
be understood, namely that the Proverbs are called (...) per excelle^tiam.
Eusebius. Thirdly the testimony of Horum libros lege duos atque viginti,
nihilque cum Apocryphis habeto commune, Vid. Locu^ S Cyril. Catech. 4. p 99.
Edit. Paris 1608.
St Cyril. Who so is desirous to see more, I refer him to those excellent
Lectures sometimes read here in Oxford, and lately set forth by Praelectiones D
Rainoldi De Libris Apocryphis, In nobili Oppenheimio sumptibus Viduae Levini
Hulsii and Henrici Laurentii, Ao 1611. Vid. Praelect. 34, 35, 36.
Strangers to as great a commendation unto them, as a reproach unto our selves.
But thus much of the sixth Article.

In the seventh we join hands again, there is I confess some little
difference; but the Article is this; The Old Testament is not contrary to the
New. For both in the old and new Testament everlasting life is offered to
Mankind by Christ, who is the only mediator between God and Man, being both
God and Man. Wherefore they are not to be heard which feign that the old
Fathers did look only for transitory promises. Although the Law given from God
by Moses, as touching Ceremonies and Rites, do not bind Christian men; nor
the Civil Precepts thereof ought of necessity to be received in any Common
wealth: yet notwithstanding no Christian man whatsoever is free from the
obedience of the Co^ma^dements which are called Moral. Now when it is said in
this Article, that They are not to be heard which feign that the old Fathers
did look only for tra^sitory promises (meaning the Fathers of the old
Testament) true it is, that our Popish writers have run upon that string, and
by name the Fathers of the Council of Trent, alleging St Austen for that
point (they might have done Chrysostom. Tom. 1. Hom. de Fide Annae p. 490. Edit.
Paris. 1556
St Chrysostom too) but forasmuch as it is none of the Controversies in
question now adays, I will refer you only to Mr D. Rainolds D. Rain.
Praelect. 7. p. 78. and Prael. 11. p. 98.
Lectures, where he handles this point. The three Creedes, Nicene Creed,
Ath^nasius Creed, and that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed ought
thoroughly to be received, and believed. For they may be proved by most certain
warrants of holy Scripture. I say after a sort, for that our Adversaries it may
be, suppose there are some points in those Creedes that are proved rather by
Tradition, but I will not now stand on this point. I come to our greater
fallings out, and that is in the 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14. Article. Original
sin stands not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians do vainly talk)
but it is the fault and corruption of the nature of every man, that naturally
is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone from
original righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined to evil, so that
the flesh lusts always contrary to the spirit, and therefore in every person
borne in this world, it deserves Gods wrath and damnation. And this infection
of nature does remain, yea in them that are regenerated, whereby the lust of
the flesh, called in Greek (...), which some do expound the wisdom, some
sensuality, some the affection, some the desire of the flesh, is not subject to
the law of God. And although there is no condemnation for them that believe and
are baptized, yet the Apostle does confess that Concupiscence and lust has of
it self the Nature of sin. Here then in this Article we are to confirm two
Points. First that Original Sin remains in Gods dear Children: Secondly,
that Concupiscence even in the Regenerate is Sin. Prove one, and prove both.
That Concupiscence, and the corrupt inclination of Nature even in the Children
of God is verily and properly Sin, is thus proved by the word of God. First St
Paul so calls it, Romans 7.17, Now then it is no more I that do it, but the sin
that dwells in me. And again, v. 20, Now if I do that I would not, it is no
more I that do it, but the sin that dwells in me. Nay he calls it Sin
six several times in that Chapter: he had called it so in the sixth Chapter no
less then five times; and in the Chapter next to this, that is in the eight,
Three times. We dare not say as the Conc. Trid. Sess. 5 Number. 5.
Council of Trent did, Hanc Concupiscentiam, quam aliquando Apostolus peccatum
appellat, Sancta Synodus declarat Ecclesiam Catholicam nunquam intellexisse
peccatum appellari, quod vere and proprie in renatis peccatum sit, sed quia ex
peccato est, and ad peccatum inclinat: This Concupiscence which the Apostle
sometime calls sin, this Holy Synod declares that the Catholic Church
never understood it to be called sin, for that truly and properly it was sin
in the Regenerate. No we take the Apostle at his word, and whatsoever their
Catholic Church has thought in this point, the Catholic Fathers not only
thought, but taught also otherwise. Witness St Ambrose, whom St Austen Ambros.
apud August. Tom. 7. Contra Julian. l. 2. p. 661 Edit. Basil 1528.
cites: Multa in nobis operatur peccatum: nobis reluctantibus redivivae
plerumque voluptates resurgunt. This sin (original) works many things in us:
even against our wills a many times pleasures revived arise within us. Witness
St Cyprian who^ St Austen Cyp. apud August. Ib. p. 666.
cites to, Ne quisquam sibi de puro and immaculato pectore blandiatur. Si nemo
esse sine peccato potest, quisquis se inculpatum esse dixerit, aut superbus,
aut stultus est. Let no man sooth up himself that he has a pure and
immaculate heart. And for because no man can possibly be without sin, he who
says he is, is or proud, or foolish. Witness S. Austen himself, Sicut
coecitas cordis, Aug. Tom. 7. Cont. Julian. l. 5 c. 3. p. 725.
says he, and peccatum est, and poena peccati est, and causa peccati: ita
concupiscentia carnis adversus quam bonus concupiscit spiritus, and peccatum
est, and poena peccati est, and causa peccati est. As blindness of the heart
is both sin it self, and the punishment of Sin, and the cause of Sin: so
is Concupiscence of the Flesh against the which the good Spirit lusts.
Briefly where the Fathers say that Concupiscence is not Sin, their meaning is,
says a worthy Anion. Sadeelis Ad Artic. 39. p 466. Opera Theol. Edit. 1593.
Writer, for that through Gods Grace it is not imputed unto us. Whosoever is
desirous to see more, I refer him to M. Dr Whitakers De Peccato Originali, l.
3. the 6, and 7 Chapters. I come to the tenth Article, which is of Freewill.
The condition of Man after the fall of Adam is such that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural strength, and good works, to Faith and
calling upon God; wherefore we have no power to do good Works pleasant, and
acceptable to God, without the Grace of God preventing us, that we may have a
good will, and working with us, when we have that good will. The point in this
Article to be avouched against our Adversaries is this: Man cannot do any
work that good is, and godly, not being as yet regenerate. A truth approved
both by the Scriptures, and the Fathers. The Scriptures, as 1. Cor. 2.14, The
natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: nether can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. And 2. Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves, to think any
thing as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God. So our Savior Christ,
Ioh. 15.5. Without me can ye do nothing. And John 6.44, No man can come to
me, except the Father which has sent me draw him. The Fathers: as first St
Ambrose: Reparabilem and sanabilem esse de natura est, Ambr. Tom. 2 de vocat.
Gent. l. 2. c. 2. p 28. Edit. Bas. 1538
reparatum autem and sanatum esse de gratia est. To be fit to be repaired, and
to be healed is of Nature, but to be repaired, and healed, that is of Grace.
And again in Ambr. Tom. 3 Epist. l. 10. ep. 84. p. 270.
another place, In omnibus bonis opulentiae tuae and Gratiam Donatoris, and ius
proprietatis agnoscas. In all thy spiritual riches acknowledge the Grace of
him that gave it thee, and the right of propriety from him. And yet again in
a third Ambr. Tom. 2 de vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 2. p 5.
place, Voluntas nihil in suis habet viribus nisi periculi facilitatem. Quoniam
voluntas mutabilis quae non ab incommutabili voluntate regitur, tanto citius
propinquat iniquitati, quanto acrius intenditur actioni. Will has nothing in
her own power, but a facility to miscary. For mutable will which is not
rectified by that immutable Will above, is so much the nearer to Iniquity, the
more intent she is to do ought. Fulgent. de Praedest. p. 15. Edit. Bas. 1587
So Fulgentius: Dat Deus cor novum vt in iustificationibus etus ambulemus, quod
pertinet ad bonae voluntatis initium. Dat etiam vt iudicia eius observemus and
faciamus, quod pertinet ad bonae operationis effectum. Vnde Forte cognoscimus.
cognoscimur Dei esse, vt bonum facere velimus, and vt bonum facere valeamus.
God gives us a new heart to the end we should walk in his Statutes, and that
belongs to the beginning of a good will. It is his gift also, that we observe
and do his Statutes, and that belongs to the effect of good working. Wherefore
we acknowledge it to be Gods peculiar, that both we be willing to do that
which good is, and able also to perform it. Lastly S. Austen: Quae voluntas?
Aug Tom. 10 de verb. Apost. Ser. 13. p. 214. Edit. Bas. 1529
says he, quod liberum arbitrium? nisi ille regat cadis, nisi regat iaces.
What will? what Freewill do thou prattle of unto me? Unless God do govern
it thou fallest down right: unless he govern it, there thou lie without
recovery. And again in Aug. To. 1. Retract. l. 1. c. 15. p. 16 Edit. Basil.
1529.
another place, In tantum libera est, quia in tantum liberata est. The will is
so far forth free, for she is freed so far forth by the mercy of God. In a
word, where S. Austen in other places seems to defend the Freedom of will, it
was for because having to do with the Manichees, who held that Me^ were of
evil will by creation of the evil God, he held indeed Freedom of will, but
yet V. D. Fulke on the Rhem. Test. in Mat. 25.34.
Freedom of will from coaction by nature, not from the thraldom of Sin
through the first man's fall. The eleventh article is of the Justification of
Man. We are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our own works or deservings.
Wherefore that we are justified by Faith Only is a most wholesome doctrine, and
very full of comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily of
Justification. In which Article we are to make good against our Adversaries two
several Propositions: First that only for Christ his merit we are accounted
righteous before God: Secondly that we are justified by Faith Only. Both these
in a manner are one, and therefore that only for Christ his merit we are
accounted righteous before God, and that we are justified by Faith Only,
witness that of the Apostle S. John 1. John. 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all Sin. That of the Apostle S. Paul, Romans 5.19. As by one
man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many
also be made rigbteous. That of the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.30. Ye are of him
in Jesus Christ who of God is made unto us Wisdom and Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption. I, but this term ONLY, You have it not in all
the word of God that Faith only does justify, says Campia^ This Proposition,
Faith only does justify is not to be found in all the word of God Conference
in the Tower p. D. d. 3. b. though S. Paul say, man is justified by Faith, yet
he never said by faith only. Rhem in Iam. 1.24.
say our Adversaries, where is that in all the Scripture? where? where is it?
and where is this term Merit? where is Tra^subtantiation? where is Mass?

-- Senec. Troas Act. 3 Sc. Quid moesia.
Vbi Hector? Vbi cuncti Phryges?
Vbi Priamus? Vnum quaeris; ego quaero omnia.
Howbeit as there is in Scripture that which they imagine proves all this: both
Merit, and Mass, and Transubstantiation, and the like, not named there in
particular, so we are assured there is in Scripture that which proves Faith
Faith. For what mean there those many Negatiues, Romans 9.11. Gal. 2.16. Tit.
3.5.
Not by works: Romans 11 6. Ephesians. 2.9.
Not of works; 2 Timothy 1.9.
Not according to works; Rom 4.6.
Without works; Romans 4 13.
Not through the law: Romans 3.20.
Not by the works of the law, Rom 3.21.
Without the law: Gal 2.16.
Not but by Faith: is he not purblinde as St Petere speaks ((...)) and cannot
see a far of, that sees not in those Negatiues, Only Faith? 2. Pet. 1 9.
Faith Only? Did not the Fathers therein perceive as much before us? Do they
not thereupon use those very words of Sola Fides in Latin, and (...) in
Greek? and that which was also equivalent to them as Tantum. vt credant. Amb.
Tom. 5. in Epist. ad Rom c. 4 p. 186. Edit. Basil. 1538. Number est and hic
quippiam allaturus? Fidem duntaxat. Theophyl. in Ep. ad Romans c. 4 p. 7 Edit.
Colo^. 1528 Totum. credulitas sola donauit (Abrahamo) Aug. Tom. 10. de Temp
Ser. 68. p. 516. Edit. Basil. 1529. De remissione peccatorum sufficere deberet
sola credulitas. Cyp. in Symb. Apost. p. 379. Edit. Basil. 1530. Fidem tantum
prodesse, and tantum nos posse qua^tum credimuss. Cyp. ad Quirinu^, l. 3. c.
42. p. 305. Edit. Basil. 1530. (...); Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Titum. (...). fol.
99. b. Edit. Veronae. 1529. (...). Oecum. in Ep. ad Romans p 270. Edit. Veronae.
1532.
Tantum credere, sola credulitas, Fides tantum, etc? Search and see, or to save
you a labor let me be the Searcher for you. I have else where proclaimed it
long since, I will now make it good unto you, that unless it be one Case only
(which my poor reading perhaps has not light upon as yet) otherwise there is
no one Case in Sola Fides but some of the Fathers have used it, more then once
in their writings. As first in the Nominative Fides sola iustificat. Hilar. in
Mat. Can. 8. p. 352. and Can. 21. p. 406. Edit. Basil. 1535. Whereupon faith
Erasmus, Addit Hilarious, Fides enim sola iustificat, atqui haec est vox tot
clamoribus hoc saeculo lapidata, quae in Hilario revere^ter auditur. Erasm. de
Ratione Concion. l. 3.
St Hilary, Sola fides posita est ad salutem. Ambr. Tom. 5. in. Epist. ad Romans
c. 9. p. 216. Edit. Basil. 1538.
St Ambrose, Si Gentes fides sola non salvat, nec nos. In 2. ad Gal. p. 346.
Col. 2. And In 3. ad Gal. p. 347. he has five times Sola Fides, though be say
in that Chapter too, Non iustificat sola fides, meaning a dead faith. Hier. Tom
9. Edit. Basil. 1537.
St Ierom, Quia sola fides Christi mundat, non credentes in Christum soluti
sunt ab emundatione. Aug. Tom. 8. in. Ps. 88. Conc. 2. p. 987. Edit. Basil.
1529.
St Austen and Ab hoc peccato quod originaliter carnalis nativitas trahit,
neminem facultas naturalis, neminem litera sanctae legis, sed sola fides eripit
Jesus Christi. Fulgent. de Incarnat. c. 16, p 746. Edit. Basil. 1587.
Fulgentius: In the Genitive, (...). Chrysostom. in 2. ad Ephesians Ser 5. p 145. And
again, (...), In 1. ad Tim. c. 1. (...). p. 8. b. Edit Veronae 1529.
St Chrysostom, (...). Theodor. ad Graec. Infid. Ser. 7. p 107. Col. 1. Edit.
Commelin. 1592.
Theodoret, and Dicit (Apostolus) sufficere solius fidei iustificationem. Orig.
in. 3. ad Romans p. 504. Oper. Part. 2. Edit. Bas. 1571.
Origin: In the Dative, (...), Chrysostom. in 3. ad Gal. p. 95 Edit. Veronae. 1529.
St Chrysostom again, and (...). Basil. de Humil p. 388. Edit. Basil. 1532.
S. Basil. In the Accusative, Impius per solam fidem iustificatur apud Deum. In
4. ad Romans p. 186. And again, Solam fidem gratiae Dei posceret ad Salutem, Ib.
And again, Cum sciant Abraham per solam fidem iustificatum. And a little
after, Hi ergo haeredes sunt promissionis Abrahae qui illi succedunt
suscipientes fidem in qua benedictus and iustificatus est Abraham. Ib. in 3. ad
Gal. p, 329. And again, vt veniens qui promissus erat Abrahae fidem solam ab
iis posceret, qua^ habuit Abraham vt and maloru^ suoru^ venia^ and
iustificationem mererentur. Ibid. p. 331. Ambros. Tom. 5. Edit. Basil. 1538.
S. Ambrose, Recte dici posset ad solam fidem pertinere Dei mandata, si non
mortua, sed viva illa intelligatur fides. Aug. Tom. 4. de Fid. and Oper. c. 22.
p. 54. Edit. Basil. 1528.
St Austen, Quid a nobis exigit, quid praestari fibi a nobis iubet, nisi solam
tantummodo fidem, castitatem, humilitatem etc. Salvian. de Provident. l. 7. p.
241. Edit. Par. 1594
Salvianus, Nos dicimus, illi per fidem solam ad indulgentiam attingunt. Arnob.
in Ps. 106. p. 92. Edit. Par. 1580.
Arnobius, Nunc plane demonstrat fidem ipsam vel solam iustificandi in se
habere virtutem. Theophyl. in 3 ad Gal. p. 77. Edit. Colon. 1528.
Theophilact, and Solam iustificatus per fidem pacem habebit ad Deu^, Super
Cantic. Ser. 22. Fol. 137 Col. 4. And again, Innuens: solam interdum fidem
sufficere ad salutem, and sine ipsa sufficere nihil. Bernar. Epist. 77. fol.
205. Col. 4 Edit. Paris. 1547.
S. Bernard: In the Ablative Hoc co^stitutum est a Deo, vt qui credit in
Christum salvus sit sine opere sola fide gratis accipiens remissionem
peccatorum, In 1. Cor. 1 p. 239 And again, Sola fide iustificati sunt dono
Dei. In 3 ad Romans p. 184. And again, Sola fide iustificentur apud Deum. in 4.
ad Romans p. 186. Ambr Tom. 5. Edit. Basil. 1538.
St Ambrose again, Evangelium per quod Gentes sola fide salvantur, in 2. ad
Gal. page 345. Col. 2. And again, Non ex operibus legis, sed sola fide sicut
Gentes vitam in Christo invenisse te nosti, Ib. p. 346: Col. 2. Again upon
that of the Apostle, In fide vivo filii Dei] In sola fide; quia nihil debeo
legi antiquae. p. 347. Col. 1. And again, In sola fide spes collocatur
animarum, In 6. ad. Gal p. ^53. Col. 2. Hier. Tom. 9. Edit. Basil. 1537.
St Jerome, Praecogniti quod non fuerant credituri ea fide qua sola possent a
peccatorum obligatione liberari. Aug Tom. 9. in Evang. Joan. Tract. 42. p. 216
Edit. Basil 1529.
St Austen and Salus sola fide quaeritur. Paulin. apud Augustinum Tom. 2. ep.
58. p. 186 Edit. Basil 1528.
Paulinus. Shall I give you a taste in every Case? Fides Sola iustificat, so St
Hilary: Sufficit solius fidei iustificatio, so Origin: Qui soli fidei innititur
benedictus est, so St Chrysostom: Impius per solam fidem iustificatur, so St
Ambrose: There wants indeed the Vocative: but, Gentes Sola Fide salvantur, so
St Jerome. Now where our Adversaries would shift of these and the like places
with a Rhem. in Iam. 1.24. Vid. D. Fulke against them.
distinction of a first and second Justification, we may meet them at that
turn with that of St Gregory: Nudum me in fide Greg. Moral. l 2. c. 40. p. 11.
Col. 1. Edit. Par. 1551.
says he, prima gratia genuit, nudum eadem gratia in assumptione salvabit. He
speaks in the person of a tempted Soul, as if such an one should say: The
first Grace begot me in faith when I was but naked (in good works) and the
same Grace shall save me hereafter, whenas I shall be but naked (in them)
nether. Besides that they speak not only of the first conversion of a man, but
of justification unto salvation of every faithful man according to the example
of Abraham, and David, who both had good works, yet were not justified by them
before God, but by their faith only. But of this see more in D. Fulkes
Reioinder to Bristowes Reply, p. 206. and 207, as also against the Rhemish
Testament on James 1.24. I will conclude this point with that of Calvin, in Act
Synod. Trid. Sext. Sess. Antid. Tract. Theol. p. 336. Col. 2.
Calvin: Fides Sola est quae iustificat; sides tamen quae iustificat non est
sola. Vt solis calor solus est, qui terram calefaciat: non tamen idem in sole
solus est, quia coniunctus cum splendore. It is faith alone that iustifies, and
yet that Faith that iustifies is not alone. Like as it is the heat alone of the
Sun that heateth the earth, yet is not that heat in the sun alone, forasmuch
as it has brightness joined with it. I come to the 12, 13, and 14, Articles
concerning Good Works. Albeit that good Works, which are the fruits of Faith,
and follow after justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure the
severity of Gods judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in
Christ, and do spring out necessarily of a true and lively Faith, in so much
that by them a lively faith may be as evide^tly known as a tree discerned by
the fruit. Works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his
spirit, are not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of faith in Jesus
Christ, neither do they make men meet to receive grace (or as the
Schoole-Authors say) deserve grace of co^gruity: yea rather for that they are
not done as God has willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but
they have the nature of sin. Voluntary Works besides, over and above Gods
commandments, which they call works of Supererogation, cannot be taught
without arrogance and impiety. For by them men do declare that they do not only
render unto God as much as they are bound to do, but that they do more for his
sake, then of bounden duty is required: whereas Christ says plainly, when ye
have done all that are commanded to you, say we be unprofitable servants. Now
from these three Articles arise three maine Questions. First from the 12
Article, whether our good Works can put away our sins, and endure the
severity of Gods strict judgment. Secondly, from the 13 Article, whether Good
Works being done before Justification can please God, and deserve grace of
congruity, and have not rather the nature of Sin. Thirdly, from the 14
Article, whether Works of Supererogation can be taught without arrogance and
impiety. But that Good Works cannot put away our Sins, and in no wise endure
the severity of Gods judgment: and that before justification they cannot
please God, and deserve grace of congruity, but rather have the nature of
Sin: and that works of Supererogation cannot be taught without arrogancy
and impiety, is evident in effect by that which has been already said
concerning Works, and Faith Only. I come to the 15, 16, 17, and 18, Article
wherein our agreement is much greater. The 15, Article, is of our Saviors
being alone without sin. Christ in the truth of our nature was made like unto
us in all things (sin only except) from which he was clearly void, both in
his flesh, and in his spirit. He came to be a Lamb without spot, who by a
sacrifice of himself once made should take away the sins of the world: and
sin (as St John says) was not in him. But all we the rest, (although
baptized, and borne again in Christ) yet offend in many things, and if we say
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Not every
deadly sin willingly committed after Baptism, is sin against the Holy Ghost,
and unpardonable. Wherefore the grant of repentance is not to be denied to
such as fall into sin after Baptism. After we have received the holy Ghost, we
may depart from grace given, and fall into sin, and by the grace of God (we
may) arise again, and amend our lives. And therefore they are to be condemned,
which say they can no more sin as long as they live here, or deny the place
of forgiveness to such as truly repent. The 17 Article is of Predestination,
and Election. The Article is this: Predestination to life, is the everlasting
purpose of God, whereby (before the foundations of the world were laid) he
has constantly decreed by his counsel, secret to us, to deliver from curse
and damnation, those whom he has chosen in Christ out of mankind, and to
bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor.
Wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a benefit of God, be called
according to Gods purpose by his Spirit working in due season: they through
grace obey the calling, they be justified freely, they be made sons of God by
adoption; they be made like the Image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ;
they walk religiously in good works, and at length by Gods mercy, they
attain to everlasting felicity. As the godly consideration of Predestination
and our Election in Christ, is full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort
to godly persons, and such as feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of
Christ, mortifying the works of the flesh, and their earthly members, and
drawing up their mind to high and heavenly things, as well because it does
greatly establish and confirm their faith of eternal salvation to be enjoyed
through Christ, as because it does fervently kindle their love toward God: so,
for curious and carnal persons, lacking the spirit of Christ, to have
continually before their eyes the sentence of Gods Predestination, is a most
dangerous downfall, whereby the Devil does thrust them either into
desperation, or into retchlesnesse of most unclean living, no less perilous
then desperation. Furthermore, we must receive Gods promises in such wise, as
they be generally set forth to us in holy Scripture: and in our doings, that
will of God is to be followed, which we have expressly declared unto us in the
Word of God. The 18 Article is of obtaining eternal salvation, only by the
name of Christ. The Article is this: They also are to be had accursed, that
presume to say, that every man shall be saved by the law or sect which he
professes, so that he be diligent to frame his life according to that law, and
the light of nature. For holy Scripture does set out unto us only the name of
Jesus Christ, whereby me^ must be saved. Now in all these we have in some sort,
gone (as it were) together, we are now again to part and that at the Church
Style, for the 19. Article is this. The visible Church of Christ, is a
Congregation of faithful men, in the which the pure word of God is preached,
and the Sacraments be duly administered, according to Christ's ordinance, in all
those things that of necessity, are requisite to the same. As the Church of
Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch have erred: so also the Church of Rome has
erred, not only in their living and manner of ceremonies, but also in matters of
Faith. Here I confess should much be spoken as well for our selves, as against
our Adversaries, howbeit since of the Visible Church I have spoken so much
Lect. 6. p. 106
already, as also of the Church of Rome, how it has and does Ibid. p. 123.
err, I will refer you concerning this Article to that which has been
already spoken, and I come unto the next, which is of the Authority of the
Church. The Church hach power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and authority in
controversies of Faith: and yet it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any
thing that is contrary to Gods word written, neither may it so expound one
place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another. Wherefore although the
Church be a witness and a keeper of holy writ; yet as it ought not to decree
any thing against the same, so besides the same, ought it not to enforce any
thing to be believed for necessity of salvation. Of this also should much be
spoken, but forasmuch as I have spoken before, and that upon the 6. Article of
the Sufficiency of holy Scripture, it shall be needless to prove at this time,
that the Church may enforce any thing to be believed that is either contrary,
or besides the word of God, that is the Scriptures. Of the power the Church
has to decree Rites and Ceremonies, see Reverend M. Hooker in his third Book
of Ecclesiastical Polity, the 9. Section. I come to the 21. Article, Of the
authority of general Counsels: the Article is this. General Counsels may
not be gathered together without the commandment and will of Princes. And when
they be gathered together (forasmuch as they be an assembly of men, where of
all be not governed with the spirit and word of God) they may err, and
sometime have erred, even in things pertaining unto God. Wherefore things
ordained by them as necessary to salvation, have neither strength nor
authority, unless it may be declared, that they may be taken out of holy
Scripture. That Princes as supreme Governors within their own Territories
and Dominions may command all sorts of men to meet together, either to the
implanting of Truth where it is not: or to the suppressing of Errors, Idolatry
or Superstition where it is, witness the Councels that were holde^ in the time
of the Mosaical Government by David, Solomon, Asa, Ezekiah, Josiah, etc. as
also the General and National Councels that have bin held by Christian
Emperors, Kings and Princes. General: as the Nicene by Constantine the great,
the Council of Constantinople by Theodosius the elder, the Council of Ephesus
by Theodosius the younger, the Council of Calcedon by Martian. And to go a
little out of my way, these were those four Councels that in Vid M Hooker
Ecclesiast. Pol. l 5. 54. p. 116.
four only words, (...), that is, Truly, Perfectly, Indivisibly, Distinctly:
the first against the Arrians, the second against the Apollinarians, the third
against Nestorians, the fourth against Eutychians, taught us how to comprise by
way of abridgment whatsoever Antiquity has handled at large, either in
declaration of Christian Belief, or in refutation of those four Heresies. Of
these also it was, that S. Gregory gave that testimony, how he honored them
all Four, and that which was next unto them too, as he did the Four Sicut
Sancti Evangelii quatuor libros, sic quatuor Concilia suscipere and venerarime
fateor, etc. Quintum qu^que Concilium pariter veneror etc. Greg. Epist. l. 1
ep. 24. p. 156. Col. 1. Edit. Paris. 1551.
Gospels: meaning as it is likely, and as M.D. Whitaker Whitaker. in Camp. Rat.
4.
observes, that which was decreed and concluded in those Counsels out of Gods
word against those Heretics. I proceed.

Besides these General Councels there have been National and Provincial
too, called by those Princes who had the government in those Parts, as the
Council at Frankford, Rhemes, Moguntia etc. by Charles the Great: at Paris and
Orleans by Childebert, and at other places by other Princes. That the ancient
Fathers were of opinion that so it was to be, witness first of all S. Jerome,
Synodus, Hieron. Tom. 2. Advers. Ruffin. Apol. 2. p. 221. Edit. Basil. 1537.
says he, a qua excommunicatus est (Hilarious) in qua vrbe fuit? Dic
Episcoporum vocabula. Doce qui eo anno Co^sules fuerint, qui Imperator hanc
Synodum iusserit congregari. He would needs know of Ruffinus, amongst a many
other questions, what Emperor had caused that Synod to be called, wherein
Hilarious was supposed to have been excommunicated. Such another witness might
be Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Epist 1. ad Innocent. p. 971. Edit. Bas. 1547
S. Chrysostom, such another Conc. Tom. 1. in Conc. Aqui leiens p. 331. b.
Edit Colon. 1538.
S. Ambrose, but I produce not their testimonies for brevities sake.

That Councels have erred, we have the experience of it in some of them, and
the testimonies of the Fathers besides. The experience we have of it in some of
them is in that they have concluded things contradictory, as the Council of
Laodicea, Vid. D. Rain. These. Angl. These 2 p. 699. Vid. Whitak de Conc qu. 6.
c. 3. p. 287
and the third Council of Carthage about the Canon of the Scripture. The
Council of Nice and the Council of Lateran, about the Jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Rome. The Council of Constance, and the Council of Florence, about
the Popes subjection to general Councels.

-- Lucan. l. 1.
Infestis obvia signis
Signa, pares Aquilas, and pila minantia pilis.
The testimonies of the Fathers are many, I will instance only in a few. First
in Gregory Nazianzen, who being requested to come to a Council utterly
refused, and gave this (...). Naz ep. 42. ad Procop. p. 814. Edit. Par. 1609
reason, he for his part had never seen any good end of such meetings.
Secondly in St Jerome, Spiritus Sancti Hieron. Tom. 9 in Ep. ad Gal. citatur a
Whitakero l. de Co^c. qu. 6 c. 3. p. 328 and in Duraeum. l. 4. p 292.
says he, doctrina est, quae Canonicis literis prodita est; contra quam si
quid statuant Concilia, nefas duco. It is the doctrine of the holy Ghost, which
is delivered unto us in the Canonical Scriptures, against which if so be
Councels should in any wise decree, I should hold it a wicked act. Thirdly, in
St Austen, who speaking of Councils, Quis nesciat Aug. Tom. 7. de Bapt. contra
Donat. l. 2. c. 3. p. 261. Edit. Basil. 1528.
says he, and ipsa Concilia, quae per singulas Regiones vel Provincias fiunt,
plenariorum Conciliorum authoritati, quae fiunt ex vniverso Orb Christiano
sine vllis ambagibus cedere, ipsaque plenaria saepe priora posterioribus
emendars? It was a point that no man was ignorant of in his days, how that
National and Provincial gave place to General Councels, and that the General
Councels themselves were oftentimes amended by them that came after. I come to
the 22. Article, which is of Purgatory. The Article is this: The Romish
doctrine concerning Purgatory, Pardons, worshipping and adoration as well of
Images, as of Relics, and also Invocation of Saints, is a fond thing, vainly
invented, and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to
the word of God. First concerning the point that Purgatory, Pardons,
worshipping and adoration of Images and of Relics, and Invocation of Saints
are grounded on no Scripture-warrant has been manifested, by the examining of
those Scriptures where upon our Adversaries have grounded them. I will instance
in Purgatory. The chiefest placesl brought for that, is Malachy 3, 2. 1. Cor.
3.10. Mat. 5.25. alleged by Cardinali Allen, Allen. of Purg. l. 1. c. 6. etc.
10
and with which they keep a great pudder Purgatories Triumph over Hell, by
I.R. c. 3.
now of late, Mat. 12.32. First concerning those two places that of Malachy and
that of the Apostle to the Corinthians, it may be showed by the plain
circumstances of the places themselves, and also by the judgment of the
ancient Fathers that neither of them both appertains any whit to Purgatory.
See more in Mr D. Fulke his D. Fulk^ Answer to Allens Book of Purgatory, c. 6.
p. 101
Answer to Cardinal Allen. Concerning that of Mat. 5.25. Thou shall not come
out thence, till thou have paid the utmost farthing. The meaning of Christ D.
Fulk, Ib. c. 10. p. 135.
says D. Fulke is plain, that he shall never come out, no more then that
wicked Servant, which was cast in prison until he should pay the whole debt,
which was ten thousands talents, Mat. 18.34. Concerning that of Saint Matthew
again, Mat. 12.32, St Mark as the same D. Fulke against the Rhemish Test. in
Mat. 12.32.
Dr Fulke observes in an other place is a sure Interpreter of those words
showing Mark. 3.29. that he shall never have forgiveness, but is culpable of
eternal damnation. But of this place of Scripture you shall read much more in
those excellent D. Ray. Prael. de lib. Apocryph Praelect. 171. 172, 173, 174,
175, etc.
Lectures of D. Raynolds. I refer you unto him. I need not here produce the
Fathers concerning the point here mentioned in this Article, seeing the Article
speaks here of Scripture only: howbeit that you may see, we have of the
ancient Fathers even in these points too, first concerning Purgatory, and
Pardons, you shall hear what St Hilarie says, Confessio peccatorum Hilar. in
Ps. 51. p 466. Edit. Basil. 1535.
says he, non nisi in huius seculi tempore est, dum voluntati suae vnusquisque
permissus est, and per vitae licentiam habet confessionis arbitrium.
Decedentibus namque de vita, simul and de iure decidimus voluntatis. Tunc enim
ex merito praeteritae voluntatis lex ia^ constituta, aut quietis aut poenae
excedentium ex corpore suscipit voluntatem. It is in effect that which the
Eccles. 11.3.
Preacher has, If the tree do fall toward the South, or toward the North, in
the place that the tree falls there it shall be. So St Jerome, Docemur
Hieron. Tom. 5. in 6. ad Gal p. 199 Col. 1. Ed^t. Bas. 1537 So S. Austen, Donec
sumus in hac vita, quan tacunque nobis acciderint peccata, possibile est omnia
ablui per poenitentiam. Cu^ autem abducti fuerimus ab hoc saeculo, ibi iam
etiam si paenetebit nos; val. de enim nos poenitebit, sed nulla erit vtilitas
paenitentiae etc. Aug. Tom. 10. De Temp. Ser. 181 p 712 Edit. Basil. 1529.
says he, dum in praesenti seculo sumus sive orationibus, sive consilijs
invicem posse nos coadiuvari. Cum autem ante tribunal Christi venerimus, non
Job, no^ Daniel, nec Noe rogare posse pro quoquam; sed vnumquemque portare onus
suum. We are taught whilst we are in this world that we may be helped by each
others Prayers, or each others Counsels. But when we shall once come before
the Tribunal Seat of Christ, neither Job, nor Daniel, nor Noe can possibly
intercede for any, but every one must bear his own burden. For worshipping
and adoration of Images, I told you Lect. 6. p. 120
before what Lact. Divin. Instit. l. 2. c. 19. p. 144. Edit. Lugd. 1541.
Lactantius said, Non est dubium quin Religio nulla sit vbicunque simulachrum
est. Religion and Images agree together, as Dagon and the Arc did, 1. Sam.
5.4. For worshipping and adoration of Relics, as the Cross, etc: we say with
Arnob. adver. Gent. l. 8. page 228. Ed. Paris. 1580
Arnobius, or Minutius Felix rather, Cruces nec colimus, nec optamus: vos plane
qui ligneos Deos consecratis, cruces ligneas vt Deorum vestrorum parts
forsitan adoratis. True it is he spoke to the Gentiles, but may not the like be
said to Papists now? Or suppose some Papists should say these words of Arnobius
to the Gentiles, might not the Gentiles entreat Horace to make reply to the
Papists again, Horat. Sermon. l. 2 Sat. 3.
O mayor tandem parcas in sane minori?

It is too too much they offend in this kind, specially about the Cross, which
(a body would tremble to relate it, they not to write it) is to be worshipped (
Ergo Crux Christi est adoranda adoratione latriae. Th. Aquin. Sum. Part. 3. qu.
25. Art. 4.
say they) with the selfsame honor that is due to God himself. For whereas
Thomas in one Crucem illam vt quandam Christi rem per contactum, ibi (in 30
sente^tiarum) hyperdulia, hic latria adorandam dicit. Hoc enim patet non esse
revocationem dicti, quod crux illa vt quaedam Christi res, est vener^nda: sed
magnificatione^ illius, dum ab hyperdulia ad latriani ascenditur. Thomae a Vio
Caiet. Comment. in illum locum Th Aquin.
place (I can not Saint him now) had given Hyperdulia to it, a dish above
Commons, yet not content herewith (such is the greedy appetite of the
Changelings of the Church of Rome) in an other place he gives it Latria, and so
Insomuch that Greg. de Valentia holds, as may well be concluded by his words,
that some kind of Idolatry is lawful, and that S. Peter insinuated so much.
His words be these. B. Petrum insinuavisse cultum aliquem simulachrorum (nempe
sacrarum imaginum) rectum esse, quum fideles nominatim ab illicitis idolorum
cultibus deterrere voluit, Greg. Valent. de Idololat. l. 2 c. 7. Now the words
of S. Peter are, 1. Pet. 4.3. (...); Valentia goes on, Quid enim attinebat ita
determinate cultos simulachrorum illicitos notare si omnino nullos
simulachrorum cultus licitos esse censuisset. So that by his reckoning S. Peter
might have said (...) as well as (...). Vid. D Rain de Romanae Eccles.
Idololat. l. 2. c 9. 9 p. 587.
a many after him. This being taught in their Schools by their great Rabbyes
that then lived, imagine how the common Fry went to their Idolatry as to their
dinners. There needed not Nebuchadnezzars Dan. 3.10.
Decree that every one that should hear the sound of the Cornet, Trumpet,
Harp, etc: should fall down and worship, this would they do without bidding to
the great infamy of Christian Religion. But now concerning the last point,
Invocation of Saints; wherein we say with Aug. Tom. 9 Meditat. c. 5 p 476.
Edit. Basil. 1529.
St Austen, Quem alium dirigam intercessorem tibi nescio, nisi hunc qui est
propitiatio pro peccatis nostris. And again in an other Aug. Tom. 8. in. Ps.
64 p 455. Edit. Basil. 152.
place, Ipse Sacerdos est qui nunc ingressus in interiora veli, solus ibi ex
his qui carnem gestaverunt interpellat pro nobis. If Nisi hunc, and solus
exclude all other, then can this Doctrine of our Adversaries by no means be
admitted. I come to the 23, Article which is, Of ministering in the
Congregation; wherein we agree somewhat better. The Article is this: It is not
lawful for any man to take upon him the office of public preaching, or
ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be lawfully called and
sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge lawfully called, and
sent, which be chosen, and called to this work by men who have public
authority given unto them in the Congregation, to call, and send Ministers into
the Lords Vineyard. I would we might but as well agree in the next Article
unto this, which is of speaking in the Congregation in such a tongue as the
People understands. The Article is this: It is a thing plainly repugnant to
the word of God, and the custom of the Primitive Church, to have public
prayer in the Church, or to minister the Sacraments in a tongue not
understood of the People. Now that it is first of all repugnant to the word
of God we may hence gather, for that it crosses a whole Chapter of the Apostle
St Paul's to the Corinthians. It 1. Cor. 14 6
profits not, it is V. 9.
spoken in the air, that is, it is not understood, he that speaks is a V. 11.
Barbarian, the understanding is without V. 14.
fruit, it V. 17.
edifies not, it V. 19.
instructs not, it gives occasion to some to say that we that use it are V. 23.
out of our wits. Concerning the custom of the Primitive Church let us hear
what the Fathers say for their times. First Origin: Germane Christiani, Origin.
cont. Cells. l 8. p. 799. Edit. Bas. 1571.
says he, ne vsitatis quidem in sacra Scriptura Dei nominibus vtuntur inter
precandum, sed Graeci, Graecis, Romani, Romany, singulique precantur propria
lingua, Deumque celebrant pro viribus: and omnium linguarum Dominus omnibus
linguis precantes exaudit, tam vary loquentes haud secus quam consonos (vt ita
dicam) and vnius vocis homines intelligens, Non est enim Deus maximus vnus
eorum qui certa^ aliquam linguam sortiti sunt sive Graecam, sieve Barbara^,
ceterum ignari, nec solliciti de alienae linguae hominibus. The Graecians name
God in the Greek tongue, the Romans in the Latin, and all several Nations
pray unto God, and praise him in their own natural and mother tongue. For he
that is the Lord of all tongues, hears men praying in all tongues, no
otherwise then if it were one voice pronounced by diverse tongues For God that
rules the whole world, is not as some one man, that has gotten the Greek or
Latin tongue and knows none besides. So S. Ierom: Nunc passionem Christi,
Hieron. Tom. 1 ad Heliodor. Epitaph. Nepot. p. 22. Edit. Bas. 1537.
says he, and Resurrectionem eius, cunctorum Gentium and voces and literae
sonant. Taceo de Hebraeis, Graecis, and Latinis, quas Nationes suae Crucis
titulo Dominus dedicavit. And again a little after, Bessisunt in Thracia iuxta
Strymone^ amnem, ad dextru^ accolentes latu^ Solin. c. 15. Bessis etiam
finitimas Getis oste^dit Ovidius. Vivere quam miserum est inter Bessosque
Getasque Illum qui populi sem per in ore fui. Ovid. Trist. l. 4. Eleg. 1.
Bessoru^ feritas, and pellitorum turba populorum, qui mortuorum quo^dam
inferijs homines immolabant, stridorem suum in dulce Christi fregerunt melos
and totius mundi vna vox est Christus. Now both the tongues and Books of all
Nations do found out Christ his Passion and Resurrection. I omit the Jews,
and Greeks, and Romans, which Nations the Lord has dedicated to himself in
the title of his Cross. The savage nature of the Bessi, and People that for
their wildness go clad in skins, who sometimes made Sacrifices of the Bodies
of Men, have turned their barbarous speech into the sweet harmony of Christ,
and Christ is now become the voice of the whole world. How S. Austen Aug. Tom.
8. in Ps. 18 Exposit. 2. p. 61. Edit Basil. 1529.
resembles those that understand not what they say or sing at time of Divine
Service to Parrats, and Pyes, and Crows, and such like, I have showed David's
desire to go to Church Ser. 1. p. 48.
elsewhere. Now though Public Prayer and Sacraments be only specified in this
Article, yet are the Scriptures also meant, forasmuch as public Prayer (meant
here in this place) is never without them. True it is they are heard in some
places and above the capacity of the common People, but our Adversaries will
be never able to answer that one passage of Aug. Tom. 8. de Doct. Christ. l.
2. c. 9 p. 17. Edit. Bas. 1528
S. Austen: In his quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt inveniuntur illa omnia,
quae continent fidem, moresque vivendi. All such things as concern our Faith,
and Manners for life, are there found plain enough. And therefore, says he in
another Aug. Tom. 10 De verb. Apost. Ser. 1. p. 169. Edit. Bas. 1529
place, Sancta and divina eloquia Fratres iugiter imo quotidie nobis salubriter
recitantur, vt animae nostrae pasca^tur, in futuro autem seculo aeternis epulis
saginentur. Brethren, says S. Austen, the Holy and Divine Scriptures are
continually, I, every day rehearsed unto us wholsomely, and profitably, to the
end our souls should be nourished thereby, Coimus.
and should be made fat with everlasting Feasts in the world to come. Tertul.
in Apologet. c. 39. p. 709 Edit. Paris. 1580.
So Tertullian, Cogimur, n says he, ad literarum divinarum commemorationem, si
quidpraesentium temporum qualitas aut praemonere cogit, aut recognoscere. Certe
fidem sanctis vocibus pascimus, spem erigimus, fiduciam figimus. We meet
together to hear the rehearsal of holy Scriptures. If the state of the
present time do force us to forewarne any thing, or call any thing to
remembrance of that which already we have heard. Verily we feed our Faith with
those holy words, we confirm our hope, we assure our confidence and trust. The
more I wonder at some of our own coat, who so causelessly complain of the wast
and desolation of so many distressed Souls, who in so many places of this our
Land and Country, say they, I use their own Nomen quaetis? cui bon^?
words, have been, and are daily either pined away and consumed to the bone,
for lack of Gods sustenance, the bread of life, the word of God, the only
preservatiue of the Soul: when God he knowet^ ^t is not the want of that that
makes them so to pine (if so be they do pine and consume away) as not
attending to it when it is read unto them, or refusing to hear it if it be not
preached, and that as they take Preaching too, or not reading it at home
themselves, or not hearing others read it that can. Benefits, our Martyrs when
time was, would have been glad to have enjoyed: but we wax wa^ton now,
Iuvenal. Sat. 6.
and must have our fancies pleased. Nunc patimur longae pacis mala! But of this
I have spoken Conc. ad Cler. p. 5.
elsewhere although in another Dialect. I come to the 25 Article which is of
the Sacraments. The Article is this: Sacraments ordained of Christ be not only
badges or tokens of Christian men's profession: but rather they be certain sure
witnesses and effectual signs of Grace and Gods good will toward us, by the
which he does work invisibly in us, and does not only quicken, but also
strengthen, and confirm our faith in him. There are two Sacraments ordained by
Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to say, Baptism, and the Supper of the
Lord. Those five commonly called Sacraments, that is to say Confirmation,
Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and extreme Vnctio^, are not to be counted for
Sacraments of the Gospel, being such as have grown partly of the corrupt
following of the Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the Scriptures;
but yet have not like nature of Sacraments with Baptism and the Lords supper,
for that they have not any visible sign or ceremony ordained of God. The
Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried
about, but that we should duly use them. And in such only, as worthily receive
the same, they have a wholesome effect or operation: but they that receive them
unworthily, purchase to themselves damnation, as St Paul says. That these
five are Sacraments it lies on our Adversaries to prove, Probatio L. cum de
Lege. ff. de proba: and glos. Ibid.
says the Civil law, incumbit affirmanti; which if so be they could have
proved, they would (I doubt not) have proved long ere this. They that so much
boast of Antiquity as they do, and that the Fathers are as verily theirs as Ad
Patres si quando licebit accedere, confectum est praeliu^ Tam sunt nostri quam
Gregorius ipse Decimus tertius, fiuorum Ecclesiae Pater amantissimus. Camp.
Rat. 5.
Gregory the thirteenth was, sometimes Bishop of Rome, me thinks in all this
while they should have queld us with one Father that says there are seven
Sacraments. In the mean time till they do it, let them consult with these
Fathers whom we produce, but for two. First St Austen: Sacramentis is numero
paucissimis Aug. Tom. 2. Ep. 118. p. 359. Edit. Bas. 1528
says he, observatione facillimis, significatione praestantissimis societate^
novi Populi Christus colligavit. Christ has gathered together a whole society
and fellowship of a new kind of People by Sacraments most few in number, most
easy to be observed, and most excellent for signification. Now if they be the
fewest in number, what more few then two? Or if they will say that Paucissima
might be the phrase of Antiquity for Seven, and I remember indeed that
Possidius, or Possidonius in St Austens life Sibi iuss^rat Psalmos Davidices
qui sunt paucissimi de poenitentia scribi Posid. in vita Aug c. 31. page 609.
Oper. Aug. Tom. 1
calls the Penitential Psalms Paucissimi, which were no less then seven, and
St Austen himself says immediately after the former words alleged, Et si quid
aliud in Scripturis canonicis commendatur; yet in diverse places he speaks of
the Sacraments but as of two. As for example. Aug. Tom. 8. in Psalm. 103. Conc.
4. p. 834 And Tom 9. in Evang. Joan. Tract. 15. p. 9. Edit. Bas. 1529
De latere Crucifixi percusso Sacramenta Ecclesiae profluxerunt. Now out of our
Saviors side when he was crucified we know there issued nothing but u Blood
and Water. And again in an other place, Aug. Tom. 9. de Cataclys. c. 4. p.
675. Edit. Bas 1529.
Continuo exivit. Sanguis et Aqua, quae sunt Matris Ecclesiae gemina
Sacramenta. Forth with came there forth Blood and Water which are the two
Sacraments of our Mother the Church. Aug. Tom. 3. de Doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 9
p. 35. Edit. Bas. 1528
And in his Book de Doctrina Christiaena he names no more. So Cyp Epist. l 2.
ep. 1. ad Steph. p 42. ^. Edit. Bas. 1530.
S. Cypria^: Tunc demum plane sanctificari and esse Filij Dei possunt si
vtroque Sacramento nascantur. Then may they be thoroughly sanctified, and become
the Children of God, if they be newborn by both the Sacraments. I omit Justin
Martyr Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr, Tertul. cont. Marcion. l. 1. and 4.
Tertullian, Ambros. de Sacram.
St Ambrose, Cyril. in Mystagogicis.
Cyrillus Alexandrinus and others, who having occasion to treat of Sacraments
speak only but of two, Baptism, and the Supper.

Concerning the gazing on the Sacraments here specified, and carrying them
about, let our Adversaries call to mind how well they agree with the Fathers
in this Practice. First Origin: Dominus panem Origin in Levit. c 7. Hom. 5. p.
129. Edit. Basil. 1537.
says he, quem Discipulis dabat, and dicebat eis, Accipite and manducate, non
distulit, nec servari iussit in crastinu^. The bread which our Lord gave unto
his Disciples he prolonged not to give it, he commanded it not to be kept
against the next day. Then Hier. Tom. 9. in 1. Cor. 11. p. 316. Col. 2. Edit.
Basil. 1537.
St Jerome: Post communionem quaecu^que eis de sacrificijs superfuissent, illic
in Ecclesia communem coenam comedentes pariter consumebant. After the Communion
whatsoever was left of the sacrifices, even there in the Church they all eat
together as they did eat their common Supper. Then Cleme^s Clem. Romans ep. 2.
Oper. p. 360. Edit. Colon. 1570.
Romanus, Tanta in altario holocausta offerantur, quanta populo sufficere
debeant. Quod si remanserint, in crastinum non reserventur, sed cum timore and
tremore Clericorum diligentia consuma^tur. Let so many Hosts be offered on the
Altar as may suffice for the People that are present. If any remain as
overplus let them in no wise be reserved till the morrow, but with fear and
trembling let the^ be eaten by Clergy men. Evagrius Evagrius Hist. Ecclesiast.
l. 4. c 35. p. 622 Edit. Bas. 1587.
tells us that it was the old custom, that if any Fragme^ts did remain the
little children that went to School were called to the eating of them. I come
to the 26. Article which is of the unworthiness of the Ministers how it
hinders not the effect of the Sacraments, wherein both sides do agree. The
Article is this: Although in the visible Church the evil be ever mingled with
the good, and sometime the evil have chief authority in the ministration of
the Word and Sacraments: yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own
name, but in Christ's, and do minister by his commission and authority, we may
use their ministry, both in hearing the Word of God, and in receiving of the
Sacraments. Neither is the effect of Christ's ordinance taken away by their
wickedness, nor the grace of Gods gifts diminished from such, as by says, and
rightly do receive the Sacraments ministered unto them, which be effectual
because of Christ's institution and promise, although they be ministered by evil
men. Nevertheless, it appertains to the discipline of the Church, that
inquiry be made of evil Ministers and that they be accused by those that have
knowledge of their offenses: and finally being found guilty, by just judgment
be deposed. We agree also in the 27 Article which is of Baptism. The Article
is this: Baptism is not only a sign of profession, and mark of difference,
whereby Christian me^ are discerned from others that be not Christened: but it
is also a sign of regeneration or new birth, whereby, as by an instrument,
they that receive Baptism rightly, are grafted into the Church; the promises
of the forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to be the Sons of God, by the
Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed; faith is confirmed, and grace
increased by virtue of Prayer unto God. The Baptism of young Children, is in
any wise to be retained in the Church, as most agreeable with the institution
of Christ. The 28 Article which is, Of the Supper of the Lord does set us at
odds, nothing more. Cui non mirum id, monstrique simile videatur Io. Foxii
Syllogist in Epi. Hertator.
says Reverend Fox, ex ea re, quae vna omnium maxim ad concordiam comparata
sit, tantum discordiae incendium conflari potuisse? To whom may it not seem
strange even to admiration, that out of that Matter which most especially was
provided for peace and unity, such burning flames should be caused betwixt one
Christian and an other, But come we to the Article. The Supper of the Lord is
not only a sign of the love that Christians ought to have among themselves one
to an other: but rather it is a Sacrament of our redemption by Christ's death.
In so much that to such as rightly, worthily, and with faith receive the same,
the bread which we break is a partaking of the Body of Christ, and likewise
the Cup of Blessing, is a partaking of the blood of Christ. Transubstantiation
(or the change of the substance of bread and wine) in the Supper of the Lord,
cannot be proved by holy writ: but it is repugnant to the plain words of
Scripture, overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has given occasion to
many superstitions. The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper
only after an heavenly and spiritual manner. And the mean whereby the Body of
Christ is received and eaten in the Supper, is Faith. The Sacrament of the
Lords Supper was not by Christ's ordinance reserved, carried about, lifted up,
or worshipped. First for the word Transubstantiation which signifies a
passing or turning of one substance into an other, they themselves do think
that it is intolerable to say that the substance of bread is changed into the
substance of Christ's Body, and therefore their Schoolmen hold that the Bread
departs and gets it self away and that then in place thereof, succeeds
Christ's Body. Which kind of change Vid. B. Iuell Defense of the Artic. Ar. 8.
p. 397.
say we cannot be termed Transubstantiatio, but rather Cessio, Successio,
Annihilatio, or Substitutio. But as concerning the point it self, that it
cannot be proved by holy writ, nay that it is repugnant thereunto, and
overthrows the nature of a Sacrament is that that is here affirmed, and our
Adversaries themselves have made good. For neither have they proved it by holy
writ, nor have they disproved such Proofs as have showed how repugnant it is
to the plain words of Scripture, and overthrows in very truth the nature of
a Sacrament. They are excellent Treatises, that Sadeel has Sadeel de
Spirituali manducat. Corp. Christi. Item. de Sacrament. ma^ducat. Corp. Christi
Oper. Theol. p. 216. and p. 251.
made to this purpose, by reason of my haste I will refer you unto them. And
least in the mean time you should think for that the Scriptures are here
named only, our Adversaries by all likelihood have some relief yet out of the
Fathers, I will acquaint you with what I have read even concerning the Fathers
in this point, and for ought I have read in our Adversaries Books (who are not
altogether tonguetyed when they can take any advantage) goes uncontrolled as it
is there set down, and a many more passages to that purpose. Bring us but one
Father The true Difference between Christian subjection and unchristian
Rebellion. Part. 4.
says our worthy Bilson, for 800 years, that ever taught your
Transubstantiation, and we will count it Catholic. You may wrest says he,
and misuse 500 places of the Fathers, as your Friends before you have done in
this point, and your selves in other questions have showed the like activity.
But that the substance of the bread vanishes by consecration, and the
substance of Christ's Body really succeeds under the same dimensions and
accidents of Bread and wine, and enters our mouths locally comprised within
those forms: for this says he^, you shall never show us any one Father Greek
or Latin within the compass of 800 years after Christ. Here would they needs
have come with their Replies. I.R. should have here triumphed. I wisse it is
good reason our Saviors Triumph should have bin before Purgatories Triumph at
the least. But nay, nay. Purgatory has stood them more in steed them ever did
our Savior. The Children of this world are Luke 16.8.
not to learn wisdom of the Children, no not of light. I go on.

That the Body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper, only after
an heavenly and spiritual manner; and that the Means thereof is Faith,
witness that of (...), etc. Athanas. Tom. 1. in illud. Quicunque dixerit
verbum p. 771. Edit. Commelian. 1601.
Athanasius: How few men would his Body have sufficed, that this should be the
food of the whole world? Yea therefore does he warn them of his ascension into
heaven, that he might draw them from thinking on his Body, and they thereby
learn, that the flesh which he spoke of, was celestial meat from above, and
spiritual nourishment to be given by him, etc. That of Cyp de Coen. Dom. p.
447. Edit. Bas. 1530
St Cyprian: Eating and drinking be referred to one and the selfsame end, with
the which as the substance of our Bodies is increased and preserved, so the
life of the Spirit is maintained with his proper nourishment. What food is to
the flesh that faith is to the Soul: what meat is to the Body, that the Word
is to the Spirit, working everlastingly with a more excellent virtue that,
which bodyly meats do for a time and only for a season. That of Ambrose who
approaching to the sacred Communion which they Ambr. Tom. 5 in Orat. 1.
praepar. ad Miss. p. 660. Edit. Paris 1586.
entitle a Prayer preparing to Mass, amongst other things speaks thus to our
Savior himself: Thou Lord said with thine holy and blessed mouth, the bread
which I will give, is my flesh (given) for the life of the world. He that
eats me shall live through me, he abides in me, and I in him. I am the
living bread which came down from heaven, if any eat of this bread he shall
live for ever. Most delightful Bread! heal thou the taste of my heart, that I
may feel the sweetness of thy love. Let mine heart eat thee, and with thy
pleasant relish let the bowels of my soul be replenished. Angels eat thee
with full mouth, let Man that is a Pilgrim (on earth) eat thee as his weakness
will suffer him, that he faint not in the way, having this provision for his
journey. Holy bread living bread beautiful bread! which came from heaven,
and give life to the world, come into my heart, and cleanse me from all filth
of flesh and spirit. Enter into my soul, heal and sanctify me within and
without.

An other point in this Article is as concerning the Reserving of it, and
Carrying it about, but of that we have spoken before in the 25 Article.
Concerning the Lifting of it up, and Worshipping it, I shall not need to speak
much. The Idolatry has been too too great that has been occasioned thereby.
True it is S. Austen Aug. Tom. 8. in Ps. 98. p 760 Edit. Bas. 1529
says, Nemo illam carnem manducat, nisi prius adoraverit, No man eats that
flesh of Christ unless he first adore it; but he means not the corporal
creature: no more does S. Ambrose neither, who Ambr. Tom. 2 de Spir. Sanct. l
3. c. 12. p. 195 Edit. Bas. 1538. Vid. B. Bilson vbi supra.
says in a certain place, Carnem Christi hodie in mysterijs adoramus. We
adore the flesh of Christ in the mysteries. I come to the 29 Article wherein we
say of the wicked that they do not eat the Body of Christ in the use of the
Lords Supper, contrary unto our Adversaries. The Article is this: The wicked
and such as be void of a lively faith, although they do carnally and visibly
press with their teeth (as St Augustine says) the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ: yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ, but rather to
their condemnation do eat and drink the sign or Sacrament of so great a
thing. A truth, that in very deed depends on the premises, that were made
good in the former Article. For if so be the Body of Christ be taken and eaten
in the Supper, only after an heavenly and spiritual manner, and the means
thereof is Faith, what have the wicked there to do without their wedding
garment? What fellowship 2. Cor. 6.14
says the Apostle, has righteousness with unrighteousness? And what communion
has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part
has the believer with the infidel? The judgment of the Fathers is
correspo^dent hereunto. None Vna est domus Ecclesiae, in qua Agnus editur,
nullus ei communicate, quem Israelitici nominis generositas non commendat. Cypr.
de Coena domini p. 448. Edit. Basil. 1530.
says St Cypria^, is partaker of this Lamb, that is not a right Israelite.
Multa Origin. Oper. Part. 2. in Mat. c. 15 p. 27. Edit Basil. 1571.
says Origin, de ipso Verbo dici possent, quod factum est caro, verusque
cibus, que^ qui comederit, omnino vivet in aeternum, quem nullus malus potest
edere. Many things might be spoken of the Word, as that it was made Flesh and
true meat, which whosoever eats of, without all doubt shall live for ever,
which no wicked person can eat of. And St Jerome making instance in Heretics,
Isti multas immolant hostias Hieron. Tom. 6. In Osee c. 8. p. 37. Col. 2. Edit.
Basil. 1537.
says he, and comedunt carnes earum, vnam Christi hostia^ desere^tes, nec
comedentes eius carnem, cuius caro cibus credentium est. So that Heretics you
see by S. Ierom's testimony do not eat this flesh. Why? for it is the food of
the faithful? I come to the 30. Article, of Receiving in both kinds, and we
disagree in that too. The Article is this: The Cup of the Lord is not to be
denied to the Lay People. For both the parts of the Lord's Sacrament by Christ's
ordinance and commandment ought to be ministered to all Christian men alike. A
truth so evident to the eye of him that has but looked on S. Paul in his
Epistle to the Corinthians, that unless they frame an Index Expurgatorius for
him, they are quite undone in this point too. Ye cannot, 1. Cor. 10.21
says he, drink the Cup of the Lord and the Cup of the Devils. Again, 1.
Cor. 11.26
As often as ye shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show the Lords
death till he come. Me thinks our Adversaries here should say as Act. 26.24.
Festus once did, Paul thou art besides thy self; much learning does make thee
mad: or else with the Friar in the Georg. Bu. chanani Franciscan.
Poet, S. PAVL.
Tarsensis fuge scripta senis, fuge toxica nostri
Ordinis. O primis vtinam periisset in annis,
Aut mansisset adhuc hostis, licet ante renatus
Vivifica quam Lympha esset, tam multa dedisset
Funera grassat us ferro, ingentique procella
Afflixisset adhuc tenerum pietatis ovile:
Plus tamen adscriptus nobis, plus factus amicus
Obfuit.
This Friar you must understand was an old Seniour, and gave certain Precepts
to a Novice. Among the rest this was one: Fly Novice, fly, the Man that TARSVS
bred,
Nor do his Books, or Writings read: oh dread
The bane of us Franciscans. Ah that he
Had perished even in his Infancy,
Or had remaind a Foe unto us yet,
And never with Font-water had been wet.
For had he of the Flock made havocke still,
And not have left till now their blood to spill,
Yet being Christian now, and now come to us,
Behold the harm is more, which he does do us.
But I come from verse to prose, and now I am to prove unto you, that as the
Scriptures so the Fathers are for the Communion in both kinds. First S.
Cyprian. How do we prepare, Quomodo docemus aut provocamus eos in co^fessione
nominis sanguinem suii fund^re, si eis militaturis Christi sanguinem denegamus?
Aut quomodo ad Martyrii poculum idoncos facimus, si non eos ad bibendu^ prius
in Ecclesia poculum Domini iure communicationis ad mittimus, Cyp. Epist. Lib. 1
Ep. 2. p. 4. Edit. Basil. 1530.
says he (the People) for the Cup of Martyrdom, if we do not first admit
them in the Church to drink the Lords Cup by right of Communion? Then S.
Austen: Not only no man is forbidden, A cuius sacrificii sanguine in alimentum
sumendo, non s^lum nemo probibetur, sed ad bibendum potius omnes exhorta^tur
qui volunt habere vitam. Aug. Tom. 4. Quaest. super Levit. l. 3 c. 57. p. 155.
Edit. Basil. 1528.
says he, but rather all men that seek for life are encouraged to drink. So
(...). Chrysostom in 2. ad. Cor. Hom. 18 p. 59. b. Edit. Veronae. 1529.
S. Chysostome: One body is proposed to all, and one cup. And again in another
place, while thou beholdest with thine eyes, (...). Chrysostom. de Sacerd l. 3. p.
77. Edit. August v. 1599
says he, our Lord sacrificed, the Priest intent to that sacrifice, and
pouring forth his Prayers, the People all about besprinkled and made red with
that most precious blood; do thou think thou art amongst mortal creatures,
and that thou have thy being on earth? The word he there uses is (...); made
red like crimson, or skarlet; whereunto he compares most elegantly, their
drinking of the Cup. Justin Martyr, (...). Justin. in Tryph p. 112. Edit.
Paris. 1551.
he calls it the Christians Dry, and Wet Nourishment, that they might, says he,
be admonished thereby what God the Son of God has suffered for the^.
Infinite are the places, B Bilson vbi supra.
says that worthy Prelat I spoke of eve^ now, which might be brought to make
faith, that for a thousand years in the Church of God, the People were not
deprived of the Lords Cup. I come to the 31 Article, wherein we differ most of
al: the Article is this; The offering of Christ once made, is that perfect
redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole
world, both original and actual, and there is no other satisfaction for
sin, but that alone. Wherefore the sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was
commonly said that the Priests did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to
have remission of pain or guilt, were blasphemous fables, and dangerous
deceipts. We are now come to the Diana of our Popish Ephesians, whose
magnificence of al our Adversaries is so much worshipped. Act. 19.27.
And surely were St Paul alive now in these days, and should speak as he
wrote when time was, of Christ his Offering once made, the shout was not so
great in Asia against him concerning the Diana of the Ephesians, as it would be
here in Europ concerning the Diana of the Romans. For what trow you would they
say concerning these and the like passages? Heb. 7.27.
Such a high Priest it became us to have which is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens: which needed not daily
as those high Priests to offer up sacrifice first for his own sins, and then
for the Peoples for that did he ONCE when he offered up himself. Again, Heb.
9.12.
By his own blood entered he in ONCE unto the holy place, and obtained eternal
redemption for us. Again, Heb. 9.26.
Not that he should offer himself often, etc: for then must he have often
suffered since the foundation of the world, but now in the end of the world
has he appeared ONCE to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. Again,
Heb. 9.28.
As it is appointed unto men that they shall once die, and after that comes
the judgment, so Christ was ONCE offered to take away the sins of many.
Again, Heb. 10.10.
By the which will we are sanctified, eve^ by the offering of the Body of Jesus
Christ ONCE made. Again, V. 12.
This man after he had offered ONE SACRIFICE for sins, sits for ever at
the right hand of God, and from henceforth tarryeth, till his enemies be made
his footstool. V. 14.
For with ONE OFFERING has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified.
What would they say of all this? Would they not wish as did the Friar, Primis
perijsset in annis, aut ma^sisset adhuc hostis, that he had died in the Cradle,
or had been still an Enemy unto Christians? Indeed there is good reason they
should take it to heart; for if so be our Savior Christ did but once enter
unto the Holy place and obtained eternal redemption, if he has appeared but
Once to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself, if but with one offering
he has consecrated for ever them that are sanctified; then offered he not for
sins any Sacrifice in his Supper, much less did he institute any such
Sacrifice to be reiterated, and this, Beloved, is that that cuts the
heart strings of Popery. That the Fathers speak as we do is manifest by their
writings. First Aug. Tom 3. De Trin. l. 4. Co. 13. p. 217. Edit. Bas. 1528
St Austen: Jesus Christus morte sua quippe vno verissimo sacrificio pro nobis
oblato, quicquid culparum erat, vnde nos Principatus and Potestates ad luenda
supplicia iure detinebant purgavit, abolevit, extinxit, etc: what sins soever
we committed, by reason whereof Principalities and Powers had us in subjection,
our Savior Christ Jesus by his death, namely by one most true sacrifice
offered for us, has purged, abolished, and quite extinguished. So S.
Chrysostom: There is now (...). Chrysostom. in Epist ad Heb. Hom. 13 p. 15^. Edit.
Veronae, 1529.
says he, no other sacrifice. It is one only that has purged us. Nothing now
after that, but Fire and Hell. So Theophyl. in 8 ad Heb. p. 154. b Ed. Colo^.
1528.
Theophylact: Hic vero hostiam taliter obtulit, and tam fuit illa rei ingentis
effectrix, vt vel temporis momento, per se terrarum orbem purgaverit. And
again a little after, Nec saepe pro alijs sed semel obtulit. Quia cum virtute
is praestet and pietate, vel vnica and sola oblatione satis potuit cuncta
perficere. Our Savior offered such a sacrifice and of so great va^ue, as that
in a moment of time it purged the whole world (of the faithful,) and he
forasmuch as he was of such virtue and power, well might he perform as much by
one alone and sole sacrifice. I but Rhem. in 1. Cor. 10.21. Vid D. Fulke
against them.
say our Adversaries the Fathers call the Mass a Sacrifice. The Mass? Why
they do not so much as name it. St Ambrose has the word once, and so have two
Provincial Councels in Africa. Leo has it twice, which is all (says our
worthy B. Bilson. vbi. supra.
Prelate) they can find in 600 years. True it is they speak of Sacrifices
indeed, but they are as like that Sacrifice, as York is foul Sutton to speak
in a Northern Proverb. Sacrificamus Tertul. ad Scap. p. 448 Edit. Paris. 1580
says Tertullian, sed quomodo Deus praecepit, pura prece. We sacrifice for the
safety of the Emperor, both to our God and his God: but as the self same God
commands us too, only by mere prayer. He would have laughed outright to have
read in our Adversaries books, that a poor woman was as much bound to procure
a Mass to be said for her Hen, as a king for his kingdom. Which Cardinal
Allen perhaps foresawe too, and therefore Coram Deo no^ est magis ridiculum vt
panpercula procuvet sacrificium pro Gallina, quam Rex pro Imperio: cum
Christiani a minimo ad maximum dicere debeant; Pro omnibus quae retribuisti
mihi Calicem salutaris accipiam and nomen Dei invocabo. Alan. de Sacrific.
Eucharist. l. 2. c. 33. p. 623.
sets it down, Coram Deo non est magis ridiculum: it was not so with God, with
men he knew it was impossible. But to return unto my purpose. As Tertullian,
so Justin Martyr, Supplications (...). Justin. Martyr. in Tryph. p. 112 Edit.
Par. 1551.
says he; and giving of thanks, I grant are the only perfect Sacrifices, and
such as are acceptable unto God. And Christians, they have learned to make only
such sacrifices, God Naz Orat:. 15 p. 225. Edit. Parif. 1609.
says Nazianzen requires at our hands the alone and only sacrifice of praise,
and a contrite heart, and a new Creature in Christ, which new Creature the
Scripture does call a new man. And chrysostom. Hom de Spiritu Sancte Tom. 3 p. 885.
Edit. Bas. 1547
St Chrysostom to this purpose, Quod tuum altarium? men's tua spiritualis? Quod
spirituale tuum sacrificium? omnis bona operatio. Quod templum tuum? mundu^
Cor. So that he makes the Mind, the Altar, every good Work a Sacrifice, the
Heart of Man, the Temple. I, but the Fathers say that Christ is here sacrified,
and that he is offered here. Be it so, and they say withal that Christ is
Crucified also here. But do they mean may we think, really Crucified? No
doubtless, and therefore think they not, or Sacrificed, or Offered. They knew
the force of the Apostles consequence, Then must he have often suffered. Heb.
9.26. I come to the 32 Article, which is of the Marriage of Priests, wherein we
might hope of some good match to be made, but that they are ^o ready to forbid
the banes. The Article is this: Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are not
commanded by God's law either to vow the estate of single life, or to abstain
from marriage. Therefore it is lawful also for them, as for all other Christian
men to mary at their own discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve
better to godliness. The best is, it is not enough to forbid the banes only,
but it must be on a lawful cause. Which seeing they cannot allege, and yet
still forbid the banes, we will do as Agesilaus did in an other case, who being
to pass by a neighbor Country with a troop of Soldiers which he had, and
asking leave of the Governor thereof to that purpose, when answer was
returned that he would advise upon it, Deliberet sane Plut. in Agesilao. and
Apophthegm. Lacon.
says Agesilaus, nos interim progrediemur. well then, let him advise, we in
the mean time will go forward: right so say we in this case, let them deny the
banes, we will marry notwithstanding, I mean so many of us as want, that which
hundreds of them have not, The gift of Continency. Neither shall we this do
either against Scriptures, or the Fathers. That Priests were married in the old
Testament is a case as clear as the Sun; I, they had precepts give^ unto them
concerning the choice of their wives. Levit. 21.13
He should take a maid unto his wife. But a widow, or a divorced woman, or a
polluted, or an harlot, these he should not marry. Concerning the New Testament
the Apostle St Paul so speaks of the Clergy, 1. Tim 3.2.
Bishops, Tit. 1.6.
Elders, and 1. Tim 3.12
Deacons, as if his meaning had been that they might be married. I, the
Apostles themselves (as Omnes Apostoli exceptis Ioanne and Paulo vxores
habu^runt, Ambros. Tom. 5. in 2. Cor. 11. p. 310. So that I say all the
Apostles, meaning the 12. Apostles: of which 12 Paul was none. And yet there
are that say St Paul had a wife too, as Ignatius, and Clemens. For Clemens,
see Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l 3. c. 27. Edit. Basil. 1587. Concerning Ignatius, D.
Martin in his Treatise of Priests unlawful Marriages c. 1 p. z 3. b. says he
has seen Manuscripts to the contrary, and makes instance in one in Magdalen
College Library. But concerning this see more in D. Poynets Defense of Priests
marriages. p. 118 For I take it to be D. Poynets, and not as D, Coosens does
(Part. 2. p. 109.) to be D. Parkers, sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury.
some think) were al of them married, John the Evangelist only excepted. If
you would see more concerning this, I refer you to Socrat. Hist. Eccl^s. l.
8. c. 8. Edit. Basil. 1587.
Socrates, and Sozom Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 22 Edit. Basil. 1587.
Sozomen concerning Paphnutius, how being himself an unmarried man, stood
mainely yet in the defense of the Clergy that was married. I refer you to the
Synodus 6. Constant. c. 13. l. 8 c. 19. Ex Gratian, Did. 31. c Quoniam p. 153.
Edit. Lugd. 1584 Vid. Acts and Monum. p. 1153 Col. 1.
Sixth Council of Constance that by no means would have those marriages
dissolved. To that of Hier. advers. Iovin. l. 1. p. 40. Edit. Bas. 1537.
S. Jerome, Eliguntur Mariti in Sacerdotium, non nego: quia non sunt tanti
virgins, quanti necessarij sunt Sacerdotes. Married men I grant are chosen into
the Priesthood. True! for Priests indeed are far more necessary then Virgins.
Lastly to your own Mantuan, who writing of S. Hilarie one of the Fathers of
the Church, Bapt. Mant. Fast. l. 1. Op. Tom. 2. p. 252. Ed t 1576
has concerning him these verses: Non nocuit tibi progenies, non obstitit vxor
Legitimo coniuncta thoro, non horruit illa
Tempestate Deus thalamos, cunabula, taedas.
Sola erat in pretio, quae nunc incognita, virtus
Sordet, and attrito vivit cumplebe cucullo.
To thee, good Bishop, Children were no let,
Nor wife that lay with thee in lawful bed,
That thou thereby thy Function should forget,
And Flock of thine should be but scarsly fed.
No, God himself at those times did not blame
Or Bed or Cradle, or the Nuptial Flame.
Yet was that Virtue then in high esteem,
Which we a chaste and honest life do call,
A virtue seldom now, or never seen,
But with the Churchmen then was all in all.
Its raged and torn even as poor Creatures be;
They are in threadbare Garments so is she.
So Prosper lib. Epigram p 210 b. and there is in the margent., Videtur esse
carmen Paulini, postea Nolani Episcopi ad vxore^. Oper. Edit. Duaeci. 1577.
St Prosper, Age iam precor mearum
Comes irremota rerum.
Trepidam, brevemque vitam
Domino Deo dicemus.
But I come to the 33 Article wherein we agree somewhat better. The Article is
this: That person which by open denuntiation of the church, is rightly cut off
from the unity of the Church, and excommunicated, ought to be taken of the
whole multitude of the faithful as an Heathen and Publica^, until he be openly
reconciled by penance, and received nto the Church by a Judge that has
authority thereto. We agree also in the next which is of the Traditions of the
Church; at least wise the difference is not great. The Article is this: It is
not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one, or utterly
like, for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed according to
the diversity of Countries, Times, and Men's manners, so that nothing be
ordained against Gods word. Whosoever through his private judgment, willingly
and purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church,
which be not repugnant to the word of God, and be ordained and approved by
common authority, ought to be rebuked openly (that others may fear to do the
like) as he that offends against the common order of the Church, and hurts
the authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the consciences of the weak
Brethren. Every particular or National Church has authority to ordain,
change, and abolish ceremonies or rites of the church ordained only by man's
authority, so that all things be done to edifying. In the next to this which
is of Homilies I confess we agree not, especially concerning the Matter of
them. The Article is this: The second book of Homilies the several titles
whereof we have joined under this Article, does contain a godly and wholesome
doctrine, and necessary for these times, as does the former Book of Homilies,
which were set forth in the time of Edward the Sixth: and therefore we judge
them to be read in Churches by the Ministers diligently and distinctly, that
they may be understood of the People. Then follow the Names of the Homilies.
1 Of the right use of the Church. 2. Against peril of Idolatry. 3, Of the
repairing and keeping clean of Churches. 4, Of good works, first of fasting.
5, Against gluttony and drunkenness. 6. Against excess of apparel. 7, Of
Prayer. 8, Of the place and time of Prayer. 9, That common Prayers and
Sacraments ought to be ministered in a known tongue. 10, Of the reverent
estimation of Gods word. 11, Of alms doing. 12, Of the Nativitie of Christ.
13, Of the passion of Christ. 14, Of the Resurrection of Christ. 15, Of the
worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. 16, Of the
gifts of the Holy Ghost. 17, Of the Rogation days. 18, Of the state of
Matrimony. 19, Of Repentance. 20, Against Idleness. 21, Against rebellion. But
of the Matter of these Homilies so far forth as it touches our Adversaries, I
have partly spoken heretofore, partly I shall speak hereafter upon diverse and
sundry opportunities, that shall be offered: wherefore I omit it now for this
time, M. Mason of the Consecrat. of the Bishops in the Church of England, as
also of the Ordinations of Priests and Deacons. Concerning which Book I. R. in
his Purgatories Triumph over Hell. p. 141 has this passage. I dare not urge M.
Mason too far, least he bring me the next time he writes, as authentical
Records for the consecration of Cra^mers heart in Lambeth Chapel, as he has
printed now at last, when such are dead as might control them, which their
importunity could never obtain in their life, for the ordinations of his
Bishops in the same place. Thus are they never pleased, nor full, nor fasting.
But I trust by that time M. Mason has done with him, Habebit poenam noxium
caput, to speak in Livies phrase, or rather in S. Ieroms, Os barbarum, and
procax and in convitia semper armatum.
and come to the 36 Article, which is of the Consecration of Bishops, and
Ministers. The Article is this: The book of consecration of Archbishops, and
Bishops, and ordaining of Priests and Deacons, lately set forth in the time of
Edward the sixth, and confirmed at the same time by authority of Parliament,
does contain all things necessary to such consecration and ordaining, neither
has it any thing, that of it self is superstitious or ungodly. And therefore
whosoever are consecrated or ordered according to the Rites of that book, since
the second year of the forenamed King Edward, unto this time or hereafter
shall be consecrated or ordered according to the same Rites, we decree all such
to be rightly, orderly, and lawfully consecrated, and ordered. And in this
Article is there much to say, but I have lately been prevented by a painful
and skillful u workman in the house of God, the Church, to whose labors I
refer you. And I refer you the rather to him for he was sometimes of this
House, though afterward full worthily he were chosen into another. I come to
the 37 Article, which is of the Civil Magistrates. The Queens Majesty has
the chief power in this Realm of England, and other Her Dominions, unto whom
the chief government of all estates of this Realm; whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all causes does appertain, and is not, nor ought
to be subject to any foreign Jurisdiction. Where we attribute to the Queens
Majesty the chief government, by which titles we understand the minds of
some slanderous folks to be offended; we give not to our Princes the
ministering either of Gods word, or of the Sacraments, the which thing the
Iniu^ctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen, does most plainly
testify: but that only prerogative which we see to have been given always to
all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself, that is, that they should
rule all estates and degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil sword the stubborn
and evil doers. The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of
England. The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian men with death, for
heinous and grievous offenses. It is lawful for Christian men, at the
commandment of the Magistrate, to wear weapons, and serve in the wars. This
concerns the Supremacy of his Majesty now Regnant (howsoever according to
those times these Articles were framed in, Queen ELIZABETH be here named.) And
reason good that as his Majesty defends our Rites, so we also for our parts
should every of us endeavor to defend his Right and Title. True it is, he is
able himself to do that, no man better, and we have seen to our great joy,
even in this kind, -- Virg. Aeneid. l. 11.
Quantus
In clypeum assurgat, quo turbine torqueat hastam.
but yet for our Adversaries be many, even like the Aramites 1. Kin. 20.27
filling whole Countries, reason we should all and every of us put to our
helping hand. But to come to the point in hand.

That we give no more in this Article to the Prince that is over us then is
given him by Gods word, and confirmed by the Fathers, I shall briefly now prove
both by the Word, and by the Fathers. First concerning the Word, the Apostle St
Peter, by whom they claim, disclaiming (it should seem) all such Superiority,
Submit your selves 1. Pet. 2.13.
says he, unto al manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
unto the king as unto the superior, or unto Governors as unto them that are
sent of him. So the Apostle St Paul, Let every soul Romans 13.1.
says he, be subject unto the higher powers. And that ye may know of what
Powers he speaks there in that place, Princes V. 3.
says he, are not to be feared for good works but for evil. So our Savior
Christ himself, when Pilate was up with his authority over him, Know thou
not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to loose thee? Thou
could have no power at al against me Ioh. 19.11.
says our Savior, except it were given thee from above. And indeed that the
chief government of al estates of a Realm whether they be Ecclesiastical, or
Civil do appertain to Kingly authority; witness that of the Prophets, who so
often and so earnestly commanded the Kings in their time (from the mouth of the
Lord) to cut down the groves and high places, to break down the Idols, and
Images whereby Idolatry was committed, and commended such as did it, and
threatened such as did it not. So that a Christian Prince indeed as our worthy
Iuell Jewel Apol. p. 160
observes has the charge of both Tables committed to him by God, to the end
he may understand, that not Temporal matters only, but also Religious and
Ecclesiastical Causes pertain to his office. Thus Theodosius the Emperor did
not only sit among the Bishops, but also Socrat. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 10.
Sozom. l. 7. c. 12
ordered the whole arguing of the cause, and tare in pieces the Heretics
books, and allowed for good the judgment of the Catholics. In the Council of
Chalcedon a Civil Videtur nobis iustum esse, eide^ poenae Dioscoru^ R.
Episcopum Alexand, and Iuvenale^ Rev. Episc. Hicrosol. etc. Council. Ch^lced.
Act. 1. p. 831. Vid. Evagriu^. l. 2. c. 4.
Magistrate condemned for Heretics, by the sentence of his own mouth,
Dioscorus, Iuvenalis, and Thal^ssius being Bishops, and gave judgment to put
them down from their dignities in the Church. But I come to the Fathers.

Colimus Imperatorem sic Tertul. ad S^^^ de Perseq. ta^ 448. Edit. P^t. 1580.
says Tertullian, quomodo and nobis licet, and ipsi expedit, vt hominem a Deo
secundum: and quicquid est a Deo consecutum, solo Deo minorem. And again in an
other Tertul. Apologet. c. 30. p 703. Edit. eiusd.
place, Sentiunt eum Deum esse solum in caius solius potestate sunt, a quo sunt
secundi, post quem primi an^e omnes and super omnes Deos. The meaning is, it is
only God who is above Princes, Princes are after him, and then before all
others. So Optat. cont. Parmen. l. 3.
Optatus, Super Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus qui fecit Imperatorem. The
Emperor has none above him, but God that made him. And (...) Chrysostom ad Pop.
Antioch. Hom. 2 p. 33. Edit. Land. 1590.
St Chrysostom to this purpose, Parem vllum super terram non habet. The
Emperor has no Peer on earth, much less a superior. They had little Vid B.
Bilson vbi sup. Part. 3. p 69. Edit. Land. 1586
Arithmetike in those days to cast that a Priest should be seven and forty
times greater then a Prince, by reason of the Sun and Moon in the firmament. I
will end this point of the Supremacy with the subscriptio^ of a Priest, D.
Rayn. Conf. c. 10. Divis 1. p. 674 At the beginning of which Conference there
is a letter of M Hearts to justify M. D. Raynolds true dealing with him. Both
set forth in M. Hearts life time least some wrangling I.R might say: He has
printed now at last, when such are dead as might control him.
Mr Heart by name with who^ our D. Rainolds had that famous co^fere^ce. Who when
he had thought that we meant to give as much to the Prince by the title of the
Supremacy, as they did to the Pope, and saw by Mr Nowels Books that we gave
her no more, then does St Austen, who says that kings do serve God in this, as
kings, if in their own Realm they command good things, and forbid evil; not
only concerning the civil state of men, but the In hoc Reges sicut eis
divinitus praecipitur Deo serviunt in quantum Reges sunt, si in suo Reg no bona
iubeant, mala prohib^^nt, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem,
verumetiam quae ad divinam religionem. Aug. Tom. 7. cont. Crescon. Grammat. l.
3. c. 50. p. 185. Edit Bas. 1528.
Religion of God also, thus much he subscribed unto. Upon which Confession if
you please you may make these seque^ces: First what is the right and interest
of Princes in matters Ecclesiastical: Secondly, that by a Priests confession
we gave no more to Queen Elizabeth then was indeed due unto her: Thirdly,
that you need not travail over sea for this knowledge either to Rome, or
Rhemes, or Doway or so forth, you may as well learn it here at home. But to
return to the matter in hand. That the Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction
within this Realm is a sequence of the Premises, and therefore may he do well
to stoop to Thrasoes proffers in the Poet, Terent. Eunuch. Act. 5. Scen. 9.
Vt haereat in part aliqua tandem apud Thaidem, to play at small games in our
kingdom, rather then wholly to sit out. Now, throwing at all as he does there
is great good hope on our side, fear on theirs, that he shall at length loose
all. I come to the 38 and 39 Articles: the one of Christian men's goods which
are not common: the other of a christian man's oath, wherein we agree. The 38
Article is this: The riches and goods of Christians are not common, as touching
the right, title, and possession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do
falsely boast. Notwithstanding every man ought of such things as he possesses,
liberally to give Alms to the poor, according to his ability. The 39 Article
is this: As we confess that vain and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men
by our Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle: so we judge that Christian
Religion does not prohibit, but that a man may swear when the Magistrate
requires, in a cause of faith and charity, so it be done according to the
Prophets teaching, in justice, judgment, and truth. Ratification of all the
Articles going before, namely that being agreed upon in the year 62, they were
confirmed again some nine years after in the year 71.

And thus, Beloved, have you heard at length the chief points of that Doctrine
which our Mother the Church of England does hold at this day. And now as Jacob
Genesis 31.36.
said to Laban, What have I trespassed? What have I offended, that thou have
pursued after me? Seeing thou have searched all my stuff, what haste thou
found of all thy household stuff? Put it here before my brethren, and thy
Brethren, that they may judge between us both: so let us say unto our
Adversaries what have we trespassed? What have we offended? That they pursue us
so hotly, and at every third word call us Heretics. Now that all our stuff
is thus searched, what Heresy is it they therein find? Do we say the
Scriptures are sufficient to Salvation; that the Apochrypha are not Canonical;
that Original Sin remains in them that are regenerated; that Man has not
free will; that we are justified by faith only; that good works cannot put
away sin and endure the severity of Gods judgment; and done before
Justification that they cannot please God, and deserve grace of congruity; and
that works of Supererogation cannot be taught without impiety? Do we say that
any particular Church may err; and General Councels to; that the doctrine of
Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping of Images, etc: is repugnant to the word of
God; as also public Service in a Tongue not understood that there are but two
Sacraments only, Baptism and the Supper; that there is no Transubstantiation
in the Sacrament, that is, a pasing or turning of one substance into an other;
that the wicked eat not the Body of Christ; that the Cup is to be administered
to the People? Do we say that the Mass is no Sacrifice; that Ministers may
marry; that who are consecrated and ordered Bishops and Ministers according to
our Rites are lawfully consecrated, and lawfully ordered; that the Prince is
Supreme Governor, and the Pope has nothing to do in this our whole Land,
nor Church, nor Commonweal? Alas what is there in all this that may not
evidently be proved, both by See more hereof in M. Rogers of these Articles.
Scriptures and by Fathers? Somewhat you have heard out of either of them
concerning these several points already. Much See Mr. Rogers upon these
Articles. Printed by John Legate. 1607.
more might have bin brought, but my purpose was to give a taste only, that when
you shall come to riper years, you in reading of the Fathers may say as the
Psalmist did in another case, Ps. 47.9. vulg
Sicut audivimus, sic vidimus, Like as we have heard, so have we seen, Psalm.
48.7. It was a worthy speech of one of our B. Bilsons survey of Christ's
sufferings for Man's Redemption. p. 415.
Prelates: I do no where refuse the faith professed and preached in the
Primitive Church of Christ by the learned and ancient Pastors, and Guiders
thereof. I openly confess to God, and this Realm, I should never sleep
quietly, if I saw my self to be of another faith then they were. Thus he: and
imagine for Oxford, for he was an Oxford man, one more shall you have for
Cambridge, and then no more. This I dare avow, D. Fulke against Stapletons
Fortress, p. 25.
says D. Fulke, that what Article of Doctrine soever we do affirm, the same
has been affirmed of the godly Fathers of the Primitive Church, whatsoever we
deny, the same cannot be proved to have been universally affirmed and received
of all the godly Fathers by the space of 600 years together. And what
remains but I now conclude not only with the words of my Text, But this we
confess unto them that after the way which they call Heresy, so worship we
the God of our Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law, and
the Prophets: but believing al things also that were written by the
Evangelists, and the Apostles, and not refusing that Faith that was professed
and preached in the Primitive Church of Christ by the learned and ancient
Fathers the Pastors and Guiders thereof. The God of Heaven so bless us, and
the seed that has been sown, etc.

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS
IT was an excellent speech of Arnob. adver. Gent. l. 8. p 231
Arnobius, or rather of Minutius Felix, Lecture 9. Iunij, 10. 1613.
Nos non habitu sapientiam, sed mente praeferimus: non eloquimur magna, sed
vivimus. We Christians make no show of wisdom by our exterior outward habit,
but by the habit of our mind; our words are not so lofty as our lives. And
Tertullian speaking of the Christians how virtuously they lived in his days,
has many lines to this purpose: I at this time will only english them, and
indeed I would they were englished by English men as they should be. He writing
to the Heathens, It is De vestris se^per aestuat carcer; de vestris semper
metalla suspirant; de vestris semper bestiae saginantur; de vestris semper
munerarii noxiorum greges pascuntur. Nemo illic Christianus nisi plane tantum
Christianus, aut si and aliud, iam non Christianus. Si de Pudicitia provocemur,
lego partem sententiae Atticae in Socratem corruptorem Adolescentium
pronunciatam. Sexum nec soemineum mutat Christianus. Novi and Phrynem
meretricem Diogenis supera recubantis ardorem subantem. Audio and quendam
Spensippum de Platonis schola in adulterio periisse. Christianus vxori suae
soli masculus nascitur. Democritus excoecando semetipsum quod mulieres sine
co^cupiscentia aspicere non posset, and doleret si non esset potitus,
incontinentiam emendatione profitetur. At Christianus salvis oculis foeminam
videt, animo adversus libidinem coecus est. Si de Probitate defendam, ecce
lutulentis pedibus Diogenes superbos Platonis thoros alia superbia deculcat;
Christianus nec in pauperem superbit. Si de Modestia certem, ecce Pythagoras
apud Thurios, Zenon apud Pryenense^ tyrannidem affectant; Christianus vero nec
aedilitatem. Si de Aequanimitate congrediar Lycurgus (...) optavit, quod Leges
eius Lacones emendassent; Christianus etiam damnatus gratias agit. Se de Fide
comparem, Anaxagoras depositum hostibus denegavit; Christianus etiam extra
fidelis vocatur. Si de Simplicitate consistam, Aristoteles familiarem suum
Hermiam turpiter loco excedere fecit; Christianus nec inimicum suum laedit.
Idem Aristoteles tam turpiter Alexandro regendo potius adulatur quam Plato a
Dionysio ventris gratia vnditatur Aristippus in purpura sub magna gravitatis
superficie nepotatur, and Hippias dum civitati insidias disponit, occiditur;
hoc pro suis omni atrocitate dissipatis nemo vnquam ten^avit Ch^istianus. Sed
dicet aliqu^s etiam de nostris excedere quosdama regula disciplinae, de sinunt
tum Christiani haberi penes nos. Tertul. Apologel. c. 44 and 45. p 713. 714.
715.
says he, with men of your sort that the Prisons are so replenished; yours
they are that for their misdeeds are condemned to the mines; it is with yours
that your wild beasts fat themselves; yours they are that your beautiful
Citizens do feed their droues withal procured for that purpose. No Christian
to be seen in those places, as he is a Christian only: or if so be he be
somewhat else, then is he no Christian. And comparing a little after their
Philosophers and Christians together, If, says he, the challenge be made
concerning CHASTITY, I could tell you what even your Socrates in part was
condemned for; I could tell you of Phrynes the harlot of Diogenes, and of one
Speusippus a Scholar of Platoes; as for a Christian he shows himself to be
male only unto...his wife. Your Democritus he forsooth put out his two eyes,
and all for he could not look on a woman, but he must needs lust after her: a
Christian looks on women with safety of eie-sight enough, and concerning lust,
it is not his eye, it is his heart that is blind only, If I should speak of
CIVILITIE, I could tell you of Diogenes, that trampled Platoes pride under
foot, but with a greater pride of his own; a Christian is not proud, no not
toward the very poor. If so be I should speak of MODESTY, even Pythagoras
with the Thurians, Zeno with the Pryenians affected a kind of Tyranny: a
Christian seeks not after the meanest office that is. If so be I should speak
of PATIENCE, Lycurgus wished to the Lacedaemonians an evil end, for because
they altered his laws: a Christian though he be condemned, will
notwithstanding give thanks for it. If I should speak of FIDELITY, Anaxagoras
refused to give the Enemy his Depositum, that which was given unto him in
keeping, no Enemy can blame a Christian for such kind of dealing. If I should
speak of PLAINENES and SIMPLICITY, I could tell you how Aristotle used his
friend Hermias: a Christian will not harm, no not his enemy. The selfsame
Aristotle as basely flattered Alexander, as Plato did Dionysius, or Aristippus
played the gurmandizer, Hippias the Traitor: this a Christian will never
adventure upon, no though it were to the good of a many besides. But some
perhaps will say that there are even of Ours to, that sometimes tread awry: nay
but then they are none of ours, but are utterly discarded by us. Behold,
Beloved, what a golden age there was of Christians at that time! how virtuous
they were! how religious! what discipline toward such as gave occasion of
offense! Their scope was obedience, ours is skill; their endeavor was
reformation of life, our virtue nothing but to hear gladly the reproof of
vice; they in the practice of their religion wearied chiefly their knees and
hands, we especially our ears and tongues: In a word, we are grown, says M
Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. ^. 81. p. 265.
Reverend Hooker, as in a many things else so in this to a kind of inte^perancy,
which (only Sermons excepted) has almost brought all other duties of Religion
out of taste.

The consideration hereof, Dearly Beloved, did cause me at the first, when I
pondered with my self what kind of Lectures to read unto you, to make such a
Division of the^ that as some should be for knowledge, and illightning of the
mind, so others again should be for life and conversation. This it was that
made me make that divisio^ at the Lect. 1. p. 20.
first of what the Church was to Believe, and what to Practice. Doing and
Teaching was our Saviors method, Act. 1.1. ours shall not be contrary to it,
if Teaching be first, and then Doing. Having told you the^ hertofore what the
Church is to Believe, and by consequence every of you who are of that Church:
come we now unto her Practice which being first of all to observe the
Commandments, secondly to Pray, thirdly to Fast, fourthly to give Alms: of
every of these in their several order, and in as many several Lectures, and
first of the ten Commandments. The Text I have chosen to this purpose is out
of St Matthewes Gospel. Mat. 22. the 37, 38, 39, and 40 verses. The words be
these: Jesus said to him: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and the
great Commandment. And the second is like unto this, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, On these two commandments hangs the whole Law and
the Prophets. The words you see are an answer, and the answer is to a
guestion, which a certain Pharisee here made. This Pharisee it should seem
was of the humor of some in our days whose questioning with their Minister is
not so much to learn, as to try what he can do, and if he bestirre not
himself the better, to expose him to the scorn and contempt of standers by. A
saucy and malepert kind of Sheep Ram. pant.
Questionists, who having so many Quaerees for others, have not one only for
themselves, whether the disgrace so wittingly and willingly offered to the
Servant, redound to the Master or not. But to return unto my Pharisee. He was,
says the Text, An expounder of the Law, and setting upon our Savior in his
own proper element, the law, he thought now to show himself such an one
therein as that the world should take notice of him that he was the man that
put Jesus to a Non plus.

Pers. Satyr. 1.
Nam pulchrum est digito monstrari, and dicier hic est. It is not unlikely but
that he studied the Case long before, and all the Obs, and all the Sols, that
might have been made to that purpose. As if so he had said with himself.
What? will he say the first Commandment is greatest of all, Thou shall have
no other Gods but me? Why but the second is as great as that: Thou shall make
no graven image. And as great as is the second, is the third by all likelihood
of not taking Gods name in vain. And the fourth concerning the Sabbath may
seem to be greatest of all: for besides that our memories are specially
charged with that Commandment, Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day, how
was there one but for gathering thereon a few sticks even stoned to death by
Gods own Number. 15.36.
express commandment. But what would he say then unto the fifth, concerning
the honoring of our Parents, which is the first Commandment with promise? So
likewise of the rest, there being not one amongst them all, but in one respect
or other seeming to have more peculiarly some pre-eminence above the rest. But
whatsoever it was that urged him to urge our Savior in this wise, whether
Haughtines or Pride upon the talent of learning God had given him, or Fnvy that
our Savior should so much speak of the law as he did; Virg. Aen. l. 1
Non illi imperium pelagi: saevumque tridentem,
Sed mihi sort datum;
or else with Envy in the Poet indeed, Ovid. Met. l. 2
Vixque tenens lachrymas, quia nil lachrimabile cernit.

Our Saviors answer here unto him was a good effect of a bad cause: for had
not the Pharisee here been so vicious, we had wanted perhaps this good
Instruction of Epitomizing thus the ten Commandments, nor have known the first
and great Commandment, of loving God above all, and how the second is like
unto it, of loving our Neighbors as our selves. Howbeit before we come to this
Epitomizing of our Saviors, it will not be amiss to take a view of each one
of them in particular, that so having considered them one by one, we may make
the true benefit of an Epitome indeed, which is not therefore made us, to save
us a labor in reading the larger Volumes, (that would prove the bane of true
Learning) but when we have read them over, to call to our minds what we have
read, and to treasure up the sum thereof more firmly in our memories.

Two several places there are in holy writ that contain therein these
Commandments at large, Exodus, 20.1. and Deuteronomy. 5.6. In the book of Exodus
they were first given, in Deuteronomy they were repeated again. The reason was
for that they being dead to whom the Law was given in Mount Sinai (and of that
Exodus makes mention) Moses repeateth the Law again more particularly in
Deuteronomy exhorting and persuading them to observe and keep the same. But
first of these ten Commandments in general, then of every of them in
particular. Jesus said to him: thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and so forth.

The opinion was wondrous great the Romans had of those Laws of theirs, which
they called the 12 Tables. Tully was so transported with the love he bare unto
the^, that having occasion to entreat of them, Fremant omnes licet, Tully de
Orat. l. 1.
says he, dicam quod sentio, Bibliothecas mehercule omnium Philosophorum, vnus
mihi videtur duodecim Tabularum libellus, si quis Legum fontes and capita
viderit, and autoritatis pondere, and vtilitatis vbertate superare. Let others
take it as they list, I for my part will show you my opinion, namely that that
one little Book of the twelve Tables (if so be a man would feign see the
fountains of Laws, whence they spring, and the chiefest heads of all and
every of them) seems to surpass all the Books that all the Philosophers ever
wrote, partly in respect of the authority which it has, partly in respect of
the profit and utility which it brings. Now if so be you would feign know
what is become of that Book, we must return it with a writ of, Non est
inventus: It is not indeed to be found, only some Fragments still remain,
which rather show unto the world that there was indeed such a Book, then that
the Book that was, was such. But whatsoever the opinion of that Book was, and
the words of Tully how true soever, it was nothing comparable to two Tables
the Scripture speaks of, so far beyond those Twelve, as the Sun and Moon
beyond the Stars. As Tully spoke in their commendation, so S. Austen in the
others, Quae disputationes, Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 3. p. 9.
says he, quae literae quorumlibet Philosophorum, quae leges quarumlibet
Civitatum duobus Praeceptis ex quibus Christus dicit totam Legem, Prophetasque
pendere vllo modo sint comparandae? Hic Physica, Ethica, Logica, Politica. What
disputations, says St Austen, what learning of any Philosophers whatsoever,
what Laws of any Cities are in any wise to be compared to those two
Commandments, on which our Savior says the whole Law and the Prophets do
hang. In those two are comprised the Physics, the Ethics, Logic, and the
Politics. Physics, forasmuch as all the causes of natural things are in God
the Creator: Ethickes for that a good and an honest life is not otherwise
framed then when those things are loved which are to be loved; God and our
Neigbour: Logic for that the truth and light of a reasonable soul is God
only: Politics for that a city is not governed or kept unless the chief good
be beloved, that is God himself, and in him every of us love each other
syncerely, and for his sake. I should be very loath to make them equal, for I
remember that of Hieron. adv. Iovin. l. 1.
Ierom, Quando minora maioribus coaequantur, Inferioris co^paratio superioris
iniuria est: when lesser things are equald to those that are greater, wrong is
done vno the better part: and therefore let us now see the odds between them
both. First concerning the 12 Tables call we to mind the first maker of them,
and it was man, mortal man: the Commandments were first written by the Exodus
32, 16 and 31.18. Deuteronomy. 9 10.
finger of God himself. Secondly, consider the scope of them, and it was but
to bind the outward man, I mean the outward actions of those men as were
subject to the same: here the inward man is bound too, But I say unto you,
says our Savior, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her already in his heart. Mat. 5.29. Thirdly, If we
consider the extent of those 12 Tables, they were but for one meridia^, and
befitting only a popular state: no Nation under Heaven, whom these
Commandments may not fit. For why spould God, Cur etenim Deus Vniversitatis
conditor, mundi totius gubernator, hominis Plasmator, vniversaru^ gentium
Sator, Legem per Moysen vni populo ded^sse credatur and non omnibus gentibus
attribuisse dicatur? Tertul. adver. Iudaeos. p 99.
says Tertullian, the maker and governor of this whole world, framer of Man,
and Creator of all the Nations in the world, be thought to give by Moses a Law
to one People, and not be said rather to have given it to all the world. Lastly,
If we consider the perfection of those, we shall find that at the first there
were in all but 10 Tables, afterward Two were added to make them up just
Twelve: these were but Ten at first, and so have continued ever since,
admitting in them no alteration of that perfection they first had. True it is,
as In lege Adae data, omnia Praecepta condita recognoscimus, quae pestea
pullulaverunt data per Moysen. Tertul adv. Iudaeo (...)
Tertullia^ observes they were al of the^ comprised in that one Precept given
to Adam, Genesis 2.17. about the forbidden fruit, and therefore he calls that Law,
Primordiale^ Legem, and says that it was Quasi matrix omnium Praeceptorum Dei,
The first original law that ever was, and as it were the womb of the ten
Commandments, howbeit afterward when they were brought forth and once came to
be ten in number; the number afterward still held, howsoever the Tables that
held the^ were but two.

No controversy at all then about the number of them, nor of the two Tables
that did contain them; a controversy there is which they are that are in
whither Table, and how they are to be divided. Some there are that in respect
they are all of them but Ten, divide them into equal parts, placing five of
them in the first Table, and five in the second, so Josephus and Philo Iudaeus:
others make but three in the first Table, and seven in the second, so S.
Austen, and Clemens Alexandrinus in part, for he makes three in the first, but
then in the second he has but six: but the most usual division is of Four in
the first Table, and Six in the second, and this is the division of all the
Fathers besides. Our Antipodes of Rome that so much boast of the Fathers, and
how they are theirs thick and threefold, in their Division of the
Commandments leave all the Fathers Vid D. Rain. Confer. with M, Heart c. 2.
Divis. 2 p. 75.
quite and clean, and follow S. Austen only. Under color of whom they
conceal the second Commandment from the People, and omit it in their Prayer
Books, as also in their Catechismes, and then to salve the matter least thereby
we should have no more then nine Comma^dements they cut the Flatly opposite to
holy Scripture. For house and Wife the two members that should in our
Adversaries judgment make two several Commandments, are placed. Deuteronomy. 5.21,
Wife and House, so that the former member Exodus 20, 17 is the latter, Deuteronomy.
5.21. and the latter Deuteronomy. 5.21. is the former Ex, 20.17. and so by their
reckoning the 9 Commandment should be the 10 and the 10 the 9. or indeed we
should not knew which is ninth, or which is tenth Vid. M. Bunnies Head corner
Stone. l. 1. c. 7. 4. p. 135.
Tenth into twain. But to return unto my purpose.

There being in the first Table then Four Commandments, in the second Table
Six, they are specified to be these. The first of having no other Gods, but the
Lord: the second of having no Images: the third of not taking his name in
vain: the fourth, of keeping the Sabbath. And these in the first Table, the
reason of the connection of all which four, seems this. The first teaches
Gods inward worship: the second his outward: the third the reverent use of
both: the fourth the principal time when both are to be done. Those six in the
second Table are specified to be these. The first, is of honoring our Parents:
the second, of not killing: the third, of not committing adultery: the fourth,
of not stealing: the fifth, of not bearing false witness: the sixth and last, of
not coveting. The reason of this connection seems to be this. In the first
which is the fifth Commandment, we are taught special duties, and those
mutual, as of the Superior to the Inferior, and of the Inferior to the
Superior again, and that under the Precept of Honoring Father and Mother. In
the other five are contained general duties, and first because life is the
ground of all the rest, therefore in the first of them, which is the sixth
Commandment, order is taken to preserve that Thou shall not kill. Secondly
because as life must be preserved, so we ought to live an honest life,
therefore in the second of them which is the seventh Commandment, order is
taken for that, Thou shall not commit Adultery. Thirdly because an honest life
must be honestly maintained, and we must content our selves with what God gives
us, be it little, be it much, in the third which is the eight Commandment, we
have a precept concerning that, Thou shall not steal. Fourthly for it is not
enough to possess our goods in such good sort, but we must have a care of our
good names too, in the fourth, which is the ninth Commandment, we are
forbidden To bear false witness. Lastly, for the heart of Man is the fountain
of all vices, there coming from thence as speaks our Savior, Mat. 15.19.
Evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, and so forth; and when we see many Pipes
and Conduits infected we go to the Fountain, for that from thence the
infection comes, and we endeavor to take order for that hence it is that in
the fifth, which is the tenth Commandment, we are forbidden the first motions
and inticements unto sin, howsoever the Heart consent not. And thus much of the
Commandments in general, come we now to each particular, and that as briefly
as I may, not forgetting that of (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. in Sanct. Bapt. Orat.
40. p. 637.
Nazianzen, that Excess of speech is as great an enymie, and as obnoxious to
the ear, as superfluity of meat is to the stomach. Besides that holding you
so long the last time I will now endeavor to make you amends. To come the^ to
the matter in hand. The first Commandment is in these words: Exodus 20.1. Deuteronomy.
5.7.
Then God spoke all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which has
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shall
have no other Gods before me.

In which words I note first of all two several Prefaces: Secondly the Precept
it self. The one of those two Prefaces is that which Moses made concerning
God: the other is that which God made concerning himself. That which Moses
made concerning God is in these words, Then God spoke all these words, saying.
Then? when? Exodus 19.1
when the Israelites were come to the wilderness of Sinay, V. 14.
when they were sanctified, and as Moses commanded them, had washed their
clothes, V. 15.
when they were ready on the third day and came not at their wives, V. 16.
when it was early in the morning, and there were thunders, and lightnings,
and a thick clowd upon Sinai, and the sound of the Trumpet exceeding loved. V.
18.
When mount Sinai was all on smoke, because the Lord came down in fire, and
the mount trembled exceedingly, and the sound of the Trumpet blew long, and
waxed louder and louder. When V. 25.
Moses was gone down from the mount Zanch. de Redempt. l. 1. c. 12 p. 214.
least it should have been thought to have been his voice. In a word, when
the sight that appeared was so terrible, that even Moses himself said, (...),
I So our New Translat. Heb. 12.21.
exceedingly fear, and quake. Then God spoke all these words, saying. And
indeed if we respect the nature of the Law, full well was all this as Harbingers
unto it. For what does the law but accuse and terrify, Make us subject unto
sin, subject unto Death, subject to the wrath of God, and when we once are in
that plight, what do we see in the whole world, but Thu^ders, and Lightnings,
and Clouds, and sounds of Trumpet as it were summoning us to Judgment; Before
us, all the world as it were on a light fire, Above us, an angry Judge, About
us, Satan and his Accomplices, Beneath us, Hell and Damnation, With in us, a
worm of conscience, that howsoever we die, Esaias. 66.24. Mark 9.44. and v. 46.
and v. 48.
never dies. It follows, God spoke all these words, saying.

God in his own person, attended upon with millions of glorious Angels, spoke,
in a distinct voice and sound of words, that the People both heard and
understood them. The People were at that time six hundred thousand men,
besides women and children, and well might it be, as Zanch. vbi supra.
Za^chius observes, that God himself spoke, for what human voice had been
possible to have pierced even the twentieth part of so many several ears? In
this respect it is Vid. M.D. Boys his Exposition of all the principal
Scriptures in our Liturgy p. 86.
thought that St Stephen does call the^ (...), Act. 7.38.
lively Oracles, in as much as they were uttered by the lively voice of God
himself. I come to the other Preface, that which God made concerning himself,
I am the Lord thy God which has brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of
the house of bondage.

In which Preface he yeeldes them two sorts of Arguments to prove that both he
on his part might give them a law, and that they on their parts were bound to
keep it. The first argument is taken from his essence, and his greatness, and
goodness toward them, I am the Lord thy God: the second from a peculiar
benefit, and a principal favor done unto them, which has brought thee out of
the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Concerning his Essence, and
Greatness, and Goodness, the words are in the Original Iehova Eloheka. (...)
Of the former namely Iehova I have spoken Lect. 2, p. 28.
before, a word or two of the latter, Elohim.

Elohim Elohim est nomen potentiae and fortitudinis, magnarumque virium, eoque
optime convenit Deo, and quidem soli, proprie. Zanch, de Div. Attrib. l. 1. c.
12 p. 33.
, says Za^chius, is a name of power and strength, and of great puissance, and
therefore is most agreeable unto God, and properly to him alone. It is a word
of the plural number, and oftentimes so used throughout the holy Scriptures, in
the singular very seldom, all to signify thereby three Persons in the
Godhead. Being a word, says he, of the plural number, it is sometimes in
construction joined with a verb of the plural, sometimes with an adjective of
the plural though the verb be in the singular, sometimes with a verb of the
singular. In all these three kinds there is Zanc. Ib. p. 34.
says he, to be noted a plurality of Persons, though it be not so apparent in
this last kind, as in the two former. Besides as he says in an other Nunquam
dixit in sacris literis se esse vnum Elohim, sicut semper ait se esse Iehovam
vnum. Zanch. de Redempt. l. 1 c. 12. p. 215.
place, God never calls him self One Elohim, as he ever calls himself One
Iehova, to show no doubt in himself a plurality, not of Essence, or of
essential Attributes, but of Persons. And thus much briefly of the word.

The second argument taken from that peculiar benefit of his done unto them,
was concerning the land of Egypt out of which he brought them, when as they had
been in bondage there the space of 400 years.

-- Virg. Aen. l. 1
longa est iniuria, longae
Ambages: sed summa sequar fastigia rerum.
So it was that Joseph the son of Jacob after diverse and sundry afflictions
came in Egypt to great Gen 41.44.
honor. Where being a great dearth and in all the Countries round about, and
especially in Canaan, where Joseph's Father and Brethren lived, he Genesis 45.10.
Act. 7.14.
sent for them and their families to soiourne with him in Egypt some threescore
and fifteen souls. It pleased the Lord afterward in tract of time to
multiply them exceedingly, in so much that they grew to many thousands. Which
the kings of Egypt that came after perceiving, and how Exodus 1.18.
obnoxious it would be unto them to have such a People in their bosom, and
to grow up still amongst them, they endeavored to keep them under, and set
Taske-masters over them, afterward they took order to Exodus 1.22.
slay all their male children.

In time of this massacre was Moses borne, and not only escaped miraculously,
but as miraculously was he Exodus 2.10.
brought up under the nose of one of those Tyrants. From whom at length flying
upon occasion of a murder he had committed upon one of his Subjects in behalf
of one of his Brethren, after some forty years after that, he returned to
Egypt again with a message from the Lord concerning the deliverance of his
People. Exodus 5.1.
Pharaoh was loath to hear on that ear, but afterward when he saw so many
miracles wrought concerning Exodus 7.1.
Blood and 8.6.
Frogs, and 8.16.
Lyce, and 8.24.
Flies, and 9.3.
Moraine, and 9.10.
Blisters, and 9.23.
Thunder, and 10.13.
Grasshoppers, and 10.22.
Darkness, and 12.29.
loss even of his own Firstborn, then lo he granted leave, who yet
afterward repenting himself, and pursuing them with all his People hoping to
have recovered them, and to have had them in the slavery he had them before, he
utterly Exodus 14.28.
perished in the Sea, as he was pursuing them amain. And this was the house of
Bondage here spoken of in this place, from which the Lord having thus delivered
them by means of so many strange miracles, no mervaile though he use it as a
special argument in this place, why he on his part might give them a Law, and
they on their parts were bound to keep it. So that this his benefit and favor
to them is here remembered in this place, partly for it was a late benefit, the
sweetness whereof was yet in their mouths: partly for it was so great a
benefit, and to be remembered of all posterity: partly for it was a type of the
deliverance of all the Elect from the Egypt of this world. In all and every of
these respects it Zanch de Redempt. l. 1. c. 12 p. 217 Col. 1.
agreed to the Children of Israel; in this last respect it agrees to
Christians, who are now the Gal. 6.16.
Israel of God. For if so be the Lord himself Ier. 16.14.
said, The days come, that it shall no more be said, The Lord lives, which
brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, but, the Lord
lives, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the North, etc:
how much more may it well be Mat. 8.11.
said, Vivit Dominus, The Lord lives, that shall bring all and every of us
from East and West, North and South, to sit with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob
in the kingdom of heaven. But I come to the Precept it self, Thou shall have
no other Gods before me.

First whereas it is here said, Thou shall have no other Gods, the truth is
there is no other God besides to be had. For who is God, Psalm 18.31.
says the Psalmist, but the Lord? or who has any strength except our God? So
likewise the Prophet Esaias, I am the Lord, and there is no other, Esaias 45.5. and
again, I am the Lord, and there is no other, Esaias, 45.18, and yet again the
third time, I am God, and there is no other, Esaias, 45.22. Howbeit seeing man's
nature is such as that he will frame to himself other Gods, partly in opinion,
partly in practice, hence it is that here it is said, Thou shall have no other.
So that the Emphasis is in Thou: Thou, whether thou art an Israelite, or Thou,
whether a Christian, Thou shall have no other Gods. Though there be, 1. Cor.
8.5.
says the Apostle S. Paul, that are called Gods, whether in Heaven, or in
Earth, (as there be many Gods, and many Lords) yet unto us there is but one
God, which is the Father of whom are all things, and we in him: and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things and we by him. Secondly where he says
Before me, or as it is in Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 5.7, Before my face, Indignitatem
auget, Calvin Inst. l. 2. c. 8.. 16.
says Calvin, it shows the augmentation of the haynousnesse of the crime, if
so be we betake us to other Gods, like as if an unchaste woman, says he, by
bringing in an adulterer openly before her Husbands eyes, should the more vex
his mind. That of Assuerus is famous concerning Haman, who when he was fallen
upon the bed whereon Ester sat: what Ester, 7.8,
says the king, will he force the Queen also before me in the house? and then
was there no way with him but one. So the Lord here in this place the more to
fray us from falling from him, gives us warning that we can do nothing in that
kind, but that he himself is a witness of it, He that planted the ear, Ps.
94.9.
says the Psalmist, shall he not hear? or he that made the eye, shall he not
see? Quantascunque tenebras factis tuis superstruxeris, Deus lumen est, Tertul.
de Poenit p. 379.
says Tertullian. It is that in effect which David Ps. 139.10.
says, If I say, Peradventure the darkness shall cover me: then shall my
night be turned to day. Yea the darkness is no darkness with thee, but the
night is as clear as the day: the darkness and light to to thee are both
alike.

I might seem to have sufficiently entreated of this Commandment considering
the brevity I have proposed to my self, howbeit there is one thing yet that I
must necessarily tell you of, before I part from it, and it serves not only
for this Commandment, but for all the other that follow after. It is a Semper
in negativis meminerimus affirmativa contineri. Strigel. Loc Theol. Part 2. c.
4. p. 26.
ruled case, That all the Commandments if they be Negative, then by way of
Synecdoche they comprehend in them an Affirmative too, if so be they be
Affirmative, then by the self same figure they comprehe^d a Negative too. This
being then a negative Precept, and comprehending in it an affirmative, the
affirmative therein comprehended is this: We ought to retain the Lord, as our
own and only God. Not as Masters retain their Servants to have or to discard
as it falls out a many times at their pleasure, and as Tertullian Tertul. in
Apologet. c 5 p. 669.
writes merrily of the Heathens, Nisi homini Deus placuerit Deus non erit. Homo
iam Deo propitius esse debebit. Unless God please Man the better, he shall be
God no longer Man must now be friendly and favorable to God. Noe but that
perpetually we have him as our own, not giving away elsewhere what is proper
and peculiar to him. Now the things we owe to God, though they be indeed
innumerable, yet as Calvin well Calvin. Instit. l. 2 c. 8. 16.
observes may be reduced to four heads, Adoration, Affiance, Invocation, and
Giving of Thanks. But I come to the second Exodus 20.4, Deuteronomy. 5.8.
Commandment.

Thou shall make thee no graven Image, neither any similitude of things that
are in heaven above, neither that are the in earth beneath, nor that are in the
waters under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to the^, neither serve them,
for I am the Lord thy God a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers
upon the Children, upon the third generation, and upon the fourth of them that
hate me: and showing mercy unto thousands to them that love me and keep my
Commandments. There are in this second Commandment three especial and
principal parts. First, the Precept it self: Secondly a menacing of those that
worship him otherwise the^ he will: Thirdly, a promise unto such as worship him
aright. The Precept consists of two points: First, that Images should in no
wise be made, namely to worship God withal: Secondly, they should not be
adored, or served by us.

Concerning the former point of Images not to be made, I therefore add, to
worship God withal, for that Sanders in his Treatise of worshipping of Images,
has a whole Chapter, the contents whereof is, That the word of God forbids
not generally the making of all kind of Images, and in what sense Images are
forbidden to be made: whereunto you shall have the Answer of that worthy Hector
of ours D. Fulke. That the word of God, M. D. Fulkes Cenfu^. of Sand. Treatise
of the worship of Images. p. 596.
says he, forbids not the making of all Images generally, it is a matter
out of Controversy with us, although the Jews and Mahometists think the
contrary. But seeing making of Images is by the second Commandment expressly
forbidden, we may clearly perceive, what Images are forbidden to be made, if we
consider that this is a Precept of the first Table, which concerns Religion.
Therefore by it we are forbidden to make our selves any manner of Images for any
use of Religion. Now that Images ought not to be made to worship God withal,
we have diverse and sundry Scriptures, as Deuteronomy. 4.15. Esaias, 40 18. Act. 17.29,
Romans 1.23. I spare to cite the words, you may turn unto them at your leisure.

The second point relyeth on that which has been said concerning the former,
for if Images may not be made to any use of Religion, much less may they be
worshipped. But of Images I have spoken Lect. 8. in Artic. 22. p. 181.
before, only now let me briefly show that there is in truth no difference
between an Image and an Idol, if so be the Image be once worshipped. First,
Idolum by their own Vulgar is Vulg. Exodus 34.15 Levit. 26.30. Number. 23.21 where
it being in the Vulgar, Non est Idolum in Jacob nec videtur Simula. chrum in
Israel. The Doway Bible set forth 1609. translateth thus There is no Idol in
Jacob, neither is there simulachre to be seen in Israel. Ha, ha, he. I pray
you remember the verse before, p. 108. Spectatu^ admissi, etc. My friends were
you admitted to this sight, Could you refrain? would you not laugh outright?
called Simulachrum, and Simulachrum signifies as much as Imago, an Image. So
Tully, Statuae and Imagines, Tull. pro Archia Poeta.
says he, non animoru^ simulachra sunt, sed corporum. So Arnob^cont. Gent. l.
8.
Arnobius, as you have heard before, Quod simulachrum Deo fingam, cum si recte
existimes, sit Dei homo ipse simulachrum. Of this, see more in M.D. Fulks D.
Fulks Defense against Martins Discovery, c. 1. na. 5. p 7, 8, 9, etc.
Defense of the Translation of our Bibles. Secondly, they are both borrowed,
the one from the Greek, the other from the Latin, and therefore in their own
Dialect signifying both of the^ one thing, it is probable that even in the
English tongue they may be both of them so applied. Thirdly, you shall find it
in An old manuscript in my own keeping. The beginning whereof is, In the name
of the Fadir etc. Some call it Christianorum Speculum.
old english, that the first woe that ever came to the Children of Israel after
that they were comen out of Egypt was for the worshipping of an Image.
Fourthly, and lastly, Bellarmine himself brings nothing to the contrary, but
that oftentimes the name of an Idol is attributed to true Images, whereof see
more in D. Raynolds in his D Rayn. de Romans Eccles. Idololat. l. 2. c. 3. p. 361
Besides that our Adversaries themselves use the word Images in their D^way
Bib^e upon Nu^b. 31.16. in margin: Images of Beelphegor. And those I trow were
Idols. Doway Bible p. 386, Edit. 1609.
Book de Idololatria. And thus much of the first part namely of the Precept.

Concerning the Menacing of those that worship him otherwise then he would;
which he calls here, An hating of him, he shows that he is a Jealous God,
and how he Visites the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, upon their
third and fourth generation, but of this have I spoken Lect. 4. p. 75.
heretofore, only for the word Jealous here let me observe that Ielousy, as
Zanch. de Redemp. l. 1. c. 14. p. 338. Col. 2.
Zanchius tells us, is first an affection of a Lover who cannot endure any
Rival. Secondly that affection of his whereby he is so moved for wrongs
offered him as that he cannot but be revenged. They are Solomon's own words,
Jealousy is the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in the day of
vengeance, Prove. 6.34 Now both those significations, says Zanchius, agree to
the Lord our God. First God, he is the Husband of the Church, and will be
worshipped by her only, and as by the Church in general, so by every member of
it in particular. Secondly, we see the punishment here, as also the promise
unto such as worship him aright, but of both these I have spoken Lect, 4. p.
64. and 72.
before, and therefore come I to the third Exodus 20, 7. Deuteronomy 5.11.
Commandment.

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain. As in the former, so in
this there is a Precept, and a menacing to. The Precept is in these words: Thou
shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: the menacing in these;
for the Lord will not hold him guiltless. In the Precept I observe first what
the Name of Lord is, secondly, what it is to take that Name in vain. We shall
be too too scant in our measure if entreating now of the Name of God we afford
him no other name then we have given him Lect. 2. p. 26.
heretofore. You may remember what those Names were, but they are not the only
Names here intimated in this place. Here then is meant by the Name of God not
only his Titles and Properties, but his Ordinances, his Works, and his whole
outward worship whereby God is made known unto us, as men are by their names.
Now by In vain here in this place is meant all abuse of them, the which is
done two ways, or in our works, or in our words. Our Works; as when the Name
of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles (or for we live not now among Gentiles,
among our Adversaries the Papists) through us, Romans 2.24. Our Words, as when we
talk, of God, as also of his Word, irreverently and unworthily, without any
devotion in the world, or else when on every light occasion no perfect period
passes our mouths but it has a volly of oaths in triumph of what is spoken.

Horat. Epod. Od. 7.
Quo quo scelesti ruitis? aut our dexteris
Aptantur enses conditi?
And indeed such oaths are Swords, nay worse the^ swords and that to a man's
own self. A sword does not pierce so deep, (...) Chrysostom. ad Pop Antioch. Hom.
15.
says St Chrysostom, as the nature of an oath does, neither does it give so
deadly a blow. Virg. Aeneid. lib 4.
And as one says he, that has the halter about his neck, and is going out of
the gates of the City to be executed, is as a dead man already even before he
come to the place of execution, in such a case says S. Chrysostom, is the
Swearer, as if he had said, he has his deaths wound about him, -- Haeret
lateri let halis arundo. well he may hold out for a spurt, but it is not likely
to be long, What is your life? says Iam. 4.14.
S. James, It is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and afterward
vanishes away. Of all Sins this is a Sin that does most impeach our
reputation. For Oaths are ordained where need is, that Truth should not
perish, and Debates should be at an end. So the Apostle to the Hebrews, An oath
for confirmation Heb. 6.16.
says he, is among men an end of all strife. But he that swears at every
word, declares plainly that no credit is to be given to any of his words and
therefore he ioines to every word an Oath as a surety of the truth thereof.
Like as if a man would offer a great substantial Surety when he would borrow
but a Penny does he not plainly show to him of whom he would borrow it, that
he is of small credit himself that would for so small a matter offer so great
a Surety? But what do I speak of credit with men, you see what follows here
in this place concerning the menacing, The Lord will not hold him guiltless,
that takes his name in vain. You see the arrow sticks in him still.

-- Virg. Aeneid. lib. 7.
Actaque multo
Perque vterum sonitu, perque ilia venit arundo.
Now if the Lord will not hold him guiltles, he has scarsely the benefit of
that Superscription to be set upon his door, which infected Houses have in a
well governed City, Lord have mercy upon us. They were the Lords own words to
the Prophet Zachary, who when he said unto him, what see thou? And he
answered, I see a flying book: the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the
breadth thereof ten cubits: This Zach. 5.2.
says the Lord, is the curse that goes forth over the whole earth: for every
one that steals shall be cut of, as well on this side as on that: and every
one that swears shall be cut of, as well on this side as on that. In any wise
we that are Scholars let us beware of this Book, of all the Books in the
world let not this be the Scholars Book. Were I to speak now to Tradesmen I
would wish them they would not make it their Shop-booke neither, but I come to
the fourth Exodus 20.8. Deuteronomy. 5.12.
Commandment.

Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. Six days shall thou labor and
do all thy work. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in
it thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy man
Servant, nor thy Maid, nor thy Beast, nor thy Stranger that is within thy
gates. For in six days the Lord made the Heaven and the Earth, the Sea and
all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: therefore the Lord blessed
the Sabbath day, and hallowed it. Between which Commandment and the former
three that went before, we may observe three special Vid. Zanch. de Redempt.
li. 1. c. 19. p. 594. col. 2.
differences. First they were Negative only, this Negative in part, in part
Affirmative. Secondly, in the former, there he showed us not his own example,
here he does. Thirdly, in the former three, there was no such note of special
remembrance, in this there is. All to intimate unto us that God had a special
liking to this Commandment, and therefore so carefully charge us with it.
But I come to the Precept it self wherein I observe four points. First the
explication of this word Sabbath: Secondly, what it is to keep it holy,
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. Thirdly, the Parties concerning whom
this Commandment is given, (...) Whereof comes ELISABETH Requies Dei, of El
and Sabbath, Vid. Barthol. Scheraei Itinerar. number. 1075.
the Master himself and Mistress, Son and Daughter, man Servant, and maid
Servant, Beast, and Stranger. Fourthly, Gods own example of sanctifying the
same, For in six days the Lord made the Heaven, and the Earth, etc.
Concerning the explication of this word Sabbath, it is an Hebrew word, and
signifies Rest. And sometimes is it taken by the way of Synecdoche for a
whole week, as Luke 24.1, (...), The first day of the week, and Luke 18.12,
(...), I fast twice in the week, but here in this place it signifies a Day of
rest, appointed to be kept holy to the Lord, and to be spent in his service.
This among the Jews was the seventh day being reckned from the Creation: we
That of 7 days, one is to be consecrated to the Lord, that is moral and
perpetual but that this one day was the 7, that was ceremonial and therefore
abrogated by the Church. Vid. Zanch. de Redempt. l. 1. c. 19. p. 593. col. 1.
Christians make it the next unto it in remembrance of our Saviors
Resurrection. And this observatio^ of the Lords Day has testimony of holy
Scripture, as 1. Cor. 16.2. Act. 20.7. Revel. 1.10. See more hereof in D.
Fulkes Answer to the Rhemists Testament, upon this last quotation of the
Apocalypse. Concerning the second point of keeping it holy, it is to apply it to
such uses as it was ordained for at first, namely to rest from our weekly
labors all that day, and to give our selves wholly to the Service of God. And
yet allow we to be done three kinds of works, Opera pietatis, The works of
Piety, Opera Charitatis, The Works of Charity, and Opera Necessitatis, The
Works of Necessity. Of these three you may see more in Mr D. Willets D.
Willet Synops. Papismi. The 9. general Cont. qu. 8. p. 430. Edit. 1610.
Synopsis. I am persuaded I may yet go a little farther, even as he does.
Namely that whereas some are utterly against any Recreation at al on that day.
I fear me they are as far out in one extreme, as the Profaners of the
Sabbath are in an other. To recreate our selves so far forth as we shall be the
fitter for divine exercises that we are to perform at Church whether at
Morning or Evening Prayer, or hearing of Sermons if there be any, is no where
forbidden by the word. And I am persuaded no one thing has caused the People
to be so far out of square from keeping the Sabbath as they should, as the
unreasonable exactions of such who will permit the^ no refreshings. But I come
to a worse Tenet. In regard it is here said, Six days shall thou labor, and
do all thy work, there are that are of opinion that we should have no Holy
days at all, and which is worse then opinion, you shall have them put it in
practice. I would it were not in this City, which by reason of so much
Preaching and Preachers on the one side, and so many kinds of Magistrates, and
Governors on the other, should be an example to all other that has much fewer
of both sorts. But I come not to complain. What Zanchius has said of our Holy
Days I have told you David's Desire Scr. 2. p. 103.
elsewhere, namely how they are comprehended in this fourth Precept under the
name of the Sabbath. They are his very words, Zanch. de Redempt. l. 1. c. 10.
p. 597. Col. 1.
Quatenus Praeceptum hoc ad nos quoque pertinct, quia ex part morale ac
natural est, concludimus, nobis quoque mandari, vt nostros dies festos
sanctificemus. So far forth as this fourth Precept belongs to us Christians, in
regard it is partly moral and natural, we conclude, that we therein in are
commanded to sanctify our Holy Days, which though they happen to us at other
times, then did the Jewish Sabboths and their Feasts, nomine tamen Sabbathi,
nobis his significatur, quod in nostris Festis debeamus and nos Sabbathi (...),
hoc est, quiescere ab illis operibus a quibus and Iudaei quiescere iubebantur:
yet is it signified unto us in the name of the Sabbath here, that we in our
Holy Days ought to rest from those works from which the Jews were commanded
to rest. As for that it is here said, Six days shall thou labor, and do all
thy works: this, Archb. Whytgifts Defense of the Answ. to the Admonit. Trac.
10. c. 1. Divis. 4 p. 541.
says a worthy Prelate of our Church, is no Commandment, but a signification,
that so many days they might labor. See more in that worthy Prelate, as also
in Zanch de Redempt. l. 1. c. 19 p. 603. Col. 1.
Zanchius.

As touching the Parties concerning whom this Commandment is given, it is in
effect that which Joshua once Josh. 24.15.
said, I, and my house, will serve the Lord. Adigere quisque Paterfamilias
potest, says Zanchius, and debet suos domesticos ad externum cultum. The
Master of a Family (and consequently the Magistrate too, for he also is
understood, says Zanch. Ib p. 601. Col. 2.
Zanchius) may and must compel those of his household to the outward performance
hereof. Besides that he takes care even for 1. Cor. 9.9.
Oxen here, and teaches us to be those righteous men that Prove. 12.10.
regard the life of their beast.

But his own example is that which ought to move us nothing more. We to
profane that which God himself has sanctified? we to dare to work on that
day, on which, for gathering a few sticks an Israelite was Number. 15.36.
stoned to death by Gods own determination? nay to work on that day on which
the Lord himself would not work? no nor rain so much as Exodus 16.27. and V.
29.
Manna on it? What? is not God the same God still? is he not as Just as ever? is
his arm so shortened, that it cannot even now adays strike home? But I had
rather use those golden interrogations of Leo the Emperor, who when Cod l. 3.
tit. 12. l. 3.
Constantine had with over great facility licensed Sundaies labors in Country
Villages, reversed that, and made another in these words: Leo Constit. 54. Vid.
Mr Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. 71. p. 202.
We ordain accorcording to the true meaning of the Holy Ghost, and of the
Apostles thereby directed, that on the sacred day wherein our own integrity
was restored, all do rest and surcease labor, that neither Husbandman, nor
other on that day put their hands to forbidden works. For if the Jews did so
much reverence their Sabbath which was but a shadow of ours, are not we which
in habit the light and truth of grace bound to honor that day which the Lord
himself has honored, and has therein delivered us both from dishonor, and
from death? Are we not bound to keep it singular and inviolable, well
contenting our selves with so liberal a grant of the rest, and not incroaching
upon that one, which God has chosen to his honor? Were it not retchlesse
neglect of Religon to make that very day common, and to think we may do with
it as with the rest? But thus much of the fourth Commandment, and consequently
of the first Table: come we now unto the second Table, and therein to the first
Commandment which is in number the fifth; Exodus 20.12. Deuteronomy. 5.16.
Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, that thy days may be prolonged upon the
land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.

In which Commandment we have first of all the Precept it self, then the
Reason of it. The Precept is concerning Parents, and the Honor to be done unto
them; and therefore first who these Parents are, next what this Honor is here
specified. By Father and Mother are meant first of all our Natural Parents,
concerning whom in holy Scripture there are diverse and sundry passages. As
Exodus 21.15, He that smites his Father, or his Mother shall die the death. And
Exodus 21.17, He that curses his Father or his Mother shall die the death. So
Prove. 20.20, He that curses his Father or his Mother his light shall be put
out in obscure darkness. And Prove. 30.17, The eye that mocketh his Father, and
despises the instruction of his Mother, let the Ravens of the valley pick it
out, and the young Eagles eat it: or as it is in our New Translation, The
Ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it.
Now concerning the word Cursing in both the places that went before we are to
note that it is in the Hebrew Kallel which though it be rendered Cursing, (...)
yet properly signifies Vilifying, and Contemning, and so may it be taken in
those places, as Lavater in Prove. 20.20. p. 212 Vid. Barth. Scheraei Itinerar.
number. 964.
Lavater observes. A point I note the rather, for that some perhaps will not
stick to vilify and contemn their Parents, who would be loath to curse the^
outright, but there is no difference in this case, either in vilifying, or
cursing them. The Text in the Original aims at both. But the greatest impiety
of all is to lay violent hands on them; and to bereave them of their lives,
with which kind of Parricides how the Romans dealt by sowing them in a Sack
with an Ape, a Dog, a Cock, and a Viper, and so threw them into the Sea,
Justin. Instit. l. 4.
Justinian, and Tul. pro Rosc. Amerin.
Tully, and others will tell you. Besides our Natural Parents our Superiors
are understood to, whether it be the Magistrate, or the Minister. The one, for
he rules and protects us, and indeed is a nurcing Father, Esaias 49, 23, the
other, for he instructs us, and begets us through the Gospel, 1. Cor. 4.15.
But I come to the Honor here.

The Honor here specified in this place compriseth in it three Calvin. Instit.
l 2. c. 8 36.
points, Reverence, Obedience, and Gratitude: or as it is observed by the
Ecclus. 3.9.
Son of Syrach in Deed, and in Word, and in all Patience. But of these points
I shall have occasion to speak else, only now let me say unto you that this
Precept of Honoring our Parents must always be with that Proviso of the
Apostle Ephesians. 6.1.
St Paul's, (...), In the Lord. Otherwise we may say as did our Savior in a
certain case, who is my Mother? and who are my Brethren? Mat, 12.48. Honora
Patrem tuum Hieron. ad Furiam. de Vidui servand.
says St Jerome, sed si te a vero Patre non separat. Tam diu scito sanguinis
copula^, quam diu ille suum noverit creatorem. And they are memorable words he
has in an other Hieron. ad Heliod. de vita Eremitic^.
place; Licet parvulus ex collo pendeat nepos, licet sparso crine and scissis
vestibus, vbera quibus te nutrierat matter ostendat, licet in limine pater
iaceat, per calcatum perge patrem, ficcis oculis ad vexillu^ crucis evola.
Solum pietatis genus est in hac re esse crudelem. So that this excepted of
obeying God rather the^ our Parents if they both command contrary things, it is
a special good note Plutarch. de Fraterno Amore.
Plutarch gives us; Matri and Patri non ita se dare, vt semper ea dicas atque
aga^ quibus laetentur, etiam si molestia^ praeterea nullam afferas; impium
iniustumque habetur; not so to behave our selves to our Parents, as that we
always speak and do those things that should rejoice them to see, though
otherwise we should not anger them, yet eve^ this were bad enough and a spice
of impiety. But I come to the Reason of the Precept: That thy days may be
prolonged upon the Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.

It was the Apostle Ephesians. 6.2.
St Paul's observation hereupon that this Commandment of Honoring our Parents
was the first Commandment with promise. True it is that in the second
Commandment Mercy was promised unto thousands, but that was in general to
those that loved him and kept his Commandments: the first Zanch. in Ephesians. c. 6.
p. 487. col. 2
particular Commandment that had a particular promise annexed thereunto, that
is this, concerning Parents. What? And was the Land of Canaan then meant only
here in this place?

Virg. Aen. l. 1
Hic pietatis honos? sic nos in sceptra reponis? No doubtless not that only,
and therefore the Apostle St Paul he Ephesians. 6.3
relates the words thus: That it may be well with thee, and that thou may
live long on earth. I, but this will some say is not always fulfilled neither.
Be it, it is not always, yet is it for the most part: and when ever it is not
fulfilled according to the letter, it is never but fulfilled by way of
commutation. For if so be instead of this transitory life, God give them an
eternal life in the heavens, it is as if instead of a penny thou have promised
a pooreman, thou should open thy purse, and give him a whole pound. Now as
this Promise is here made to such as honor their Parents, so to such as honor
them not, there is intimated a Curse. You heard what was said even now of dying
the death, and of his light to be put out in obscure darkness, and of the Ravens
of the valley and young Eagles how they shall pick out and eat up his eyes. But
I come to the Exodus 20.13 Deuteronomy. 5.17.
sixth Commandeemnt: Thou shall not kill.

We are now come to that Commandment that shows Gods entire love toward Man,
nothing more. Man as you have heard was his Image, God Genesis 1.27.
says Moses, created the man in his image; in the image of God created he him:
he created them male and female. Now as if so be a man should deface his
Prince his image, he were worthy of severe punishment, for that it touched in
some sort the Prince himself, and therefore our Savior Christ of the penny
that had Caesar's Image and Superscription, Give, Mat 22.21.
says he, to Caesar the things which are Caesar's: so of how much punishment
should he be worthy that defaceth Gods image; for so is every man, high and
low, rich and poor, one with an other. They were our Saviors own words to
him that had his sword drawn (a body would have thought in as good a cause as
the world could have afforded) Put up thy sword into his place: for all that
take the sword shall perish with the sword, Mat. 26.52. a sign he came not to
break but to fulfill that Law which said, Blood defiles the land: and the land
cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him
that shed it, Numb. 35.33. I, Cain himself as wicked as he was Genesis 4.15.
had yet a mark set upon him that none should kill him, and if so be any
should do it wittingly and willingly, Doubtless, says God, whosoever slays
Cain, he shall be punished seavenfold.

Howbeit this Commandment aims not at all at the Magistrates Sword, nor at
lawful Wars that are made in defense of our Country. You may remember what you
hard out of the 37. Article of Lect. 8. p. 204.
late. The laws of the Realm may punish Christian me^ with death, for heinous
and grievous offenses. And again, It is lawful for Christian men, at the
commandment of the Magistrate, to wear weapons, and serve in the wars. So
that it aims not at the Magistrate, or at any kind of lawful warfare, at
private quarrels indeed it does, as also at all those circumstances that are
dependant thereupon, as Anger, Hatred, Envy, etc: and especially at those
Chalenges hand to hand in the field.

Virg. Aen. l. 6
Ne pueri, ne tanta animis assuescite bella:
Neu patriae validas in viscera vertite vires.
You know what follows: Tuque prior, tu parce, genus qui ducis Olympo,
Proijce tela manu, Servus meus.
Ioh. 18 11.
Peter put up thy sword into the sheath. Oh but thou must stand upon thy
manhood? A Gods name, when thy Prince, or Country calls for it: otherwise
remember thou art to stand on thy Christian duty too. How many laws did Moses
make for the Nation of the Jews, and yet not one of them all for challenging
to the field, who yet stood on their reputation no men more! Nay he that made
it a Law that if the head of an axe fly off and slay his neighbor near unto
him, with whom he had no quarrel, if the pursuer should take his Person,
before he came to the City of refuge, it was lawful to kill him, Deuteronomy. 19.6,
what would he have thought of these Gallants, who thrust themselves into this
straight, either to slay, or to be slain. It is memorable that Busbequius
writes of the Turkish Bassaes, how they took up a Turkish Captain that had
made such a challenge to one of his fellows for wronging him. What? Tun'
Commilitoni tuo singular certamen denu^ciare ausus es? Deerant quippe
Christiani, in quos pugnares. Vivit vterque vestrum pane nostri Imperatoris:
nihil omnius intervos de vita decernere parabatis. Quo iure? quonam exemplo? An
ignorabatis vtercunque vestru^ cecidisset Imperatoris da^no casurum? Anger.
Busbequius. Legate. Turc. Epist. 3. p 83. b Edit. Paris. 1595.
says he, and did thou dare to denounce the combat against thy fellow
soldier? Are there no Christians now to fight with all? you both of you live
by the bread of our Emperor: and yet notwithstanding both forsooth must needs
^oe hazard each others life. I, but by what right? I, but by what example?
Did thou not know that whether soever of you had been slain in that
quarrel, our Sovereign had had the loss? he had lost a man? Which as soon
as they had said, says my Author, they commanded him to prison, whence after
many months obtaining with much ado his liberty again, he never could
recover his reputation after. That which follows is too true: Apud nos, says
he, multi host publico nunquam conspecto, quod in ciuem aut contubernalem
strinxerunt ferrum, clari and memorabiles habentur. A many with us Christians,
are counted gallant and brave men for drawing their Swords not against a
public enemy, whom they never so much as saw, but only against their own
Countryman, and perhaps their Companion too. And this forsooth is Valor.
Howbeit true Valor is that which is joined with Virtue, and there is no Virtue
at all, but what is grounded on Gods Book. The only Duel approved there, is
between the Old man, and the New, the Flesh and the Spirit. Hic certemus, Pet.
Martyr. Loc. Com. Class. 4. Loc. 18.
says an excellent writer, let us here fight our bellies full. Nor is it a
Duel for an hour, a month, or a year, but for all our whole life time. We
have God, and Angels, and Men for the Spectators: the Word of God for the
Sword; Faith the Shield the Devil our Adversary. Strength we have from Christ,
and shall have at the length assured Victory Romans 16.20.
The God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly. But I will end
this point of D^uels with that excellent passage of S. Bernard: Si in voluntate
alterum occidendi, te potius occidi co^tigerit, moreris homi cida. Quod si
praevales, and voluntate superandi vel vindicandi forte occidis hominem, vivis
Homicida. Non autem expedit sieve mortuo, siuo vivo, sieve victori. five victo,
esse Homicidam. Infelix victoria, qua superans hominem, succumbis vitio.
Bernard. ad Milites Templi Ser c. 1. fol. 100 Col. 1.
If in fighting thou have a mind to kill another man, and then art slain thy
self, thou die a Murderer: If thou prevail and kill the other, the^ thou
live a Murderer. But whether thou live or die, conquer, or be conquered, it
is not good to be a Murderer. Here, Beloved, might I take occasion to speak
of that admirable issuing forth of the blood after it is settled in the Body, if
he that slew it appear in pesence within some certain hours, some say
seven. But I refer you to Hieronymus Hieron. Mag. Miscel. l. 3 c. 5.
Magius, who among some score of witnesses to this purpose has Lucret. l. 4.
Lucretius, Hom Iliad 17
Homer, Ficin de Immort. l 16. c. 5.
Ficinus, Lang. Ep. 40.
Langius, Lemnius de occultis not. mirac. l. 2 c. 7.
Le^nius, and others: as also to Coelius Rhodiginus, who Coel. Rhodig. L^ct.
Antiq l. 3. c. 12. p. 106.
assaies to give the reason of it. I come to the Exodus 20.14 De^t 5.18.
seventh Commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery.

As Murder in the former Commandment may be committed by unadvised Anger
only, and therefore our Savior Christ, I, Mat 5, 22.
says he, say unto you, whosoever is angry with his Brother unadvisedly, shall
be culpable of judgment; much more by Hatred only, and therefore the Apostle
S. John, 1. Ioh. 3.15.
whosoever hates his Brother is a manslayer (meaning any one Christian
whatsoever, for we are all of us Brethren) so may Adultery in this
Commandment, by a lusting look only, and therefore our Savior again, I,
Mat. 5.28.
says he, say unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman, to lust after her,
has committed adultery with her already in his heart. I, and such Adultery as
may cast him into hell fire, and therefore it follows immediately, V. 29.
Wherefore if thy right eye cause thee to offend, pluck it out, and cast it
from thee: for better it is for thee that one of thy members perish, then that
thy whole body should be cast into hell. Whatsoever it is, Quicquid est quod
significat oculus, sine dubio tale est, quod vehementer diligitur. Quod autem
additum est Dexter, fortasse ad augendam vim dilectionis valet. Aug. Tom. 4. de
Ser. Domini in Monte, l. 1. p. 794.
says S. Austen, that signifies an Eye here, without all doubt it is such a
thing as is dearly beloved of us. And it may be the Right Eye is specified too
in this place, to show that it is such a thing as is more then dearly beloved
by us. Nicelaus de Lyra in hunc locum p. 111.
Lyra comes a little more near the point. Whereas it is said here in this
place Pluck it out, it is not so to be understood, that man to avoid
concupiscence should deprive himself of any member that God has given him:
for that is not the way to heal Concupiscence whose vigor is within. Now
because, says he, a more effectual remedy may be had another way, namely by
the Will repressing the unlawful acts of the members, therefore is the plucking
out here metaphorically understood. For as the Eye being once plucked out, it
can by no means actually see; so consequently he plucks out his eye exceeding
well, who willingly represseth it from every unlawful act of seeing. But to
come unto my purpose.

This being their danger who in respect of actual adultery are a great way of,
in what a miserable plight are they whose concupiscence breaks forth into act,
act into custom, custom into carelesnes, who assemble themselves by companies
in the Erat fama (de Domitiano) quasi Concubinas ipse divelleret, nataretque
inter vulgatissimas meretrices. Suet. in Domitian. c. 22.
harlots houses, as Erat fama (de Domitiano) quasi Concubinas ipse divelleret,
nataretque inter vulgatissimas meretrices. Suet. in Domitian. c. 22.
speaks the Prophet Jeremy, and rise up in the morning like fed horses: and
neigh after their neighbors wives. In a word, who make a covenant with her
Prove. 6.27.
whose feet go down to death, and her steps take hold of hell. O quanta
iniquitas Aug Tom. 9. de honest. mulier. c. 3. p. 1052. and Tom. 10. de Temp.
Ser. 250. p. 818.
says St Austen, o qua^ta perversitas, Ier. 5.7.
vt animam quam Christus suo sacro redemit sanguine, luxuriosus quisque propter
vnius momenti delectationem libidinis, Diabolo inimico suo vendat ac traedat. O
how great injustice is it, what overthwartnesse in the highest degree to make
sale, and deliver up that Soul to thy adversary the Devil, and all for a
spurt of pleasure, which cost our Savior Christ the dearest blood he had. But
I am not now to preach to such, I am only to give you warning, that in any wise
your tender years beware of such sales. Quid mihi and voluptati Hieron. ad
Eustech. de custod. virginitatis.
says S. Jerome, quae brevi perit: what have I to do with pleasure which is
gone in a moment. Memorable is that which the same S. Jerome has concerning
Hilarion. The Devil Cernebat se vinci a puero, and prius ab eo calcatum suiss^
quam per aetate^ calcore potuisses Hieron de vita S. Hilarion.
says he, that boasted once how he would ascend Esaias, 14.14.
above the height of the clouds, and he would be like the most High, perceived
himself to be overcome of a child; and to be spurned and trampled by him,
even before he was of age to trample on him. As for that uncleanness which the
Apostle calls, Iud. v. 7.
strange Flesh, (...), Quam Daemones videntes oculos claudunt Aug, Tom. 10. ad
Fratres in Eremo Ser. 47. p 986.
and at the sight whereof the Devils themselves (as one speaks) close up
their eyes, I trust there is no such iniquity either in Jacob, or in Israel. I
come to the Exodus 20.15 Deuteronomy. 5 19.
eight Commandment, Thou shall not steal. Of stealth there are many Calv.
Instit. l. 2. c. 8.. 45.
kinds. There is one by way of violence when by force and threats we take
licentiously other men's goods. An other is by way of deceit whereas we convey
them away guilefully. A third is when we obtain them by color of law, having
indeed no right unto them. A fourth by way of flattery, when we diue into me^,
to make our selves Masters of what they have. In a word all crafty means
whatsoever, whereby we possess our selves of what is an other man's, is stealth
in this Commandment. To steal apples, or pears, or plumbs, etc: is perhaps
but a sport to many, who laugh full merrily at it when they have done. But see
how seriously S. Austen confessed the like prancke of his, both to God and the
world. O Lord Furtum certe punit lex tua Domine, and lex scripta in cordibus
hominum quam ne ipsa quidem delet iniquitas. Et ego furtum facere volui and
seci, nulla compulsus egestate nec penuria, sed fastidio iustitiae, and sagina
iniquitatis. A^bor erat Pirus in vicinia vineae nostrae pomis onusta, nec forma
nec sapore illecebrosis. Ad hanc excutiendam atque asportandam, nequissimi
adolescentuli perreximus nocte inte^pesta, and abstulimus inde onera ingentia.
Ecce cor meum, Deus meus, ecce cor meum, quod miseratus es in imo abyssi. Aug.
Tom. 1. Confess. l. 2. c 4 p. 56.
says he, thy law does punish theft, and that law which is written in the
hearts of men, which iniquity it self can in no wise disanull. I also was
willing enough, and indeed did steal, compelled by no occasion of want, nor of
penury that I had, but a loathing I had of goodness, and I was puffed up with
iniquity. There was a Pear tree hard by our vineyard full of goodly pears to
see to, and of an indifferent good taste. A many cracks of us went thither on a
night to gather and carry away, and we had every of us good store indeed. Behold
my heart, my God, behold my heart, whereof thou have had some pity even in the
bottom of Hell. I come to the Exodus 20.16 Deuteronomy. 5.20.
ninth Commandment.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. It is the first
Commandment wherein our Neighbor is mentioned, but not not the first wherein
he has been intimated. The truth is, all this second Table is concerning our
Neighbor. The, fifth that we should honor him; the sixth, that we should not
kill him; the seve^th, that we should not voluptuously abuse either him, or his;
the eight, that we should not steal from him; and this ninth, that we should
not witness against him falsely or perfidiously. If you would know who is our
neighbor, Luke 10.29.
it was a question was asked our Savior, and he immediately put to the asker
such a pretty kind of case, as that the asker of the question did V. 37.
answer it himself. Hence it is that S. Austin says, not as it is in the
proverb, Terent And. Act. 4 Sc. 1.
Proximus sum egomet mihi, but Aug. Tom. 8. in Ps. 118. Conc. 8. p 922.
Omnis homo omni homini proximus, Al men are neighbors to one an other: and
again in an other Aug. de Tem. Ser. 221. p. 771
place, Proximus omnis homo; Proximus tuus ille est qui tecum natus est ex Adam
e^ Eva. Every man is thy neighbor. He is thy neighbor that is borne as thou
art, of Adam and Eve. Though there is I confess a Specially too; Gal. 6.10.
Specially they of the howshold of faith. That which here then is commanded us,
is first that we defame and slander no man; secondly, that we give no ear to
such as are fraught with that vice: thirdly, that we give no cause of such ill
speeches to go of us. Concerning the first, though Witnessing be here named in
special, and witnessing is properly then, when as we are called to give
testimony; yet that is but one point only of all the branches here Semper eo
recurrendum est, ex singulis vitiorum generibus speciem vnam paradigmatis loco
proponi ad quam ceterae referantur: eam autem potissim^ deligi, in qua vitii
turpitudo maxim emineat. Calv. Inst. l 2. c. 8. 47.
meant, as you hard before of Murder, Adultery, and of Stealth. And as
touching defaming and slandering our Neighbor, miru^ est, Calv. Ib.
says Calvin, quam supina securitate passim in hac re peccetur, vt rarissimi
reperiantur qui non hoc morbo notabiliter laborent: adeo venenata quada^
dulcedine oblectamur in alienis malis tum inquirendis, tum detegendis. It is
strange to see how securely men in every place offend herein, insomuch that
there are very few to be found at all that are not notoriously sick of this
disease, so much are we all delighted with a kind of poisoned sweetness in
searching out and disclosing the evils of other men. But as the talebearer,
so the tale-hearer is in fault top: the one is the Thief, the other the
Receaver. Vno in momento, Bernard. in Cant. Ser. 24. So S. Ierom, Nemo invito
auditori libenter refert. Discat detractor, dum te videt no^ libenter audire
non facile detrahere. Hiero^ Tom. 2. ad Nepotian, de vita Cleri^orum. And
again, Detractor cum tristem faciem viderit audientis, imo ne audientis
quidem, sed obturantis aures suas, ne audiat iudicium sanguinis, ilico
conticescit, pallet vultus, haerent labia, saliua siccatur. Idem. ad Rustic
Monach. de vivendi forma.
says S. Bernard, multitudinis audientium dum aures inficit, animas
interficit. At one and the self same time while he is muttering in the ear,
he is murdering the soul. S. Austen would none of that; and therefore about
his Possid. de vita August. c. 22.
Table (for they are commonly at great men's Tables that have such a flux of
tongue) had these two verses, Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere vitam:
Hanc mensam indignam noverit esse sibi.
In english thus: would God in England: Who so the party absent hence,
By Tales seeks to disgrace:
Let him arise from this my Board,
Such Guests have here no place.


But to come again to prose. We are not altogether scotfree our selves, if so
be we give just occasion of such reports to be made of us. And therefore was it
Hieron. Tom. 2. ad Celant.
S. Ieroms counsel, Ne ex nobis scintilla procedat per quam adversus nos
sinistrae famae flamma confletur. That the sparkle should not fly from our
selves, that should cause such a flame of an evil, report against us. In
vain, says he, are we angry with those our Slanderers, if we minister fuel to
their fire. But I come to the tenth and last Commandment that which contains
a Fire indeed, I mean for it does forbid that Fire of Concupiscence that is in
all, and every of us.

Exodus 20.17 Deuteronomy. 5.21.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, neither shall thou covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his man servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass,
neither any thing that is thy neighbors. The former Precepts they condemned
the settled thought to do mischief: this Precept condemns even the first
inclination and motion to Sin, though a man consent not. I, Romans 7.7.
says the Apostle, knew not sin, but by the Law: for I had not known lust,
except the Law had said, thou shall not lust. So that God commands here in
this place a mavelous fervency of Love to our Neighbors, which in no wise he
would have tainted with the least concupiscence that is. The slightest
provocations that are, are utterly against this Commandment. We shall not need
to say with 1. Sam. 14.43
Jonathan, I tasted a little honey, and lo I must die: this is much less. If so
be we do but wish to taste of honey, or whatsoever else belongs to our
Neighbor, though we taste it not indeed, if we but wish to have it, we are dead
by the Law, there is a handwriting against us. You know Martial. Epig l. 4
Epig. 18.
whose verses they were, Quid non saeva sibi voluit fortuna licere?
Aut vbi mors non est, si iugulat is aquae?
But what is it the Law of God rather does not take fast hold of, and where is
not Death included in it, when but a Thought shall stifle us? So that we shall
not say with David neither, The waters are come in, even unto my soul. Ps.
69.1.
I stick in the deep mire where no ground is: I am come into deep waters so
that the floods run over me, no, the Law you see takes hold of our thoughts,
and Quomodo aures nostrae ad voces nostras, Aug. Tom. 8. in Ps. 148. p. 1188.
and Tom. 10 Hom. 16. p. 308.
says S. Austen, sic aures Dei ad cogita^^ones nostras. As our own Ears are
to our words, so are Gods Ears to our thoughts.

Here a question arises betwixt us and our Adversaries whether it be possible
to keep these Commandments or no. Our Adversaries say it is, but without
Scriptures, without Fathers. First concerning Scriptures, Gal. 3.21. If there
had been a Law given which could have given life, surely righteousness should
have been by the Law. Romans 8.3, It was impossible to the Law (namely to
justify and save us) in as much as it was weak because of the flesh. And 1.
Cor. 13.9, We know in part, and we prophecy in part. Concerning the Fathers,
first S. Austen Aug. Tom. 8. in Ps. 40 p. 249
says, Quis illam implet? Who it it that does fulfill it? So Hieron. Tom. 2 ad
Ctesiphons. advers. Pelag. p. 254.
S. Ierom, Facilia dicis Dei esse mandata, and tamen nullum proferre potes qui
vniversa compleverit. You say; says S. Ierom to Ctesiphon, that Gods
Commandments are easy, and yet can you instance in no one that has fulfilled
all of them. Again, Hieron. Tom. 2. advers. Pelag. l. 3. p. 303.
Multis testimonijs supra didicisti Legem nullum potuisse complere. Thou have
had already many testimonies to teach thee, that no man could ever fulfill the
Law. And again in a Hier. Tom. 2. Advers. Iov in. l. 1. p 30.
third place, Quam implere nullus potuit, which no man could fulfill. So S.
Bernard, Bernard. in Cantic. Scr. 50. fol. 159. col. 3.
Non latuit Praeceptorem praecepti pondus heminum excedere vires. The giver of
the Commandment was not ignorant how the weight of the Commandment far
exceeded the strength of men. True it is, we may in one sense fulfill them too,
and therefore Aug. Retract l. 1. c 19. p. 20.
S. Austen, Omnia ma^data facta deputantur, quando quicquid non fit ignoscitur.
God accounts all these Commandments performed by us, when a^ he forgiues us
what we perform not. And again in another place, Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 3.
p. 259.
Cancellos tibi fecit Lex vt non inventendo qua exires, ad gratiam convolares.
The Law has made rayles and bars about thee, that no ways finding how to
get out, thou should fly to Gods mercy. Much more might be said herein; but I
refer you to our worthy D. Abbots Defense of the Reformed Catholic Part 2.
p. 550. vsque ad p. 573.
Professor, who has said so much already against a Doctor of our
Adversaries, as also to Mr Fox in his good Friday Sermon at Paul's Cross, both
in English and in Latin.

And thus, Beloved, as briefly as possibly I could, have I now run over at
length these ten Commandments. Joan. Foxius de Christ crucis. Par. 2. p 55
It is true, much more might have been spoken of every one of them, so might
there have been of our Churches Tenets, so of the Articles of our Faith; but
my project is, to refer you to the heads only, partly for I am to comprise
much matter in few hours, partly for I have not many hours to speak in this
kind more unto you.

There are of the Interpreters that resemble these Comma^dements unto your ten
Predicaments: so Peter Martyr in diverse places; The ten Commandments P.
Martyr. Loc. Com. Class. 2. Loc. 10. 14 and Class. 2. Loc. 14. 3.
says he, are in respect of Virtue and Vice, as are the ten Predicaments in
respect of all things that have a being. For as there is nothing, says he, but
may reduced to some one Predicament or other, so is there no Virtue, no Vice at
al, but may be reduced to some Commandment. If question be made of Drunkenness
(for of Drunkenness some make question) Drunkenness as Aquin. 2^ 2 ae qu. 150.
Art. 1 in corp.
Aquinas tells us is contained under Gula, Gluttony, as the Species under Genus,
and therefore to be referred to that Commandment that Gluttony is. Now for
Gluttony he Aquin. Ib. qu. 148. Art. 2. ad 1m.
tells us, that by a kind of reduction it is opposed to that Commandment,
which is of Sanctifying of the Sabbath in regard it does avert us from the end
we are to tend unto. Now as it is reducible to that Commandment, so may it be
besides unto the Rest, so far forth as it is the cause of such several vices
as are condemned in such Commandments. As it makes us then forget God, so may
it be reduced to the first Commandment: as it makes us to swear and state, so
unto the third: as to forget our Superiors, so unto the fifth: as to rail and
revile our neighbors, so unto the sixth and ninth: as to behave our selves
lasciviously so to the seventh and tenth. But thus much of the ten
Commandments in general, and of every of them in particular. Come we now to
our Saviors Epitome of them, whereof but in a word. Jesus said unto him: Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind. This is the first and the great Commandment. And the second is
like unto this. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. On these two
Commandments hangs the whole Law and the Prophets.

That Ten are reduced to two, it is because the four Commandments that are
in the first Table are reduced to One, and the Six Commandments in the second
Table reduced to an Other. First concerning the Four.

That Four may be reduced to One, it must be done by such a means, as all the
Four are capable of, and also that One. By that which has been said it does
appear that the soul (as it were) of the four Commandments, that are in the
first Table, is the Love of God, I mean that love wherewith we ought to love
him. So that if we love him is we ought, that is with all our heart, with all
our soul, and with all our mind, then shall we have no other Gods but him, and
this is an inward worship, and this is the first Commandment. If we love him
as we ought, that is, with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our
mind, then as we worship him inwardly in our heart, so shall we do it
outwardly in our actions, and not impart it unto Images, and this is the second
Commandment. If we love him as we ought, that is, with all our heart, with all
our soul, and withal our mind, then will we reverently use these two
worships, the inward, and the outward, and this is the third Commandment.
Lastly, if we love God as we ought, that is, with all our heart, with all our
soul, and with all our mind, then shall we have special desire to keep his
Sabboths, and this is the fourth Commandment. So that the Love of God being
all in all, you see what cause our Savior had to reduce all Four to One.

The self same cause he had to reduce the other Six into an Other, for as the
Love of God in the first Table was al in all, so in the second, the love of our
Neighbor. Whereupon the Apostle S. Paul, Owe nothing Romans 13.8.
says he, to any man but to Love one an other: for he that loves an other
has fulfilled the law. For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall
not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall
not covet: and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended
in this saying, eve^ in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Nor
wanted our Savior the very words of Scripture it self to countenance this
Division. For where he said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, it is with a little
alteration set clearly down, Deuteronomy. 6.5. and the other, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self, that is set down without any alteration, even in as
many sillables, Levit. 19.18.

The only observation I will give you now, and so an end, is concerning the
Love of our Neighbors thus graced by our Savior. You see in what account it
is with God, and therefore in what it is to be with Men. Did he give but ten
Commandments in all? No less then six of the^ concern our Neighbor. Did he
afterward contract them into two? The one of them was our Neighbors. Was the
first concerning God? the second concerned our Neighbor Was the first
Commandment great? Nihil secundum long inquat a primo, Tertul. de Pudicitia p.
630.
says Tertullian, Nihil tam proximu^ primo quam secuudum. The second was like
unto it. Did the Law and the Prophets depend upon the one? so they do on the
other too. Quomodo noluit, says Aug. Tom. 9. in epist. Joan. Tract. 10. p 444
S. Austen, te dividere per multas paginas? In his duobus praeceptis Lex pendet
and Prophetae. See how our Savior was loath thou should wea^y thy flesh with
many Books. He gives thee the sum of all: On these two Commandments hang
the whole Law and the Prophets. Nay, shall I go a little farther? Said our
Savior that this second Commandment was like unto the former? Let us be tried
by the Apostle S. Paul, in whose eyes they were so like, that though he takes
not one for another, yet he takes one of them for both. Love, Romans 13.10.
says he, does not evil to his neighbor, therefore is love the fulfilling of
the Law. And again in another place, least it might be thought he had mistaken
himself, All the Law, Gal. 5.14.
says he, is fulfilled in one word which is this, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. And yet again in a third place, Gal. 6.2.
Bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ. I, our
Savior Christ himself, Mat. 7.12. Vid. Aug. Tom. 3. de Trin. l. 8. c. 7.
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do ye to them: for
this is the Law and the Prophets. And thus much of the first point the Church
is to practice, and consequently our selves; not that we are able to fulfill
them as we ought in very deed, but to do our best endeavors. And hence it is
that in our Church Service, as Reverend M Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. 39 p. 77.
Hooker observes, when the Minister lifts up his voice like a Trumpet to
proclaim these Laws unto the People, they adioyne though not as Israel did,
by way of generality a cheerful promise, Exodus 19.8.24 3. Deuteronomy 5.27.26.17.
Josh. 24.16:
All that the Lord has comma^- we will do, yet that which God does no less
approve, that which savoureth more of meekness, that which testifies rather
a feeling knowledge of our common imbecillitie, unto the several branches
there of, several, lowly, and humble requests for grace at the merciful hands
of God to perform the thing which is commanded. And thus much of the first
point, which the Church as I Lect. 1. p. 21.
observed, is to practice. The second is PRAYER, and of Prayer God willing at
my next return. In the mean time God so bless us, and the seed that has
been sown, etc.

PRAYER. Lecture 10. Iunij, 17. 1613.

BEing at this time to speak unto you of the second of those four Points
which the Church (I told you) was to practice, and consequently your selves,
namely PRAYER; me thinks in this my long voyage through so many several Seas,
as hitherto I have sailed, I am now come to such a place, as S. Luke calls in
the Act. 27.8.
Acts, (...), The fair havens. Prayer, says Reverend M. Hooker Eccles. Pol.
l. 5.. 23. p 53.
Hooker, are those Hos. 14.3.
calves of men's lips, those most gracious and sweet Rev. 5.8.
odours, those rich presents and gifts, which being Act. 10.4.
carried up into heaven, do best testify our dutiful affection, and are for
the purchasing of all favor at the hands of God the most undoubted means we
can use. And again a little after, The knowledge is small, says he, which we
have on earth concerning things that are done in heaven. Notwithstanding thus
much we know even of Saints in heaven that they pray. And therefore Prayer
being a work common to the Church as well Triumphant as Militant, a work common
unto Men with Angels, what should we think but that so much of our lives is
celestial and divine, as we spend in the exercise of Prayer. I may say
concerning Prayer as speaks the Apostle concerning Faith: By Faith Abel Heb.
11.4
says he, offered unto God a greater sacrifice then Cain: V. 5.
by Faith ^as Enoch taken away that he should not see death: V. 7.
by Faith Noe being warned of God of the things which were as yet not seen,
moved with reverence prepared the Ark, and so forth. So may I say, Beloved, of
Prayer, and so indeed was it long ago said by one that was not solum carne
mihi, as speaks Aug. de verb. Dom. Ser. 26. page 72.
St Austen, sed etiam religione germanus, my own Fathers My dear and worthy
Brother Mr. Richard Day now with God.
Son. By prayer In his Preface to the Book of Christian Prayers.
says he, Hanna was of a barren woman made 1. Sam. 1.27
fruitful: David 2. Sam 12.13 Psalm. 51.17.
obtained forgiveness for his manslaughter and whoredom: Elias 1. Kin. 18.42.
caused great plenty of rain: Ezechias 2. Kin. 19.15
overcame Senacherib: Toby Toby. 8.5.
prospered: Susanna was Dan. 13 42.
delivered from death. By Prayer, Queen Hester Esther. 14.3.
delivered her self, and her people: Jonas was Jonas. 2.2.
delivered out of the Whales belly: the Ninivites from that Jonas. 3.8.
destruction, that was intended against them. By Prayer Luke 17.13.
Leapers were cleansed, the Luke 18 38.
blind restored to sight, the Mat. 8.6.
palsy cured, many obtained health for their Mat 9.18.
daughters, Luk 9 38.
sons, and Mat 8.13.
servants. By Prayer the Act. 3.3.
lame man was restored to limbs, the Mark. 7.32.
deaf to hear, the Mat. 9.32.
dumb to speak: remission of sins was Mat. 18 27. Mat. 11.28.
obtained, the Holy Ghost Ioh 14 16. Act. 2.4.
purchased both for the Apostles and all the Faithful. And now Beloved what
shall I more say? I will only say with Chrysostom. Tom 5. De incomprehe^sib. Dei
natura Hom. 5. p. 1195
S. Chrysostom: The force of Prayer has extinguished the force of fire; it
has stopped the mouths of Lions, it has appeased wars, ended battles,
driven away tempests, expelled Devils. It has opened the doors of Heaven,
broken in sunder the bands of death, rid us of diseases, smothered our
offenses, it has strengthened Cities that by Earth quakes were ready to fall,
it has averted from us plagues that were coming down from heaven, plots and
practices of wicked men, in a word all what ever Hell and Satan could devise.
Of Prayer then at this time, and the Text I have chosen to this purpose, is
that golden Stamp of Prayer which has the Image and Superscription of our
Savior himself. You shall have it in St Matthewes Gospel, the 6. chapter, the
9, 10, 11, 12, and 13. verses. The words are these.

After this manner therefore pray ye. Our Father which art in heaven hallowed
be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done even in earth, as it is in
heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our debts, as we also
forgive our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
evil: for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever, Amen.
Which words as here they lie, are parcel of that Sermon which our Savior made
upon the Mount. Now among all the Sermons our Savior made and so many several
Instructions as he gave, his Sermon on the Mount was the most famous of all the
rest, partly in respect of the length of it, partly of the Matter contained in
it. The length thereof takes up no less then three whole Chapters, the fifth,
the sixth, and the Seventh: so that as Aristophanes thought of Archilochus
Poems, or Mihi tu? quis minus? cui vt Aristophani Archilochi Iambus, sic
Epistola longissima quaeque optima videtur. Tul. ad Attic. l. 16. ep. 11.
Longissima quaeque Ciceronis Oration doctioribus maxim placet, quod de
Orationibus Demosthenis eidem Tullio visum est. Joan. Passeratii Orat. and
Praefat. p. 81.
Tully of Atticus his Epistles, or of Demosthenes his Orations, or learned men
of Tullies, that the longest were the best; right so may we say of our Saviors
Sermons, and of this in particular, for that of all the Sermons he ever made,
we have nothing so many passages as we have of this. Concerning the matter
contained in it S. Austen is of opinion that if a man consider it well he shall
find therein concerning Manners, An absolute and perfect way whereby a
Christian life ought to be led. Nor speak I this Aug. Tom. 4. De Sermon. Dom. in
Monte l. 1.
says he, at all adventures, and rashly, but I gather as much from our
Saviors own words. Who concludes so his Sermon, as if he meant it should be
such a perfect rule for us. For at the end thereof he says, whosoever then
hears of me these words and does the same, I will liken him to a wise man
which has builded his house on a rock etc. Seeing then he said not whosoever
hears my words, but whosoever hears these my words, I trow he sufficiently
intimates that those very words spoken on the mount, do so perfectly instruct
them who will lead their lives thereafter, that well they may be likened to
him that builded his house upon a Rock.

Now this sixth Chapter wherein we are, being a parcel of that Sermon, it
contains in it from the first to the 18. verse these three points, Alms, and
Prayer, and Fasting, three most necessary duties of every Christian. Beginning
in the fifth verse to speak of Prayer, he tells us of two sorts of Praying, that
we must in any wise eschew, An hypocritical kind, and An heathnish kind,
both as bad as bad may be. Our Savior here deals, as did an expert B Jewels
Sermons at the Court. p. 104.
Musician, of whom Apollonius spoke unto an Emperor. The Emperor pretending a
reformation of the Empire which before his time Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, and
others, had spoiled and defaced and asking Apollonius what order he were best
to take: Sir, says he, you must do as the cunning Musician did who sent his
Scholars to a rude Minstrell, but with this Item, whatsoever you see him do,
see that you avoid it. He is unlearned and his manner of fingring naught: see
therefore that in playing you for your parts do the contrary. Even so our
Savior here for Praying; When thou prayest Mat. 6.5.
says he, be not as the Hypocrites: for they love to stand and pray in the
Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, because they would be seen of
men. Also when ye pray V. 7.
says he, use no vain repetitions as the Heathen; for they think to be heard
for their much babbling. Be ye not like them therefore: for your Father knows
whereof ye have need before ye ask of him. Now for it was not sufficient in
this case to tell the^ what they should not do, without enforming them also
what to do: he delivers a form of Prayer, which because himself taught
it, is therefore called, The Lords Prayer. This Prayer he taught his Disciples,
at two sundry and several times. Once in this his Sermon which he made upon
the Mount: an other time when one of his Disciples Luke 11.1.
said unto him, Master teach us to pray, as John also taught his Disciples. So
that as John's Disciples had received of their Master a form of Prayer amongst
themselves which none but themselves did use, so that by it as by a Vid. M.
Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 35. p. 72.
mark of special difference they were known from others: the Apostles it
should seem having taken special notice thereof, thereupon they request our
Savior to teach them to pray, as John the Baptist had taught his. It should
seem they had forgotten what our Savior had taught in this place; and indeed
it is to true which Aug. Tom. 4. de Consens. Evang. l. 3. c. 13. p. 352,
S. Austen has, Fluitat humana memoria per varias cogitationes, nec in
cuiusquam potestate est, quid and quando veniat in mentem. Man's memory by
reason of diverse and sundry thoughts does floate up and down, neither is it in
any man's power, to call to mind what, and when he list. Memory, says a witty
Mountaignee Essaies l. 2. c. 17
French man, the more I distrust it, the more it troubles me. It serves me
best of all by chance, and I must carelessly sue unto her, for if I once urge
her, she is amazed, and if she once begin to waver, the more I sound her, the
more entangled, and intricate she proves: she will wait upon me, when she
list, not when I please. But to return unto my purpose.

By reason that our Savior taught his Disciples this Prayer, hence it is that
Praemissa legitima and ordinaria Oratione quasi fundame^to. Tertul. de Orat. p.
659.
Tertullian, and Moneo vos Charissimi, vt precem legitimam Patri, and Deo
offerendam ante discatis. Aug. Tom. 10. de Temp. Ser. 126. p. 626.
S. Austen both term it, Orationem legitimam: the Prayer which Christ's own
Law has tied his Church to use, in the same prescript form of words;
wherewith he himself did deliver it. And therefore what part of the world
soever we fall into, if Christian Religion have been there received, the
ordinary use of this very prayer has with equal continuance accompanied the
same as one of the principal, and most material duties of honor done unto
our Savior Christ Jesus. S. Austen Verba quae Dominus noster Jesus Christus in
Oratione docuit, forma est desideriorum. Non tibi licet petere aliud, quam ibi
^^riptum est. Aug. Tom 10. Tract. in Orat Domin. Again, Quamlibet alia verba
dicamus nihil ^liud dicimus quam quod in ista Dominica Oratione positum est, si
recte and congruenter oramus, and again a little after, si per omnia
Precationu^ verba discurras, quantu^ existimo, nihil inenies, quod non ista
Dominica contineat and concludat Oration. Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 121. c. 12.
calls it Formam Desideriorum, the Mold and Pattern of all such Petitions as
we are at any time to make, and shows that we are at any hand to keep within
this compass. Should I discourse at this time of the excellency of this
Prayer, I should hold you too too long, especially should I declare unto you
the Dignity of it, the Brevitie, the Perfection, the Order, the Efficacy and
Force, as also the Necessity of it: but I will content my self at this time
with that of S. Cyprian. Quae vera magis apud Patrem precatio, quam quae a
Filio; qui est veritas, de eius ore prolata est? vt a liter orare qua^ decuit
non ignorantia sola sil, sed and culpa, quando ipse posuerit and dixerit,
Reiicitis ma^datu^ Dei, vt traditionem vestram statuatis. Oremus itaque,
Fratres dilectis simi, sicut Magister Deus docuit. Amica and familiaris Oration
est Deum de suo rogare, ad aures eius asce^dere Christi orationem. Agnos cat
Pater Filii sui verba, cum prece^ facimus. Qui habitat intus in pectore, ipse
sit and in voce. Et cu^ ipsum habeamus apud Patram Advocatum pro peccatis
nostris, quando peccatores pro delictis nostris petimus, Advocati nostri verba
premamus. Na^ cum dicat, quia quodcunque petieritis a Patre in nomine meo dabit
vobis: quanto efficacius impe tramus quod petimus in Christi nomine si petamus
ipsius Oratione. Cyp. Ser. 6. de orat. Domin p. 230.
What Prayer to be accounted with the Father more truly a Prayer, says he,
then that which is spoken by the mouth of the Son, who is truth it self.
Insomuch, that to pray otherwise then he has taught, is not ignorance only,
but a fault, seeing he himself has set down and said, ye lay the
Commandment of God apart, that you may observe your own Traditions. Let us
pray therefore, Beloved Brethren; says he, as our Master has taught us. It is
a friendly and a familiar kind of Praying to ask God with his own, to have
Christ his Prayer to ascend into his ears. When ever we Pray let the Father
acknowledge the words of his own Son. Christ who is in our hearts let him be
in our Tongues too. And seeing we have an Advocate with the Father for our
Sins, when we who have sinned go to seek for pardon, let us allege unto
God the self same words which our Advocate has taught us. For since his
promise is our plain warrant, that what we ask in his name we shall receive,
how much rather shall we receive; if not only his name do countenance, but
also his speech present our requests? And so I come to the words themselves,
Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name, etc.

Diverse and sundry are the Moulds into which this Prayer is cast by
Interpretets of both ages, Old and New, as also of both sides, Protestants, and
Papists. It is not my purpose to allege them al, that would ask a long time,
only will I bring you that which best befits the words as here they lie. First
the Access, or entrance to Prayer commonly called the Exordium, and that in
these words, Our Father which art in Heaven: Secondly the Prayer it self
consisting, some say in Six, some, in Seven Petitions, al comes to one
reckoning. Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done eve^ in
earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day, our daily bread. And forgive us our
debts, as we forgive our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver
us from evil. Lastly the Conclusion, and that is in these words: For thine is
the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever, Amen. Of every of these
in their several order, and first of the Access or Entrance, commonly called
the Exordium. OUR FATHER WHICH ART IN HEAVEN.

Inchoari oration debet a Dei laud Amb. Tom. 4 de Sacram. l. 6. c. 5. p. 384.
says S. Ambrose, vt roges omnipotentem Deum cui possibilia sunt omnia, qui
habet voluntatem praestandi. Our Prayers are to begin with the praises of God,
that so we may seem to ask God omnipotent with whom all things are possible,
and besides who has a will to grant us our Requests: In these words are both,
his Will, and his Power. His will in these, Our Father, his Power in the next
unto them, which art in heaven. Concerning the word Father, Tertullian says it
is a name of Power to. Appellatio ista Tertull. de Orat. p. 657.
says he, and pietatis and potestatis est. It is a name both of Piety, that is
of natural and loving affection, such as Parents bear to Children, and also of
Power. Dicendo Patrem says he, Deum quoque cognominamus. In calling him
Father, we imply he is God to, in that we put our affiance in him. Thus God
(...). Cyril Hierosol. Catech. 7. p. 169
says S. Cyrill, vouchsafes by his unspeakable clemency to be called the
Father of men: he which is in heaven, to be the Father of them which are upon
the earth: he which made al times to be Father of them which live in time: he
which holds the earth in his fist, to be Father of them which walk as
Grasshoppers upon the earth. But do we not Mentimur Iovem? Iunonis odio creed.
L Y. Quid violas Iovem? Mertale coelo non potest iungi genus. Senec. H^rc Fur.
Act. 2 Scen. Non vetera.
mentiri Iovem? Is God our Father indeed? Valerius Maximus has a whole Chapter
of those that being but basely borne would make the world believe that they
came of high Parentage. And he Valor. Max. l. 9. c. 16.
calls it, Impudentiae genus, nec ferendum vllo modo: a kind of impudency, and
in no wise to be borne withal. And surely we Christians should prove such kind
of Creatures should we say we are Gods, and God not our Father. But the Apostle
S. Paul will avouch this Petigree, namely he is our Father, first by Creation,
then by Adoption. By Creation, for we are his Generation, Act. 17.29. And Deuteronomy.
32.6, Is not he thy Father, that has bought thee? he has made thee, and
proportioned thee. So the Prophet Esaias, Doubtless thou art our Father, though
Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not, yet thou O Lord, art our
Father, and our Redeemer, Esaias, 63.16. So Aug. de verb. Dom. Ser. 28. p. 76.
S. Austen, Nobis omnibus in commune est Pater, quia nos creavit, he is a
Father to us all in general, for that he did create us. By Adoption; so the
Apostle S. Paul to the Romans, As many Romans 8.14.
says he, as are led by the spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. V, 15.
For ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again: but ye have
received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. V. 16.
The same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the Children of
God. Now if you would know what adoption is, the Civilians will tell you, that
it is Vid P. Martyr Loc Com. Class. 3 Loc. 3.
Actus legitimus imitans natural, repertus ad illorum solatiu^ qui liberos non
habent. A lawful act in imitation of Nature, found out for their comfort who
have no children of their own. True it is God himself was not destitute of a
Son, for he had a Beloved Son in whom he was well pleased, as you have heard
Lect. 7. p. 134.
heretofore, howbeit for in all the nature of man he had yet no children at
all, thence it was that he adopted his Elect unto himself. Cum haberet vnicum,
Aug. in Epist. Joan. Tract. 8. p. 434.
says S. Austen, noluit illum esse vnum: sed, vt fratres haberet, adoptavit
illi, qui cum illo possiderent vitam aeterna^. When he had his only Son, he
would not have him to be alone: but he adopted Brethren unto him, who should
enjoy with him eternal life. Now whereas we say, Father in this Prayer, we are
to imply withal both The Son, and Holy Ghost. The reason is, for that the
name of Father, a also the name of God, when it is opposed to all Creature (as
Father is here in this place) then is it taken not personally, but essentially.
In Patre Filius invocatur Tertul de Orat p. 657.
says Tertullian: ego enim, Ioh. 10.30.
inquit, and Pater vnum sumus. When we pray unto the Father, we pray to the Son
too, for the Son has said, I and my Father are one. And thus much of these
first two words, Our Father, here in this Prayer: only an Instruction from
either of them, and then to the words that follow.

First for the word Our, Our Father, here in this place, the Instruction I
gather is, that it was our Saviors mind that we should not in our Prayers
have respect unto our selves only, but to all and every of our Brethren. And
therefore all is here in the plural number, as Our Father, and Give us, and
Our bread, and Forgive us, and Our Sins, and so forth. Let every one pray,
Vnusquisque oret Dominum non pro se tantu^ sed and pro omnibus fratribus, sicut
Dominus Jesus orare nos docuit, vbi non singulis privata^ precem mandavit, sed
communi and concordi prece orare pro omnibus iussit. Cyp. Epist. l. 4. ep. 4.
page 124. And again, Ante omia pacis doctor atque vnitatis magister singulatim
nolis it, and privatim precem sieri, vt quis cum precatur prose tantu^
precetur. Id. de Orat. Domin. p. 231.
says S. Cyprian, not for himself only, but for all his Brethren, as the Lord
Jesus has taught us to pray, when he gave not in particular to every one of
his Disciples a private Prayer, but commanded them to pray for all with one
mind and one assent, in a Prayer that is common to al. And therefore Ad magnum
genus pertinere coepistis. Sub isto Patre fratres sunt Dominus and Servus, sub
isto Patre fratres sunt Imperator and miles, sub isto Patre fratres sunt dives
and pauper. Omnes Christiani fideles diversos in terra habent Patres, alii
nobiles, alii ignobiles, vnum vero Patrem invocant qui est in coelis. Aug. de
Temp. Ser. 135. p. 641.
S. Austen, You that are to say, Our Father which art in heaven, are to
appertain to a great kindred. The Master and the Man, the General and the
Soldier, the Rich man and the poor are all Brethren under this Father. Nay
all faithful Christians, says he, though they have diverse Fathers on earth,
some noble, some base, yet do they all of them call upon one Father, when they
speak to him that is in heaven. It is true, we may sometimes say, My, in
particular too, and therefore the prodigal Child, I will rise and go to my
Father, Luke 15.18. and the benefit that is common to all, we may use as
peculiar to our selves, so did the Apostle S. Paul, so the Prophets, as S.
Chrysostom has Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 34.
observed. S. Bernard gives the reason. In creatione, Bern. in Ps. Qui habitat.
Ser. 2. p. 674.
says he, in redemptione, caeterisque omnibus beneficijs est Deus omnium: sed
in tentationibus suis tanquam proprium eum habent singuli electorum. In regard
of creation, redemption, and such like benefits he is the God of all: but in
temptations, every of the Elect have him as proper and peculiar to themselves.
But thus much of the first Instruction from the word, Our, here in this place.

The Instruction I gather from the word, Father, is this: the great prerogative
we Christians have, above the Israelites that were of old, in that we may come
with such boldness to him, as to call him Father. The Israelits, I confess
were his Children, nay he calls them his Firstborn, Exodus 4.22. and yet for
all this Nusquam invenitur praeceptum populo Israel, vt diceret Paternoster,
aut oraret Patrem Deum. Aug. de Sermon. Dom. in Monte. l. 2.
which of them all when they came to pray unto him used this style of Father,
as we do? Now how potent the very name of Father is to extort a benefit from a
Father, were he averse and backward from giving it, witness Esaus importunity,
who though he obtained Heb. 12.17.
not the blessing indeed, yet a blessing he had, such as it was, Genesis 27.39.
This little word, Father, Luth. in epist. ad Gal. c. 4.
says Luther, conceived effectually in the heart, passes all the eloquence of
Demosthenes, and Tully, and the greatest Orators that ever were. Our Savior
seems to acknowledge as much. What man is there among you, Mat. 7.9.
says he, which if his Son ask him bread, would give him a stone? or if he
ask fish; will he give him a serpent? If ye then which are evil can give to
your children good gifts, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven,
give good things to them that ask him. But I come to that that follows,
which art in Heaven.

True it is, God is every where, and yet as Aug Epist. 57. p. 177.
S. Austen notes, Non dicimus, Pater noster qui es vbique, cum and hoc verum
sit, sed Pater noster qui es in coelis. We say not, though it be true too, Our
Father which art every where, but, Our Father which art in heaven. And
therefore king Solomon, Hear thou in the place of thine habitation, says he,
even in Heaven, 1. King. 8.30. So that we must, as S. Cyprian teaches us, Cyp.
cont. Demetrian. p. 147.
Illuc intueri, illuc oculos nostros erigere, in supernis Deum quaerere, non
ante ineptae simulachra, and figmenta terrena captivum corpu incurvare. Look up
to those heavens above, thither erect and cast our eyes, there in that place
seek our God, not prostrate our captive Bodies before the fopperies either of
Idols or of Images. There are Vid. Calv. Instit. l 3. c. 20.. 40.
who take these words which art in heaven, as if they signified Gods Majesty
and Power, Heaven the place thereof being put for the things themselves, and
then the meaning is, Our Father which art in heaven, that is, which ^rt of
infinite greatness, and height, and power, and immortality. But I like the
former interpretation better, so that we do not Palos terminales figere Deo,
as Turtull. de Ieiunio. p. 650.
speaks Tertullian enclose him wholly within the circle of heaven. Behold, 1.
King 8.27.
says Solomon, the heavens, and the heavens of heavens are not able to
contain thee, how much more unable is this house that I have built. And
howsoever S. Austen say in one Aug. in Psalm. 145. p. 1162.
place, Absens est Pater noster ad quem clamamus, Pater noster qui es in
coelis. Ideo Ecclesia vidua quasi absente sponso, absente viro. That Father of
ours is absent from us, to who^ we cry, our Father which art in heaven. And
therefore the Church is as a Widow, her Lord, and Husband thus absent: yet
says he in another Aug. de Temp. Ser. 140. p 649
place, Absentia Domini non est absens. Habeto fidem and tecum est quem non
vides. The absence of the Lord is no absence at all. Have but faith, and he
whom thou see not, is notwithstanding with thee. Thus much of the Exordium:
now concerning the Prayer which whether it consists of six, or rather of
Tres petitiones superiores aeternae sunt. Quaetuer seque^tes ad islam vitam
pertinent. Aug. Hom. 42. p. 364. So that hereby we may shape an answer unto
such as complain of our Church Prayers, more the^ a third part (say they)
spent in praying for, and praying against the commodities, and incommodities of
this life. Vid. M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5 35. p. 71.
seven Petitions, the first of them is this, HALLOWED BE THY NAME.

To be Hallowed is to be sanctified, and it is a metaphor taken from things
dedicated to God, or to the Temple. And our desire here is (the Imperative
being put for the Optatiue as also in the other Petitions) that Gods Name, that
is, his Attributes, his Works, his Word, his Sacraments, whereby he is known
to his Church as men are by their names, that all these (I say) be put apart
from all profane abuses unto the right use prescribed in the third
Commandment, where it was said that the Lord would not hold him guiltless
that takes his name in vain. So that we wish Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 20. 41.
that honor to be given to God which he is most worthy of, that men never
speak, or think of him but with exceeding great reverence, that God would not
only deliver that holy Name of his from all contempt and dishonor, but subdue
all mankind to the worthy esteeming of it. Which is not says S. Austen so to
be understood, as if we desired this of God for his own sake, not for ours.
Intellige Aug. Tom. 10. Tract. in Orat. Domini.
says he, and pro te rogas. Hoc enim rogas, vt quod semper sanctum est in se
sanctificetur in te. Thou prayest herein for thy self to. For this it is thou
praiest for, that that Name, which is always holy in it self, should be
hallowed in thee. Again, this request which we make of hallowing the Name of
God Aug. Tom. 4. de Sermon. Dom. in Monte. l. 2.
says he, is not so made by us as if the Name of God were not holy already,
but the meaning is that it should be hallowed by men. And again a little
after, Et hoc est quod nunc agitur says he, dum Eva^gelium adhuc vsque quaque
per diversas gentes innotescendo, commendat vnius Dei nomen per
administrationem filij eius. And this it is which is now performed throughout
the whole world, while the Gospel by beco^ming to be known every where among
so many Nations, commends this name of our God unto us, through the
administration of his Son. I come to the Tertullian makes it the third.
Tertul. de Orat. p. 658.
second Petition. THY KINGDOM COME.

Gods kingdom is twofold: First that Administration whereby he governs all
things even the Devils themselves: secondly, that Administration of his Son
Christ Jesus the head of the Church in which he frames men by his word and
spirit to the subjection of the same word; and so is the kingdom of God here
taken in this place. And so taken here in this place, this kingdom is twofold
too. First, the kingdom of Grace: Secondly, the kingdom of Glory. The
kingdom of grace is that wherein those only, live that are subject to Christ,
are obedient to his laws, and are continually taught in his word by his holy
Spirit. And of this kingdom the Apostle S. Paul speaking, The kingdom of God
Romans 14.17.
says he, is not meat and drink, but rigteousnes, and peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost. And, Tunc venit regnum Dei Aug. de verb. Dom: Sermon. 28. p 76.
says S. Austen, quando est is gratiam eius consequuti: Ipse enim ait, Regnum
Dei intra vos est. The^ comes the kingdom of God unto you, when ye have
obtained his grace. And therefore he himself Luke 17.21.
says, The kingdom of God is within you. The kingdom of Glory is that which
is the blessed state of all Gods People that partly are already in heaven,
partly shall be hereafter when God shall be all in all. The former is an entrance
and preparation to this latter: this latter is the end and consummation of the
former. If so be we would participate of the kingdom of Glory, we must first
of all be Subjects in the kingdom of Grace. But that is to be while here we
are in this world: Behold now 2. Cor. 6.2.
says the Apostle S. Paul, the accepted time, behold now the day of
Salvation. Now in this Petition we aim at three points. First that this
kingdom of Grace be not hindered by many spars and lets that it has what with
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Secondly, that he quicken his coming
unto judgment; for so the Saints themselves pray, I mean the Church
Triumphant, Rev. 6.10. and so the Church Militant too, Rev. 22.20. Thirdly,
that he would come to each and every of us in particular, and summon us to him
by Death, not in respect of Crosses and calamities he sends us at any time,
that were pusillanimitie, and want of courage in us, but to be freed from this
body of Sin, not to be constrained, as Ps. 120 4.
speaks the Psalmist, to dwell with Mesech, and to have our habitation among
the Tents of Cedar, to desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ, as Philip.
1.22
speaks the Apostle to the Philippians.

The Instruction I gather hence is, not to play the hypocrites with God, namely
to make this petition and yet to be full loath to see that day. Optas vt veniat
Aug. in Ps. 97. p. 756.
says S. Austen, quem times ne veniat? corrige te, vt non ores contra te.
Do thou desire him to come, whom thou fear least he should come. Why then
amend thy self, least thou prayest against thy self. So likewise in another
place, Perversum est Aug. in Psalm. 147 p. 1172.
says he, and nescio vtrum verum, quem diligis, timere ne veniat; orare,
veniat regnum tuum, et timere ne exaudiaxis. This is perverse dealing, and far
from sincerity to fear his coming who^ thou say thou love: to pray that
his kingdom come, and yet to fear thou should be heard. But they are most
excellent comforts, which S. Austen has in that place, Vnde autem timor, says
he, quia Iudex venturus est? nunquid iniustus? nunquid malevolus? nunquid
invidus? etc. Nihil horum. Quis ergo venturus est? quare no^ gaudes? quis
venturus est iudicare te, nisi qui venit iudicari propter te. And why art thou
afraid says S. Austen, for he shall come as a Judge? Why is he an unjust
Judge? Is he a malicious Judge? Is he envious and spightfull? No, not a whit.
And who then shall come to judge thee? Why do thou not joy thereupon? Who
shall come to judge thee, but he who when time was, came himself to be judged
for thee. He spoke not as Papists do, Vid. Foxium de Christo gratis
iustificante. l. 3. p. 338.
Canisius by name, that the expectation of that day is not terrible only to
Sinners, but also to the Saints: no he spoke as our Savior rather, When these
things begin to come to pass, then look, up, and lift up your heads; for your
redemption draws near, Luke 21.28. I come to the third Petition: THY WILL BE
DONE IN EARTH AS IT IS IN HEAVEN.

We have here in this Petition two several points to be considered: First, the
will of God that it is to be done; Secondly, the manner of doing it. First
concerning the will of God, Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 20.. 43.
his secret will is not here meant whereby he governs all things, and
directs them to their ends, but his other will, his will revealed, namely
that whereunto our willing obedience ought to answer. Like as our Savior said
in his Mat. 26.39
agony, O my Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me,
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. And again, V. 42.
O my Father if this cup cannot pass away from me, but that I must drink it,
thy will be done. And again the V. 44.
third time, O my Father if this cup cannot pass away from me but that I must
drink it, thy will be done, for he said the V. 44.
same words again. He that taught us to say, Mat. 6.10. Thy will be done: you
see how in his own case, Mat. 26.42, he puts it in practice. Ipse erat, Tertul.
de Orat. p. 658.
says Tertullian, voluntas and potestas Patris, and tamen ad demonstrationem
sufferentiae debitae, voluntati se patris tradidit. He himself was the will and
power of his Father, and yet to make demonstration of his patience that was
due, he yielded himself to his Fathers will. Now concerning this will of God
as there are diverse and sundry particulars commended unto us in holy writ, so
may they be reduced to three Heads. First to believe in Christ, so the Apostle
Ioh. 3.23.
S. John, This is then his Commandment that we believe in the name of his Son
Jesus Christ. The second is our Sanctification of Body and Soul, and of this
the Apostle to the 1 Thessalonians 4 3.
Thessalonians, This is the will of God even your sanctification, and that you
should abstain from fornication, that every one of you should know, how to
possess his vessel in holiness, and honor, and not in the lust of
concupiscence even as the Gentiles that know not God. That no man oppress or
defraud his Brother in any matter: for the Lord is avenger of all such things.
The third is our bearing afflictions in this life, whatsoever God shall send
us, and of this, the same Apostle in the same Epistle to the 1 Thessalonians. 5.18.
Thessalonians: In all things give thanks, for this is the will of God in
Christ Jesus toward you. And thus much of the will of God, that it is to be
done.

Concerning the manner of doing that will of his, it is here set down by way of
Similitude, Sicut in coelo, and in terra, In earth as it is in heaven. Sicut,
Aug. in Epist. Joan. Tract. 4. p. 412.
says S. Austen, non semper ad parilitate^ and aequalitatem refertur. This
word Sicut [As] does not always intimate unto us a paritie or equality in
each respect. He makes instance in that of our Savior, Ioh. 17.23.
Dilexisti eos sicut and me dilexisti: Thou have loved them, as thou have loved
me. It is true, the Apostles were beloved of God, and as the Son himself was
beloved, but not in that degree of love, for all that Sicut there. Right so the
Sicut here in this place, his will is to be done by us here in earth as it is
in heaven, namely by those Angelical Creatures there, willingly, speedely, and
faithfully, in regard whereof they are said to be winged, but is it the meaning
of our Prayer here, that we also should perform the same in the same degree of
perfection? No that's impossible while here we are in this life: it is
sufficient for us if we come aloof off, or if we march with them hand in hand
as it were, yet to be but like As^anius of whom the Virg Aen. l. 2
Poet, -- Sequiturque Patrem non passibus aequis, half a dozen of whose steps
made but one of his Fathers. And thus much of the three Petitions that
principally concern Gods glory: now of those three, or four rather that have
reference especially to our own good: the first whereof is this, and it is the
fourth Petition; GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD.

Our Rhemists that with much ado were brought at length to be willing to
translate the New Testament into English, when they came to this place
translated it thus: Give us to day our supersubstantiall bread. Now
Supersubstantial is as well understood of them, for whom they translated that
Testament, as if it had been plain gibberish. Doubtless this, Beloved, was
not the way whereby the People should be Rhem. 1. Pet. 2.5.
Superedified, to use another of their words: and little have they Rhem.
Philip. 4 10.
Reflourished to care for them to use a phrase of theirs: and least of all will
it help them, Rhem Ephesians. 6.12.
Against the Rectors of the world of this darkness, Against the spirituals of
wickedness in the celestials, smile not at them they are their own phrases, and
now forsooth Canonical. But to come to the matter in hand.

The word in the (...) Vid. D Fulk against the Rhemish Testament in Mat. 6.11.
Original is ambiguous, and upon the ambiguity of the Greek word many of the
Fathers refer this Petition to spiritual Food especially; among which the
Lords Supper is a part, as the Preaching of Gods word also is an other part,
noted by the Fathers to be desired in this Petition. And therefore Amb. Tom. 4.
de Sacram. lib. 6. c. 5. 384.
says S. Ambrose Haec postulatio maxima est eorum quae postulantur. This is
the chiefest Petition of all. Howbeit Luke 11.3.
S. Luke, as D. Fulke D. Fulke vbi supra.
notes is the best Interpreter of the Greek word, who shows that it
signifies Bread sufficient for every day: (...), says S. Luke, (...). In
which place our Rhemists themselves translate it, Daily. But now concerning the
word Bread.

Bread in the Hebrew Dialect is taken for that sustena^ce whereby the life of
man is maintained and signifies as Sustenance, that is, Meat and Drink, so
Apparel, Health, Liberty Peace, etc. Like as when the Lord said to Adam, Genesis
3.19.
In the sweat of thy face, shall thou eat bread till thou return to the earth,
his meaning was he should earne his living by the sweat of his brows. Now
Bread in this kind as it has here in this place, so ought it to have three
special properties. First, it must be given us: Secondly, it must be our own:
Thirdly, it must be Daily. Given us, for that as a worthy B. Andrews of the
Combat between Christ and Satan. Ser. 7. p. 91.
Prelate observes out of Brentius many have Panem quotidianu^, that cannot come
by Da nobis: they come not to it by Gods gift. No they come to it either as 1.
Kin. 21.19.
Ahab came to Naboths vinyard, that is, by force: or as 2. Sam. 16 4
Ziba came to Mephiboseths lands, that is by fraud. Secondly, it must be our
own, that is, such as we obtain by the calling that we have. In regard
whereof it was the Apostles 2. These. 3.10
Precept, that if any would not work, he should not eat, and besides that they
should work with quietness, and eat their V. 12.
own bread. Thirdly, it must be Daily, that is, such as teaches us to rest on
his Fatherly goodness from day to day, like as Manna taught the Israelites,
Exodus 16.19. Merito adiecit, Da nobis hodie, says Tertul. de Orat. p. 658.
Tertullian, vt qui praemiserat, Nolite de crastino cogitare quid edatis. He
fitly annexed this Petition here, Give us this day: who had said unto them but
a little before, Be not careful for the morrow what you shall eat, or what
you shall drink. Not but that there ought to be a godly care with every
Christian of laying up sometimes more, sometimes less, as God has blessed us
with abundance, but we ought to take heed of a distrusting care, that is, when
we rely too too much upon the means, and utterly forget him who Ps. 145 16.
opens his hand and fills all things living with plenteousnes. Now the
greatest Prince and Potentate that is, is bound to beg this bread, which if so
be he has not in this sort; and so by reason of this blessing it prove unto
him the Staff of bread, Esaias 3.1. It will prove but the Bread of carfulness,
Psalm. 127.3. I come to the fifth Petition. AND FORGIVE US OUR DEBTS, AS WE ALSO
FORGIVE OUR DEBTORS.

That by Debts here, Sins are meant; first our own word Trespasses which we
continually use instead thereof, does sufficiently confirm, secondly the
Evangelist S. Luke who uses the very word (...), Sins, Luke 11.4. Now Sins
are called Debts in respect of the great resemblance that is betwixt Debts and
them. For eve^ as a Debt does bind a man either to make satisfaction, or else
to go to Prison till he pay the utmost farthing, Mat. 5.26. so is it with us in
respect of Sin which binds us or by our selves or by some other to satisfy
Gods justice which is to be satisfied to the utmost mite, Luke 12.59. Now
Forgiveness serves for both, both for Debt and Sin. And hence it is we ask
it here, and no doubt as we do ask it, so we as verily obtain it to, if we
faithfully ask the same. Qui orare nos pro debitis and peccatis docuit Cyp. de
Orat. Domin p. 238.
says S. Cyprian, paterna^ misericordiam promisit, and veniam secutura^. He
that taught us to pray for these our debts and sins, promised his fatherly
mercy, and pardon to ensue.

But why do we here say, As we also forgive our debtors. As we also? Why We? or
what kind of consequence does it seem to be, that though we forgive others
that are Me^ as we are, yet God should forgive us who are in respect of him but
worms, and not men. The consequence seems to be this. Seeing we, that have
but a drop of mercy in respect of thee, forgive others, thou who art the
fountain of mercy, do thou forgive us. And therefore S. Luke sets it thus
down: For even we forgive every man that is indebted to us. I, but how then if
we do not forgive? If we do not forgive, no not to die for it? How if we say
we do forgive, but we will never forget it? How if we proclaim that the Party
offending us may well come into our Pater Noster; but he shall never come into
our Creed? Quid agemus nos in die iudicii super quoru^ iram non vnius diei, sed
tantoru^ annorum Sol testis occubuit. Hier. Tom. 2. Ad Castorinam Materteram.
How if the Sun not of one Day only, but of whole Twelve months go down
upon our wrath? Si dicis, fac Aug. in Evang Joan Tract. 7. p. 45.
says S. Austen, quid enim facturus es, quo iturus es, si mentitus fueris in
precibus? If you say you do forgive, by all means do forgive then, for what
can thou possibly do, whether will thou go for succor, if in thy prayers
thou tellest a lie. I come to the sixth Petition: AND LEAD US NOT INTO
TEMPTATION.

First here is a good sequence, and very fitly does this Petition follow the
former, to teach us that as we must be careful to pray for pardon of sins
past, so by all means we must endeavor to prevent sins to come. But now
concerning the words, Lead us not into temptation, that is, says Id est, ne
nespatiaris induci ab eo vtique qui tentat. Ceterum absit vt Dominus tentare
videatur, quasi aut ignoret fide^ cuiusque, aut deiicere sit conse^tiens.
Diaboli est and infirmitas and malitia, Tertul de Orat. p. 659.
Tertullian, suffer us not to be led by him who indeed does tempt us. Be it
far says he, from us to think that the Lord does tempt, as if he knew not any
ma^s faith, or were consenting to his overthrow: that is, the iniquity and
malice of Satan himself. Dictum est ne no^ inducas in tentationem, quod
intelligitur ne nos inferri deserendo permittas. Aug. ep 89 p. 257.
S. Austen expounds it thus? Lead us not into temptation, that is suffer us not
by forsaking us to be led there into And indeed Cypr. de Orat. Dom. page 239.
S. Cyprian has it in these words, Ne patiaris nos induci in tentationem;
suffer us not to be led into temptation. So Ambros. Tom. 4. de Sacram. Sermon. 6.
cap. 5 page 384.
S. Ambrose, and Chrysostom. Tom 5. Hom. de Orat. Dominic. If that be S.
Chrysostomes. For To. 2. Mat. in Hom. 20. he has, Ne nos inducas.
Saint Chrysostom to, grounding no doubt on that of Iam. 1.13.
S. James, Let no man say when he is tempted I am tempted of God: for God
cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. Howbeit seeing here
it is said unto no other but God himself, Lead us not into temptation: and the
Scriptures bear witness of Christ himself that he was Mat. 4.1.
led aside of the Spirit to be tempted of the Devil, which Spirit doubtless was
the good Spirit, Luke 4.1. this same Suffer us not reaches not hoame to that
which is intimated here indeed, and therefore say we to God himself, (...): Do
not thou oh Lord lead us into temptation, as being an action of God himself.
Why but the Apostle S. James says, that God tempts no man, (...). True, as
the Author of evil, but as a righteous Judge he does. Witness S. Austen who
after a long Disputation against Inlian the Pelagian brings this Petition, as
an argument to prove the same. What is that Quid est aute^ quod quotidie
dicimus, Ne nos inferas in tentationem, nisi vt non tradamur concupiscentiis
nostris? Tradit ergo Deus in passiones ignominiae, vt siant quae non
convenient, sed ipse convenienter tradit, and fiunt eadem peccata and
peccatorum supplicia praeteritorum, and suppliciorum merita futurorum. Sicut
tradidit Achab in Pseudo-prophetarum mendacium: sicut tradidit Roboam in falsum
consilium. Facit haec miris and ineffabilibus modis, qui novit iusta iudicia
sua, non solum in corporibus hominum, sed and in ipsis cordibus operari. Aug.
Tom. 7 cont. Julian. Pelag l. 5. c. 3.
says S. Austen, which we say daily, lead us not into temptation, but that we
be not delivered to our own concupiscences? And again a little after,
Therefore God delivers into ignominious passions, that those things may be
done, which are not convenient, but he delivers conveniently, and the same
sins are made both punishments of sins past, and deserts of punishments to
come. As he delivered Achab into the lie of the false Prophets, as he
delivered Roboam into false counsel. These things he does by marveilous and
unspeakable means who knows how to work his judgments, not only in men's
bodies, but in their very hearts. Who so will see more hereof, and as much
indeed as need be spoken, I refer him to those excellent Lectures, the 18,
and 19, upon Jonas, delivered by him that worthyly now is one of the My Lo^d of
London, who truly makes the garment of holiness honorable, Ecclus. 50.11.
worthyest of our Clergy. Our conclusion may be this. As the Romans in the
Conspiracy which was made against Caesar, if there were in it any thing worthy
of renown, that they referred Plutarch. in Cas.
wholly unto Brutus, but all the cruel and violent acts those they imputed unto
Cassius: so Temptation so far forth as it is good for us (and good it is
sometimes, Bonu^ mihi, Ps. 118.71. vulg. Ps. 119.71.
says David, quia humiliasti me: It is good for me that I have been
afflicted) the Lord himself works it: as there is any evil in it, Cassius
the Devil, and his Accomplices, I come to the seventh and last Petition, though
there be that make it but an Appendix unto this, BUT DELIVER US FROM EVIL.

He that seeks, Qui vult liberari a malo, testatur quia in malo est. Aug.
Hom. 42.
says S. Austen, to be delivered from evil, is a witness against himself
that he is in evil. I, and against our Roman Catholics too, that think that
men may be so holy, as that they may merit even for others. But this is not
that I aim at now. Now at this time I am to tell you of the many evils that
surround us, while here we are in this world. In this world, In hac Terra
tentatio est, in hac terra periculose navigatur, in hac terra per rimas
fragilitatum subintrat aliquid quod debeat se^tinari. Aug. Tom. 10. Tract. in
Orat. Dominic.
says S. Austen, there is tentation, there is in this world a dangerous
navigation, somewhat there is while we are in this world, that always enters
into us by the leakes of our infirmities, which is still to be pumped out. I,
but their are but generalities. will you have the^ specified in particular? S.
Cyprian does it, no man better. If Avarice, Si Avaritia prostrata est, exurgit
Libido: si Libido co^pressa est, succedit Ambitio: si Ambitio contempta est,
Ira exasperat, instat Superbia, Violentia invitat, Invidia co^cordiam rumpit,
amicitiam Zelus abscindit. Cyp. de Mortal. p. 207,
says he, be overthrown, Lust presently starteth up: if Lust be suppressed,
Ambition follows after: if Ambition be disgraced, Wrath inflames us, Pride
puffes us up, Drunkenness allures us, Envy breaks concord, and Hatred cuts
off Friendship. And thus, Beloved, have we to do with such an adversary, as
was Hannibal to the Romans, Live. Dec. 3. l 7.
Seu vicit ferociter instat victis: seu victus est, instaurat cum victoribus
certamen. Whether he vanquish, or is vanquished, nothing but blows to be
looked for. Ad debellandos Dei servos, Cyp. de zelo and livore p. 190.
says S. Cypria^, inquietus semper, and se^per infestus: over busy and never
but making of roads to va^quish and overcome the servants of Go^. And He it is
as the most think, that is the Evil here meant. It is in the Original (...),
and (...) (...) potius de Persona quam de re dicitur. Beza Annot in Mat. 6.13.
says Beza, is spoken of the Person rather then of the thing, howbeit it is al
one whether of both we take it to be. The Devil indeed is the enemy that lies
in wait for our life: but Sin is the weapon wherewith he continually wars
against us. And thus much of the Prayer it self, come we now to the
Conclusion, which partly alleges the Reason of making al these Requests to
God, and that in these words, For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the
glory for ever: partly assures us that al shall be as we have formerly
requested and that in the word, Amen. FOR THINE IS THE KINGDOM, AND THE POWER,
AND THE GLORY, FOR EVER, AMEN.

I love Erasmus well, and am persuaded he well deserves as much of all that love
true learning, but in my opinion he was much to blame to Erasm. Annot. in Mat.
6. p. 33. Edu. Bas. 1527
say of this Conclusion that they that added this unto the Lords Prayer did
Divinae Precationi suas nugas assuere, to so heave^ly a prayer did sow patches
of their own. I am sorry that in this point his great Learning, and great
Judgment were yet no better matches. And yet can I hardly be of Mr Cartwrights
mind on the other side, that says these words were M. Cartwrights Answer to
the Preface of the Rhemish Testament. p. 154.
borrowed from the Prophet David out of the Book of Chronicles: for if he
suppose they came from thence, for that the Prophet 1. Chr. 29.11
there says, Thine O Lord is greatness, and power, and glory and victory and
praise: for all that is in heaven, and in earth, is thine: thine is the
kingdom O Lord, and thou excellest as head over all, as being an abridgement
of them: he may cause another to think that our Saviors words, Mat. 12 30. He
that is not with me is against me, and he that gathers not with me
scatters: And Mark, 9.40. Whosoever is not against us is on our part, came
from a like speech of Caesar's set down by Cic. Orat. pro and Ligario.
Tully, Nos, omnes adversarios putare, nisi qui nobiscum essent: te, omnes, qui
contra te non essent, tuos. But howsoever that be, the words are not to be
neglected, cheefely for that though they want in some Greek Copies, and those
of the most ancient stamp, nor are expounded by diverse of the Fathers that
expound of purpose this Prayer unto us, yet other Greek Copies have them, and
the Vid. D. Fulke against the Preface of the Rhemish Test.. 38.
Hebrew, and Syriack too; and therefore now concerning the words.

Quomodo coepit a laudibus Dei [Oratio] Amb. Tom. 4 de Sacram. l. 6. c. 5. p
384.
says S. Ambrose, sic debet in Dei laud desinere. As in our Prayers we must
begin with the Praises of God, so must we end with them too. The Prayers here
given are threefold. Funiculus triplex, Eccles. 4.12
says the Preacher, difficile rumpitur. A threefold cord is not easily broken.
Here is Kingdom, and Power, and Glory, all given unto God, and twisted here
together to great good purpose. First concerning Kingdom here, it is his royal
Government over all the world, and every particular therein, the hairs of our
heads not excepted, nor so much as a pile of grass. Concerning his Power, it
is that Omnipotency of his, whereby he does execute and administer whatsoever
belongs to that Government. Concerning his Glory, it is that exceeding Praise
which redoundeth unto him, by reason of such administration. And all three are
for ever, his Kingdom for ever, his Power for ever, and for ever his Glory
too. Aeternitas, Aug. Tom. 8. in Psalm. 145. p. 1162.
says S. Austen, in verbo, quatuor syllabis constat, in se sine fine est.
Eternity in respect of the word consists only of four syllables ( Ever,
consists but of two) but in it self it is endless. A countefeit whereof we
have in this life, Vicissitudine temporum sibi succedentium, dum Luna minuitur
and rursus impletur, dum sol omni anno locum suu^ repetit, dum Ver, vel Aestas.
vel Autumnus, vel Hyems, sic transit, vt redeat, aeternitatis quaedam imitatio
est. Aug. in Ps. 9. p. 39.
says the same S. Austen in another place, When as the Moon waineth and
waxes again, when the Sun every year recovereth his wonted place, when
Spring, or Summer, or Autum, or Winter, so pass and go on, that at length
they return again. What? and is his the Kingdom then, and that for ever? Of
whom then should we ask these things that belong unto that Kingdom, but only
of God? Besides, that as S. Chrysostom Chrysostom in Mat. Hom. 20.
notes, it shows that our Adversary the Devil is subject to the same God,
howsoever God so permitting him he seem to resist him all he can. Is his the
Power, and that for ever too? Then was it a foolish decree of king Dan. 6.7.
Darius, that none should ask a Petition for thirty days but only of him,
seeing it is God that is powerful only to grant all requests made unto him,
and consequently these. Lastly, is his the Glory, and that for ever? It is for
his Glory that we crave these things, 1. Sam. 4.21.
which Glory (should but one miscarry, one only of all his Elect that thus
pray) how should it be darkened and obscured, how might we say thereof as
Phineas his wife Proinde a quo petam vt accipiam? apud que^ quaeram vt
inveniam? ad que^ pulsabo vt aperiatur mihi? quis habet petenti dare, nisi
cuius omnia Scuius su^ etiam ipse qui peto. Tertul. advers. Marcion. l. 4. p.
217. (...)
said when she was in travail, Ichadob, where is the Glory? The glory is not
departed so much from Israel, as it is in truth from the God of Israel. I will
end this point with that of Tertullian, who after a short co^victio^ of Marcion
the Heretic out of every of the former Petitions, has at the length this
passage, and as it is likely by reason of this Conclusion. Therefore of whom
shall I ask that I may receive? At whom shall I seek, that I may find? At
whom shall I knock, that it may be opened unto me? who has to give to him
that asks, but he whos^ are all things, whose also I am that ask.

The word Amen, is an Ob sui emphasin singularem retinetur haec vocula Amen in
omniu^ Christianorum linguis invariata: praebens simul luculentum argumentum
primaevitati Hebraicae. Barth Schaer. I^in. in Ps. David number. 53. Vid. Aug
Epist. 178 and de Doctr. Christ. l 2. c. 10. and 11. and in Evang. Joan. Tract.
41.
Hebrew word, and derived from a word that signifies Truth, and has this
signification here: that the premises are certain and out of doubt, and
whereunto we do assent, and believe that so they shall be, trusting to the
truth of the promises of God. S. Jerome Hier. in Mat. c. 6 p 21.
calls it Signaculum Orationis Dominicae, The seal of the Lords Prayer, and so
it may be called of al our other Prayers besides. This indeed is the Peoples
word, howsoever now adays it be poasted over to the Clarke, who because when
the People are absent, is to supply that defect, is permitted by them even when
they are present too to say it, and that alone. That it was and is the Peoples
word, witness that of the Apostle S. Paul, 1. Cor. 14.16. as also that whole
Chapter of Deuteronomy. where it is said twelve sundry times, as it is in our new
Translation, And all the People shall say Amen. It was at that time when a many
Curses were Deuteronomy. 27.15.
pronounced by the Levites in the hearing of the People, as Cursed be the man
that shall make any carved or molten image, and V. 16.
cursed be he that curses his Father and his Mother, and V. 17.
cursed be he that remoueth his neighbors mark, and so forth. Now if they
were bound to say Amen to those Curses, and that by the precept of God
himself; how willingly should they now at the end of every Prayer which
contains so many blessings, be always ready to say it, and that in a decent
loud voice. I omit the custom of the Primitive Church in this case related
unto us by so many of the Fathers, Justin Martyr Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr, Tertul. despectaculis c. 25.
Tertullian, Aug. epist. 106
S. Austen, and Hieron. Praef. ad. Lib. 2. Comment. in epist. ad Gal.
S. Jerome, for that I hasten to an end.

Thus, Beloved, have you had in brief my short meditations of this Prayer. You
have heard of the Exordium of it: You have heard of the Prayer it self: You
have heard of the Conclusion. Elegant is that (...), that Recapitulation, and
summary Honor in Patre, fides, testimonium in Nomine, oblatio obsequii in
Voluntate, commemoratio spei in Regno, petitio vitae in Pane, exomologesis
debitorum in Deprecatione, sollicitudo tentationu^ in Postulatione turelae,
Tertull. de Orat p. 659.
brief, which Tertullian has upon this Prayer, but speaking of it in general,
Compendijs paucorum verborum says he, quot attinguntur edicta Prophetarum,
Evangeliorum, Apostolorum, Sermones Domini, Parabolae, Exempla, Praecepta, quot
simul expunguntur officia Dei. Within the small compass of a few words how
many passages are coucht up together of the Prophets, the Evangelists, the
Apostles? How many of our Saviors Sermons, Parables, Examples, and Precepts?
How many Titles and honors of God are there set down? So Cyp. de Orat.
Dominic. p. 239 And again, Qualia sunt Orationis Dominicae sacramenta, quam
multa, quam magna, breviter insermone collecta, sed in virtute spiritualiter
copiosa! vt nihil omnino praetermissum sit, quod non in precibus atque
orationibus nostris coelestis doctrinae compendio comprehendatur. Cyp Ib. p.
232.
S. Cyprian, Praeceptorum suorum fecit Jesus grande compendium, vt in
disciplina coelesti discentium memoria non laboraret, sed quod esset simplici
fidei necessarium velociter disceret. Our Savior has made a special brief
of all his Precepts, that the memories of such as are brought up in his School
should not be clogd with them, but easily and quickly learn whatsoever was
requisite to the simplicity of their faith. So Aug: de Temp. Ser. 170. p. 692.
S. Austen, Docuit te pauca verba quae quivis idiota potest tenere and dicere.
He has taught thee a few words which the simplest that is may have by roate,
and repeat it again. There are that call this Prayer Durand. Rational. divin.
Offi^. l. 5. c. 5.. 17.
The salt of all of our Prayers, which we make to God above, and indeed not
unfitly. For as Tully gives a precept concerning Rhetoric, that, Tul. de.
Orat. l. 1.
Libandus est ex omni genere vrbanitatis facetiarum quidam lepos, quo tanquam
sale perspergatur omnis oration: we must gather and pick out here and there
pretty and witty sayings, wherewith our speech is to be sprinkled as it were
with salt, to make it the more toothsome: right so in the Congregation are all
our Prayers besprinkled with this Prayer, and therefore is it used in our
Church Service, First in the front of our Prayers, immediately after the
Confession, Secondly, after the Belief, Thirdly, at the end of the Letany. In
the front M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. 35 p. 72.
says Reverend Hooker, as a Guide, in the end of some principal limbs, or
parts of our prayers, as a complement which fully perfecteth whatsoever may be
defective in the rest. And here should I make an end, but that I hold it very
requisite having showed you Quid, what to pray, to put you a little in mind
Quales, after what sort you should come to Gods house to pray. I will effect it
in a few lines.

The Author is Apocryphal, the words notwithstanding may be Canonical, which
Jesus the Son of Syrach has Ecclesiasticus, 18.23. Before thou prayest says
he, prepare thy self, and be not as one that tempts the Lord. I say the
words may be Canonical, for that the self same words in effect are indeed in
Canonical Scripture. Take heed to thy foot Eccles. 4.17
says Ecclesiastes, when thou entrest into the house of God, and be more near
to hear, then to give the sacrifice of fools. Alas Beloved, who is it now a
days that esteems of the Church as of the House of God? What difference do we
make betwixt it and the poorest Cottage that is? where must our Children play
but forsooth in the Church, or that which is all one in effect, the Churchyard.
We may well blush to speak it, but it is in vain to hide it, it is too too
manifest to our faces, those monuments, those Amongst the rest, that concerning
King Alfred with all the Customs of the University very fairly set forth in
glass, and Pentameter verses under every of them, at the West end of S. Mary's
Vid. M. Twine Antiq. Acad. Oxen. Apol. p. 202.
glorious monuments that have stood in our Windows vncrackt, untouched, fair
and seemly to see to, for hundreds of years together, have even in our memory
been pelted down by little Brats in their plays and pastimes, to the
eie-soare, nay heart-soare of as many as truly love Gods House. Alas how were
Children brought up heretofore in ages gone and past, had they no pastimes? No
recreations? Yes doubtless, and places to recreate themselves in, though the
Church or Churchyard by all likelihood were none. But what will you say means
this? What is this unto my purpose? I was to tell you now, after what sort you
should come to Gods house to pray. True it is I was so, and so I do, and
therefore made instance in this Example to put you in mind how reverently you
should esteem of the Church. It was Jacobs saying when it seems he had
somewhat forgot himself, Genesis 28.16.
Surely the Lord is in this place, and I was not aware. And presently after,
How fearful is this place! This is no other but the house of God, and this is
the gate of heaven. Beloved, we have as great cause to say as much of Gods
Churches: and shall we We come (a many of us) about the middle of Service, if
not at the later end, we there set with our hats on al a great part of it: but
Service is no sooner ended but we clap on our hats indeed, which should it, be
in a Chamber of Presence, might make us to forfeit our heads. Offer it now unto
thy Prince: will he be content with thee, or accept thy Person, says the Lord
of hosts. Malac. 1.9.
go into them, or go out, or behave our selves therein, as rudely and vncivilly
as if they were but our Fathers Barnes? I dare avow that that Popish extremity
of Superstition, is far better then this Extremity of Profaneness on our
side, and though a reverend regard of place add nothing to Prayer it self,
yet is it a help no doubt to them that pray, in regard whereof Churches
especially have been deputed to that use. Hence those many religious
Solemnities in erecting them at first, in making of them public, and
delivering them as it were into Gods own possession, all to intimate unto us
in solemn manner the holy and religious uses, it is intended they should be
put unto. When Vid Eusebius. de Vita Constant. l. 4 c. 41. 43, 44. 45.
Constantine the Emperor had finished an House for the service of God at
Jerusalem, the dedication he judged a matter not unworthy, about the solemn
performance whereof, the greatest part of the Bishops in Christendom should
meet together. The like is recorded by Athanas. Apolog. ad Constantium.
Athanasius concerning a Bishop of Alexandria in a work of the like devout
magnificence. It will not be long or ever our own eyes (Godwilling) shall
behold the like in a Wadham College Chapel which was shortly after
consecrated, namely June 29. being S. Peter's day.
neighbor College, the you^gest Daughter of our Mother the University. God
forbid it should be said of that Dedication, as was said of those Luds
seculares, that were but once in an age: Pol. Virg. de Inventor. reru^ l. 8. c.
1.
Venite ad Ludos, quos nemo mortalium vidit, neque visurus est; come see those
Plays that never man saw, nor ever shall see again: so, come and see that
Dedication of a Chapel that never here was seen in our memory before, nor
ever shall be seen again. God I say forbid! but if this were the custom of
Antiquity to consecrate these places, and we by practice approve the same, let
us accordingly acknowledge their worth, and not behave our selves therein as if
they were in truth no better then base Houels. There is an other sort of
comers to Church not so bad I confess as these, and yet in this respect
Oportet vt quando psallitur ab omnibus psallatur: and cu^ oratur, vt ab omnibus
oretur: cumque Lectio legitur, facto silentio, aeque au diatur a cunctis
Isidor. de Eccl. Offic. c. 10.
bad enough, who in time of Divine Service will be there with their Books
indeed, but not with Church-bookes. Some Pamphlet or other they bring, to pass
away the time, and there are they toti in illis, as deeply in, as deep may
be. The Apostles speech in an other case affords us words unto the^ in this: 1.
Cor. 11.22
Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? despise ye the Church of God? So,
have they not Studies to apply those Books in? Despise they the Church of God?
Is this to have as Clemens Alexandrinus Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7.
speaks, vnam vocem, and vnam mentem, one voice, one mind? Or as S. Bas. in
epist. ad Cleric. Neocaesar
Basil, vnum os, and vnu^ cor, one mouth, one heart? Or as the Prophet Ier.
32.39.
Jeremy, Cor vnum, and viam vnam, one heart, and one way? But I will end with
that of Quando slamus ad orationem. Fratres dilectissimi, vigilare and
incumbere ad preces toto cord debe mus. Cogitatio omnis secularis and carnales
abscedat, nec quicquam tunc animus quam id solum cogitet quod precatur. Ideo
and Sacerdos ante orationem praefatione praemissa, parat fratrum mentes
dicendo, Sursum corda, vt dum respondet plebs, Habemus ad Dominum, admoneatur
nihil aliud se, quam Dominum cogitare debere. Claudatur contra Adversarium
pectus, and soli Deo pateat, nec ad se hostem Dei, tempore orationis adire
patiatur: obrepit enim frequenter and penetrat, and subtiliter fallens prece^
nostras a Deo avocat, vt aliud habeamus in cord, aliud in voce, cum intention
syncera Dominum debeat non vocis sonus, sed animus and sensus orare. Quae autem
segnitia est alienari and capi ineptis cogitationibus and prophanis, cum
Dominum deprecaris, quasi sit aliud, quod magis debeas cogitare quam quod cum
Deo loquaris: Quomodo te au diri a Deo postulas, cum te ipse non audias Vis
esse Deum memorem tui cum rogas, cum tu ipse memor tui non sis* Cyp de Orat.
Dominic. p. 241.
S. Cyprian: When we prepare says he, our selves to prayer, we must with all
our hearts apply our selves to the prayers then made in the Church. Every
secular and carnal thought ought then to be abandoned, and our mind fixed only
on that which is said by the Minister. Hence it is the Minister says, Lift up
your hearts, and the People answer again, We lift them up unto the Lord. So
that let our Heart be close shut against our Adversary, but wide open unto God,
nor let it suffer in time of Prayer the Enemy of God to come but near it. S.
Cyprian goes on, elegantly, and excellently, but I made promise but of a
little, wherefore but thus much of Prayer, the second of those points that the
Church is to practice. The third is FASTING, and of Fasting I had thought to
have entreated the next Thursday, but for then we are to celebrate elsewhere
the Nativity of him who came neither eating nor drinking, Mat. 11.18. that is
in the way of Righteousness, Mat. 21.32. whose Disciples fasted often, Mat. 9.19.
It is I am persuaded Gods good providence whose wisdom so comely Wisd. 8.1.
orders all things, that first (as it were) we should see the Party who is so
memorable for Fasting, thereby to season us the better for the better receipt of
that Doctrine. Of Fasting then if God be willing the Thursday after that.

In the mean time HE so bless us and the seed that has bin sown, etc.

FASTING. Lecture 11. July, 1. 1613.

I Am come at this time to speak of FASTING, an Argument seldom spoken of,
and as seldom practiced by a many. For how many are there in this Kingdom to
whom throughout the whole year no meal comes amiss, Fasting Days, and
Flesh Days are all one with the^, unless perhaps (which is often too) the
Fasting Days prove more fleshly, then the Flesh Days themselves. It is true
we show our selves that we are no Papists herein (and yet by your leave some
Papists will lick their fingers with us now and then) but in avoiding that
extremity, do we not run into another? what if they forsaking Flesh on these
days, glut themselves with Fish more powerful then any Flesh to the
furtherance of that which is not at this time to be spoken; shall we therefore
on the same days glut our selves as much with Flesh and all for we will be
opposite? what if a many of them, it may be, abstain even from Fish too, and
yet have their diverse and sundry sweet Insuper etiam famam abstine^tiae in
delitiis quaerimus. Hieron Tom. 2. ad Nepot.
Confections more powerful then Flesh or Fish, and of warmer operations; shall
we therefore gurmandize, and say we fast as they do? What if they put merit in
Fasting, and so prove erroneous; shall we therefore be profane and wholly
irreligious? Nay, God forbid. We have not so learned Christ: you know whose
saying it was, -- Non ego Avarum Hor. Ser. l. 1.

Cum veto te fieri, vappam iubeo, ac Nebulonem.
There is a difference, says our English The difference between staring and
stark blind; The wise man at all times to follow can find. Heywoods Dialogue of
Proverbs. Part, 2. p. H. 4. b.
Proverb, between staring, and stark blind. What? we not to fast at all? nay
to be Enemies to Fasting? we not to practice that, the praises whereof are so
frequent, and the effect said to be so potent, throughout the whole Scriptures,
and Fathers of the Church? Go we to the manner of the Church at all times, and
has it not always been that at the first institution, or undertaking of any
great and weighty affairs, there has been, as a worthy B. Andrews of the
Combat between Christ and Satan. Ser. 2. p. 14 b.
Prelate observes, extraordinary Fasting? So Moses, says he, when he entered
into his calling, at the receaving of the Law, Deuteronomy. 9.9.
fasted forty days. So Elias at the restoring of the same Law, did the 1.
Kin. 19.18.
like. So likewise when they went about the reedifying of the Temple: And there
at the River by Ahana, Ezra. 8.21.
says Ezra, I proclaimed a fast, that we might humble our selves before our
God, and seek of him a right way for us, and for our children, and for all our
substance. So likewise in the new Testament, as at the Separation of Paul and
Barnabas, Act. 13.3. at the ordaining of Elders, Act. 14.23. and in a dangerous
voyage by Sea, Act. 27.9. Come we to the Fathers, and when as they endeavor to
speak of Fasting, they can hardly satisfy themselves with the several
appellations they give unto it. Fasting, Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Ser. de Itiun.
says S. Chrysostom, is an imitating, or following the very Angels in heaven
so far forth as we are able, a contempt of things present, a School of
Prayer, a sustenance of the Soul, a Bridle to the Body. What is Fasting, Ambr.
Tom. 4. de Helia and Ieiun. c. 3. p. 289.
says S. Ambrose, but an heavenly substance and representation. Fasting is a
refreshing of the Soul, the food of the mind. Fasting is the life of Angels.
Fasting is the Death of offenses, the razing out of sin, the remedy of
Salvation, the root of Grace, it is the Foundation of Chastity. And again a
little after, Fasting, Ib. c. 8. p. 292.
says he, is the Schoolmaster of Continency, the doctrine of Virginity, the
humility of the mind, a chastizing of the Flesh, a form of Sobriety, a rule
of virtue, a purifying of the Soul, the bounty of commiseration, the doctrine
of Lenity, the allurement of Charity, the glory of old men, the preserver of
young. Of Fasting then at this time: and the Text I have chosen to this purpose
is a saying of our Saviors in the second Chapter of S. Marks Gospel, the 19.
and 20. verses. The words are these: And Jesus said unto them, can the Children
of the Marriage chamber fast, whiles the Bridegroom is with them? As long as
they have the Bridegroom with them, they cannot fast. But the days will come
when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast in
those days.

In which words we are to consider. First the occasion of them, then the words
themselves.

The occasion of these words is intimated unto us in the verse going before.
The Disciples of John, says Saint Mark, and the Pharisees did fast, and came
and said unto him, why do the Disciples of John, and of the Pharisees fast,
and thy Disciples fast not? S. Mathewe Mat. 9.14.
says the Disciples of John, did come and ask the question. S. Luke Luke 5 30.
says it was the question of the So it may seem by co^paring the 30 and 33
verses together: but S. Austen was of opinion that S. Luke did mean the Guests
in that place. Aug. de Consens. Evang. l. 2. c. 27.
Scribes and Pharisees. So that belike all came, the Disciples of John were
here joined with Scribes and Pharisees. Not Saul among the 1. Sam. 10.11
Prophets, but the Prophets among Saules; Brutus with Cassius, and Cassius with
Brutus, and both against Caesar. John the Baptist was a man of whom our Savior
gave that great testimony; Mat. 11.11.
Verily I say unto you, among them which are begotten of women, arose there not
a greater then John Baptist. The Scribes and Pharisees were the greatest
enemies that ever our Savior had, and yet see how these old Foxes could wind
themselves into that Brood, and cause them here to join with them in way of
opposition to our Savior. They could not be ignorant how their Master John
condemned the Pharisees, no man more, how he Mat. 3.7.
inveighed against them most bitterly, tearming them Generation of Vipers, as
being unworthy the name of Men, and yet forsooth who but they here with Scribes
and Pharisees. A lesson to teach us with whom we use to consort our selves, for
it is not for nothing that Solomon Prove. 22.24.
counsels us to make no friendship with an angry man, nor to go with the
furious man, and the reason he gives is this, Least thou Novi ego hoc saeculum
moribus quibus sit. Malus bonum malum esse vult vt sit sui similis Plaus.
Trinum. Act. 2. Sc. Quo illic.
learn, says he, his ways, and receive destruction to thy soul. That God
was merciful to the Souls of these Disciples of John I doubt not, but see how
they learnt the ways of these angry, and furious men. First they learn to
find fault with him of whom their Master himself had Ioh. 1.29.
said, Ecce Agnus Dei; Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of
the world, that Lamb of God, that Son of the Father that takes away the
sins of the world, and was to have mercy even on them: they are now offended at
him, they are offended with his Followers, they make themselves inmates with
those who were Traitors to his Person, Nolumus hunc regnare super nos. We will
not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19.14.

Iuv. Satyr. 1.
Omne in praecipiti vitium stetit. They rest not here, they run headlong yet
farther, they fall to boasting of themselves. We the Disciples of John, and of
the Pharisees fast, nay as it is in Mat. 9.14.
S. Matthews Gospel, we and the Pharisees fast often. It was an excellent saying
of Aug ep. 56. p. 170.
S. Austen, Vitia catera in peccatis, superbia vero etiam in recte factis
timenda est, ne illa quae laudabiliter facta sunt, ipsius laudis cupiditate
amittantur. All other vices are to be taken heed of in the sins that we
commit, but we are to beware of Pride eve^ in the good things that we do, least
we should loose the benefit of those things that are laudably done by a desire
to be praised for them. And might not our Savior now have said as Caesar did
to Brutus that stabd him with others, Suet. Tranq. in Iulio c. 82.
(...)? What and Brutus too? What? John's Disciples so brutish? Might he not
have said as the Prophet Hosea did, Hos. 4.15.
Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah sin? Might he not have
said as once he did, Mat. 6.17.
When thou fastest anoint thy head and wash thy face, that thou seem not unto
men to fast, much less boast of it so untimely? But let us see what our
Savior said. And Jesus said unto them; Can the children of the marriage
chamber fast, whiles the Bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the
Bridegroom with them they cannot fast. But the days will come when the
Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast in those days.
He puts the^ in mind of a certain speech which they had heard of their Master
before. For when they had come unto their Master long before this and said unto
him, Rabbi he that was with thee beyond Jordan to who^ thou barest witness,
behold he baptizeth and all men come to him: his answer unto them was, Ioh
3.27.
A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven. Ye your
selves are my witnesses, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent
before him. He that has the Bride is the Bridegroom. So that he who a little
before saw Nathaniel under the figtree before that Philip called him, Ioh.
1.48. saw no doubt all this, and heard all this communication between John and
his Disciples. To this then it is likely he alludeth here in this place, hence
it is he here says, Can the Children of the marriage chamber fast whiles the
Bridegroom is with them? as long as they have the Bridegroom with them they
cannot fast. But the days will come when the Bridegroom shall be taken from
them, and then shall they fast in those days.

Which words contain in them a double answer to the former question. First an
answer by way of interrogation with an affirmative annexed, and that in these
words, Can the Children of the marriage chamber fast whiles the Bridegroom is
with them? As long as they have the Bridegroom with them they cannot fast.
Secondly, an other answer by way of affirmation only, how indeed they should
fast afterward: But the days will come when the Bridegroom shall be taken
from them, and then shall they fast in those days. So that our Savior here in
this place stops not (as elsewhere) two gaps with one bush, but one gappe with
two bushes, to make the sense somewhat stronger, according unto that, a good
measure, pressed down, shaken together and running over, Luke 6.38. It is in
Vid. Aug. de Consens. Evang. l. 2. c. 27.
S. Lukes Gospel, Can ye make the children of the wedding chamber to fast,
Luke 5.34. and Mat. 9.15, Can the children of the marriage chamber mourn, so
that the Simile here used is borrowed primarily from the solemnity of marriage.
As if our Savior had thus said: Eccles, 3.1.
To all things there is an appointed time, and a time to every purpose under
the heaven. V. 4.
A time to weep, and a time to laugh, a time to mourn, and a time to dance.
A time to embrace, and a time to be far from embracing. A time of war, and
a time of peace. Now the time that is most suitable to the time of laughing and
of dancing, to the time of embracing, and of peace, what is it under heaven,
if it be not marriage time, when after so much love and liking of both Parties,
the Bridegroom, and the Bride, so many Institutum est vt iam pactae sponsae
non tradantur statim, ne vileus habeat Maritus datam, quam non suspiraverit
sponsus dilatam Aug. Confess. l. 8 c. 3. Vbique maius gaudium, molestia mayor
praecedit. Ib.
sighs on either side for wanting each other, so many stays and lets and
prolongings of the time, both at length enjoy each other, to the great
reioicing of their friends, who strive to show that joy of theirs some in one
kind, some in an other. But what will you say is this to the question here
proposed? Much every manner of way. Our Savior Christ Jesus here was this
Bridegroom. He had newly married (as it were) his Church unto him. It was the
cause of his coming from heaven to solemnize this marriage. They were as you
heard before S. John the Baptists own words: Ioh. 3.28.
He that has the Bride is the Bridegroom: but the friend of the Bridegroom
which stands and hears him, reioiceth greatly because of the Bridegroomes
voice. This my joy therefore is fulfilled, Now as our Savior was the
Bridegroom, so his Apostles were the marriage Guests, for so by an Calv. in
hunc locum.
Hebrew phrase, The children of the marriage chamber here signify. They the^
enjoying his corporal presence what should they but rejoice, I, and rejoice
greatly because of the Bridegroomes voice, as John the Baptist spoke. And thus
at this time did the Apostles, as our Savior fared, so fared they, and how
then could Feasting and Fasting agree together. So that Cannot here in this
place, As long as they have the Bridegroom with them they cannot fast, is
taken for that as Greg. Naz Orat. 36. p. 583. Edit. Par. 1609.
Nazianzene notes, which is not convenient not agreeable unto reason, nor is
not fitting so to do. And thus much of the first Answer.

The second answer (which I told you was by way of affirmation only) was that
there was indeed a time to come when these his Disciples should fast. When
there should be mourning, and weeping, and great lamentation, like as Mat. 2.18.
Rachel wept for her children, and would not be comforted because they were
not. For the time was afterward to come, and that within a few years, when
this their Bridegroom should be taken from them, and then indeed were they to
make many an hungry meal God wot. He was to be taken as a Thief with swords
and with staves, Mat. 26.55. He was to be taken from Prison and judgment, Esaias
53.8. He was to be taken out of life, even as a sheep is brought to the
slaughter, Esaias, 53.7. he was to be taken from the Cross, and put into a new
Tomb, Mat. 27.60. he was (as they thought) to be taken from thence too, They
have taken away the Lord out of the Sepulcher, and we know not where they have
laid him, Ioh. 20.2. Lastly, he was to be taken up on high, for a clowd took
him out of their sight, Act. 1.9. The Bridegroom then so many ways to be
taken away from them, imagine, Beloved, in what a taking these his Disciples
might be, and how prone they should be to fast, that were to surfeit afterward
of so many several sorrows. You have seen the occasion of these words, as
also the words themselves. It remains that out of the same I now observe unto
you such points as may be gathered thereupon, and those are three. First a
Necessity of Fasting, and that in these words, And then shall they fast.
Secondly, who they are upon whom this necessity is here laid, and that in these
words, The children of the marriage chamber: Thirdly, the time when, and that in
these, The days will come when the Bridegroom shall be taken from from them,
and then shall they fast in those days. Of every of these in their order, and
first of the Necessity of Fasting. And then shall they fast.

Before we come to show the Necessity of Fasting it will will not be amiss to
consider first what Fasting is, Fasting Chemnit. Ex am. Conc. Trid. Part. 4 p.
90. Col. 2.
says a good Writer, est castingatio corporis, and humiliatio animi per
abstinentiam cibi and abdicationem deliciarum seu delectationum, quibus corpori
and sensibus alias been solet fieri. Fasting is a chastisement of the Body, and
a humiliation of the mind through abstinence of meat and abandoning of
pleasures whereof the Body at other times is made partaker. Or thus, Ieiunium
est abstinentia cibi, and abdicatio delectationum corporis ad tempus talis, qua
and corpus castigetur, and animus humilietur; an abstinence from meat and such
a forsaking for a time of all our pleasures, as that the Body is thereby
chastned, and our minds and souls humbled. For the better conceauing whereof
we are to know that whereas every Man consists of two parts, the Body and
the Soul, and this Body, and this Soul are too too many times like Simeon and
Levi, Genesis 49.5.
Brethren in evil, going about to overthrowe themselves, and to work their
own bane: and whereas all this harm proceeds cheefely from the Prius
seminatur homo, postea concipitur in vtero, and ibi caro formatur, deinde pos^
dies 47. creatur anima and corpori infu^ditur Aug. ad Fratres in Eremo. Ser. 25
p. 943.
elder of these twain, the Body, which has this advantage of the Soul, that
as it self shall be affected, so shall the Souls operations be: hence it is,
that to bring them both into a ghostly kind of temper, and to make them hold a
true pace, we bereave the Body of that usual food which formerly we gave unto
it. Famous was the saying of Hilarion to this purpose, who living solitarily in
the Wilderness, and feeling those sparkles arising that use to set the Soul a
fire: what says he unto his Flesh, and dare thou begin to kick? Hieron de
vita Hilarion.
Ego Aselle faciam vt non calcitres. Ass as thou art I will hamper thee well
enough. Nec te hordeo alam, sed paleis. Fame te conficiam and siti: gravi
onerabo pondere, per aestus indagabo and frigora, vt cibum potius quam
lasciviam cogites. I shall not hereafter feed thee with prove^der, but only
with cahffe. I will make thee even pine away with hunger and thirst. I will
drive thee through heat and cold, so that thou shall have little lust to think
on any thing, but of meat. But as there is in this case to be an abstinence of
meat, so there is to be besides an abandoning of all such pleasures as we are
at other times to partake of. And therefore the Prophet Joel in an
extraordinary case of Fasting, such as a Public Fast is whereof you shall
hear anon, Blow the Trumpet, Joel. 2.15.
says he, in Syon, sanctify the congregation: gather the Elders: assemble the
children, and those that suck the breasts: let the Bridegroom go forth of
his chamber, and the Bride out of her Bridechamber. Behold, Beloved, even the
Bridegroom, who was by Moses law privileged no less then for a tweluemonth,
that he should not go a Deuteronomy. 24.5.
warfare, neither be charged with any business, but he should be free at home,
and rejoice with his wife, and privileged by our Savior here in this place;
yet had he no privilege in a case extraordinary, and no marvel, for nor
Children, nor Babes that sucked the breasts were it seems exempted either. So
the Apostle to the Corinthians speaking to married couples, 1. Cor. 7.5.
Defraud not one another, says he, except it be with consent for a time, that
you may give your selves to fasting, and prayer. What, and is this wild fire of
our Flesh the only cause of Fasting then? No not so neither. Much harm, M
Hooker. Eccles Pol. l 5.. 72 p. 205.
says Reverend Hooker, has grown to the Church of God, through a false
imagination that Fasting stands men in no steed for any spiritual respect,
but only to take down the franknesse of nature, and to tame the wildness of
the flesh. Whereupon the world being bold to surfeit, does now blush to fast,
supposing that men when they fast do rather bewray a disease, then exercise a
virtue. I much wonder, says he, what they who are thus persuaded, do think,
what conceit they have concerning the Fasts of the Patriarchs, the Prophets,
the Apostles, our Lord Jesus Christ himself. Some other causes there were in
these then, and may be in us likewise, which may move us to fast. There are
that allege other causes, why we also ought to fast, as first that we may be
the better disposed to Prayer and Meditation: Secondly, that it should be a
testimony of our humiliation before God, when upon extraordinary causes we
acknowledge our own guiltines. And indeed when we call to mind our many
weaknesses in praying, whose conscience will not check him, and control him
for the same? Let me instance every in the Fathers, who acknowledging as much
of themselves, are sufficient witnesses unto us of the general deluge of this
Sin. While we intend, Dum ad aures tuas voce cerdis intendimus, nescio vnde
irruentibus nugatoriis cognitationibus res tanta praeciditur. Aug. Conf. l. 10.
c. 35. p. 130.
says S. Austen, to pray unto thee with the voice of our heart, we are cut off
I know not how, with a many idle cogitations that rush in upon us. So S.
Jerome. I come, Ad orationem assisto; non orarem, si no^ crederem, sed si vere
crederem, illud cor quo Deus videtur mundarem, manibus tandere^ pectus, genas
lachrymis rigarem, corpore inborrescere^, ere pallerem, iaterem ad Domini mei
pedes, eosque fletu perfu^derem, crine ter gerem, haererem certe trunco crucis,
nec prius amitterem, qua^ misericordiam impetrarem. Nunc vero crebetrime in
oratione mea, aut per porticus deambulo, aut de faenore computo, aut abductus
turpi cogitatione, etiam quae dictu erubescenda sunt, gero. Hieron. Advers.
Luciferian. Dial.
says he, to pray, I should not pray at al unless I did believe, but if I did
believe indeed, then should I cleanse that heart wherewith God is seen, I
should knock my breast with my hands, water my cheeks with tears, I should
feel an horror over all my body, I should be as pale as ashes, I should kneel
at the feet of my Lord, and wash them with my tears, and wipe them with the
hairs of my head, doubtless I should hold fast the beam of his Cross, and
in no wise part from it until I had obtained mercy. Howbeit now most often
times in the Prayers that I make, or my wits are a woolgathering, or my mind
is on my halfe-peny, or quite transported with foul and filthy thoughts, I do
those things that are shameful to be spoken. Thus S. Ierom, if not of
himself, yet in the person of Orthodoxus, a true believer, to show that even
true Believers may thus be distracted in their prayers. So S. Bernard: Have
mercy upon me O God, Miserere mei Deus quoniam ihi plus pecco, vbi peccata mea
emendare debeo. In Monasterio namque saepe dum oro, non attendo quod dico. Oro
quidem ore, sed mente feris vagante, orationis fructu privor. Corpore sum
interius, sed cord exterius: and ideo perdo quod dico. Idcirco magnam iniuriam
Deo facio cum illum precor vt meam precem exaudiatquam ego qui fundo no^ audio.
Deprecor illum vt mihi in. e^dat. ego vero nec mihi nec illi intendo sed quod
deterius est, immunda and invtiton in cord versando, faetorem horribilem eius
aspectibus ingero. Bern. Meditat. Alias lib. de anima. c. 8. p. 297. col 4.
says he, for where I ought to amend my faults, there am I faulty more and
more. For often times in my Monastery while I am a praying, I attend not to
what I say. I pray indeed with my mouth, but my mind wandering abroad, I am
deprived of the fruit of prayer. My body is within indeed but my heart is
without, and therefore I loose the words that I speak. And again a little
after, Wherefore I do great injury to God, when I pray him to hear my prayer,
whereunto my self do not harken while I power it forth unto him. I make
request unto him to attend unto me, and I for my part neither attend my self
nor him, nay which is far worse, by casting to and fro unclean and
unprofitable thoughts in my heart, I present unto his presence an intolerable
stinch. Now if the Belweathers of the flock of Christ thus spoke of
themselves, at least wise of such Believers as they themselves were, what may
we say in like case, whose consciences will put us in mind of more then this
comes to. We are never better affected unto God, M Hookers learned discourse of
Iustif. Works, etc. p. 10.
says Reverend Hooker, then when we pray; yet when we pray, how are our
affections many times Nos experimento continue cernimus and setimus hanc
euagationis necessitatem. Gerson de Orat. and eius valere. Oper. Part. 3. fol.
4^1 Col. 3. And he tells a little before of the Country fellow that was to say
his Pater noster for an Ass and quite lost him by reason of the Saddle.
distracted! How little reverence do we show unto the grande majesty of God,
unto whom we speak! How little remorse of our own miseries! How little taste
of the sweet influence of his tender mercies do we feel! Are we not, says he,
as unwilling many times to begin, and as glad to make an end; as if in saying
Call upon me, he had set us a very burden some task? All this and more then
this our Flesh continually works, that traitorous Flesh of ours, and
therefore you see how necessary it is we should subdue it as by other means,
so especially by Fasting.

You see what Fasting is. You have scene withal the Necessity of it. For if our
Flesh be thus wild and not to be tamed but by Fasting: if Fasting better
disposes us to Prayer and Meditation: if Fasting be a special testimony of
humbling our selves before God, what remains but as the Apostle S. Paul said
of Preaching, 1. Cor. 9.16.
Necessity is laid upon me, and woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel, so
we say of Fasting in time of the Gospel; Necessity is laid upon us and woe is
unto us if we fast not. Woe unto our Bodies for they are as so many Serpents
proffering forbidden fruit unto our Souls: woe unto our Souls for they are as
so many Eues tempted, and tempting others. Woe to us Bodies and Souls, which
shall not be cast out of Eden only, where shall be set Genesis 3.24.
Cherubims and the blade of a Sword shaken to keep the way of the tree of life,
but both shall be cast out into utter darkness where is Mat. 8.12.
weeping and gnashing of teeth. I come to the second point: who they are that
are to fast, and that in these words; The children of the marriage chamber. And
Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the marriage chamber fast, whiles the
Bridegroom is with them?

You heard before who they were that were meant by these Children here. And it
is true the Apostles indeed were primarily meant, they were the Parties here
oppugned, and they were the Parties here in this place defended by our Savior.
Howbeit as somethings were spoken to, and of the Apostles in particular,
wherein no body else was to bear a part: some things wherein their Successors
only and the Clergy should have a share: some things wherein all Christians
should share as well as they: so this among other things appertained to al
Christians especially al such as to whom or Age, or weakness gave no exemption.
For as for such our Adversaries themselves will not deny but they are to be
exempted indeed. And therefore Bellarmine has some certain Classes, ranckes
and orders of me^ of this kind. In the first he Bell de bon. Oper. in partic.
l 2. c. 10.
places Oldmen and Children, sick folks, and women with child, All such as
in the opinion of Physicians cannot fast without danger of bodily health, and
all such poor folks as go from door to door. In the second Preachers, and
Lecturers, and Confessors, and such as attend on sick folks, and any other
who cannot possibly fast and satisfy withal the duty they owe unto the Church.
In the third all such as having a laborious kind of trade have their spirits
exhausted by it, he makes instaunce in Masons, Smithes, Carpenters and the
like. And indeed reason good, for if Jacob said well to Esau, Genesis 33.13.
My Lord I^c^b knows that the children are tender, and the Ewes, and kine
with young under my hand; and if they should overdriue them one day, all the
flock would die; and therefore would he drive softly according to the pace of
the Cattle, and as the Children should be able to endure: how much more should
the Church have care and compassion in this spiritual driving of hers, least
whose Souls she seeks to save, she should cause their Bodies to be
destroyed. But where was this care or compassion when time was in this Mother
Church of Rome, if so be she be a Mother that has no (...) Quorsum superbum
Matris illa vendicet Nomen sibi, quae Matre dignu nil agit, Sophocl. Trachin
Mother-hood in her at al or toward women with Child, or toward them that
kept them: did they not Vid Acts and Mon. concerning Frebarns wife, p. 1184.
and concerning two young girls Lucy Wily and Agnes Wily, who kept their Mother
in child bed: p 1048.
handle them most barbarously, and profanely use that nourishment which was to
be food unto them? I wonder what these Fellows would have done with that
piece of powdered Porke which Spiridion, cum iam instaret Quadragesima, even in
the beginning of Lent did Sozom. Hist. l. 1. c. 11. p. 436
set before his Guest willing him to eat thereof, and began unto him himself.
But I hasten to the Time, for that the Time it self hastens. The days will
come when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them and then shall they fast in
those days.

How the Bridegroom was taken from them and by how many manner of ways, I have
told you eve^ now, and so is he consequently taken from us too, till he come at
length for good and all Whom the heaven Act. 3.21.
says S. Peter, must contain until the time that all things be restored: and
Aug Ep. 57. p. 176.
S. Austen to this purpose, Noli itaque dubitare ibi nunc esse hominem Christu^
Iesum, vnde venturus est, nec aliunde quam inde ve^turus est ad vivos
mortuosque iudicandos. Doubt thou not therefore that Christ Jesus as he is man
is there (in heaven) from whence he shall come, and from no place but thence to
judge both quick and dead. But he may be said to be absent from us two manner
of ways besides. First from any of us in particular when he lays any cross
or calamity upon us, and therefore the Prophet Ps. 22.1.
David, My God, my God (look upon me) why haste thou forsaken me: and art so
far from my health, and from the words of my complaint? Secondly, from us all
in general when upon a whole City or upon a Nation he sends some general
calamities, and therefore the Prophet David Ps. 74.1.
again, O God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long, why is thy wrath so
hot against the sheep of thy pasture? According to these two circumstances
Fastings were commonly in holy Scriptures, and now in time of the Gospel ought
our Fasts also to be. So that Fastings in holy Scripture were either of men's
own free and voluntary accord as their particular devotion did move them
thereunto, or else they were publicly enioined in their Synagogues, and
required at the hands of all. Concerning private Fasts in holy Scriptures there
was an ancient practice among the Jews of fasting voluntarily and in private,
when as there was no day set, but the Party that fasted chose any time
according to season and opportunity. And it was concerning those that our
Savior gave those precepts, Mat. 6.16. Where he taught them also the manner of
Fasting, and proposed unto the^ a reward. Now private Fasts P. Martyr loc.
Cont. Class. 3. Loc. 10. 8.
says Peter Martyr are then to be undertaken when some proper and peculiar
calamity afflicts us at home, or if no such betide us, then must we so do
for others. Thus did David the Prophet in general, Psalm. 35.12. and
particularly for Abner, 2. Sam. 3.35. When they were sick, says he, I put on
sackcloath, and humbled my soul with fasting: and again concerning Abner, So
do God to me, says he, and more also, if I taste bread, or ought else til the
Sun be down. Concerning their public Fasts, required at the hands of all,
they were either Ordinary or Extraordinary. Ordinary Fasts, such as were either
yearly, or monthly, or weekly, observed by them. Extraordinary, or upon
occasion of some imminent danger, or some public calamity that had overtaken
them already, or upon the undertaking of some great and weighty affairs.
Imminent danger as that of Niniveh (though the Ninivites were not Israelites)
Ion. 3.7. Public calamity, as that of the Israelites against the Beniamites,
Judge. 20.26. Undertaking of weighty affairs, as Reedifying of the Temple, Esd.
8.21.

Inimitation of all this we have also our Fasts too, Ordidinary, and
Extraordinary. Our Ordinary Fasts are such as are to be observed either yearly,
or weekly. The yearly Fast is Lent, and Ember days. Ember days so called as
if you should say Temper-daies, of Quatuor Temporu^ (according to the Vid.
Bristew^ Motives M^t: 32,
Dutch, the root of our English) and are to be fasted four several times a
year. The weekly Fast is to be observed on Wednesdaies, and Frydaies, and
Saterdaies. Concerning Frydaies, and Saterdaies, how first they were kept by
the Church but yearly, and that immediately before Easter, how afterward they
came to be weekly: bow the Churches that observed not Saturday, had Wednesday
instead thereof, it would ask a long time to tell you, and therefore I refer
you to M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l 51 72. p. 208.
Reverend Mr Hooker for this point. Concerning Wednesday, it is a day enioined
us by QVEENE ELIZABETH of blessed memory as well as the two other, and therefore
when that frantic Pius, 5.
Pope in his furious Bull against her, among many gross and palpable untruths
had set down this for one that she had abolished Ciborum delectu^, al choice
of meats: out worthy Jewel thus answered it; B. Jewels view of a seditious
Bull p. 12. Opera Angl. Edit. 1611.
What one fish day is changed through the whole year? What Lenten, Ember,
Saturday, Friday, or other usual Fasting day? Our Law Eliz. Anno 5. c 5.
says, it shall not be lawful to any person or persons within this Realm to
eat any flesh upon any days now usually observed as fish days. Nay besides
those days which our Forefathers kept, we have appointed that Wednesday in
every week throughout the year, be kept fish day, and that no manner of
person shall eat any flesh on the same day, whereby we have made nigh fifty
fish days more, then have been observed heretofore by the laws and customs
of this Realm. What? and does this please them? No nor this neither. Stapleton
Stapl. Promp. Morale in Dom. 1. Quadrages. p. 370.
calls it, Novum ieiunium, Politicu^, minime Philosophicum, and minus
religiosum, a new kind of Fast, a Politic fast, such a Fast as is not so much
as Philosophical, and no ways religious, or Ecclesiastical. Weston he Westen
de tripl. hom. offic. l. 2 c. 7 p, 92.
tells us that Iciunij quartae feriae, concerning. Wednesday fast, post Ignatium
mentionem fecit antiquissimus Ecclesiastes Clemens Alexandrinus: that two of
the most ancient, Ignatius and Clemens Alexandrinus, do mention it both. Thus
will they have it sometimes to be new, sometimes to be old, sometimes Politic,
sometimes Ecclesiastical. It were a skillful Cook that knew their diet. But
thus much of ordinary Fasts.

The Fasts that are Extraordinary, are either upon occasion (as I said) of
some imminent danger, or some public calamity that has already overtaken us,
or upon the undertaking of some great and weighty affairs. And the difference
between the Ordinary, and the Extraordinary Fasts is this, that in the
Ordinary Fasts we need but abate only the quantity and kind of diet (and
therefore the Law does rather Vid. D. Abboss. Answer. to D. Bish. Epistle to
the King p. 65.
call them Fish days then Fasting days) but in the Extraordinary, we ought to
deprive our selves wholly of al food during the time that our Fasts continue.
And of these Extraordinary Fasts should much be spoken, especially how they
should not be My Lord of London on Jonas Lect 35. p. 473.
practiced but by warrant from the Magistrate, and how the peevish
overhastinesse of some have by preventing the Magistrates decree, done in
truth more harm then good: only this I will now say, that by how much these
gener^ll Fasts are the seldomer practiced of us, by so much should we keep the
Ordinary ones, and specially our private Fasts much more often. For never to
seek after God, M Hooker Eccles. Pol. l 5. 72. p. 205.
says Reverend Hooker, saving only when either the crib, or the whip does
constrain, were brutish servilitie: and a great derogation to the worth of
that which is most predominant in man, if sometime it had not a kind of
voluntary access to God, and of conference as it were with God, all inferior
considerations laid aside. Which kind of fasting from all meat and drink, or
what may be instead thereof, or in our particular fasts, or extraordinary is
not so to be taken neither, as if the Lord, as Non quod Deus vniversitatis
creator and Dominus, intestinorum nostiorum rugitu, and inanitate ventris,
pulmonisque delectetus ardore, sed quod aliter pudicitia tuta esse non possit.
Hieron Tom. 1 ad Eustoch. de custodia Virgin p. 137.
speaks S. Jerome, were delighted with the croaking of our bellies, and
emptiness thereof, and parching heat of our lungs: but that we join with this
abstinence, an abstinence from vices too, or else the other abstinence is
nothing worth. A peccatis nostris, Aug. de Temp Ser. 182. p. 695
says S. Austen, principaliter ieiunemus, ne ieiunia Forte, Nostra.
vestra sicut Iudaerum ieiunia a Deo respuantur. Quale est enim vt a cibis quos
Dominus creavit, nescio quis impostor abstineat, and peccatorum sagina
pinguescat. Let us principally fast from our Sins, least our Fasts as the
Jews fasts should be rejected of the Lord. For what a kind of Fast is that,
that some Impostor should abstain from meats that God has created, and should
fat himself with sin. And how the Fasts of the Jews were rejected of the
Lord, the Prophet Esaias will tell us from the Lords own mouth, who when the
People said unto him, wherefore have we fasted and thou see it not? we have
punished our selves, and thou regardest it not, Esaias. 58.3.
Behold, says the Lord, in the day of your fast, you will seek your will, and
require all your debts. V. 4.
Behold, you fast to strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness: you shall not fast as you do to day, to make your voice to be
heard above. V. 5.
Is it such a fast that I have chosen, that a man should afflict his Soul for
a day, and to bow down his head as a Bul-rush, and to ly down in sackcloath
and ashes? Will thou call this a fasting, or an acceptable day to the Lord? V.
6.
Is not this the fasting that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness,
to take off the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye
break every yoke. V. 7.
Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that
wander, unto thine house? when thou see the naked that thou cover him, and
hide not thy self from thine own flesh? The Prophet Esaias goes on, but I must
Vid Chrysostom. Ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 71, cui titulus, Nihil prodeste ^eiunium si
reliqua desint merita. Tem. 5. p. 446.
content my self with this, for that I have yet far to go.

You have seen, Beloved, concerning Fasting, First, the necessity of it:
Secondly, the Parties who they are that are to fast: Thirdly, the time, and
withal the manner of Fasting how it is, namely for a certain time to abstain
from all meat and drink, or what may be instead thereof, as also from vices
too, and besides to be doing good. Now the Popish kind of Fasting (whereof they
so much boast, and contemn us ten times more then ever the Luke 18.11.
Pharisee did the Publican for not observing of the same) how little
correspondence it has with true Fasting indeed, is evident by the premises.
For may that be called a Fast, when they fast from the flesh of Birds and
Beasts, and feed on the flesh of Fish? I speak no otherwise then does the
Apostle Saint Paul, All flesh, 1. Cor. 15.39
says he, is not the same flesh, but there is one flesh of Men, another flesh
of Beasts, another of Fishes, and another of Birds. I speak no otherwise then
Moses does, who speaking of Fish, calls it Flesh too, for when the Lord had
promised Flesh unto the People, Six hundred thousand footmen are there of the
People, Number. 11.22
says Moses, among whom I am: and thou say that I will give them flesh that
they may eat a month long. Shall the Sheep and the Beeues be slain for them
to find them? either shall all the Fish of the Sea be gathered together for
them to suffice them? I speak no otherwise the^ the Lord himself does, who
having spoken of Fish that have nor Finnes, nor scales: They, Levit. 11.11
faith the Lord, shall be an abomination unto you, ye shall not eat of their
flesh, but shall abhor their carkesse. Now as our Ioh. 10 35.
Savior reasoned in another case, If he called them Gods, unto whom the word
of God was given, and the Scripture cannot be broken, say ye of him whom the
Father has sanctified and sent into the world, thou blasphemest because I said
I am the Son of God? So if the Apostle S. Paul, if Moses, if the Lord
himself call Fish by the very name of Flesh, and the Scripture cannot be
broken, say they of him who eats Fish, that he abstaineth from eating Flesh?
or that he eats no Flesh at all, who eats nothing but Fish? That which the
Spirit of God in the holy Scriptures has thus joined (as it were) together,
will they presume to put asunder, especially in such a case as concerns (as
they say) no less then Life and Death, Salvation and Damnation? But be it they
were distinguished, and it were meritorious to feed on Fish, and damnable to
feed on Flesh, yet may that be called a Fast when they feed not on Fish only
(more The fast of Fish is much more delicate and exquisite the^ that of flesh.
Montaign. Essaies l. 1. c. 49.
powerful a many times then Flesh is to the works of the Flesh) but they pour
down their throats withal so much of that Blood, which Jacob Gen 49.11.
calls the Blood of the grape? My meaning is when they fast not from Wine.
Vinu^, Ephesians. 5.18.
says the Apostle S. Paul, in quo est luxuria, wine wherein is excess. Nec
mirum, Hieron ad Furiam p. 81.
says S Jerome, hoc figulum sensisse de vasculo quod ipse fabricatus est, cum
etiam Comicus cuius finis est humanos mores nosse atque describere, dixerit,
sine Cerere and Libero friget Venus. Nor is it any marvel that the Potter
should so speak of the vessel which he himself framed, when as the Comical
Poet, whose end it is to know and show the manners of men, said that Venus was
but key-cold without the company of Ceres, and Bacchus, the one the Goddess of
Corn, the other the God of Wine. Wine, says the same Hieron. ad Eustoch. de
custod. Virgin. p. 137.
S. Jerome, that is no better then Venom; Prima arma Daemonum. Incendium
voluptatis. The Devils chief weapon, and inflammation of pleasure? Quid oleum
flammae adijcimus, says he, quid ardenti corpusculo fomenta ignium
ministramus? Why do we by drinking of wine add oil unto the flame, says he,
why do we yield that fuel to our Bodies already burning? And indeed it is a
clear case, how the ancient Fathers in their Fasts abstained from wine too.
Qui nos abstinemus a vino, Aug. de Temp Ser. 64. p. 511.
says S. Austen, quo moderate vti licet, imprimis peccata fugiamus, quae
omnino nunquam licent. Again, Cessent lavacra, Aug. de Temp Ser 65 p. 512.
says he, vina, vel carnes, non quod creaturam Dei iudicemus esse damnandam,
sed qui toto anno nobis viximus, saltem vel paucos dies vivamus and Domino. So
Chrysostom Tom. 5. de Ieiun. Ser. 1. p. 815.
S. Chrysostom, Quae tibi subtracta sunt? Vinum, phlegmatis immundicia,
capitis dolor, respirandi difficultas. So Clem. Romans Co^stit. Apost. l. 5 c. 17.
Clemens Romanus, Cyrillus Hieros. Catech. 4. p. 92. Edit. Paris. 1608.
Cyrillus Hierosolimitanus, Origin in Job. l. 3. p. 431.
Origin, and Basil. de Ieiun. Hom. 1. p. 237. (...).
Basil. But what do I reckon up by peece-meale the many Solecismes of their
Fasts. Consider we the Fasts of the Manichees of old; consider we what was
spoken against them by the Orthodox Christians that then lived: and see if in
the one we have not the true pattern of Popish Fasts, and of Protestants
arguments and reasons against them in the other. Our thrice-worthy M.D. Abbots
against D. B sh. Epistle to the King. p 34.
Professor has thus observed it. The Montanists appointed Horum ^em po^a
obse^vantes and dies and menses and annos Galaticamur plane, si Iudai carum
ceremo niarum, fi legalium solennitatum observantes sumus, illas enim Apostolus
dedocet cempescent veteris Testamenti in Christo sepulti perseverantiam and
novi sistens, Tertul. de Ieiun. p. 650.
certain and standing days for fasting and forbearing of certain meats: so
do the Papists. The Mo^tanists did not take any creature or meat to be Quo
ille non ex institutione, sed ex devotione abstinebat. Tertul. Ib. p. 648.
Abstinentes ab eis quae no^ reiicimus sed differimus. Tertul Ib. p. 651 Sciebat
quosdam castigatores and interdictores victus incusare qui ex fastidio, non qui
ex officio abstinerent. Tertul. Ib.
unclean, but did only by way of devotion as they pretended forbear at
certain times: and the Papists also do the same. The Montanists being urged
with the place of S. Paul to Timothy of them that command to abstain from
meats, answered that that place touched Praedamnans haereticus perpetuam
abstinentiam praecepturos ad destruenda and despicienda ^pera Creatoris-quales
apud Marcionem, apud Tatianum, non apud Paracletum, Tertul. Ibid.
Marcion and Tatianus, and such other who condemned the creatures as evil and
unclean not them who did not reject the creatures, but only forbear the use
of them at some times: the same answer give the Rhem. Annot. in. 1. Tim. 4.3.
Papists. The Montanists took their very fastings to be a service and worship
of God: so do the Bell. de bonis Oper. in partic. l. 2. c. 8.
Papists. The Montanists thought that their fastings did Nos hoc prius
affirmare debemus, quod occulie subrui periclitatur quantum valeat apud Deum
inanitas istat and ante omni^, vnde ratio ipsa prec^sserit ^oc modo promerendi
Deum. Tertul. Ib. p. 645. Delicta quae ieiuniis elimentur. Ib. p. 650.
merit at Gods hands: that it was a satisfaction for sin, an expiation of sin:
that emptiness of belly did much avail with God, and made God to dwell with
man: the same effects do the Papists teach of their superstitious Fasts. Were
there so many correspondences between Martial the Poet, and Maximus? No
doubtless, and yet you know how Martial. Epig. l. 2. Epig. 18.
oftentimes he said, I am sumus ergo pares. There is now no difference between
us. Our worthy Professor goes on. Look what arguments, says he, the Papists
use for their fastings, the very same Tertullia^ used for the Montanists. Look
what cavils and calumniations the Papists use against us of Feasting instead of
Fasting, of Epicurisme, and papering the belly, the same Tertullia^ being a
Montanist used against the doctrine of the Church of Rome that then was,
whereas neither that Church then, nor we now do reject that true fasting which
the Scripture teaches, but only those opinions of Fasting which the Montanists
first devised, and the Papists have received against the Scripture; namely, to
forbear continually by way of religion such and such days from such and such
meats with a mind therein, and by their very forbearance to do a worship to
God, to satisfy for sin, to merit and purchase the forgiveness thereof and
to deserve eternal life. But what do I mention our own Writers that find such
fault with their Fastings? Are we the only men that do it? Are there not even
of themselves that show as well as we, how they swerve therein from all
Antiquity? nay, that find fault with it as well as we? Mark and observe
their words, you shall see what the force of Truth is by our Adversaries
themselves. Quid enim dicerent? quo evaderent, as speaks Aug. de Verb. Apost.
Ser. 22. p. 253.
S. Austen, inclusi retibus veritatis? For what indeed should they else say?
how should they possibly escape entangled as they are in the Nets of Truth.
First Maldonate a Jesuit has of Fasting these words. Quod attinet ad ciborum
delectu^ Maldonat. in Summula qu. 23. Art. 2. p. 341. Edit. Col. 1604.
says he, sempere in Ieiunio obseruatum est vt ab illis cibis abstineretur,
qui maxim finem ieiunij imp^dire poterant. Id autem mutatum est, mutatis
temporibus saepe. Nam verum and perfectum ieiunium, and quasi exemplar omnium
fuit illud, quod ipso nomine declaratur, Nihil comedere, vt latino verbo
significatur. Nam proprie esse ieiunum est nihil prorsus edere. Ad hunc modum
perfectissimos ieiunatores legimus ieiunasse. Concerning the choice of meats in
Fasting it has bin always observed to abstain from those meats, which
chiefly might hinder the end of Fasting. But that with the often change of
times is changed now a days. For a true and perfect Fast, and as it were a
pattern of all other, is that Fast which is signified by the name it self,
that is, to eat nothing at all, as appears by the latin word for properly to
be Fasting is to eat just nothing. He makes instance there in that place in
the fast of Moses, of Elias, of our Savior, of S. Paul, and those other that
fasted with him the space of fourteen days, Act. 27.33. You shall have
coupled with Maldonate an other Jesuit too, Azorius by name, he of Fasting
has these words: Certe, Azor. Instit. Moral. l. 7 c. 10. Certe p. 563. Col. 1.
Edit. Colon. 1602.
says he, negari non potest consueta veterum Christianorum ieiunia, carnium
esu and vini potis caruisse: at vero in more positum est, vt in diebus
ieiuniorum piscibus, herbis, leguminibus, and fructibus, and vino similiter
vtamur. Certainly it cannot be denied but that the usual Fasts of the ancient
Christians was to want the Use of eating of Flesh, and drinking of Wine;
howbeit now in these days it is with us an usual custom both with Fish, and
Herbs, and Pulse, and Fruit, to have the use of wine too. What? of Wine would
some body say? wine wherein is excess as you heard before from the Apostle S.
Paul? wine, as bad as venom? the Devils chief weapon, and inflammation to
voluptuousnes, as you heard from S. Ierom? wine as you hard from S. Chrysosto^e
the fylth and matter of phlegm, the cause of headache, and of difficulty of
fetching brath? Oh yes! Omnes communi consensu testantur, id quod solum in
potum, no^ in cibum sumitur, cuiusmodi vinum etiam est, ieiunium minime
relaxare. They are al agreede upon it, that that which is taken for drink
only, not for meat, such as wine is, does not prejudice a man's fast. Good
news for Drinkers, who care but little for Meat, so they be not bard the
Spicket. But let us hear him answer one objection more. Azor. vbi sup. Colum.
2.
At vinum inquies, etiam ipsum nutrit, you will say that wine nourishes. Likely
enough: and what will Azorius say to that? Verum est says he, nutrire quidem
aliquantulum: sed non sumitur precipue ad nutriendum, sed ad sitim leuandam,
and ideo non in cibum, sed in potum adhibetur. Indeed says Azorius, true it
is, it nourishes a little, but wine is not chiefly taken in regard of that,
but to quench the thirst, and therefore is it used not for meat, but for
drink. A worshipful wise conclusion, Vinum no^ in cibum sed in potum
adhibetur, wine is not used for meat, but for drink. But if wine may be
drunk for all it nourish a little, and there is no breaking of the Fast: why
should a little Flesh be so capital an offense that it may be, will not
nourish much more? Or why did not all agree upon this in those primitive times
of the Church when Wine so strictly was forbidden? But I hasten to my third
witness, him whom when you shall once hear to speak, you would suppose he
were some Protestant, should I not name the man unto you. But Ferus is the man,
he reckons up no less then eight Ferus Exord, in Ionam Proph inter Opusc,
v^ria p. 178. Edit. Lugd. 1567.
abuses which are in their Fastings. First, says he, for that Fasting is too
much straightened by some amongst us, and is made exceeding difficult and
burdensome to the Poor. Secondly, for that by Fasting the Consciences are more
bound the^ they ought to be. Thirdly, for that hereupon they make mortal sin
too too easy. Fourthly, for that the Rich being dispensed withal, the Poor
are left in the briars. Fifthly, in that a many of them (I might have englished
it, the most, Ferus his word is, Plerique) but in that a many of them put their
hope of Salvation in Fasting, prefer it before the Commandments of God, and
account it a greater Sin not to fast, then to commit Denique non ieiunare maius
peccatum aestimant, quam adulterari, aut inebriari. Mark this for that one S.
R. in his Answer to Bells challe^ge insinuates, that no Catholic does so, and
skores it up for Bells fourscore and sixteenth untruth, and in his Epistle to
the Reader he terms it a Slander. Thus we sla^der them with matters of
Truth.
adultery, or to be drunken. Sixthly, for that we judge too too rashly of those
that fast not. Seave^thly, for that we ^bstaine only from Flesh, and seek a
greater pleasure both in Fish and also in Wine. Eighthly, that we fast from
Flesh, but not from the vices of the Flesh. Nay we in our Fasts, says he, Imo
in ieiunio nostro non minus adulteramur, fernicamur, inebriamur, foenecamu^
proximos opp^iraimus, b^sphemamus etc. quam aliis temporibus. The same S. R. in
his Answer to Bell. p 410. in the Margent produces M. Fox his Testimony, that
PROTESTANTS ARE SO ILL THAT THEY CANNOT BE WOR^E IF THEY WOULD, which is likely
enough to be true of some that go under that name, who with these Roman
Catholics are like another day to be bound up in bundles and to be thrown
into hell fire Mat. 13.30. So say our Rhemists. Look whether your me^ be more
virtuous, your women more chaste, your children more obedient, your servants
more trusty, your maids more modest, your friends more faithful, your Laity
more just in dealing, your Clergy more devout in praying: whether there be
more religion, fear of God, faith, and conscience in all states now, then of
old, when there was not to much reading, chatting, and iangling of Gods word,
but much more sincere dealing, doing and keeping the same. The Rhemists in the
Preface to their Testament. 18. Whereunto M. Cartwright in effect thus answers
The trial of the cause by the outward Fruits receaueth many exceptions. First
as four sorts of grounds sown by the seed of the Gospel, there is but one
fruitful; wherefore to prejudice the Fruit that the good ground yields, by
the barrennes and unprofitableness of the other three sorts, is not equal nor
upright judgment. Secondly the fault may be in the negligence of some of the
Governors of the Church. Now, to lay that fault upon the Religion, which
cleaves unto the Governors, is likewise an unequal and vn^veniudgement.
Thirdly, though Sin reigned in Popery, yet it appeared not, the candle of
knowledge clean put out, The bright shining of the Gospel makes it now appear
more ugly. M. Cartwright in his Answer to the Preface of the Rhemish Test. p.
53, 54, 55, etc.
commit no less adultery, fornication, drunkenness, usury, we oppress our
neighbors no less, and blaspheme God as much as we do at other times.

Virg. Aeneid. l 2.
Apparet domus intus and atria longa patescunt. Me thinks they should now
boast no more of their Fasting: much less twit us in the teeth for our
intemperancy. Doubtless then thus to be, we cannot be worse if we would, and
were we the worst that ever were, we should hardly deserve this report. But
thus much of Fasting the third of those four points the Church is to practice,
and consequently our selves: the fourth is ALMS, and of Alms Godwilling at my
next return, my next, and last.

In the mean time God so bless us, and the seed that has been sown, etc.

ALMS. Lecture 12. November. 18 1613.

MOses, great Moses, so famous throughout the world both with Jew and Gentile,
Grecian and Barbarian, when after much ado he was persuaded by the mouth of
God himself to go unto Pharaoh, that he might bring the Israelites out of
Egypt, he took his wife and his sons Exodus 4.20.
says the Scripture, and put the^ on an Ass, and returned toward the land of
Egypt. Howbeit as he was by the way in the Inn V. 24.
says the self same Scripture again, occurrit ei Dominus, and volebat
occidere eum: the Lord met him, and would have killed him. A strange kind of
accident, and if I mistake not, one of the strangest in Gods book. The Lord
was the Author of that his journey: he persuaded him unto it diverse and sundry
ways; it was a message he sent him about of singular great importance, and yet
for all this: As he was by the way in the Inn says the Scripture, the Lord
met him, and would have killed him. Neque tamen causa exprimitur Calv. in hunt
lecum.
says Calvin, cur Deum sibi-tam infestum senserit and yet the cause is not set
down there why God was so angry with him, only by the Text we may conjecture
for he had not circumcised his Son. O the judgments and justice of God
against Sin even in his Servants, if Luke 23.31.
they do these things to a green tree, what shall be done to the dry? The time
is come 1. Pet. 4.17.
says S. Peter, that judgment must begin at the house of God. If it first
begin at us, what shall the end be of them which obey not the Gospel of God?
And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly, and the sinner
appear?

It fared with me the last Term, Dearly Beloved in our Savior, as it did
with Moses at that time, who having such a message concerning you, as Moses had
concerning the Israelites, about a spiritual delivery of you from an Enemy
spiritual, was in like danger as Moses was of loss of temporal life. The
difference betwixt us was, that the danger of the loss of his life was at the
very beginning of his message, mine at the latter end. I had but one only
Lecture to make you, when as my many and manifold sins caused that great God
above to read himself a Lecture unto me concerning another world. And as the
Apostle Philip. 2.27.
speaks of Epaphroditus, No doubt he was sick very near unto death, but God
had mercy on him: so may I say concerning my self, sick I was, and by all
likelihood as Corpus pene iacebat exanime, and anhelos artus mors vicina
quatiebat. Hieron. ad Marcellam de aegrotat. Blesillae.
near unto Death, but God that had mercy on him, had mercy on me too: he Psalm.
103.4
saved my life from destruction, and crowned me with mercy, and loving
kindness. For my own part my resolution was Bern. Ser. in Festo S. Martin p.
64 Col. 3,
that of S. Martin, sick (it should seem) of the same disease that I was,
Domine si adhuc Populo tuo sum necessarius, non recuso laborem, and I added
thereunto, sin autem, non sepulchrum. O Lord, if so be yet thou will employ me
still among thy People, I am content to take the pains, if not, to betake my
self to my sepulcher, or my grave. But it seems the Lord had yet somewhat else
to employ me in, wherefore so graciously he having now lengthened the thread of
my life, what remains but I now arise and minister unto him, as did S. Peter's
Mother, Mat. 8.15. To come then to the matter in hand.

It is a good definition, or description rather which Athanasius does give us
of a Christian man. A Christian, (...). Athanas Tom. 2. Tract. de Desinit. p
59. Edit. Conunclin. 1601
says Athanasius, is a true and a reasonable house of Christ, builded up by
good works, as also by a right belief. Now S. Austen speaking of Faith, he
tells us how it is our Firstborne, and goes before Works. All our good works,
Primogenita cordis nostri Fides est, nemo enim been operatur, nisi Fides
praecesserit. Omnia opera tua bona filii tui sunt spirituales sed inter istos
tibi primogenita Fides est. Aug. Tom. 9. de Convenient. December Praecep and dece^
Plagar. c. 10. p. 785. and Tom. 10. de Temp. Ser. 95 p. 566.
says he, are our spiritual Children, but the eldest of them is Faith. This
it was that caused me to make that Division at the first (as I have told you
Lect. 9. p. 213
heretofore) of what it was the Church was first of all to believe, and
secondly what to practice. Concerning her Belief you have heard already, as
also concerning three points of those four she is to practice. The fourth is
Alms, and of Alms God willing at this time, and the Text I have chosen to
this purpose is a passage of the Apostle S. Paul's, in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, the second Chapter, the tenth verse. The words are these, For we
are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
ordained that we should walk in them. I omit the coherence here in this verse
with that which went before, nor do I purpose now to tell you who these
Ephesians were. I come to the words themselves, out of which I observe unto
you four especial and principal points: First a Creation of us: Secondly, in
whom: Thirdly, unto what: Fourthly, our correspondence thereunto. First of the
first and foremost, namely our Creation.

Our Creation here spoken of, is not that Creation whereof I have told you
Lect. 2. p. 33. and Lect. 5. p. 91
heretofore concerning the making of our Bodies, and enduing them with a lively
Soul, as you have heard heretofore out of Job, and out of David, no, that is
common to us with the very wicked and reprobate, but this Creation here spoken
of, is proper and peculiar to the Godly. And would you know what that is? Our
Regeneration, our new Birth, that which our Savior spoke of to Nicodemus, Ioh.
3.3.
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be borne again, he cannot see
the kingdom of God. We see it by experience the Tree that bears Crabs, and
wild and sour fruit, by graffing and inoculating, bears that which is sweet
and pleasant. So is it with mankind. In our first birth we are but like crab
stocks, but being new graffed by regeneration, we are clean altered and
changed. Nor in this case does it avail us that we are, begotten by faithful
Parents, forasmuch as they beget us, as Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 14. p. 222.
speaks S. Austen, Non vnde regenerati, sed vnde generati sunt, as they
themselves were borne at first, not as they were afterward born anew. Even as
of winnowed corn, says he, when it is sown in the ground, an husk grows up
with the corn, and yet without the husk was the corn first sown.

I but in whom is this Creation? In our Savior Christ Jesus. A party not
unknown unto you. I have told you Lect. 7. p. 134
heretofore of these two Names of his, Christ and Jesus. He is the Party we are
grafted into, we are now Flesh of his Flesh and Bone of his Bones. No union in
the world more near then between our Savior and our selves. They are his
own words. Ioh. 15.5.
I am the vine ye are the branches, which unless himself had spoken, not any
one of us but might have said, -- Virg. Aen. l. 1.
Haud equidem tali me dignor honor. They are his Apostles words also, 2. Cor.
11.2.
I have prepared you for one husband, to present you as a pure Virgin to
Christ: it is in effect the same which the Servants of David said to Abigail,
M. Hooker Eccl Pol. l. 5.. 56. p. 124.
David sent us to thee to take thee to his wife; whereunto we may answer again
with Abigayls humble complement, 1. Sam 25.41
Behold, let thy handmaide be a Servant to wash the feet of the Servants of my
Lord. Christ therefore both as God and as man, is that true Adam whose Eues we
are, that true vine whereof our selves both spiritually and corporally are
truest Branches. The mixture of his bodily substance with ours y says Reverend
Hooker, is a thing which the ancient Fathers Nostra quippe and ipsius con
iunctio nec miscet personas, nec unit substantias, sed affectus consociat and
confaederat volu^tates. Cyp. de caena Dom.
disclaim. Yet the mixture of his Flesh with ours they Iren. advers. haer. l.
4. c. 34.
speak of, to signify what our very Bodies through mystical conjunction
receive from that vital efficacy which we know to be in his, and from bodyly
mixtures they borrow diverse Cyril. in Ioh. l. 10. c. 13.
Similitudes rather to declare the truth, then the manner of coherence between
his sacred, and the sanctified Bodies of Saints.

The third point to be observed, is to what we are thus created, and it is said
to Good Works. Whereunto in the fourth place our correspondence ought to be,
by being prompt and ready therein; intimated here in this place by the Metaphor
of Walking. For as nothing is more usual in health then walking is, nothing
more willingly we do perform if we be in health indeed, nothing that
confirms more our health unto us then moderate walking does, right so Good
Works they are the very way we are every of us to walk in, and then is it a
very pregnant proof that we have our spiritual health indeed, when as we are
prompt to perform Good Works upon any occasion offered to us.

Concerning Good Works they are many and manifold, even all our good Actions
whatsoever, as well those inward Actions of the Mind and Will, as those
outward of the Body. And therefore our Savior Christ, he calls Belief a
work, Ioh. 6.29. and the law of God, which is called The law of Works, Romans
3.27. commands not only outward Works, but inward Operations too. These
Geod Works the Apostle calls the fruit of the Spirit, and he Gal, 5.22.
reckons the^ up to be these, Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperancie, among all which Goodness is that,
which I chiefly aim at at this time. Now Goodness when it is referred to God,
as it does oftentimes signify his gracious kindness whereby he is beneficial
to his creatures; so being referred unto men, it signifies that quality
whereby men after Gods example become beneficial and helpefull to others. Thus
Ruth. 2.20.
Naomi of Booz in Ruth, Blessed says she, be he of the Lord: for he cease
not to do good to the living, and to the dead. To the living and to the dead,
that is Quomodo mortuos? Cum adhuc superstites essent Elimelech et Filij eius
beneficia in eos contulit, postea vero ipsis mortuis, propter little memoriam
viduis ipsorum, quibuscuque in rebus potuit gratificatus est. Hoc est pietate^
vel misericordiam facere erga mortues Lavater in Ruth. c. 2. p 59. b.
says Lavater, to my Husband, and Children when as they were alive, and now
they are dead, to us their widows for their sakes. So the Apostle to the
Galathians, Let us not be weary Gal. 6.9.
says he, of well doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.
While we have therefore time, let us do good unto all men, but specially unto
them which are of the household of faith.

Now as there are many ways of doing good, and therefore Chremes in the
Terent. Heaut Act 1. Sc. 1.
Poet to his neighbor Menedemus, Aut consolando, aut consilio, aut re iuvero:
he would help him or with comfort, or with counsel, or if need were with
his Purse: so is there no one way throughout the Scriptures so often beaten
into our memories, as is the relieving by Alms. Hence so many gentle
invitations to it, as Esaias 58.10. If thou pour out thy soul to the hungry,
and refresh the troubled soul: then shall thy light spring out in the darkness,
and thy darkness shall be as the noone day. And the Lord shall guide thee
continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones, and
thou shall be like a watered garden and like a spring of water, whose waters
shall not fail. And Prove. 19.17. He that has mercy on the poor Deo igitur
faeneratus es, ipsu^ reposce: sed non tibi in praesenti cuncta restituet Veru^
hoc quoque tuo commodo facit. And a little after, Hic quidem red dit ex part,
maximum aute^ tibi in futuro thesaurum reservat. Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 15
lends unto the Lord, and the Lord will recompense him that which he has
given. And Psa. 41.1. Blessed says David, is he that co^sidereth the poor and
needy, the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble. Whereupon S. Ambrose,
Who is it Quis est qui intelligit? qui compatitur ei, qui advertit co^sortem
esse naturae, qui cognoscit quod and divitem and pau perem fecit Dominus, qui
scit quod sanctificet fructus suos, si de his delibet aliquam pauperibus
portionem Ambros. Tom. 4 De Naboth. Israelita. c. 8. p. 280.
says he, that considers the poor? He that has compassion on him, he that
observes him to be of the self same nature with himself, he that remembers,
how the Lord made both the rich man and the poor, he that knows that God
sanctifies the rest of his fruits, if he part with any of it to the poor. A
many more are the places of Scripture that are to this purpose. Howbeit for
all men are not of one mould, but as some are led by fair means, others must
be compeld by threats and menaces; hence are there in the self same Scriptures
as many menaces on the other side. As Esaias 32.5, A niggard shall no more be
called liberal, nor the churl rich. And Prove. 21.13, He that stops his
ear at the crying of the poor, he shall also cry and not be heard. And Psalm.
140.12, Sure I am that the Lord will avenge the poor, and mainetaine the cause
of the helpless. And concerning that menacing in the Proverbes how he that
stops his ears at the poor man's cry, shall cry himself and not be heard:
we may remember the experience of it in Dives and Lazarus. S. Austen speaking
of that Rich man, Desideravit guttam, Aug. Hom. 7. p. 291.
says he, qui non dedit micam: he that would not part with a crumme of bread
to poor Lazarus, craved of Abraham but a drop of water, and by no means could
obtain it. But among all the threatenings in the Scripture, none in my opinion
more powerful to persuade us, then when our Savior declaring to us an
Hypotyposis of the last Judgment, plainly shows that the not giving of
Alms unto the poor makes us, howsoever otherwise faultlesse perhaps, and
without crime, incapable of Gods kingdom. Besides that he flatly shows us how
we play the Niggards with himself to. Mat. 25.41.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, V. 42.
for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat. I thirsted, and ye gave me no
drink. V. 43.
I was a stranger, and ye lodged me not. I was naked, and ye clothed me not,
sick and in prison, and ye visited me not. And when they shall answer
again, V 44.
Lord when saw we thee an hungered, or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or
sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? The reply unto them shall
be such as they shall be never able to answer unto, though from this very
time to that, they did but study this one case, V. 45.
Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not to one of the least of
these, ye did it not to me. This, Beloved, would be well marked, and I know not
whether in all the Scriptures there is such a key again as this for the
opening of our Cofers. Me thinks upon the hearing hereof we should every of us
say, as Saul did when as he was unhorsed by our Savior in his way to Damascus,
Lord, what will thou that I do? Act. 9.6. Nay, we know already what he would
have us do: me thinks upon the hearing hereof we should say with Zacheus
rather, Behold Lord the half of my goods I give to the poor, Luke 19.8.
Nether let it seem strange unto you, that I said unto you eve^ now, that the
not giving Alms to the Poor makes us incapable of Gods kingdom, howsoever
otherwise we may be faultles, and perhaps without crime: it was S. Austens
observation, who upon that of our Saviors, There was a certain rich man, Luke
16.19. Our Savior said r says S, Austen, Aug. Hom. 7. p. 291.
he was a rich man, he said not he was a slaunderer, he said not how he was an
oppressor of the poor, a deceiver, an imbeasler of other men's goods, an
vndoer of the fatherless, a wronger of the widow: quod ergo eius crimen, nisi
iacens ante ianuam vlcerosus, and non adiutus: and what was then his fault, but
for that the poor man lay at his doors, void of help, full of soars. His
observation is the like upon another relation of our Saviors, concerning
another Rich man, whose ground brought forth so plentifully, that store was a
sore unto him, and therefore be thought himself of building and pulling down,
and altering, and changing, Horat. Epist. l. 1. ad Maecen.
Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata rotundis, What, says S. Austen, did he in
all this seek to have that which was another man's? No, Aug Hom. 7. p. 290.
Vid. Hom. 48. p. 375
says he, we read not there of any wrong offered to any man, he removed not
the mere stones, he spoiled not the poor, he circumvented not the simple,
only he bethought himself how and where to lay up his store, and, Audite,
says he, quid audierit qui tenaciter servabat sua: Harken to that which
himself heard, for being such an hold-fast of his own: Luk 12.20.
Oh fool this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee: the^ whose shall
those things be which thou have provided? It is true, it is very true, it was
David's saying long before, Ps. 39.7.
Man walks in a vaine-shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain: he heapeth
up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them. We see the daily experience
of it, and yet Fools as we are, we cannot beware by other men's harms. This
man left so much, this man so much, to his Widow, or to his Heir. Comes me
one calamity, or another, some one or other Cross and sweepes it clean away.
There is more then one Swallow, to this Summer. S. Austen goes on. What? and
did God befoole him then? Non sic dicit Deus, Stulte, quomodo dicit homo: tale
in quenquam Dei verbum iuditium est. God, says S. Austen, does not so befoole
us, as one man befools another, such a word from the mouth of God is no less
then condemnation, for will he give, says he, to Fools the kingdom of
heaven? no the five foolish Virgins can tell you so much, who when they rapped
at the doors and would full feign have entered in, the answer they had was
this, Mat. 25.12.
Verily I say unto you I know you not.

These things, thus Beloved, let us now consider with our selves the causes we
are so much called upon to perform good works in this kind, and distributing
of Alms. The causes are many and manifold, but we may reduce them to three
heads, The glory of God, The profit of our Neighbor, The good of our own
selves.

First, concerning Gods glory, we are to tender that Glory of his, as the apple
of our eyes, nay we are to tender it much more. You may read in the second of
Samuel, what befell king David for neglecting that Glory of his, The Lord, 2.
Sam. 12.13
says Nathan, has put away thy sin, thou shall not die. Howbeit because by
this deed thou have caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheame, the child
that is borne unto thee shall surely die. David full feign would have had the
Childs life, he besought the Lord for him, he fasted, he went in, and lay all
night upon the earth, but the Lord by no means would be entreated. No, Them
that honor me, 1. Sam. 2.30.
says the Lord, I will honor, and they that despise me shall be despised. Now
that Alms is an honor and Glory to God, witness many places in holy Scripture.
First king Solomon. Prove. 14.31
He that oppresses the poor, reproves him that made him: but he honors
him, that has mercy on the poor. Secondly, our Savior who was Mat. 12.42.
greater then Solomon, Let your light, says he, so shine before me^ that they
may see your good works, Mat. 5.16.
and glorify your Father which is in heaven. So the Apostle S. Peter, who
learnt it no doubt of his Master, Have your conversation, 1. Pet. 2.12.
says he, honest among the Gentiles, that they may by your good works which
they shall see glorify God in the day of the visitation. True it is, we live
not now among Gentiles, and the Heathen, no but among them that are as bad
Neighbors, who howsoever they will be never brought to afford us a good word,
except we be as they are, yet are we to take especial heed, that we give them
no just cause of complaint against us.

The second motive to Good Works, is the Profit of our Neighbor, we being
born not for our selves, but each one for each other. The very Heathen
perceived thus much, and therefore Tully from the mouth of the Stoics, Quae in
terris, Tull. Offic. l. 1
says he, gignuntur, ad vsum hominum omnia creari, homines autem hominum causa
esse generatos, vt ipsi inter se alij alijs prodesse possint. All things
whatsoever grow, says he, grow up for the use of men, but men are born for one
another use, to the end and purpose to help each other. Who it is that is our
Neighbor I have told you Lect. 10. page 243.
heretofore. Neighbors we are by our Saviors Luke 10.37.
relation, though we never saw one another before. It is enough if we see them
once, and if we love them not whom we have so seen, you know whose Ioh. 4.20.
conclusion it is, (...), how can he love God, whom he has not seen? Ah but
some will say to bestow a little Alms, what profit is that unto our
Neighbor, especially unto such as go from door to door, if you will needs
have them to be our Neighbors too. You know what Plautus Plaut. Trinummus Act.
2. Sc. Quo illic.
says De Me^dico male meretur qui ei dat quod edat, aut quod bibat. Nam and
illud quod dat perdit, and illi producit vitam ad miseriam. He that gives to a
Beggar any thing at all to eat or drink, the Beggar is but little beholding to
him. For it is but lost what he so bestows, and prolongeth besides the Beggars
misery. I know it very well, and remember withal the saying of Lactant.
Instit. l. 6. c. 11.
Lactantius thereupon, that it is detestanda sententia, a speech to be
detested, as in very deed it is: At enim Poet a fortasse pro persona, says he,
locutus. It may be the Poet there spoke according to the Person that spoke it,
and indeed so he did, and kept therein a right Decorum. It was the saying of
one Philto there, an old Penny-father, who spoke as he thought himself, or as
he was sure what others thought But we have too too many testimonies of
Scripture to out-cou^tenance those words: I will allege only one. Whosoever, 1.
Ioh. 3.17.
says S. John, has this worlds good, and sees his Brother have need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? I
come to the third motive, The good of our selves.

And now me thinks Avarice her self (were she here in her own person) would
arrigere aures, give diligent heed to what in this case should be spoken.
Though I fear not God Luke 18.4.
says the unrighteous Judge nor reverence man, yet because this widow
troubles me, I will do her right, least at the last she come and make me
weary. So Avarice herself me thinks should now say, though I tender not much
the Glory of God, much less the Profit of my Neighbor, yet seeing my own Good
is interessed herein, I will now be beneficial, I will now be liberal of my
Alms. What? and is the giving of Alms the^, so good and gainefull to our
selves? Yes: and better then common gain. S. Austen speaking of common gain,
Vbi lucrum Aug. de Tem^ Ser, 215. p. 763
says he, ibi and damnum, lucrum in arca, damnu^ in conscientia: where there
is gain, there is damage too, gain in the Chest, and damage in the Breast;
but it is not so with this gain. Well then, how gainful is it? Vid. Vrsin.
Catech. Ang. p. 873. Edit. Land 1611.
First by Alms as it were by the effects we make our Calling and Election
sure. It is the Apostle S. Peter's observation. 2. Pet. 1.10. Secondly, our
faith as it makes it self known thereby, and discovers it self to the
world, so is it exercised and made more powerful, that it may the better be
able to resist, whenas the Enemy shall approach us. Thirdly, for they are the
way, wherein we are every of us to walk as is evident by my Text. I, they are
our Lords High way. If once we learn this way (I wisse it is not so much
beaten, as we should purposely avoid it) and betake our selves to bypath,
its ods but we miscarry horse and man. Fourthly they give a testimony of our
resemblance with our Savior.

Virg. Aen. l. 3.
Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat. He was when he lived here on earth
Eyes to the blind, Feet to the lame, and a Father to the Poor, even as Job
also was, Job. 2^.15. Fifthly, they are to be done, that thereby we may escape
both temporal and eternal punishments. They were Mat. 3.10.
S. John the Baptists words and seconded by our Mat. 7.19.
Savior, Every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and
cast into the fire. Sixthly, and lastly they are to be done that we may obtain
at Gods hands Rewards of both sorts to, temporal and eternal. For we deny
not, as our Adversaries would bear the world in hand we do, that works are
necessary to Salvation, we deny indeed the Merit of them, but the Necessity of
the^ in no wise. But of this see more, in Mr D. Raynolds third D. Reyn.
Praelect 3. p 42. 43. 44 45 etc.
Lecture where he brings a world of Witnesses of our side, Calvin, Beza, Bucer,
Hyperius, Zanchius, Vrsinus, Luther, and the Confessions of Helvetia, Bohemia,
French, English, Belgia, Suevia, Saxony, etc: all to prove that Protestants
hold the Necessity of Works unto Salvation.

And thus have you heard of Good Works. You have hard of the multiplicity of
them, you have heard of Alms: you have heard how the Scripture inviteth us
toward the doing of the same, how it menaceth us if we do them not, what
special motives there are for performance of the same. There are now to be
handled certain Questions concerning this matter of Alms, which when I have
unfolded to you, in as brief a manner as I may, I will then commit you to him
whose Workemanshippe you are. The first is about the Merit of them. The second
about the Doers of them. The third to whom to be done. The fourth when and how.
The fifth and last whether Protestants have been so backward in them as our
Adversaries give out. Of every of these in their several order, and first
concerning Merit.

It cannot be denied but the name of Merit is plentiful with the Fathers. No
one word more usual with the^ then Merere, and Meritum, which a many of our
Adversaries when they light on, score up presently for their Merit. Howbeit
Merit in the Some of our Adversaries confess as much, as Vega, Non me fugit
vsurpari apud Patres nomen Meriti, vbi nulla est ratio Meriti neque de Congruo
neque de Condign^. Vega de Iustif. l. 8. c. 8 p. 189.
Fathers, and Merit which our Adversaries mean have as much affinity with one
an other, as Phillip the Apostle had, with Phillip king of Macedo^, or Phillip
king of Spain. They have indeed one name, and so had the Apostle, and both
those Phillips; but come to the nature of Merit, and we shall see the
difference between them both, in one and the self same period. Witness Saint
Austen, who in a certain Sermon of his: Nos vero charissimi Aug. de Temp Ser
138. p. 646
says he, qui nullis praecedentibus meritis de Inferni carcere, and de
tenebris aeternae noctis meruimus liberari. And again in an Aug de Temp Ser.
252. p. 821
other place, Nullis praecedentibus meritis per gratiam Dei meru^mus fieri
templum Dei. Now if Meruimus in both these places be to be understood
popishly, how comes it that he says in both places, and that in one and the
selfsame period, Nullis praecedentibus meritis: Nullis praecedentibus meritis.
Meruimus, and yet, Nullis meritis: and again, Meruimus, and Nullis meritis,
how may that be? How? But by taking Meruimus in both places, as Saint Austen
meant in both, namely for obtaining, or finding the favor to obtain, and so
the Sentence runs most clearly: As for us dear Brethren who without any
Merits going before, have found the favor to be delivered from the Prison of
Hell and eternal darkness, let us endeavor to live, etc: as follows in
that place. I, some of our own friends have used the word Merit in this very
sense. We teach Docemus bona opera divinitus praecepta necessario facienda
esse, and mereri gratuita Dei clementia sua quaedam sive corporalia, sive
spiritualia praemia. Harmonia Conf. p. 147. Edit. Genevae 1612. Vid M Hookers
learned Discourse of Iustif. Works, etc. p. 27
say they of Wittenberg, that good Works commanded of God are necessarily to be
done, and that through the free mercy of God they merit their own either
corporal or spiri^uall rewards. So likewise they of t Auspurge, Obedience
toward the law pleases God, and is accounted a kind of Justice, and meriteth
rewards. Again, Harm Confess. Ib. p. 41.
Paenitentia meruit vt Deus sententiam de delenda Ninive mutaret. Repentance
deserved that God should alter his purpose, touching the destruction of
Niniveh. And again in a third place as it is in the English Harmony of
Confessions, These exercises The Harmony of Confess. in English, Sect. 16, p.
495. Printed by Thomas Thomas 1586.
say they, when as they are referred unto that end, that we may have our bodies
fit for spiritual things, and to do our duties, according to a man's calling,
etc: they are good and godly, and In the latin Edition before mentioned it is
only thus: Sunt in piis bona opera vt testatur Danielis exemplu^ Harm. Conf. p.
47. But the english no doubt followed another Edition that was set forth with
Sections a many years before.
meritorious works, as the example of Daniel does testify. What? was it their
meaning, that works by their own worthynesse did merit at all? No they
utterly disclaim that, but using the word as the Fathers did, and the Fathers
using it as the ancient Romans had done before them, they meant that Rewards
were gotten and obtained by Obedience, and Repentance did obtain, that God did
alter his purpose touching Ninivehs destruction, etc.

This being laid as a Foundation we shall the more easily now go forward as
little prejudiced by the Fathers who use the word Merit in their writings so
much. For as it was a silly reason of Campians, that therefore S. Austen was
against us in the Question of Freewill because forsooth he had written Sinine
placabiles Augustino qui de Libero Arbitrio libros tres. Camp. Rat 5.
Libros tres de libero Arbitrio, three books of Freewill, whereas S. Austen in
all those Books never touches our Tenet, and the Freedom of Will, which S.
Austen touches, we Vid. Lect. 8. p 169. 170. 171.
deny not: so is their reasoning again as silly, who upon the word Merit in the
Fathers nick up still our own Deserts, when as the Fathers were as far from
that conceit, as the East is from the West. Witness their own words. First
Origin: For as much as al me^ Quia omnes conclusi sunt sub peccato, nunc iam non
in meritis, sed in misericordia Dei salus humana consistit. Origin. in ep. ad
Romans l. 9. c. 12 p. 601 Edit Basil. 1571.
says he, are shut up, and closed about with sin, the salvation of Man
stands not in man's merits, but in the mercy of God. So S. Jerome: Si nostra
consideremus merita desperandum est. Hieron. Tom. 5 in Esaias c, 64. l. 17 p 241.
Col. 2.
If we consider our own merits, we must needs despair no remedy. And again
in an other Tunc iusti sumus quando nos peccatores fatemur, and iustitia nostra
non ex proprio merito sed ex Dei consistit misericordia. Hieron. Tom. 2.
advers. Pelag. l. 1. p. 265
place, Then are we righteous, when we acknowledge our selves to be sinners,
and our righteousness consists not upon any our own merits, but the mercy
of God. And Haec hominis summa est Iustitia quicquid potuerit habere virtutis,
no^ suu^ putare esse, sed Domini qui largitus est, Hier. Ib
presently after, This is man's cheifest righteousness to esteem whatsoever
virtue he has to be none of his own, but the Lords who gave it to him. So S.
Basil, Everlasting rest, (...). Basil. in Ps. 114. p. 224 Edit. Bas. 1532.
says he, is reserved for them who have in this life fought a good fight: not
for the merits of those their deeds, but because of the most bountiful favor
of God, wherein they put their trust. And again in another place, This, (...).
Basil. de Humil. p 388. Edit Basil. 1532
says he, is our full and perfect rejoicing in God, when we acknowledge that
we are void of any our own righteousness, and are justified by Faith alone. So
Exaltari merebitur, sed in tua Iustitia. Auferat de medio iustitiam suam and
humilietur, veniet Dei iustitia and exaltabitur. Aug in Ps 88. Conc. 1. p 674.
S. Austen, The People shall merit to be exalted, but it shall be in thy
righteousness. Let them take away their own Righteousness and be humbled, and
then shall come the righteousness of God, and they shall be exalted. And
again in another Da veniam Apostole, propria tua non novi nisi mala, da veniam
Apostole: dicimus qu^a tu docuisti. Audio consitentem, non invenio ingratum,
Prorsus tua a te tibi parata non novimus nisi mala. Cum ergo Deus coronat
meritatua, nihil coronat nisi dona sua. Aug. Tom. 1^. Hom. 14 p. 305.
place, Pardon me O Apostle, I know nothing of thine own, but that which is
bad only. Pardon me O Apostle, bold I am to say as much, for that thou thy
self have taught me to say no less. I hear thee confess it, I find thee
not ungrateful, and therefore God when he crowns thy Merits, he crowns
naught else but only his own Gifts. And as here he speaks in particular of
crowning the Apostles Merits, so speaks he in another Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 105.
p. 301.
place in general, Cum Deus coronat merita nostra, nihil aliud coronat quam
munera sua. When as God does crown our merits, he crowns nothing but his own
gifts. I, St. Bernard himself, as lately as he wrote, is not (...), he will
pay his share to this reckoning. Concerning life everlasting, Iam vero de
aterna vita scimus quia non sunt condignae passicues buius temporis ad futuram
gleriam, nec si vnus omnes sustineat. neque enim talia sunt hominum merita, vt
propter eavita aeterna deveatur exiure, aut D^us iniuriam aliqua^ faceret nisi
eam donaret. Nam vt taceam quod Merita omnia dona Dei sunt, and ita homo magis
propter ipsa Deo debtor est, quam Deus homini: quid sunt Merita omnia ad
tanta^ gloria^? Bern. in Annu^ ciat. B. Mar. Ser 1. p. 27. Col. 2.
says he, we know that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of
the glory which shall be showed unto us, no, though one man alone should bear
them all and every one. For the Merits of men are not such as that everlasting
life should be due unto the^ of right, or that God should wrong us, if so be he
bestowed it not on us. For to omit says he, that all Merits are the gifts of
God, and Man in respect thereof is more a debtor unto God, then God is unto
man, what are all merits whatsoever, if they be compared with that great glory.
To conclude, Denique quis melior est Propheta cui Dominus ipse tam in sign
testimonimonium perhibet, dicens, Virum inveni secundum cor meum? Veruntamen
and ipse necesse habuit dicere de deo, Non intres iniud cium cum servo tuo
Domine. Nemo itaque se seducat, quia si been cogitare voluerit, inveniet
proculdubio quod nec cum december millibus possit occurre^e ei qui cum viginli
millibus venit ad se. Bernard Ib.
says he, who is better then that Prophet of whom the Lord gave so great a
testimony of being a man according to his heart? And yet was he even forced to
say, Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord. Let no man therefore
deceive himself: for if he will cast up his accounts accordingly, doubtless
he shall find that he shall not be able with ten thousand to meet him that
comes against him with twenty thousand. And again in another Meum proinde
meritum miseratio Domini N^^ plane sum meriti inops quamdiu ille miserationum
non fuerit. Quod simisericordiae Domini multae, multis nihilominus ego in
meritis sum. Quid enim si multorum sim mi^i conscius del^ctorum. Nepe vbi
abundavit delictum superabundavit and gratia Bern. super Cantic. Ser. 61 Fol.
167 Col 4.
place, Wherefore my Merit is the mercy of the Lord. I am not altogether void
of Merit, as long as he is not void of mercy. Now if his mercies are many, then
am I rich in Merits. For what though my sins are many too, the Apostle S. Paul
tells me, that where sin abounded, that Grace abounded much more.

From the Fathers let us come to our Adversaries themselves; and will not
themselves avouch as much concerning no affiance in our Merits? True it is,
when they set at ease, they vainly tickle their own hearts with a wanton
conceit of I know not what proportion between their Merits and Rewards which
in the trance (as Reverend Hooker M Hookers learned Discourse of Iustificat.
Works, etc p. 28.
speaks) of their high speculations they dream that God has measured,
waighed, and laid up (as it were) in Bundles for them: but when once the hour
of death approaches, and they hear themselves summoned to stand at the bar
of that Judge, whose brightness causes the eyes of Angels themselves to
dazzle: oh how do these their imaginations then vanish? how do they hide the
face for shame? To name Merits then, says he, is to lay their Souls upon the
Rack, the memory of their own deeds is loathsome to them. No staff to lean
on then, but only on CHRIST JESUS, his Blood, his Death, his Merits, the only
note they then can sing. Wherefore, as S. Austen Aug. de verb. Dom. Ser. 5. p.
15.
speaks in another case, Ego nudos interrogo, non interrogo in vestibus
quales sitis, sed quales nati fueritis: I demand the question of you as you
were born naked at the first, not as you are apparelled now at this time: so
likewise say I in this, Ego morituros interrogo, Let us ask them concerning
Merit when they are on their Deathbeds, and then if they can so speak, as now
they do in their bravery, Vicerint: it shall be theirs. Sure I am it is Vid.
Fox in Oser. l. 2. p. 77. b
storyed of S. Bernard (as good and virtuous a man as any of that side is like
to be) that when he foresaw the end of his life to approach, and that he was
then summoned to appear before the judgment Seat of God, how he began to
express a wonderful fearfulness, and to be very much dismayed in his mind:
whom as his friends standing about him would have recomforted, and encouraged
to cheer himself with the confidence of the good life he had lead: Indeed,
says he, I perceive, I may seem to be in such estimation among you: but I
fear me least the judgment of God is far unlike the judgment of men.

But what need we take so long a Day as to see what they will say on their
Deathbeds, we shall hear some of them confess it somewhat sooner, even while
they are alive, and liue-like. First, Waldensis that great Champion of theirs,
and the Bellarmine of his time: Quid dignum facimus Waldens. cont. Wiclef.
Citatur a Vega Opusc. de Meritis Q. 4 p. 782.
says he, vt participes coelestibus fieri inveniamur? Apostolo dicente,
Existimo quod non sunt condignae passiones huius te^poris ad futuram gloriam,
quae revelabitur in nobis. Reputo igitur saniorem Theologum, fideliorem
Catholicum and Scripturis Sanctis magis concordem, qui tale meritum simpliciter
abnegat. What worthy thing do we, that we may be found in the fellowship of the
heave^ly Spirits, seeing that the Apostle says, I judge that the afflictions
of this time are not worthy of that glory that shall be revealed in us.
Wherefore I take him to be the sounder Divine, the faithfuller Catholic, and
more agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, that utterly denies all such kind of
Merit. Bell. de Iustif. l. 5. c. 7. Prop. 3.
So Bellarmine himself, Propter incertitudinem propriae iustitiae and
periculum inanis gloriae tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia
and benignitate reponere. By reason of the uncertainty of our own
righteousness, and the danger of vain glory, it is our safest way to repose
our whole trust in the only mercy and goodness of God. So Cardinal Poole to
match another Cardinal with Cardinal Bellarmine, who having read over Osorius
his Books de Iustitia dedicated unto him, Non potest, non potest, Vid. Fox. in
Oser. l. 2. p. 67. b and p. 58. b.
says he, nec Gratiae divinae nimium vnquam tribus, nec humanis viribus demi:
It cannot be, it can by no means be, that we should or ascribe to much to the
mercy of God toward us, or abase our own strength too much. Famous is that of
Albertus Pighius, a great Champion of theirs, who reading Calvin's Institutions
with a mind to have confuted it, Vid. D. D. Raynol. de Romans Eccles. Idololat.
in Admonit. ad Lect. p. 596.
became himself of Calvin's mind in the point of Justification and
consequently of Merit. But thus much of the first Question, I come unto the
second, Who they are that are to do Good Works, especially Alms.

Concerning Alms, a body would think that every Christian were to do them
that were of any ability. But Cardinal Bellarmine says no, and therefore
makes exception of Wives, and Children, and Servants, and Monks: All these,
says he, non debent, nec possunt eleemosynas facere, nisi vel in extrema
pauperum necessitate, vel ex consensu tacito, uel expresso superiorum, vel in
certis alijs caesibus. Neither ought they, neither may they give Alms, except
in some extreme necessity of the poor, or except they have the silent, or
express consent of their superior; or in some certain other cases. A
strange kind of passage me thinks, that you must all of you go to your
Cases before you can give an Alms. For by Children he means not Infantes, but
such as you your selves are. Filij is his word, and he means thereby all
those that are (as he there speaks) Sub potestate Parentum, under the wings
of their Parents. First then concerning Wives ought not they to do
Almesdeedes of whom Solomon speaking in the Person of a virtuous woman, She
stretches out her hand to the poor, Prove. 31.20
says he, and puts forth her hands to the needy? Suppose she be matched
with some Nabal, or let us instance in her who was matched with a Nabal indeed,
might not Abigail have done what she did, 1. Sam, 25.18. without the silent
and express consent of that Churl, her Superior. Belike Bellarmine had he bin
her Servant would upon her commandment in the 19. verse of that Chapter, have
gone to his Master first to have known his Worships pleasure, and so his
Master and he, in the 34. verse of that Chapter, had undergone one fortune. But
come we unto Childrens such as are even of your own age, and may not such
give Alms neither, of whom S. John writing to a certain Lady, suppose their
Lady Mother, I reioiced greatly 2. Ioh. 1.4.
says he, that I found of thy Children walking in truth, as we have received a
commandment of the Father? Or did they walk in that Truth without giving to
the Poor? Surely that had been Talking not Walking: and there are too too many
such Talkers indeed whose Tongues are flippant when you but speak of the
Gospel, but come to the Practice of it, and specially by way of Alms, and
then God give you good night. Come we lastly unto Servants. (For as for their
Monks we will not speak of them, only let them take special heed they be not
on that hand, to whom our Savior shall say an other day, Mat 25.42.
ye gave me no meat, ye gave me no drink, ye lodged me not, etc:) but come
we unto Servants, and may not they give Alms neither? What? Servants, who are
not now as Servants, but Philem. v. 16
above Servants, even as Brethren beloved, and the Lords Freemen, as 1. Cor.
7.22.
speaks the Apostle S. Paul? What not Servants, such as Solomon Prove. 17.2.
speaks of, A discreet Servant shall have rule over a lewd Son, and he shall
devide the heritage among the brethren? Not Servants, such as Abraham's Servant
was who had the Genesis 24.2.
rule over all that he had? But this is Bellarmines Supersedeas for them, and
for Children, and for Wives: this comes not from the Court of Heaven, but the
Scriptures being wrote for such, as well as for any other, and commending unto
us so oftentimes this duty of Alms, whether it be right in the sight of God to
hearken to Bellarmine rather, then to them, even they may judge who cannot
discern between their right hand, and their Jonas, 4.11.
left. I come to the third Question, To whom we are to give.

This may easily be stated with that of S. Austen, Brethere^ Ergo fratres ad
hanc max^me exhortamur vos charitatem non solum in vos ipsos, sed in eos etiam
qui foris sunt, sieve adhut Pagani, nondum crede^tes in Christo, sive divisi a
nobis nobiscum caput confitentes, and a corpore separati. Aug. in Ps 32.
says he, we exhort you unto charity, not only toward one an other, but
toward those also that are without, whether as yet they are Pagans still, not
believing in our Savior, or whether by heresy they are divided from us,
acknowledging indeed the Head with us, but separated from the Body. And again
in an other Aug. Hom 39 p. 357.
place, Date ergo omnibus Dilectissimi Fratres, date praecipue ad Domesticos
fidei, date omnibus, ne eui no^ dederitis ipse sit Christus, cuive dederitis
ipse est Christus. Wherefore Beloved Brethren says S. Austen, give unto all,
though especially unto those of the household of Faith: give unto all, least he
to whom thou have not given should be Christ, and to whom thou have given, he
perhaps be Christ. What? will you say, and must we give then to them that are
of an evil life, of a bad conversation, etc? I, Beloved, even to them to, if
so be occasion be offered. For leaving their evil to be punished either by the
hand of God, or by the Magistrate who is the Minister of God, we are to cast
our eye only upon his misery. Your Aristotle will teach you so much, who being
reproved for giving an Alms to one that was unworthy, Diog. Laert. in Aristot.
answered that he gave it, Non Homini, sed Humanitati, meaning that we ought to
show our selves Men, in doing one for an other. I come to the fourth Question:
When, and how we are to give.

Seeing al things are done in time M. Hooker Eccl. Pol l. 5.. 71 p. 197.
says Reverend Hooker, and many offices are not possible at one and the
selfsame time to be discharged, duties of al sorts must have necessarily their
several successions and seasons, in which respect says he, the Schoolmen
have well and soundly determined that Gods affirmative Laws and Precepts, the
Laws that enioine any actual duty, as Prayer, Alms, and the like do bind us Ad
semper velle, but not Ad se^per agere, we are tied to iterate and resume them
when need is, howbeit not to continue them without any intermissio^. Much less
are we bound to give away all our goods at once, and so to make our selves
poor. Oh but say our Adversaries they were our Saviors Mat. 19.21.
own words: If thou will be perfect, go sell that thou have, and give it to
the poor, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven, and come and follow me. It
is true so he said, but to whom did he so say? He said it to a young man that
boasted he had observed all the commandments from his youth. He said it unto
him that put such confidence in his Actions, that because he kept from his
youth the letter of the Law, he thought himself peerless. He said it unto
him that thought nothing was wanting now, (...), what do I yet lack? But said
our Savior thus to Ioh. 3.2.
Nicodemus, that came unto him by night? Or did he thus say unto Luke 10.38.
Martha, that received him into her house? Or said he not unto Zacheus when he
gave but Luke 19.8.
half his goods unto the poor, This day is salvation come unto this house,
forasmuch as he is also become the Son of Abraham? It was not then our
Saviors meaning that all should do, as he bad the young man do, namely sell
all, and so follow him. Yes say our Adversaries, if they will be perfect.
Perfect? why, Perfection is required of every Christian, and commanded us
throughout the Scriptures. Our Savior himself Mat. 5.48.
says, You shall therefore be perfect, as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect. And the Apostle to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 13.9.
This also we wish for, even your perfection. And again a little V. 11.
after, Finally Brethren, fare ye well, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of
one mind: and in his Epistle to the Coloss. 4.12
Colossians, Epaphras says he, the servant of Christ which is one of you
saluteth you and always striveth for you in prayers, that ye may stand
perfect, and full in all the will of God. And the Apostle to the Hebrews,
Therefore leaving the doctrine of the beginning of Christ Heb. 6.1.
says he, Let us be led forward unto perfection. So the Lord himself to
Abraham, as it is in our new Translation, I am the Almighty God Genesis 17.1.
says he, walk before me, and be thou perfect. Now how should Abraham, how
should the Hebrews, how should the Colossians, the Corinthians, al Christians
have been perfect, had not Perfection been, without giving all unto the Poor?
But be it our Savior meant not so to the young man only, but to all in
general, as indeed in an other place he speaks in the plural number, Sell
that you have Luke 12.33.
says he, and give alms: make ye bags which wax not old, a treasure that can
never fail in heaven, where no Thief comes, neither Moth corrupts: was it
his meaning that we should in a trice stripour selves of all we had, and not to
have had wherewith at other times to give unto the Poor? No our Savior had no
such meaning, except the times were extraordinary; and then may we do, nay we
must do, as those Possessors of Lands did, Act. 4.34. who sold them, and
brought the price of the things that were sold, and laid it down at the
Apostles feet, and Ananias, and Sapphyra for iugling in that case were blasted
by S. Peter's breath, Act. 5.5. Charge the^ that are rich in this world 1. Tim.
6.17.
says the Apostle unto Timothy. What? to uncase themselves of al they had, and
to give it to the Poor? No, but that they be not high minded, (the positive
degree of Hardness for a Rich man, oh how hard a thing is it?) and that they
trust not in uncertain riches (that's the comparatiue degree, that is a point
somewhat harder) but will you see the superlatiue, that which indeed is hardest
of all? That they do good, and be rich in good works, and ready to distribute
and communicate. These three points if the Rich shall keep, then may they be
rich indeed, riches shall be a blessing to them. They shall be the true Abraham's in
this world, and Lazarus shall be in their bosoms, a sure and certain sign,
that both the one, and the other shall an other day Luke 13.29.
sit at table with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of God. I
come to the fifth and last Question, Whether Protestants have been so backward
in giving of Alms, as our Adversaries give out.

A Question wherein I confess our Adversaries have against us great advantage.
I say it again: It is a Question, wherein our Adversaries have against us
great advantage. And yet mistake me not. The advantage they have is this: that
either we must praise our selves, or loose the cause we have in hand. We may
say as S. Ierom did in an other Hieron. advers. Iovin. l. 1
case, Periclitamur responsionis verecundia, and quasi inter duos Scopulos and
quasdam Necessitatis et Pudicitiae (...) hinc atque inde, vel pudoris, vel
causae, naufragium sustinemus. Si ad proposita respondeamus, pudore
suffundimur. Si pudor impetrarit silentium, quasi de loco videbimur cedere, and
Adversario feriendi occasionem dare. We may say as did Dan. 13.22.
Susanna, I am in trouble on every side: for if I do this thing it is death
unto me: and if I do it not, I connot escape your hands. We may say as Job 2.
Sam. 24, 3.
said unto king David, The Lord thy God increase thy people an hundred fold mo
then they be, and that the eyes of my Lord the king may see it: but why does my
Lord the king desire this thing? So the Lord of heaven increase our Works an
hundred fold more then they be, and that our eyes and the eyes of our
Adversaries may see it, but why should I go about to number them here in this
place. Others I confess have done it, who may in this case, say as did the 2.
Cor. 12.11
Apostle, I was a fool to boast my self: ye have compelled me: indeed they
are points not to be boasted of, howbeit seeing our Adversaries lay it so hotly
to our charge, I will refer you unto M. D. Willets Synops. Contr. 19. Quaest.
2. p. 960. Edit. 1600
them which have done it already to our hand, especially unto him who being
sometimes of this JACOBS WILL, or a Sermon preached before his Majesty at S.
Albons 1612. by M. Westerman now Dr of Divinity.
House, discoursed so learnedly, so religiously of JACOBS WELL. Only thus much
let me say of this Question, that if Wives, and Children, and Servants neither
ought in Popish Religion, nor can but in certain cases give and bestow Alms,
we have by so much the start of them, by how much every of these with us are
both taught another lesson, and practice it a many of them accordingly. I will
end with that of Aug. de Temp Ser. 227. p. 779
S. Austen: Rogo vos Fratres vt ista recipiantur in animis vestris, and ita
proficiat peregrinis, vt ante tribunal aeterni Iudicis, and mihi pro benigna
admonitione venia, and vobis pro Eleemosynarum largitate aeterna gloria
tribuatur. I beseech you Brethren to ponder with your selves what I have said,
in your hearts, and let it profit the poor so far forth, that before the
Tribunal Seat of that eternal Judge, both I may obtain pardon of my sins,
by reason of this my fruitful admonition, and unto your selves by reason of
the bounty of your Alms, eternal glory may be given.

And thus, Beloved, have I now at length absolved that task whereunto I
betook my self at first. You have heard of those two chief points of
Divinity GOD and his CHVRCH. Concerning GOD, you have heard: First of his
Essence, then of his Attributes, then of his Works: Concerning the CHVRCH you
have also heard: First, what that is, Secondly, what she is to Believe, Thirdly
what to Practice. In showing you what she was, you saw her distinguished:
First, from Paganism, and Iudaisme, the two grand Religions of the old world:
Secondly, from Turcisme, and Papisme, the two smoking firebrarnds of this
world. In her Belief you have heard: First, of the Articles of our Faith
commonly called the Apostles Creed: Secondly, of all those Tenets which our own
Church holds against the rebellious Church of Rome. In her Practice you have
heard: First of the ten commandments: Secondly, of Prayer? Thirdly of Fasting,
and now at this time of Alms. All this as at first I proposed, so God you see
has disposed it too, and so, Beloved, have I now taught you the Fear of the
Lord, according to my first Text wherewith I began unto you by way of Preamble,
Psalm. 34.11.
Come ye Children and harken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
I will end with that of the Apostle, Romans 16.25.
S. Paul: To him now that is of power to establish you according to my Gospel,
and preaching of Jesus Christ, by the revelation of the mystery, which was kept
secret since the world began: but now is opened and published among all Nations
by the Scriptures of the Prophets, at the commandment of the everlasting God
for the obedience of faith, to God I say only wise, be praise through Jesus
Christ for ever AMEN.

FINIS.
TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader: so many white Pages falling out, just occasion is offered me of
a few more lines then I made account of. I have wrought thou see Twelve
Hours and the Day is spent, I must borrow a little (as it were) of the Night
to make these particulars known unto thee.

First, whereas in all my Lectures I follow our Former Translation, not our
Last, it is not for I mislike the Last, or prefer the other before it. But
the truth is owing unto the Former, as much as mine own Salvation, in regard
it first taught me to know what I know, I for my part cannot so easily be
weaned from it, Sicut defuncta corpora Necessariorum officiis deducenda
quodammodo ad sepulturam, non autem deferenda continuo. Aug. ep. 19. And
again, P^stea ta^quam cum honor se^ pulta sunt. Aug Ib.
and therefore account it my bounden duty to follow it with honor to the
Grave.

Secondly, where in the Psalms I leave that Translation too, and follow that
usual one in the Service Book, It is, for it is the same which we read
continually in the Church: the passages whereof coming better to mind by
reason of that reading: they are more familiar to us the Ministers as also to
you the People.

Thirdly, where I say in one Lect. 11. p. 288
place that The Body has this advantage of the Soul, that as it self shall
be affected, so shall the Souls operations be: I had reference in very deed to
a Treatise of Galen to that purpose. But since I have called to mind a Note of
M. Bunnies, Quod animi mores corporis temperaturam sequantur. Galen. Oper.
Clas. 1. p 317. Edit. Venet. 1565.
who observes, that, The Soul does not follow, but rather does use such
Temperature as the Body has. See that Note in his Book of Christian Exercise
appertaining to Resolution.

Fourthly, whereas in the Eight Lecture, Page 170, 171, 172. etc. I speak of
Sola Fides, I omitted the common objection out of S. James: Ye see then how
that of Works a man is justified, The Resolution p. 171. Edit. Land. 1585.
Iam. 2.24.
and not of Faith only, which therefore I did omit, partly for it was so
common: partly for I had said so much of Sola Fides before. Howbeit now since
there is so much room, I will acquaint you with three Answers. First of all
Calvin says that S. James speaks of the Declaration of Righteousness, and
not of the imputation. Certain de Iustitiae declaratione non autem imputatione
ipsum (Iacobum) loqui apparet Calvin. Instit. l. 3. c. 17.. 12
M. Hooker thus: Finding that Justification is spoken of by S. Paul without
implying Sanctification, when he proves that a man is justified by Faith
without Works: finding likewise that Justification does sometimes imply
Sanctification also with it: I suppose nothing to be more sound, the^ so to
interpret S. James, as speaking not in that sense, but in this. M. Fox thus:
There has bin a long contention, M. Hookers Learned Discourse of
Justification, Works, etc. p. 25.
and much ado in the Church how to join and reconcile S. Paul, and S. James
together. When all is said, there is none can join these two together better,
then your selves, to whom we preach. And how is that? Join the lively Faith of
S. Paul, with the Good Works of S. James, M. Fox his Sermon of Christ
crucified. p. 68. Printed by my FATHER.
and bring both these into one Life, and then have thou reconciled them both,
and so shall thou be sure to be justified, both before God by S. Paul's Faith,
and before Man by S. James Works. And a little after, In cause of Iustication,
and peace of Conscience Faith stands alone, and does all.

Fifthly, whereas so oftentimes I quote the very Pages of the Fathers, Greek
and Latin, it is for they are for the most part in our own College Library,
and most commonly of such Editions as are specified in the Eight Lecture, and I
have of purpose forborne to interpret the Greek a many times, to whet our Youth
the better toward the finding out of the meaning of it.

Sixthly and lastly, some Oversights would be amended, especially these: Page
33. in the margent, the Hebrew in some Copies should be (...). Page 44. lin.
21. read thus: but contrariwise it was convenient that the Holy Ghost should be
showed upon the Disciples in Fire. Page 108. lin. 15. read thus: My Friends
were you admitted to this sight. Page 172. lin. 3. read thus: that which
proves Only Faith. Some more there are besides which we must endure as well as
we may having this for our comfort, that nor Service Book, nor Bible it self
escape altogether free from faults Typographicall.

-- Omnes haec vna manet Vox if you pleafe.
Nox
Queis calcanda semel via Praeli.

