A Catechism, wherein is contained the true grounds of the Articles of the
Christian faith, contained in the Lords prayer and the Creed, by way of
Question and answer between Protestant and Papist. Divided into twenty Saboth
exercises, for children to learn the Christian Religion.

Imprinted at London by G. Eld. 1612.

To the Worshipful and my good friend Master Thomas Digges Esquire: Francis
Dauis, wishes health, long life, with increase of much worship.
Sir:
SInce I have made bold already with your worship in offering to present my
labors unto you, and finding your worship so kindly to receive them, I have
here in this small volume taken some pains in gathering these few
instructions, and how soever they are, I wished them well. So presenting them
to your worship, desiring you to depresse errors with my good meaning, loath to
be tedious unto you in a trifle, I leave you to the protection of the
Almighty: praying unto him to send you much health and happiness. I rest.

Your Worships to command during life. FRAN: DAVIS.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader since that I have heretofore set forth some of my works, and
finding of your kind receipt of them, it has stirred me up into farther
matters, whereof this small volume is one, wherein is declared the true ground
of the Articles of the Christian faith, contained in the Lords prayer and the
Creed, whereunto I have set out the Papist to ask the Question and the
Protestant to resolve it, which it does also serve for youth to learn, and the
Minister to ask the Question, and the Child to answer. It is but a small
price for to buy this book, and the Child to learn in the week days but so
much as I have marked from one Sunday to another, and every Sunday the Minister
of every parish to but call the Children before him, every Sunday but one hour,
and to examine them upon them few points, and no doubt but they will labor
and strive in the week days, to get in their minds by root of heart to
answer him, and no doubt but it will increase in time to some comfort to the
souls health. Thus Reader wishing you well, and desiring you to follow these
few Instructions, in order as I have declared them, but I leave it to thy own
consideration, and thy better meditation, So with my prayer for the same to the
Almighty God, I end.

Your friend F. D.

The Papist meeting with the Protestant, and being desirous to be converted or
instructed by him in the true knowledge of God, and of his Christian faith: to
the which the Papist asks the question, and the Protestant resolves him. The
first question of the Papist, is of the Articles of the faith: and also this
may serve for the instruction of youth and children.
Papist. WHat is the principal and chiefest end of man's life?


Pro. To know God.


Pap. What moves thee to say so.


Pro. Whereunto man was created and made.
Because he has created us, and placed us in this world, to set forth his
glory in us, and it is good reason, that we employ our whole life in his glory,
seeing he is the beginning and fountain thereof.


Pap. What is then the chiefest felicity of man.


Pro. Even the self same, I mean to know GOD, and to have his glory showed
forth in us.


Pap. The greatest felicity that man can atta^ to.
Why do thou call this, man's chief felicity.


Pro. Because without it our condition, or estate were more miserable, then the
state of brute beasts.


Pap. Hereby then we may evidently see, that there can no such misery come
unto man, as not to live in the knowledge of God,


Pro. That is most certain.


Pap. But what is the true and right knowledge of God.


Pro. The true knowledge of God,
When a man so knows God, that he give him due honor.


Pap. Which is the way to honor God arigh?


Pro. The right manner to worship God, stands in four points.
It is to put our whole trust and confidence in him, to study so serve him in
obeying his will, to call upon him in our necessities, seeking our salvation,
and all good things at his hands: and finally to acknowledge both with heart and
mouth, that he is the lively fountain of all goodness.


The second Sunday.
Pap. Well then, to the end that these former questions give me full
satisfaction, I pray declare more at large, which is the first point.


Pro. The first point of honoring God.
To put our whole confidence in God.


Pap. How may that be?


Pro. When we have an assured knowledge that he is Almighty and perfectly God.


Pap. Is that sufficient?


Pro. No.


Pap. Show the reason?


Pro. For there is no worthiness in us, why God should either show his power
to help us, or use his merciful goodness to save us.


Pap. What is there then further required?


Pro. That every one of us be fully assured in his conscience, that he is
beloved of God, and that he will be both his Father and Savior.


Pap. How shall we be assured thereof?


Pro. The foundation of our faith.
By his own word, wherein he utters unto us his mercy in Christ, and
assures us of his love toward us.


Pap. Then the very ground to have a sure confidence in God, is to know him in
our Savior Christ.


Pro. Yes truly.


Pap. Then briefly, what is the effect of this knowledge of God in Christ?


Pro. It is contained in the confession of the faith, used of all Christians,
which is commonly called the Creed of the Apostles, both because it is a brief
gathering of the Articles of that faith, which has been always contained in
Christ's Church, and also because it was taken out of the pure doctrine of the
Apostles.


Pap. Rehearse the same.


Pro. The Creed of the Apostles.
I believe in God the Father Almighty maker of heaven and earth, etc. I believe
in the holy Ghost, etc.


The third Sunday.
Pap. To the intent that this confession may be more plainly declared: into how
many parts shall we divide it.


Pro. The Christian faith stands in 4 points.
Into four principal parts.


Pap. What be they?


Pro. The first concerns God the father. The second is of the son Jesus
Christ, wherein briefly also the whole history of our redemption is rehearsed.
The third is touching the holy ghost. The fourth concerns the Church, and
Gods gifts to the same.


Pap. Seeing there is but one God, what moves thee to make rehearsal of the
father, the son, and the holy Ghost, as if there were three?


Pro. As concerning the Trinity.
Because that in the substance or nature of God, we have to consider the father
as the fountain, beginning, and original cause of all things: then secondly
his son, who is the everlasting wisdoms. Thirdly, the holy Ghost, who is his
virtue and power spread upon creatures, and yet nevertheless, remains always
wholly to himself.


Pap. This is then thy meaning, that there is no inconvenience at all, to
understand severally these three persons in the Godhead, who not withstanding
are one and not thereby divided.


Pro. It is even so.


Pap. I pray ye make rehearsal of the first part of the Creed.


Pro. The first part of the Creed.
I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth.


Pap. Wherefore do thou call him father.


Pro. I call him so, having respect to Jesus Christ, who is the everlasting
word, begotten of God before all worlds, who being afterward openly showed
unto the world, was evidently declared to be his son. Now seeing God is our
Savior Christ's Father, it follows necessarily, that he is also our Father.


Pap. What meanest thou by that, thou call him almighty.


Pro. What is meant by this word Almighty
I mean not only that he has a power, which he does not exercise, but also
that all creatures be in his hand and under his governance: that he disposes
all things by his providence: That he rules the world as it pleases him, and
guides all things after his own good pleasure.


Pap. The power of God is not Idle.
So then by thy saying the power of God is not Idle, but continually exercised,
so that nothing is done but by him, and by his ordinance.


Pro. That is most true.


The fourth Sunday.
Pap. Wherefore is that clause added: maker of heaven and earth.


Pro. Because he has made himself known unto us by his works, it is
necessary for us to seek him out in them. For our capacity is not able to
comprehend his divine substance: A glass wherein we may see God.
therefore he has made the world as a glass, wherein we may behold him in
such sort, as it is expedient for us to know him.


Pap. Do thou not comprehend all creatures in these two words, Heaven and
Earth?


Pro. Yes verily, and they may be right well contained under these two words,
seeing that al things be either heavenly or earthly.


Pap. And why call thou God only Creature, seeing that to order things and
to conserve them always in their state, is a thing of much more importance,
then to have for one time created them.


Pro. By this word Creator, is not only meant, that God once created them,
having no further regard to them afterward: but we ought to understand, that
as the world was made of him in the beginning, even so now he does conserve the
same, so that heaven and earth, with the rest of the creatures, could not
continue in their state, if his power did not preserve them. Moreover, seeing
in this manner he does maintain all things, holding them as it were in his
hand, it must needs follow, that he has the rule and governance of all.
Wherefore in that that he is Creator of heaven and earth: it is he that by his
goodness, power, and wisdom, does govern the whole order of nature. It is he
that sends rain and drought, hail, tempest, and fair weather, fertility
and dearness, dearth and plenty, health and sickness, and to be short, he
has all things at commandment, to do him service at his own good pleasure.


Pap. What say thou as touching the devils and wicked persons, be they also
subject to him?


Pro. Albeit that God does not guide them with his holy spirit, yet he does
bridle them in such sort, that they be not able to stir or move without his
permission and appointment: yea, and moreover he does compel them to execute
his will, although it be against their intent and purpose.


Pap. To what purpose does it serve thee, to know this.


Pro. The devil ^ath no ^ower but ^y God.
The knowledge hereof does wonderfully comfort us. For we might think our
selves in a miserable case, if the devils and the wicked, had power to do any
thing, contrary to Gods will. And moreover, we could never be quiet in our
consciences, if we should think our selves to be in their danger. But for so
much as we know, that God bridleth them fast, and chaineth them, as it were in
a prison, in such wise that they can do nothing but as he permits, we have
just occasion, not only to be quiet in mind, but also to receive most
comfortable joy, since God has promised to be our protector and defendor.


The fifth Sunday.
Pap. Go too then, let us come to the second part of our belief.


Pro. The second part of the Creed.
And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord.


Pap. What is the effect of this part.


Pro. It is to acknowledge the son of God to be our Savior: and to
understand the means, whereby he has redeemed us from death, and purchased
life unto us.


Pap. What signifies this word Jesus, by whom thou namest him.


Pro. It is as much to say as Savior, and this name was given unto him by the
Angel, at Gods commandment.


Pap. What is that of more estimation, then if that name had been given him by
men.


Pro. Yea, a great deal, for since Gods pleasure was, that he should be so
named, he must needs be our Savior indeed.


Pap. What signifies then this word Christ?


Pro. This word Christ does express more effectually his office, and does give
us to understand, that he was anointed of his Father, King, Priest, and
Prophet.


Pap. How have thou the knowledge hereof.


Pro. By the Scriptures, which do teach us, that annoynting did serve for
these officers, the which be attributed unto him in many places of the same.


Pap. But what manner of oil was it wherewith he was anointed?


Pro. It was not such material oil as we use, and as did serve in old time,
to the ordaining of Kings, Priests, and Prophets but a far more excellent
oil, even the grace of Gods holy spirit, whereof the outward anointing in old
time was but a figure.


Pap. What manner of Kingdom is that whereof thou speak?


Pro. It is spiritual, and does consist in Gods word, and in his holy spirit,
wherein is contained both righteousness and life everlasting.


Pap. And what is this Preisthood?


Pro. It is an office and authority to present himself before God, to obtain
grace and favor for us and to pacify his fathers wrath, by offering an
acceptable sacrifice unto him.


Pap. Why call thou him Prophet?


Pro. Because that he came down into the world, as chief Ambassador of God
his Father, to declare at large his fathers will, and to finish all revelations
and Prophesies.


The sixth Sunday.
Pap. Comes there any profit unto thee by those names and dignities of
Christ?


Pro, Yea they altogether belong to our comfort, for Christ did receive all
these of his father, to make us partakers thereof, whereby we might every one
receive of his fullness.


Pap. Declare this thing more at large unto me.


Pro. He received the holy Ghost in full perfection, with all the gifts of the
same, to bestow them on us, and to distribute unto every one of us, in the
measure and quantity, that God knows to be most meet, and so by this means
we draw out of him, as out of a fountain, all the spiritual gifts that we
have.


Pap. To what use does the Kingdom of Christ serve us?


Pro. To set us at liberty of Conscience, to live godly and holily, that we
being enriched with his spiritual blessings, and armed with his power, may be
able to overcome the Devil, sin, flesh, and the world, which be pernicious
enemies unto our souls.


Pap. What profit have we of his Preisthood.


Pro. First by this means he is our mediator, to bring us unto the favor of
God his father: and again hereby we have a free entry to come in, and show
our selves boldly before God, and to offer up our selves, with all that
belongs unto us for a sacrifice, and in this point we are fellows after a
sort of his Preisthood.


Pap. The vtility of his office, in that he is a Prophet is yet behind.


Pro. Since our Lord Jesus has received his office, to become the master and
teacher of his flock, the end of this divinity is, to bring us to the right
knowledge of the Father, and of his truth, so that we might become Gods
household scholars, and of his family.


Pap. Then it is true, that a man may briefly gather of the words, that this
name Christ does include three sundry offices, that God has given unto his
son, to the intent to bestow the fruit, and profit of the same upon his
elect.


Pro. It is true.


The seventh Sunday.
Pap. By what reason call thou Christ the only Son of God since God does
name all us also his Children.


Pro. As touching that, that we are Gods children, we are not so of nature, but
only of his fatherly adoption, and by grace, in that God does aceept us for his
Children: now our Lord Jesus being begotten of the substance of his father,
and being of the self same nature, may justly be called Gods only son,
for that there is none other that is so by nature.


Pap. This is then thy meaning that this honor pertains peculiarly to him
alone as to whom it belongs of nature, the which notwithstanding he has by
free gift of his goodness communicated unto us, in that we are his members.


Pro. It is even so, and therefore in respect of that his communicating with us,
the scripture calls Christ in an other place the first borne among many
brethren.


Pap. Why call thou him our Lord?


Pro. Because he is appointed of the Father to have Lordship over us, and to
rule in Heaven and earth, and to be the head of men and Angels.


Pap. What is the meaning of that which follows?


Pro. It declares after what sort the son of God was anointed of his father,
to become our Savior, That is to say, he took upon him our flesh, and
therein fulfilled all things necessary for our redemption, according as they
be here rehearsed.


Pap. What meanest thou by these two clauses: conceived by the holy Ghost,
borne of the Virgin Mary.


Pro. That he was fashioned in the Virgins woombe, taking very substance and
manner of her, that he might thereby become the seed of David, as the Prophet
had before signified, and yet notwithstanding all this was wrought by the
marvelous and secret power of the holy Ghost, without the company of man.


Pap. What is it then needful that he should take upon him our very flesh?


Pro. Yea verily, for it was convenient that man's disobedience, against God
should be purged in the nature of man. And moreover if Christ had not been
partaker of our nature, he had not been a meet Mediator to make us at one
with God his Father.


Pap. Then is this thy saying, that it behooves that Christ should become very
man, to the end he might execute the office of a Savior, as in our person.


Pro. Yea verily for we must borrow of him all that which is lacking in our
selves: for this our default could not otherwise be remedied.


Pap. By what cause, was this thing wrought by Gods holy spirit, and not rather
by the company of man, according to the order of nature?


Pro. Because the seed of man is of it self altogether corrupted with sin,
it behooued that this conception of Christ, should be wrought by the power of
the holy Ghost: whereby our Savior might be preserved from all corruption of
sin, and replenished with all manner of holiness.


Pap. So then by these sayings it is evidently declared unto us, that he which
should purify and cleanse others from filth of sin, must be himself free from
al spots thereof, and even from his mothers womb, dedicated unto God in
pureness of nature, so that he may not be guilty of that corruption,
wherewith the whole stock of man is infected.


Pro. I mean so.


The eight Sunday.
Pap. Wherefore speak thou of his death immediately after his birth, and
leauest out the whole history of his life?


Pro. Because there is nothing mentioned or spoken of in our Creed, but that
which pecularily belongs to the substance of our redemption.


Pap. Why is it not said plainly in one word, that he dyed, without any
speaking of Pontius Pilate, by whose judgment he suffered?


Pro. This was not only to make the history of Christ's passion, to have more
evident assurance, but also to declare unto us, that he was condemned to death
by a Judge.


Pap How so?


Pro. He dyed to suffer the pain that was due unto us, that we might be
thereby delivered from the same. Now for so much as we were guilty before Gods
judgment, as wicked misdooers, Christ took upon him our persons, and
vouchsafed to show himself before an earthly Judge, and to be condemned by
his mouth, that thereby we might be declared before the judgment seat of God.


Pap. Notwithstanding Pilate does pronounce him innocent, and so by that he
does not condemn him worthy of death?


Pro. Pilate did both the one and the other. First, he was pronounced innocent
and just, by the Judges own mouth, to signify that he suffered not for his
own desert, but for our trespasses: and yet withal the same Judge did give
solemnly the sentence of death against him: to testify and express, that he
is our true pledge and ransom, as he who also has taken unto him our
condemnation, to deliver us from the same.


Pap. That is well said: for if he had been a sinner indeed, he had not been
meet to have suffered death, for the offenses of other: and nevertheless, to
the end we might be clearly quit by his condemnation, it was necessary that
he should be counted as among the wicked.


Pro. So I mean.


The ninth Sunday.
Pap. Where thou say, Christ suffered on the Cross, was that kind of death
of more importance, then if he had been otherwise put to death?


Pro. Yea verily: and as touching that matter, Saint Paul says, that he was
hanged on a tree, to the intent that he might take upon him our curse, and so
discharge us: for that kind of death was accursed of God.


Pap. What: is it not a great reproach and dishonor unto our Lord Jesus Christ,
to say that he was accursed, and that before God?


Pro. No not a whit: for he: through his almighty power, by taking the curse
from us unto himself: did in such sort make it void and of none effect, that
he himself nevertheless continued still so blessed, that he was able to
fill us also with his blessings.


Pap. Declare that follows.


Pro. In so much as death was a punishment appointed unto man for sin,
therefore our Savior Christ did suffer death, and by suffering ouer-came it.
And to the intent also, to make it the more certainly known unto us, that his
death was not counterfeit, it pleased him also to be buried after the common
manner of men.


Pap. But it appears not that any profit comes to us by this, that Christ
has won the victory of death, seeing that we notwithstanding cease not to
dye.


Pro. That does not hinder, for the death of the faithful is now nothing else
but a ready passage to a better life.


Pap. It follows then necessary hereof, that we ought in no wise to be
afraid of death, as though it were a dreadful thing, but rather it behooves
us willingly to walk the trace of our head and Captain Jesus Christ.


Pro. It is even so.


The tenth Sunday.
Pap. What is the sense of that clause, He descended into Hell?


Pro. That Christ did not only suffer natural death, which is a separation of
the soul from the body, but also that his soul after this separation, did
descend into Hell, or the place of the damned.


Pap. For what consideration would he descend thither?


Pro. To show the wicked that they were justly condemned, because they believed
not in him: and to triumph over the devil in his own tents, whither he pursued
him: and that his victory, and the soueraintie of his humane nature might
appear over all; and lastly that we might not descend, and abide there for
ever, he descended, and returned, according as it was prophesied of him: Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption.


Pap. Was his descending into Hell a part of his passion, or humiliation?


Pro. No, but of his victory, and exaltation; according to that testimony of S.
Paul: He spoiled principalities, and powers, and he led captivity captive: This
he did in Hell, even in that place where the Devil had most power: whereby
both the devil might be the more disgraced, and Christ himself more honored.


Pap. What testimonies of Scripture have you to prove this?


Pro. Psalm. 16.10. Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, which is cited by
Saint Peter. Act. 2.31. also Ephesians. 4.9. In that he ascended, what is it but that
he sirst descended into the lowest parts of the earth? Also, Romans 10.7. say
not in thy heart who shall ascend into Heaven, this is to bring down Christ;
or who shall descend into the deep, this is to bring Christ again from the
dead: what can be understood by the deep, but Hell; as it is taken, Luc. 8.31.
And they requested him not to send them into the deep.


The eleventh Sunday.
Pap. May we now gather by this, what profit comes to the faithful by the
death of Jesus Christ?


Pro. Yea very well: and first of all we see that it is a sacrifice, wherewith
he has fully satisfied his Fathers judgment in our behalf, and thereby also
he has appeased Gods wrath, and has brought us into his favor again.
Secondly, that his blood is a washing of our souls from all manner of spots.
And finally, that he has so clean wiped away our sins through his death,
that GOD will never here-after have remembrance of them, so that the Obligation
which was against us, is now cancelled and made void.


Pap. Have we none other profit of his death?


Pro. Yes verily, that is, if we be true members of Christ our old man is
crucified, and our flesh is mortified, to the end that none evil lusts do
hereafter bear rule in us.


The twelfth sunday.
Papist. Expound the Article following?


Pro. He rose the third day from death to life, wherein he showed, that he
had gotten the victory of death and sin. For through his resurrection, he
has swallowed up death, he brake a sunder the chains of the devil, and
finally he destroyed all his power.


Pap. Tell me how many ways, this resurrection of Christ does profit us?


Pro. Three manner of ways. The first, that we have fully obtained to be
righteous thereby.

Secondly, it is a sure gage of our immortality.

Thirdly, that if we be indeed truly pertakers of his resurrection, we rise
now in this present world, into a new kind of life, whereby we serve GOD
only, and lead our lives agreeable to his will.


The thirteenth Sunday.
Papist. Let us now go forward to the rest.


Pro. He ascended into heaven.


Pap. Went CHRIST up into heaven in such sort, that he is no longer in the
earth?


Pro. Yea, for when he had performed wholly all things that were enjoined him
by the commandment of his Father, and had accomplished all that was necessary
for our salvation, it was not needful he should remain any longer in the
world.


Pap. What profit have we by this Ascension:


Pro. We receive double profit thereby: for since that our Savior Christ is
entered into Heaven in our name: even in like manner as he came down from thence
for our sakes he has thereby made an open entry into the same place for us,
giving withal an assured knowledge, that the gate of heaven is now open to
receive us, which was before shut through our sins, The second profit is that
he appeared in the sight of God the father, to make Intercession for us, and to
be our Advocate to make answer for us.


Pap. But is our savior Christ so ascended into heaven that he is no more
here with us?


Pro. Not so, for he himself promises the contrary: that is, that he will
be present with us unto the worlds end.


Pap. Is it meant of his bodily presence, that he makes promise so to
continue with us?


Pro. No verily for it is another matter, to speak of his body, which was
taken up into Heaven, and of his power which is spread abroad throughout the
whole world.


Pap. Declare the meaning of this sentence he sits at the right hand of God
the Father.


Pro. The understanding of that, is, that he has received into his hands the
governance of Heaven and Earth, whereby he is King and Ruler over all.


Pap. What signifies this word right hand and the sitting at the right hand?


Pro. It is a similitude or manner of speech borrowed of earthly Princes, which
are wont to place on their right side, such as they substitute next under them,
to rule in their name.


Pap. Then thou meanest nothing else thereby, but that which Saint Paul speaks
that he was appointed head of the Church, set in authority above all powers,
and that he has received a name or dignity passing all other.


Pro. Even so it is.


The fourteenth Sunday.
Pap. Go foreward to the residue.


Pro. From thence he will come to judge the quick and the dead, that is to say,
he will come down from heaven, and show himself visible once again in
judgment, as he was seen to ascend.


Pap. Seeing the judgment of God shall be in the end of the world, how may that
be which thou say: some shall be alive, and other shall be dead, since it
is a thing appointed unto all men to dye once.


Pro. Saint Paul makes answer to this Question himself, saying that they
which shall be left alive at that time, shall be suddenly changed, to the end
that their corruptible nature being abollished, they may be clothed with
incorruption.


Pap. Thy meaning is then that this change shall be unto them in stead of a
Death, in so much as it shall abollish their former nature, and make them rise
again in a new state.


Pro. Truth it is.


Pap. Do we receive any comfort by this that our Savior Christ shall come to
judge the world.


Pro. Yea verily, and that great, for we are taught certainly that his coming
at that time shall be only for our salvation.


Pap. Then there is no cause why we should be afraid of the day of judgment, or
that we should tremble therefore.


Pro. No truly for that we shall apeare before no other Judge but him, who is
our Advocate and has taken upon him to defend our cause.


The fifteenth Sunday.
Pap. Let us now come to the third part?


Pro. That concerns our says in the holy Ghost.


Pap. And to what purpose does it serve us?


Pro. It does us to understand, that even as God has redeemed us, and saved us
in Jesus Christ, even so it pleased him to make us pertakers of his redemption,
and salvation through his holy spirit.


Pap. How so?


Pro. In like manner, as the blood of Christ is the only purgation of our
souls: even so the holy Ghost must sprinckle out consciences with the same to
make them clean.


Pap. This needs a more evident declaration.


Pro. It is to say, that the spirit of God dwelling in our hearts, does make us
feel the virtue of our Lord Jesus.


The sixteenth Sunday.
Pap. what follows now next.


Pro. The fourth part of our belief, where it is said, I believe that there is
an holy universal Church.


Pap. what is the Church universal.


Pro. It is the body and fellowshippe of them that do believe, whom God has
ordained and chosen unto life everlasting.


Pap. Is it necessary that we believe this Article?


Pro. Yea, unless we mind to make Christ's death of none effect, and make all
those things to no purpose, which we have rehearsed already, for all Christ's
doings proves there is a Church.


Pap. This is then thy saying, that all which hitherto has been declared,
does touch the cause and ground of our salvation, in so much as God has
received us into his favor, by the mean of our Savior Christ, and has
established this grace in us through his holy spirit: but now the effect that
comes of all this, is declared unto us, to give the more evident assurance
thereof.


Pro. It is even so.


Pap. What meanest thou by calling the Church holy?


Pro. I call the Church holy in this sense, because that those whom God has
chosen, be justifies, and reformeth unto holiness and innocence of life, to
make his glory to shine in them: and also our Savior Christ has sanctified
his Church which he redeemed: To the end it might be glorious and without
spotte.


Pap. What means this word Catholic, or universal?


Pro. It serves to put us in remembrance, that as there is but one head of the
faithful, even so it behooves them to be knit together in one body, so that
there be not diverse Churches, but one Church only, dispersed through out the
whole world.


Pap. Declare as touching the communion of Saints.


Pro. That clause is put too, for a more plain declaration of the unity of the
members of Christ's Church. Moreover, it does us to understand, that all the
benefits that Christ has given to his Church, belongs to the profit and
salvation of every faithful person, for so much as they have all a community
together.


The seventeenth Sunday.
Pap. But is this holiness of that Church now already perfect?


Pro. No verily, for it is in continual battle, so long as it is in this
world, and labors always under imperfection and infirmities, which shall
never be clean taken away, until it be altogether coupled to her head
Christ, by whom it is perfectly sanctified.


Pap. Is there none other way to know this Church but by faith?


Pro. Yes verily: there is a Church which may be seen to the eye, for so much
as God has given sure tokens, by the which we may know the same. But here in
this place, mention is made properly of that Church which he has chosen by
his secret election to everlasting life, the which cannot be perfectly
discerned by our senses.


Pap. What is there more?


Pro. I believe the remission of sins.


Pap. What is the proper signification of this word remission.


Pro. That God does freely forgive all the sins of them which believe in him,
in such sort, that they shall never be called to any account, to receive any
punishment therefore.


Pap. It is easy then to be gathered of this, that we do not merit by our own
satisfaction, that God should pardon our sins.


Pro. Ye say true: for our Savior Christ has made satisfaction, by suffering
the pain due unto the same: for we of our part, be not able to make any
recompense to God, but of his meet liberality, we obtain this benefit freely.


Pap. Wherefore do thou make mention of remission of sins, immediately
after thou have spoken of the Church?


Pro. Because that no man can receive forgiveness of sins, unless he be
joined in the fellowship of Gods people, and so continue in the unity of
Christ's body, even to the end, like a true member of his Church.


Pap. By this saying, then without the Church, there is nothing but hell, death
and damnation.


Pro. That is most certain: for all such as do divide themselves from the body
of Christ, to break the unity there by sects, are utterly destitute of all
hope, to enjoy everlasting life, whiles they keep themselves so divided.


The eighteenth Sunday.
Pap. What follows more?


Pro. The rising again of the body, and life everlasting.


Pap. Whereto serves this Article of our belief.


Pro. To teach that our felicity consists, not in any thing upon earth: the
which knowledge may serve us for two necessary purposes, first it teaches us
to pass through this transitory world as through a strange Country, setting
not by earthly things. Secondly it puts us in comfort that although we do
not as yet enjoy the fruit of that grace, which our Lord God has freely given
us in Christ, that yet we ought not to discourage, but patiently to wait for
him, until the time that he shall appear.


Pap. What shall be the manner of our resurrection.


Pro. All they which be dead before that time shall then take their own bodies
again unto them: howbeit they shall be after another sort, that is, they shall
be no more subject to death or corruption: and yet notwithstanding they shall
be of the self same nature and substance as before, and such as shall then
remain alive, God will raise them up maruelously, and suddenly change their
bodies in the twinkling of an eye, as we have said before.


Pap. Shall not the wicked be as well partakers of this resurrection as the
faithful?


Pro. Yes verily: but they shall be in condition far unlike: for the
faithful shall rise again to everlasting joy and salvation, and, the other to
everlasting death and damnation.


Pap. wherefore is there mention made of life everlasting and not of hell.


Pro. Because the Creed is a brief sum of our faith, containing in as few
words as can be, that which belongs peculiarly to comfort the conscience of
Gods faithful: therefore Gods benefits, which be freely bestowed upon his
people, be rehearsed only without any mention of the wicked, who are clean
shut out of this Kingdom.


The ninteenth Sunday.
Pap. Since we have the foundation whervppon our faith is builded, we may
gather hereof what is the right faith.


Pro. Yea verily, that is to say, it is a sure persuasion, and a steadfast
knowledge of Gods entire love toward us, according as he has plainly uttered
in his Gospel that he will be a father, and a Savior unto us through the
means of Jesus Christ.


Pap. Does faith stand in our power: or is it a free gift of God?


Pro. The scripture teaches us, that it is a special gift of the holy Ghost,
and very experience does confirm the same.


Pap. How so?


Pro. For the feebleness of our wits is such that we can by no means, attain
unto the spiritual wisdom of God the which is revealed unto us by faith: and
our hearts are naturally inclined to a certain distrust, or at the least a
vain trust either in our selves or in any other creatures: but what time Gods
spirit has lightened our hearts and made us able to understand Gods will, the
which thing we cannot attain otherwise, then does he arm us also with a
steadfast confidence in his goodness sealing the promises of salvation in our
hearts.


Pap. What profit comes to us through this faith when we have it?


Pro. It does justify us before God and makes us inheritors of everlasting
life.


Pap. Is not a man then justified through good works if he live holily, and in
the obedience of Gods will?


Pro. If any man were perfect before God he might worthily be called righteous,
but for so much as we are all wretched sinners in the sight of God, we are
driven to seek elsewhere, for a worthiness to make answer for us to Gods
judgment.


The 19. Sunday.
Pap. But be all our works so disprooued that they can merit nothing at all
for us before God?


Pro. First all such works as we do of our selves, by our nature are utterly
corrupt whereof it follows necessarily, that they cannot please God, but
rather do procure his wrath and he condemns them every one.


Pap: This is then thy saying, that until the time that God has received us
to mercy and regenerate us by his spirit, we can do nothing but sin: even as
an evil tree that can bring forth no fruit, but that, that is evil.


Pro. Even so it is, for although our works make a fair show to man's sight,
yet they are wicked before God, so long as the heart is naught unto which he
has cheifely respect.


Pap. Hereby then thou do conclude, that it lies not in our power to
prevent God with our merrits, and so to provoke him to love us, but much rather
we thereby do stir him to be more angry against us.


P. Yea surely and therefore I say that without any consideration of our own
works, he does receive us into his favor, and of his bountiful mercy,
through the merits of our Savior Christ, accoumpting his righteousness to be
ours, and for his sake imputes not our faults unto us.


Pap. What meanest thou then, that a man is justified by faith?


Pro. For as much as through believing, that is, receiving with an assurance of
the heart, the promises of the Gospel, we enter into possession of his
righteousness.


Pap. This is then thy meaning, that as God does offer righteousness unto us
by his Gospel so the only way to receive it is faith.


Pro. So I mean.


The twentieth Sunday.
Pap. Well then, after that God has once received us into his favor, be not
the works which we do, by the virtue of his spirit, acceptable unto him?


Pro. Yes verily: because he does of his free goodness so accept them, and not
because their worthiness does deserve so to be esteemed.


Pap. How is it, that they be not worthy of themselves to be accepted: since
they proceed of the holy ghost?


Pro. Because there is mixed some filth, through the infirmity of the flesh,
whereby they are defiled.


Pap. By what means then are they made acceptable unto God?


Pro. By faith only, whereby a man is assured in his conscience, that God will
not straightly examine his works, nor try them by the sharp rigor of his
Justice: but that he will hide the imperfectness, and the unclean spots
that be in them, with the pureness of our Savior Christ, and so account them
as perfect.


Pap. May we say then, that a Christian is justified by his works, after that
God has called him, or that he does merit through them Gods favor: or the
procurement of life everlasting.


Pro. No verily, but rather it is said, that no man living shall be justified
in Gods sight: and therefore we must pray he enter not into judgment with us.


Pap. Thou meanest not hereby, that the good deeds of the faithful are
unprofitable?


Pro. I mean nothing less: for God promises to reward them largely, both in
this world and in the life to come, and yet this notwithstanding, those rewards
of God are not given for our worthy deserts, but only because it pleased God
of his goodness, to love us freely, and so to cover and forget our faults,
that he will never call them any more to remembrance.


Pap. May we be just without good works.


Pro. That is not possible: for to believe in Christ, is as much to say, as to
receive Christ in such sort, as he does give himself unto us. Now this is an
evident thing, that Christ does not only promise to deliver us from death, and
to restore unto us the favor of God his Father, through the only merits of
his innocence, but also he promises to make us new Creatures by his holy
spirit, to the end that we should lead an holy conversation in all good works.


Pap. Then I see, it is so far from the office of faith, to make men
despisers of good deeds, that it is the very root, whence all good works do
spring.


Pro. It is most certain, and for this cause the doctrine of the Gospel does
confess in these two points, faith and repentance.


Here ends the Articles of the faith.
FINIS.
Master D. his Counsel to all that are his: as also a brief lesson for all
estates.
Keep council. Use not many words. Tell the truth. Be slow to speak.
Bridle thine anger. Appease debate. Hinder no man's good name. Take heed of
drink. Remember thy end. Be merciful. Try before thou trust. Repose no
confidence in a reconciled adversary. Sorrow not for that which cannot be got
again. Rejoice not in thy neighbors cross. Strive not with thy ouermatch.
Reveal not thy secrets to thy wife, nor to thy children: for women and
children say all they know. Three things undid the Romans reign: privy
grudge, young heads, and private gain. Bear with others as thou would have
others bear with thee. Be not too rash, hasty, bold, nor wise in thine own
conceit.

Do not speak believe do say
all thou know. hear. can. see.


Behold the end ere thou begin,
Have mind on death and fear to sin:
For death shall reap that life has sown,
and life shall spring where death has mowen.
Though Fortune have set thee on hie,
Remember yet that thou shall dye.
Abstinence is good for the health and wealth of the. Soul, Mind, and body.


If thou fly Idleness, Cupid has no might.
His bow lies broken his fire has no light.
FEAR GOD.

FINIS.

