THE WORLDS HYDROGRAPHICAL Description. Wherein is proved not only by
authority of writers, but also by late experience of travelers and reasons
of substantial probability. that the world in all his Zones Clymats and
places, is habitable and inhabited, and the Seas likewise universally Nauigable
without any natural anoyance to hinder the same whereby appears that from
England there is a short and speedy passage into the South Seas, to China,
Molucca, Phillipina, and India, by Northerly Navigations, to the renown honor
and benifit of her Majesty's state, and Communalty.

Published by I. Dauis of Sandrudg by Dartmouth in the County of Deuon.
Gentleman. Anno 1595. May 27.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson dwelling at the three cranes in the
vinetree. And are there to be sold. 1595.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable Lords of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Consayle.
MY most honorable good Lords for as much as it has pleased God, not only to
bestow upon your Lordships, the excellent gifts of natures benefit, but has
also beutified the same with such special ornaments of perfection: As that
thereby the minds and attentive industry of all, have no small regard unto
your honorable proceedings. And so much the rather, because to the great
content of all her majesty's most loving subjects, it has pleased her highness
in her stately regard of government, to make choice of your honors as special
members in the regal disposition of the mightiness of her imperial command:
Emboldeneth me among the rest to humble my self at your honorable feet, in
presenting unto the favor of your excellent Judgments, this short treatise
of the worlds Hydrographicall bands. And knowing that not only your renowned
places, but also the singularity of your education, by the prudent care of
your noble progeniters, has and still does ind^ce and draw you to favor and
embrace, Whatsoever bears but a seeming of the Commonweals good: Much more
then, that which in substantial truth shall be most beneficial to the same. I
am therefore the more encouraged not to slack this my enterprise, because that
through your honorable assistance when in the balance of your wisdoms this
discovery shall have indifferent consideration, I know it will be ordered by
you to be a matter of no small moment to the good of our Country. For thereby
we shall not only have a copious and rich vent for all our natural and
artificial commodities of England, in short time by safe passage, and without
offense of any, but also shall by the first employment return into our
Country by spedie passage, all Indian commodities in the ripenes of their
perfection, whereby her Majesty's Dominions should be the storehouse of
Europe, the nurse of the world, and the glory of nations, in yelding all
forrayne natural benefits, by an easy rate: In communicating unto all,
whatsoever God has unto any one asigned: And by the increase of all nations,
through the mightiness of trade. Then should the merchant, tradesman, and
poor artificer, have employment equal to their power and expedition, whereby
what notable benefits would grow to her Majesty, the state, and comunaltie,
I refer to your perfect judgments. And for that I am desirous to avoid the
contradiction of vulgar conceits, I have thought it my best course, before I
make proof of the certainty of this discovery, to lay down whatsoever may
against the same be objected, and in the overthrow of those conceipted
hindrances the safenes of the passage shall most manifestly appear, which
when your wisdoms shall with your patience peruse, I do in no sort distruct
your favorable acceptance and honorable asistance of the same. And although for
diverse considerations I do not in this treatis discover my full knowledge for
the place and altitude of this passage, yet whenever it shall so please your
honors to command, I will in few words make the full certainty thereof
known unto your honors being always ready with my person and poor ability
to prosecute this action as your honors shall direct, beseeching God so to
support you with all happiness of this life, favor of her majesty love of her
highness subjects and increase of honor as may be to your best content. I most
humbly take my leave from Sandrudg by Dartmouth this 27. of May 1595.

Yours in all dutiful service to command. I D.

The worlds Hydrographicall Objections against al northerly discoueries.
ALl impedimentes in nature, and circumstances of former practices duly
considered. The Noretherly passage to China seem very improbable. For first it
is a matter very doubt^ull whether there be any such passage or no, since it
has been so often attempted and never performed, as by historical relation
appears, whereby we may fully persuade our selves that America and Asia, or
some other contient are so conjoined together as that it is impossible for any
such passage to be, the certainty whereof is substantially proved unto us by
the experience of Sebastian Gabotta an expert Pylot, and a man reported of
especial judgment, who being that ways employed returned without success.
Jasper Corteriallis a man of no mean practice did likewise put the same in
execution, with diverse others, all which in the best part have concluded
ignorance. If not a full consent of no such matter. And therefore since practice
has reproved the same, there is no reason why men should dote upon so great an
incertayntie, but if a passage may be proved and that the contenentes are
disioyned whereof there is small hope, yet the impedimentes of the clymate
(wherein the same is supposed to lie) are such and so offensive as that all
hope is thereby likewise utterly secluded. For within the frozen Zone no
reasonable creature will deny but that the extremity of cold is of such
forceable action (being the lest in the fulness of his own nature without
mitigation) as that it is impossible for any mortal creature to endure the
same, by the virtue of whose working power, those Northerly Seas are wholly
congealed, making but one mas or contenent of yse, which is the more credible
because the ordenary experience of our fishermen gives us sufficient notice
thereof, by reason of the great quantity of yse which they find to be brought
upon the cost of newefound land from those Northern regions. By the abundance
whereof they are so noysomly pestred as that in many weeks they have not been
able to recover the ^hore, yea and many times recover it not until the season
of fishing be over passed. this then being so in the Septentrionall latitude
of 46.47. and 48. degrees, which by natures benifit are latitudes of better
temprature then ours of England, what hope should there remain for a nauegable
passing to be by the norwest, in the altitude of 60.70. or 80. degres, as it
may be more Northerly, when in these temperate parts of the world the shod of
that frozen sea breadeth such noisome pester: as the pore fisherme^ do
continually sustain. And therefore itseemeth to be more then ignorance that men
should attempt Navigations, in desperate clymates and through seas congeled that
never dissolve, where the stiffnes of the cold makes the air palpably gross
without certainty that the lands are disioyned.

All which impediments if they were not, yet in that part of the world,
Navigations cannot be performed as ordenarily it is used, for no ordenarie sea
chart can describe those regions either in the parts Geographicall or
Hydrographicall, where the Meridians do so spedily gather themselves
together, the parallells being a very small proportion to a great circle,
where quick and uncertain variation of the Compass may greatly hinder or
utterly overthrow the attempt. So that for lack of Curious lyned globes to the
right use of Navigations, with many other instruments either unknown or out of
use, and yet of necessity for that voyage, it should with great difficulty be
attained. All which the premises considered I refer the conclusion of these
objections, and certainty of this passage to the general opinion of my loving
countrymen, whose dangerous attemptes in those desperate uncertainties I wish
to be altered, and better employed in matters of great probability.

To prove a passage by the Norwest, without any land impedimentes to hinder the
same, by authority of writters, and experience of travelers, contrary to the
former objections.
HOmer an Ancient writer affirms that the world being divided into Asia,
Africa, and Europa is an Island, which is likewise so reported by Strabo in his
first book of Cosmographie, Pomponius Mela in his third book Higinius, Solinus
with others. Whereby it is manifest that America was then undiscovered and to
them unknown, otherwise they would have made relation of it as of the rest.
neither could they in reason have reported Asia Africa and Europa to be an
Island unless they had known the same to be conjoined and in all his parts to
be environed with the seas. And further America being very near of equal
quantity with all the rest could not be reported as a part either of Africa
Asia or Europa in the ordenarie lymites of discretion. And therefore of
necessity it must be concluded that Asia Africa and Europa the first reueiled
world being known to be an Island, America must likewise be in the same nature
because in no part it conioyneth with the first.

By experience of Travelers to prove this passage.
ANd that we need not to range after forrayne and ancient authorities,
whereat curious wits may take many exceptions, let us consider the late
discoueryes performed, within the space of two ages not yet passed, whereby it
shall so manifestly appear that Asia Africa and Europa are knit together,
making one continent, and are wholly environed with the seas, as that no
reasonnable creature shall have occasion thereof to doubt. And first beginning
at the north of Europe, from the north cape in 71. degrees whereby our
merchantes pass in their trade to S. Nicholas in Rouscia descending toward
the South, the Navigations is without impediment to the cape of Bona Esperanca,
ordenarilie traded and daily practiced. And therefore not to be gaynesayd:
which two capes are distant more then 2000. leagues by the nearest tract, in
all which distances America is not found to be any thing near the coasts
either of Europe or Afric, for from England the chefest of the parts of Europa
to newfoundland being part of America it is 600. leagues the nearest distance
that any part thereof bears unto Europa. And from cape verde in Gynny being
part of Africa, unto cape Saint Augustine in brasill being part of America,
it wants but little of 500. leagues, the nearest distance between Africa and
America. Likewise from the said North cape to Noua zemla by the course of East
and West nearest, there is passable sailing, and the North parts of Tartaria
are well known to be handed with the scithian seas to the promontory Tabin so
that truly it is apparent that America is far removed and by a great sea
divided from any part of Africa or Europa. And for the Southern parts of the
first reueiled world it is most manifest that from the cape of Bona Esperanca
toward the east, the costs of Safalla Mosombique, melinda Arabia and Persia
whose gulfes lie open to the main occian: And all the coasts of East India to
the capes of Callacut and Malacca are banded with a mighty sea upon the South
whose lymattes are yet undiscovered. And from the Cape of Malacca toward the
North so high as the I Will of Iapan, and from thence the cost of China being part
of Asia continues still North to the promontory Tabin, where the Scithian sea
and this Indian sea have recourse together, no part of America being nere the
same by many 100 leages to hinder this passage.

For from the Callafornia being part of America, to the yles of Phillippina
bordering upon the coasts of China being part of Asia is 2100. leages and
therefore America is farther separated from Asia, then from any the sea coasts
either of Europe or Africa. Whereby it is most manifest that Asia Africa and
Europa are conjoined in an Island. And therefore of necessity follows that
America is contained under one or many yla^ds, for from the septentrionall lat.
of 75. degrees. unto the straights of Magilan it is known to be nauigable and has
our west occian to lymet the borders thereof, and through the straightes of
Magillane no man doubts but that there is Nauigable passage, from which
straightes upon all the Western borders of America, the costs of Chili, Chuli,
Rocha, Baldiuia, Peru to the ystmos of Dariena and so the whole West shores of
Noua Hispania are banded out by a long and mighty sea, not having any shore
near unto it by one thousand leagues toward the West, how then may it be
possible that Asia and America should make one contenent?

To prove the premises by the attemptes of our own Countrymen, besides others.
BUt least it should be objected that the premises are conceits, the acting
aucthors not nominated, I will use some boldness to recyte our own countrymen
by whose paynefull trauells these truths are made manifest unto us. Hoping and
intreting that it may not be offensive though in this sort I make relation of
their actions. And first to begin with the North parts of Europe, it is not
unknown to all our countrymen, that from the famous city of London Sir Huge
Willobie knight gave the first attempt for the North estren discoueries, which
were afterward most notably accomplished, by master Borrowes, a Pylot of
excellent judgment and fortunate in his actions, so far as Golgoua vayga^s
and Noua Zemla, with trade thereby procured to S. Nicholas in Rouscia. Then
succeeded master Ginkinson who by his land travel discovered the Scithian sea
to lymit the North coasts of Tartaria, so far as the riue^ ob. S^ that by
our Countrymen the North parts of Europe are at full made known unto us: and
proved to join with no other continent to hinder this passage. The common and
ordenary trade of the Spanyard and Portingall from Lysborne to the coasts of
Guyny, Bynny, Mina, Angola, Manicongo, and the cost of Ethiopia to the cape of
Bona Esperanca, and all the cost of Est India and Illes of Molucca, (by which
wonderful and copious trade, they are so mightily enriched, as that now they
challeng a monarchy unto them selves upon the whole face of the earth) that
their trade I say, proves that America is far separated from any part of
Africa or the South of Asia. And the same Spaniard trading in the City of
Canton within the kingdom of China, having laid his storehouse of abundance
in Manellia a City by him erected in Luzon one of the Illes of Phillippa a
bordring upon the cost of China, does by his common and ordenarie passages to
Iapan and other the borders of the coast know that the Est continent of Asia
lies due North and South so high as the promontory Tabin where the Scithian sea
and this maine occian of China are vnioyned. But with what care they labor to
conceal that matter of Hydrographie for the better preservation of their
fortunate estate, I refer to the excellent judgment of states men, that
painefully labor in the glorious administartion of a well governed Common
weal, so that by them Africa and Asia are proved in no part to join with
America thereby to hinder this passage.

By late experience to prove that America is an Island, and may be sailed round
about contrary to the former objection.
ASia Africa and Europa being proved to be conjoined and an Island, it now
rests to be known by what authority America is proved to be likewise an
Island, so that thereby all land impedimentes are removed, which might bread the
dread or uncertainty of this passage. The first Englishman that gave any
attempt upon the coasts of West India being part of America was Sir John
HauKins knight: who there and in that attempt as in many others sithins did and
has proved himself to be a man of excellent capacity, great government, and
perfect resolution. For before he attempted the same it was a matter* doubtful
and reported the extremest lymit of danger to sail upon those coasts. So that
it was generally in dread among us, such is the slow^es of our nation, for the
most part of us rather joy at home like Epicures to sit and carpe at other men's
hassardes our selves not daring to give any attempt (I mean such as are at
leisure to seek the good of their Country not being any ways employed as
payne^ull members of a common weal,) then either to further or give due
commendations to the deseruers. how then may Sir John Haukins be esteemed who
being a man of good account in his Country, of wealth and great employment, did
notwithstanding for the good of his Country, to procure trade, give that
notable and resolute attempt. Whose steps many hundreds following sithins have
made themselves men of good esteem, and fit for the service of her sacrid
majesty.

And by that his attempt of America (whereof Westindia is a part) is well
proved to be many hundred leagues distant from any part of Afric or Europe.

Then succeeded Sir Francis Drake in his famous and ever renowned voyage about
the world, who departing from Plymouth directed his course for the straightes
of Magillane, which place was also reported to be most dangerous by reason of
the continual violent and irresistable current that was reported to have
continual passage into the straightes, so that once entering therein there was
no more hope remaining of return, besides the peril of sheldes, straightnes
of ^ee passage, and uncertain wyndinges of the same, all which bread dread in
the highest degree, the distance and dangers considered. So that before his
revealing of the same the matter was in question, whether there were such a
passage or no, or whether Magillane did pass the same, if there was such a man
so named, but Sir Frauncis Drake, considering the great benefit that might
arise by his voyage through that passage, and the notable discoueries that
might be thereby performed, regarded not these dastardly affections of the idle
multitude, but considering with judgment that in nature there cold be no such
perpetuity of violence where the occian is in no sort straighted, proceeded
with discreet provision, and so departing from England arrived unto the same,
and with good success (through Gods most favorable mercy passed through)
wherein his resolution has deserved everlasting commendations. For the place
in view is dangerous and very unpleasing, and in the execution to pass
Nothing may seem more doubtful, for 14. leagues west within the cape of Saint
Maria lies the first straight, where it flows and ebbeth with violent
swiftnes, the straight not half a mile broad, the first fall into which
straight is very dangerous, and doubtful. This straight lasts in his
narrownes, 3. leage^ ^hen falling into an other sea 8. leages broad and 8.
leages through there lies the second straight due west South West from the
first, which course being unknown it is no small peril in finding this
second straightes, and that again is not a m^le broad and continues the
breadth 3. or 4. le^ge^ Southwest, with violent swiftnes of flowing and
reflowing, and there again he fall^th into an other Sea, through which due,
South South west, lies the cape froward, and his straight (so rightly named in
the true nature of his perverseness, for be the wind never so favorable, at that
cape it will be directly against you, with violent and dangerous flaughes)
where there are three places probable to continue the passage. But the true
straight lies from this cape West Nor West, where the land is very high all
covered with snow, and full of dangerous counterwindes, that beat with
violence from those huge mountains, from which cape the straight is never
brother then 2. leages and in many places not half a mile, without hope of
ancorage the channel being shore deep more then tow hundredth fadomes* and so
continues to the South sea forty leages only to be releued in little
dangerous coues, with many turnings and chang of courses, how perilous then was
this passage to Sir Frauncis Drake, to whom at that time no part thereof was
known. And being without relief of ancorage was enforced to follow his course
in the hell dark nights, and in all the fury of tempestious ^^ormes. I am the
holder to make t^is particulerrela^ion in the praise of his perfect constancy
and magnanemitye of spirit, because I hau^ thr^^e passed the same straights
and have felt the most bitter and mercyles fury thereof. B^t now knowing the
place as I do (for I have described every creke therein) I know it to be a
vo^age of as great certaynty, pleasure, and ease, as any whatsoever that
bears but the distaunce from England that these straightes do. And this
straight is found to be 1200. leages from any part of Africa so that truly
it is manifest that these two lands are by no small distance separated.

And after that Sir Frauncis was entered into the South seas he coasted all the
Western shores of America until he came into the Septentrionall latitude of
forty eight degrees being on the back side of newfound land. And from thence
shaping his course toward Asia found by his trauells that the Ills of Molucca
are distant from America more then two hundredth leages, how then ^an Asia and
Africa be conjoined and make one continent to hin^es the passage, the men yet
living that can reprove the same, but this conceit is the ba^^ard of ignorance
borne through the fornication of the malicious multitude that only des^r^ to
hin^er when themselves can do no good. Now their only rests the North
parts of America upon which coast my self have had (...) exp^rience of any in
our age, for (...) I (...) that ways employed for the discovery of this
notable passage, by the honerable care and some charge of Sir Frauncis
Walsingham knight principal secretory to her majesty, with whom diverse noble
men and worshipful merchantes of London joined in purse and willingness for the
furtherance of that attempt, but when his honor died the voyage was frindles,
and men's minds alienated from aduenturing therein. In my first voyage not
experienced of the nature of those clymattes, and having no direction either by
Chart Globe or other certain relation in what altitude that passage was to be
searched. I shaped a Northerly course and so sought the same toward the South,
and in that my Northerly course I fell upon the shore which in ancient time was
called Groynland five hundred leagues distant from the durseys West Nor West
Northerly, the land being very high and full of mighty mountains all covered
with snow no view of wood grass or earth to be seen, and the shore two
leages of into the sea so full of yse as that no shipping cold by any means
come near the same. The loathsome vewe of the shore, and Irksome noise of the
yse was such as that it bred strange conceits among us, so that we supposed
the place to be wast and void of any sencible or vegitable creatures, whereupon
I called the same desolation, so coasting this shore toward the South in the
latitude of sixty degrees, I found it to trend toward the west, I still
followed the leading thereof in the same height, and after fifty or sixty
leages, it failed and lay directly North, which I still followed and in thirty
leages sailing upon the West side of this coast by me named desolation, we were
past all the yse and found many green and pleasant Ills bordering upon the
shore, but the mountains of the maine were still covered with great quantities
of snow, I brought my ship among those ylls and there mored to refreshe our
selves in our weary travel, in the latitude of sixty four degrees or there
about. The people of the Country having espied our ships came down unto us in
their Canoes, holding up their right hand to the Sun and crying Yliaout,
would stricke their breasts, we doing the like the people came aborde our
ships, men of good stature, vnbearded, small eyed and of tractable
conditions* by whom as sign, would permit, we understood that toward the
North and West there was a great sea, and using the people with kindness in
giving them nails and knifes which of all things they most desired, we
departed, and finding the sea free from yse supposing our selves to be past all
danger we shaped our course West Nor West thinking thereby to pass for China,
but in the latitude of sixty six degrees, we fell with an other shore, and
there found an other passage of 20. leages broad directly West into the same*
which we supposed to be our hoped straight, we intered into the same thirty or
forty leages, finding it neither to wyden nor straighten, then considering
that the year was spent for this was in the five of August, and not knowing
the length of this straight and dangers thereof, we took it our best course to
return with notice of our good success for this small time of search. And so
retourning in a sharp fret of Westerly winds the 29. of September we arrived
at Dartmouth. And acquainting master Secretory with the rest of the honorable
and worshipful adventurers of all our procedinges. I was appointed again the
second year to search the bottom of this straight, because by all likelihood
it was the place and passage by us labored for. In this second attempt the
merchants of Exeter, and other places of the West became adventurers in the
action, so that being sufficiently furnished for six months, and having
direction to search this straightes, until we found the same to fall into an
other sea upon the West side of this part of America, we should again return
for then it was not to be doubted, but shiping with trade might safely be
conveyed to China and the parts of Asia. We departed from Dartmouth, and
ariuing unto the south part of ye cost of desolatio^ costed y^ same upon his
west shore to the lat. of 66. degres, and there ancored among the ylls
bordering upon the same, where we refreshed our selves, the people of this
place came likewise unto us, by whom I understood through their signs that
toward the North the (...) was large. At this place the chief shipe whereupon
I trusted, called the Mermayd of Dartmouth, found many occasions of
disconte^tment, and being unwilling to proceed she there fors^oke me. Then
considering how I had given my faith and most constant promise to my
worshipful good friend master William Sanderson, who of all men was the
greatest aduenturer in that action, and took such care for the perfourmance
thereof that he has to my knowledge at one time disbursed as much money as
any five others whatsoever out of his own purse, when some of the company have
bin slack in giving in their adventure. And also knowing that I should lose
the favor of master Secretory, if I should shrink from his direction, in one
small bark of thirty to^^es, whereof Master Sanderson was owner, alone without
farther comfort or company I proceeded on my voyage, and ariuing unto this
straights followed the same eighty leages until I came among many ylandes,
where the water did eb and flow six fadome upright, and where there had been
great trade of people to make train. But by such things as there we found we
knew that they were not Xpians of Europe that used that trade, in fine by
seaching with our boat, we found small hope to pass any farther that way,
and therefore retourning again recovered the sea and so coasted the shore
toward the South, and in so doing (for it was to late to search toward the
North) we found an other great inlett near forty leages broad where the
water entered in with violent swiftnes, this we likewise thought might be a
passage, for no doubt but the North parts of America are all ylands, by ought
that I could perceive therein, but because I was alone in a small bark of
thirty tonnes, and the year spent I entered not into the same for it was now
the seventh of September, but coasting the shore toward the South we saw an
incredible number of birds, having diverse fishermen aborde our bark they all
concluded that there was a great scull of fish, we being unprovided of
fishing furniture, with a long spike nail maid a hoke, and fastening the same
to one of our sounding lines, before the bayte was changed we took more then
forty great cods, the fish swimming so ^^^ndantly thick about our bark as
is incre^^^^e to be reported, of which with a small portion of salt that we
had, we preserved some thirty couple, or there aboutes, and so returned for
England. And having reported to master Secretory the whole success of this
attempt, he commanded me to present unto the most honorable Lord high
thresurer of England some part of that fish, which when his Lordship saw and
heard at large the relation of this second attempt, I received favorable
countenance from his honor, aduising me to prosecute the action, of which his
Lordship conceived a very good opinion. The next year although diverse of the
adventurers fell from the action, as all the western merchantes and most of those
in London yet some of the adventurers both honorable and worshipful continued
their willing favor and charge, so that by this means the next year 2.
ships were appointed for the fishing and one pynace for the discovery.

Departing from Dartmouth through gods merciful favor I arrived to the place of
fishing and there according to my direction I left the 2. ships to follow that
business, taking their faithful promise not to depart until my return unto
them, which should be in the fine of August, and so in the bark I proceeded
for the discovery but after my departure in sixteen days the ships had
finished their voyage, and so presently departed for England, without regard of
their promise, my self not distrusting any such hard measure proceeded in the
discovery and followed my course in the free and open sea between North and
Nor west to the latitude of sixty seven degrees and there I might see America,
West from me, and Desolation East, then when I saw the land of both sides, I
began to distrust that it would prove but a gulf, notwithstanding desirous to
know the full certaintye I proceeded, and in sixty eight degrees the passage
enlarged so that I could not see the western shore, thus I continued to the
latitude of seventy five degrees, in a great sea, free from yse coasting the
western shore of Desolation, the people came continually rowing out unto me in
their Cauoas twenty, forty, and one hundred at a time, and would give me fish
dried, Samon, Samon peale, cod, Caplin, Lump, stone base, and such like,
besides diverse kinds of birds, as Partrig, Fesant, Gulls, sea birds, and
other kinds of flesh, I still labored by signs to know from them what they
knew of any sea toward the North* they still made signs of a great sea as we
understood them, then I departed from that coast thinking to discover the North
parts of America, and after I had sailed toward the west near forty leages
I fell upon a great bancke of yse, the wind being North and blewe much, I was
constrained to coast the same toward the South, not seeing any shore West
from me, neither was there any yse toward the North, but a great sea, free,
large, very salt and blue and of an unsearchable depth. So coasting toward
the South I came to the place where I left the ships to fish, but found, them
not. Then being forsaken and left in this distress referring my self to the
merciful providence of God, shaped my course for England and unhoped for of
any God alone releuing me I arrived at Dartmouth, by this last discovery it
seemed most manifest that the passage was free and without impediment toward
the North, but by reason of the spanish fleet and unfortunate time of master
Secretoryes death the voyage was omitted and never since attempted. The cause
why I use this particular relation of all my procedinges for this discovery, is
to stay this objection, why has not Dauis discovered this passage being thrice
that ways employed? how far I proceeded and in what form this discovery
lies, does appear upon the Globe which master Sanderson to his very great
charge has published whose laboring endeavor for the good of his country,
deserves great favor and commendations. Made by master Emery Mullineux a man
well qualited of a good judgment and very expert in many excellent practices,
in my self being the only mean with master Sanderson to employ master
Mulineux therein, whereby he is now* grown to a most exquisite perfection.

Anthony de Mendoza viceroy of Mexico, sent certain of his captains by land,
and also a navy of ships by sea to search out the Norwest passage, who
affirmed by his letters dated from Mexico in Anno 1541. unto the Emperor
being then in Flaunders that toward the Norwest he had found the kingdom
of Cette, Citta, Alls, Ceuera, seven cities, and how beyond the said kingdom
farther toward the Norwest, Francis^o Vasques of Coronado having passed great
deserts came to the sea side, where he found certain ships which sailed by
that sea with merchandise, and had in their banners upon the prows of their
ships, certain fowls made of gold and silver, named Alcatrazzi, and that
the mariners signified unto him by signs, that they were thirty days coming
to that haven, whereby he understood that those could be of no other country
but of Asia, the next known continent toward the West. And farther the said
Anthony affirmed that by men well practiced he understood that 950. leages of
that country was discovered upon the same Sea, now if the cost in that distance
of leages should lie to the West, it would then adioyne with the North parts
of Asia, and then it would be a far shorter voyage then thirty days sailing,
but that it is nothing near Asia by former authority is sufficiently
expressed, then if it should lie toward the North it would extend it self
almost unto the pole, a voyage over tedious to be performed by land travel.
Therefore of necessity this distance of 950. leages must lie between the North
and East, which by Anthony de Especio in his late trauells upon the North of
America is sufficiently discovered, then this being so the distance is very
small between the East part of this discovered Sea and the passage wherein I
have so painefully labored, what does then hinder us of England unto whom of
all nations this discovery would be most beneficial to be incredulus ^low of
understanding, and necligent in the highest degree, for the search of this
passage which is most apparently proved and of wonderful benefit to the
universal state of our country. Why should we be thus blinded seeing our
enemies to posses the fruits of our blessedness, and yet will not perceive the
same. But I hope the eternal majesty of God the sole disposer of all things
will also make this to appear in his good time.

Cornelius Nepos recyteth, that when Quintus Metellus Caesar was proconsull for
the Romans in France, the king of Sweuia gave him certain Indians, which
sailing out of India for merchandise were by tempest driven upon the coasts of
Germany, a matter very strange that Indians in the fury of storms should ariue
upon that coast, it rests now carefully to consider by what wind they were
so driven, if they had been of any part of Africa how could they escape the
ylls of cape Verd, or the ylles of Canaria the coasts of Spain France
Ireland or England to ariue as they did, but it was never known that any the
natyues of Afric or Ethiopia have used shippings. Therefore they could not be
of that part of the world, for in that distance sailing they would have been
starued if no other shore had given them relefe.

And that they were not of America is very manifest, for upon all the Est
part of that continent, being now thereby discovered, it has not at any time
been perceived that those people were ever accustomed to any order of shiping,
which appears by the ariuall of Colon upon those coasts, for they had his
shipping in such wonderful admiration that they supposed him and his company,
to have descended from heaven, so rare and strange a thing was shiping in their
eyes. Therefore those Indians could not be of America safely to be driven
upon the chastes of Germany, the distance and impedimentes well considered.

Then coming neither from Afric nor America, they must of necessity come from
Asia by the Noreast, or Norwest, passages. But it should seem that they came
not by the Noreast to double the promontory Tabin, to be forced through the
scithia^ sea, and to have good passage through the narrow straight of Noua
Zemla and never to recover any shore is a matter of great imposibilitie.
Therefore it must needs be concluded that they came, by the North parts of
America through that discovered sea of 950. leages, and that they were of those
people which Francisco Vasques of Coronado discovered, all which premises
considered there remains no more doubting but that the lands are disioyned
and that there is a Nauigable passage by the Norwest, of God for us alone
ordained, to our infinite happiness, and for the ever being glory of her
majesty, for then her stately seat of London, should be the storehouse of
Europe: the nurse of the world: and the renown of nations, in yelding all
foreign natural benefits, by an easy rate, in short time returned unto us,
and in ye fulness of their natural perfection: by natural participatio^ through
the world of all natural and artificial benefits, for want whereof at this
present the most part live distressed: and by the excellent comoditie of her
seat, the mightines of her trade, with force of shipping thereby arising, and
most abundant access and intercourse from all the kingdoms of the world,
then should the idle hand be scorned, and plenty by industry in all this land
should be proclaimed.

And therefore the passage procued, and the benefits to all most apparent, let
us no longer neglect our hapines, but like christians with willing and
voluntary spirits labor without fainting for this so excellent a benefit.

To prove by experience that the sea fryseth not.
Having sufficiently proved that there is a passage without any land
impediments to hinder the same, contrary to the first objection, it now
rests that the other supposed impedimentes he likewise answered. And first
as touching the frost and fresing of the seas, it is supposed that the frozen
Zone is not habitable and seas innauigable by reason of the vehemency of cold,
by the divine creator allotted to ye part of the world, and we are drawn into
ye absurdity of this opinion by a coniectural reason of the suns far distance
and long absence under the Horyzon of the greatest part of that Zone, whereby
the working power of cold perfourmeth the fullness of his nature, not having
any contrary disposition to hinder the same, and when the Sun by his presence
should comfort that part of the world, his beams are so far removed from
perpendicularitie by reason of his continual ueerenes to the Horizon, (...)
that the effects thereof answer not the violence of the winters cold. And
therefore those seas remain for ever undissolved. Which if it be so, that the
nature of cold can congeale the seas, it is very likely that his first working
power, begins upon the upper face of the waters, and so descending works
his effect, which if it were, how then comes it to pass that ships sail
by the North cape, to Saint Nicholas five degrees or more within the frozen
Zone, and find the seas free from pester of yse, the farther from the shore
the clearer from yse. And my self likewise how could I have sailed to the
septentrionall latitude of seventy five degrees, being nine degrees within
the frozen Zone, between two lands where the sea was straightned not forty
leages bro^de in some places, and thereby restrained from the violent motion
and set of the maine occi^^, an^ yet found the same Nauigable and free from
yse not only in the midst of the channel, but also close aborde the estern
shore by me (...) Desolation, and therefore what need the repetition of
authoritics from writers, or wrested Philosophical reasons, when plain
experience makes the matter so manifest, and yet I deny not but that I have
seen in some part of those seas, tow sorts of yse, in very great quantity, as
a kind of yse by seamen named yla^^s of yse, being very high above the water,
forty and fifty fadomes by estimation and higher, and ^uery of those have
been seven times as much under the water, which I have proved by taking a
^eece of yse, and have put the fame in a vessel of salt water, and still have
found the seventh part thereof to be above the water, into what ^orme soever I
have reduced the same, and this kind of yse is nothing but snow, which falls
in th^se great pieces, from the high mountains bordering close upon the shore
deep seas. (For all the sea coasts of Desolatoin are mountains of equal
height with the Pike of Tenerif, with very great valleys between them) which
I have seen incredible to be reported, that upon the top of some of these
ylls of yse, there have been stones of more then one hu^^reth ^^mes wayght,
which in his fall, that snow has torn from the clyffs, and in falling makes
such an horible noise as if their were one hundredth canons shot of at one
instant, and this kind of yse is very white and fresh, and with shore winds
is many times beaton far of into the seas, perhaps twenty leagues and that is
the farthest distance that they have ever bin seen from the shore. The other
kind is called flake yse, blue, very heard and thin not above three fadomes
thick at the farthest, and this kind of yse bordreth close upon the shore. And
as the nature of heat with apt vessels deuideth the pure spirit from his
gross parts by the coning practice of distillation: so does the cold in
these regions divide and congeale the fresh water from the salt, nere such
shores where by the abundance of fresh rivers, the saltnes of the sea is
mittigated, and not else where, for all yse in general being dissolved is very
fresh water, so that by the experience of all that have ever traveled toward
the North it is well known, that the sea never fryseth, but we know that the
sea dissolueth this yse with great speed, for in twenty four hours I have
seen an ylande of yse turn up and down, as the common phrase is, because it
has melted so fast under water that the heauior part has been upward,
which has been the cause of his so turning, for the heuiest part of all
things swiming is by nature downwards, and therefore since the sea is by his
heat of power to dissolve yse, it is greatly against reason that the same
should be frozen, so that the congealation of the seas can be no hinderance to
the execution of this passage, contrary to the former objection, by late
experience reproved, yet if experience wanted, in ordenary reason men should
not suppose nature to be monstrous, for if all such yse and snow as
congealeth and descends in the winter, did not by natures benefit dissolve in
the summer, but that the cold were more actual the^ the heat, that difference
of inequallitie be it never so little would by time bread natures overthrow,
for if the one thousand part of the yse which in winter is congealed, did the
next Summer remain undissolved, that continual diffrence sithins the worlds
creation would not only have converted all those North seas into yse, but
would also by continual access of snow have extended himself above all the
ayers regions, by which reason all such exalations as should be drawn from the
earth and seas within the temperate zones and by winds driven into these
sti^fe regions, that moisture was no more to be hoped for that by dissolution
it should have any return, so that by time the world should be left
waterlesse. And therefore how ridiculus this imagination of the seas frysing
is. I refer to the worlds general opinion.

That the air in cold regions is tolerable.
ANd now for a full answer of all objections, if the air be proved
tolerable then this most excellent and commodious passage, is without al
contradiction to be performed. And that the air is tolerable as well in the
winter as in the Summer is thus proved. The inhabitants of Moscouia, Lapland
Swethland, Norway, and Tartaria, omit not to travel for their commodity: in the
deepest of winter, passing by sleades over the yse and congealed snow being
made very slipperie and compact like yse by reason of much wearing and trading*
having the use of a kind of stag by them called Reen to draw those their
sleades.

Groynland (by me lately named Desolation) is likewise inhabited by a people of
good stature and tractable conditions, it also mayntayneth diverse kind of
fowls and beasts, as deers, foxes, hares, and other beasts which I have
their seen, but know not their names, and these must travel for their food
in winter, and therefore the air is not intolerable in the extremest nature
of coldness: and for the quality thereof in Summer, by my own experience I
know that upon the shore it is as hot there as it is at the ylls of cape de
Verde in which place there is such abundance of moskeetes, (a kind of gnat
that is in India very offensive and in great quantity) as that we were strong
with them like lepers, not being able to have quiet being upon the shore.

And under the clyfe in the pooles ^^to which the streams arise not, I have
found salt in great plenty as why^e as the salt of May^ cougeled ^ro^ the salt
water which ye spring tids bring into those poles, which could not be but by
the benefit of a notable heat, of which f^le I brought with me and gave to
master Secretory Walsingham and to master Sanderson, as a rare thing to be
found in those parts, and farther the same was of an extraordenary saltnes. And
therefore it is an idle dream that the air should there be insufferable for
our selves have with the water of those seas made salt, because we desired to
know whether the benifit of the sun were the cause of this coagulation, what
better confirmation then can there be then this?

Island is likewise inhabited and yeldeth hawks in great store, as falcons,
Ierfalco^s, lanardes and sparrow hawks, ravens, crows, bears, hares, and
foxes, with horses and other kind of cattle upon which coast in August and
September the yse is utterly dissolved, all which the premises are certainly
verified, by such as use trade thither from, Lubec, Hambro Amsterdam, and
England yearly, then why should we dread this feigned distempreture? From cold
regions come our most costly fures as sables being esteemed for a principal
ornament and the beasts that yield us those furrs are chiefly hunted in the
winter, how grievous then shall we think the winter to be, or how
insu^^erable the air, where this little tender beast lives so well, and where
the hunters may search the denn^s and hauntes of such beasts through the woods
and snow.

Vpsaliensi^ affirms that he has felt the Summer nights in gotland scarcely
tolerable for heat, whereas in rome he has fel^ them cold.

The mountains of Norway and Swethland are fruitful of metalls in which
silver and copper are con^oct and molten in veins, which may scarcely be done
with fornaces, by which reason also the vapors and hot exhalations pearcing the
earth and the waters and through both those natures breathing forth into the
air, tempereth the quantity thereof making it tolerable, as wytt^es the huge
bigues of whales in those seas, with the strength of body and long life of such
beasts as live one the land, which thing could not be except all things were
there comodiously nourished, by the benefit of the heaven and the air, for
nothing that in time of increase is hindered by any injury or that is evil seed
all the time it lives can prosper well.

Also it is a thing undoubtedly known by experience that upon the coasts of
newfounde land (at such time as the yse remains undissolved upon those
shores) the wind being esterly coming from the seas, causes very sharp
cold, and yet the same is sufferable, but coming from the shore, yt presently
yeldeth ^eat abo^nda^tly according to ye true nature of the scituatio^ of y^
place, whereby it pl^^nely appears that the very breath of the yse is rather
the cause of this cold, then the distempreture of the air.

Wherefore if in winter where is abundance of yse and snow the air is so
sufferable, as that traueling and hunting may be exercised, how much rather may
we judge the seas to be Nauigable, and that in the depest of winter, where
there is neither yse nor snow that may yield any such damps or cold breathings
to the anoiance of such as shall take these interprises in hand. And therefore
the Summer in no sort to be feared, but some curious wit may object that the
natural anoyance of cold is prevented by reason of the travel of the body
with other artific^all provisions to defend the fury thereof as als^ the whot
vapors which the earth may yield* ^hereof experience urges confession, but upon
the seas it cannot be since it is a cold body subject to yield great dampes and
cold brethinges, most offensive to nature. To the which I answer in the
universal knowledge of all creatures, that God the most glorious
incomprehensible, and ever being sole creator of all things visible,
invisible, rational, irrational, momentory and eternal in his divine
providence has made nothing vncommunicabl, but has given such order unto all
things, whereby every thing may be tolerable to the next, the extremities of
ellements consent with their next the air is gross about the earth and water,
but thinn and hot about the fire, by this providence in nature the sea is very
salt, and salt (says Pliny) yeldeth the fatnes of oil, but oil by a
certain native heat is of property agreeable to fire, the sea then being all
of such quality by reason of the saltnes thereof moves and stirs up
generatiue heat. etc. Whereby the sea has a working force in the dissolution
of yse, for things of so great contrariety as heat and cold have together no
affinitye in conjunction, but that the one must of necessirye avoid, the seas
not being able by the ^andes of nature to step back, does therefore cause the
coldness of the air (by reason of his natural heat) to give place, whereby
extremities being avoided, the air must of necessity remain temperate, for
in nature the air is hot and moist, the cold then being but accidental is
the sooner avoided* and natures wrongs with ease redressed.

That under the Pole is the place of greatest dignity.
REason teaches us and experience confirms the same, that the Sun is the
only sufficient cause of heat through the whole world And therefore in such
places where the Sun has longest continuance, the air there rece^eth the
greatest impression of heat, as also in his absence it is in like fort aflicted
with cold* And as the heat in all clymates is indurable, by the ^ternall
ordinance of the creator, so likewise the cold is sufferable by his
everlasting decree, for otherwise nature should be monstrous and his creation
wast, as it has been ydly affirmed by the most Cosmographicall writers,
distinguishing the sphere into five zones, have concluded three of them to be
wast, as vaynely created, the buring Zone between the two tropikes, and the
two frozen Zones, but experience having reproved the grosenes of that error
it shall be needless to say farther therein. For although in the burning Zone
the sun beams are at such right angles as that by the actual reuerberation
thereof the lower reg^o^ of the air is greatly by that reflection warmed, yet
his equal absence breadeth such mitigacion as that there we find the air
tolle^able, and the countries pleasant and fruitful, being populus and well
inhabited: so likewise under the pole being the center of the supposed ^rozen
Zone, during the time that the Sun is in the South signs, which is from the
thirteenth of September unto the 10. of March, it is there more cold then in
any place of the world, because the Sun in all that time does never appear
above the Horyzon, but during the time that the Sun is in the North signs
which is from the tenth of march unto the thirteenth of September he is in
continual view to all such as posses that place, by which his continual
presence, he works that notable effect, as that thereby all the force of
frising is wholly redressed and utterly taken away, working then and there more
actual then in any other part of the world. In which place their continual
day from the Sun rising to the sun setting is equal with twenty six wekes
and five days, after our rate: and their night is equal with twenty five
weeks and three days such as we have, so that our whole year is withthem but
one night and one day, a wonderful difference from all the rest of the world,
and therefore no doubt but those people have a wonderful excellency, and an
exceeding prorogatiue above all nations of the earth, and this which is more to
be noted. In all other places of the world the absence and presence of the Sun
is in equal proportion of time, having as much night as day, but under the
Pole their artificial day (that is the continual presence of the Sun before
he set) is nine of our natural days or two hundredth 16. hours longer then
is their night, whereby it appears that they have, the life, light, and
comfort of nature in a higher measure then all the nations of the earth. How
blessed then may we think this nation to be? For they are in perpetual light,
and never know what darkness means, by the benefit of twylight and full
moons, as the learned in Astronomy do very well know, which people if they
have the notice of their ^ternitie by the comfortable light of the Gospel, then
are they blessed and of all nations most blessed. Why then do we neglect the
s^^rch of this excellent discovery, against which there can be nothing said to
hinder the same: Why do we refu^e to see the dignity of Gods Creation, since it
has pleased his divine majesty to place us the nerest neighbor thereunto. I
know there is no true englishman y^ can in conscience refuse to be a contribute^
to procure this so great a hapines to his country, whereby not only the Prince
and mighty men of the land shall be highly renowned, but also the merchant
tradesman and artificet mightily inrich^^.

And now as touching the last objection, that the want of skill in Na^igation
with curious i^strumentes, should be the hinderance or over throw of this
action. I hold that to be so frivolous as not worth the answering, for it is
well known that we have globes in the most excellent perfection of art, and
have the use of them in as exquisite sort, as master Robert Hues in his book of
the globes use, lately published has at large made known, and for Horizontall
paradoxall and great circle sailing I am my self a witness in the behalf of
many, that we are not ignorant of them, as lately I have made known in a
brief treatis of Nauigacion naming it the Seamans Secreats. And therefore this
as the rest breadeth no hinderance to this most commodious discovery.

What benefits would grow unto England^ by this passage being discovered.
THe benifits which may grow by this discovery, are copious and of two sorts, a
benifit spiritual, and a benifit corporal. Both which since by the laws of
God and nature, we are bound to regard, yet principally we are admonished first
to seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all things
shall be given unto us. And therefore in seeking the kingdom of God we are not
only tied to the deep search of Gods sacrid word, and to live within the
perfect lymits of christianity, but also by all means we are bound to multiply
and increase the flock of the faithful. Which by this discovery will be most
abundantly performed, to the preservation of many thousands, which now most
miserably are covered under the loathsome veil of ignorance, neither can we in
any sort doubt of their recovery by this passage discovered, Gods providence
therein being considered, who most mercifully says by the mouth of his prophet
Esaias, 66. I will come to gather all people and tongues, then shall they come
and see my glory, of them that shall be saved I will send some to the ge^tils
in the sea* and theyls far of that have not heard speak of me and have not seen
my glory shall preach my peace among the Gentiles.

And in his 65. Chapter he farther says. They seek me that hitherto have not
asked for me, they find me that hitherto have not sought me.

And again chapter 49. I will make ways upon all my mountains, and my
footpathes shall be exalted, and behold these shall come from far, some from
the North and West, some from the land of Symis which is in the South. Then
since it is so appointed that there shall be one shepherd and one flock, what
hinders us of England (being by Gods mercy for the same purpose at this
present most apely prepared) not to attempt that which God himself has
appointed to be performed, there is no doubt but that we of England are this
saved people by the eternal and infallible presence of ye lord predestined to
be sent unto these Gentiles in the sea, to those ylls and famous kingdoms there
to preach the peace of the Lord; for are not we only set upon mount Sion to
give light to all the rest of the world, have not we the true handmayd of the
Lord to rule us, unto whom the eternal majesty of God has reveled his truth
and supreme power of excellencye, by whom then shall the truth be preached, but
by them unto whom the truth is reveled, it is only we therefore that must be
these shining messengers of the Lord and none but we, for as the prophet says.
O how beutifull are the feet of the messenger that brings the message from
the mountain, that proclameth peace, that brings the good tidings and
preaches health and says to Sion thy God is king, so that hereby the
spiritual benefit arising by this discovery is most apparent, for which if
there were no other cause we are all bound to labor with purse and mind for
the discovery of this notable passage.

And now as touching the corporal and worldly benifits which will thereby
arise our own late experience leads us to the full knowledge thereof. For as
by the community of trade grows the mightines of riches, so by the kind and
guide of such tradinges may grow the multiplication of such benefits with
assurance how the same may in the best sort be continued* In the consideration
whereof it is first to be regarded with what commodities our own country
abounds either natural or artificial, what quantity may be spared, and where
the same may with greatest advantage be vented. And in the sale or forrayne
passage thereof* we must respect what commodities either natural or
artificial our country is deprived of, and where the same may with the easiest
rate be gained, and how in his best nature unto us returned, all which by this
passage shall be unto us most plentifully effected, and not only that, but
this also which is most to ^e regarded that in our thus trading we shall by no
means enrich the next adjoining states unto us, for ri^ches bread dread, and
poverty increases fear, but here I cease fering to offend, yet it is a
qu^stion whether it were better by an easy rate to bent our commodities far of,
or by a more plentiful gain to pass them to our nearer neighbors, and those
thereby more enriched then our selfs, the premises considered we find our
country to abound with woll and woollen cloth, with lead, tin, copper, and iron,
matters of great moment, we also know our soil to be fertile, and would if
trad did so permit have equal imploiment with any our neighbors, in linen
cloth, ^ustians, seys, grograms, or any other foreign artificial commodities,
besides the excellent labors of the artsmen, either in metallyne mechanical
faculties or other artificial ornaments, whereof India is well known to
receive all that Europa can afford, rating our commodities in the highest
esteem of valewe, which by this passage is speedily performed, and then none
of these should lie dead upon our hands as now they do, neither should we be
then ignorant as now we are in many excellent practices into which by trade we
should be drawn. And by the same passage in this ample vent, we should also
at the first hand receive all Indian commodities both natural and artificial
in a far greter measure by an easier rate, and in better condition, then now
they are by many exchaunges brought unto us, then would all nations of Europe
repair unto Englan^ not only for these foreign merchandises, by reason of
their plenty, perfection, and easy rates, but also to pass away that which God
in nature has bestowed upon them and their country, whereby her majesty and
her highness successors for ever, should be monarks of the earth and commanders
of the Seas, through the abundance of trade her coustomes would be mightily
augmented, her state highly enriched and her force of shipping greatly advanced
as that thereby she should be to all nations most dredful, and we her
subjects through imploime^t should embrace abundance and be clothed with
plenty. The glory whereof would be a deadly horrer to her adversaries, increase
frindly love with all, and procure her majesty stately and perpetual peace,
for it is no small advantage y^ arises to a state, by the mightines of trade:
being by necessity ^inked to no other nation the same also being in
commodities of the highest esteem, as gold, silver, stones of price, Iuells,
pearls, spice drugs, silks raw and wrought, velluetts cloth of gold, beside
many other commodities with us of rare and high esteem, whereof as yet our
country is by nature deprived, al which India does yield at reasonable rates in
great abundance receiving ours in the highest esteem, so that hereby plenty
retourning by trade abroad, and no small quantity provided by industry at
home, all want then banished in the abundance of her majesty's royalty so
through dred in glory, peace and love, her majesty should be the commanding
light of the world: and we her subjects the stars of wonder to al nations of
the earth. Al which ye premises considered it is impossible that any true
English heart should be stayed from willing contribution to the performance of
this so excellent a discovery, the Lords and subjects spiritual for the sole
publication of Gods glorious gospel. And the Lords and and subjects temporal
for the renown of their prince, and glory of their nation should be thereunto
most vehemently affected. Which when it shall so please God in the mightines of
his mercy, I beseech him to effect. Amen.

FINIS.

