Mirum in modum.

A Glimpse of Gods Glory and The Souls Shape.

Eyes must be bright, or else no eyes at all
Can see this sight, much more then mystical.


LONDON Printed for William Aspley. 1602.

To the most noble, judicious, and my best beloved Lord, William Earl of
Pembrooke; the most honorable Sir Robert Sidney Knight, Lord Governor of
Vlishing; and the right right worshipful Edward Herbert of Mountgomery Esquire,
my most honored and respected Friends.
TO subdiuide Souls indivisible,
(Being wholly in the whole, and in each part)
For me were more then most impossible,
Though I were Art it self, or more then Art.
Yet must I make my Soul a Trinity,
So to divide the same, between you three;
For Understanding, Will, and Memory,
Makes but one Soul, yet they three Virtues be.
The Understanding being first, I give
Unto the first; (for Order so does crave)
And Will (Good Will) the second shall receive.
Then Memory the last shall ever have.
And as I part my Soul, my Book I part
Betwixt you three, that shares my broken heart.
All yours wholly, and to you most humbly devoted John Dauies.

Mirum in modum A glimpse of Gods Glory, and the Souls shape
Wlt yield me words, Wits words Wisdom bewray.
My Soul, infuse thy self in it Sames divine.
The froath of Wit, O Wisdom skumme away;
Powder these lines with thy preserving Brine:
Refresh their saltness, salt their freshness fine;
That Wits sweet words, of Wisdoms salt may taste,
Which can from crude Conceit corruption stay,
And make the same eternally to last,
Though in Oblivion be buried ay
The skumme of Wit, the witty Skummes repast,
Which like light skum, with those lewd Skums does waste
O Thou maine Ocean of celestial light,
(From whom all Lights derive their influence)
The light of Truth infuse into my sprite,
And clear the eyes of my Intelligence,
That they may see my Souls circumference,
Wherein the Mind as Center placed is.
Wherein thou restest Center of true Rest,
Compassed with glory, and vncompass'd bliss,
Which do thy Lodge with glorious light inuest,
-- Then lighten thy dark Inn, O glorious Ghest.
The Soul of Man immortal and divine,
By Natures light beholds the light of Nature,
Like as the Bodies eyes when Sun does shine,
Do by the Sun behold the Suns fair feature:
So by that light she sees she is a Creature;
Created to her fair Creators form,
In Wisdom, Knowledge, and such goodly graces
Which do the Understanding right inform,
To guide the Will aright in sundry cases,
Whenas the Sense deluded, Reason out-faces.
For as the Uaynes the body ouer-spreds,
And to its utmost bounds themselves extend:
So Science in the Soul from certain heads,
In great variety her veins does send,
To whatsoever the soul may comprehend.
This is her Birthright, with the body borne,
Kind Natures larges given with hand displayed,
Which does the Mind illustrate and adorn:
To, and from whom, all knowledge is conuai'd,
That tends unto the soul or bodies aid.
Which is deduced from power more supreme,
Then in th'externall Senses does reside,
This light proceeds from that infused beam,
Which in the Souls supreamest part does bide,
The Bodies motions and her own to guide.
For though th'incomprehensible has stamped,
His wisdom in his works to prove his Being,
Yet all save Man, from this Light is exempt,
By which the Souls eyes sees (past sense of Seeing)
Celestial sweets with her sweet self agreeing*
For the outward Senses Beasts with us enjoy,
Nay they possess the same in greater power:
But yet those Senses they cannot employ
To Reasons use, and Understandings cure,
But these effects do flow from Sense more sure,
Which from an understanding Soul proceeds,
Yet naught that Understanding does digest,
But first on it the outward Senses feeds:
Both which inuites the Will unto their feast,
Those Senses being tasters to the rest.
Then if the Senses be affected ill,
Or apprehend their Objects with offense,
They wrong the Understanding and the Will:
With false report of their experience.
But first they misse-informe the Intelligence,
It giving credit to their information,
Misse-leads the Will (that way ward is by kind)
Which moves the Members wih all festination:
(Being isntrumental agents of the Mind)
To do what ere the Senses pleasant find.
But when we say the Understanding seazeth
On naught but what the Senses first surprizeth,
Its meant of things that pleases, or displeases,
And to the Senses sensibly arises:
Then hereupon the common Sense deuiseth,
And then transferres it to the Intellect,
Which by her power inherent does discourse,
By Reasons rules from Causes to the effect:
And being there, runs forth with greater force,
Till Judgment (with strong hand) does stay her course.
Herehence it is, the Soul her self does know,
Her own effects she to her self discloseth,
So to herself, herself, herself does show,
By powers which she within hirselfe encloseth;
Whereof hirselfe, not of hirselfe disposes;
But are directed by a higher Power,
Yet has she eyes to see, and sense to feel,
The way unto hirselfe (though most obscure)
Which hirselfe virtues to hirselfe reveal,
Through which she wots what works her woe or weal.
This knowledge of the unknown part of Man,
(Namely the known Souls unknown part)
From Man is hid since he to sin began,
For Ignorance of Sin is the just smart,
Which now does hold enthralled his unjust heart.
But since the Soul is such a precious thing,
As cost the price of past-price dearest blood,
Then can no knowledge more advantage bring,
Then knowledge of the Soul, as first she stood,
Or since she fell from her extremest Good.
For she enwombes worlds of variety,
Of Sunne-bright Beauties and celestial Sweetes,
United all in perfect sympathy,
Whereas the Mind with diverse Pictures meets,
Which Fancy forms, and from the Fancy fleetes.
From whence proceeds all marvelous Inventions,
Which do produce all Arts and Sciences
That Doubts resolve, and do dissolve Dissentions,
Touching the universal Essenses,
Subject to our inward, or our outward Senses.
Then what Soul on the Soul excogitates,
But it is rapt with joy and wonderment,
Since when the Mind but her adumberates
(In Fancies forge) it feels such rauishment,
As yeeldes therewith a heaven of high content:
Then since all Weal, or Woe, that us befall,
Flows from the Soul, as from their special Spring,
We should not to her Weal be neuterall,
But study to preserve that precious thing,
As that conserues the Soul and Bodies Being.
Wherein three Faculties still working be,
Animal, Vital, and the Natural,
The Animal divided is in three,
Motive, Sensitive, and Principal.
The Principal has three parts special,
Imagination, Reason, Memory.
The power Sensitive includes the powers
Of the external Senses seu'rally.
The Motive power, the Corpse to stir procures,
As long as Vital faculty indures.
Which Faculty is seated in the Heart,
Infusing Spirits of Life through every vain.
The virtues Animal do play their part,
In all the seu'rall cauerns of the Brain.
The virtues Natural the womb contain;
Which do consist of three essential parts,
Feeding, Growing, and Ingendering;
Which subdivided are by Natures Arts
Into six Faculties, with them working,
And common to them all in every thing.
The first and second, with the third and fourth,
Attracts, retains, concocts, and distributes;
The fifth, and sixth, encorp'rates and puts forth
What is supersluous. And thus executes
Their pow'res as one, though sextiplied in suits*
The food the Mouth prepares for the Maw;
The Maw forthwith prepares it for the Liver,
From whence a sanguine tincture it does draw,
And then unto the Heart does it deliver,
Who in the nerves and veins it soon does sever.
Then through those channels of the blood it flows,
Through all the limbs, to give them nourishment,
And by those condites to the Brain it goes,
(Whereas the Soul does hold her Parliment,
To give Laws for the Bodies government:)
Where, if the food be fine and delicate,
It turns to blood, that in the Brain does breed
Those Spirits fine, that do refine the pate,
And crown the same with glory for its meede,
For Glory Spirits refined does succeed.
The like is found between th'internall Senses,
And those same Powers, and virtues Animal.
First must a Power receive the Images
That formed are in the Senses corporal,
Which Power is called, the power Fantastical:
This is the Souls eye (seeing all unseen)
Which viewes those Senses objects being absent,
And of th'internall Senses is the mean;
They to the Memory the same present,
Who safely keeps that which to her is sent.
Thus then the Fantasy attracts we see,
The Memory retains, and Reas'on digest:
Judgment distributes all in their degree;
Experience then incorporates the best:
And Wisdom by her power expells the rest.
Now for these Senses, Powers, and Faculties,
Have all their Organs seated in the Brain,
Order requires that we particularize
What cauernes in the scull the same contain,
And in what manner they do there remain.
Which Caves or Cells distinguished are with skin,
Or subtle Membranes, and so being divided,
The Head is like a House, that is within
Too many rowmes, or chambers subdivided,
Vaulted with Bone, and with Bone likewise sided;
The skin that rafters, or else lines the roof,
Is hard, for durance, and thick, to enwall,
Which is the skin of Skins, a skin of proof,
That Dura matter lo, the Latins call,
For it enwombes the rest from dangers all.
The use whereof, is to preserve the Brain,
(When it does move) from hardness of the Scull;
For discreet Nature makes naught in vain,
Whose tender providence, of care is full:
With Means she does Extremes together pull.
It likewise serves to give a passage free;
For all the Veins the Brains to feed and guide,
Whereby the vital spirits may governed be,
And likewise into parts the Brain divide,
Before, behind, on this, and on that side.
Besides this Membrane, there is yet another,
More fine and subtle, wou'n of many veins,
Hight Piamater, or the godly Mother,
Which in her womb does subdiuide the Brains,
And them in seu'rall secret Celles contains,
Wherein the Soul does use her chiefest Pow'res,
Namely the Animal; and Rational.
Therefore all brains of Beasts are less then ours,
Ours fill their Cells and well-neere Scull and all.
Which do refine the Spirits Animal.
Those Spirits that thus the Brains repurifie,
Procures the Bodies vnconceiued bliss;
And serves as Organs to Reas'ns faculty:
Which in the Soul the highest virtue is,
That her corrects, if she directs amiss.
Four Ventricles or concaues close conioyn'd,
In substance of the Brain, Dame Nature seats,
With mutual passages which are assigned:
For all the Spirits egresse which Sense creates,
For Nature all, to all, communicates.
Those Cells wherein this witty work's begun,
Are made by right more rowmsome then the rest,
Of those to which the Spirits well-wrought do run:
For there they purge their bad, and keep their best,
For the last Uentricles, which are the least.
Two of the foremost then like Cressents twain,
Placed on each side the Head, are most complete.
The third's in middle Region of the Brain,
Where Reason rules, and holds her royal Seat,
The Fourth's behind, where Memory is great.
The Brayn-presse, into which the Blood is pressed,
(That gives the Brains their vital nutriment,)
Is compast with those concaues (with the rest,)
By which the Soul effects her intent,
As with her worke-performing Instrument.
Likewise an Organ made most curiously.
(Like little Wheels together close connext)
Is placed as Portall of the Memory,
To let the Spirits swift passage, lest perplexed,
It might be by their throng, and shrowdly vexed.
From the midde Uentricle, unto the last,
A pipe does pass as Chariot of the Sp'rites;
There to, and fro, they come and go in have,
In mutual wise as Nature them incites,
To do their duties, and perform their rites.
In this part of the Brain the Brayn-wrights skill,
And wisdom infinite do most appear.
And here to Man he shows his great good will.
For he imprints his own Character there;
Wherein his divine Nature shines clear.
Which we the more perspicuously should see,
If we could see to which internal Sense
Each of these parts pertayne, or Vessels be;
Wherein the Soul most shows her excellence.
But this surmounts the Minds intelligence,
For such a Mystrie is embozomed,
In Wisdoms Breast, chest of such Secrets hie,
Which is with obscure clouds environed.
That it is concealed from the Eagles eye,
Much more from Man, that sees but here by.
Thus having slightly touched this tender part,
(For I could not but touch it thus at least;
Because the Soul therewith performs her Art,)
It now remains to prosecute the rest:
Of what my Muse touching the Mind expressed.
Imagination, Fancy, Common-sence,
In nature brooketh odds or union,
Some makes them one, and some makes difference,
But we will use them with distinction.
With sense to shun the Sense confusion.
The Common-sence (whose local situation,
The Forehead holds) has that name assigned:
Because it first takes common information
Of all the outward Senses in their kind.
Of inward Senses this is first I find,
Ordained to sort, and sever every thing,
According to its nature properly,
Which the outward Senses to this Sense do bring,
And then transmitteth it successively,
To each more inward Senses faculty.
The outward Senses then, cannot discern,
What they do apprehend but by this Sense,
Of which those Senses all their science learn:
And unto which their skill have reference.
As it referres all to the Intelligence.
Making a through-fare of the Fantacie,
Which does so form, reform, and it deformes,
As pleases her fantastic faculty,
Not pleased with what the common Sense informs,
But in the Mind makes calmes, or stirs Storms.
This Power is pow'refull yet is most unstaid;
She rests not, though Sleep the Corpse arrest:
She doates, and dreams, and makes the Mind afraid,
With visions vain, wherewith she is oppressed.
And from things likely, things unlikely wrest:
She is the Ape of Nature, which can do,
By imitation what she does indeed,
And if she have her Patterns add thereto
A thousand toys, which in her Bowels breed,
Without which patterns, she cannot proceed.
Now she Chimeraes, then she Beauties frame,
That do the Mind beheau'n with matchless bliss;
The whole she cripples, and makes whole the lame,
And makes and marrs as she disposed is,
Which is as life is led, well, or amiss.
She with her wings (that can out-fly the wind;)
Through Heaven, Earth, Hell, and what they hold does fly,
And so imprintes them lively in the Mind,
By force of her impressing property,
Seeing all in all, with her quick sighted Eye.
She (double diligence) is still in motion,
And well, or ill, she ever is employed;
Therefore good Spirits and badde, with like devotion
Frequent her still: which she cannot avoyde,
Wherewith the Mind is cheered or annoy'de.
For as celestial Spirits can object,
To the Minds Eye divine soul-pleasing sights,
So can infernal Sprightes with like effect,
Present the Soul with what the Soul affrights,
So powerful in their Power are both these Sprights.
Which Power fantastic is of so great force,
As what she powrefully does apprehend
Within the Body she imprints perforce;
For to the Body, she does force extend.
A proof whereof in women kind is kend,
When they in Coitu fix their Fancy fast
On him they fancy; if they then conceive,
It will be like their Fancies object faced:
If then a wife does but in thought deceive,
The husband in that face may it perceive.
This Power is so preualent in the Mind,
As if some pass a Bridge, or some such thing,
They lightly fall, because their Fancies find
Danger beneath, which to the brain does bring
A giddiness, which causes stumbling.
Thus then the Fancy often the fact produces,
That she with recollected virtue minds,
And by the shade the substance often traduceth;
So violent each Sense her virtue binds,
And noyes, or joys the Mind, in diverse kinds.
Halla my Muse; here rest a breathing while,
Since thou art now arrived at Reasons seat;
To whom, as to thy Sovereign reconcile
Thy straying thoughts, and humbly her entreat,
With her just measure all thy lines to meat,
Lest that like many Rimers of our time
Thoublotst much Paper, without mean or measure,
In Verse, whose reason runs alto Rhyme:
Yet of the Laurel wreathe they make a seazure,
And does Minerua so, a shrewde displeasure.
HAd my Soul power, the Souls power to express.
And with strong reasons, Reasons strength bewray,
Men would admire her virtue, and confess,
By Natures right, she should their nature sway.
Monsters alone resists her mightiness,
But Men (though powerful) her power will obey,
For she as Sovereign sits in the Soul,
All perverse passions therein to control.
She by the power of her discreet discourse,
In th'operations of the Fantasy,
Can judge of good, and bad, and by her force,
Swiftly surmount each Senses faculty;
And whatsoever interrupts her course,
She it remooues with great facility,
For Natures bosom nothing does embowre,
That is not subject to his searching pow're
In which respect she has her Throne assigned,
Between the extreme parts of the parted Brain,
(The place where Nature, Virtue has confined)
There does she sit, and over the Senses reign,
And by her might does signlorize the Mind,
Whose wild and waiward moods she does restrain,
Their spite of Passion, she does keep her place,
Though Passion in her spite, her often disgrace.
For should she she transplac'd to Fantasy,
Or with Imagination be confounded,
A world of mists would cloud her Sunne-bright eye,
Wherewith she should be evermore surrounded;
So that she should not Truth from falsehood spy,
But with strong Fancies should her power be bounded,
And like a Queen deposed from her throne,
She should not able be to use her own.
So fares it with her when the Affections force,
(Like a swift stream that carries all away)
Does carry her (by current of their course)
Far from hirselfe, as wanting strength to stay;
Until the whole man waxing worse and worse,
Be brought to utter ruin and decay:
But if that she be strong them to withstand,
She doomes aright, and does aright command.
Then rules Sans check, then doomes without appeal,
No second sentence can hirs contradict,
She rules alone the whole Minds common weal,
By wholesome Heasts, and Laws, and Judgments strict,
Which to the Memory she does reveal,
Else it Oblivion would interdict,
Wherein, as in a book of Decretalls,
She writes her decrees in Capitalls.
For which respect the seat of Memory,
Confineth hard upon her Continent,
That so she may soon empte the Fantasy,
Of what does pass through her arbitterment;
For else, what boots her Good and Bad to try,
If to the Memory it were not sent?
For that is it, that is sole receptacle,
Of humane Wisdom, Natures miracle.
Therefore, her part and portion of the brain,
Is much less humid, and more firmly sixth,
Because it so the better may retain,
Th'impressions by the Senses there infixt,
And for its Fount of marrow in the rain,
Whereof the strongest sinews are commixt,
For both which reasons Nature had respect,
To bind the Brain behind to that effect.
And yet too hard the Brain may there be bound,
For so twill hardly open to conceive,
And being ouer-moyst, it will confound
All the impressions which the Senses give.
Well temp'red therefore needs must be the ground,
That truly yields the seed it does receive;
Yet the moist brain conceiues more readily,
But the dry brain retains more steadily.
The judgment which the outward Senses give,
Is even as if we saw the shade of things,
And what we from the Fantacie receive,
Is as it were their lively picturings.
The Intellect (which seldom does deceive)
Does show the substance of those shadowings:
But that which Reas'n presents to the Mind,
Is their effects and virtues in their kind.
Th'externall Senses serves the common Sense,
The common Sense informs the Fantacie,
The Fantacie, the Minds Intelligence;
The Intelligence does Knowledge certify,
Which (when it has past Judgments conference)
Commits all unto the Memory:
Then Memory does mirror-like reflect
To them again, what they to her object.
Thus Reason in the Soul is as her eye,
Wherewith she see'th the well linckt chain of Causes,
And uses every Senses faculty,
To find what is included in their clauses,
Yet cannot lift her lowly look so hie,
Without re'nforcing of her sight by pauses:
For since dark Sin eclipst her native light,
She see'th but by degrees, and not outright.
But as she is, she plainly can discern,
The Sence-transcending Heavens plurality,
And in the book of Nature she does learn,
What Is taught in this Worlds University.
She keeps the Compass, and does stir the Stern,
That guides to Wisdoms singularity:
All whose collections when the Soul suruayes,
She sees hirselfe diuin'd a thousand ways.
Thus Reasons reach is high and most profound,
Whose deep discourse is twofold, which depends,
On Speculation, and on Practice sound;
The first has Truth, the last has Good for ends;
For Speculation rests when Truth is found.
But Practice, when that Good it apprehends,
It stays not there, but to the Will proceeds,
And with that Good the Will it freely feeds.
Yet lest the Soul beholding her fair form,
Above hirselfe, should of hirselfe aspire:
He gives us proof, he can her parts deforme,
That formed her parts, if pride provoke his ire,
Then lets he Fiends the Fantacie enorme,
With strong delusions and with passions dire:
Herehence it is that some suppose they are
Stone dead, some, all- Nose, some, more brittle ware.
Some having this part perfect, are defected
In the power rational, the (Souls sentinel)
That is, with doting dullness so infected,
As what they say, or do, they wot not well;
Yet is their Memory right well affected,
And all their other Faculties excel:
So Sickness some Men's Memory vnframes,
That they forget their country, friends, and names.
Some others, not in part, but wholly loose
The use of all the Senses of their soul,
(Because they did their faculties abuse)
Those being frantic, Reason with Rage control,
And worse then beasts they live, and cannot choose
The Good from Bad, ne yet the Fair from Foul:
But like infernal Furies fare they than,
Injurious to themselves, to God, and Man.
Thus may these Powers perish all, or part,
When that almighty Power his grace withdrawes,
Then let high Spirits retain a lowly heart,
That may obedient be to Reasons Laws,
For ill success proceeds from worse desert,
And good effects proceeds from no ill cause:
If thy Minds eyes see more then such eyes can,
Thank God therefore, yet think thy self a man.
For if thy thoughts fly higher then that pitch,
And Luciferian pride thy Mind inflate,
Thou may with him fall hedlong in the ditch,
And run into Gods vnreuoked hate:
Then will the Fiend so much thy Mind bewitch,
That thoushalt be possesst in endless date:
With his strong Legions. Then let Reason rain
Thy headstrong Will, and thy high thoughts restrain.
Now having seen how each internal Sense
Contained is in cauernes of the Brain:
And how their works have mutual reference,
That so they may their common good maintain,
Let us with Eagles eyes without offense
Transview the obscure things that do remain:
For Man's aye-searching Sp'rite with toil's oppressed:
Til it have found that Good that gives it rest.
Yet this breeds bate twixt Reas'n and Fantacie:
For Fantacie being near the outward Senses:
Allures the Soul to love things bodily;
But Reason mounts to higher Excellences,
And mooues the spirit her nimble wings to try,
In pursuit of divine Intelligences,
Who in the jaws of Fantasy does set
A Snaffle, to o're-rule her wild coruet.
And all this vigor to the Spirit is given,
To fly with restless wings of Contemplation,
Unto that Power which in the highest Heaven
Makes his no powre-impeaching Habitation:
Of which Power, if this Power be quite bereau'n,
Her dignity incurreth degradation.
For as naught is more rare in Man then Spright,
So naught but rarest things should it delight.
For it beseemes not that high Maiestic,
To Man (his creature) lower to descend
Then Man by force of his Minds Ingeny
Is able to him easly to ascend.
That makes him not appear to Man's weak eye,
Because his Reason can him apprehend.
If Reason then (by use) be clear and bright,
She may see him (unseen) by her own light.
For by our Reason and Intelligence,
We know him, from which knowledge, Love does slow;
For we may love, that we see not by Sense,
But cannot love, the thing we do not know;
Our Souls we love, and love the place from whence
Our Souls first came, though Sense them cannot show.
So that high Power, though our Sense cannot show him,
Yet may we love, because our Reasons know him.
For, can it be Man's Soul should be endowed,
With Understanding, Reason, Will and Wit,
(To whose high power, the highest Power has bowed
His goodness, to be conversant with it)
But that the Soul is therewithal allowed,
On sempiternall Thrones with him to sit,
If so, what can be worth the Souls discourse,
But that same Mind, that gave the Soul such force?
Let Beasts, whose souls are merely Sensitive,
Whose Being cease with their Bodies being:
Let those with Tooth and Nail strive here to live,
Because they die for ever with their dying:
To them no other Souls did Nature give,
But such as to this life was most agreeing;
But since Men's souls of God Characters be,
With nothing but with God, they should agree.
Which Souls without their corp'rall Instruments,
By virtue of their intellectiue powers,
Within themselves can act some good intents,
(Though not express them to this sense of ours)
Who are sometimes rapt up with rauishments,
As parted from the Body certain hours,
Wherein they exercise their virtue so,
That more then erst they knew, they do, and kno.
Wherein the Understanding and the Will,
(Wherewith the Soul are sumptuously set forth)
Are most imploi'd; whose functions are to fill,
The Souls with Treasures of the rarest worth,
Which the Intellect to Will presents still,
And to the love thereof the will allur'th,
For Will will nothing entertain in love,
But what the Understanding does approve.
And what it does approve (as erst was said)
It sends to Memories safe custody:
So then the powers that most the Soul do aid,
Is Understanding, Will, and Memory,
Which if by Error they be not betrayed,
They will the Souls affects so fortify,
That she in spite of all the Pow'res below,
Shall give her foes a glorious overthrow.
Yet as the Sun to us imparts his light,
Now more, now less, as it is clear, or clouded,
So fares it with our Understandings sight,
That Is dark as hell, if it with Sin be shrouded:
Or if that Earthly things enclose it quight,
Wherewith the Soul may be so ouer-crowded,
That she may faint and finally may fall
To utter darkness, her foe Capital.
Besides, the Sodies state and constitution,
May much avail, or disadvantage it;
Then Riot is no good Physician,
To heal, or keep in health, man's feeble Wit,
For excess tends to Dissolution,
And Dissolution does in Darkness sit,
Then would thou have a clear Intelligence?
Fear God, fare well, but feed without offense.
For though the Soul the Body should o're-rule,
By law of Nature, and in Reasons right,
Yet often we see the Body rule the Soul,
When meats excess augments the Bodies might:
The Flesh exalted, will the Spirit control,
And make the Bodies manners brutish quight:
But if thy Flesh be ill composed by kind,
Mend it with wholesome meat, and moderate mind.
For what a monstrous vice is this in Man,
To quench his Spirit with wine and belly-cheare,
When Beasts will take no more then well they can,
Although (by force) they should aby it dear:
For never Man a Beast by rigor wan
To eat, or drink, more then he well could bear.
Then if thou would not have a Beast excel thee,
Take thou no more then Nature does compel thee.
O that these Healthes that makes so many sick,
Were buried in the lake of Leachs quick!
For since our English (ah) were Flusbeniz'd,
Against good manners, and good men they kick,
As Beasts they were, and wondrous ill aduiz'd:
Band be these Bacchus feasts which often they make,
"Which makes Reason sleep, and Riot keeps awake.
Can Meat and Drink which pleases but the Taste,
(A Sense from th Understanding most remote)
Which pleasure for so small a while does last,
As passing but (two inches of the throat)
Make men their sames and Souls away to cast,
GOD shield that famous Men so much should dote.
Let never Men of Mind their Minds defile,
With such a vice more vile, then Vice most vile.
O what a hell of Mind good Minds endures,
When they in mind behold such Men of Mind,
Whose Souls are decked with intellectiue pow're,
Employ the same (repugnant to their kind,)
To find out loathsome leakage which procures
Them wits to loose, where they such Leakage find!
Can any grief be greater then to see,
A man that men commands, a beast to be?
Converting martial sports that were in use,
To winie vnaccustom'd Combats; O
That valiant men should dare men to carouse,
And count them cowards that will not do so!
For now it is become a great abuse,
Healthes to refuse, If legs can stand or go:
But out upon such Combatts and such game,
Whereas the victors glory is their shame.
The Spirit of Man whose temper is divine,
And made to mount unto the highest height,
Should not, to such Soule-smillings base decline,
But with her nimble wings should take her flight,
Where she might druncke be made with Angels wine,
To make her slumber in divine delight.
But if his Sprite ascend, when wine descends,
The Spirit of Wine, and not his Sprite ascends.
Then how prodigious is it when the Mind,
(That should be conversant with heavenly Sweetes)
To swash of Swine, should (Sow-like) be inclind,
That swallows up, what ere their rauine meets?
And in strong drink devouring pleasure find
Till they lie durt-deuoured in the Streets.
But let great men whose sp'rites are most divine,
This most base beastliness, to Beasts assign.
For if the Head replenisht be with Wit,
No room remains for Wine there to reside.
For if the Wine thrusts in, it out thrusts it.
Much Wine and Wit together cannot bide.
And when the Heart where the Affections sit,
With wine's inflamed the Affects soon shrink aside;
And like enraged Furies do confound,
Both Grace and Nature, Wit, and Judgment sound.
For when the Brains are full of winie fumes,
The Soul with Aegypts darkness is inclosde.
And what the Brain receives the Heart assumes,
For as the one, the other is disposde.
The Powers of both Wine utterly consumes,
If Wine against their Powers be opposde.
So the Souls Faculties and her Affects,
Are brought to naught by Wines (too bad) effects.
For if the Soul at best, (and best aduizd)
Be prompt Opinion still to chop and change;
What will she do when she with Wine's baptizd?
How will she wander then? where will she range?
Where? nay, where not? she being so disguizd,
If from herself, herself she may estrange;
Then every way she will run, save that is right,
Because her eye of Judgment wants sight.
For Reas'n (the effect of the Intelligence)
Winde-driu'n from the Stern that rules the Mind,
What shall direct the faculties of Sense
In their right course, but bold affections blind,
Which headlong runs into all foul offense,
As they are moved by their corrupt kind?
For every Sensual man in sensual sort,
Of Sensuality makes but a sport.
Then Reas'n must rule, or Sense will run awry,
(Unruly Sense, by kind, is so o'rethwart,)
Yet Reason has a two-folde property,
And in her practice uses double Art:
For now by Consequence she Truth does try:
Then here and there for Truth her trialls start:
And starting so, she balkes Truths evidence,
Then right she doomes not, but by Consequence.
Sharp Wits, will pierce hard Propositions strait;
Quick Wits, by sharp conjecture Truth attaines;
Great Wits, at once conclude it in Conceit;
Slow, and yet sure wits, find it out with pains:
And all those wits on Wisdom still do wait,
To serve her in the Skonce that bounds the brains.
Whose Power she still imployes t'augment her might,
And doomes of their endeavors most upright.
For she within the Soul is Queen of Queens,
As God unto the Soul is King of Kings:
Th'internall Senses are Queens, yet but means
Wherewith her business to effect she brings.
On whom (as on her Minions) still she leaner,
With greater ease to do uneasy things.
But for her self, she is in Natures due,
Souls Mind, Minds Soul, and Gods sole Image true.
Or rather, Gods Souls sole Character right,
In whose breast it had, have, and shall have ever,
True restless rest, whose word true Wisdom hight,
(That past beginnings lived, and dies never)
Did on our flesh (which did in painful plight)
That none might from our Souls that Wisdom sever:
For wein that, and that in us does bide,
By unchanged interchange on either side.
The Body in the Elements is cloz'd;
The Blood within the Body is confind;
The Spirits within the Blood: the Soul's dispoz'd
Within the Spirits, which Soul includes the Mind.
The Understanding in the Minde's repoz'd,
And God in the Understanding rest does find:
So this Worlde's made for Man, Man for the Soul,
Soul for the Mind, the Mind for God her Gole.
How be it it is too true she was betrayed,
When Sin persuaded her, she should be even
With Wisdom infinite, and so assay'de,
To match that Pow're that all her power had given,
Then, for she was ingrate, and so vnstay'd,
She was bereft much virtue (though forgiu'n:)
That now she see'th Truth but through a veil,
So in discerning Truth, she often does fail.
For as the Soul, so is her faculties,
The Spring being choked the stream cannot be strong,
They see not well, that have but sand-blind eyes,
Nor is that firm, that frailty has among.
So humane Wisdom, be it never so wise,
Often goes right, but ofter runs wrong;
Whose restless trauells are but Truth to meet,
And yet (though often at hand) she cannot see t.
For how can humane Wisdom choose but err,
When all her science comes from the outward Senses?
Which often miss apprehend, and miss refer,
And so betrays our best intelligences.
Then Judgment needs must fail that does confer;
False Antecedents with false References:
For what those Senses constantly affirm,
The Judgment does as constantly confirm.
But yet in cases of our constant faith,
We Faith believe, and give our Sense the lie,
Nay, whatsoever our humane reason says,
If it our faith gainesay, we it deny:
On highest heights Faith her foundation laith,
Which never can be seen of mortal eye;
For if Faith say, a Maid may be a Mother,
Though Sense gainesay it, we believe the other
If Faith affirm, that God a man may be,
(A mortal man, and live, and die with pain)
We it believe, though how, we cannot see,
For here strong Faith does headstrong Reas'n restrain
And with the truth compells her to agree,
Lest she should overrun her self in vain:
So, if Faith say one's three, and three is one,
Though Sense say nay, we Faith believe alone.
Faithes Senses are so firm, they cannot fail,
For they derive their science from Gods Son,
Through whom, in what she seeks, she does prevail,
And by the light thereof, aright does run:
Faith has no Fancies fell her thoughts to quail,
Nor by delusions is to waver won:
For being guided by so true a light,
Her Judgment and discourse must needs be right.
No marvel then though men with Faith endowed,
Become so firm, that no plague, power, or skill,
Can shake them once: for they are wholly vowed
To him, whose Rod and Staff do stay them still.
In few, by no means can she be subdued:
But stands as vnremou'd as Sion hill.
Then Faithes foundacions must of force be sure,
That can all kind of force so well endure.
Yet Judgments function is of great effect,
Which sorts Particulars from Generals,
Then Generals from Generals elect,
And so from Special, parts special,
Then all conferres, and (as she can) select
The good from bad, and Spirits from Corporals.
This by her pow're she able is to do,
Especially, if God gives aim thereto.
But when discourse sets out, Fancy must rest;
She Is like a whelpe that plays with every toy,
Nor must the Will the Memory molest,
Because it does the Intellect annoy,
Which quietly must Sense reports digest,
And al her power it must thereon employ:
But if commotions of the Mind impugn,
She cannot work; and all must needs go wrong.
For as in well composed Commonweals,
The Members in their place, their works apply;
And with reciprocal affection feales
Each others want, and it with speed supply:
So in well-mannag'd minds the Senses deals,
Which hinders not each others faculty.
But for the public good of Souls and Mind,
Each Pow're applies the work to it assigned.
And Memory is true, if she be trusted;
If otherwise, she is more then most unsure;
She Will keep Minds riches else till they be rusted,
(Yet riches of the Mind are passing pure)
But if the Mind with rust of Care be crusted,
Then Memory in force cannot endure:
For cares are moathes and cankers of the Mind:
That Memory consumes, therein confined.
So while Reas'n works, Judgment rest does take:
But when that work is wrought, the same she ways
And marks with Linxes Eyes what Reas'n did make:
If well, or ill, or neutrall, she bewrayes.
And if she find her eyes not well awake,
With watchful eyes again she it suruayes;
And cease not till she be fixed fast,
In that which of the truth has greatest taste.
And when she doubts she is her self deciu'd,
It grows from Ill that is so like to Good;
That for that good its commonly received:
Yet is the Friar not made by the Hood;
But likelihoods of Truth by Sense conceived,
May drown her (without heed) in Errors flood.
Else hardly would she slide, but firmly stand.
If Falsehood, like Truth, bare her not from land.
For as true Good, agrees with the Will,
So Truth has with the Mind true simpathy,
And as the Will has no such foe as Ill,
So Error is the Minds most ennemy.
If Judgment then approve of Reasons skill,
She ioynes her self thereto insep'rably.
And so of Judgments reas'n and Reas'ns judgment
Makes then but one, by force of one consent.
Fow'r things there are that makes our knowledge strong,
Experience known, to know each Principle;
Natural judgment, (having health among)
And revelation from the Invisible
That Is just and right, and cannot utter wrong:
These makes us know all comprehensible.
The first three tends to Philosophy,
The last belongs to Divinity.
These are the Elements whereof is formed,
Our total knowledge, humane, or divine;
And had the first Man not bin sinne-deform'd,
More bright then Sol, it in the Soul should shine,
For to that influence t'had bin conformed,
That make the Minds eyes pure and chistaline;
For then Gods glorious Son all only wise,
Had lent the Spirit Sunne-bright all-seeing eyes.
Now twixt the Soul and Spirit, great odds there is,
(Though vulgarly they taken are for one,)
For by the Soul is meant those faculties,
That do consorta humane Soul alone.
The Spirit does not (as they do) often amiss,
For it to grace and virtue still is prone.
The Soul to Sin consents, but not the Sp'rit,
For that with Sin and Flesh, still maintains fight.
Whereto (in sort,) agrees what (...) feign,
How Jove did Reas'n ensconse within the (...).
And for the Affections did the Corpse ordain:
Which Reas'ns regiment does disannull,
Taking two Tirants fell with them to reign,
Which often the whole man to their part do pull.
That Is Ire, which in the Heart has residences
And in the Belly reigns Concupiscence.
Which Passion of it self, is of such power
(Unless the almighty Power prevent the same,)
As, Nolens volens will the Soul deolow'r,
And make the flesh Gomorrah-like to flame,
Though God and Nature at that sight doelow'r,
And Hell wide-gaping laughes to see the same.
Nay though it should forthwith destroy the Soul,
Yet Flesh being frail, will make fair Flesh thus foul.
But from this Passion to repasse from whence,
We past Oblique, and so outright proceed;
For having past the faculties of Sense,
It rests that now we weigh what does succeed.
But stay a while my Muse, thou must from hence,
Mount higher then thou can; then have thou need.
To rest in contemplation of thy flight,
Since Contemplation next ensues by right,
WHen from the outward Senses is conuai'd,
All their relations in the common Sense,
And so to Fantasy (as erst was said)
And then to Reason, or Intelligence,
From whence (being sent to Judgments confe-
It lastly comes to Contemplations sight, rence,)
Which is the view of Truths true consequence,
For Reas'n and Judgment finds out what is right,
Which Contemplation viewes with rare delight.
For to the Spirit naught more pleasing is,
Then naked Truth, she is so passing fair,
For when they meet, they do with comfort kiss,
And naught but Error can that joy impair,
Herehence it is, that though we do despair,
Of some whose manners are most monstrous,
Yet they, by Natures instinct, Truth desire;
For knowledge to their Spirits is precious,
And deem all dull-heads most inglorious.
Nay though the Sp'rit cannot come near the truth,
It pleases her t'approach the neer'st she may,
Which like an egre Beagle it pursu'th,
Whose pains are passing pleasure all the way:
Then as the Mind is more divinely gay;
So will it most, most divine Truth affect:
But being base, it will the same bewray,
By most pursuing things of least effect,
Which Spirits of divine temper do neglect.
The Contemplation then does ruminate
On Truth, and none but Truth; for only it
Unto her dainty taste is delicate,
And nothing does the same so fully fit,
As this Soule-feeding single, simple bit,
Then Contemplation must be most divine,
That can with Truth divine a humane wit,
And Zeal from Error does aright refine,
And to the purest faith the same combine.
She (divine Pow're) consociates Pow'res divine,
Gliding through Heaven, on her celestial wings,
And to the Angels Hymns her ears incline,
And all the Host of Heaun together brings
At once, to view those bright-eye-blinding things:
Yet stays not here, but does her self intrude,
Into the presence of the King of Kings,
To see th* Obiectiue sole Beatitude,
That of the Cherubins cannot be viewed.
And hou'ring here she stays, and strains her fight,
To see the same (as of it self its seen)
But taper-pointed Beams of extreme light
Darts through her eyes, and make them sightlesse clean,
Yet inly sees a certain Light unseen,
That so does ravish all her powers of Sense,
As in the Heaven of Heavens it makes her ween,
She sensibly has real residence,
Overwhelmed with Glory and Magnificence.
But if the Body in disposed be,
And due proportion of the Humors want,
(If Wisdom do not well the same foresee)
She here may pass the bounds of Grace (I grant)
And so wax frantic, vain, and ignorant,
Or else presumptuously too curious,
For Power inscrutable she must not fcant,
To her powers reach, for that were impious,
And most impard'nably presumptuous.
For as our Corp'rall Eyes cannot behold
The Sun, whose substance is but corporal:
So the Souls Eye (being fixed to mortal mould)
Cannot behold the Deity immortal:
But if our Eye were supernatural,
And fixed unto the Sun, then might it see
The Sun it self, and with the Sun see all:
So shall the Souls Eye see that Deity,
When after death, it fixed to it shall be.
Yet Contemplation may by force of love,
Whilst yet the Soul is to the Body tide,
(Wing*d with Desire) ascend her self above,
And with her God eternally abide,
So near, as if she touched his glorious side:
For as one drawing nigh material fire,
Does feel the heat, before the flame be tried,
So who draws nigh to God by Loves desire,
Shall, to, and with, that heavenly Flame aspire.
This is that holy, kind, and sugared Kiss,
That God in love vouchsafes the loving Soul,
To which this loving Lord espowsed is,
When (as her Lord) he, by his grace, does rule,
Which does extinguish all affections foul;
This Kiss must needs be short as Lightnings leame,
Or else it would the Body so control,
Through Souls excess of joy (in such extreme)
That it would leave her in a datelesse dream.
Those Souls that are by Contemplation fixed
So fast to God, that they are removed by none,
Are like the Seraphins to God confixt,
Who are exempt from outward charge alone,
And still (like burning lamps) surround his Throne,
For as fine Gold being molten in the fire,
Does seem, as if the fire and it were one,
So is the loving Soul through loves desire,
With God in Contemplation made entire.
Here Contemplation may so long reside,
(For here she makes the Soul drunk with delight)
As if the Body, Soulelesse did abide,
And all the Senses were deprived of might,
While from her self, the Soul thus takes her flight,
To such excess of mind some men are brought,
That they do see by revelation right,
How they should live, and believe as they ought,
With many maruells else surmounting thought.
This ghostly wine in Contemplation drunk,
Has made, ere now, some Souls so drunk with joy.
As some good Bodies in the same have suncke,
As if they were struck dead with some annoy.
And othersome, it has constraind to toy,
To sing, to leap, to laugh, and some to rue
(Who then to weep they do themselves employ)
Some nothing say, but, Jesus, Jesus, Jesus:
And othersome, some words they never knew.
The cause of all these motions (as should seem)
From the Souls bliss and ioyes-aboundance came,
Which to the Body shares that joy extreme,
And it not able to contain the same,
Does vent it out with jestures used in game.
As when new wine into a caske is cast,
It vpwardes boiles, and many motions frame.
And wanting vent, it will the vessel brast;
So fares the Body which these Dainties taste.
But here me thinks I hear some Athist say,
All these are but mere natural effects,
For the object of our Love, our Souls betray
To every Passion which it self reflects:
And so the Pagan his false God respects
As Love thereto, these things in him does work:
But never Heathens heart had these Affects;
For never in a Pagan, Jew, or Turk,
Can such Soule-pleasing Iubilations lurk.
For as in Tempests, Smoke away does fly,
Which yet augments the fire, and spreads the flame,
So in Afflictions storms these dogs will die,
And can no prayer with devotion frame.
But Christians then, can best perform the same,
Who though with Troubles storms they still are tosst;
Yet of their endless griefs they make their game,
And in their most affliction, glory most
When such affliction grieves a Pagans ghost.
Know then (whose knowledge is but Ignorance,
Whose Wit (though never so nimble) is but lame).
That all is subject to the governance
Of that I Am, that no Tongue well can name.
For there is nothing subject unto Chance,
But as he will, so will all Fortunes frame,
Who is the proppe of divine Providence,
Which thou see not, for want of Grace and Sense.
Thou Diu'l incarnate, Monster like a Man,
Perfidious Athist, graceless Libertine,
Which Nature then produced when she began
To wrong her self, and from herself decline.
Yea then when Reason far herself ore-ran,
And to the brutish part did whole incline:
What brow of Brass can bear thy earned blame,
Whose Conscience feared wants sense of sin, and shame?
For lo the Soul (by force of Contemplation)
Engulphed lies in joyful Extacy.
Where she does languish in a loue-sicke passion,
Swallowed with sweets in such extremity,
That she is even stifled with felicity.
But O (wretch that I am) when, when, O when
Shall my dry soul her thirst here satisfy?
But I a sincke of sin and Soil of Men,
Am too too foul this Fount a loofe to ken.
Here need the Soul to stand upon her guard,
And keep the Tempter at the Spirits sword-point,
Else pride will puff her, since so well she fared:
Which swelling will run down from joint to joint,
That she will burst, if Grace her not annoint.
This found he true, that found this true repast,
In the third Heaven as God did fore-appoint,
Yet must he Buffetts with such Banquets taste
Lest he should be puffed up, and so disgraced.
For our Souls foe extracts Ill out of Good,
As our Souls friend does draw Good out of Ill,
The foe can foil (if he be not with-stood)
With Pride our Piety, and our good will.
But our best friend, though we offend him still,
From these offenses draws humility:
Which makes us crouch, and kneel, and pray, until
He does commiserate our misery;
This does our friend, unlike our enemy.
The Soul cannot her soundness more bewray,
Then when she does Temptations strong resist,
For like as when our Pulses strongly play,
We know we need not then a Galenist.
So when the Soul does paint, strive, and persist,
In struggling with Temptations, then we kno,
That Soul with perfect health is truly blist:
For she by demonstration it does sho,
And blessed are all those Souls that strives so.
But in the Minds excess and trance of Spirit,
(When Revelations rusheth on the Soul)
It her behoues to have much ghostly might,
The spirit of Pride with courage to control,
Lest with the Prince of Pride her fall be foul;
For he being mounted near Heavens Majesty,
Sought with the same the UNIVERS to rule,
So fell he from his glorious dignity,
So may a Soul inflate with Sanctity.
But if the Soul through the Almighties power,
(Anteperistezing her pow'res with grace)
Break through those muddy walls which her immure,
And would compel her foul affects to embrace,
She then (sans pride) might look God in the face.
Which to express, ah who can it express?
Not God as Man, can show Gods glories grace,
Much less can Moses: Paul, and John much less,
Then what can I do Sincke of Sottishness?
Moses saw but his back: Paul not so much,
John but his shade, being shadowed with his wings,
Such as the Eyes, their objects still are such:
Then mortal Eyes can see but mortal things,
No king can live and see that King of kings.
No power can give that privilege to Man,
But only Death and Grace to God him brings,
That Heaven and Earth does measure with his span,
Then to discribe his greatness, ah, who can!
Dare I, vile froth of Frailty, Follies scumme,
Presume t'exploit impossibilities?
In my base barren wit dare I inwombe
The magnitude of all Immensities?
And prove so great improbabilities?
Veil, veil thy thoughts, the imaginations veil,
Unto the depth of all profundities:
And ere thou enterst this Sea, strike the Sail,
Or thou will be o'rewhelmed without fail.
But be it granted we may safely swim,
Near to this boundless Oceans shorelesse-shore,
Yet if Presumption bear us from the Brimme,
Then are we lost, and can come out no more.
Nay, if too much thereon we chance to pore,
Albe't we are within a ken of Land,
It Will turn our brains, and make our Eyes so sore,
That we our Senses hardly shall command,
With upright judgment uprightly to stand.
To form the Godhead (in our Fancies forge)
With all the Beauties, Heaven and Earth contains,
We must be feign again it to reforge,
For in his sight those Beauties are but stains.
In vain therefore it is to beat our brains,
To frame that Form, that framed all Forms that are,
And yet himself a formelesse Form remains,
That in Formosity is past compare,
His glory is so great, his grace so rare!
Objects of Sense are printed in the Mind,
By that which from those Objects, Sense attracts;
But that which Sense still seeks, yet cannot find,
The Mind from thence no Images abstracts:
Then if the Mind, GODS form of Sense exacts,
Sense must inform it with form sensible,
Which from Gods creatures beauty it extracts,
Which cannot be incomprehensible,
As Gods form is, that is most insensible.
He that but touched his Arc at point to fall,
He struck stone-dead, then needs must the offense,
To look therein be more then Capital,
Because himself had there true residence:
Then truly we may well collect from hence,
No creature should be so presumptuous,
To search for Gods true form, with erring sense,
Which at the best is most ambiguous;
Then so to do is deadly dangerous.
The Seraphins being Angels most supreme,
Exists but as a mean twixt God and Men,
(Yet near the lower then the high Extreme)
Then if those Spirits no mortal eve can ken,
For glittering glory with the which they bren,
How shall such eyes behold Iehouahs face,
Since Seraphins themselves are blinded, when
They do but glaunce upon his glories grace?
They must confounded be, they are so base.
Men being most unable to find out
The substance of the Godhead by their sense,
Have with the highest Titles gone about,
To explicate that Super- excellence:
But that which argues most pre-eminence,
Of all high Titles, they the GOOD him call,
But that name fits not his beneficence,
For Good is good, of Goodness, but he is all
Goodness it self supersubstantiall.
Nay, Goodness cannot possibly extend
To Express his goodness, that we Goodness call,
For Goodness on some substance does depend,
Butin that Godhead can be naught at all,
That is not more then super- substantial:
Then can no name his namelesse Name express,
But what (in Sense precise) vnnames them all,
For who so knows it most, does know it less,
As they that knows most of all confess.
He is unmoved, unchanged, pure, bodilesse,
Most simple, subtle endless, infinite,
All wise, all good, all great, beginninglesse,
All these are names by which we do recite,
Not what he is, but what he is not, right
He Is vncontain'd, yet in himself confined,
Whose mightiness is bounded in his might,
Which so extends that he himself can find,
Without himself, no Being in no kind.
An actual understanding infinite.
Philosophy can reach no higher style,
Which in respect of him is but finite.
Divinity it self, cannot compile,
His name in words, for words are too too vile:
I am (quoth he) what art Lord?) that I am.
Lo here is the highest state (alas the while)
That Words can reach, though he deuis d the same,
That with words cannot tell his namelesse name.
Yet as a worm that only has a will,
To try her force in that she cannot do,
So I (though void of grace, and want of skill)
Bring with me more then much good will hereto,
And still to it my self, my self does woo,
Yet am I terrified when well I way,
How some great Doctors did their wits undo,
When they this mystery sought to bewray,
Then will I, ere I enter, humbly pray.
O great and dreadful Si^e of Gods and Men!
O all-wise Word, that no word can express!
O Unction Spiritual that bright do bren!
O threefold, yet all one Almightinesse!
Inspire my wit, (comprised in mortal press)
With that pure Influence thy Throne attending;
That notwithstanding my unworthiness,
I may, in part, unfold (without offending)
That which does far surmount all comprehending.
Mount Muse, but rise with reverence and fear;
With Icarus soar not too near the Sun,
Lest that thereby thy waxen wings do meare,
And in this Sea thou fall, and be ore-runne,
Where thou shall loose thy self, and be undone:
Couer'thy face with thy celestial wings,
As Cherubins now do, and still have done;
Yet through thy plumes, glaunce at this Thing of Things,
Being the cause entire of all Beeings.
For he is Good, without all Quallity,
Then, O how good is he, that knows the same!
And he is great, beyond all Quantity,
Then, O'how great is he that can him name!
Eternal, without time, from whom Time came,
Being present every where, yet without place,
For every place he framed, and keeps in frame:
Beholding all, yet none beholds his face,
He giving all, none giving to him grace.
But where art thou? What shall I call thy name?
O GREAT, O GOOD, a good great name I want,
Thou art so great, that I no name can frame
To fit thy greatness, but it is too scant,
Thy goodness is as great, good Great I grant:
But where art thou? among thy Angels? Noe;
Where then? with thy Church ever triumphant*
There, and where not thou art, but yet not so
As thou art with, and in, thy self, I know.
For twixt the Heaven, where Saints and Angels rest,
And that same Heaven of Heavens, where thou resid'st,
Is greater distance then from East to West:
Yet on the Cherubins thou often rid'st,
And every where in Essens thou abid'st;
But where thy Glories beams do glitter most,
With distance infinite, thou it deuid'st:
From all the Orders of the heavenly Host
Where to thy self thy self alone thou sho'st.
In quintescens of Glories quintescens,
Which was, and is, most vnapprochable,
The Throne is placed of thy magnificence*
Whereon thou sit st in light vnthinkeable,
Then not by Tongue, or Pen, expressable,
For even as when the Sun his beams display.
(Because our Eyes to see the same's unable)
We through a scarf behold them as we may,
Even so must Man, behold Gods Glories ray.
Such as go down into the Sea profound
Of deep Philosophy, do meet thee there,
Of Men profane thou art there often found,
For in thy Works thy steps do plain appear:
Nay in thy works is stamped thine Image clear;
And yet no work of thine resembles thee
So right (though Men and Angels drawn near)
But that the difference infinite must be,
Since thou art infinite in each degree.
The Deites that in the Stars do dwell,
Thy Deity their seu'rall Mansions made,
And all that Sacred Senate found full well,
That it over them supreme dominion had,
Who found it permanent, when these did fade;
By Natures light, they saw a light extreme
Glaunce from his grace that did their glory shade,
And saw his Image true as in a dream
Together with the new Jerusalem.
This goodly Great, or greatly Good is he,
(So good, so great, as none so great, or good)
That was, that is, and evermore shall be,
(In each respect) without all liklyhood;
Including in his threefold-single Godhood,
Notions, Properties, Relations,
In whom they still, as in their Subject stood:
Then all Divines divide the Notions
Into five branches or partitions.
Namely, into Innascibility,
Fatherhood, breathing or Spiration,
Son-hood, Procession; these five naturally
Depends still by Logical relation,
Upon the mystery of the Trinity:
All which conioynd makes but one Unity;
The two first solely to the Sire pertaines;
The third to Sire and Son indifferently;
The fourth the Son, within himself retains
And to the holy-spirit the fifth remains.
Which Notions are Relations in some sense,
For Father, Son, does ever presuppose:
And Son a Father by like consequence;
The holy Spirit proceeding from both those,
Implies them, from, and with whom he goes,
The Notion of Innascibility,
Is no Relation, since it does suppose
No other person in the Trinity
But is a Notion noting Unity.
The two first is the Fathers in respect,
He only does beget, and does unite,
Spiration Father and the Son effect;
From it the Holy-Ghost's excluded quite.
They breathe, and what is breathed is that Sprite,
But Filiation solely to the Son
Does appertain, since only Son he hight:
For as one Father, so one Son alone
The Trinity affords, and brooks but one
cession with the holy Spirit accords,
(And only with that Spirit it does agree)
As with the other two, three other words
Agreed, and did with him quite disagree:
So this alone applied to him must be,
For if they breathed him forth (as erst was said)
None can be said then to proceed but he,
Since from the other two he is conuaide,
Yet in the other two, he still is staid.
Now in another Sense we may transmute
These Notions into Properties. To wit,
When they do one, and not another suit,
As father does the Father only fit,
The Son, the Son, and to the holy Sprite,
Procession is peculiar. And again,
Innascibility we must admit
The Father. But Spiration the other twain;
Then name of Property it will not sustain.
So in the Trinity five Notions are,
Four Properties, and four Relations,
Wherein besides are other Secrets rare,
Founded upon unsearchable foundations.
The Sires beginning is the eternal Sons,
(Though he be said to be the Sons beginning)
Yet no beginning had these holy ones,
But from beyond Beginnings both have bin
Nor can their never endings, ever li^.
The Sire and Sons beginning being one,
Breath forth their blessed Spirit, a third one being,
Which by a general creation,
Beginning gave to all (in one agreeing)
And from eternity the same foreseeing.
The greatest Monarch, and the least Insect,
With earthly things; aquaticall, or fleeing,
Whose seu'rall shapes, and what they should effect,
Had ever being in their Intellect.
et how they should there actually exist,
And by what means they should have entrance there,
(Since there eternally they did subsist)
Is hard for Man to know, who does appear
A Chaos of defect, and folly mere.
They entered not by means into his mind,
As from Ideas which without him were,
Without whom nothing is in any kind,
Then in him self, he all that all does find.
Yet are they not of such necessity,
As without them he could no way exist,
For they on him, not he on them rely,
Then how eternally can they consist,
Since he alone does only so subsist?
They are not of his Nature, but his will,
His Intellect inciting to insist.
In knowledge of what that will should fulfill,
So in that knowledge they existed still.
For as to God it is most natural,
To know himself, in whom he all does seet
Even so to him, it is essential,
To know the kinds of all things as they be,
Or else he should not know his own degree.
Yet his essential knowledge does not stretch
Unto particulars, as Me, and Thee;
For he may well exist without that reach,
And which his knowledge no way can impeach.
But all his Science of distinguished things,
Flows from the freedom of his sacred will,
Drawn from those Notions which his nature brings,
And are essential to his nature still.
Who made (to show his universal skill)
What is created in particular,
As it were a proof of that he can fulfill,
When he is pleased, to make, or mend, or mar,
Then in that skill all things distinguished are.
The things that were, or are, or are to come,
Makes, in his mind, no change, though changed they be,
Objects our minds affect, our minds overcome*
But his intelligence is ever free,
Active, not Passive, since all Act is he.
For, as by Sense he makes us Arts to learn,
And abstract- Forms by other means to see:
So he, by means, can seu'rall things discern,
Though it no way his nature does concern.
Who being infinite, naught is in him
That's less then so, but so he could not be,
If his all-seeing Eyes should be so dim,
That now he sees, what erst he could not see:
Then sees he all from all eternity.
The whole, the parts, the roots, and what they bear,
The thoughts, words, deeds of men; and then must he
In Understanding infinite appear.
Who is not changed by Place, for he fills all,
Nor yet by Time, for he is without time,
He is not changed in Form nor never shall,
Because he always is an Act in prime,
Nor changed by Chance, since he above does clime,
For he all moves, and yet is moved of none:
He opes the Sluice through which we flow like slime,
Which if he shuts, we cease, and quite are gone,
But he is aye one, and the same alone.
Place is conceived as a thing created,
Or as that which includes some thing placed,
In this last sense God is in no place seated;
Yet in the other sense no where displaced:
So he is no where, and each where, first and last,
In no place barred, but fills and bounds each place,
For being indissoluble and fast,
He Is whole in all, and in part, and in each case,
And without mixture does all interlase.
For as the Objects which our Minds conceive,
Mixed not themselves together with the Mind,
Albee't they do the Mind in it them receive,
Without being mixed or closed in any kind,
Even so God all conceiues, and yet does wind
Himself in it all* but is conceived of none,
Like as the Sun (within himself confined)
Infuseth Light to all, yet he alone,
Is not contained, or mixed with any one.
God which is one, yet one of three compact,
Essential, nor Personall's understood,
For to create is an essential act,
Not personal (which cannot be withstoode;)
But when by Lord, we mean the same Godhood:
We take it Personal, not Essential.
For it is referred unto the Fatherhood,
That did beget the Son, God coeternall,
And to beget, is an act personal.
Now none (I hope) can be so ignorant,
T'imagine any such begetting here
As creatures use, for that were discrepant
To Reason; for we said They ever were,
Which temporal begetting cannot bear:
Begetting then does Cause and Order show,
Since to beget, the Getter did not steer,
But from him without motion, that did flow,
That was himself, and to himself did go.
Then but respectively the Sire and Son,
And not essentially distinguished be,
As Sole his beams begets, yet so begun,
That they are full as old and bright as he,
And from them both the Light proceeds we see:
Which is as old and bright as Sun or Beams,
And nothing differs but respectively?
For first the Sun begat his radiant Leames,
Then both yields Light, and all in like extremes.
But more distinctly to distinguish them,
And to express their Natures unity,
(If it be not impiety extreme,
To liken them to things so transitory:)
Then may we imagine from eternity,
A Taper burns, which does a second light.
Those two do light a third, and joined nie,
They show all one, and all alike are bright,
Which do illustrate this dark Secret right.
Which merely is all Essence and excludes
All (whatsoere) that is not of the same;
So though his Essence all his works includes,
And in his Essence all those works did frame,
Yet near his Essence his works never came:
For no Effect is wholly like his Cause,
If so it be, then what a sin, and shame
Its for Men, that like Men, this Essence draws,
As knowing naught above themselves like Dawes.
Were Angels Limners to delineate,
That All (but that) excelling Majesty,
(Sitting in chair of State, surmounting State)
They must, with wings displayed, defend their Eye,
From being confounded with his radiancy,
Then how shall Man (an outcast Eglet) view,
That Glory, or paint his Vbiquity,
That Art itself, nor Knowledge never knew?
And Beauty is too base to blaze their hue.
Put Vacuums foe, the clear corpse of the Air,
Ten times refined therein, and give them Sp'rite
It Will file, not fill, the least part of that Chair.
Nay, all the Host of Heaven in one unite,
(Yea, add to that what all tongues can recite)
And set it in that Seat, it will scarce appear;
But seem as it were turned to nothing quite,
For nothing can at once be every where,
But him alone that no where has a Peer.
Borrow from Heaven and Earth and what they hold,
The perfect'st parts of Beauties excellence,
Cast these perfections in the perfect'st mould.
To make his like, twill be but Impotence,
Compared to Glory, and Omnipotence.
Who can precribe a form t'a formelesse Form?
(Yet in that Form all Forms have residence:)
But to make all in one does him deforme,
Then but this ONE, who can this All perform?
He Is Infinite, put this to whatsoere,
It makes it God, sole cause of things finite,
Since infinite can nothing caused bear,
For to be caused, is to be definite,
Chief essence must it be, that is Infinite,
And One alone, two Infinites exclude,
Which One must needs be incorporeall quite,
Because a Corpse a place must needs include,
Wherein this Infinite cannot be mu'de.
Then to be Infinite, is to be free
From matter; and from matter to be quit
Is void of Passion, and of Change to be:
For Change has Passion resident in it,
And to them both is Motion firmly knit.
Which Motion tends to Rest, which Rest remains,
Where Rest remaining rests Infinite;
That is in him, without whom nothing is
Subject to Rest, or Motion, Bale, or Bliss.
Though he (his Actions to diuersifie)
Takes on him parts, and passions of a Man,
(Stouping thereby to our capacity)
Yet none of both's in him that all things can,
Without them both: then both are as a Fan,
To kepee our Reasons eye from that defect,
Which cannot apprehend where that began,
Which as the Cause, our joy or grief effect;
All which he does t'informe our Intellect.
Those Attributes are borrowed from our Kind,
To lend our Reason light, that Light to see:
But those essentially to him assignd,
Of his own nature and existence be,
Namely Ubiquity, Simplicity,
Eternity, and sole Omnipotence,
Consorted all with perfect Unity;
Yet are these Attributes, not his essence,
For they are diverse, that*s but one Immence.
Which Essence is the Fount from whence does flow,
Each fore rehearsed Essential property,
But to that Essence they do not reflow,
To mix the same with their variety;
For that stands not with his simplicity.
What then? can aught be first, or last, in it?
In Order yea; in Time I it deny,
For Order sets the Will behind the Wit,
And yet in Time they both together sit.
In Order then his Vnderstanding's set,
Before each one essential property,
Which is his form, wherein he does beget,
His co^ternall Son, his Wisdoms eye.
Wherewith upon himself he still does pry,
Producing so a third one infinite,
Yet infintenesse is not their Essence, why?
Because that must exist, ere it exite,
That which confineth al, that is finite.
In Time they are all one, for One is he,
In Order he is an Essence ere he is wise;
So he is sole wise, ere insinite can be:
Which stands with Reasons rules in sense precize.
And whosoever sees it, must have Reasons eyes,
Yet is not his true Essence privative,
(As that which still bereaues without supplies,)
But really, and truly Positive,
From whom all Positiues themselves derive.
Then Wisdom, Knowledge, and Intelligence.
(As in their Subject,) are in him alone;
With, and without, a proper difference:
By which, as one, or diverse, they are known.
That Is as they are consid'red, all, or one;
And all, or any one, are in him so,
As they exist by power of their own,
And in existence all together go,
Though in their functions parted other fro.
Now from his Understanding flows his Will,
Essentially traduced from the same;
(Which is the act ofth' Understanding still:)
Whence flows his Actions free (as Will) from blame.
As from the Well (his Will) from whence they came.
Whose Office is true Good to covet aye,
Which is his Glory whereat it does ame,
Which of all goods, most goodly is, and gay.
Being the Object of his Will always.
Which Will is stable, and omnipotent,
Nothing can alter it, or it constrain;
How then (being changelesse) seems he to repent:
That one he willd, as though he willd in vain?
And Prayers seems, and seems not, it to strain.
We must distinguish here, between his will
Known, and vnknow'n, and then the case is plain.
That known has changed, the vnknow'n stands still,
Yet prayers pure, both those good wills fulfill,
Which being good, from it can come no ill.
Here is the Gulf that swallows all amiss,
This is the Hell, that hatcheth every evil;
Our shallow, yet too deep insight in this:
Makes God our foe; Sins cause, and so a Diuill.
O damned presumptuous ignorance uncivil!
Sin, Flesh, and Blood, stay, stay, O stay; here stay,
This point dispute not, for ye can but cavil;
God saues by means, the means vsd, he does say,
He sure will save; who doubts, are cast away.
For to conceive that so himself he binds
To any such absurd Necessity,
That though he would, he cannot change our minds,
Nor grant our suites, though made in charity,
Were fond, and full of damnd impiety:
Yea opposite to both his Will and Word,
Which still are good, without variety;
But neither can they be, if they afford
No grace to them, that with them do accord.
Now if that Curiosities Cattes eyes,
Would feign be prying (further than is fit)
To see how this clear doctrine can arise
From light so dark (which Light in dark does sit)
Still let them ptie, till they fall out with it.
For God being constant if unconstant Man
Would find him other, he may lose his wit
In search thereof: for God such Searchers ban,
Because they would do more than Himself can.
Who being immateriall, cannot change,
(For that's immutable that's matterlesse)
No accident is to his knowledge strange:
No object can his fixed will impresse:
Angels consists of Matter more or less,
Which may be changed, and Passion to endure:
So Men and Angels may thereby transgress;
But God in Essence is so passing pure,
That all he wills and works is passing sure.
Now from his Will flames forth his ardent Love,
Which is as it were the substance of his Form,
Which without motion, still his will does move,
To do what e're his will would feign perform.
Loves office is to love, Spirits to conform.
Loves object is those Spirits sanctity:
For Love, the like will to the like transform,
Since where there is a perfect simpathy,
Love likes to make a perfect unity.
If God be Love, how then can true Love hate?
For he loves Good, and hates Ill perfectly;
Yet Hate does seem his goodness to abate,
And yet it is but the antipathie*
Of his pure nature with impurity.
Which Grands his Goodness, and augment; his fame;
For if he should not hate iniquity,
Which does his Image true confound and shame,
He should not love himself, much less the same.
Love cannot hate, no more than Fire can freeze,
God cannot hate, no more than Good be Ill:
But when his Justice unjust Souls surprise,
He Is said to hate them, since he them does spill;
Which as he is Mercy, is against his will:
But as he is Just, he does it willingly.
This Will and Nill his goodness do fulfill,
And both agree in perfect unity,
T'aduaunce the glory of his Majesty.
He cannot hate, nor is he moved to wrath,
As Men do hate, and are to anger moved.
No Passion in the Godhead being has,
But those he likes that are of him beloved;
And those he loathes that are of him reprou'd,
By an eternal motion of his will:
Moving to that which is by him approved,
And ay removing from all show of ill;
So in this Love and Hate, he is constant still.
Which Hate is no less Great, than He is Good,
That's infinite, for naught in him is less:
Were in him, as in us, a passive mood,
He were not God, for God is Passiuelesse;
He is an Active Spirit, motionlesse.
Seeing all at once, Past, Present, and to Come,
Without succession, seeing all success;
Then since at once, he sees all and some,
No chance with Passion can his Sprite overcome.
Who in their causes, and essential forms,
Knows all that was, or is, or e're shall be.
Then no Intelligence his Mind informs
Of that he knows not; since he does foresee,
Even all that All, beyond eternity.
For he beyond beginnings did exist.
Existing so, he saw in each degree,
What should begin, and end, or still consist.
Which in Praescience infinite he wist.
Could he begin, Beginnings that began?
If so he could, what is beginninglesse?
Or Time, or Nothing. That's untrue, for than,
If there were Time, it was not motionlesse;
For Time is made by Motion, all confess.
But where there nothing is, no Motion is,
For Nothing has no motion, and much less
Can Nothing make of nothing, Something. This
Something sometime, of nothing made* all his.
God ever was, and never was not God,
Not made by Nothing, nothing could him make.
Could nothing make, and not make? this is odd;
And so is he, that could creation take
Of Nothing; for all was, whenas he speak.
Nothing was made, that was not made by it.
Then nothing was that could it undertake,
To make its Maker, what had power or wit,
Not him that can do all, that he thinks fit.
Time's but a Moments flux, and measured,
By distance of two Instants (this we prove)
Which then commenced (it self considered)
When fist the Orbs of Heaven began to move.
That's but six thousand years, not much above.
But what is so many years, as may be cast,
In thrice as many Ages, to remove
Eternity, from being fixed fast;
And God therein, from being First and Last.
He is eternal, what is so, is he.
So is no creature, for it once was made,
Then ere it could be made, it could not be:
But the Creator ever being had,
To pull out from Not-beeing^ who can wade?
(Being a Deapth so infinite profound)
But he that was, and is, and cannot fade?
This Being infinite, this Deapth must sound,
To list up all to Being, there being dround.
Eternity and Time are opposite,
For Time no more can bound Eternity,
Then Finite can inuirone Infinite,
Both of both which have such repugnancy.
As nere can stand with Gods true Unity:
Eternity is then produced from hence,
By joining of his sole Infinity,
With his essential intelligence,
And all the Attributes proceeds from thence.
If then Eternity does bound this One,
(Or rather he bounds all Eternity)
How could he Be? or being all alone,
How could he work? (that work incessantly)
(For he is all Act, that acts continually)
Having no subject whereupon to work,
And being without his Creatures utterly,
It seems he must in Desolation lurk,
Which must of force an active nature irke.
Or how could he extend his goodness, when
None could receive it? (if none Being were,
What honor could he have, there being then
No one to honor him, or him to fear?
Or what (in love) if he his children dear,
Had made t'exist from all eternity,
As to eternity they are made t'appeere?
What inconvenience could ensue thereby?
Yes very great, and mark the reason why.
He is an Essence free, not bound to ought,
Who can and does exist in boundless bliss,
Although besides himself, that there were naught:
For he of greatest glory cannot miss,
Since that eternally all gloris his:
But should the Creatures eternal be,
His glory would be much eclip'st by this,
For were the eternal too, as well as he,
They would be gods as great in each degree.
Then naught he needs to give him laud, or love,
Or subject for his work, though naught there were,
For ere naught was, he did not work or move,
Yet idle was not, for his Spirit did steer
In contemplation of his Essence clear:
So himself, to himself, was Well of Weal,
And in himself, did Glory it self appear;
Which to himself, himself did aye reveal,
So pleased himself, with what himself did feale.
Suppose no man but one were on the Earth,
And none but Vermin vile did him attend,
What honor could they yield? What joy or mirth
Could they afforde, that rather do offend?
Such, and no more do men their Maker lend,
Who were made changeable by changelesse will,
So changed they are, and to the worse they tend,
Who in respect of him continue still,
Worse then vile Uermine, though they were more ill.
Who for his goodness is the God of grace,
And for his glory is the Lord of Light,
Whose glorious greatness fills every place,
(For no place is exempted from his Sp'rite)
And by it all that is, compasst quite,
As the least Point, is by the Heavens clire,
And nothing is so solid, as has might,
To keep him out, as it can Air or Fire,
But he is all in all, and part entire.
He Is not in Temples made with mortal hands,
Nor those which his immortal hands have made,
Nor in himself as Man, for Fleshes bands,
Can hardly hold the least glimse of his Shade,
Much less his Substance, which e're biding had,
No more in one, then in an other place:
And though with Flesh it seems to be clad,
Yet dwells he in it but by power and grace,
And so he dwells in all he does embrace.
He dwells in Heaven of Heavens by his Glory,
(For there that matchless Glory glitters most)
He is in Hell, and each place transitory,
By presence of his Spirit, (the holy Ghost.)
He dwells in Christ, but how, O Christ thou know,
For as the Soul and Body makes one Man,
So God and Man, one Christ do make thou showst,
Yet the coherence neither may or can,
The diffrence abrogate, since Christ began.
Whose natures from confusion are as free,
As from distraction they are clearly quit,
Which though connext, confounded may not be,
Much less distracted; both in one being knit,
But how conioyn'd, surmounts the reach of Wit:
For in Christ's body, bodily does dwell,
The fullness of the Godhead; most unfit, Coloss. 3.

To be contained in Heaven, Earth, or Hell,
His greatness, does their greatness so excel.
Then Contemplation stay; here make a pause,
Stir not too fast, about vncompasst things,
Though thou can compass Heaven and Earth, because
Thou art the Image of this King of Kings,
Yet this flight is too far, for thy clipped wings,
The Trinity, in Unitie's a wonder,
Surmounting wonders; which amazment brings;
Yet less (if more may be) that God is under
Frail flesh, and so contayn'd, God cannot sunder.
Which twofold natures, often co-operates,
And evermore assotiates each other,
But never mutually participates
Each others properties, as mixed together;
For what one has, the self same has not either,
But in their kinds are diverse, yet but one,
That Is one of two, or two in one much rather,
Which mystery to God is only known,
But not as he is Man the same is shown.
To whom yet nerethelesse all power is given,
In whom as in its proper place it bides,
By which he rules in Earth, Hell, and Heaven,
And were there some thing else, the same besides,
Which power being infinite, with it he guides,
Each finite thing unto its proper end,
In which omnipotence, such force resides,
As were he willing he the Heavens could bend,
Below base Hell, and make it Heaven transcend.
Which peerless power, though nothing can oppugn,
Yet does it self, it self still so restrain,
As that it self, cannot it self impugn,
For what it binds; it cannot loose again,
At self same time; for then that power were vain,
As being repugnant to it self, and so,
No order should that rulelesse power contain,
And then it self, it self would ouerthro,
And with it self, all things to wrack should go.
He cannot make Man free, and bond at once,
Nor give him Will, and wrest it how he will,
He cannot hold in hate his Holy ones,
Nor in his love (much less) embrace the ill.
He cannot change himself, being changelesse still,
Such things he cannot do; not through defect,
Of power what not? (if please him) to fulfill,
But of his power this is a strong effect,
That can do all, but that it should reject.
Who being evermore a complete Acts,
In highest degree of divine excellence,
He need not chase Perfection by the tract,
For in himself, It self has residence:
Then motion has he none by consequence,
For that must firmly stand, wherein all moves,
Who is both Center and Circumference
Of Motions motion; for it him behoues,
To give all rest which he moves or remoues.
He cannot move but to himself alone,
Because alone, at once he is every where,
And all that is, is only in this ONE,
Then unto what? or whither should he steer?
Since all is in him, that shall be, is, or were.
For moved he, Motion should not tend to Rest,
But Motion, should to Motion, tend for ere;
So Time in bootelesse turns should be at best,
When it should draw most near, to most unrest.
He is that ONE in whom each one does move,
He moves each one, that all in him should rest,
For whatsoever from him does most remove,
It finds and feels thereby the most unrest:
Yet from himself, nothing himself can wrest.
Who being One, though one in trinity,
Consisting of himself he has addressed,
From himself all this Alls diversity,
To move to rest in his true unity.
As in a Quire of well tuned voyced Men,
When the first man has given the first accent,
There does ensue a noise melodious then
Of all the voices, joined in one consent:
So God by power, super-omnivalent,
Giving first motion, to the highest Sphere,
(Being first Mouer) then incontinent,
All lower Bodies orderly did steer,
As by their present motion does appear.
Look on the World, and what it does comprize,
And Sense shall see, all moving unto one,
The Elements, and ten-fold orbed Skies,
(In motion diverse tend to one alone,
And make one World, through their conjunction:
The Sea ingirts the Earth; The Air boundeth both,
Being compas'd with the Fiery region,
The Coape of Heaven, does seem them all to cloth,
Who arm in arm unto an Union goth.
The Sea through veins and Arteries of the Earth,
Creeps through her Corpse, to fix her droughty dust:
That done, it springs aloft, as it were in mirth,
For that it has performed what needs it must,
And then returns with windings most unjust,
Just to it self; which undivided is,
So many members makes one Body just,
And many joys compleates one perfect bliss,
Which bliss is only Ones, and none but his.
From one self Earth, all earthly things proceed,
To which self Earth, those earthly things retires,
One silly drop of slime mankind does breed,
In which one kind are manifold desires,
Which nerethelesse one Good alone requires,
All numbers do consist of many Ones,
And every one to only One aspires,
Which One those seu'rall unities attones,
So ONE above all ones, himself enthrones.
All parts of Man with mutual respect,
Discharge their functions to preserve the whole,
The like in commonweals the parts effect,
The like the faculties do in the Soul,
And but one truth is taught in every School:
The parts of speech, tends but to perfect speech,
The end whereof is Error to control,
And show one truth, which only one does teach,
That by one truth, rules all within his reach.
Where Unity is lost, Confusion's found;
Where Unity is found, there is nothing lost.
The noblest creatures, need the vil'st on ground,
The vil st are served by the honored most.
And which is more, the very heavenly host
Does serve the basest creatures void of sense,
Yet over* rules them, in each Clime and Coast.
So one to other, have such reference,
As they in Union have their residence.
Arithmetike from Unity proceeds,
Even as from Punctum flows Geometry.
Music the symphony of sounds succeedes.
And Architecture Uniformity.
Perspectiue at one point, looks diversely.
Physic does aim at health, and that's no more
But Humors well-consorted unity.
The Law looks at one Right, whose only lore,
Is to conioyne, that Wrong vnioyn'd before.
Good government brings many Families
Under obedience to one Maiestrate:
And many Servants, Daughters, Sons, Alies,
Under a household petty Potentate:
And many Passions, in one Mind at bate,
It reconciles, to Reasons only rule:
And many peace-infringers in a State,
The Rod of Discipline does overrule,
And makes them One, that makes all mis-rule.
Which union of so many Unities,
And which diversities in Union,
Implies there is but* ONE, all only wise,
Who through his Wisdom, made them every one.
To whom all lauds divine, belongs alone.
Plurality of Gods who then defends,
Must be the author of Confusion,
For many Gods he makes, for many ends,
Which to Distraction and Confusion tends.
Can all things, Thick and Thin, Heavy and Light,
Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry, Great, Small, or Quick, or Dead,
That do appear, or not appear to sight,
Be held in one, without some One, their Head?
Shall these in one, to us alone be lead,
And we misse-led, to many Gods from one?
Who in these Capitalls, may plain be read
To be the God of Gods, yea God alone?
If so we should, our wits were not our own.
But with what words can I their blame bewray,
That maugre all that ever can be said,
To prove this God; will all that All gainesay,
And flat affirm, and speak as wellapaide,
There is no God. Whose words (if they be waide)
Do make them worse than Fiends, for they confess
There is a God, of whom they are afraid.
O Fiendes of Fiends, I cannot call you less,
But more, much more, since ye much more transgress.
Omitting many reasons which they bring,
(Reasons? O no, but diu'lish blasphemies)
To prove no God, nor any such like thing
They say, That Man is ill, no man denies;
If then God made him, he made Ill likewise.
If he made Ill, then cannot he be good.
And if not good, not God in any wise,
For God's the Fount, and Goodness is the flood,
Thus urge they this unlikely likelihoode.
Know Diu'lls incarnate Antideities,
To make and mar are two repugnant things,
To make, implies Natures, or Substances.
Both which are good; and from Gods goodness springs.
Ill's none of both, for unto both it clings,
No otherwise then Rust to Silver cleaues.
Which is the accident Privation brings
That Good of goodness casually bereaues,
And so the Good the Ill (unmade) receaues.
Which of it self, consists not, nor consists
In aught that naught is; but in Good alone:
Its no Effect, but Defect, which resists
The good of Goodness by corruption,
It is not made therefore by any one,
For were it made, by Sin it must be made:
And Sin is nothing but privation,
Which in it is nature does to nothing fade,
So, Evil of it self, is still unmade.
For Ill being but a mere defect of Good,
It follows then, its but a mere Defect,
Which is no more, but a mere Nihilhood;
For Want can be no more, in no respect,
And not to Be, is nothing in effect.
Then Nothing being but a Negative,
(How ere it goodness, may (perhaps) infect)
Produces Nothing, being the Privative,
Which Naught makes good, this my affirmative.
Wherefore in that things Be, of God they be,
And that they fail, they fail, since Naught they were:
For All of nothing, Good created he,
Which All to nothing of themselves do wear,
Then Good they are, in that they truly are,
And Ill they be, since Being they have none,
Good on his part, that made them so appear,
And Ill because they al to nothing rone,
Then he is good, of whom they Are alone.
Ye Soule-confounding, selfe-confounding Souls,
Can ye not see, because ye will not see,
How all the Orbs of Heaven in order roules,
Which cannot move; unless they moved be:
By some first mouer, since unmoved is he?
For nothing moves, but it another moves,
So Motion from degree unto degree,
Does mount to that, that moves it and approues,
The same for God, as it the same behoues.
What moves ye then, ye Monsters in Men's shapes,
To move such questions which assoile ye can;
By that self motion? For such wilful scapes
Moves from the Fend, to him, to move frail man.
Your conscience tells ye so (which looks wan,
With bleeding still, your selves still wounding it)
If Diuills Be, Godis, assure ye than,
And I presume, your diu'lish searching wit,
Finds out God by the Diu'll, though most unfit.
What Is under Heaven, but God above does preach?
Save Hell it self, which in you ye retain,
And yet the very Hell, a Heaven does teach,
Which is not void, for then it were in vain.
But he there dwells, that does the same sustain.
Thou great wise man, why lett'st thy brains to beat,
On things unworthy of thy beaten brain?
For all thou think on, is, how to defeat,
Thy self of God, and himself of a Seat.
What humane heart of temper is so hard,
That yields not to the impression of Gods form?
From whence can his Ubiquitie be barred,
That what he will, does every where perform?
Then can the heart of Man, a forcelesse worm,
Keep out that God that nothing can with-stand?
No, no, perforce he must himself inform,
There is a God by whose allmighty hand
All things were made; and all things does command.
What is it that hanged the Earth within the Air?
Yet hanged it so, that it is fixed fast?
What made the Gulf, where waters all repair*
Whose foming fury makes the Earth aghast,
Lest it in rage, the same should ouer-cast.
Yet is it barrd, with flatt frail sandy bounds,
What power could make such weak bars so to brast
The banded Billows which on them rebounds,
But Power, whose praise both Land and Sea resounds?
Who peopled that wide watery World with store,
Of scaly creatures, which there wandering are?
Resembling all that live on Earth and more,
More supereminent, and much more rare,
The Whale (amongst the rest) does make this clear,
Which being the amplest Masterpiece of Nature,
With thundering voice, does amplely declare,
There Is some high Hand, that gave him his huge stature,
And Nature did direct, to frame his feature.
For every thing that Nature does produce,
(As by experience is most evident)
She does direct unto some end and use,
Then what directs that her regiment,
But some one Thing much more preheminent?
For she is finite in her Acts and power,
But so is not that Power omnipotent,
That Nature subordain'd, chief Governor,
Offading Creatures while they do endure.
For that all worldly things do end we see,
It does infer the World beginning had,
Then if this World began; how could it Be,
Without a cause Efficient had it made,
To say it made it self, when it was unmade,
Does Nature, Reas'n and common Sense impugn,
To say a part the whole made, were more mad,
Can part e're to the whole it does belong,
Create the whole? this wholly is more wrong.
Weigh all the World in Balance of the Mind,
And all the world will make thee God to way,
Look in thy little World, and thou shall find,
That great, great great, three greates in one always,
Which GREAT in thy least parts does wholly stay,
His rare existence to thee to reveal,
That being felt (as it were) thou should bewray,
Unto his praise what thou do see and feel,
And not in sullen silence it conceal.
There do thou find, the World epitomized,
A corpse for motion meet, of diverse kinds,
A divine Soul wherewith its all suffiz'd,
Which vnremou'd, the Body turns and winds:
And powers to every part, with power assigns,
Thy corpse a copy of this copious Mass,
Thy Soul his Image that no Image finds
Like him but it, that able is to pass,
Through Heaven and Earth, yet stay still where it was.
For as we hold there is but one God alone,
But yet three persons in the Deity:
So the Soul's parted (though in substance one)
In It Understanding, Will, and Memory,
These Powers or Persons makes one Trinity,
Yet but one Substance indivisible,
Which perfect Trinity in Unity,
(Both being Spiritual and invisible)
Do make the Soul, her God so right resemble.
And like as one true God in persons three,
Does rightly rule this great Worlds Monarchy,
So in Man's little World these Uirtues be,
But one Soul ruling it continually,
Yet in this lesser World, as well we try,
Be sundry sorts of people; some there are
That be as heads, Some Rulers not so hie,
Some common Citizens; and some less rare,
Those Ruralls be, that still are out of square.
The Heads are those above recited three,
The under Rulers Thoughts, and Fancies are,
The Citizens the outward Senses be,
The Ruralls be the Bodies rare,
(Which often make the Soul most poor and bare)
For when these Riffe-raffes in commotion rise,
And all will have their will, or naught will spare,
The Soul (poor Soul) they then in rage surprise,
And rob her of her wealth, and blind her of her eyes.
Then set Jehovah thunder from on hie,
And in the Soul advance his glorious voice,
The Understanding, Will and Memory
Then cannot hear it for the other noise:
As when a king speaks to his captains choice,
Though nere so near, if the Army make a shoute,
They hear him not, though his speech high he hoise;
So God may speak, but were as good be mute,
For he is not heard, when Passions do dispute.
But when those traitrous Tirants are suppressed,
Then like as Moises did ascend the Hill,
And left the Izralites below in rest;
To commune with his God and know his will,
So the Souls Senses may the like fulfill.
Who then may Contemplations Mountain scale,
To talk with God, the Passions being still,
And left below in Meekness humble vale,
Where they are cooled with many temprate gale.
Lo thus the Soul has the similitude
Of God, and of the World; of God, because
He with his Attributes has her endu'd;
And of the world, since that so near she draws,
To be, and not to be, contained by laws.
Of God in point of government she is like,
And of the World, since she does seldom pause:
Against her government (though just) to like,
For which her self, her self does often mislike.
But what a needelesse pain is it to prove,
The Sun (that lights each Eye) to be light?
When none endu'd with Sense, a doubt will move,
Of that which doubtless is so passing bright:
That even the blind perceiues it without sight.
Then much more needless is this proof of mine,
Since Wrong it self, must needs know God aright;
And Powers of Darkness sees this Power divine,
Much more must Men whose Eyes are christaline.
What shall I say? look thou with all thine Eyes
Seen or unseen, on things unseen, or seen;
Either above, or underneath the Skies:
What can thou see, in which God is unseen?
Since he is much more then all in all, I mean
He all, and much more, able is to fill
Without an adiunct, or a second mean,
Even by the only motion of his will,
Which can do all, and yet can do no ill.
What makes the hugest, and the strongest things
Obedient to the things most small and weak?
Will strong things be the weakers underlings
Ofselfe accord; since all things freedom seek,
Without some mightier will, their will to break?
The smallest Ante, whose strength is but Defect,
Has more preeminence, and virtue eake,
Then the Earthes total Globe, in each respect,
Then Power in weakness show'n, works this effect.
And naturally Contraries spill each other,
Then how can Nature (these Diu'ls God) compound,
The disagreeing Elements together:
But that she must those Elements confound?
In Nature no such force was ever found.
Then must some Power supernatural,
Give to each Element his vttmost bound,
That though they swerve in Nature; yet they shall
In one agree, through One uniting All.
The Sun does warm the cold womb of the Earth,
The Moon and Stars, her reasons does assign,
The Air, and Water brings forth her birth,
Which serves Beasts, and Beasts serve Men in fine:
If from Eternity these things thus were,
How could they to them selves an end design?
Seeing the end for which things formed are,
Before the things themselves, must needs appear.
And in our selves we find and feel a Mind,
That can at once a thousand Worlds contain,
Which needs must be of a celestial kind:
Then can we think no Mind does else remain,
When to our Minds that Mind appears plain.
For we can nothing mind, or good, or bad,
But it directs our Minds, with might and maine
Unto a Mind that never beginning had,
By whom in our beginning ours were made.
If not from thence, from whence was our beginning?
Did we begin our selves, that once began?
For that must needs begin, that needs has ending:
And run we up Man's race, from Man to Man,
A first we find from whom all others ran.
For could we make our selves, why make we not
Such as our selves are, where we list, and when?
Why has a wise man, to his Son a Sotte?
But that he cannot make his Son, God wot.
Man cannot make a Moath, much less a Man.
For as no hand but his, that Man did make
Could make an Angel; so no other can
Make the least hair, or make it white, or black.
If not a hair, nor color if it lack,
Can Man create, how make himself can he?
No, no, he cannot that Task undertake,
For through his ignorance he needs must see,
His blessed Being that made him to Be.
Because we see him not: (not as he is)
But by effects which from him do proceed.
Shall we deny his being, or his bliss,
And so subvert the forefront of our Creed?
Then raze we Reas'n and Conscience by that deed.
Were we endungeon'd from our birth, yet we
Would ween there were a Sun, whose beams are shed,
Through chincks on us, though him we could not see;
Then shall we question, if a God there be?
And shall we question make if God there be,
When through Sun, Moon, and Stars, and all below them,
He darts his Glories beams for us to see,
And yet shall we not see them, though he show them?
But wincke (wincke hard) because we will not know them?
For should we think naught is, which we see not,
We should not think we had eyes, though we owe them.
For though with them we see, yet well we wot,
We see them not themselves, though free from blot.
Much less they see the Soul, by which they see,
Yet Reas'n persuades Sense, there is a Soul,
From whom the Senses powers derived be,
Yet shall our Sense, our Reason so control,
To make it to maintain this error foul,
That God is not, without whom nothing Is.
For all that Is, is but as it were a Scroule,
Wherein in letters plain, that none can miss,
God is enroulde, above all Deities.
But some there are, (ah woe that such there are,)
That do confess, (perforce they do confess,)
There is a GOD; yet hold he has no care,
Of worldly things; but reigns in blessedness,
And of the World makes Fortune gouernesse.
These Diuills are more dampened then the rest,
Since they confessing God, make more transgress,
For if a Providence be not confessed,
Who will not live to live as he thinks best.
These fools confessing God do God deny,
Whom to confess, without his Atributes,
Does to that fond confession give the ly,
Because it self, against it self disputes;
And to their shame, it self, it self confutes,
For ask a Savage, if a God he holds,
Why so he weenes? he straight his reasons suits,
From Order drawn which he in all beholdes,
Which he beeleeues, some ord'ring Power vpholdes.
By naught so much as by his providence,
Is God discerned; which all must needs discern,
That has a humane Soul, and common sense;
For common sense, the outward'st sense interne,
At the first sight that principle does learn:
For if through the effects we see their cause,
Then may we plainly see, whose Nature's Stern,
By that Decorum we see in her laws,
Namely this Power, that Land and Ocean awes.
Who if he careless were of wordly things,
It is for want of power, or want of will;
If want of power, his power in bounds it brings:
If want of will, his goodness it does spill,
For of his works to have no care is ill.
But if thou God confess, confess thou do,
That he is good, and most almighty still,
Ifso he be, then needs confess thou must,
That he is provident, or most unjust.
For Providence being but a wise connay,
Of things created to some certain end;
And that no humane soul her powers employ,
Ought to effect, but does the same intend;
Then shall we say, he to whom all does tend
When he made all, meant not they should do so,
As if against his will to him they bend,
So spill his wills and spoil his wisdom to?
If not, then must we say, God all must do.
For as his will had pow're, the World to make,
So had his wisdom might to sway the same,
For Wisdom infinite cannot mistake;
But as it deemeth, so will all things frame,
And in less power, never loses ame:
For as he made the whole, the parts he made,
And if the whole he cares for, sure I am
The parts he cares for, (though they seem to fade)
Which sense and common reason does persuade.
Nature (we well perceive) makes naught in vain
And thou make naught, but to some end or use.
Thou ween'st thou merrits, praise for that thy pain,
(As sure thou do) and think thou do misse-vse,
In making vselesse things, thy wits and Muse,
Dare GOD bereave, of what returns thee praise?
And give him that in thee thou deem'st abuse.
O Men! O Manners! O most damned Days!
What Tongue or Pen can paint your just dispraise*
Alphons, the tenth that Spain did signiorize,
(The maine objection against all Providence) Because such a Monster should ever
breathe.

Said, (O that such a Slave from Kings should rise!)
Had he bin with God, when things did commence,
They should have better bin, in their essence,
This Fool, the Only wise would needs direct,
But for his pain, Pain was his recompense,
Who for he would surmount God in effect,
This Lucifer to Earthes Hell was diject.
Pherecides the damned Assirian,
For scorning God, and Providence out right,
Lice him consumed, for on him so they ran,
That he for shame abandoned all men's sight,
And desolately died in wretched plight.
So Lucian that from the Faith did slide,
(In Traians time) became an Athist quight,
And did both God and Providence deride,
For which in pieces torn by dogs, he did.
Upon the Statua of Senacherib,
Engraven was, Learn by me God to fear,
Who for this monster, at Heavens God did gibe,
Was slain b' Adramelech, and Sharezer,
The wicked Sons, of this more wicked Sire.
And so th'appostata, damned Julian,
Of plagues for such contempts can witness bear,
Whose blood whilst from his heart, amain it ran,
Cried, thou have overcome, O Galilean!
Justinian, whom Pelagius ill did school,
For holding but that only heresy,
Was quite of Sense bereft, and made a fool,
And in one day was well, ill, and did die;
So ended in a day, his life, and folly.
But should I site, the Judgments (as I might)
That have bin powered on such impiety,
It would be tedious, and with horror dight,
The hardiest hearer it would sore affright.
Pirrhon, Plutarchus Son, would not believe,
What his Eyes, Ears, Nose, Tongue, and hands did kno,
His Senses he imagined might deceive,
And therefore did conclude, they still did so:
So God, and Providence deniers do;
Who though their Senses outward and interne,
The being of them both do plainly sho,
Yet they will not believe what they discern,
Though never so near it do their Souls concern.
But bring we their best reasons to the Scoles
Of Judgment; and well weigh the same therein,
If there were Providence, say these wise fools,
Why should not vselesse things which made have bin
To comber Man, cease, or to ruin rin?
Whereto serves Rocks, and Seas, and Dales, and Hills;
Desartes, wild Beasts? by such, what do we win*
Which burdens but the Earth with harmefull Ills,
That Men annoy, and often destroy and killes.
Why are the virtuous plagued, the vicious pleased?
And twixt all creatures, why is here such strife?
Yea, why has Sin upon all mankind seas'd?
And why do such lead here a dying life
Where goodness is most rare, and evil rife?
Can Providence remain where these consist?
As-well may concord rest twixt Man, and Wife,
That still are tongue to tongue, and fist to fist,
As Providence appear, where these exist.
With Reasons, leaving no place for reply,
These questions often have bin replide unto:
Then in a word, thou can not this deny,
But in an Artists work thou can not do,
Are things made to some end, thou do not kno.
Yet blam'st thou not the worke-man but thy Wit;
Then, will thou not to God like favor sho.
But censure things he makes, as most unfit,
When thou want reason, but to aim at it?
For he is Reas'n it self, we Rashness are,
Which nerethelesse had Reason for our guide,
Which Guide played least in sight, ere we were ware,
And almost quite forsook us for our pride,
That now in us, it is scarce seen to abide.
But should we see with Reasons open Eyes,
The secrets which in Wisdoms breast reside,
We should be Gods; at least should be as wise,
For we with God should all that Is, comprise.
But since fools follies must be answered,
Lest they do ween them wiser then they be,
In few, too few of their objections bred,
In their best brains, (that with the worst agree)
We Will shape (as being bound) them answer free,
Had it not bin, (say thou lewd Libertine)
Meeter that Man should never Corruption see,
Then to the same (made as he is) incline,
And so impeach the Providence divine?
Why do not rather ask, why Man is Man?
And not an Angel, rather then a clod?
Man's Mind immortal is, and reason can,
And were he all unchanged, he were a God.
God steadfast stands, but his works needs must nod,
Man's not created, here still to remain,
But to his Maker he is made to plod
Through thick and thin, and cannot rest attain,
Till in his God alone, he it obtain.
How can there be (say thou) such providence,
Since God made Man, to serve him as his end?
Then how could Man prevent Gods purpose since,
And fall from that his Maker did intend,
Without his God should thereto condescend?
Or if not so, then it is a consequent,
What did eusue, God could not comprehend,
Or if he could, he could it not prevent,
And so not God; if God, not provident.
Nor Grace, nor Power, nor Wisdom did he want,
This to prevent, but he it did permit,
(Not that his providence therein was scant,)
But to make man more cling to him by it,
What providence can better God befit,
Then Ill to turn unto a greater Good?
For had we still bin staid, we had not flit,
Then would we ween, that of our selves we stood,
And think our selves Gods peers in constant mood.
For what procured Man's fall, but peerless pride?
Which was, that he would needs be without peer,
And as a God, without his GOD abide;
So God to make himself, sole GOD appear,
Made man to see he could not stand or steer
Without his God, that seeing he could not stand,
But by his aid, he should to him draw ncere,
Inuoking humbly, his all-helping hand,
And bind himself, to him in loving band.
For we with ghostly pride are often inflate,
And being so, God suffers to fall,
With Wit and Will, for which our selves we hate,
And ay are vexed at the very Gall,
That we to sin should so our selves enthrall,
So Sin it self, serves for a Sentinel,
To keep us from it, since no sorrow small,
It threatens to her Slaves, then O how well,
Ought we to speak of God, and his counsel*
Of whom our Motions, and our Actions are,
But their disorder from our selves* proceed,
Yet he of our well-doing has a care,
Though of our selves we do not well indeed,
But yet he makes our ill often well to speed,
He whom his heart approved, did prove this true,
Who through adultrous, and a worse misse-deed,
Himself, and eake his God, he better knew,
And did himself forsake, and God ensue.
As he permitted Man for Justice sake,
To fall, to make his Justice so appear,
So suffers he Man's will, his to forsake,
That his pow're should be seen to draw them near,
And make of both free-wills, one will entire,
For were there but (twixt God and Man) one will,
Then Gods great pow're not so perspicuous were,
Which makes Man's wayward will his own fulfill,
Without constraint, through pow're and peerless skill.
But yet thou say, why staid he not Man's will?
How should he then have made his will bin free?
Better vnfree (say thou) then be so ill,
But it is not ill at liberty to be.
If it brings bondage, better be vnfree
(Say thou again.) But then Man were not Man,
And he would grudge at lack of liberty,
So God did for the best, say what thou can,
Although Man's liberty to looseness ran.
But would thou God bereave of liberty?
That is self Freedom, and his hands so bind,
That he should not (through straight extremity)
Do with his own, according to his mind?
Then all Gods pow're by thee should be assigned,
And so thou God would be, and Man him make,
For other reason, Reason cannot find,
If thou his liberty wilt from him take,
But he should be thy subject for thy sake.
But yet thou say, how stands it with his grace,
To let his Creatures quite to ruin run?
Can Providence in him have any place,
That so will end the works he has begun?
Yet, what he does is for his Glory done,
(Damnd Hell hound, that against thy God do howl)
For by what is lost, to him is Glory won,
Since glorious it is to damn thy sinful Soul,
That will thy God in all his works control.
For he is glorifide (none can deny)
By Justice and by Mercy both alike.
But here I hear thee ask the reason, why
He does not spare those whom his Justice strike,
Whom if he would, he should no way mislike?
For what preuailes against his prevailing will?
Not All, though all at once against it kick.
Then if he would, All should the same fulfill:
And since he will not, it is worse then Ill.
To such rash Whies! (that under run his Rod,)
He thus replies (by him through whom he spoke)
O Man, what art thou that should question God?
May not the Potter what it please him make
Of his own Clay? And what if all he brake
When it is made? does he unlawful act?
Thou can not say he does, and not mistake.
But here thou will infer upon this Fact,
That God perforce Man's will must needs coact.
God by his Power and Will, all Powers has made,
And all Wills has disposde to each effect:
That his power swaies all Powers, Sense does persuade,
But that his will, all free- Wills should direct
Without constraint, our reason does reject.
If God those Wills should guide without their sway.
His power could not have gaind so great respect,
As when all Wills his Will do disobay;
Yet to his will, all wills themselves betray.
Two wicked ones, whom he would plague with death,
(With sudden death) fly to the field to fight
(By malice moved) there reaue they others breath.
And in their malice they perform aright
His righteous will, by rigor most unright.
Nero must dye his hands in Christians blood,
To make them Martires, moved thereto by spite;
So God would have it for his Churches good,
And for the Tyrants plague that her withstood.
To cast away a man's own handy works,
Although the works be his, and stuff and all,
Does argue no great wisdom in him lurkes,
And lesser goodness; for its prodigal.
If this in mortal Man be criminal,
What is it in him, whose All is infinite?
Is It not in him crime more than capital,
To mar what erst he made with rare delight?
Herein, say thou, thou can not God acquit.
No can? cursed dog, 'that barks and bites at once,
God can himself acquit, though I could not,
And thee requite with vengeance for the nonce,
For that his beauty thou so feign would blot.
But to his goodness it can be no spot,
Nor to his wisdom blemish can it be
To mar, since he thereby has glory got,
As well as make, since both in their degree,
With his prerogative do well agree.
Say he brought that to naught, he made of naught,
Since it prou'de naught, though he it good had made,
Must he to Sinners Bar for this be brought,
And there arraignd, condemnd, and doomd as bad,
Because such Changelings he created had?
To make Man God, he could not bring to pass,
For God is coeternall and unmade;
Then must he needs make Man such as he was,
Or not have made Mankind in any case.
For were a Nature reasonable unchanged,
And subject to no accident of Time,
Above an Angel it were, for they have changed,
Therefore it needs must be the Nature prime,
To which Man being created, cannot clime.
But yet thou say Adam in Paradise,
Could not so slide (though he were made of slime.)
But Providence it needs must prejudice,
Which should have staid him still in his justice.
Then must it have bereft him of free will,
(Whereat he would have still repining griu'd,)
And kept from him the knowledge of all Ill,
(Which knowledge of all good, has him deprived,)
Yet God, at first, from him that knowledge hiu'd.
But Man would needs be God, and so know all,
And knowing all, he knew him self was giu'd.
(That first was free) so did himself enthrall.
And so himself, did cause himself to fall.
O but (say thou) had God so pleased bin,
To Have kept him from the thought of that amiss,
And so have staid him, that he could not sin,
He still in Paradise had lived in bliss.
But yield to God (damnd wretch) as reason is,
That due that to a mortal king belongs,
By whose prerogative, and power of his,
He may, above his laws do seeming wrongs,
We may not question with repyning tongs.
If God should render reason for this Fact,
It should be such as we could not conceive;
For being Reas'n it self, he cannot act
Unreasonable deeds, which should bereave
Him of his nature which he cannot leave.
Yet Reas'n it self, when it does mount as hie
As it can reach, and there a proof does give
What it can do, we cannot that descry,
Unless we Reason were, eternally.
This height is past Man's reach which is but low,
This Depth cannot be gagged but by the Highst,
This Secret's such, as who the same does know,
Must needs be God, or at the least be Christ.
Then cursed art thou, that in it further pri'st
Then is convenient for a creature made;
In his Creators service to insist,
And not too far into this whirle-poole wade,
Where thou may loose thy self in Errors shade.
And which of both (think thou) would Reason choose?
To be made capable of endless bliss,
With possibility the same to loose,
And win a Hell, where all is quite amiss;
Or not to Be at all, both those to miss:
Sure, Reaz'n the first would choose, because the last
Is lowest hell, where highest horror is;
For in Not-beeings bottom, being fast,
Ought would to worse then naught, vnworen wast.
But to have Being, and such being to,
As next to Gods and Angels is the best;
And so to Be; what not? would Nothing do,
If it had power to do, right Reasons hest.
Then Man bless God, for this thy Being blessed;
That though thou be accloid with worlds anoy,
And standst in danger worse to be distressed,
If thou do not thy Being well employ;
But live to die: and thou shall live in joy.
If Hell we get it is with greater toil,
Then we endure to gain Heavens happiness;
Our Souls and Bodies we do more turmoile,
In worldly-solace (Sincke of Wretchedness)
Then (Crossed by Christ) we do in all distress.
For Sins Ambrosia is compact of Gall,
But moan for Sin is Manna Angels Mess,
And they that Hell endure for Heaven, they shall
Feel Heaven in Hell, and Hell no Hell at all.
For worldly pleasure does but kill the Soul,
As worldly sorrow does the Body spill.
Sorrow for sin does make both sound and whole,
Because such sorrow's mixed with solace still;
Which is substantial good with seeming Ill.
This takes away th'obiection used by thee,
(Thou godless Man) against thy Gods good will,
Which faith he has no care how ill we be,
Or if he had, from Ills would set us free.
Wherein thou do the Good and Ill confound,
For to a good man can no ill befall,
Though hells of harms did ever him surround;
And to a bad man, no good can, or shall
Fall to his share, though he possessed all.
For Goods the Ill abuse unto their woe,
Wherewith they execute no mischiefesmall.
As worldly ills do make the good forgo,
All that is ill indeed, or ill in shoe.
For as a Body crazed conuerts good food
Into the humor ill predominant,
Whenas the sound conuerts to perfect blood,
Those meats that are to health most discrepant;
So do the Bad with Wealth, the Good with Want.
With thy Minds eyes behold those Caesar's past
That were fell Tyrants, and thou needs must grant,
That for they were of their own shades aghast,
That which they held, held them to horror fast.
What if an aching head were crowned with gold,
What could that do, more then to pain it more?
It were too heavy, hard, and too too cold,
To give it case, or make it as before,
Which goldes restoratiue cannot restore.
How stopps the purple Robe, the purple blood?
Of him whose heart, a traitrous hand did gore;
If in such cases, such can do no good,
Then who will Tirants tax in envious mood
With gold or Ir'n, what skils it to be giu'd,
Since both our freedom reaues indifferently?
What matters it, to be of life deprived
With Axe or Hemp? since all is but to die; The Noble comes sooner by violent
death then the obscure.

Save that the Axe does it more speedily.
Advance a Beggar on a burning Throne,
And at his foot let Princes prostrate lie,
What pleasure takes he in Kings so or'throwne?
But such as kingly Tyrants feel alone.
A greater sign of death cannot appear,
(If fage Hipocrates we credit may)
Then when we see the Sick to gripe the gear,
That lies upon them, or with it to play,
They are past help (God help them) then we say.
So they which still are fingring worldly things,
And greedily gripes all that is in their way,
Whether they Subjects be, or frolic Kings,
Are at Deaths grizly gate, and Swan-like sings.
Many thou see with Justice Sword in hand,
Upon it fall, or it falls from their fist,
Because they could not well the same command,
And so themselves might mischief ere they wist.
God spills and spares by like means whom he list.
So want saues some that wealth would cast away,
Physicians meats restrain that health resist,
And we for our health sake do them obey,
"Because of sufferance comes ease we say.
Grieve not to see a Beggar made a King,
Nor yet a King a Beggar made by chance,
The first does stand in awe of every thing,
The last fears nothing subject to mischance,
Because he lives as death should him advance.
No Kingdom to Content, no Crown t'a Cross,
No peace to that continual variance,
We have with our Affections, and no loss,
To that of Heaven for a world of dross.
Store is no sore (some say) nor is ease ill,
So thought not Cirus who the Sardines sill'd,
With all that might voluptuous thoughts fulfill,
Which for a plague to them he so fulfilled,
And that they might so curelessely be spilled.
The sober Soul, and temp rate Body sees,
How mortal it is to be ouer-fill'd
But the eyes of swollen Excess still ouersees,
That which with God and Nature best agrees.
Many meets Death at Feasts that in the field,
Could not come ne ere him, though for him they sought,
A Splint at Triumph has some Kaesars killed,
That many a bloody battle erst had fought,
Thus Kings to death, triumphantly are brought,
Because they will triumph ere victory,
The end makes all, and in the end we ought
To triumph only: if we live and die,
Below the Cross, that us shall crown on hie.
But yet (say thou) what Providence can see*
The guiltless made a bloody sacrifize,
To expiate the rage of Villanee,
That nothing else will quiet or suffize,
What skills it how the virtuous liver dies,
Since by a bloody death in likelihood,
It pleases God their Souls so to surprise,
And on the brow of Time write with their blood,
Their virtues for succeeding Ages good?
Thus makes he Evil, Good, in spite of Evil,
For all that Is, does to his Glory tend.
Whereto he guides the doings of the Devil?
Though Diu'ls do it not, unto that end.
Then since Gods Providence so clear is kend,
As that s^^se Blindness needs must see the same,
Let Gods ^^^les wisely thereon still depend,
Whiles these wise men, like fools past Grace and Shame,
(Denying it) loose Body, Soul, and Name.
FINIS.

