LE PRIMER REport des Cases and Matters en Ley resolves and adiudges en les
Courts del Roy en Ireland.

Collect et digest per Sr. John Dauys Chiualer Attorney General del Roy en
cest Realm.

Liber librum aperit.

DVBLIN. Printed by John Franckton Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty
Anno. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, THOMAS LORD ELLESMERE LORD
CHAVNcellor of England.
KIng Henry the Second (my most honorable good Lord) was the first King of
England after the Norman Conquest, that was styled Lord of Ireland. Yet are
there no records of that kings time remaining, whereby it may appear, that he
established any form of Civil government in this land. But it is manifest by
many records, and stories, that his son King John made the first division of
Counties in Ireland, published the laws of England, and commanded the due
execution thereof in all those countries which he had made, erected the Courts
of Justice, made the Standard of Irish moneys equal with the English:
Breefely, he did order and settle the government here in all points,
according to the Model of the commonwealth of England. And to that end, when
himself in person came over into Ireland the second time (which was in the
twelfth year of his reign) he brought with him many learned persons in the
law, and other Officers, and ministers of all sorts, to put the English laws
in execution: whereof there is a notable record in the Tower of London, 11.
Henr. 3. Patent. Membr. 3. agreeing with that which is related by Matthew. Paris.
histor. magn. sol. 220 b.

After which time the records of all legal Acts and proceedings, namely the
Piperolls, containing the charge of the revenue both Certain and casual, the
Plearolls, containing as well Common pleas, as pleas of the Crown, Parliament
Rolls, Charters, Patents, Commissions, and Inquisitions, were made up in good
form in every kings time, till the later end of the reign of King Henry VI,
when by reason of the dissension of the two Royal houses, the state of England
neglecting the government of this Realm, the Clarks and Officers grew also
negligent in the execution of their several places. And though many of those
ancient records have been embezeled, and many have perished by carlesse
keeping, yet diverse of all sorts do yet remain, as fair and authentic, as
any I have seen in England. Howbeit during all the time that the laws of
England have had their course in Ireland, which is now full four hundred
years, there has not been any Report made and published of any Case in law,
argued, or adjudged in this Kingdom: but all the arguments and reasons of the
judgments and resolutions given in the Courts of Ireland, have hitherto been
utterly lost, and buried in oblivion.

Which seems to me the more strange, because there have been within this
Realm, in every age since the reign of King John, men sufficienly learned in
the laws, who have derived their learning out of the fountains of law in
England, the Innes of Court there (being the most flourishing and honorable
Academy of gentlemen, that ever was established in any nation, for the study
and learning of the Municipall laws thereof) And therefore they might have
been induced to imitate the learned men of England, who from the Norman
Conquest downwards, did continually preseiue the memory of such notable cases
as did from time to time arise, and where argued and ruled in the Courts of
Justice in England, by reducing the same into books of Reports, which may be
called, not improperly, the Annalles of the law.

For albeit our Reports at large which are published in Print, do beginn with
the reign of king Edw. III. And the broken Cases of elder times, which are
scattered in the Abridgements, are not found higher then the time of king Henry
III. yet assuredly there were other Reports digested in years and Terms, as
ancient as the time of king William the Conqueror: as appears by that which
Chaucer writteth of the Seriaunt at law In Terms had he Cases and Doomes all,
That fro that time of King William were fall.


Neither does Glanuill or Bracton disaffirme this antiquity of the Reports of
the law, in that they affirm that the law of England was Ius non scriptum in
their times, as your Lordship has noted in that most learned, grave, and
prudent speech of yours, touching the Postnati of Scotland. For indeed those
Reports are but Comments or interpretations upon the Text of the Common law:
which Text was never originally written, but has ever bin preserved in the
memory of men, though no man's memory can reach to the original thereof.

For the Common law of England is nothing else but the Common custom of the
Realm: And a custom which has obtained the force of a law, is always said
to be Ius non scriptum, for it cannot be made or created, either by Charter,
or by Parliament, which are acts reduced to writting, and are always matter
of Record, but being only matter of fact and consisting in use and practice,
it can be recorded and registered no where, but in the memory of the people.

For a Custom takes beginning and grows to perfection in this manner. When
a reasonable act once done, is found to be good and beneficial to the people,
and agreeable to their nature and disposition, then do they use it, and
practice it, again, and again, and so by often iteration and multiplication
of the act, it becomes a Custom, and being continued without interruption
time out of mind, it obtains the force of a law.

And this Custumary law is the most perfect, and most excellent, and without
comparison the best, to make and preserve a commonwealth, for the written laws
which are made either by the edicts of Princes, or by Counselles of estate, are
imposed upon the subject before any Trial or Probation made, whether the same
be fit and agreeable to the nature and disposition of the people, or whether
they will breed any inconvenience or no. But a Custom does never become a law
to bind the people, until it has bin tried and approved time out of mind,
during all which time there did thereby arise no inconvenience, for if it had
been found inconvenient at any time, it had been used no longer, but had
been interrupted, and consequently it had lost the virtue and force of a law.

Therefore as the law of nature, which the schoolmen call Ius commune, and
which is also Ius non scriptum, being written only in the heart of man, is
better then all the written laws in the world to make men honest and happy in
this life, if they would observe the rules thereof: So the custumary law of
England, which we do likewise call Ius commune as coming nearest to the law
of Nature, which is the root and touchstone of all good laws, and which is
also Ius non scriptum, and written only in the memory of man (for every
custom though it took beginning beyond the memory of any living man, yet it
is continued and preserved in the memory of men living) does far excel our
written laws, namely our Statutes or Acts of Parliament: which is manifest in
this, that when our Parliaments have altered or changed any fundamental
points of the Common law, those alterations have been found by experience to
be so inconvenient for the commonwealth, as that the common law has in
effect been restored again, in the same points, by other Acts of Parliament,
in suceeding ages.

And as our Custumary unwritten law does excel our Parliament laws, which
are written, so for the government of the Commonweal of England (which is as
well instituted and established as any Commonweal in Christendom.) Our
native Common law is far more apt and agreeable, then the Civil or Canon
law, or any other written law in the world besides: howsoever some of our
own Countrymen, who are Ciues in aliena Republica, and hospites in sua, may
per^^ppes affirm the contrary. But certain it is, That the great and
wisemen of England in the Parliament of Merton did not prefer a Foreign
law before their own, when motion being made by the Clergy that Children
borne before Marriage might be adjudged legitumate, They all made answer with
one voice, Nolumus Leges Angliae mutari, And again in II. R. 2. when a new
course of proceeding in Criminal Causes, according to the form of the Civil
law was propounded in that unruly Parliament, Answer was made by all the
Estates, That the Realm of England, neither had bin in former times, nor
hereafter should be Ruled and governed by the Civil law. Rot Parliam II. R.
2. in Archiv. Turris.

And here I may observe for the Honor of our Nation, and of our Ancestors
who have founded this Commonweal wherein we live, and enjoy so many
felicities, That England having had a good and happy Genius from the
beginning, has bin enhabited always with a virtuous and wise people, who ever
embraced honest and good Customs, full of Reason and conveniencie, which being
confirmed by common use and practice, and continued time out of mind, became
the common law of the Land. And though this law be the peculiar invention of
this Nation, and delivered over from age to age by Tradition (for the common
law of England is a Tradition, and learned by Tradition as well as by Books)
yet may we truly say, That no human law written or unwritten has more
certainty in the Rules and Maxims, more coherence in the parts thereof, or
more harmony of reason in it: nay we may confidently averr, that it does
excel all other laws in upholding a free Monarchy, which is the most
excellent form of government, exalting the prerogative Royal, and being very
tender and watchful to preserve it, and yet maintaining withal the ingenuous
liberty of the subject.

Breefely, it is ^o framed and sitted to the nature and disposition of this
people, as we may properly say, it is connaturall to the Nation, so as it
cannot possibly be ruled by any other law. This law therefore does
demonstrate the strength of wit and reason, and self sufficiency which has
been always in the people of this land, which have made their own laws out
of their wisdom and experience (like a silk worm that forms all her webb
out of her self only) not begging or borrowing a form of a commonweal
either from Rome, or from Greece, as all other nations of Europe have done, but
having sufficient provision of law and Justice within the land, have no need
Iustitiam and iudicium a^ alienigenis emendicare, as King John wrote most nobly
to Pope Innocent the third. Matthew Parishistor. magn page 215. En populus sapiens
and intelligens, gens magna: As it is said of Gods chosen people 4. Deuter.
Neither could any one man ever vaunt, that, like Minos, Solon, or Lycurgus, he
was the first Lawegiuer to our Nation: for neither did the King make his own
prerogative, nor the Judges make the Rules or Maxims of the law, nor the
common subject prescribe and limitt the liberties which he enjoys by the
law: but as it is said of every Art or Science which is brought to perfection,
Per varios vsus artem experientia fecit, so may it properly be said of our
law, Per varios vsus legem experientia fecit. Long experience, and many
trialles of what was best for the common good, did make the Common law.

But upon what reason then does Polidor Virgill and other writers affirm,
that King William the Conqueror was our Lawegiuer, and caused all our laws to
be written in French? Assuredly, the Norman Conqueror found the ancient laws
of England so honorable, and profitable, both for the Prince and people, as
that he thought it not fit to make any alteration in the fundamental points
or substance thereof: the change that was made was but in formulis iuris: he
altered some legal forms of proceeding, and to honor his own language, and
for a mark of Conquest withal, he caused the pleading of diverse Actions to be
made and entered in French, and set forth his public Ordinances and Acts of
Counsel in the same tongue: which form of pleading in French continued till
36. Edw. 3. when (in regard that the French tongue begann to grow out of use,
which for many years after the Norman Conquest was as common as the English
among the Gentry of England) it was ordained by Parliament, that all pleas
should be pleaded, debated, and Judged in the English tongue, and entered, and
enrolled in Latin. And as for our statutes or Acts of Parliament, the bills
were for the most part exhibited in French, and passed and enrolled in the same
language, even till the time of King H. 7. And so are they printed in Rastalles
first Abridgment of statutes published in the year 1559. But after the
beginning of King Henry 7. his reign, we find all our Acts of Parliament
recorded in English. Only our Reports of the Cases, resolutions, and Judgments
in the law, whereof our books of the law do consist, have ever until this
day been penned and published in that mixed kind of speech which we call the
law French, differing indeed not a little from the French tongue, as it is now
refined and spoken in France, as well by reason of the words of Art and form,
called the Terms of the law, as for that we do still retain many other
old words and Phrases of speech which were used four hundred years since,
and are now become obsolete and out of use among them, but are grown by long
and continual use so apt, so natural, and so proper for the matter and
subject of these Reports, as no other language is significant enough to
express the same, but only this law french wherein they are written.

And this is the true and only cause, why our Reports and other books of the
law for the most part, are not set forth in English, Latin, or the modern
french, for that the proper and peculiar phrase of the common law cannot be
so well expressed, nor any case in law be so succinctly, sensibly, and whithall
so fully reported, as in this speech, which is in deed mixte and compounded of
all these three languages. Which reason has not been well understood by
those, who object it as a fault to the Professors of our law, that, forsooth,
they write their Reports and books of the law in a strange unknown tongue
which none can understand but themselves, to the end, that the people, being
keept in ignorance of the law, may the more admire their skill and knowledge,
and esteem and value it at a higher price. As Cicero in his first book de
Oratore does testify, that the like conceit was held of the first Professors
of the Civil law, Quia veteres illi qui huic scientiae praesuerunt,
obtinendae atque augendae potentiae suae causa, pervulgari artem suam
no^uerunt. And Caesar speaking of the Druides, who were Judges, and interpreters
of the law among the ancient Britains, does report of them, that though
they spent twenty years in the study of those laws, Non existimabant fas esse
^a literis mandare.

But the weakness of this objection against the Authors of our law books will
easily appear, if we consider how easy the Law french is to be learned: in
so much that the meanest wit that ever came to the study of the law, does come
to understand it almost perfectly within ten days without a Reader. So as we
do not seal or lock up the mysteries of our law in Hieroglyphickes, or in a
dark language that cannot be understood: But we express the Cases,
arguments, and Judgments of the law in a form of speech, so plain, so
significant, and in a tongue so soon learned by any man, that can speak
English, and understand Latin, as I dare say, there is no rational science in
the world, having so many words and Terms of art and form, that is so
clearly delivered in any language. And I may truly say withal, that if the
books of our law were all translated into English, they would not be better,
nay, they would not be so well understood by the students thereof, as in this
proper and peculiar language wherein they are now written.

And as this objection touching the speech or language wherein our Reports are
penned does arise out of ignorance of the cause thereof, as is before declared,
so are there other vulgar imputations cast upon the law and lawiers, which
may be as easily cleared, as having indeed no other ground but the mere
misunderstanding of such as are strangers to the profession: namely 1. that
there is much uncertainty in the reasons and Judgments of the law. 2. that
there are extreme and unnecessary delays in the proceedings of the law.
(...). that many bad and dishonest causes are wittingly defended by the
professors of the law. But Sapientia iustificatur a filijs suis.

1 Therefore first touching the incerteinty of the law* Certain it is, that
law is nothing but a rule of reason, and human reason is Lesbia regula,
pliable every way, or like a cupp with two ears, as the French proue^b is,
which may be taken up on either side, as well with the left hand as with the
right: so as not only the knowledge of the law, but all other rational
sciences that are subject to Argument and discourse, must needs be subject to
uncertainty and to error: and therefore upon Judgments given in our Ordinary
Courts of Justice the law does admit and allow writts of error to be
brought, without any touch or dishonor to the Judges, though there Judgments
be reuersed for error in point of law.

Howbeit there is no art or science that stands upon discourse of reason,
that has her Rules and Maxims so certain and infallible, and so little
subject to diverse interpretation as the common law of England, as it is
observed by the Lord chief Justice Cook in his Preface to the second part of
his Reports, that in all his time, there have not been moved in the Courts of
Justice in England, two quest^ons touching the right of discents or escheats,
or the like fundamental points of the common law: So certain, sure, and
without question are the principles and grounds thereof.

But whence then do so many debates and controuersis arise? whereupon do we
plead, and contend so much in the Courts of Justice, it there be so few
doubts and vncerteinties in law? doubtless this question is soon resolved,
by one plain and common distinction. In all the causes that are controuerted,
there is either Quastio Iuris, or quaestio facti. But for one cause wherein a
question of law does arise, that is indeed with the debating, there are a
thousand causes at least wherein the fact is only in question, and wherein if
the truth of the fact were known, the law were clear and without question.
So as the pleading and contention in Westminster hall, and the rest of the
Courts of Justice in both realms, is for the most part touching matters of
fact. In the Chauncery whether there be Trust or no trust, Fraud or no fraud:
In the Starchamber whither a Riot^ or no riott, Forgery or no forgery. Per^u^y
or no periu^y: and the like matters of fact come only in question in all other
Courts which proceed to the hearing and determining of causes by examination of
witnesses. And in the Co^^^^ of law where the trial is by Jurors, are there
not a thousand issues joined upon matters of fact, for one demurrer that is
joined upon a point in law? and when all these issues are tried either at the
Bar or at the A^s^sses, how many hundreds of general verdictes are there
given which determine matters in fact, for one special verdict whereupon do
result questions in law?

And again of all the questions in law which do arise upon demurrers or
special verdicts, or which are moved in arrest of Judgment, how many of them
are there over ruled upon the first opening or putting of the Case? and how
few of them are there that are malleable or can endure the hammer, so as they
come to be solemnly argued at the Bar, and at the Bench? As for the
Eschequer-chamber cases which are of such difficulty as that they draw an
assembly of all the Judges of the law for the resolution thereof, they are so
rare as scarce twice in a year are those Judges drawn out of there proper
Courts to deliver their opinions upon those doubtful points. So as it is
to be ascribed to the great learning, wisdom, gravity, and constancy of our
Judges, and to the certeinty and excellent harmony of reason in our law, that
there are no more diversities of opinion among the Judges, or doubtful
questions in the law then there are.

For if the Rules and Maxims of the law were a thousand times as many as they
be indeed, yet would they carry no proportion with the infinite diversity of
men's actions, and of other accidents which make the cases that are to be
decided by the law. Besides, it must be a work of singular Judgment, to
apply the grounds and rules of the law which are fixed and certain, to all
human acts and accidents which are in perpetual motion and mutation.

And therefore we may truly say for the honor of our law, notwithstanding
that vulgar imputation of incerteinty, that the Judgment and reason of it is
more certain then of any other humane law in the world: As well because the
grounds of our common law have from the beginning been laid with such deep
wisdom, policy, and providence, as that they do provide for, and meet with,
almost all cases that can possibly fall out in our commonwealth, as also
because those grounds are so plain, and so clear, as that the professors of
our law have not thought it needful to make so many glosses and
interpretations therevppon, as other laws are perplexed and confounded
withal: which glosses, as one does well observe, do increase doubt and
ignorance in all Arts and Sciences. And therefore the Ciuilians themselves
confess, that their law is a sea full of waves, the Text whereof being
digested into so many volumes, and so many Doctors interpreting the Text, and
twice as many more Commenting upon their interpretations, and so gloss upon
gloss, and book upon book, and every Doctors opinion being a good authority
fit to be cited and vouched among them, must needs breed distraction of
opinions and uncertainty in that law. The like may be said of the Canon law,
albeit the Text thereof be scarce four hundred years old. But of the
professors of our law, who ever yet has made any gloss or interpretation
upon our Master Litleton? though into that little book of his, he has reduced
the principal grounds of the common law with exceeding great Judgment and
authority, and with singular Method and order? and yet if he had been an
author in the Civil or Canon law, I dare say, there had been, by this time,
so many Comments and glosses made upon him, as the books written upon this
book only, would have been more in number, then all the volumes of our law
at this day.

But the learned men in our law have ever thought, that Littleton being a
learned and reverend Judge, wrote with a purpose to be understood, and that
therefore an other man, specially if he were of less learning then he, could
hardly express him better then he has expressed himself. And therefore his
book has ever been read^ of our youngest students, without any Commentary or
interpretation at all.

But for all this, it is objected, that our later Judgments do many times
cross and contradict the former, directly, in one and the same point of law,
which is a manifest argument of incerteinty in the law.

Assuredly, there are very few precedents of such contrary Judgments, scarce
two in one age. And yet if the reasons of the later Judgments did appear of
record, we should find them grounded upon mischeefes and inconueniencies
arising since the former Judgments, or upon other weighty considerations
respecting the good of the commonwealth in general. Otherwise there are no
Judges in any State or Kingdom under the Sun, that do more reverence the
opinions and Judgments of their predecessors then the Judges of England have
ever done, as your Lordship, for their honor has observed in that most worthy
speech of the Postnati, wherein, among other things, your Lords^ip does noate
the memorable saying of Askue 37. Henr. 6 fol. 22. Such a Charter has been
allowed in the time of our predecessors, who were as sage and learned as we
be, and of Markham 4. Edw. 4. fol. 41. It is good, says he, for us to do,
as it has been used in former time, and not to keep one way one day for one
party, and another day the contrary for the other party: the former precedents
are enough for us to follow.

But on the other side, let us hear what a learned Canonist, Lodo^icus Gomez
in regula de Triennali possessore cap. 5. is bold to say, Non est inconueniens
says he iudicium esse vno tempore iustum, and postea eius contrarium iustius:
and hoc malum videtur imponi mortalibus in p^nam, vt little opiniones secundum
varietatem temporum senescant and intermoriantur, aliaeque ^iuersae vel
priorihus contrariae renascantur and deinde pubescant. Talis enim est humani
iuris disciplina, vt nulla in ^a opinio ^odem statu diu stare possit. Dies d^^i
^ructat verbum, and nox noct^ indicat scientiam.

And again, Opiniones hominum ^orum corpora sequuntur, quae cum tempore
vetara^^unt and pereunt, and s^^ut rerum omnium, ita quoque and opinionum est
quaedam vicissitudo. And in another place, Stilus hodiern^s propter ma^orem
temporum experientiam videtur magis iure fundatus, and ideo solet dic^ quod
moderni sunt sicut Culices in capite Elephantis, quae vident priora and
posteriora: quanto juniores tanto perspicatiores. And thus much may suffice to
be spoken to remove that scandal of uncertainty, which ignorance does
unworthily cast upon the common law.

2 But if the reason and ludgement of our law be so little subject to
uncertainty, how comes it to pass that the proceedings of our laws are so
much subject to delay? for this is another vulgar objection against our law
and the professors thereof. But who are they that make this objection? have
they themselves been engaged in any suites of importance? have they passed
through the Courts of Justice either in course of law, or in course of equity?
if they have not, they speak but by hearesay, and then their testimony in this
behalf is of little credit. If they have had any long depending suites of their
own, then let them examine, whither their own spleen and wilfulness, or the
corruption of some needy sollicitors, (who pick their living out of the
business they follow, and are loath to quench the fur that makes them warm)
have not rather drawn their causes to an extraordinary length, then the
ordinary process of law, or the advice of learned Counsel. For such as are
learned Counselors indeed are like good Pilots, who though their skill be
best tried in a long and difficult voyage, do rather desire fair weather, and
a speedy arrival with their passengers in the haven.

But the troth is, it is the stomach or malice of such clients as will not
stick to say, that they will spend all they are worth to have their will of
their adversaries (and therefore will not be satisfied with any Judgment or
decree) that does produce and prolong suites in law: who when their learned
Counsel indeed do refuse to nourish that peccant humor in them, do seek out
discarded impostors or Idols of whom there is an opinion among light and
ignorant people, of extraordinary cunning and slight in carrying of business
with advantage, and in curing of foild and desperate causes. These men give
them counsel according to their own heart because they sooth them in their
litigious humor: howbeit in the end when they have wearied and wasted
themselves, they find how weak those wiles and crafty courses are, and
learn of Esope, that that one only plain way which the Cart had to escape
from the dogs, was better and safer then those hundred tricks of evasion
whereof the Fox did vaunt before he was taken: and they find withal, the
saying of Cicero true, ignoratio iuris litigiosa est potius quam scientia.

Besides this malignant and unquiet disposition of many Clients, there is
another cause why suites are not brought so soon to an end as perhaps they
were in former ages: namely, the multitude of causes now depending in every
Court of justice, every of which causes must have convenient time allowed, as
well to prepare it, and make it ripe to be heard or tried, as for the trial
and hearing it self. And the true cause of the multitude of causes does
proceed from this, that the commodities of the earth being more improued, there
is more wealth, and consequently there are more contracts real, and personal,
then there were in former ages. Besides there is more luxury and excess in the
world, which breeds unthriftiness, banckruptes, and bad debtors, more
coueteousnesse and more malice, which begets force and fraud, oppression and
extortion, breath of the peace, and breach of trust. Out of these fountains
innumerable suites do spring, which make the Courts of Justice so to swell: and
hence it is that our statute laws since Henr. 8. his time, do make up so
great a volume: and hence it is, that the professors of the law are grown
withal to so great a number, for where there is magna messis there must be
of necessity operarij multi.

Indeed, if we all lived according to the law of nature, we should need
few laws, and fewer lawiers. Do as thou would be done unto were a rule
sufficient to rule us all: and every man's conscience would supply both the
place of an Advocate and a Judge, and then we should suffer no costs of suite,
nor delay of process.

And again if we were a poor and a naked people, as many nations in America
be, we should easily agree to be judged by the next man we meet, and so
make a short end of every controversy. When the people of Rome were little
better then Sheepards and heardsmen, all their laws were contained in ten or
twelve Iuory tables. But when they became Lords of all the world, what a world
of books were there written of the Roman civil law? The like we see in
every commonwealth when it once begins to flourish, and to grow rich and
mighty: the people grow proud withal, and their pride makes them contentious
and litigious, so as there is need of many laws to bridle them, and many
Officers to execute those laws, and many Lawyers to interpret those laws, and
all little enough: as when a body grows full and gross, it needs more
Physic then when it was lean.

And yet though our suites and causes be very many, and our Courts of Justice
but a few, whereby it must needs come to pass, that every particular business
moving in his turn must have the slower motion: yet if we compare our legal
proceedings with the process of other Kingdoms and commonweals, specially of
France, we shall find, that according to the vsua^l clause in diverse writts,
we have indeed plenam and celerem iustitiam (though the breefest Justice be
not always best) and that our causes for the most part being orderly pursued
may come to their Period in a year, with the course of the Sun, when there
are many processes in foreine countries that seem to be governed by Saturn,
which planet does fearce finnish his course in the space of thirty years: as
Bodin does testify of his own country, that their were more suites in law
depending in France, then in all Europe besides, and that many of those causes
were an hundred year old: as that of the county of Raise, says he, which
suite has been so well entertained in all the Chambers of Justice, as albeit
the parties that began it, are long since dead, yet the suit it self is still
alive. Besides, we have not so many Appeals, nor so many reuiewes of causes,
as the Civil and Canon laws do admit, neither have we at this day so many
delays by Essoines, viewes, vouchers, and protections, as were in use in
former ages, when titles of land were tried only in actions Real, which are
now grown almost out of use, and a more speedy course of trial invented by
m^xt and personal actions.

Lastly there is no Nation in the world (I speak it for the honor of our
Nation, and of our land) that has a course of Justice so speedy, and withal
so commodious and easy for the subject, as our trialles by Assise and nisi
prius are. For what Kingdom is there under the Sun, wherein every half
year the public Justice does make her progress into every part thereof, as
it does in the kingdoms of England and Ireland? whereby it comes to pass,
that whereas the people of other contries do travel far to seek Justice in
their fixed and settled Courts, as it were at fountains, or Cesternes, the
streams of Justice are derived unto our people, and brought by conduit pipes
or quilles even home, as it were, to their own doors. And thus much I thought
fit to observe for the clearing of that unjust imputation of long and
unnecessary delays in our legal proceedings.

3 But there is yet another exception against the professors of our law,
namely, that wittingly and willingly they take upon them the defense of many
bad causes, knowing the same to be unjust, when they are first consulted with
and retained. And this is objected by such as presume to censure our Profession
in this manner. In every cause between party and party (say they) there is a
right, and there is a wrong, yet neither the one party, nor the other did ever
want a Counselor to maintain his cause. This may be true for the most part,
and yet in truth the learned Counsel whose fortune it is to light on the wrong
side, may be free from imputation of any blame. For when does the right or
wrong in every cause appear? when is that distinguished and made manifest? can
it be discovered upon the first Commencement of the suite, and before it be
known what can be alleged and proved by either party? Assueredly it cannot:
and therefore the Counselor when he is first retained cannot possibly Judge of
the cause, whether it be just or unjust, because be hears only one part of
the matter, and that also he receaues by information from his Client, who does
ever put the case with the best advantage for himself. But when the parties
have pleaded, and are at issue: when they have examined witnesses in course of
equity, or be descended to a trial in course of law: after publication and
hearing in th^one cause, and full evidence delivered in the other: then the
learned Counsel of either side may perhaps discern the right from the
wrong, and not before. But then are the causes come to their Catastrophe, and
the Counselors Act their last part. And yet until then the true state of the
cause on both sides could not possibly be discovered.

If then the causes that are prosecuted, do for the most part hang in a
doubtful balance, until the hearing or trial thereof (for if a cause be
undoubtedly and apparently naught on the one side, no man is so unwise as to
follow it to the end, with the expense of money, and hazard of his credit) how
can it be justly said that the Counselor against whose Client a decree or
verdict does pass, has wittingly defended an unjust cause, when he wist not
how the balance would incline, until he had made his uttermost defense?
howbeit if any of our Counselors do either in the prosecution of their Clients
causes, give sinister and crafty Counsel, or upon the hearing or trial
thereof, make an over bold defense of any dishonest action, our Judges are so
tender and jealous of the honor of our profession, as they lay a noate of
Infamy upon such persons, so as they seldom or never after are permitted to
rise to any higher degree in the law, or any Office of trust in the
commonwealth.

Whereby it comes to pass, that no men of any other calling or profession
whatsoever are more careful to preserve their good name and reputation, and
stand more precisely upon their good behavior then the learned professors of
the common law.

And as our Judges do discountenance bad Counselors, so does our law abhor
the defense and maintenance of bad causes, more then any other law in the
world besides. For by what other law is unlawful maintenance, champertie, or
buying of titles, so severely punished? By what othet law does the plaintiff,
pro falso clamore, or unjust vexation, or the defendant for pleading a false
plea pay an amercement or fine to the public Justice? And this is one cause,
among others why our law does not allow Counsel unto such as are indicted of
Treason, Murder, Rape, or other capital crimes: So as never any Professor of
the law of England has been known to defend (for the matter of fact) any
Traitor, Murderer, Rauisher, or Thief, being indicted and prosecuted at the
suite of the King. Turpe reos empta miseros defendere lingua, says the Poet,
and therefore it is an honor unto our law that it does not suffer the
Professors thereof to dishonor themselves (as the Aduocats and Orators in other
countries do) by defending such offenders. For example whereof we have extant
diverse Orations of Cicero, one pro C. Rabirio perduellionis reo, another pro
Roscio Amerino who was accused of Parricide, and another pro Milone who was
accused of Murder.

But good Lawyers have not with us that liberty which good Physicians have.
For a good Physician may lawfully undertake the cure of a foul and desperate
disease, but a good Lawyer cannot honestly undertake the defense of a foul and
desperate cause. But if he fortune to be engaged in a cause, which seeming
honest in the beginning, does in the proceeding appear to be unjust, he
follows the good Counsel of the Schooleman Thom. Aquinas 22. quaest. 71.
art. 3. Aduocatus si in principio credidit causam iustam esse, quae postea in
processu appareat esse iniusta, non debet eam prodere, vt scilicet alteram
partem iuuet, reuelando causae suae secretas: Potest tamen, and debet causam
deserere, vel eum cuius causam agit, inducere ad cedendum, sieve ad componendum,
sine aduersarij da nno.

And thus I conceive, that the most common and colorable exceptions which are
taken against our law and Lawyers, may be answered and cleared by the plain
reasons and demonstrations before expressed: So as our Profession may stand and
be justified in all points against Ignorance, Envy, and ill-contented
suitors, who like choleric Chesse-plaiers, when they have had a mate given
them, could find in their hearts to cast both the Chessebord, and Chessemen
into the fire.

These vulgar errors being thus reuersed, so as we may truly say, that there
is no such uncertainty in the rules of the law, no such delay in the
proceedings, no such preuarication or corruption in the Professors thereof, as
it is by some unjustly pretended: why may we not proceed further and affirm
confidently, that the profession of the law is to be preferred before all
other humane professions and sciences, as being most noble for the matter, and
subject thereof, most necessary for the common and continual use thereof, and
most meritorious for the good effects it does produce in the common wealth?

For what is the matter and subject of our Profession but Justice, the Lady and
Queen of all moral virtues? and what are our Professors of the law but her
Counselors, her Secretaries, her Interpretors, her Servants? again, what is
the King himself but the clear fountain of Justice? and what are the
Professors of the law but conduit pipes deriuing and conueying the streams of
his Justice unto all the subjects of his several kingdoms? so as if Justice
be rightly resembled to the Sun in the firmament, in that she spreads her
light and virtue unto all creatures: how can she but communicate part of her
goodness and glory, unto that science that is her handmaid and waits upon
her? And if Kings be Gods scholars (as Homer writes) and that the rules of
Justice be their principal lesson, and if God do honor Kings with his own
name, Dixi quod dij estis (as a more divine Poet then Homer sings) specially
for that they sit upon Gods own seat when they minister Justice unto the
people, do not Kings again highly honor those persons, whose subordinate
ministry and service they use in performing that principal part of their
kingly office? Undoubtedly, touching the advancement of such persons, Solomon
the King speaks, that they shall stand before Kings, and God will set them,
says David, with Princes, even with the Princes of his people.

Neither is this Profession ennobled in regard of the dignity of her imploiment
only, but she is to be honored so much the more for the necessity and
continual use of her service in the commonweal. For if we must honor the
Physician, propter necessitatem, as the wise man prescribes: much more must
we honor, for the same cause, the professors and ministers of the law. For
neither do all men at any time, nor any one man at all times, stand in need of
the Physician: for they that are in health (which are the greatest number of
men) non egent medico, says the great Physician of our souls, and our only
Advocate which is in heaven. But all men, at all times, and in all places do
stand in need of Justice, and of law, which is the rule of Justice, and of
the interpreters and ministers of the law, which give life and motion unto
Justice.

For do not all persons stand in need of Justice, when without her rule the
Prince himself knows not how to rule, nor his people how to obey? When
without her support, the noble man cannot uphold his honor, nor the common
subject hold his liberty? When without her safeguard, the rich man cannot be
free from spoil, nor the poor man from oppression? Breefely, when without her
no man living, be he virtuous or vicious, can enjoy his life, nor any thing
that makes his life delightful? For the covetous man cannot increase his
profitt, nor the sensual man enjoy his pleasure, but under the shadow of her
wings.

Again, is not Justice needful at all times, when we can neither travel
safely by day, nor sleep securely by night with out her protection? when if
such a law were made indeed, as was propounded by a wicked Emperor, That all
laws should cease for four and twenty hours, that short cessation would be
suffitient to give opportunity to wicked men to make a greater combustion in
the whole world, then that which happened when the Chariot of the Sun did
want a guide but half a day, as it is lively expressed in the fable of Phaeton.

Lastly, is not justice necessary in all places, when we cannot without peril
make a voyage by Sea, unless she wafte us, nor a journey by land unless she
conuoy us? when we should be oppressed by force in the country, if she not
defend us, and undone by fraud in the City, if she did not relieve us? When
she encloseth every man's garden and field, and makes every man's cottage his
Castle of defense? So as we have not such an universal and continual use
neither of the light, of the Sun, nor of fire and water, as we have of the
light, and heat, and comfort of justice: for a man may remain alive some
hours without the use of those common benefitts, but a commonwealth, wherein
each private man's weal consists, cannot stand and continue one minute of an
hour, if Justice, which is her soul, be departed from her.

If therefore Justice, and the law, which is but a Rule or lesson of Justice,
be so necessary for all persons, times and places, as no family, no City, no
commonwealth, no Kingdom, can stand without the support thereof: how
needful is the service of learned men in the law without which Justice it
self cannot possibly stand? for Iustitia periret says the President
Cassanaeus, si d^esset qui iustitiam allegaret. For if no man did study the
reason of the law, if no man kept in memory the rules of the law, if no man
knew the form of pleading, or the course of proceeding in the law, what
would become of the public Justice in a short time? or how should the benefitt
of the law be derived and communicated unto the people? for as in a natural
body the reasonable soul cannot use or transmitt any of her powers, but by
special Organs of the same body disposed and fitted by nature for every
function, as the eye to see, the ear to hear, the tongue to speak, and the
like of the rest: so in the body politic of a common wealth, the law which is
the soul thereof, produces no effect or operation at all, but by such of her
ministers, as by art and experience are enabled and qualified for her service.
For lex est iustitia inanimata, says the schoolman, Lex est mutus magistratus
says Cicero: the law of it self is dumb and speaks not, but by the tongue
of a learned and eloquent Lawyer: she is deaf and hears no complaints, but
by the ear of a grave and patient Judge: she is blind and sees no
enormities, but by the eye of a watchful and diligent Officer.

Again, the law is nothing else but a Rule, that is made to measure the
actions of men. But a Rule is dead and measures nothing, unless the hand of
the Architect do apply it. It is indeed an excellent Instrument, to make
harmony and concord in the commonwealth: but the best Lute that ever was made,
could never make music of it self alone, without the learned hand of the
Luteplaier.

Therefore though Iuppiter (as Protagoras in Plato tells us) did first invent
and give the law, yet was Mercury sent with that heavenly gift, to deliver it
ever unto mankind. So as it is manifest, that without the ministry of these
Mercuries, of these interpretors of the law, namely the learned Professors
thereof, there can be no use or application of the law, and consequently the
law or Justice it self cannot consist without them.

But as the estimation and price of this Profession is exceedingly raised by
the necessary and universal use thereof, so do her great merits to the
commonwealth deserve a far greater exaltation of honor. For first the
commonwealth is indebted unto the law for all her temporal blessings and
felicities whatsoever. For all our peace, plenty, ciuility, and moral honesty
depends upon the law. That we enjoy our lives, our wives, our children,
our lands, our goods, our good names, or whatsoever is sweet and dear unto
us, we are beholding to the law for it. Quid sunt regna nisi latrocinia sine
iustitia? says Saint Augustine? without Justice the land would be full of
thieves, the Sea full of Pirates, the Commons would rise against the Nobility,
the Nobility against the Crown: we should not know what were our own, what
another man's, what we should have from our Ancestors, what we should leave
to our Children: Maios haereditas venit vnicuique nostrum a Iure and legibus,
quam a parentibus says Cicero: in a word there would be nothing certain,
nothing sure, no contracts, no commerce, no conversation among men, but all
Kingdoms, and states would be brought to confusion, and all humane society
would be dissolved.

But on the other side, the law is a fortress for the weak to retire unto, a
Sanctuary for the oppressed to fly unto, it restrains the boldness of the
insolent, it tieth with Manacles the hands of the potent, and like Orpheus
harp or Noahes Arc, it charmeth the fiercenes of the Lion and the Tiger, so
as the poor lamb may ly in safety by them.

If then the law it self does merit so highly of all mankind in general,
for that it is the fountain of all these benefitts, what do the Professors of
the law deserve, which draw these benefitts out of that fountain, and derive
the same unto every particular person? Nam si non habes quo haurias, and puteus
altus est, as the woman of Samaria says of Jacobs well in the Gospel, how
can thou refresh thy self with the water of that well? Si veritas sit in
profundo demersa, as Democritus was wont to say, if humane actions be so
carried in clouds, as it is hard to find what is true and what is false, and
when the truth of the fact is found, it is many times as hard to distinguish
what is just and what is unjust, if in all causes that come in question, either
quaestio facti or question Iuris must first be decided, before a man can
receive the benefitt of the law (for as the wise man says, Deus fecit
hominem rectum, sed ipse miscuit se infinitis quaestionibus) what a meritorious
work is it, to resolve these troublesome questions which arise in the Civil
life of man, either by laying open the truth of the fact, or by clearing the
doubtful point in law, that speedy and equal Justice may be done unto all,
and every one may have and enjoy his own in peace? how often would the truth
be concealed and suppressed? How often would fraud ly hid and undiscovered? How
many times would wrong escape and pass unpunished, but for the wisdom and
diligence of the Professors of the law? Does not this profession every day
comfort such as are grieved, counsel such as are perplexed, relieve such as
are circumuented, prevent the ruin of the improuident, save the innocent,
support the impotent, take the Pray out of the mouth of the oppressor, protect
the Orphan, the widow, and the stranger? Is she not Oculus caeco, and pes
claudo as Job speaks? Does she not withal many times stretch forth brachium
saculare in defense of the Church and true Religion? All which are works of
mercy, and of singular merit. Again, does she not register and keep in
memory ^he best Antiquities of our Nation? Does she not preserve our ancient
Customs and form of government, wherein the wisdom of our Ancestors does
shine far above the policy of other kingdoms? Are not the Records of her
acts and proceedings so precious, as they are kept in the Kings Treasury,
like Iewelles of the Crown, and reputed a principal part of the Royal
treasure? Lastly, is not a worthy Prosessor of the law a starr in the
firmament of the commonwealth? Is he not Lux in tenebris wheresoever he
dwells? Is not his house as it were an Oracle not only to a Town or City,
but to a whole country round about him? So as he may truly say of the people
that seek his counsel, as Apollo Pithius spoke in Ennius of such as resorted
unto his Temple. Suarum rerum incerti, quos ego open mea
Ex incertis Certos, compotesque consilij
De^itto, ne res temere tractent turbidas.


Therefore one of the Roman Emperors does not without cause give this
honorable testimony of the Professors of the law, Aduocati, qui dirimunt
ambigua facta causarum, suaeque desensionis viribus, tam publicis in rebus quam
in priuatis, lapsa erigunt, satigata reficiunt, non minus human^ generi
provident, quam si praelijs atque vulneribus patriam parentesque saluarent:
neque enim solos nostro Imperio militare credimus, qui gladijs, elypeis, and
Thoracibus nituntur, sed etiam aduocatos. Militant namque causarum Patroni, qui
laborantium spem, vitam, and posteros defendunt. For if it be a worthy deed
(as doubtless it is) for a man to defend his freindes or country with his
right hand and his sword only: what an excellent service is it to defend them
with his speech, his reason, and wisdom wherein the excellency of man does
principally consist.

Therefore both the Schooleman and the Politic do prefer Justice before
Fortitude, and the Statute of 31. Henr. 8. cap. 10. which ranketh the great
Officers of the kingdom in their due places, does place the Constable and
Marshall beneath the Chauncellor in all assemblies of Counsel. For Ille semel
(says Cicero) speaking of the Martial man, Hic semper proderit Reipublicae,
meaning the learned man of the long robe.

And in very troth, as the commonwealth is much beholding to the Profession of
the law, so are the Professors of the law not a little beholding to the
commonwealth. For if they procure and preserve her peace and her plenty, does
not she requite them again with riches and with honor? Does she not advance
them to her chief Benches and Offices, and trust them with the liuelyhoode and
lives of all her people? Neither do our learned men of the law grow to good
estates in the commonwealth, by any illiberall means (as envy sometime
suggesteth) but in a most ingenous and worthy manner. For the fees or rewards
which they receive are not of the nature of wages, or pay, or that which we
call salery or hire, which are indeed duties certain, and grow due by
contract for labor or service, but that which is given to a learned
Counselor, is called honorarium and not merces, being indeed a gift which
gives honor as well to the Taker as to the giver: neither is it certain or
contracted for, for no price or rate can be set upon Counsel, which is
invaluable and inestimable, so as it is more or less according to
circumstances, namely the ability of the Client, the worthiness of the
Counselor, the weightynesse of the cause, and the custom of ^he Country.
Breefely, it is a gift of such a nature, and given and taken upon such
terms, as albeit the able Client may not neglect to give it, without noate of
ingratitude (for it is but a gratuity or token of thankefullnesse) yet the
worthy Counselor may not demand it, without doing wrong to his reputation:
according unto that moral rule, Multa honest accipi possunt, quae tamen
honest peti non possunt.

Lastly, it is an infallible argument, that the estates of such as rise by the
law, are builded upon the foundation of virtue, in that Gods blessing is so
manifestly upon them, not only in raising, but in preserving their houses and
posterities: whereof there are examples not a few, and those not obscure, in
every shire of England, and of the English Pale in this kingdom of Ireland.

If then our common law of England be clear from those vulgar imputations,
which ignorance does conceive, and envy report thereof, if the Profession or
science of the law be more noble, more necessary, more meritorious then any
other temporal Art or Science: and if the dignity of this profession do
accordingly dignifie all the Professors thereof which are qualified with
learning and virtue fit for so worthy a Calling (for such as are ignorant or
dishonest, as they are to receive no grace by the Profession, so the profession
is to suffer no disgrace by them) how highly is that person honored, whose true
merit has advanced him to the most transcendent place of honor, that can
possibly be attained by that Profession? This is that great place or Office
which your Lordship most worthily holds (and long may you hold the same)
under his Majesty, which though it be the highest pinnacle of honor, that any
secular person of the long Robe can in re or spe aspire to, under any Monarch,
yet was it given unto your Lordship, nec expetenti, nec expectanti, by the
wisest and most renowned Queen that ever reigned in Europe: who leaving her
Crown together with the faithful servants thereof unto the wisest and Iustest
King upon earth, his Majesty in his infallible Judgment and wisdom
confirmed this honorable Office unto your Lordship, not only with a fullness
of grace to your selse, but with an augmentation of honor to your posterity.
For what increase of honor can the Lord Chauncellor receive in his own person,
being that in England which Joseph was in Egypt, the second person of the
Realm in the administration of all Civil affairs? being made (as it were)
chief Steward of his masters house, the chief dispenser of his bounty and
Justice, by the delivery and custody of the great Seal, which may properly
be called the key of the Kingdom? Being the Sole Judge of that high Court,
which is Seeds misericordie, and therefore exalted above all seats of Justice:
where he has Potestatem absolutam as well as regulatam in binding and loosing
the proceedings of the law, and in deciding of causes by the rules of his own
conscience.

Breefely what can there be more done to the man whom the King will honor? Is
he not ad latus Principis, to attend him? Is he not Auricularius Principis to
advise him? Does not the King make him a conduit of his wisdom, when he
uses his voice and tongue to declare his Royal pleasure? And does he not make
him an Organ of his goodness, when he trusts him with his mercy and
conscience, in sweetening the bitter waters of Summum ius, and in mittigating
the rigor of the law unto his people? In a word does he not represent
reuerentiam Principis in the power and authority of his Office? And do not the
people fear and honor the King even in the gravity and dignity of his person?
And are not all these honors made more honorable, and exceedingly raised in
true estimation and value, when the same are enjoyed in a most famou^ and
flourishing commonwealth, and do proceed as Sun beams from the most
religious, learned, wise, the most renowned and excellent King of the world? If
then the greatest honors do of right belong to the greatest virtues (for what
is honor but a reflection and reward of virtue?) how virtuous a person must he
be, with what gifts and graces, with what abilities, and ornaments, both of
art and nature must he be endowed, who can worthily supply that great and
honorable Office?

Assuredly, besides the natural faculties and powers of his mind which he
ought to have in great perfection, and besides the outward comeliness and
dignity of his person, for Gratior est pulchro veniens (...) corpore virtus,
and Sapientia hominis lucet in vul^ueius, says Solomon, he must be furnished
withal learning that has any relation to the public good: Divinity, Law,
Policy, Morality, and specially Eloquence, to impart and communicate all the
rest. He must withal have a long and universal experience in all the
affairs of the commonwealth: he must be accomplished and absolute in all
points of Gravity, Constancy, Wisdom, Temperance, Courage, Justice, Piety,
Integrity, and all other virtues fit for Magistracy and government, yet so, as
the same be seasoned and tempered with affability, gentleness, humanity,
courtesy, howbeit without descending or diminishing of himself, but still
retaining his dignity, state, and honor. Breefely, he must be a person of
such virtue and worthiness, as his life may be a Censure, and his example a
Mirror for all other Magistrates. These are the excellencies and perfections
wherewith that great Officer must be qualified and adorned: And this Idaea
have I conceived of him, not out of mine own imagination or weak discourse of
reason, but out of an humble observation of your Lordship in whom not only
those abilities and virtues before expressed, but many other graces and
ornaments do shine so brightly, as the weakest Judgment may collect out of the
same a most exquisite Pattern of a most excellent Chauncellor.

But perhaps it would be thought more comely for me to pronounce this of
your Lordship to others collaterally, then to speak it to your Lordship of
your self directly (though what can I declare in this kind to others, but
that which the world has long since known and acknowledged?) yet is there no
man living whom it may better become then my self to praise and honor your
Lordship every way, whose favor has been (as it were) a good Angel unto me,
and to whom I stand bound for so many benefits, as that which might carry a
show of adulation in another, must needs be thought but Duty and gratitude
in me.

Howbeit, besides my particular obligation, there is no Professor of the law,
that is not obliged to do your Lordship all honor, for the honor you have done
to the Profession of the law, whereof your Lordship has been, during all
your time, a principal light and ornament.

And now (my most honorable good Lord) my devotion to the Profession of the
law, and to your Lordship the most noble Patron of the Professors thereof,
having enlarged this discourse beyond the measure and limitts of an Epistle
(and therefore I give it the name of a Preface) it remains that I present
unto your Lordship the ^ude collection of a few selected Cases, which since
the beginning of his Majesty's Reign have been argued, resolved, and adjudged
in this Realm of Ireland.

These are the first fruits of my labor in this kind of learning, and are
therefore a due and proper oblation to your Lordship, for that my study have
yealded the better fruit, being cherished by the Sunnebeames of your Lordships
favor. This is also the first Report of Cases arising in Ireland and ruled in
the Courts of Justice there, that ever was made and published to the world,
since the laws of England were first established in this kingdom. Lastly, I
have made choice of such special Cases, as are either proper for this kingdom
only, or else do contain for the most part points of learning not common, or
at least not largely debated, in our books of the law.

But for as much as Natura incipit ab imperfectis as the Schooleman says,
Therefore these weak and imperfect beginnings do seek your Lordships
protection, till time shall give them more strength and reputation. In the
mean time, if your Lordships Judgment shall allow the publication hereof, I
shall have the less cause to doubt the censure of any other, specially of my
Masters of the law in England, if any of these books happen to come to their
hands: to whom I may truly make this protestation, that these Cases being
resolved and adjudged in the Courts of Justice in Ireland, are not collected
and published by me, to increase the number of the books of law in England,
or to interrupt the better studies of the Students there, by reading of this
collection, but principally for the use and benefitt of our practisers here in
Ireland, and to move and incite others in this Kingdom, by this first example,
which does only open and show them the way, to perform the like service
hereafter to posterity.

Neither have I besought your Lordships patronage for these Cases of Ireland in
respect of my self only, but also in regard of that relation which your
Lordsh^p has unto this kingdom. For albeit pour Lordship be Lord Chauncellor
of England, yet the great Seal^ which you keep there, is also of force and
power within this Realm. Neither can we forgett, without ingratitude, that
your Lorship in that high place of Counsel which you hold in England, is upon
all occasions watchful and careful of the public good and welfare of Ireland.

Now therefore the only wise God who has given unto your Lordship those
blessings which wisdom has in store for them that love her, Longitudo dierum
in dextra ^ius, and in sinistra ^ius diuitiae and gloria, preserve your
Lordship for many years in health and honor, that you may long continue a
prudent and principal Counselor unto your Sovereign, a loving and provident
father unto your country, a comfort and countenance to your particular
freindes, and all others who partake of your honorable favors, among which I
remain.

Most bound, and most devoted to do your Lordship all humble service. Io: Dauys.

Trin. 2. Iacobi en ^^eschecquer.
Le Case de Proxies.
ENter le Roy and Sir Ambrose Forth, Doctor del civil Ley, and un des Masters
del Chauncery, le case fuit tiel.

L'Evesque de Meth, devantle dissolution des Monasteries, avoit un Proxy de
xv. (...). iiii. d. payable annualment horse del co^maund^y de Kells en le
county de Meth, parcel del possessions del Hospital de Saint John de Jerusalem
en Ireland; and un auter Proxy de xx s. paiable annualme^t horse del
impropriate Rectory de Trevet en mesme le county, parcel del possessions del
Abbey de Thomascourt en le county de Dublin.

Anno 33. Henr. 8. le dit Hospital de S. John de Jerusalem, and le dit Abbey
de Thomascourt fueront suppress and dissol^e, and touts les possessions des
ambideux ditz measons fueront ^est en le actual and real possession del Corone
per act del Parliament. Mes en mesme le act est un express Saving de Proxies
a^ touts Evesques and lour successors.

Apres ceo, l'Evesque de Meth and son Clergy, (car cest evesquery ^ad Deane
and Chapter) per fait enroll dat: 16. Martij 36. H. 8 grant les Proxies
a^antdit (enter auters) al Roy Henr. 8. ses heirs and successors; le dit Roy
esteant al temps del grant and puis, en actual possession del dit co^maundry
and Rectory, horse de queux les ditz Proxies fueront payable.

Puis, la Run Elizabeth, per ses letters pate^ts dat 1. Novembris en l'an.
33. de sa reign, demise le dit commaundry et Rectory al Doctor Forth, rendant
rent, sa^s ascun reservation des Proxies. Et si ore il serra charge o^e les
dits Proxies, and les arrerages d'yceux encurrues depuis le comenceme^t de son
leas, fuit le question. Et fuit adiudge que il serroit charge. Et 3. points
fuero^t move, and debate en l'argume^t de cest Case. 1 Si les Proxies fueront
tout ousterment extinct per le suppression and dissolution des dits religious
measons de S. John de Jerusalem, and de Thomascourt, nient obstant le dit
Saving, deins l'act de Dissolution. 2 Si l'Evesque puissoit graunter les
Proxies al Roy. 3 Si les Proxies fueront extinct en maines del Roy per l'Unity
de possession.


PUr le Primer point, fuit object per le counsel del Sir Ambrose Forth, que les
Proxies fueront extinct per le suppression and dissolution de les religious
measons: pur ceo que le Visitatio^ de les religious measons fuit la sole cause
de payment des Proxies. Et cessante causa cessat effectus. Car les religious
persons esteant deraigne, and disperse, ne fueront, apres ceo, subject al
visitation, and donques, quant le visitation cease, le Proxy, esteant solement
un Exhibition doneal visitor purses travayling charges, cessera auxi. Car
Procuratio (come les Canonists define ceo) est exhibitio sumptuum necessariorum
facta praelatis, qui diocoeses peragrando Ecclesias subiectas visitant.

Uncore ils agreeont, que le Visitation ne cessa immediatement per le
surrender, ouper l'act de Parliament, que done les religious measons and lour
possessions al Corone; car per ceo, lour Corporations ne fueront dissolve; come
est tenus en le case de Deane and Chapter de Norwich en le 3. part des Reports
de le Seignior Coke. 15. Ass. p. 8. 32. H. 8 Br. Corporations 78. mes quant les
religious persons fueront deraigne, and avoent relinquish lour habit, rule, and
order, pur queux ils fueront visitable, adonques le Corporation fuit ousterment
dissolve, and sur ceo le visitation cessa.

Et ils reseinblont le proxy due pur Visitation al Annuity pro Consilio, ou
pro Servitio impe^dendo; si le counsel, ou le service soit withdraw, le
Annuity est determine: issint si Rent charge soit grant pur un chimin, stopp le
chimin, and le Rent charge serra auxi stopp. 9. Edw. 4. 19. 15. Edw. 4. 2. 21.
Edw. 3. 7. 45. Ed. 3. 8. Dier. 6. H. 8. 2. and 6. Ed. 6. 76. issint ou Corody
est grant pur certain service destre fait; omission del service, determine le
Corody. 20. Edw. 4. fol. vltimo.

Fuit auxi dit, que cest duty ne fuit annual, mes co^tingent; and payable
tantsolement sur chescun Visitation, come Escuage sur chescum journey royal,
ou come Aid pur ^le marier, on pur fair fitz chivaler; en queux darrain cases,
si avowry soit fait pur l'ayde, est bon plea en bar d'avowry, a dire, que
l'avowant and teil fitz ou ^ile en vie, al temps del Aid levy. N. N. Br. 82.
g.

Et pur le Saving, ils diont, que ceo fuit un Flattring Saving, que ne poer
preserver les proxies en esse, queux la Ley ad extinguish, come est tenus 14.
Eliz. Dier. 313. que les Tenures del Obitou Chauntry terres tenus del subjects,
sont extinct per lact del 1, E. 6. meant obstant le Saving en le dit act,
propter absurditatem; issint les Proxies icy serront extinct propter
absurditate^. Car come est absurd que le Roy serra subject al attendance en
respect de Tenute, issint est absurd, que le Roy serra subject al visitation ou
al ascun duty en respect de ceo. De mesme le nature sont plusors Savings mise
en Walsinghams case, Plow. Com. 563. queux so^t la appell Flattring Savings.

PUr le second point, fuit object, que l'Evesque ne puissoit graunter les
proxies al Roy, pur: 2. reasons: l'u^ deduce del person del Roy, l'auter del
person del Evesque. 1. pur le Roy, admit que il ^uit capable de teil
spiritual office, come destre Visitor des religious persons, vncor il navera
Poxies pur l'inconveniency, and indecency, and auxi pur l'impossibility. Car
nest convenient, ou decent, que les poures religious persons porteront les
charges de Roy, and est auxi impossible. Car per le Canon Ley, Procuratio
exhibe^da est secundum qualitatem personae visitantis; and le Majesty del
person del Roy, and le grandeur de son Train est teil, que per presumption del
ley, null private person poet porter ses necessary charges, ou fair a luy
entertaynment aggreeable al quality de son person. Et pur ceo est tenus 27.
Henr. 8. 10 b que ou common sans number fuit grant al Abbe and ses successors
horse del Manor de Dale, que apres le dissolution, le Roy na^era le common sans
number: car la est dit, que si le Roy ave ^oit, il puissoit surcharge la terre,
que la ley ne voet suffer. Come si un villain purchase common sans number, le
Seignior navera ceo, pur le reason avantdi^, car donques le ter^^nant perdroit
la profitt de sa terre.

Pur l'Evesque, coment que il poet graunter ses Temporal Possessions ove
l'assent de son Chapter ou Clergy: uncore ceux duties queux il ad per
prerogative de ^on Episcopal Chair, ou come incident a son spiritual
function, il ne poet graunter: queux per la rule del Cahon ley sout de 3.
Kinds. 1. Subsidium Cathedratieum, que est duty de prerogative and
superiority. 2. quarta Episcopalis, que est done a luy pur rep^ration de les
Esglises. 3. Procurationes, pur son visitation, vt supra, que est perquisite ou
profit de son spiritual jurisdiction. Come creation money done al Duke, ou
Earl, pur maintenance de ^on honor, ne poet estre grant ouster. 6. Henr. 8.
Dier. 2. a.

PUrle 3. point, ils diont, que coment que Proxy soit un personal chose,
payable tantsolement en respect des persons Visitable: vncor admit que ceux
Proxies sont devenus real, and que le commaundry and rectory sont charges ove
ceux Proxies, donques le unity de possession extinguish euxen Maines del Roy:
come Seigniory, rent charge, common, and similia sont extinguish per le
purchase del Terrtenant, sil ad equal estate en le terre, and en la chose que
charge la terre. Et a cest intent le case de 2. H 4. 19. a. fuit mise, ou un
Prior an annuity ho^s* del personage per Prescription, le personage est
appropriate al Priory, l'annuity est extinguish a touts iours.

MEs d'auter part, fuit respond per le counsel del Roy, and resolve per le
Court, que les dits Proxies ne fueront extinguish per le dissolution des dits
religious measous, mes fueront bien preserve and saves al Evesque: Et que
l'evesque ad eux bien grant al Roy: and que le unity de posses on en maines
del Roy fesoit forsque un suspension, and nemi extinguishment des dits Proxies.

QUant al Primer point, primerment fuit observe, que les Proxies n'avoent lour
Original en le Primitive Church. Car Saint Paul en visitant touts les
Esglises queux il ad plant en Asia and Europe, ne demaundoit ascun Proxies, mes
laboroit ove ses proper maines, pur son sustenance, ne serroit burdensome al
Esglises. Uncor long temps apres, le Canon ley, que declare que Proxies sont
due al Euesques en lour Visitations, dit, que ceo est agreeable al doctrine de
S. Paul, vt a quibus spiritualia recipimus, eisdem Temporalia co^municemus.
Iustit. Iuris Canon libr 2. c. deCe^sib.

Secondment fuit note, que ceo que nous appellons Proxy ou procuracy, est
appell per les Canonists, Procuratio, pur ceo que sur chescun visitation les
persons visitable procuront necessary provisions pur les visitors: queux
prouisio^s al primes fueront fait en refections ou victuals, viz. in
esculentis and Poculentis, mes ceo fuit ove measure and Te^perance, ne
ieiunioru^ doctrina^ rube^tibus buccis praedice^t, come est dit en vndes Canons

Mes apres, quant le pomp and excess des visitors requiroit tant des
provisions que fueront grievous and intolerable al Esglises, and religious
measons: adonques chescun Esglise and meason fuit reasonablement tax, and per
ceo^, chescun Proxy fuit reduce al certain sum de money, payable annualment,
en nature de pension, al Ordinary, que ad le power de visitation de mero Iure,
come est dit. 10. Eliz. Dier. 273. b.

Et ceo fuit aptement resemble al Socage en nostre Ley, de que Littleton dit,
que en ancient temps, devant le limitation de Temps de memory, grand part de
les Tenants queux tiendront de lou^ Seigniors per Socage, devoent vener ove
lour Sokes per certain iours per an, pur arer and semer les demesnes del
Seignior; and pur ceo que tiels overages fueront fait pur le viver and
sustenance de lour Seigniors, ils fueront quites envers lour Seigniors de touts
auters services; and puis apres tiels services fuetout changes en Deniers, per
consent des Seigniors, and per desire des tenants, en un Annuel Rent* etc. Et
sicome les tenants en Socage apres le dit change, payerent lour Rents
annualment al Seignior, coment que il ad alien ses Demesnes, and ad null terre
destre Are ou seem: issint les Esglises and Religious measons, apres que le
procuration de victuals fuit reduce al sum certain, payeront ceo al Ordinary
annualment, coment que il ne fesoit ascun Visitation. Et issint le Rule de
Cessante causa cessat effectus, ne tient en ceux Cases. Et a cest intent
directment est le case de Sir William Capel, mise en Luttrels Case, en le. 4.
part. des Reports de le Seignior Coke, ou fuit resolve: que ou home tient
certain terre per Rent pur Castle Guard, coment que le Castle soit dirute o^
decay, vncor le rent remain; Car la est dit, que quant le Tenant regnoit del
Seignior, de garder, ou repair le Castle del Seignior, and puis teil service
(come Littleton dit en Case de Socage) fuit en ancient temps, per mutual
consent del Seignior and tenant, change en un Annuel Rent; coment que soit dit
rent Pro warda Castri, vncor le Seignior ne poet aver le Castle Guard arrere,
quant il voet, mes, apres le composition and change fait, le Castle Guard est
tout ousterment ale; and Pro ne import condition, come en le case d'annuity
grant Pro consilio impendendo, mes plein and perpetuel recompense and
satsfaction. Pur mesme le reason en nostre case, coment que les personages
impropriate sont fait ore lay fee, and devenus en maines des Lays gents, queux
ne sont visitable; and coment que les religious measons sont suppress,
dissolve, and dirute, come le Castle en Sir William Capels Case; vncor les dits
certain sums de money queux veignont en liew de Proxies, and retaynont le
nosme de Proxies, and per ancient composition sont fait parcel del certain and
settled revenewes del Evesque, remaineront a touts iours, and ne serront subject
al extinguishment; nient plus que Annuites, pensions, ou portions de Tithes,
queux sont pay a cest iour horse del plusors Abbeyes, and impropriate Rectories,
and l'originall causes, pur queux ils fueront grount ou pay, ne serront ore
examine, ou brought en question. Et a cest iour le Roy mesme pay and allow
Proxies horse de touts impropriations queux il ad en son possession; and put ceo
en quescun lease fait per le Roy del impropriate rectory, il y ad un ^ovenant
del part del lessee, que il portera and payera touts Proxies, Synodalls,
pensions, etc. Et Sir Humfrey Winch adonques cheef Baron disoit, que devant le
dissolution des Monasteries, ou rectory fuit appropriate al Abbey,
immediatement le Visitation cessoit quant ^l Rectory; car l'Abbe ne fuit
visitable come Rector, pur son doctrine, mes come Abbe, pur son rule and order:
and vncor sans question le Ordinary ad ses Proxies horse de touts personages
appropriate al Abbeyes, cibien devant le Dissolution, que apres.

Et pur le Saving en l'act de 33. H. 8. c. 5. ceo nest idle, ou Flattring
Saving, mes real and effectual; car est agree devant, que ceux Proxies sueront
en esse all temps del fesans del Act, and nient extinguish per le Surrender des
religious measons, car lour Corporations ne fueront dissolve, tant que les
religious persons ont relinquish lour measons, and ont estre disperse: Et
donques tiels chooses, queux fueront en esse al temps del fesans del act, poent
estre bien preserve, and save per l'act, coment que chooses extinct devant, ne
poent estre revive per un Saviug, sans express parolx de grant and
restitution. Et cest difference appiect pleinment en le case de Kekewich. 27.
H. 8. Brook Parliaments 77. Et en Sir John Molins Case en le. 6. part. des
Reports de le Seignior Coke.

2 QUant al Second point, fuit resolve, que les Proxies en lour Original
nature esteant duties payable pur Visitation, fueront grauntable al Roy, and le
Roy fuit capable de tiel grant, specialment, quant les dits duties fueront
convert al Sum de money certain, en nature de pension ou Annuity. Car per le
ancient Ley del Realm, le Roy ad power de visiter, reformer, and correcter
touts abuses and enormities en l'Esglise: and per le statutes fait en temps H.
8. le Corone fuit forsque remitt and restore a son ancient jurisdiction; que
fuit usurp per L'evesque de Rome. 33. E. 3. fitz. Aid del Roy. 103. Reges
sacro oleo vncti spiritualis iurisdictionis sunt capaces. Et Proxy est profit
del Irisdiction. 10 H. 7. 18. Rex est mixta persona cum Saccrdote. Auxi le Roy
avera Tithes per le common ley, de queux null lay person fuit capable. 22. Ass.
p. 75 21. H. 7. 1. Le Roy mesme visitera ses frank Chapels, and Hospitalls. 8.
Ass. p. 29. N. Br. 42. a. Et Cassaneus in Catalogo Gloriae mundi part. 5.
consideratione. 24. Cite un text del Canon Ley, Viz. quod omnes reges dicuntur
Clerici, Et un auter text, que dit, Quod causa spiritualis committi potest
Principi laico.

Et ou fuit dit, que en respect del grandeur del Roy, and de son train,
competent Proxies ne poent estre exhibit a luy, and per consequence, ne poent
estre grauut a luy; test objection est toll, en ceo que les Proxies al temps de
cest grant fueront reduce al certain reasonable sums de money: Auxi le rule
del Canon Ley nest pleiriment cite devant, car le rule est. Procuratio
exhibenda est secundum qualitatem personae visitantis, and substantiam
visitatorum.

Fuit auxi resolve, que L'evesque, ove lassent de son Clergy, puissoit bien
graunter les Proxies al Roy, pur ceo que la Ley ad qualify le person del Roy
de receaver teil grant, coment que ceo ^oit tiel prerogative del Evesque que
ne poet esire assign al auter person: come le creation money del Duke ou
Countee, poet estre grant and surrender al Roy, coment que ne poet estre
grant al subject. Auxi les Proxies esteant ore reduce al certain sum de
Argent, and issint ^air part del certain, settled, and perpetual revenew del
Evesque, poent estre cibien grant per luy, come portion de Tithes, ou Annuity,
ou ascun de ses Rents, services, ou auters hereditaments temporal.

3 QUant al Tierce point, fuit auxi resolve and adindge, que le unity de
possession des Proxies ove les rectories impropriate and religious measons,
horse de queux les Proxies sont payable, ne Extinguish les Proxies en maines del
Roy, mes Suspend le Payment de eux Tantum, pro tempore, quovsque le Roy per son
grant ad sever l'nn del auter.

Pur trover la Ley en cest point, le nature de ceux chooses fuit consider, queux
en ascun manner poent estre subject al Drowning, ou Extinguishment, per Unity
de possession. Et ceux sont de 3. Kinds. 1. Estates en terre. 2. Actions Real
and Titles al terre. 3. chooses issuant ou provenant horse del Terre, ou prises
and eu sur terre.

1 E^^ates en terre, sont properment merge ou confound, quant meinder estate
concur ove greinder estate, en mesme le person, and en mesme le droit: come,
Terminus and feodum non possunt constare simul in vna eademque persona. Et le
pregnant reason de ceo est mise en le case de Bracebridge Plow. Com. 319. b.
Pur ceo que Term est temps finite, and Fee simple est temps infinite, and le
finite de necessity covient estre merge and confound en le infinite. Mes ceo
est Confounding and nemi Extinguishment: car si particular tenant grant ou
surrender son estate al cesty en reversion, le particular estate nest extinct,
coment que soit merge and confound: car si particular tenant ad charge le Terre
ove rent, ou anter encumbrance, l'Estate remainera en essea cest intent. Et
revera Estates en terre, and Droit al terre, sont chooses de tiel Substance,
queux ne poent estre extinct, ou interire interire penitus. Et pur ceo
Littleton dit, que si disseisee, quant son entry est toll, relessa al
terrtenant tout son droit, que ceo ne envrera per voy de Extinguishment; car le
droit que il avoit passa al tenant per son Releas: Et serroit inconvenient, que
tiel ancient droit serroit extinct tout ousterment, Car droit ne poet pas
morier.

Mes chooses queux issuont horse del terre, come Seignory, rent charge, etc. sout
subject al Extinguishment a touts entents. Come (...) Seignior grant son
Seigniory al Tertenant and estrange, la serra null ioyntenancy, ou survivor
enter eux, carle moity del Seigniory est extinct a touts entents and purposes.
Plow. Com. 419. a. Et si Seignior releas al tenant tout son droit en le
Seigniory, ou en la terre, tiel releas va per voy D'extinguishment verse touts
persons. Littleton. 112. b.

2 Real actions auxi, and conditions, sont subject al Extinguishment, and ceo
est quasi per unity de possession. Come en touts cases de Remitter, la cestuy
que ad droit d'Action pur terre, ad le possession de mesme le terre, issint que
nest ascun person verse que il poet porter son action, and pur ce^ l'Action est
Extinguish a touts iours.

Et sur mesme le reason, condition que done title de Reenter en terre est
Extinguish per purchase del terre, ou part de ceo. 8. H. 7. 8. b. 33. H. 8. Br.
Extinguishment. 49. issint Garranty est Extinguish per reenfeffment, ou Descent
del terre al mesme le person que ad le Garranty. 40. E. 3. 13.

3 Chooses issuant ou provement horse del Terre, ou prise and eu sur Terre, sont
de 3. Kinds: and sur ceux different Kinds de chooses, surdont ceux differences.

1 Si les chooses ont iour Original and commencement horse del terre, and nemi
aliors, and sont due en respect del Terre tantum, and sont part des profits de
terre, tiel chooses serront touts foitz Extinguish per unity de possession, si
home ad equal estate, and un droit, en ambideux ensemble. de cest nature est
Seigniory and real services. 3. H. 6. 1. a. 40. E. 3. 40. b. Littl. 49. a.
122. b. 34. Ass. p. 15. Rent charge. Littleton 48. b. Dier. 140. b. Common. 11
H. 4. 5. a. 24. E. 3. 25. b. Chimin 21. E. 3. a. 11. H. 4. 5. a. Et. 2. reasons
de cest rule fueront mise: un, pur ceo que le chose que est extract horse de
terre, quant ceo vient al terre arrere, serra naturelment extinct, car est,
Revolutio ad materiam primam don't vient le natural Extinguishment, cibien del
home, que de touts auters Terrestrial chooses. L'auter plus legal reason est,
que cestuy que ad touts les profitz entierment, ne serra dit daver part des
profitz, car part est confound en le Tout, and pur ceo home ne poet aver
Seigniory, rent, common, on Chimin en son terre demesme.

2 Mes del auter part, chooses que ne sont issuant horse del terre, come parcel
des profitz del terre, mes sont derive aliors, and due pur auter respect,
coment que sont prise and eu deins certain Terre, vncor, unity de possession ne
Extinguish tiels chooses. De cest nature sont touts Francheses: come si home ad
Warren ou Purlieu en le terre de un auter, and apres purchase la terre, cest
unity de possession ne Exringuish les Francheses, mes il avera eux en sa terre
demesne. 28. H. 8. Dier. 30. b. 16. Eliz. Dier. 327. a. 35. H. 6. 56. a. issint
est de Waif, Stray, Wreck, Leet, etc.

3 Auxi, coment que chose soit part des profitz de terre, and payable per tiel
person tantum que ad le terre, vncor si tiel chose ad son commencement and
Original pur ascun Personal respect, and nemi en respect del Terre, and
issint le person est solement charge, and nemile Terre, tiel chose ne serra
subject al Extinguishment per unity de possession: and de cest nature sont
Annuities, Dismes, Proxies.

1 Si Annuity soit grant en fee per apt parols, de charger l'heir, ou
successor, coment que l'heir ou successor ne serront charge sans Assets de
terre, vncor, si grauntee del Annuity enter en cest terre, ceo ne suspend, ne
Extinguish l'Annuity: car le terre nest charge, mes le person en respect del
Terre, car si le terre fuissoit charge, ne serroit Annuity tantum, mes Rent
charge, and serroit recover per distress and avowry, quel remedy la ley ne
done pur un mere annuity. Auxi sur assignement ouster de tiel Annuity,
Atturnament serroit necessary, que ne besoigne sur assignement del Annuity,
come est note per Yaxley. 21. H. 7. 1. b.

Cest point est fait plus clear. 10. E. 4. 10. a. Abbe port Scire facias verse
vicar, sur Idgment en Annuity eu verse le predecessor del vicar, le defendant
dit, que l'Annuity issuist horse del Manor de B. and les dismes, oblations, and
obventions del vicarage, quel manor and dismes font le vicarage: Et que le Pl.
ad enter en 43. acres parcel del manor, and ad pris les dismes, Idgment sil
execution doet aver. Et tout le Court tient, que nest plea, pur ceo que cest
recovery ^uit sur breef de Annuity: car en brief d'annuity le person solement
est charge, and nemi le terre, per que adire, que il ad enter en la terre, ou
per son suit appiert que le rent ne issuist horse* del terre, nest plea. Et est
auxi la resolve, que en Annuity verse Abbe, sur title de prescription, nest
plea, que le Pl. ad enter en parcel des possessions del Abbey. Et en annuity
verse heir, coment que il ne serra charge sil n'ad per descent, vncor nest plea,
adire, que le Pl. ad enter en le terre discendue.

Mes. 21. H. 7. 1. le Case est plus fort: Person del Esglise fuit charge ove
annuity al auter Person per prescription: le personage, horse de quel l'annuity
fuit payable, fuit appropriate al Priory des Aliens, quel Priory esteant
suppress per E. 3 fuit grant per Parliament al. H. 5. Apres E. 4. grant le
personage impropriate al Deane de S. Stevens, ^ers que breef d'Annuity est port
per le Person que avoit l'annuity per prescription. Et l'opinion del Court la
fuit, que l'annuity nest extinguish per le gtaunt del personage al H. 5. per
Act de Parliament, coment que ne soit Saving de ceo, and que cest annuity nest
done Inclusive ove le Rectory, car le rectory 'ne fuit charge ove l'annuity,
mes le person del Rector tantum. Et coment que le payment de cest Annuity soit
suspend en maines del Roy, vncor quant le Roy ad grant le personage ouster,
serra revive.

2 Quant al Dismes, ceux sont part des profits de terre, and sont provenant,
and renovant, de, and horse del Terre, vncor ne serront extinct, per unity de
possession, pur ceo que sont Originalment due en Personal respect. Car le
ignorance and weakness des lay persons, que besoigne d'aver Instruction, and
confirmation en matter de Religion, fuit l'Original cause del payment de
Tithes. Et le Person d'esglise ne claim Tithes en respect del terre, mes en
respect del person de parishioner. Et que unity de possession ne extinguish
Tithes, Vid 30. H. 8. Dier. 43. 32. H. 8. Br. Dismes. 17. Cest case de Dismes
est un Parallel del case de Proxies, and concur ove ceo en touts points. Car
sicome Instruction fuit le cause de payment des Dismes, issint Visitation que
fuit touts foits accompany ove Instruction Littl. c. de Frankalmoigne. 30. b.
fuit la cause de Proxies. Et sicome Dismes sont ore due and payable al lay
persons queux ont purchase impropriate rectories, coment que ils ne donont
ascun Instruction, issint Proxies sont due and payable al Ordinaries horse del
impropriations and Religious measons dissolved, coment que lour Visitation
cessa. Et sicome null paet prescribe de non Decimando, come est communement dit
en nostre livers, issint le Canon Ley ad un rule, Quod nulla est adversus
procurationem praescriptio. Instit. Iuris Canonici libr. 2. cap. de Censibus.
Et pur ceo Proxies, que resem^^ont Tithes en auter points, poent estre bien
compare a eux en cest point, viz. que ne serront subject al Extinguishment per
unity de possession.

Cest case dependoit plusors Terms sur Demurrer, que fuit join en temps de
Sir Edmund Pelham cheef Baron, and adiudge en temps de Sir Humfrey Winch. Et
fuit argue per l'Atturney general pur le Roy, and per Henry Linch del Middle
Temple, pur Sir Ambrose Forth.

Mich. 5. Iacobi en Bank le Roy.
Le Case de Customs payable pur Marchandises.
INformation fuit exhibit en Bank le Roy, per L'atturney general, verse le
Mayor, vicounts, and citizens de Waterfod, en que il monstre, qu^ le dit Mayor,
Vicountes, and Citizenz, pur le space d'un an devant, ont receave, and convert
a lour proper use, le Grand and Petit Customs, and le Subsidy de Pondage, de
touts marchandises importes, and exportes, in and de le Port de Waterford, and
que ils ont auxi fait and ordain un Customer ou Collector des Customs, un
Controller des customs, un Searcher, and un Gageor, deins le dit Port, al
preindice del Roy, and sans ascun Garrant: and sur ceo il pry process verse le
dit corporation, de fair eux venir and responder, Qu^ warranto ils ont prise
les dits Customs, and Subsidy a lour proper use, and ont create and ordain
les Officers ava^t dit.

A cest information ils pleadont un special plea, en que ils iustisiont le
receaving des dits Customs and Subsidy, and le ordaining des dits Officers,
per virtue de 4 several Charters.

Per le primer Charter, dat. 8. Nouembris, anno Regis Iohannis nono, Le dit Roy
grant al Citizens de City de Waterford (que ado^ques fuit lour nosme de
corporation) Custumam vocat. le Murage, de omnibus rebus Venalibus and
Mercimonijs, infra dictam Civitatem emptis, seu venditis, ita been, and
integre, sicut Burgenses Villae suae Bristoll habebant, vel melius habere
consueverunt. Et ils averrone in facto, que les Burgesses de Bristoll, al temps
del dit grant, avoent le dit custom de Murage, de touts chooses and
merchandises achates and vendues deins le dit Uilie de Bristoll.

2 Per le second Charter Dat. 6. Maij. 1. Henr. 5. le dit Roy grant al Mayor,
Baylives, and Citizens del city de Waterford (per quel nosme ils fueront
donques incorporate) Custumam eiusdem civitatis vocat. Le Cocquet, capiendam
per manus dicti Maioris and Ballivorum imperpetuum absque aliquo computo, etc.

3 Per le tierce Charter dat. 12. Maij. 3. Hen. 7. le dit Roy grant al Mayor,
Ballives, and citizens del city de Waterford, and successoribus suis, quod
ipsi and successores s^i, and eorum quilibet, ac omnes and singuli cives and
inhabitants eiusdem civitatis Waterford, qui tunc erant, and qui pro tempore
futuri essent, and eorum quilibet, pro bonis catallis and merchandisis suis
quibuscnnque, infra civitatem suam Waterford praed. ac portum, praecinctum, and
libertates eiusdem, and in omnibus and singulis alijs portubus, crecijs, and
locis, infra terram suam Hyberniae, de nova Custuma, viz. De praestatione sive
solutione duodecim denariorum de libra, Pondagio vulgariter nuncu^ato, erga
dictum dominum Regem, haeredes, and successores suos imperpetuum sint quieti,
exonerati.

Et vt mayor concursus tam hominum quam mercandisarum ad eandem civitatem pene
in extremae desolationis and paupertatis abyssum deductam, de caetero confluat
and accrescat, vlterius dedit and concessit praed. Maiori, Ballivis, and
civibus, etc. Quod omnes and singuli mercatores, and homines, tam indigenae,
quam alienigenae, and eorum quilibet, ad praedictam civitatem suam Waterford,
ac portum and praecinctum eiusdem causa mercandizandi venientes, pro catallis
and merchandisis suis quibuscunque, infra civitatem praedictam, and praecinctum
and libertates eiusdem, de dicta nova Custuma, sive Pondagio, erga dictum
dominum Regem, haeredes, and successores suos, similiter sint quieti and
exonerati imperpetuum.

4 Per le 4. Charter dat. 8. Februar. 11. Eliz. La dit Roigne grant al dit
Mayor, Ballives, and citizens, and successoribus suis, quod imperpetuum,
annuatim, de seipsis eligere valiant and possint, Scrutatorem, Geageatorem, and
alios officiarios and ministros quoscunque, infra eandem civitatem and
libertates eiusdem, vsuales and necessarios, ove averment, que le Customer and
Controller de Customs fueront necessary Officers deins le dit City, pur ceo
que le Roy Henr. 5. ver son Charter avaunt dit, ad grant a eux le Cocquet
custom. Et ils concludont lour plea, que per le dits Warrantes, ils ont
receave les dits Customs, and Subsidy de pondage, a lour proper use, and ont
fait and ordain les dits Officers deins lour City. Et sur cest plea
l'Atturney del Roy demurr en Ley.

Et en argument de cest demurrer. 2. principal matters fucrent consider. 1.
quel manner de duties Customs and Subsedies sont, and lour Original, and
Difference. 2. Le quel les dits Charters sont sufficient warrantes al
corporation de Waterford, a receaver les dits Customs and Subsidies a lour
proper use, and de fair Customer, Controller, Searcher, etc.

QUant al primer matter, pur le explanation de cest learning de Customs, fuit
primerment observe, que les Duties payable al Roy horse de Merchandises exported
ou imported sont de 3. Kinds. 1. Customs. 2. Subsidies. 3. Imposts ou
Impositions. Queux fuerent define, and divide, en cest Manner.

1 Customs sont duties certain, and perpetual, payable al Roy, come
inheritance de son Corone, pur merchandises, transportes de Travers le Mer, del
un Realm en auter. Car pur chooses vendible per voy de merchandise, caries de
un port, al auter port, deins mesme le Realm, per Mer, ou per Terre, null
merchant est tenus de payer ascun Custom.

Ceux duties appell Customs sont divide en. 3. Kinds. 1 Magna and antiqua
Custuma. 2 Parva and nova Custuma. 3 Prisage and Butlerage.


Et en touts ceux la Corone ad un cerceyn and perpetual enheritance.

1 Le Graund and Ancient custom est payable horse de Native ou hoamebred
commodities de. 3. Sorts: viz. Wool, Wooltells, and Hydes. Et est in certenty.
vi. s. 8. d. pur un Sack de wool. vi. s. 8 d. pur. 300. woolfells. vi. s. 8.
d. pur un Last de Hydes. xlii. s. iiii. d. Et est destre note, que chescun Sack
de wool coateyn. 26. stone, and chescun stone. 14. pound. and que le Last de
hydes est 20. Dikar, and enescun Dikar. 10. hydes.

Ceo est l'auncient custom payable per chescun Denizen pur rexportation des
commodities avantdits: mes les Merchants Strangers payout un tierce part plus,
pur remission de prises, and auters privileges a eux grauntes per le charter
de. 31. E. 1. Dier. 1. Eliz. 165. b.

2 Le Novel and petit custom est. 3. d. de le pound payable per Merchants
Strangers tantsolement, pur touts commodities per eux imported and exported
come est express en le dit charter de. 31. E. 1.

3 Prisage est Custom prise de Wines de touts sorts, and est en certenty. 2.
Tons de Uine horse de cheseun Nief laden ove. 20. Tunncou pluis, l'un Tun
destre prise devant le Mast del Nief, and l'auter darriere le Mast. Et pur teo
que cest Custom est part del merchandise unported, and Prise in specie, est
appell Prisage.

Et ^ell Custom de Prisage fuit payable en Engleterre per touts Merchants
Denizens, and Aliens, devant le dit Charter de. 31 E. (...). per que le Roy
remise al Merchants strangers touts prises: and en mesme le charter est
express que en consideration de ceo, les Merchants strangers ont grant de
payer al Roy and ses heirs Nomine Custumae. 2. (...). de quolibet Dolio vini,
quod adducent vel adduci facient infra Regnum, etc. quel custom de. 2. s. del
Tun, est ore, en Engleterre appell Butlerage, and payable la per touts
Merchants Strangers. vid. stat. de extreat. ad Scacc. 15. E. 2.

Et ceo est le'Nature de ceux several Duties, quenx sont properment appell
Customs.

Pur le Original de ceux Customs.

1 Le dit Ancient and Graund Custom est parcel del ancient enheritance de la
Corone, and cy ancient que la Corone mesme. Inhaeret sceptro, and est due de
common droit, and per prescription, and nemi per grant ou benevolence des
Merchants, ou per act de Parliament. Dier. 1. Eliz. 165. b. Et ceo primerment
fuit raise horse del Native, proper, and primer commodities del nostre Pais,
viz. Wool, Woolfels, and Hydes, queux accrewont per les avers depasturant la
terre, sans industry des inhabitants, and sont Revera les Natural riches
d'Engleterre. Car invention and industry des homes, ont trove and produce
Tynne, and Plumbe, and Drapes, and Iron en several Ages. Mes les. 3. primer
commodities, viz. Wool, Woolfells, and hydes fueront properment and
auncientment dit, les Staple commodities del Realm (coment que per le staiut
de. 27. E. 3. c. 1. Plumbe soit auxi declare destre un Staple commodity, and
pur ceo cestuy que est oblige en statute Staple, conust que il est indebt, Pro
lanis, corijs, and plumbis, etc.) Et fueront appell Staple commodities, pur ceo
que fueront destre port al Staple del Roy, destre exported la, and nemi aliors,
pur le melior Collection des Customs due al Roy. Vide les Statutes de. 27 E.
3. cap. 1. and 43. E. 3. c. 1. On est express en queux Uilles d'Engleterre,
Ireland, and Gales les Staples del Roy fueront establish pur l'exportation de
ceux commodities. Et appiert auxi per diverse Statutes, que Caleys fuit ascun
foits appoint pur un General Staple, uncore ceo fuit ^oll and ousted arrere,
and les ancient Staples reestablish.

Mes pur ceux. 3. primer commodities tantsolement viz. Wool, Woolfells, and
Hydes, le dit ancient and certain Custom fuit due and payable. Car pur
Plumbe, coment que fuit dit un Staple commodity, le petit Custom de. 3. d. sur
le pound tantum fuit pay, come appiert per le Statut de 27. E. 3. cap. 1. Et in
libr. Rubro Scaccar. hic. fol. 8. a.

Et que le Roy ad estate de enheritance en cest Graund and ancient Custom,
appiert pleinment. 3^ H. 8. Dier. 43. b. du est dit, que Custom est
enheritance del Roy per course de Common ley, and Subsidy est un tax assesse
per Parliament. Uide auxi. 1. Mar. Dier. 92. ou le Roy. E. 6. ad grant license
al un Merchant stranger, de transporter touts merchandises payant pro Custumis
and Subsidijs tot and tantas denariorum summas, quot and quantas ascun Angleis
merchant ou Denizen payerott, and non vltra. Et fuit resolve per touts les
Istices, que apres le mort del. E. 6. le grant fuit von pur le Custom. and
void per le Subsidy: pur ceo que le Roy ad enheritance en le Custom, come
prerogative annex a son Corone, and en les Subsidies il n'avoit estate forsque
pur son vie, per act de Parliament. Issint. 9. H. 6. 12. a. La Roigne ad part
de sa Dower assign, Ex magna Custuma de London: que est argument, que le Roy
ad greinder estate en le Graund Custom que pur son vie demesne: Et pur ceo,
l'opinion de Babington la, que le Roy and enheritance en le Graund Custom, mes
en le Petit Custom tantum, n'ad ascun color de reason. Issint per l'estatute
de 18 H. 6. Est provide, que les Gages des Istices serront Perpetualme^t pay
horse des primer deniers provenants des Customs, que ne puissoit estre, si le
Roy n'avoit estate de perpetuity en les Customs. 1. H. 7. 4. a. Darrainment,
est un rule infallible, que si home ad chose de common droit, and per
prescription, que il ad estate de fee simple en mesme la chose, car de
particular estate le commencement poet, and doet estre monstre. 21. H. 7. 15. a.

Mes pur ceo que chescun chose que est due de common droit, and per
prescription, doet aver reasonable cause de Commencement, fuit note and observe
que, cest Custom fuit primerment pay al Corone, pur. 4. principal causes, ou
reasons. 1 Pur Conge de departer le Realm, and de carrier les commodities del
Realm horse de ceo. Vide Dier. 1. Eliz. 165. b. and l'estatut de. 18. E. 3. c.
3. 2 Pur l'interest que le Roy ad en le Mer, and en les Braches de ceo. 22.
Ass. p. 93. 15. Eliz. Dier. 326. b. 3 Pur ceo, que le Roy est Gardein de touts
les Ports and havens del Realm, queux sont Ostia seu Ianuae regni, and le Roy
est Custos totius regni. 4 Pur waftage, and protection des Merchants sur le
Mer, verse les Enemies del Realm, and verse Pirates, queux sont Common enemies
de touts Nations.


2 Le Petit and novel Custom payable per Merchants Strangers solement, avoet
commencement en temps. E. 1. Car devant cest temps, les Duties payable per
Merchants Strangers pur touts Foreign commodities imported (except wines) and
pur touts Native commodities Exported (except les dits Staple wares, de Wool,
Woolfells, and Hydes) fueront uncertain. Car le Roy per son prerogative Prisoit
a son use, and a son price, tant, and tiels portions de lour marchandises,
grant il ad besoigne, per nosme de prises, queux fueront touts foits uncertain.

Mes le Roy E. 1. person Charter dat. 1. Februarijanno. 31. de son Reign, en
favor des Merchants Strangers, and de traher lour commerce, Remitt a eux touts
prises, and grant a enx diverse auters Privileges. Et pro supradictis
libertatibus obtinendis, and prisis remittendis (ceux sont les parols del
charter) Supradicti Mercatores vniversi and singuli pro se, and omnibus alijs
de partibus suis, concorditer and vnanimiter concesserunt que ils payeront al
Roy, and ses hetres Tres denarios de libra pur touts Merchandises Imported ou
Exported per eux, come est express plus particularment en le dit Charter, que
est destre trove en l'Office de cheef Remembrancer en l'Eschecquer del
Engleterre, and in libro Rubro Scaccarij hic. Et cest Charter del. E. 1. en
touts points, fuit ratify and confirm per act de Parliament. 27. E. 3. c. 26.
Et ceo est l'Originall del Petit Custom.

Mes est destre note, qne cest Petit Custom pur Foreign commodities, fuit
accept per le Roy, quant forsque petit quantity de teils foreign wares fuit
import en Engleterre. Car en temps. E. 1. Et apres ceo, en temps. E. 3. les
Native Commodities D'engleterre exported fueront de greinder qnantity and value
per. 2. parts de. 3. al meins, que les Foreign marchandises imported: per que le
Roy. E. 3. raso^t cy graund revenew horse del Native commodities de ses
dominions: que est note de bon husbandry en cest Roy. Car Oportet
Patremfamilias Vendacem esse, and non Emacem. Come Cato le Senior disoit. Mes
ore est tout contrary: Car a cest temps, le Outgate est meinder que le Ingate:
les Foreign wares imported sont de Greinder quantity and value per. 2 parts, que
nostre Native commodities exported. Que est graund honte a nostre Nation,
destre issint enamore ove les Mercery and Grocery wares importes per strangers,
and d'expender sur eux plus que le value de touts les Staple and real
commodities de nostre Pais: que serra en fine le ruin del Commonweal.

3 Prisage de wines, est auxi Custom due per prescription, and parcel del
ancient enheritance de la Corone. Et que le Roy ad enheritance en le Prifage de
wines, appiert per les Charters grauntes al Citizens de London, and al ceux de
les Cinque Ports destre discharge de Prisage en touts Ports, a touts iour^.
Vid. stat. 1. H. 8. c. 5. Et le Countee de Ormond ad estate de d'enheritance en
le Prisage de wines en cest Realm per grant del Roy. Er le charte^ de London
fuit allow en cest point en l'eschecquer D'engleterre. 44. Eliz. Mes le
question la fuit, si un Citizen de London que n'ad famely, ne pay Scott and
Lot, ines soi^urne en le meason d'un autet, avera le benefit del dit Charter.
En l'argument de quel Case, Coke donques Attorney General miloir cest
dif^erence de Citizens, viz. que il y ad Citizen Nomine, Citizen Re, and
citizen Re and nomine. Mes fuit resolve, que solement le citizen Re and Nomine,
viz. cestuy que est freeman de London, and est auxi enhabitant, and pay Scott
and Lot la, serra free de Prisage per le dit Charter. Pur l'Originall de
Butlerage que est pay per Merchants Strangers, ceo aboit commencement per le
Charter de. 31. E. 1. come est avantdit, and est limitt destre pay al Roy and
ses heirs en perpetuity.

Et ceo est le nature, Original, and difference de les ancient Duties payable
pur marchandises, queux sont properment appell Customs, and sont l'enheritance
de la Corone.

SVbsidies auxi son duties payable pur merchandises exported and imported, mes
sont grant per act de Parliament. Dier. 31. H. 8 43. b. 1. Mar. Dier. 92. a.
Et sont de 3. diverse sorts, accordant al diversity des commodities, and sont
appell, 1 Aides ou Subsidies, esteant grant horse des dits native commodities,
viz. Wool, Woolfels, and Hydes, vltra and praeter le ancient Custom avantdit.
2 Tunnage, grant horse de Wines de touts sorts, vltra and praeter le Prisage,
and le dit Custom de. 25. de Dolio grant per le Charter de. 31. E. 1. ore
appell Butlerage. 3 Pondage, grant horse de touts commodities imported, and
exported, except Wines, and les Staple commodities avantdit, and payable per
Merchants Strangers, vltra and praeter le Petit Custom.


Pur l'Originall de ceux duties.

1 Aides and Subsidies payable horse des dits Native and Staple commodities
exported, ne fueront soventfoits grant per Parliament, devant le temps del. E.
3. mes a cest Roy pur maintenance de ses Guerres en France, per Parliament 14.
E. 3 (que fuit le primer an de son Reign de France) un Aid ou Subsidy fuit
grant de. 40. s. horse de chescun Sack de Wool. 40. s. horse de. 300.
Woolfels, and. 4. l. horse de chescun Last de Hydes. Et ceo de continuer pur un
An tantum, and que apres les merchants payeront forsqne l'auncient Custom.

Apres ceo per Parliament. 31. E. 3. un Subsidy fuit grant al dit Roy de. 50.
s. sur chescun Sack de Wool. 50. s. sur chescun. 300. Woolfels, and. 5. l sur
chescun Last de hydes.

Per act de Parliament. 31. H. 6. un Subsidy fuit grant al dit Roy de. 43. s.
iiii. d. horse de chescun Sack de Wool, and 43. s. iiii. d. de chescun. 240.
Woolfels: mes apres en mesme le Parliament cest Subsidy fuit abate, and reduce
al. 33. s. iiii. d. pur Sack de Wool, and. 33. s. iiii. d. pur. 240. Woolfels,
and le payment limitt pur. 5. ans Tantum. Issint que ceux Aides ou Subsidies ne
fueront del un certain quantity, ou continuance, iusques al temps del. E. 6. a
quel Roy, en le primer Parliament de son Reign, fuit grant un Subsidy de.
33. s. iiii. d. de chescun Sack de Wool. 33. s. iiii. d. pur chescun. 240.
Woolfels, and. 3. l. 6. s. viii. d. de chescun Last de Hydes exported per
Denizens. Pur chescun Sack de Wool exported per Aliens. 3. l. 6. s. viii. d.
and pur chescun. 240. Woolfels. 3. l. 6. s. viii. d. and pur chescun Last de
Hydes. 3. l. 13. s. iiii. d. Et cest Subsidy fuit grant de co^tinuer dura^t
le vie natural del ^oy: and puis le mort de cest Roy, mesme le Subsidy ad
estre grant al Q Mary, Q. Elizabeth, and al nostre Seignior le Roy que ore
est, durant lour several vies, per several acts de Parliament.

2 Tunnage, que est Subsidy horse de Wines de touts sorts, suit primerment
grant per Parliament. 5. R. 2. ou. 2. s. de chescun Tun de wine destre
imported en Engleterre, fuit grant al Roy pur. 2. ans, and ceo fuit pur
maintenance d'un fleet sur le Mer, a suppresser les Pirates. Mes apres, per
Parliament. 3. E. 4. Tunnage fuit grant al cest Roy pur term de son vie
natural en cest manner, viz. 3. s. pur chescun Tun de wines, and (ouster
ceux. 3. s.) pur chescun Tun de Sweet wines. 3. s. pluis. Vide statut. 12. E.
4. c. 3. and cest Subsidy, fuit apres grant al. H. 8. and. E. 6. ove cest
addition en temps. E. 6. que de chescun Awme de Remish wine auxi. xii d. serra
pay: and puis le temps del. E. 6. cest Subsidy de Tunnage ad estre grant en
Engleterre per several acts de Parliament al Q. Mary, Q. Elizabeth, and al
nostre Seignior le Roy que ore est, durant lour several natural vies.

3 Pondage, que est Subsidy grant horse de touts commodities exported and
imported, except wines, and les ancient Staple wares, vt supra, and payable
per touts merchants Den: zens and Aliens, est vicesima pars del value des
Marchandises, viz. xii. d. de le pound, and fuit primerment grant per
Parliament en Engleterre 31. H. 6. durant le vie de cest Ro^: quel grant fuit
immediatement resume. Mes apres ceo, viz. 3. E. 4. ce^ Subsidy de Pondage fuit
grant al dit Roy durant son vie, vide statut. 12. E. 4. c. 3. and puis mesme
le Subsidy fuit grant al. Henr. 8. durant son vie, and mesme le grant ad
estre renew al. E. 6. Q. Mary, Q. Elizabeth and al nostre Seignior le Roy que
ore est, durant ^out several vies per several acts de Parliament en
Engleterre.

Mes icy en cest Realm de Ireland le Subsidy de Pondage ad commencement en
cest manner. Anno. 14. E 4. un Fraternity des Arms fuit erect per act de
Parliament, consistant de. 13. plus honorable, and loialment disposed persons
en les Counties de Dublin, Kildare, Meth, and Louth: Et un certain number des
homes a chival, ove lour pages, and des archers a chival fuit assign a eux,
ove certain enterteynment and Gages, ^ayable a^ chescun des dits homes a
chival, and archers. Queux Freres des arms, ove lour dit retinew serront touts
temps prist a defender le English pale encounter Rebels and Outlawes. Et pur
le payment des gages des dits Archers and homes a chival, fuit enact, que les
dits Freres des Arms, and lour successors averont. xii. d. de le pound de
touts marchandises imported, and exported, horse de cest Terre de Ireland
(Hydes, and Wines, and les marchandises del freemen de Dublin and Drogheda
solement except.)

Apres, 10. H. 7. ^n le Parliament tenus per Sir Edw. Poynings fuit enact, que
pur tant que le dit. xii. d. de le pound grant al dit Fraternity (que est la
appell le Fraternity de Saint George) fuit expend and convert al private uses,
and nemi en discharge de public service, pur ceo le Roy averoit le dit Pondage
pur. 5. ans ensuant, and que touts auters graunts fait del dit Pondage soent
repeal and adiudge void, etc.

Les dits. 5. ans esteant expire, viz. Anno. 15. Honr. 7. novel Pondage fuit
grant per act de Parliament al dit Roy ses heirs and successors in
perpetuity, ove un Proviso, que cest act ne serroit prejudicial al freemen de
Dublin, Waterford, and Drogheda esteant free per Birth, Marriage, ou
Pre^tishood, etc. Et issint le Roy ad estate d'Enheritance en cest Subsidy de
Pondage en Ireland, ou il n'ad ceo forsque durant son natural vie en Engleterre.

3 IMposts ou Impositions sont le Tierce kind de duties payable pur
marchandises, and sont ascun^oits rates and assese per Parliament, and donques
sont en nature de Subsidies, and ascunfoits sont impose per Praerogatiue
Royal, pur supporter les necessary charges de la Corone, and donques, Nihil
magis iustum est, quam quod necessarium est, come un ancient Senator de Rome
disoit.

L'Impost sur Wines en cest Realm, fuit primerment assesse per Parliament, and
limit destre pay pur certain term d'ans, quel esteant expire, ceo est ore
continue per pre rogative del Roy.

CEux, sont les duties payable al Roy d'Engleterre pur l'exportation and
importation de marchandises. Et coment que cest revenew del Corone ad estre
graundement improche en cest darrein age, vncor si les Customs, Subsidies, and
impositions d'Engleterre sont compare al duties and payments de cest kind, en
foreign countries, serront trove destre moderate and fort reasonable.

Les ancient Romans (car cest revenew payable horse de merchandises, est le
pluis ancient, honorable, and reasonable que appertient al ascun Prince ou
state) avoent ceux duties per nosme de Vectigalia, a mercibus evectis, and
invectis, queux l'Emperour Justinian appell Exagogica and Isagogica. Et
touchant la Nature d'eux, les Rules de nostre Ley, sont agreeable al ceux de la
Imperial Ley.

1 Nous diomus, que Custom est l'auncient enheritance de la Corone
D'engleterre, ils diont, Vectigal origin ipsa Ius Caesarum, and Regum
Patrimoniale est. 2. En nostre Ley, Wastage and Protection de merchants sur le
Mer, est un des principal causes de payment de ceux duties: and en la Ley del
Empire, Primaria Vectigalium causa, ac ratio fuit, vt plana, tutaque mercatori
praetereunti itinera praestarentur. Et Plin. lib. 19. cap. 4. dit, Merces
praetiosae, vt ex India, Arabia, Aethiopia, tuto a mercatoribus in Europam
conveherentur, necessario classem parandam esse adversus Piraticas incursiones.
Inde maritimi exercitus alendi causa, Vectigal Rubri maris institutum.

Et cest Vectigal, octava rerum pars erat, and pur ceo, suit un sort des
Publicanes, queux fueront appell Octonari^: mes les Merchants queux avoent le
privilege des Citizens de Rome, payeront forsque Vicesimam partem ou Pondage,
and les Publicanes ou Collectors de cest Custom, fueront appell vicesimari^.

Et ceo fuit le ancient Custom payable per merchants deins l'estate del
Empire. Et en Britanie, devant que cest Island fuit fait Province subject al
Empire, est credible que les merchants payeront greinder Rates pur Exportation
des commodities, que ils payont ore. Lay Strabo dit, Britanni Victigalia
tollebant gravia earum rerum, quas in Galliam, tametsi brevi maris trajectu,
importabant.

Mes a cest iour, est certain, que en auters Realms de Europe, les Customs
sont plus haute, and heavy que nostres.

En Spain, le Roy prist octavam partem de ses proper subjects, mes des
Merchants Strangers il prist ascunfoits le Cinque part, ascunfoits le Quart
part, del value de lour merchandises.

En France, les Customs payable per strangers amountont al huict de Cent.
Bodin. de Republ. libr. 6. cap. 2. Mes les impositions and Gabells que le Roy
la prist de ses subjects pur Sell, Wine, and Blees, and touts chooses vendible,
sont extraordinary, and fort excessive. Issint poet estre dit del Graund Duke
de Tuscany, and auters states de Italy.

Le Graund Seignior de Turkey prist le Tenth part de Merchants Strangers, and le
Vint part ou Pondage de ses subjects.

QUant a les Officers queux ont a fair ove les Customs.

1 Le Customer fuit le pluis ancient, and al primes le sole Officer, que fuit
le Collector des Customs, and accomptable pur eux al Roy. 9. Henr. 6. 12. b.
1. H. 7. 4. b. 2 Apres en aid de Customer put trover les concealments and
substractions des Customs and Subsidies, and pur seiser marchandises for^ited,
le Searcher fuit ordain. 3 Donques, pur ceo que le Customer fuit accomptant al
Roy, mes ne puissoit estre charge forsque per son proper liver de Cocque^ts, ou
son oath, Controller fuit assign a luy. 4 Darrainment, pur discover and
preventer les frauds de touts ceux, un Office de Supervisor ad estre erect.
CEux diversities, touchant la nature de les several duties payable pur
merchandises, esteant declare and aggree, le. 2. Matter ^uit consider, viz. Si
les points de les several Charters plead, come avaunt est monstre, per le
corporation de Waterford, soent sufficient Warrants a eux, de receaver, a lour
proper use, les dits Customs, and Subsidies, and de fair les dits Officers de
Customer, Searcher and Controller des Customs.

QUant al primer Charter de le Roy John, per que (...) grant al dit
Corporation, Custumam vocatam le Murage, de omnibus rebus venalibus infra
dictam civitatem emptis seu venditis, adeo been and integre sicut Burgenses
villae de Bristoll habebant, etc. Fuit resolve, que per ceux parolx null Custom
ou Subsidy est grant a eux, pur diverse reasons.

1 Pur ceo que Murage nest rien que Toll, payable, pur reparation des Mures,
horse de chooses vend en market overt per retayle. N. N. Br. 228. D. ou Custom
est pay pur marchandises imported ou exported a travers le Mer, and vend en
gross. Et est auxi cest difference, que ^eil Toll covent estre pay touts dits
per cestuy que Achate le chose, and Custom per merchant que vende le chose. N.
N. Br. 228. E. Et que Murage nest forsque Toll appiert per le Register. 159. a.
En breef de Essendo quiet. de Theoloneo. Et per le dit Charter. 31, E. 1. per
que touts Merchants Strangers sont acquit de Murage, Pannage, and Pontage, and
vncor ils payont le Graund and petit Custom. Uide auxi Iehu Webbes Case en le.
8. part. des Reports de le Seignior Cook. 47. a.

2 Murage ne gift en grant, mes en prescription: Larsicome ascun chooses ne
gisont en prescription, mes en grafit, come conusans de pleas, Catalla Felon.
etc. 1. Henr. 7. 22. b. 9. Henr. 7. 20. a. Issint sont auters chooses que ne
gisont en grant, mes ^n prescription, come d'aver free Garren en auter terre,
ou de prender Murage, Pontage, ou Picage. 13. Henr. 4. 14. b.

3 Le Reference all vill de Bristoll, est uncertain and void, pur ceo que nest
tiel vill ou Burgh appell Bristoll, en cest Realm de Ireland, and le vill de
Bristoll entend en le Charter, esteant en Engleterre, l'averment que les
Burgesses de Bristoll avoent Murage al temps de cest grant, ne poet estre try
icy. Auxi ils doent aver en lour plea que les Burgesses de Bristoll avoent
tiel certain Toll ou Custom de chescun chose vende and achate deins le vill,
and que ils avoent ceo per grant del Roy, car donques le Reference fuissoit al
certenty. Come est tenus. 20. E. 3. Fitz. Avowry. 120. En Quo warranto port en
Eire, verse Baylives and Comminalty de Lancaster, ils pleadont un charter del
Roy John que grant a eux touts Francheses que le Burgh de Northampton ad, and
pur ceo que null franchise fuit la express, ou monstre de record, seizure fuit
agard des francheses.

2 QUant al. 2. Charter, per que. H. 5. grant al Mayor, Balives, and Citizens
de Waterford Custumam dictae civitatis vocat. Le Cocquett, capiendam per manus
dicti Maioris and Ballivorum in perpetuum: and coment que fuit object per
l'Atturney general, que le Cocquett nest forsque acquittance ou bill
testifiant que le Custom est pay, que fuit al primes appell Coquitt, pur ceo
que per teil bill, le merchant est de Costuma quietus: Per quel parol, le
ancient Custom, esteant un special enheritance de la Corone, ne poet passer:
and coment que fuit auxi object que Costume est payable per chescun several
merchant Denizen and Alien, and pur ceo ne poet estre dit Custuma dictae
civitatis: and nient obstant que soit limitt destre prise per maines del Mayor
and Baylives, vncor l'officer del Roy, viz. le Customer est charge ove ceo, and
ils doent aver allowance per peticion, come est rule. 1. H. 7. 4. a ou R. 3. ad
grant license al certain merchants a transporter laines, etc Et de ceo de
retayner lour Customs, en cest case, nient obsta^t le dit grant, les
Customers fueront charge and accomptable pur les Customs.

Uncore fuit resolve, que l'auncient Custom de Woolls, Woolfels, and Hydes,
fuit bien grant al dit corporation per les parolx de Custom vocat. le
Cocquett. Car cest ancient Custom est communement appell, and conus, per
nosme de le Cocquet Custom, en touts Ports de'Engleterre, and Ireland. Et
Custuma dictae civitatis serra entend Custom payable pur marchandises in dicta
civitate. Car favorable interpretation serra fait de teilx graunts solonque le
usage and allowance. 10. H. 7. 14. a. Et pur ceo que le Custom est grant al
eux, ils poent ceo Collecter per lour proper Officer, and l'Officer del Roy
nest accomptable pur ceo, come en le dit Case de license de retayner. 1. Hen. 7.

3 QUant al. 3. Charter dat. 12. Maij. 3. H. 7. per que le dit Roy grant al
Corporation de Waterford, quod omnes and singuli cives and inhabitants dictae
civitatis, and omnes and singuli mercatores, tam indigenae, quam alienigenae de
Nova Custuma vocat, le Pondage, viz. de praestatione. xii. denariorum de libra
imperpetuum sint quieti and exonerati, etc. fuit resolve, que cest Charter ne
fuit sufficient Warrant al eux, de receaver, a lour proper use, le Pondage de
touts merchants, Denizens, and Aliens, deins le Port de Waterford. Et reo pur.
2. principal reasons.

1 Pur ceo que cest grant tend al discharge de chescun particular Merchant,
and ne dona le Pondage al Corporation. 4. H. 6. b. a. le Roy. E. 4. grant al
Mayor and Burgesses de Oxford, que ils ne serront Ires ove foreiners, ne
foreners ove ceux, etc. Per totam Curiam les Burgesses que sont impannell,
quant ils sont demand destre Ires, poent monstrer le Charter, and pleader ceo,
mes nemi le Mayor and Corporation: a mesme lentent est. 21. E. 4. 55. and. 56.
Le Case de Norwich. Et pur ceo fuit dit, que si le Roy grannt al Abbe que touts
ses possessions serront discharge de Dismes grant en Parliament (come le
Rector de Edingtons Case est, 19. H. 6. 63. a.) L'Abbe en cest Case, ne poet
collecter les Dismes de ses tenants, and retayner a son proper use: Issint ou
le Roy ad grant al Corporation de London, que les Citizens de London serront
discharge de Prisage, le Corporation per force de cest grant, ne prist le
Prisage de les Citizens. Mes chescun particular home avera le benefit de le
Charter, sil voet demaunder ceo, auterment nient.

2 Cest grant fuit fait Anno. 3. Henr. 7. a quel temps, le Pondage que fuit
grant per Parliament Anno. 14. Edw. 4. al Fraternity de Saint George, come
devant est monstre, fuit en Esse. Mes apres, Anno. 10. Henr. 7. cest grant al
Fraternity de Saint George fuit repeal per auter act de Parliament, and Novel
Subsidy de Pondage grant al Roy pur. 5. ans. Apres quel temps, viz. 15. Henr.
7. un auter Subsidy de Pondage fuit grant al Corone en perpetuity, que est le
Pondage ore en question, issint que le novel Pondage que fuit grant per
Parliament. 15. Henr. 7. ne puissoit estre Grant ou discharge per charter
fait. xii. ans devant, viz. 3. Henr. 7. Car quant al Grant en tiel Case, est
tenus. 22. Edw. 4. Fitz. Graunts. 29. en l'Abbe de Walthams Case, que le Roy ne
poet grant ascun parcel del Dismes del clergy, devant que soit grant per le
Convocation. Et quant al Exoneration ou discharge en teil case, cest point en
le case de Rector de Edington. 19. Henr. 6. 63 a. Nest rule, ne resolve. Mes
admit que le Rector en cest Case la serroit discharge de Dismes per grant le
Roy fait devant le Parliament, vncor ceo ne serroit rule de cest case, pur ceo
queen le grant fait al Rector sont parolx de future temps, viz. que quant
ascun tax, tallage, ou Tenth serroit grant per Parliament, que il, ses terres,
and chateux serront discharge. Mes cest Charter de. 3. H. 7. parle de Nova
Custuma de Pondage donques En esse. Car ceo que est Novel, est Novelment past,
and nemi future. Et pur ceo cest Charter ne v^ en discharge de auter Pondage,
que serroit grant apres per act de Parliament. A cest intent, vid. 34. H. 8.
Dier. 52. a. ou est tenus que le Roy ne poet discharge penalty del act de
Parliament, que est destre fait en apres. Come ou Roy grant license al un de
transporter Bell Metal, nient obstant ascun statutes fait, ou destre fait al
contrary: Apres act est fait, que prohibit l'exportation de Bell Metal sur
certain pain: Le license grant devant, ne discharger^ cest penalty. Mes la
est dit, que le Roy poet dispenser ove future chose en que il ad enheritance.
Mes al temps de cest Charter grant, viz. 3. Henr. 7. le Roy n'avoit
^nheritance en le Subsidy de Pondage. Car le Pondage donques en Esse fuit
grant al dit Fraternity de Saint George, quel grant esteaut repeal, come e^
avantdit, novel Pondage fuit grant al Roy pur. 5. ans Anno. 10. Henr. 7. Et
apres Anno. 15. Henr. 7. le Pondage, ore en question, fuit grant al Roy and
ses heirs per act de Parliament. Mes si le Roy ad eu enheritance en cest
Pondage al temps de cest Charter grant al Waterford, viz. 3. Henr. 7. le
discharge, sans question, ad estre bon. Come le Roy poet grant que l'heir de
son Tenant ne serra en Guard, ou que son Tenant ne serra puny en cessauit. Car
coment que ceux sont future and casuell chooses, vncor le Roy ad enheritance en
le Seigniory al temps. 36. Henr. 6. 48.

Auxi en plusors cases, coment que grant del Roy Extend al future Temps, vncor
serra entend des chooses Praesent and ^n Esse al temps del grant. Come en. 38.
Henr. 6. 10. a. Si le Roy grant a moy liberties en touts mes terres, ieo avera
les liberties en les terres queux ieo avoy al temps del grant, and nemi en les
terres queux ieo purchase apres. Issint si le Roy grant liberties en touts mes
Demesnes, and apres Tenancy escheat, ieo navera les liberties en le terre
novelment escheated. Issint si le Roy grant Catalla felonum quorumcunque, and
apres per Parliament, un act est fait Felony que ne fuit Felony devant, le
grauntee navera les viens de person attainted de tiel Felony. Issint ou
l'Evesque de Durham ad Iura Regalia, and escheates de Treason deins son county
Palatine, il nauera les terres de Tenant en tail attaint de Treason, queux
sont forfeit per le Statute de. 26. Henr. 8. come est resolve. 12. Elizabeth.
Dier. 289.

Et pur ceo fuit resolve, que test Charter que exonerate les Merchants de
Waterford de Pondage in anno. 3. Henr. 7. nepoet estre extend pur acquitter eux
De nouel Pondage que fuit grant per Parliament Anno. 15. Henr. 7. Mes que
touts Merchants Denizens and Aliens payeront Pondage en cest Port, forsque ceux
que sont exempt per le Prouiso del dit act de. 15. Henr. 7.

QUant al. 4. Charter, concernant les Officers des Customs, fuit resolve que
ou les Customs and Subsidies ^emaynont en la Corone, and ne sont bien grant
al dit corporation, le Roy mesme appointera ses Officers pur le Collection and
due answering de ceux Duties, nient obstant cest Charter, que ennable eux de
creater teils Officers. Mes en case ou Custom ou Subsidy est bien grant al
Corporation, adonques le Constitution de teils Officers appertient a eux, and
lour Officers poent entermedier ove taunt que est bien grant a eux, and nient
pluis, mes ou lour Charter va en Discharge and exoneration tantum, ils ne po^nt
appointer teils Officers, car ne sont necessary en teil Case.

CEst Case dependoit plusors Terms en Bank le Roy icy, ou les points avantdit
fueront resolve: mes devant ascun Idgement done en ceo, le dit City de
Waterford, and les auters Maritimes Cittyes, and Port Towns de cest Realm,
per special direction del Roy, transmittoent en Engleterre certain Agents, ove
lour several Charters, al intent, que touts questions queux ont estre move
touchant les Customs and Subsidies payable al Roy pur Merchandises en les
several Ports de Ireland, sur view (...) dits Charters per les Idges en
Engleterre, poent estre resolve and determine, sans auter fait (...) le Roy, and
les dits Corporations.

Et sur ceo, Termino Michaelis. 6. Iacobi, special letters del Seigniors de
privy Counsel fueront direct al Sir Laurence Tanfeild chief Baron, Baron
Heron, Sir (...) Doddrige un des Serjants del Roy, and Sir Henry Hobarte
Aaturney general del Roy en Engleterre Et auxi al Sir James Ley donques chief
Justice de Ireland* Sir Anthony Se^^tliger Master del Rolls, and l'Atturney
general del Roy en cest Realm icy: (queux servitors d'Ireland adonques
fueront present en Engleterre, and attendant al Court* pur dispacth des auters
services) per queux letters, le dit Chief Baron, and les auters fueront
require, d'appeller devant eux les dits Agents, and sur perusal and
consideration eu de lour several Charters, de certify lour opinions and
resolutions, en queux des dits Cittyes and Port Towns, les Customs and
Subsidies payable pur Marchandises doent estre respond and pay al Roy, and en
queux les merchants Denizens, ou Aliens, doent estre discharge de payment de
ceux duties, and pur quant, etc.

Et accordant a cest direction, les dits Agents fueront appoint d'attender les
dits Referres ove lour Charters, and ove lour learned Counsel, al Serjants
Inn en Chancery Lane, al plusors tours en le dit Michelmas Term: and la
devant le Seigmor chief Baron, and les auters, les questions and points
avantdit, surdant sur les several Charters de Waterford, fueront move, and
debate, and resolve, vt supra. Et diverse auters Charters fueront produce, mes
null point de difficulty fuit move sur ascun de cux. Tantsolement, Bolton
Recorder de Dublin, insistoit fortment, lur un ancient Charter del Henr. 2.
per que le dit Roy ad grant Burgensibus de Dublin, quod sint quieti de
Theoloneo, Passagio, Pontagio, and omni consuetudine per totam terram nostram
Angliae, Normanniae, Walliae, and Hyberniae vbicunque venerint ipsi and eorum
Res, etc. Et il affirmoit, que les parols de Theoloneum, and Consuetudo,
fueront apt parols de acquitter les Citizens de Dublin de le Graund and
Ancient Custom. Et pur le signification de le parol Theoloneum, il cite le
Text e^ Saint Matthew. Gospel. Cum autem praetergredetur Jesus, vidit quendam
sedentem ad Theoloneum, etc. que est interpret desire al resceit del Custom.
Mes a ceo fuit dit, que pur trover le signification de Theoloneum en cest Case,
ne besoigne de resorter al interpreters del Gospel, mes al interpreters del
nostre Ley. Et que en nostre ley, le proper Term o^ Parol de Art que signify
teil* Royal duty que est payable pur Marchandises crossant le Mer, est
Custuma, and nemi Theoloneum: quel parol Theoloneum, en nostre ley, signify
rien forsque un Toll, and Toll (que est derive del Theoloneum) nest forsque un
petty Duty payable en Markets and Fayers, per cesty que achate le chose, o^
Custom est payable per Merchant que est vendor. N. N. Br. 126. b. and per le
Register. 260. a. un difference perenter Toll and Custom payable pur
Marchandises appiert. Car en le brief d'acquitter les biens del
Ecclesiastical person de Theoloneo, Pannagio, Muragio* etc. ^est Clause est
mise, Dum tamen merchandisas aliquas non exerceat de eisdem, issint le
difference est apparent, and pur ceo il fuit over rule pur cest parol,
Theoloneum.

^uant al auter parol, Consuetudo, il dit, que ceo f^it ^omen aequiuocum and
ad. 3. significations. 1. Usage de temps don't memory ne Court, est appell
Consuetudo. 2. Ancient Rents and services, sont appell consuetudines. 3. auxi
les Customs payable pur marchandises sont appell consuetudines. Et ceo appiert
in magna Charta cap. 30. Omnes mercatores, nisi public antea prohibiti
fuerint, habeant saluum and securum conductum, exire de Anglia, and venire in
Angliam, and morari and ire per Angliam, tam per terram, quam per aquam, ad
emendum, and vendend^m, sine omnibus malis Tolnetis, per rectas and antiquas
consuetudines. Per quel parol Consuetudines, il dit que les ancient Customs
payable pur exportation de marchandiles sont signify. En mesme le sense (dit
il) cest parol est use en Bracton lib. 2. cap. 24. Si ^ui concedatur talis
libertas, quod quietus sit de Theoloneo and consuetudinibus dandis per totum
regnum Angliae in terra and mari, and quod Tolnetum and consuetudines capiat,
infra libertatem suam, de vendentibus and ementibus, statim erit quasi in
possessione, and possessionem retinebit, cum Tolnetum and consuetudines
receperit.

I^ monstre auxi les copies de certain accounts, contein en les ancient
Pipe-Rolls en Engleterre, viz. un de. 15. Henr. 2. en ceux parols, Geruasius
Draper vicecomes Northfolk and Suffolk reddit Compotum de. 45. l. 16. s. vi. d.
de consuetudine nauium de Oreford: and in magno Rotulo. 5. R. 1 cest entry est
trove. Albericus de Billingesgate debet. 72. s. 4. d. de consuetudine de
Billingesgate and Buttolphesgate, sur que il conclude, que en ancient temps,
quant Henr. 2. fessoit cest grant, le parol Consuetudo signifioit la duty del
Custom payable pur merchandises. Uncor il agree, que a cest iour ^iel special
duties de prerogative, come Customs sont, ne poent passer per tiel general
parol de Consuetudines. Mes ancient graunts ont touts foits un favorable
interpretation, solonque le Usage and allowance. Et sur cest ground il mise
plusors livers. 14. Henr. 6. 12. a. Del grant fait per H. 2. 34. Ass. p. 14.
del grant de Will. le Conqueror. 37. Ass. p. 6. 40. Ass. p. 21. 5. Edw. 4.
121. 10. Henr. 7. 13. b.

Mes fuit resolve per le Seignior Chief Baron, and les auters Referres, que le
dit Grant, que ils serront quieti de omni Consuetudine, ne discharge eux de le
Graund Custom. Et principalment, pur mesme le reason, que ad estre use del
auter part, viz. pur ceo, que Consuetudo 'est nomen aequivocum, and signify
plusors kinds de Customs. Et issint esteant general parol, ne vnques passera
cest special Roial duty. Come ou le Roy grant omnes piscarias, and
piscationes, Royal fishings ne passont: Roy grant touts Mines. Roial mines
d'or and Argent ne passont: Roy grant touts Amercements, Royal Amercements ne
passont. 3. Edw. 3. Fitz. 445. presentment fuit fait verse Abbe, que il a^
suffer un pont deschuer, que il and ^es predecessors Seigniors del vill, ont
use de repairer de te^ps don't memory ne Court, etc. L'Abbe plead Charter del.
Henr. 3. desire quitt de reparation de touts ponts, mures, and causeyes, and
que cest Charter ad estre allow en Quo warranto, etc. Uncor cest plea ne fuit
allow. Car ceo fuit special charge ou duty per reason de son Seigniory, que
nest discharge per cest general Clause. Car ou sont parolx en grant le Roy,
que desouth un general nosme, comprehend chooses Royal, and chooses base, ^erra
prise en favor del Roy, and les base chooses passeront, and les Royal
demurreront en le Corone. Plow. Com. 333.

Et le Seignior cheef Baron misoit un notable Case a cest purpose, adiudge en
L'eschecquer D'engleterre, que fuit tiel. Le Roy ad grant al un Venetian
merchant, que il serroi^ quitt De omnibus Custumis Subsidijs, and
impositionibus, and omnibus alijs denariorum summis debitis and solubilibus pro
quibuscunque merchandisis importandis, etc. and que il serroit cy free come les
Cityzens de London. Per color de cest Charter, il claim de^^re free de
Prisage, pur ceo que per special Charter les Cityzens de London sont free de
Prisage. Uncor fuit adiudge que cest Grant del Roy ne discharge luy de
Prisage, pur ceo que Prisage nest specialment express en mesme le Grant. Et
sur mesme le reason fuit ore resolve, per le dit Cheef Barron, and les auters
Referres, sur le charter de Drogheda, per que les Burgesses de cest vill sont
discharge de Theoloneo, passagio, Pannagio, Lastagio, etc. que per force de
cest parol Lastagio ils ne serront discharge de Graund Custom de. 13. s. 4. d.
payable pur chescun Last de Hydes, pu^ ceo que il y ad un Last de Herrings, and
Last de Powder, and de plusors auters chooses ^ybien que de Hydes.

Et adarrainment fuit resolve per le dit Cheef Baron and les auters, que un
subject ne poet praescriber destre free and discharge de le ancient Custom
payable pur marchandises, ou de receaver ceo a son use deinesue, pur ceo que
ceo est un certain revenew del Corone, mes en auters chooses que sont Casual,
come Wai^, Stray, Wreck, un subject poet Praescriber.

Et apres ceo, viz. 16. Decembris. 6. Iacobi, le dit Cheef Baron and les auters
Referres returnont al Seigniors del privy Counsel en Engleterre un Certificate
de lou^ Opinion and Resolution, ou, and en quel manner, les dits Auucient
Customs and le Subsidy de Pondage doent estre pay and respond al Roy, en les
several Port-Townes del Ireland. A quel Certificate, les Agents pur les dits
Ports Towns submittont eux mesmes, devant les dits Seigniors del Counsel, and
agreeont, que dehorsenavant, les dits Customs and Pondage serront pay
accordant. Et sur ceo, cest Certificate fuit transmitt en cest Realm, and
enroll en L'eschecquer icy, and accordant a ceo, depuis cest Temps, les dits
Customs and Pondage ont estre respond, and pay al Roy, en touts les Ports del
Ireland.

Trin. 2. Iacobi
Le Case de Mixed Monyes.
LA Roigne Elizabeth, pur payer les gages del Army Royal que fuit maintain en
cest Realm pur plusors ans, a suppresser le rebellion de Tyrone, causast un
graund quantity de Mixed Moneys, ove le usual Stamp del Arms del Corone, and
Inscription de sa Royal Style, desire coin in le Tower de London, and
transmitt ceux Moneys en cest Realm, ove Proclamation portant date. 24. Maij.
Anno. 43. de sa Reign: per que sa Majesty declare and establish ceux Mixed
Moneys, immediatment apres le dit Proclamation fait, destre le Loyal and
current Money de cest Realm de Ireland, and expressement comaund, que ceux
Monyes serrout issint use, accept, and repute, per touts ses subjects, and
auters, vsant ascun traffic ou Commerce deins cest Realm: and que si ascun
ascun person ou persons refuseront de receaver ceux Mixed Monyes, solonque le
Denomination ou valuation de ceux, viz. Shillings pur shillings, and les pieces
de vi. d. pur vi. d. Et sic de caeteris, esteant tender pur payment des ascuns
wages, fees, stipendes, ou debtes, etc. Ils serront punish come contempners de
sa Royal prerogative and commandment. Et al intent que ceux Mixed Monyes
avoient le melieur course and passage, fuit ouster declare per mesme le
Proclamation, que apres le. 10. iour de June prochein ensuant, touts auters
Monyes queux ont estre current deins cest Realm, devant le dit proclamation,
serro^t decry and adnull, and esteem come Bullion, and nemy come Loyal and
current Money deins cest Realm.

En April, devant que cest proclamation fuit publish, quant le pure coin
D'engleterre fuit current deins ceit Realm, un Brett de Drogheda merchant,
aiant achate certain wares d'un Gilbert en London devient oblige al dit
Gilbert en obligation de. 200. l. sur condition que il payera al dit Gilbert
ses executors, ou assigns. 100. l Sterling curra^t and Loyal Money
D'engleterre, a le Tomb del Earl Strongbowe in Christ-Church, Dublin, al
certain iour avener: quel iour happoit destre apresle dit proclamation, and
establishme^t, del Standard de Mixed Moneys deins cest Realm: per que, al dit
iour and Liew, Brett fist Tender del. 100. l. en les Mixed Moneys del novel
Standard, en performance del condition del obligation avandit. Et si cest
Tender fuit sufficient de saver le forfeiture del dit obligation, and si le dit
Brett ore sur le change ou alteration des Moneys deins cest Realm, serra
compel de payer le dit. 100. l. en auter, ou melicur Coin, que en les Mixed
Moneys, solonque le rate and valuation d'eux al temps del Tender, fuit le
question al Counselltable, ou le dit Gilbert esteant merchant de London ad
exhibit peticion verse le dit Brett pur le speedy recovery de son debt avantdit.

Et pur ceo que cest fuit le general Case del Realm, and fuit auxi de grand
importance en consideration and reason de state, Sir George Carry esteant
donques Deputy and auxi Treasourer del Roy, requiroit les cheef Idges esteant
del privy Counsel de conferer and considerer de cest case, and de retourner a
luy lour resolution touchant ceo. Queux sur conference and consideration eu sur
touts points del dit proclamation, fueront resolve, que le Tender del dit. 100.
l. en les Mixed Moneys, al iour, and liew avantdit, fuit bon and sufficient en
la ley de saver le forfeiture del dit obligation. Et que Brett ne serra enforce
al ascun te^ps apres, de paier auter Money en discharge de cest debte, forsque
cest Mixed Money solonque le Rate and valuation que ceo avoit al temps de
Tender. Et cest resolution fuit certify per eux a le Seignior Deputy, and le
certificate enter en le Counsel Book. Et en cest Case diverse points sueront
consider, and resolve.

PRimerment fuit consider, que en chescun Commonwealth il besoigne daver un
certain Sta^dard de Moneys. Car null Commonwealth poet estre sans contracts,
and null contracts sans equality, and null equality en contracts sans Money. Car
coment que en les primer Societics del mounde, Permutation del un chose pur
auter fuit use, vncor bien toft ceo fuit trove cumbersome, and le
transportatien and division des chooses fuit trove difficult and impossible: and
pur ceo Money fuit invent, cibien pur facility de commerce, que pur reducer
concracts al equality. Cum non facile concurrebat, vt cum tu haberes quod ego
desiderarem, ego invicem haberem, quod tu accipere velles: electa materia est,
cuius publica and perpetua aestimatio difficultatibus permutationum subveniret.
Paulus libr. 1. ff. de Contrahendis Empt. Et pur ceo Money est dit Per Bodin,
mensura publica, and Budelius libr. 1. de re Nummaria cap. 3. dit, Moneta est
iustum medium and mensura rerum commutabilium: nam per medium monetae fit
omnium rerum, quae in mundo sunt, conveniens and iusta aestimatio. Et a cest
intent Keble dit. 12. Henr. 7. fol. 23. b. que chescun those poet estre value
per Argent, per quel parol Argent il entend Money coined. Et le graund vtility
del un certain Standard des Moneys and des measures, est bien monstre per
Budelius en cest verse. Vna Fides, Pondus, Mensura, Moneta sitvna,
Et status illaesus totius Orbis erit.


2 SEcondment fuit resolve, que appertient solement al Roy D'engleterre, de
fair ou coiner money deins ses dominions, issint que null auter person poet ceo
fair, sans special license ou commaundment del Roy. Et si ascum presume de
faier ceo de son Test demeine, ceo est Treason envers le person del Roy per le
common Ley. Et ceo appiert per le statute de. 25. Edw. 3. cap. 2. que est
forsque declaration del common ley, and per Glanvill, Britton, and Bracton
devant cest Statute. Stamford. fol. 2. and 3. and en le Case de Mines, Plow.
Comment. fol. 316. a. cest point est express plus cleerement, ou est dit, que
le Roy avera les Mines d'Or and Argent: Car si le subject averoit, il per la
ley ne poet Coigner teilx Metalles, ne metter Print, ne value sur eux; car
appertient al Roy solemen (...) de metter Value al coigne, and fair le Price
del quantity, and de metter Print a ceo: le quel esteant fait, le Coin est
current. and si subject ceo fait, ceo est graund Treason al common ley, come
appiert. 23. Ass. p. 2. Et est graund Treason al Roy, pur ceo que il ad sole
power de fair Money, etc.

En cest liver. 3. chooses sont express, queux sont requisite al fesans de
Loyal Money, viz. Authority del Prince, le Print, and le value. Mes sur le
consideration del case en question, fuit note and observe, que. 6. chooses ou
circumstances doent co^curre, pur faier Loyal and current Money. 1. weight. 2.
finenes. 3. impression. 4. Denomination. 5. Authority del Prince. 6.
Proclamation. Car chescun piece de Money doet aver un certain proportion de
weight ou poize, and un certain proportion de purity ou finenes que est
appell Alloy. Auxi chescun piece doet aver un certain form del Impression,
que serra cognoscibilis and discernibilis car sicome cere nest Seal, sans-
print, issint metal nest Money sans impression. Et Moneta dicitur a monendo,
quia impressione nos moneat cuius sit moneta. Cuius imago and superscriptio est
haec? Caesaris: date Caesari quae sunt Caesaris. Auxi chescun piece de Money
covient aver Denomination ou valuation pur quant ceo serra accept ou pay, come
per un penny, un groate, ou un shilling. Ettout ceo covient estre fait per
authority and commaundment del Prince, car auterment le money nest Loiall, and
doet estre publish per proclamation del Prince, car devant ceo, le money nest
current.

Ceux circumstances appearont en les ancient Ordinances fait per le Roy, pur
le Coinage de monyes, cibien en cest Realm, que en Engleterre, queux sont
destre trove en le Tower de London la, and en le Castle de Dublin icy. Auxi les
Indentures enter le Roy and les Masters del Mint, prescribont le proportion de
poize, finenes, and alloy, l'impression, ou inscription, le nosme and le value,
vid. statut. 2. H. 6. cap. 12. ou mention est fait de ceux Indentures, vide
auxi Wades Case en le. 5. part des Reports de le Seignior Cook. 114. b. que le
Roy per son proclamation poet fair ascun Coigne Loyal money de Engleterre: a
fortiori, il poet, per son proclamation tantum establish le Standard des moneys
coined per son authority deins ses proper dominions.

Et que le Roy per son prerogative poet auxi metter prize ou valuation sur
touts coins, appiert per un notable Case. 21. Edw. 3. fol. 60. b. En temps del
William le Conqueror, le Abbe de Saint Edmundes Bury complainoit al Roy en
Parliament, que ou il fuit exempt del Irisoiction del Ordinary per diverse
ancient Charters, que L'evesque de Norwich ad visitt son meason encounter ceux
Charters d'exemption. Per que fuit grant and ordeine in Parliament, que si de
cel temps en avaunt, L'evesque de Norwich ou ascun de ses successors alassent
encounter l'exemption avantdit, que ils payeront al Roy, ou a ses heirs. 30.
Talentes ou Besauntes. Apres ceo, viz. entemps Ed. 3. L'evesque de Norwich
visitt la meason arrere, encounter l'ordinance avantdit, and cest contempt
esteant trove en Banck le Roy, Scire facias issist verse L'evesque a monstrer
pur que il ne payeroit al Roy les. 30. Talentes ou Besauntes. Et sur
insufficient plea plead per L'evesque, le Court agard que le Roy recovera les
Talentes ou Besauntes, and que la prize soit interpret per le Roy mesme, de
quel prize ils serront plus^ou meins. Per que est manifest que ou Tale^tes ou
Besau^tes ou auters teils pieces ou quantities d'Or ou Argent, sont de
uncertain value (car Budeus dit, quod Talenta sunt varia, and pondera sunt,
potius quam numismata) le Roy mesme ad power de metter certeiue value sur eux:
solonque le rule bien conus al civilians Monetae aestimationem dat, qui cudendi
potestatem habet. Et en cest point la common ley D'engleterre agree bien ove
les rules del civil ley, lus cudendae Monetae ad solum Principem, hoc est,
Imperatorem de Iure pertinet. Monetandi Ius Principum ossibus inhaeret. Ius
monetae co^prehenditur in Regalibus, quae nunquam a Regio sceptro abdicantur.

Uncor per ancient Charters, cest privilege ou prerogative ad estre
communicate al ascuns subjects en Engleterre: come al Archevesque de Canterbury
per Charter del Roy Athelstane. Lambert. peramb. Kanc. fol. 291. Et
L'archebesque de York, and Evesque de Durham avoent Mintes, and power de
Coigner moneys, come appiert per le statute de 14. Henr. 8. cap. 12. and le
Deane de Saint Martins le Graund ad mesme le privilege, come est manifest per
le statute de. 17. Edw. 4. cap. 1. Et cest Ius cudendae monetae ad estre grant
al plusors graundes personages en France, en temps paravant, come Choppinus
recite lib. de Domanio Franc. fol. 217. a. Et cest prerogative a cest iour, est
impart trop generalment al toates inferior Princes and States de Germany, per
grant ou permission del Emperor. Car cest un l'ey del Empire, Ius cudendae
monetae, nisi cui ab Imperatore concessum fuerit, nemo vsurpato.

TIercement fuit resolve, que sicome le Roy per son prerogative poet fair
Monyes de quel matter and form luy plerra, and d'establisher le standart de
ceo, issint poet il changer son Money en substance, and impression, and
enhauncer ou abaser le valewe de ceo, ou tout ousterment decrier and adnuller
ceo, ^ssint que soit forsque Bullion, a son pleasure. Et nota que Bullion, que
dicitur latin, Billio, est moneta defensa and prohibita, quae videlicet, vsu
caret.

Et que le Roy ad use cest prerogative en Engleterre, appiert per plusors
notorious changes del Money, fait en temps del several Royes depuis le Norman
Conquest. An. 26. H. 2. Moneta veteri reprobata, nova successit. Matthew. Paris.
hist. magn. fol. 35. a. Anno 7. Iohannis novel Money fuit coin, a quel temps
le primer Sterling Money fuit fait solonque l'opinion de Camden, ou il parle de
Sterling Castle en Scotland. fol. 700. b. An. 32. H. 3. le Roy fuit enforce de
fair novel Money, cum moneta Angliae circumcidebatur a circumcisis Iudaeis,
come Matthew. Paris. dit. fol. 703. a. Anno. 7. Edw. 1. le Standart del Moneys
fuit renew, quant le sterling penny fuit establish de conteiner vicesimam
partem vnciae, come appiert en veteri magna Charta, en l'Ordinance appell
Compositio mensurarum, ou est ordeine, quod viginti denarij faciant vnciam.
Anno. 29. Edw. 1. quant les Moneys appell Pollardes fueront decrie, novel
sterling money fuit auxi coin, vid. 6. Edw. 6. Dier. 82. b. and lib. Rubro
Scaccarij Dublin, part, 2. fol. 1. b. Apres ceo novel moneis ont estre fait. 9.
Edw. 3. and 13. Henr. 4. and 5. Edw. 4. and 19. Henr. 7. and 36. Henr. 8. Et
derrainement. 2. Elizabethae, quant toutes Mixed and base Moneys fueront
decrie, and le standard de pure silver establish, que continue a cest iour, de
que Bodin fait honorable mention libr. 6. de Republica cap. 3.

Et semble, ceux changes de Moneys en Engleterre fueront fait per l'authority
del Roy sans Parliament, coment que plusors acts de Parliament ont estre fait,
pur ordering del eschaunge, and a prohibiter l'exportation des Moneys faites
and ordaines per le Roy, and l'importation and utterance de foreine and faux
moneys, sur certain pains and penalties, don't ascuns fueront capital, and
ascuns pecuniary. Et plusors ordinances del Roy fait sans Parliament, sont
appell Statutes, come Statutum de moneta magnum, and statutum de moneta paruum,
que sont issint nosme Statutes, put ceo, que l'ordinance del Roy ove
proclamation en tiel case, ad le force del act de Parliament.

Et sicome le Roy ad use de Chaunger le standard de ses moneys, cesta scavoir
le form and le substance, issint ad il use per son prerogative de enchaunser
ou abaser le valuation de ceo, meant obstant que le form, and substance
continewe come il fuit devant. Et ceo fuit fait. 5 Edw. 4. come appiert per le
liver de. 9. Edw. 4. fol. 49. a. ou Danby dit, que un noble est melior ore, que
il fuit Anno. 20. de cest Roy, 20. d. en chescun noble: and le Roy. Henr. 8.
per special commission Dat. 24. Iulij anno. 18. de son reign, authorize le
Cardinal Wolsey ove l'advise des auters del Counsel del Roy, de meiter
valuation sur touts moneys de Engleterre, de temps en temps, solonque les Rates
and valewes del moneys de foreine nations, queux fueront adonques trop en,
hanses, specialment per L'emperour, and le Roy de France, come est express en
le dit commission. Vid. auxi. 6. and. 7. Ed. 6. Dier, 82. and 83. diverse cases
sur imbasement des Moneys.

Et est d'estre noate, que enter l'an. 36, Henr. 8. quant plusors sorts de
base moneys fucront coigne en Engliterre, and 2. Elizabeth, quant le pure
standard des silver monyes fuit establish, il y ad. 3. notorious falls ou
decries de base monyes publish per proclamation: le primer. 9. Iulij. 5. Edw.
6. le second. 17. Augusti eodem anno, come est express en Dier. 83. a. le
tierce. 28. September. 2. Eliz.

Et sicome le Roy ad touts foits use de fair and chaunger les monyes
D'engleterre, il ad auxi use mesme le prerogative en Ireland touts temps depuis
le. 12. An. del Roy John, quant le primer standard des English monyes fuit
establish en cest Realm: come est record Per Matthew. Paris. magna hist. fol.
220. b. ou il dit, que cest Roy csteant in Ireland constituit ibidem leges and
consuetudines Anglicanas, ponens ibidem Vicecomites, aliosque ministros, qui
populum regni illius iuxta leges Anglicanas iudicarent. Praesecit autem ibidem
Iohannem de Gray Episcopum Norwicensem Iustitiarium, qui denarium terrae illius
ad pondus numismatis Angliae fecerat publicari, and tam obulum quam quadrantem
rotundum fieri praecepit: iussit quoque Rex, vt illius monetae vsus tam in
Anglia quam in Hybernia communis ab omnibus haberetur, and vtriusque regni
denarius in th^sauris suis indifferenter poneretur.

Per que appiert, que le Standard de monyes en Engleterre and en Ireland fuit
equal al primes, and que le English money ne fuit un quart part melior in
valewe que le Irish, come ceo ad estre depuis le temps del Edward. 4. Car
devant, sicome fuit un mesme Standard de monyes en ambideux Realms, ^ssint
touts foits quant le monye fuit change in Engleterre, fuit auxi change in
Ireland come en ^an 1279. viz. 7. Edw. 1. quant Edw. 1. establish novel money
en Engleterre, come devant est monstre, fuit auxi mutation des monyes en
Ireland, come est noate ^^les Annalles de cest Realm, publish per Camden en
son liver de Britannia, ou est dit, que Anno. 1279. Dominus Robertus ^e Vfford
iustitiarius Hyberniae intravit Angliam, and constituit loco suo fratre^^
Robertum de Fulbourne Episcopum Waterford, cuius tempore mutata est moneta.
Issint. 29. Edw. 1. quant per special ordinance del Roy les Pollardes and
Crockardes fueront decrie and adnull, mesme l'ordinance fuit transmitt en cest
Realm, and enroll en l'eschecquer icy, come est trove in libro Rubro Scaccarii
hic part. 2. fol. 2. b. auxi en les annaies avantdit, est note en mesme l'an,
Numisma Pollardarum prohibetur in Anglia and Hybernia.

Et sicome le Standard des moneys fuit equal, issint les mintes and coinage en
cest Realm fuit order and govern en mesme le manner come en Engleterre, come
appiert per l'accompt del Donate and Andrewe de Sperdsholt masters del
Eschaunge al Dublin. 9. and 10. E. 1. in Archivis castri Dublin, and in libro
Rubro Scaccar. hic part. 2. fol. 1. and en Rot. Parliament. in Castro Dublin.
12. Edw. 4. cap. 60. vid. auxi ^^^sors ordinances la touchaunt le Mint and
moneys. 7. E. 4. c. (...) 16. E. 4. c. 2. 19. E. 4. c. 1. 1. R. 3. c. 7.

Mes le primer difference and inaequality enter les Standards del English
moneys, and Irish moneys, est trove en. 5. Edw. 4. Car donques fuit declare en
Parliament icy, que le Noble fait en temps. Edw. 3. R. 2. Henr. 4. Henr. 5. and
Henr. 6. serroit de cest temps en avaunt current en cest Realm, pur x. s. and
issint le demi Noble, and toutes auters coins solonque mesme le rate. vid.
Rot. Parliament. 5. Edw. 4. cap. 40. and 11. Edw. 4. cap. 6. and 15. Edw. 4.
cap. 5. in l'office del Rolls in Castro Dublin, Apres quel temps, le money
fait en Ireland, ou pur Ireland, fuit tout foits meinder in valuation que le
money de Engleterre, and le usual proportion del difference fuit le quart part
tantum, viz. le Irish shilling fuit torsque 9. d. del money del Engleterre.
vid. le Proclamation avantdit, dat. 24. Maij. 43. Eliz. enroll en le Chauncery
icy, ou la Roigne fait mention de cest difference fait per ses progenitors
enter le Standard des monyes fait pur cest Realm, and les monyes D'engleterre.
Et nota que ceo que est appell Standard del money en cest case, est mesme ceo
que est appell per le French Pied de monoy, per Bodin, Pes monetarum, quasi
Princeps ibi pedem figat aiant fix and establish le pois and purity del money
en un certain proportion, que ne serra transgress per les Monyers.

Et issint est manifest, que les Royes de Engleterre ont toutfoits ew et
exercise cest prerogative de coiner, and chaunger le form, and quant ils
trovant expedient, de enhanser and abaser le valewe de monyes, deins lour
dominions. Et cest prerogative est allow and approove non solement per le
common ley, mes auxi per les Rules del Imperial Ley. Budelius de re numaria
libr. 1. cap. 5. Princeps ad arbitrium suum, irrequisito assensu subditorum,
valorem monetae constituere potest, quia populus, quantum ad hoc, omnem
potestatem and iurisdictionem in Principem seu Imperatorem transtulisse
dicitur. Et paulo post en mesme le Chapter, coment que ascuns. D D. sont de
opinion, Principem sine assensu populi monetam mutare non posse, vncor il
conclude. Si Princeps consuevisset mutare monetam auctoritate propria, sine
consensu populi, a tempore, cuius initij memoria non existit, tunc libere
imposterum eum hoc facere posse. (...). hoc Iure paragr ductus aquae. ff. de
aqua quotidian. etc. Et Couarruuias libro de Collatione veterum numismatum,
cap. de mutatione monetae dit, Princeps potest mutare monetam ratione publicae
vtilitatis, viz. tempore belli, vel si alias vtile populo sit futurum, ita
etiam, vt ex Corio fieri possit. Et pur ceo est note per Molineum libro de
mutatione Monetae cap. 100. que le slate de Rome in le primer Punick guerre,
quant Anniball ad possess graund part de Italy, and tout lour treasoure t^^t
exhaust, enhansoit base monyes al graund valewes, pur payment de lour Armies,
and vncor le Istice de cest State fuit donques famous per tout le mounde. Mes
(...)l est magis iustum quam quod necessarium, per que appiert, que les mixed
monyes fueront fait per la Roigne Eliz. su^ ^^st and honorable cause.

4 F^it resolve, que le dit Mixed money aiant Impression and l'inscription de la
Roigne D'engleterre, and esteant proclaim pur loyal and current money deins
cest Realm de Ireland, doet es^re prise and accept pur Sterling money: and sur
consideration de cest point, le nosme and le nature de Sterling money fuit
enquire and discover. Pur le nosme de sterling, ascuns Doctors de la Ley Civil
esteant deceave pur l'erronious report del Polidor. Virgill, ont conceave, que
cest English money fuit appell Sterling, pur ceo que le form d'un stare, don't
le deminuitive est Starling fuit imprint ou stamp sur ceo. Et pur ceo
Couarruuias lib. de Collatione veterum numismatum cap. 2. Sterling (dit il) est
argenteus nummus Anglicus ex vicesima sexta part vnciae, nam viginti sex nummi
argentei sterlingi, pendebant vnciam, Auto^e Polidoro Virgilio in historia
Anglica libr. 16. Dictus autem est hic nummus, vt idem author tradit, Sterling,
quod Sturnus auis, Anglice, sterling, in altera part nummi esset impressa. A
mesme l'entent Choppinus de domanio Franc. libr. 2. tit. 7. ad cest noate.
Caeterum Errico 3. Britanniae Rege, primum percussa est nunc vsitatissima
Sterlingorum moneta, ab effigy sturni sic dicta, anno. 1249. Ceux DD. esteant
aliens, fueront come semble, misinforme per Polidor Virgill, que fuit auxi un
Alien, and hospes in nostra Respublica: mes nostre Linwood auxi (que fesoit son
gloss sur les Provincial constitutions D'engleterre, en temps Henr. 6.)
titul. de Testamentis C. item quia, verbo, Centum solidos, dit, que
Sterlingorum nomen erat argenteae monetae, and habebat similitudinem denarij
vsualis, hoc salvo, quod in vna quarta habebat effigiem avis, quae vocatur
Sturnus, Anglice sterling.

Auters ont estre d'opinion, que cest English money avoit le nosme de Sterling,
pur ceo que le primer money de cest Standard fuit coigne in le Castle de
Sterling in Scotland per le Roy Edw. 1. Mes ceo est auxi erro^ious opinion,
come est noate per Camden in Scotia page 700. on il pariant del Castle de
Sterling dit, Quod quidam monetam probam Angliae, quae sterling money, dicitur,
hinc denominatam volunt, frustra sunt, a Germanis enim, quos Angli Esterlinges
ab Orie^tali situ vocarunt, facta est appellatio, quos Johannes Rex ad argentum
in suam puritatem redigendum, primus euocauit, and eiusmodi nummi, Esterlingi,
in antiquis scripturis semper reperiuntur.

Et cest derraine opinion, sans doubt, est le melieur and plus probable, per le
Idgement de touts les bien doctes Antiquaries D'engleterre. Car en touts les
ancient statutes, queux fe^ont mention de cest money, ceo cest appell
Esterling. Come. 9. Ed. 3. cap. 2. etc. Null faux money counterfeate Esterling
ne soit emport en nostre Realm. Et eodem Anno cap. 3. Null Esterlinge maile, ne
ferlinge, soit found pur vessel, etc. Et 25. Edw. 3. cap. 13. que le money
d'Or and Argent que ore court, ne soit pas empaire en pois ne en Alloy, mes
soit mise en l'auncient estate come en l'Esterling. Et Matthew. Paris. Magn.
histor. fol. 403. ou il express le form del obligation per le Clergy del
Engleterre fait al Bankers del Pape resident en London, fait mention de cest
money per nomen Esterlingorum: noueritis nos recipisse ab A. and B. etc. centum
vncias bonorum and legalium Esterlingorum, tresdecim solidis and quatuor
sterlingis pro qualibet vncia computatis and en mesme l'Autor fol. 710. eodem
tempore, dit il, Moneta Esterlingorum propter sui materiam desiderabilem,
detestabili circumcisione coepit deteriorari and corrumpi and fol. 575.
Comitissa de Biarde venit ad Regem cum 60. militibus, ducta cupidine
Este^lingorum, quibus noverat Regem Angliae abundare, and accepit a Rege
qualibet die pro stipendio tresdecim libras Esterlingorum, etc. Et Hovenden in
Richard. 1. fol. 377. b. fait mention de cest money ^n ceux parols, Videns
igitur Galfridus Eboracensis electus, quod nisi mediante pecunia amorem Regis
fratris sui nullatenus habere possit, promisit ei tria milia librarum
sterlingorum pro amore eius habendo: and ceo fuit devant le temps del Roy John,
per que semble, que le temps quant cest money fuit primerment coigne est
incerteine. Car ascuns diont, que fuit fait per Osbright un Roy de Saxon race.
160. ans devant le Norman Conquest. Et issint, Sicut nummus dicitur a Numa que
fuit le primer Roy que fesoit monyes ^n Rome, issint sterling dicitur ab
Esterlinges, queux primes fesoent le money de cest Standard en Engleterre, per
Metonymiam, cum inuentorem pro re inuenta ponimus, vt Ceres pro frumento,
Bacchus pro vino, etc.

Et est destre observe, que les Esterlinges fueront les primer founders de les.
4. principal Cities del Ireland, viz. Dublin, Waterford, Cork, and Limrick,
and del auters maritime villes en cest Realm, and fueront le sole maintainours
de traffic and commerce, que fuit tout ousterment neglect per les Irish. Ceux
Cittyes and villes fueront desouth le protection del Roy Edgar, and Edw. le
Confessor devant le Norman Conquest. Et ceux Esterlinges en les ancient
records de cest Realm sont appell Ostmanni. Et pur ceo, quant Henr. 2. sur le
primer conquest, pensoit mieux de peopler ceux Cittyes and villes o^e English
Coloines deduce de Bristowe, and Chester, etc. il assignoit al ceux Ostmen
certain proportion de terre procheine adioynant a^ chescun des dits Cities,
quel portion est appell en les Records de ancient temps, Cantreda
Ostmannorum. Et tout ceo fuit observe sur le nosine de Sterling.

Pur le nature ou substance de cest money, primerment fuit note, que le coigne
que fuit properment appell le sterling, fuit le denier ou penny de silver, come
appiert en l'Ordinance appell Compositio mensurarum fait en temps Edw. 1. ou
est dit, quod denarius Angliae, qui nominatur sterlingus, rotundus, sine
tonsura, ponderabit triginta and duo grana in medio spicae, etc. Et chescun
auter co^gne ou piece de silver fuit measure per le sterling penny, come le
groate containoit le value de. 4. sterlinges, and le half groate le value de.
2. sterlings. 25. Edw. 3. cap. 6. and le shillinge consistoit de 12.
sterlinges, Linwood de testamentis C. Item quia, verb. Ce^tum solidos. Et le
Mark consistoit de. 13. solidis and quatuor sterlingis, come devant est
monstre, Matthew. Paris. hist. magn. page 710. and le maile fuit noate per cest
parol demi, viz. Demidia pars sterlingi, and le farthing per qua, viz. quarta
pars sterlingi. vid. un Ordinance sans date in magna Charta imprime per Totell
Anno. 1556. fol. 167. and en le vieux abridgment de Rastall, money. 52. Quia
multorum Regum temporibus provisum fuit, quod propter pauperes denarius
argenti, viz. Sterlingus diuideretur in obulum and quadrantem, ex part domini
Regis praecipitur, quod quicunque recusauerit obulum vel quadrantem debitam
habentem formam, capiatur, etc. Vid. 6. and 7 Edw. 6. Dier. en le Case de
Pollardes, ou appiert que sterlingus and denarius sont tout un, car la est dit
quod duo Pollardi currebant pro vno sterlingo, and accordant duo sterlingi
fueront pay pro vno denario, Et revera en ancient temps, chescun sort de
money, fait de les several mettalls don't money ^uit vsualment coigne, fuit
properment denarius: and pur ceo les French and Italians parlont properment, ou
ils appellont touts moneys deniers, and danari, car nummi fueront vel cuprei
vel argentei, vel aurei: singuli argentei valebant december cupreos, and sic
denari^ sont appellati, and singuli aurei valebant december argenteos, and en cest
respect ceux ^ueront auxi denarij, and le ancient proportion del Or al argent
fuit. 10. al. 1. Et cest proportion (come semble) David ad observe en le
treasure d'Or and Argent que il ad prepare pur l'erection del Temple: car le
Text dit, Chron. cap. 22. verse. 14. que il ad provide a cest purpose cent mill
talents d'Or, and dix cent mill Talents d'Argent. Issint le primer and proper
Sterling coin fuit denarius.

Et pur le substance de cest denier ou sterling penny in pondere and puritate.
Quant al pois, ceo ^uit al primes vicessima pars vnciae, viz. un ounce fuit
tallie ^n. 20. Sterling deniers, and meant plus. vid. compositio mensurarum fait
en temps. Edw. 1. in veteri libro de magna Charta fol. 113. b. Et en le vieux
Abridgement de Rastall. Tit. weights and measures. 4. ou est dit, Quod viginti
denarij faciunt vnciam, and duodecim vnciae faciunt libram. Et issint le
Sterling penny fuit le vint part del ounce tanque. 9. Edw. 3. a quel temps le
ounce del silver fuit tallie en. 26. ^ence. annals del Rob. de Avesbury. M. S.
vid. plu^ors ordinances touchant le novel sterling money, fait. 9. Edw. 3.
Rastall. money. 345. Et tiel proportion fuit continue ^anque. 2. Henr. 6. quant
le ounce del silver ^esoit. 32. pence, and ceo appi^rt per le statute de. 2. H.
6. cap. 13. Et auxi per Linwood. de testamentis cap. Item quia. verb. Centum
solidos. hic solidus (dit il) sumitur pro duodecim denarijs Anglicanis: horum
viginti sex ponderabant vnciam, cum tamen iam. 32. denarij vix faciant vnciam.
Et cest gloss fuit escrite en commencement del reign del Henr. 6. come il
mesure express en le Preface a son liver. Cest standard fuit continue iusques
al. 5. Edw. 4. and donques le ounce del silver fesoit 40. pence vid. 9. Edw. 4.
49. a. and 12. Edw. 4. cap. 60. in Rot. Parliament. Dublin, and ceo continuoit
iusques al. 36. Henr. 8. quant le Roy preparoit son journey al Bulloigne, and
and donques un ounce del silver fuit divide en 45. pence, que ne fuit alter
iusques al 2. Elizabeth, quant le ounce de pure silver fuit tallie en 60.
pence, and cest standard remain a cest iour: and issint le sterling penny que
fuit al primes vicesima pars vnciae est ore sexagessima pars vnciae, and per
consequence le ancient sterling penny containoit tant de silver, quant est
contain en le piece de trois deniers que est current a cest iour.

Et quant al purity de cest sterling money. 18. s. v. d. ob. argenti purissimi
continebatur in qualibet libra, and quaelibet libra de sterling money avoit 18.
d. ob. d'allay de Copper, and nient plus, and de cest allay de sterling money
les Ordinances ou statutes de 25. Edw. 3. cap. 13. and 2. Henr. 6. cap. 13.
font mention. Mes ceo est ^ien conus al touts Moniers, and est contain en
touts les Indentures fait enter le Roy, and les masters del Minte.

Donques, le sterling money esteant de tiel pois, and de tiel finenes, le
doubt, prima facie, fuit, coment cest Mixed Money serra dit sterling. Et pur le
clearing de cest doubt, fuit dit, que en che^run coin ou piece de money est
bonitas intrinseca, and bonitas extrinseca: Intrinseca consistit in
praeciositate materiae and pondere, viz. finenesse and weight: Extrinseca
bonitas consistit in valuatione seu denominatione, and in forma seu charectere.
Budelius de re Nummaria libr. 1. cap. 7. Et cest bonitas extrinseca que est
auxi dit aestimatio sieve valor imposititius est formalis and essentialis
bonitas monetae and cest form dat nomen and esse a le money, car sans ^iel
form le plus precious and pure metal que poet estre, nest pas money. Et pur
ceo Molineus libro de mutatione Monetae dit, non materia naturalis corporis
monetae, sed valor imposititius est forma and substantia monetae, quae non est
corpus Physicum sed artificiale come Aristotle dit Ethycorum libr. 5. Et auxi
Politicorum primo, il dit a cest effect, que money fuit primerment sign and
imprinte ove certain charecter, al intent, que le people acceptera ceo, sur
credit del Prince ou state que publish ceo, sans examination ou trial del Pois
ou Purity. Et a cest intent Molineus ad cest rule Q. 99. De Iure non refert,
sieve plus, sieve minus argenti insit, modo publica, proba, and and legitima
moneta sit. Et Baldus l. singulari, dit, in pecunia potius attenditur vsus and
cursus quam materia. Et Seneca lib. 5. de beneficijs, aes alienum habere
dicitur, and qui aureos debet, and qui corium forma publica percussum. Et fuit
dit que le Roy ad mesme le prerogative a doner valewe al base metal per son
Impression ou Charecter, come il ad a doner estimation al un mean person per
imparting le Charecter del honor a luy: Sic fiet viro quem Rex honorare
desiderat.

Et issint fuit conclude, que apres que les Esterlings per commaundment del Roy
del Engleterre, ont fait cest pure English money, que a nomine opificum fuit
appell Esterlinge ou sterling money (le standard de quel money ad estre touts
foits le plus fixed and immovable standard de money en tout le mounde, que ad
estre grand honor al nostre nation, car en touts auters Realms and states, les
Standards de lour moneys sont plus unsteady and variable) Touts moneys coigne
per l'authority del Roy D'engleterre, and aiant son Charecter and impression
non solement en Engleterre, mes auxi en Scotland and Ireland ont estre
sterlinge moneys, and issint appell, repute, and accept per toutes gents, soit
le matter de ceo mixed ou pure. Et ceo appiert per l'Ordinance que est appell
statutum de moneta magnum, per quel touts moneys sont prohibit forsque le money
del Engleterre, de Ireland, and de Escosse, que fuit properment le sterling
money. Et pur ceo Freherus libro de re Nummaria, vbi enumerat varias variarum
gentium monetas. Sterlingi, inquit, habentur in Anglia, Scotia, and Hybernia.
Et Bodin. libr. 6. de Republica. cap. 3. parlant del money de Scotland, en
Escosse, dit il, sont deux Livers fort differentes, l'un de Esterlinges,
l'autre vsagere. Et certes le usual Scottish liver est semble al French liver,
and le Liver de Esterlings current la, est celle D'engleterre. Et que base ou
Mixed Money poet estre current pur sterling, appiert per le dit Case de Pollards
Dier. 82. b. ou est dit, Quod currebat quaedam moneta in Anglia loco sterlingi
quae vocabatur Pollardes, scilicet duo Pollardi pro vno sterlingo.

5 FUit resolve, que coment que cest Mixed Money suit fait destre current deins
cest Realm de Ireland solement, vncor ceo poet estre bien dit, Current and
loyal money D'engleterre, pur. 2. causes. 1. pur ceo que cest Realm est
forsque member del Imperial Corone D'engleterre, and ceo appiert. 3. Henr. 7.
fol. 10. a. ou question fuit propound a les Istices per Hobart Attorney
general, Si quis sciens monetam ad similitudinem monetae Regis Angliae
contrafactam, talem monetam in Angliam extra Hyberniam deferat, si sit proditio
necne: and dixerunt quod Hybernia est quasi membrum Angliae, and ibidem legibus
Angliae vtuntur, and authoritate Regia faciunt monetam. Et a cest intent est
recite en le statute de faculties enact en cest Realm 28. Henr. 8. cap. 19.
That this the Kings land of Ireland is a member appendant and rightfully
belonging to the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and united to the
same. Et en l'Act de. 33. Henr. 8. cap. 1. per que le style and title del Roy
de Ireland fuit done al Henr 8. ses heirs and successors, est ouster enact que
le Roy enioyera cest style and title and touts auters Royal preheminences,
prerogatives, and dignities, As united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of
the Realm of England.

2 Est appell loyal money D'engleterre en respect del lieu de Coinage, que
fuit en Engleterre, viz. En le Tower de London. Car coment que en ancient
temps le Roy avoit plusors Mints en cest Realm, sicome il avoit en Engleterre,
vncor depuis le commencement del reign de la Roigne Elizabeth, touts les Mints
ont estre reduce al un lieu, viz. al Tower de London. Et ^eo fuit fait sur von
reason de state, pur avoider falsification des moneys. Et pur ceo, devant le
Norman Conquest, touts moneys fueront coigne en Monasteries: Car fuit presume
que en tielx measons null falsity ou corruption serroit ^rove: and ceo agree ove
le prudence del Roman state, que navoit forsque un Minte pur tout Italy: Et
ceo fuit en le Temple de Juno al Rome, que pur cest cause fuit appell Juno
moneta: and a cest intent l'Emperour Charle Maine fesoit un ley en ceux parolx
viz. De falsis monetis, quia in diuersis locis contra Iustitiam fiunt, volumus,
vt in nullo alio loco moneta, nisi in Palatio nostro, fiat. Choppinus de
Domanio Franciae, fol. 217. a. vncor en 28. Edw. 1. cest prudent Roy pur le
facility d'eschaunge, causast plusors Mintes desire establish en several
villes de Engleterre: un en le Tower de London ove 30. furnasses, auter al
Canterbury ove 8. furnasses, auter al Kingston super Hull ove. 4. furnasses,
auter al Newcastle sur Tine, ove. 2. furnasses, auter al Bristow, ove. 4.
furnasses, and auter al Excester ove. 2. furnasses. Tractat. de moneta Angliae
fait en temps Edw. 1. que ^eo trove en le Library de Sir Robert Cotton, que
fuit le liver de Seignior Burleigh iadis Graund Treasurer D'engleterre, vid.
auxi les Closerolls. 29. Edw. 1. in Turri London: and ceo appiert auxi per
l'inscription de diverse ancient Coins, sur queux sont express les nosmes des
Cytties ou fueront coined, accordant al verse fait en temps Edw. 1. and prise
per Stow horse de Robert le Brun un ancient M. S. Edward did smite round penny,
halfepenny, farthing.
and donques ensuist. On the kings side, was his head and his name written,
On the Cross side the City where it was smitten.


Et mesme cest Roy aiant establish un Mint al Dublin ove. 4. furnasses, and
aiant constitute Alexander Norman de Luik master des moneys la, come appiert
en plusors Records in Archivis Castri Dublini, apres, viz. 32. Ed. 1. quant il
avoit alter le form del coigne, (...) causast diverse stamps consistant de 2.
parts, don't l'un contenoit le Pile, and l'auter le Cross, des^re transmitt al
Treasourer de cest Realm, come est Record in libro Rubro Scacar. hic, en cest
manner Magister Gulielmus de Wimundham costos Cambiorum domini Regis in Anglia,
de praecepto venerabilis Patris Bathon. and Wellensis Episcopi, Thesaurarij
eiusdem domini Regis, misit domino Gulielmo de Esenden thesaurario in Hybernia,
viginti quatuor pecias Cuneorum, Pro moneta ibidem facienda, viz. tres pilas
cum sex crucellis pro denarijs, tres pilas cum sex crucellis pro obolis, and
duas pilas cum quatuor crucellis pro ferlingis, per Iohannem le Minor, Thomas
Dowle, and Iohannem de Shordich Clericos de societate operariorum and
monetariorum London, per ^osdem ad monetam praedictam operandam and monetandam,
and la est auxi express entry fait devant queux Tesmoignes les dits stampes
fueront deliver. Car Cuneus monetae tanquam sigillum regni custodiri debet,
come est dit en le Treatise de moneta Angliae, fait en le temps, Edw. 1.
mention devant: and le reason est, pur ceo que de counterfeater l'un and
l'auter est hault treason.

Et a cest temps fuit forsque un Minte in Ireland, cest a scavoir al Dublin:
mes long temps apres, viz. 3. Ed. 4. un Minte fuit establish al Waterford, and
auter al Trim, and auter al Gallway, Rot. Parliament. 3. Edw. 4. in Castro
Dublin. Et 12. Edw. 4. Rot. Parliament. ibidem, est ordeine que les Masters de
Minte in Ireland faieront en les Castles de Dublin, and Trim, and en ville de
Drogheda, cinque sorts de Coins, le Groate, le halfegroate, le penny,
halfepenny, farthing, per que est manifest que en temps paravant, ont estre. 5.
several Mintes in Ireland en les several villes avaunt dit. Mes touts ceux
fueront discontinew en temps Edw. 6. issint que depuis le reign de cest Roy
toutes les moneys faits pur Ireland, ont estre coigne en Engleterre, and pur
ceo cest Mixed Money coined en le Tower de London poet estre dit properment
current and loyal money D'engleterre.

6 DEtrainement fuit resolve, que coment que al temps del contract and
obligation fait en le Case avaunt dit, pure money d'Or and Argent fuit current
deins cest Realm, ou le liewe de payment fuit assign, vncor le Mixed Money
esteant establish en cest Realm devant le iour de payment, poet estre bien
tender en discharge del dit obligation, and le obligee est lie d'accepter ceo:
and ^^l ceo refuse, and targe tant que le money soit change arrere, l'obligor
nest tenus de payer auter money de melieur substance, mes suffist sil soit
touts temps prist, de payer les Mixed Moneys, solonque le rate, pur que ceux
fueront current al temps del tender. Et cest point fuit resolve, sur
consideration de 2. Circumstances, viz. le temps and le liewe de payment. Car
le temps est future, That if the said Brett shall pay or cause to be paid one
hundred pounds sterling current money, etc. Et pur ceo tiel money serra pay
que serra current a tiel future temps, issint que le temps del payment, and
nemi le temps del contract serra respect.

Auxi le future temps est entend per les parols Current money, car chose que
est pass nest in cursu. Et pur ceo tout les Doctors queur escriant de re Nun
maria agreeont en cest rule, Verba currentis monetae tempus solutionis
designant. Et a cest intent sont plusors Cases ruled in nostre livers. 6. and
7. Edw. 6. Dier. 81. b. Apres le fall and embasement des monyes. 5. Edw. 6.
Debt fuit port verse executors de Lessee pur ans, pur rent arrere pur 2. aus
finie al Mich. 2. Edw. 6. a quel temps le shillinge, que al temps del action
port, fuit decrie al vi. d. fuit current pur xii. d. en cest Case les
defendants pleadont Tender del rent al iours quant ceo fuit due, in pecijs
monetae Angliae vocat. shillinges and que chescun shilling al temps del Tender
fuit solubilis pur xii. d. Mes le plaintiff ne null auter pur lui fuit prist de
receaver ceo, etc. Et concludont, que ils ^ont vncor prist de payer les
arrerages in dictis peci^s vocat. shillinges secundam ratam praedictam, etc.
Sur cest plea coment que le plaintise demurroit, vncor il fuit content de
prender l'Argent secundam ratam praedictam, sans costs ou damages. A mesme
l'entent est le Case de Pollardes adiuge. 29. Edw. 1. and Report per Dier. 7.
Edw. 6. fol. 82. b. ou en debt sur obligacion pur payment de 24. l. al. 2.
several iours, le defendant plead que al iours limit pur payment de debt en
demand, currebat quaedam moneta quae vocabatur Pollardes loco sterlingi, etc.
Et que le defendant al primer iour de payment ad Tender le moity del debt en le
money appell Pollardes, que le plaintiff refuse, and que il est vncor prist,
etc. Et offer ceo in Court, que nest deny per le plaintiff, ideo concessum est
que il recover un moiety en Pollardes and l'auter in pure sterling money. vid.
9. Edw. 4. 49. a. Un notable case sur change de moneys, ou est dit que si home
en action de debt demand, 40. l. serraentend money que curge al temps de
brief purchase. Et la un case de temps. Ed. 1. est mise, que est direct a cest
purpose. En debt port sur fait, de 30. quarters de orge, price. 20. l. fuit
t^obe pu^ le plaintiff, and le Iry fuit charge d'enquire del price al ^emps
del, payment, and fuit dit, que al temps del payment un quarter fuit al 32. s.
Mes al temps de fesans de fait fuit for^^^ue al. (...). s. and le plaintiff
recover. 18. l. pur le blee, accordant al price que fuit al temps del payment.
Auxi a cest intent Linwood ad un notable gloss sur le constitution de Simon
Mepham libr. 3. de Testamentis, cap. Item quia. Car, ou le constitution est
tiel, Pro publicatione testamenti pauperis, cuius inuentarium bonorum non
excedit centum solidos sterlingorum, nihil penitus exigatur, il fait cest
gloss: hic solidus sumitur pro duodecim denarijs Anglicanis, etc. Sed quaero,
inquit, ille, nunquid circa hos centum solidos debeat considerari valor in
moneta iam currente, vel valor sterlingorum qui currebant tempore statuti and
la il resolve, quod vbi dispositio surgit ex statuto, vt hic, licet moneta sit
diminuta in valor, tamen debet considerari respectu monetae nouae currentis,
and non respectu antiquae. Nam mutata moneta, mutari videtur statutum, vt
scilicet intelligatur de noua, and non de veteri, vide Registr. fol. 50. a. and
54 b. ou le Roy maunde son brief destre certify de^ valewe del Esglise, les
parolx del brief sont Secundum taxationem decimae iam currentis. Et 31. Edw.
3. Fitz Annuity 28. Annuity fuit grant al I. S. tantque il f^^t promote per ie
grauntor al sufficient benefice I. S. port brief d'annuity verse le grauntor,
que plead que il ad Tender al plaintiff sufficient benefice, and la issue est
prise sur le valewe del benefice al temps del Tender.

Mes fuit dit, que coment que en contracts ceux parolx Currentis monetae,
serront refer al temps del payment, vncor en derraine volunts serront refer
ad temps conditi Testamenti, car le bequeast est en le present temps, Item I
give and bequeath, etc. Et pur ceo legacies serront pay en tiel money que fuit
current al temps del fesans del Testament, ou solonque le rate de ceo. Fuit
auxi dit, que si home ad 1000. l. pure silver en Marriage ove sa femme, and
apres ils soent divorce causa praecontractus, per que la feme recevera sa
portion, ou si home recover per erroneous Idgement 100. l. en debt, and ad
execution en pure silver money, and apres le Idgement est revers, issint que il
serra restore a tout ceo que il ad perd, coment que base money solt establsh en
le mean temps, restitution serra en tiel money que fuit current ad temps del
Marriage, and al temps del recovery. Mes ceux derraine Cases ne fueront resolve.

Et pur le circumstance de lieu, fuit resolve, que coment que le contract fuit
fait en London, vncor le lieu de payment esteant appointe in Dublin, il covient
de necessity que l'obligor feroit son tender en le Mixed Money al temps de
payment. Car tout auter money fuit and decrie fait bullion per le proclamation
avaunt dit, and cest money solement establish: issint que si l'obligee ad refuse
cest Mixed Money, il ad commit contempt pur que il serroit punish. Auxi les Idges
de la Ley ne sont tenus de prender notice del ascun money que nest current per
Proclamation. Et pur ceo, Prisott dit 34. Henr. 6. fol. 12. a. nous ne somus
apprise de 6. l. Flemish, come somus de cent Nobles. Et pur ceo en touts
contracts de Merchants, Consuetudo and statuta loci in quem est destinata
solutio, respicienda sunt, Budelius de re Nummaria lib. 2. cap. 21. Et pur ceo
fuit dit, que si a cest iour la Ley serra prise, come fuit prise en temps, Edw.
1. que sur Idgement en debt done en Engleterre, sur Testatum que le defendant
n'ad rieus en Engleterre, mes que il ad biens and terres en Ireland, brief
d'execution serra agard al Justice ou Deputy de Ireland de levier le debt la,
quel brief est trove in Registro breuium Iudicialium, fol. 43. b Le sum en
tiel Case serroit levy solonque le rate de Irish money, and nemi de English
money, and en tiel coin que serroit current en cest Realm al temps
d'execution fait.

Et accordant a cest resolution, plusors auters Cases sur mesme le point
fueront apres rule and aduidge, en les several Courts de Record al Dublin.

Hill. 5. Iacobi. En Bank le Roy.
Le Case de Tanistry.
EN eiectione firmae enter Murrough mac Brien Pl. and Cahir O Callaghan Def.
sur General issue join, le Iry trove special verdict, a cest effect, viz.
Que le Castle and terres de Drominyn, ou l'entry and eiectment est suppose
destre fait, gisont deins certain lieu, ou precinct de terre, appell
Poblicallaghan alias O callaghans country deins le cou^tie de Cork. Et de
temps don't memory ne Court, etc. o^t estre de Tenure and Nature de Tanistry. Et
que en touts les terres de Tenure and Nature de Tanistry deins Poblicallaghan
avantdit, teil Custom ad estre use and aproove, de temps don't memory ne Court,
etc. viz. Que quant ascun person morust seisie des ascuns Castles, manors,
terres, ou Tenements del Nature, and Tenure avantdit, que donques mesme les
Castles, Manors, terres, and Te^ements doent descender, and de tout temps
avantdit, ont use de descender, Seniori and dignissimo viro Sanguinis and
Cognominis de teil person, que issint morrust seis^e. Et que la File ou les
Files de teil person issint morant seisie, de touts temps avantdit, ne fueront
enheritables, de teilx terres ou Tenements, ou d'ascun part de eux.

Le Jury trove ouster, que (accordant a cest Pettigree.) Donogh mac Teige O
callaghan. Conoghor. Tieg. Donogh mac Teig. le puisne.
Eleanor. = Art Okiffe. Manus Okiffe.





Donogh mac Teig O callaghan, chief de son nosme, fuit seisie del Seigniorie
ou cheifetaineship de Poblicallaghan, and des terres avantdit, solonque le
^nstome and course del Tanistay, and issint seisie ad issue Conoghor O
callaghan. Conoghor ad issue fitz and file, viz. Teige and Eleanor, Teige ad
issue Donogh mac Teige le puisne, Eleanor esteant marry al Art Okiffe, ad
issue Manus Okiffe: Conoghor O callaghan, and Teige son fitz deviont en le vie
del Donogh mac Teige le eigne. Apres, le dit Donogh mac Teige le eigne, per
feoffinent solonque le course del common Ley, execute estate al Donogh mac
Teige he puisne, and al heirs males de son corpse, Remainder al droit heirs
del seoffor. Donogh mac Teige le eigne morust, Donogh mac Teige le puisne
morust sans issue male. Apres que mort, un auter Conoghor O callaghan est^ant
le pluis eigne and le pluis digne del sang and surnosine del O callaghan, enter
^n laterre ou etc. Et claim de tenercco come Seignior ou cheifetaine de
Poblicallaghan, solonque le course del Tanistry, and fuit de ceo seisie, prout
lex postulabat.

Est trove ouster, que le dit Conoghor, issint seisie surrender le dit terre,
and tout son estate, droit, and interest en ceo, al Roigne Elizabeth, sur que
le dit Roigne, per letters patents dat. 7. Decembris, Anno 37. de sa reign, en
cons^deration del dit surrender, regraunt la dit terre, al dit Conoghor, and
ses heirs, que enter, and enfeoffe un Fagan, que enfeoffe Brien mac Owen
lessor del plaintiff.

Et est darrainement trove, que Art Okieffe, and Eleanor sa feme deviont, and
que apres lour mort, Manus Okieffe enter, and enfeoffe Cahir O callaghan le
defendant, que enter and eiect le lessee del Brien mac Owen, and sur tout cest
matter, les Irors priont l'advise del Court, etc.

Sur que un maine question surdoit, viz. si le title del heir al common Ley,
que le defendant ad, ou le title del Tanist que estate le lessor del plaintiff
ad, serra prefer, come cest Case est. Et en le discussing de cest question 3.
principal points fueront move and argue. 1 Si le dit custom de Tanistry soit
void ou nemi en luy mesme, ou auterment abolish per le Introduction del common
ley D'engleterre. 2 Admit, que soit bon custom, and nient abolish per le
common ley, si soit discontinue and destroy per le feoffment, que create and
limitt estate tail en la terre, solonque le course del common ley, issint que
ne serra reduce al course de Tanistry, quant le estate tail est determine. 3
Si Conoghor O callaghan que enter come Tanist apres le estate tail determine,
ad gain melieur estate per son s^rrender al Roigne Elizabeth, and le regraunt
fait aluy, per letters patents.


1 QUant al primer point, fuit object per le Counsel del plaintiff, que le dit
custom de Tanistry, come est trove, est bon per les rules del common Ley. Car
3. chooses doent concur, pur fair bon custom, Antiquity, Continuance, and
Reason. Et est expressment trove, que cest custom est ancient devant temps de
memory, and continual de temps don't memory ne Court, and pur ceo si soit
reasonable auxi, ceo ad touts qualities de bon custom. Et certes, cest custom
que done la terre al pluis eigne and pluis digne home del sang and surnosme,
del cesty que morust seisie, est fort reasonable, en cest Realm, pur ceo que
il poet mieux manure la terre, and defender ceo, que un enfant ou feme. Et le
continuance de terre en le sang, and surnosme est bon reason and consideration
de raiser use, Plow. Comment. fol. 305. Baintons case, ou le dignity del heir
male est express en plusors Cases: pur que cest custom ne fault reason pur
defense de ceo, and Lit. libr. 1. fol. 17. a. mise cest rule, cestascavoir, que
en diverse Seignories and diverse Manors sont plusors and diverse customs, quant
a prender Tenements, and quant a pleader, and quant al auters chooses, and tout
ceo que nest pas encounter reason, poet bien estre admit and allow.

Et coment que cest custom serroit repugnant al rule del common ley, ceo ne
prove ceo destre unreasonable: car les customs de Borough English and de
Gavelkinde sont contrary al common ley en le point de descent de inheritance,
and vncor sont approve come reasonable customs: issint le custom del turning
le plow sur headland d'un auter, and de drier nets sur auter terre. 21. Edw.
4. 50. 8. Edw. 4. 19. Issint que feffment ove garranty fait per temant en
tail, ne serra discontinuance, ceo est contrary al rule del Ley, and vncor bon
custom. 30. Ass. p. 47. Et plusors Cases fueront mise a cest intent.

Et sicome cest custom nest void pur fault de reason, issint nest void pur
fault de certenty. Car la terre descendera al pluis eigne and pluis digne: le
pluis eigne poet estre certeinment conus, mes le pluis digne semble destre
uncertain. car que serra Idge de ceo? certes la Ley, que est tout foites
certain and infallible en sa Idgement. Et la Ley dirra, que le pluis eigne est
le pluis digne, cibien en cest Case come en auter Cases de cest nature. Et pur
ceo Litt. dit en le Case de 3. freres, si le mulnes purchase terres, and morust
saus issue, le eigne friar avera la terre per descent, pur ceo que le eigne est
pluis digne de sang: Et en le chapter de Remitter, il dit, lon home ad 2.
titles a terres and Tenements, viz. un plus ancient, and auter plus darraine,
la Ley adiudgera luy eins per force del pluis eigne title, pur ceo, que le
pluis eigne title, est le plus sure, title, and le plus digne title, vid. Plow.
Comment. 259. a. Mes admit, que l'affirmatiue part del custom, viz. que la
terre descendera al pluis eigne, and pluis digne home, etc. serroit void,
vncor le negative part del custom, viz. que les files ne serront inveritable,
cest bon: car sont plusors bon customs en le negative, enconter les express
Maxims and rules del common ley. Come que feme navera dower, ou el ad receave
part des deniers pur le sale del terre, 20. Ed. 3. Br. customs 53. Et le
custom en Kent, que le Seignior navera terre per Elcheat, The father to the
bough, and the son to the plowe. Et le custom de que Kitchen parle, fol.
149. b. que si home marry widow el navera dower. Et donque si cest part del
cu^^ome soit bon, Idgeme^t serra done encounter le defendant, pur ceo que il
derive son title del file, que est heir general al common Ley.

Et cest custom nest abolish per l'Introduction del common ley, pur diverse
reasons.

1 Pur ceo que est reasonable custom and agreeable al rules del common ley,
come devant est monstre: and sur cest reason est resolve 21. Eliz. Dier. 363.
que le custom de vill de Denbigh in Gales, que un feme covert, ovesque sa
Baron, poet alien sa terre per surrender, and examination en Court la, and ceo
liera la feme, and ses heirs come fine, nest toll per le statue de 27. Henr.
8. coment que cest act introduce le common ley en Gales, come appiert per le
title de ceo, For laws and Justice to be ministered in Wales, in like force as
in the Realm of England.

2 Com^nt que le Brehon ley que fuit le common ley del Irisbrie devant le
Conquest, soit abolish per establishment del common ley d'engleterre, que fuit
iustment fait solonque la ley del nations, nient obstant que ceo fuit un
Christian kingdom, come appiert en Caluins Case en le 7. part. de les Reports
de le Seignior Cook. 17. b. vncor les particular customs poent estoier, come
le custom de Gavelkinde in Kent, and auters customs en auter particular
liewes en Engleterre remainont apres le Norman Conquest.

3 Poet estre collect per le Idgement de Parliament 12. Elizabeth cap. 5. que
cest custom de Tanistry ne fuit toll per le common ley, pur ceo que per cest
Act, The pretended Lords, gentlemen, and freeholders of the Irishrie, and
degenerated men of English name, holding their land by Irish custom, ont per
cest Act power de surrender lour terres al Roigne, and de prender estates per
letters patentes, queux serront bon and effectual en la ley, envers touts
persons, forsque ceux, que ont estate, title, ou droit al dits terres per le
due course del common ley.

QUant al second point, fuit object quele done en tail le re^mainder al dro^t
heirs del donor, and destroy cest custom, pnr 2. reasons.

1 Pur ceo que cesty que ad terre de tenure and nature del Tanistry, and tiel
estate, que il poet alien la terre en perpetuity, mes solement pur son vie, and
son estate est qualify come l'estate del person ou prebend, issint que le fee
simple est en Abeiance.

2 Pur ceo que cest custom est enherent en la terre, and courge ove la terre,
and ne poet estre extinguish per ascun alienation, mes continue en quecunque
mains, cibien en possession del Roy, que del subject: come customs de Borough
English, and Gavelkinde. Car si terre en Borough English soit done en tail, le
puisne fitz avera formedone 11. Edw. 3. fitz. Formedone 30. 32. Edw. 3. fitz.
Age. 81. 2. Eliz. 176. b. Et si terre en Gavelkinde soit done en tail le
Remainder al droit heirs del donor, come nostre Case est, cibien le Remainder,
que le possession irra al heirs per le custom, and nemie al heirs per le
common ley, 26. Henr. 8. 4. b. 6. Edw. 6. Dier. 72. b. Et coment que soit
tenus, 37. H. 8. Brook Done and Rem. 42. que si terre en Gavelkinde, soit
less pur vie, Remainder al droit heirs de I. S. Si I. S. ad 4. fitz, and
devie, que le Remainder irra al eigne, car il est droit heir, and ceo est
nosme del purchase, vncor ceo differ de nostre Case, car le Remainder limitt al
droit heirs del donor nest forsque reversion, and le heir avera ceo per
discente. Et que le possession del Roy ne extinguish tiel custom, vid. 8.
Henr. 7. 10. 21. Edw. 3. 46. 14. Henr. 4. 2. 3.

QUant al tierce point fuit object, que Conoghor O callaghan le darraine Tanist
ad gain bone estate, per le grant de Roigne Elizabeth. Car admit que cestuy
que tient terres per le custom de Tanistry and asascun estate per le common
ley, que il poet surrender, vntor ^'Act del Parliament. 12. Eliz. cap. 5.
enable luy de surrender, and authorize le Seignior Deputy and Counsel de
fair warrantes al Chancellor, de passer letters patents a^ tiel pretended
Seignior ou freeholder del Irisbrie, and ceo ^^eant fait, est ouster enact, que
tiels letters patents, serront bon and effectual en la ley, accordant al tenor
and effect de mesme les letters patents, envers touts persons sorsque ceux, que
ont droit al dites terres, per le due course de la common ley. Donque le grant
fait al Conoghor, esteant donques pretended Seignior del Poblicallaghan,
serro^t bon and effectual, coment que il ne surrender bon estate al common
ley. Car le surrender nest que ceremony prescribed per l'act destre fait per
le Irishrie, al fine q^e serront estopp en^apres de claimer lour Irisb
cheefe^^es and exactions, ou ascun auter title forsque de south les letters
patentes. Mes le final purpose de fesors del act fuit, de setle touts les
possessions de cest Realm en ^e course del common l^y.

Auxi cest grant serra bon versus le defendant, que derive son estate del
El^anor, que fuit le droit heir del Donogh mac Teige le donor, car si le
custom continue come ils ont argue, el ne fuit enheritable, and issint and
ascun estate per la course del common ley.

MEs d'auter part, fuit respond per le Counsel del defendant, and resolve per
le Court, que le dit custom del Tanistrie fuit void en luy mesme and abolish
quant la common ley D^engleterre fuit establish. Mes admit que le custom ad
estre bon vncor le conveiance de la terre, accordant al course bon, que del
common ley, ad destroy cest custom en cest terre a touts iours: Et que le dit
Conoghor O callaghan, ad gain null estate per les letters patents dat. 37. de
la Roigne Eliz. come ceo grant est trove en le special verdict.

ET pur le primer point touchant le custom, fuit primerment dit, que custom
en l'entendment del ley, est tiel usage, que ad obtain vim legis, and est
revera un binding ley al tiel particular lieu, persons, and chooses que ^eo
concern: and tiel custom ne poet estre establish per grant del Roy. 49. Edw.
3. 3. a. ne per act de Parliament. Mes est ius non scriptum, and fait per le
people tantum de tiel lieu, ou le custom curge. Car lou le people trod ascun
act destre bon and beneficial, and apt and agreeable a lour nature and
disposition, ils vsont and practisont ceo de temps en te^ps, and issint per
frequent iteration and multiplication de cest act, custom est fait, and
esteant use de temps don't memory ne court, obtain le force d'un ley. Et
issint le rule. 44. Edw. 3. 19. est vray que null ley oblige le people, forsque
ceo, que est fait per consent del people. Car consent poet estre express
cibien facto que verbo, and ceo que est express facto, est plus fort, que ceo
que est express verbo, and ceo que est express per plusors acts, and
continual acts de mesme le kind, est custom. Et issint breefement, custom
est un reasonable act, iterated, multiplied, and continued per le people, de
temps don't memory ne Court. Et ceo est le difinition de custom, que ad le
virtue and force del ley.

2 Secondment fuit d^t, que tiel custom doet aver 4. inseparable properties,
1. doet aver reasonable commencement, 2. doet estre certain and nemi
ambiguous, 3. doet aver continuance sans interruption, de temps don't memory ne
Court, 4. doet estre submit al prerogative del Roy, and nient exalt encounter
ceo.

1 Le commencement del custom (car chescun custom ad un commencement, coment
que le memory del home ne extend aceo, come le River Nilus, ad un fountain,
coment que les Geographers ne poent trover ceo) doet estre sur reasonable
ground and cause. Car si fuit unreasonable en ^'Originall, null usage ou
continuance poet fair ceo bon. Quod ab initio non valuit, tractu temporis non
conualescet.

Mes pur distinguisher, que est unreasonable custom, and que nemi, ceux
differences sueront mise. Chescun custom nest unreasonable que est contrary
al particular rule ou Maxim del ^ositive ley: Car consuetudo ex certa causa
rationabili vsitata private communem legem, Litt. 37. b. Come les customs de
Gavelkinde, and Borough English sont encounter le Maxim de descent de
inheritance, 35. Henr. 6. 26. a. and le custom de Kent, The father to the
bough, the son to the plowe, est encounter le Maxim des Escheates, and que
lessee en tail entra, nient obstant le feoffment de son pere ove garranty, est
encounter le Maxim de discontinuance. Et issint plusors auters customs queux
sont contrary al particular rules del ley, sont uncore tenus and adi^dge
reasonable, car poent aver reasonable commencement, lou ne sont prejudicial al
commonweal, ne al present interest del ascun particular person.

Uncore custom poet estre preiuoiciall al interest de particular person, and
reasonable auxi, lou est pur le beneff^t del commonweal in general. Come
custom de fair Bulwarks sur terre d'vn auter pur le defense del Realm, 36.
Henr. 8. Dier. 60. b. and derazer measons in publico incendio. 29. Henr. 8.
Dier. 36. b. Issint de turner le plow sur le headland d'un auter, en favor de
husbandry, and de drier netts sur terre d'un auter, en favor de fishing and
maintenance de navigation, 8. Edw. 4. 18. 21. E. 4. 28. Mes custom que est
contrary al public bien, que est le scope and general end de tous leyes
(Salus populi suprema lex) ou in^urious and prejudicial al multitude, and
beneficial tantum al a^^nn particular person, teil custom est repugnant al
ley de reason, que est desuis touts positive le^es, and pur c^o ne poet aver
reasonable ou loyal commencement, mes est void ab initio and null prescription
de temps poet fair ceo bon.

Et pur ceo plusors customs queux ont estre adiudge void en nostre livers,
come esteant unreasonable, encounter common droit, ou purement encounter ley,
si lour nature and quality sont consider, serront trove injurious al multitude,
and pr^iudiciall al commonwealth, and d'aver lour commencement (pur le plus
part) pet oppression and extortion des Seigniors and graund homes. 2. Henr. 4.
24. En replevin le defenda^t avow, que la terre ou etc. est un pree, ou le
plaintiff doet aver common apres le feign fanche: mes que est teil custom deius
le Manor, que null commoner mettra eins ses avers tantque le Seignior ad mist
eins ses avers. Et la Markham dit, ceo est marvelous custom, si le Seignior ne
voet vn^ues metter eins ses avers, les commoners perdront lour common. Cest
custom la fuit ad^^dge void, ^ur ceo que ceo fuit injurious al multitude de
commoners, and beneficial tantum al Seignior de la vill. Issint per Littleton
fol. 46. Custom que le Seignior avera fine de son franktenant pur marriage de
sa file, est tenus void: and custom que le Seignior del Manor detaynera
distress pris sur les demeasnes, tantque fine soit fait a luy pur le damage a
sa volont, est auxi void issint. 3. Eliz. Dier. 199. b. custume que le Seignior
prendra pur harriot le beast d'estraunger le vant and couchant sur la terre de
Tenant: Et 21. Henr. 40. custom que le Seignior del Manor avera 3. l. pur
poundbreach chescun estraunger. Et 21. Henr. 7 20. custom que tenant serra
amerce sil ne mist ses avers en le pound del Seignior. Touts ceux customs
coment que sont beneficial al Seigniors en particular vncor pur ceo que sont
prejudicial al multitude de subjects, ou al commonwealth en general, and
commenceont per tort and v^u^pation, and ne^^ per voluntary consent del people,
pu^ ceo sont adiudge unreasonable and void en ley.

2 Custom doet estre certain. Car incerta pro nullis habentur. Et consuetudo
ex certa causa rationabili vsitata private communem legem. La. 3. des essential
qualities de bon custom sont express, viz. Certenty, reasonablenes, and usage
ou continuance. 13. Edw. 3. Fi^z. Dum fuit infra aetatem. 3. Brief de dum fuit
infra aetatem fuit port verse enfant, le Tenant plead custom, que quant enfant
est de teil age que il poet counter, xii. d. ou measure un Alne de Drape que
son feoffment serra bon. Cest custom est adiudge void pur l'incertenty. 14.
Edw. 3. Fitz Bar. 277. En trespass des arbers emportes, le def. plead custom,
que cesty des Tenants del Manor que primes vient al lieu, ou, etc. avera touts
windfalls la: cest custom est void auxi, pur l'incertenty. Et la reason
allege la est, que ceo ne gist en prescription, que gist en volunt del home,
car la volunt del home est incerteine. 42. Edw. 3. 46. en Rep. port per Priores
de Shafton, le def. avow come bailife al vicount de Dorsett, que prescribe de
tener son turn en le liew ou, etc. Et d'aver de tertenant demi mark, ou
chivall, come un reward al chescun turn. Cest prescription est tenus void pur
l'incertenty. Car est auxi dit la, que ceo gist en le volunt del donor, que est
incer^em.

Et ouster ceo, 2. reasons fueront mise pur que uncertain custom serroit void,
1. pur ceo que uncertain chose ne poet estre continue de temps don't memory ne
Court, sans interruption, 2. pur ceo que home ne poet prescriber en c^ose que
ne puissoit al commencement estre been grant 13. Hen^. 7. 16. b. mes uncertain
chose ne puissoit vnques estre vien grant, and pur ceo prescription de
uncertain chose est void anxi.

3 Custom doet aver continuance sans interruption, de temps d'ont memory ne
Court, etc. Car si foit discontinue deins temps de memory, le custom est ale:
come si Copyhold soit less pur le Seignior del Manor, pur vie ou pur ans,
accordant al course de common ley, ne serra iammais demise come Copihold
accordant al custom apres. 28. Henr. 8. Dier. 30. b. Consuetudo semel
reprobata non potest a^plius induci. Car sicome continuance fait custom,
discontinuance destroy ceo. Nihil tam conueniens est naturali aequitati, quam
vnumquodque dissolui, eo ligamine quo ligatum est.

4 Custom que se exalt sur le prerogative del Roy, ceo est void auxi envers le
Roy. Car prescription de temps fait custom, mes nullum tempus occurrit Regi.
49. Edw. 3. 3. en le Case de Whit Tawers, le custom de London de fair
Corporations est tenus void. Car le Roy so^ement poet ceo fair pur son
prerogative. 35. H. 6. 26. a. custom de London de retainer biens mise en
mortage, tantque satisfaction soit fait del money sur eux apprompt, ne extend
al Iwels del Roy. Et si home ad Toll, ou wreck, ou Stray, per prescription, ceo
ne extend al biens del Roy. Issint prescription d'aver sanctuary pur treason,
ou d'aver Catalla felonum, etc. est void verse le Roy, pur ceo que ti^l
privilege exaltat se in praerogatiuam regis. 1. Henr. 7. 23. b.

PEr ceux rules de customs en general, cest particular custom de Tanistry
fuit examine. Et primerment fuit resolve, que cest custom fuit unreasonable,
and void ab initio. Car est encounter le commonwealth, and va en destruction de
ceo tout ousterment. Car commonwealth ne poet estoier, sans certain ownorship
de terre, ou si le droit d'enheritance de les terres ne rest en nulluy.

Car si homes navoent tiel estate en lour terres, que lour issues, ou prochem
cosins de lour sang poent enherit, issint que ils scavoent en certain pur quel
person ils travaylent, and defraudont lour ames de pleasure, come Solomon dit,
ils ne violent vnques improuer lour terre a le melieur use and profitt, ne
edifier measons de ascun value, ne doner civil education a lour infants, mes
aiant respect al present temps tant solement, serront tout ousterment careless
de lour posterity. Et ceo est le very cause del Barbarism and desolation que
fuit en touts les Irish contries ou cest custom de Tanistry fuit en use.

Auxi, ceo ad estre graund cause de les continual felonies and treasons
committ per les Irish en temps paravant. Car quant ils scavoent que lour femmes
ne serro^t endowes, ne lour islues enheritable de lour terres, ils committoent
teils crimes ove, greinder audac^ty: car pur affection a lour femmes, and
enfants, hemmes plus esc^noent a fair ascun felonies, come Litt. dit 196. b.

Pur que, cest custom que lessa l'enheritance destre en Abetance, and le
freehold auxi, apres le mort de chescun tenant est, unreasonable, and va en
destruction del common wealth. Et pur ceo nostre ley (que est le melior ley de
monnde pur fair and preserver un commonwealth) coment que ceo suffer le fee
simple en ascun Case desire en Abeiance pur un peu de temps, vncor ne voet
vnques suffer ie freehold destre en suspens, mes abhor le suspension de
freehold, come natura abhorret vacuum. Et pur cest reason, si leas pur ans soit
fait, le remainder al droit heirs de I. S. le limitation de remainder est
void. Et si tenant del Roy morust sans heir, ou si donee del Roy en tail
morust sans issue, la terre immediatment e^t en possession del Roy sans office,
pur avoider cest absurdity. 9. Henr. 7. 2. b. and pur cest reason. 6. Edw. 6.
Dier. 71. Terre ne poet estre appendant al Office pur vie, mes al office
d'enheritance tantum, car si serroit appendant al office pur vie, ensuerroit
graund inconvenience, come est la dit, viz. le franktenement serroit en suspens
apres le mort del officer tantque novel officer soit fait ou create, si
l'office ne descend al un heir, ou al un home que ad perpetual succession per
le common ley. Et cest le plus apt case en la ley destre resemble al case en
question. Car per le custom de Tanistry, le plus eigne, and plus digne home ne
vient eins come heir (car heir est tout ^o^ts le plus prochein de sang) mes
come un successor uncore pur ceo que nest encorporate per le common ley, come
un person, ou prehend, 40. Edw. 3. 27. ne vient eins en course de perpetual
succession, mes come officer pur vie tantum, and per election: mes tantque
election fait, le franktenement del terre fuit en suspens, and le fee simple
and enheritance fuit touts foits en Abeiance, and issint fuit null fee simple in
actu al ascun temps, contrary al principle del common ley, que de chescun terre
il y ad fee simple Litt. 144. b.

Cest custom est auxi unreasonable pur auter reason, viz. pur ceo que cest
custom (come est trove per le special verdict) que la terre descendra Seniori
and dignissimo viro, etc. appiert plainement d'aver commencement per le
usurpation and Tyranny deceux que fuerout plus potent enter eux. Come plusors
customs, don't mention est fait devant, adiudge en nostre li^errs destre void
en ley, commenceont per oppression and extortion de Seigniors. Car le ancient
Brehon ley fuit, que teil terre irroit al plus eigne del Sept, que fuit le
very Tanist, and appell en Latin Secundus, esteant successor apparent: mes pur
ceo que le pluis eigne ne fuit tout foits le plus active, ou n'avoit le
greinder number des followers, un auter plus powerful person per faction and
fort main intrudoit sur le pluis eigne, and procuroit luy mesme destre elect
come esteant pluis digne. Et coment que cest custom ad estre use de temps don't
memory ne Court, viz. de estiet un teil oue sort pluis digne en (...) del
people, uncore ceo fuit malveyes en le commencement, and malveys en le
continuance, car fuit la cause de graund effussion de sang, and mults auters
mischeefes.

3 Auxi le negative part de cest custom est unreasonable que tout ousterment
exclude les files d'enheriter estate de fee simple. Car le Tanist, sil ad ascun
estate d'enheritance, ad fee simple, car and ascun particular estate en tail
limitt a luy and les heirs males de son corpse: and est encounter le nature de
fee simple d'excluder le heir female, si le heir male fail. Et pur ceo si
feoffment soit fait al I. S. and ses heirs, prouiso que ses files ne
enheriteront, ceo est void prouiso. Et si terre soit done al I. S. and ses
heirs males, il ad fee simple, and le heir female enheritera en default del
heir male. Et ceo fuit adiudge en Parliament en le Case de Multon, viz. que en
teil case ses Soers enheriteront, 18. Ass. p. 5. 27. Henr. 8. 27. a. 9. Henr.
6. 22. Litt. fol. 6. b.

Et pur ceo per le Statut de Rutland. 12. Edw. 1. que establish le common ley
en North Gales, ou le very Irish custom de Gavelkind fuit donques v^e, per
quel custom le vastard enheritoit ove le legitimate, and les females fueront
tout ousterment exclude d'enheriter, come en cest Case icy, fuit ordain, Quod
haereditates remaneant partibiles inter haeredes masculos, sicut esse
consueuerunt, and fiat partitio sicut fieri consueuit, hoc excepto, quod
bastardi de caetero non habeant haereditates, nec habeant propartes cum
legitimis nec sine legitimis. Et si forte haereditas aliqua extunc pro defectu
haeredis masculi, descendat ad legitimas mulieres haeredes vltimi antecessoris
sui inde seisiti, volumus de gratia nostra speciali, quod mulieres legitimae
habeant propartes suas inde sibi in Curia nostra assignandas, licet hoc fit
contra consu^tudinem Wallensicam ante vsitatam. Et cest Ordinance accord ove le
divine Ordinance en le Case de Zelaphaad, number. cap. 27.

SEcondment fuit resolve, que cest custom fuit void pur l'incertenty. Car ou
per cest custom le terre descendroit, Seniori and dignissimo viro sanguinis
and cognominis de cesty que morust sesie, 1. le person est uncertain, 2.
l'estate est uncertain.

1 Pur le person a que le terre descendroit, coment que seniori soit nosme
assets certain de prender estate, 26. Eliz. Dier. 337. a. W. Humfreston convey
terre al use de sa femme pur vie, le remainder Seniori puero de corpore ipsius
W. legitime procreato, cest limitation d'estate fuit assets certain and bon.
Car seniority consist en priority de temps, and les distinctions and periods de
temps secundum prius and posterius sont certain, and poent estre bien prove and
try. Et pur ceo le S^ignior per priority (quant al guard del corpse del heir)
serra prefer devant le Seignior per posteriority, 11. Henr. 4. 18. 21. Edw.
3. 11. Stat. de W. 2. cap. 16. Et si leas pur vie soit fait, le remainder al
cesty que primes viendra al Powles, le remainder est bon. 12. Henr. 7. 28.
issint, 14. Ed. 3. Fitz. Bar. 277. Custom que le tenant que primes vien^ra al
Bois, avera les windfalls, cest bon, car le temps de primer vener poet estre
^ien try, ou si limitation fuisloit al pluis prochein de sang, ceo ad estre
assets certain. 30. Ass. p. 47.

Mes cest parol dignissimo est cy uncertain, que ne poet estre reduce al
certenty per ascun trial ou proof. Lar le dignity de teil home gi^t en
l'opinion de multitude, que est le plus incerteine chose de mounde. Scinditur
incertum studia in contraria vulgus.


Issint que ascuns dirront, que le plus docte and scavant home est le plus
digne, ascuns que le plus valiant home, ascuns que le plus rich home, ascuns
que le plus liberal home. Et issint le multitude ne puissoit vnques agreer,
and pur ceo le plus potent home fuit toutfoits prefer, que est contrary al
touts leyes. Inde datae leges, ne fortior omnia posset.


Mes si serroit refer al Idgement de plus sage home que fuit vnques, de Idger
que est le pluis digne home deins ascun pais, il preudroit bien long temps
d'advisement en cest case.

Mes fuit dit, que la ley voet Idger de plus digne, and adiudgera le plus eigne
destre le plus digne. Certes, en cases de descent d'enheritance la ley respect
le primogeniture, birthright and le proximity and entierty de sang, mes ne done
asrun regard al worthiness and sufficiency del heir. Et pur ^^o la ley iect
enheritance cyb^en sur Ideott, ou enfant, come sur home de descretion. Pur que
cest difforence est prise en Sir Henry Neuils Case Plow. Comment. 379. b. que
un Officer pur vie, ne poet assign ouster son office, sans special parolx en
le grant, car la ley entend luy destre un officer de Trust, and chosen pur son
science, and diligence, viz. pur son worthiness. Mes officer d'enheritance poet
grant ouster son office, car la ley ne entend ^ue le grant fuit fait sur
confidence del sufficiency del officer, car poet descend al femme, al enfant,
ou al Ideott. Et pur ceo la ley ne respect dignity de person en case de ^escent
del enheritance. Lar coment que primogeniture aiant un prerogative done a ceo
per la ley de Dieu, soit prefer auxi en nostre ley, and issint le plus eigne,
soit en ascun sense le plus digne, vncor per cest custom la dignity est entend
desire un auter quality que seniority, viz. un auter virtue ou meritt en le
person que doet concur ove le seniority. Car auterment le parol seniori ad
estre sufficient, and le parol dignissimo ad estre idle, and pur ceo le person
nest plus certain en cest case, que en ie case, 11. Edw. 4. 1. b. ou done est
fait al un des enfants de I. S. ou 11. Henr. 7. 13. ou grant est fait al Is ou
In, ou, 1. Mar. Dier. 91. a. ou grant est fait de tant des arbers que poent
reasonablement estre spare. Et psusors cases de incertein graunts fueront mise:
and fuit conclude, que teil Grant seniori and dignissimo serroit void, and pur
ceo teil limitation per prescription est void auxi, solonque le rule prise, 13.
Henr. 7. 16. b.

2. L'estate est uncertain. Car chescun que ad estate d'enheri^ance, ad ceo, ou
en natural capacity, ou en politic capacity. Mes ^anist n'ad estate
d'enheritance en son natural capacity, pur ceo que le plus eigne and plus
digne nest pas heir. Car le plus digne vient eins per election, and donques
nest heir, Lar Deus solus haeredem facere potest non homo. Bracton. 62. b. and
nest trove que la terre descendroit Seniori and dignissimo vt haeredi. Mes en
Gavelkind touts les fitz sont appell heirs, libr Intrac. 143. a. ou le custom
est plead en cest Manner, viz. Quod terrae and tenementa de Tenura and Natura
de Gavelkind sunt de tempore, etc. Inter haeredes masculos partita and
partibilia, and descendere debent dict. A. B. C. vt filiis and haeredibus, etc.
Issint le pui^ne fitz en Burron of English est touts foits nosme heir.

Auxi le Tanist n'ad enheritance per succession en politic capacity, pur ceo
que nest encorporate per le common ley, come person, ou prebend, etc. Et sil
n'ad forsque estate pur vie, ceo ne poet discender. Et issint il ad null estate
d'enheritance de que la ley poet prender notice, and pur consequence
l'incertenty de son estate fait ceo void en ley.

TIercement fuit resolve, que cest custom fuit interrupt and destroy en cest
terre, quant Donogh mac Tieg execute estate tail de ceo solonque le course del
common Ley. Car est difference, ou custom courge ove le Seigniory, and ou ceo
courge ove le Tenancy: car ou custom courge ove le Tenancy ne serra destroy
per conveiance secundum cursum communis legis: come si fine soit levy de terre
tenus en Gauelkind, coment que soit un quaere. 6. Edw. 6. Dier. 72. 6. Si le
course d'enheritance soit alter and fait descendable al heir al common ley,
vncor fuit agree per le Court icy que le custom ne fuit alter, and issint fuit
t^nus de terre en Borough English, 2. Eliz. Dier. 179. b.

Mes cest terre en question est parcel des Demesnes del cheeftaine ou Seignior
del Poblicallaghan. (Car les terres queux ^aont ove les cheefries tantsolement,
sont de Tenure and Nature de Tanistry) and pur ceo est semble al Copyhold terre
que est parcel des demesnes del Seignior, and si le Seignior execute estate de
ceo accordant al course del common ley, le custom est ale a touts iours.
Issint est del Homage Auncesirell, que est per prescription, and continuance de
Seigniory en sang del Seignior, and del Tenancy en sang del Tenant, per un
alienation s^lement le Homage ancestrell est ale, and le garranty est destroy
and reprisall de mesme l'estate ne iammais reducera ceo. Litt. 33. b.

Auxi cest custom de Tanistry, nest enherent en la terre, come le custom de
Gauelkind, ou Borough English, mes est plustoft un personal custom que va
ove person de pluis eigne and plus digne, and pur ceo quant la terre est un
foits convey al auter person, viz. al heir al common ley, cest custom est
anient a touts iours.

4 DArrainment cest custom de Tanistry serroit void envers le Roy, come
esteant prejudicial al profitt and prerogative del Roy. Car ou touts terres
sont tenus mediatment ou immediament del Roy, per cest custom le Roy perdroit
tout le benefitt de son Seigniory paramount en cest terre, que fuit quasi in
manu mortua, don't le Roy ne puissoit vnques aver ne wardship, ne Es^heat, ne
ascun manner de service testi^^ant que il fuit Seignior de la terre. Et Litt.
31. a. dit, que serroit inconvenient, and encounter reason, que ascun serra
tenant al auter d'estate d'enheritance, and uncore le Seignior avera null manner
de service de luy. Et pur cest reason, le custom de Kent, the father to the
Bough, the son to the plough extend forsque all felony, and toll l'escheat de
common person solement, mes ne extend al Treason, ou le Roy avera l'escheat,
22. Edw. 3. Fitz. praescr. 40. issint prescription d'aver sanctuary pur Treason
est void. 1. Henr. 7. 23. Et pur ceo comment que teil Tanist navoit estate
d'enheritance per le custom, vncor sil ad estre attaint de treason, le course
d'Escheequer icy ad touts foits estre, de seisier la terre come forfeit
on'escheat al Corone, nient obstant cest custom de Tanistry.

MEs admit, que cest custom n'ad estre void en luy mesme, vncor
l'introduction and establishment del common ley D'engleterre ad abolish ceo.
Car cest custom de Tanistry ^uit le common custom del terre d'Ireland
devantle conquest, and generalment use en touts les Irish countries, en mesme
le nature and form come est ^rove icy. Et pur ceo covient de necessity estre
abolish per l'establishment d'un auter general ley en mesme le point.

Mes pur l'introduction del common ley D'engleterre en cest Realm d'Ireland,
est ascavoir, que sicome cest Island ne fuit pleinment conquer, and reduce al
subjection de la Corone D'engleterre, tout al un temps, mes 'per parcells, and
en several ages? issint la common ley D'engleterre, ne fuit communicate a
touts les inhabitants simul and semel, mes de temps en temps, and al special
persons, and famelies del Irisbrie, a queux le Roy fuit please de graunter le
benefitt and protection de ses leyes.

Car coment que l'ordinance per que la common ley D'engleterre fuit establish
en Ireland, fuit general come est, trove in Archiuis Turris London. 30. H. 3.
patent. Membr. 3. en cest form. Quia pro communi vtilitate terrae Hyberniae
and pro vnitate terrarum (note cest parol de union) prouisum est quod omnes
leges and consuetudines quae in regno Angliae tenentur, in Hybernia teneantur,
and eadem Terra ^isdem legibus subiaceat, and per easdem regatur, sicut
Johannes Rex cum illuc esset, statuit, and firmiter mandauit, ideo volumus,
quod omnia breuia de communi Iure quae currunt in Anglia, similiter current in
Hybernia sub nouo sigillo nostro, etc. in cuius rei, etc. Test me ipso apud
Woodstok, etc. Loment que cest ordinance on brief del Roy soit general, vucor
est manifest per touts les ancient Records de cest Realm, que la common ley
D'engleterre fuit solement mise en execution en cest part de Ireland, que fuit
reduce and divide en counties, and possess per les English Lolonies and nemi
en les Irish contries ou territories, que ne fueront reduce en counties,
iusques al temps de Q. Mary and Q. Elizabeth, and vncor fueronc en extent de
terre plus que 2. third parts de cest Island.

Lar le Roy John fesoit forsque 12. counties en Leymster and Mounster viz.
Dublin, Meth, Vriel, Kildare, Caterlagh, Kilkennny, Wexford, Waterford, Cork,
Kery, Limeric, lypperary. Mes les auters Provicces and territories de cest
Realm, que sont ore divide en 21. counties alarge, esteant donques enhabit,
pur le plus part, per les mere Irish, fueront horse des limitts de tout shyre
ground, pur le space de 300. ans apres le fesans de les primer 12. counties.

Et pur ceo fuit impossible que la common ley D'engleterre puissoit estre
execute en ceux contries ou territories. Lar la ley ne poet estre mise en
execution ou breue domini Regis non currit, and le brief del Roy ne poet
courger, mes ou est county, and vicount, ou auters ministers de la ley, de
server and returner les breefes del Roy.

Et pur cest cause appiert per les ancient Records, que les mere Irish
fueront horse del protection del Roy. Lar Litt. dit fol. 43. b. que la ley del
Roy, and les breefes del Roy sont chooses per queux home est protect and aid,
and issint durant le temps que home est horse del protection del Roy, il est
horse destre aid ou protect per la ley del Roy, ou per le brief del Roy. Et
que les mere Irish homes n'avoent le benefitt de la ley D'engleterre, sans
special charters del Roy d'enabler eux, ceux records ensuant, entex auters,
fueront monstre.

1. 2. E. 3. Claus. membr. 17. in Archiuis Turr. London. Rex dilecto and fideli
suo Iohanni Darcy le Neuieu Iustitiario suo Hyberniae salutem. Ex part
quorundam hominum de Hybernia nobis extitit supplicatum, vt per statutum inde
faciendum concedere velimus, quod omnes Hybernici, qui voluerint legibus
vtantur Anglicanis, ita quod necesse non habeant, super hoc, Chartas aliquas a
nobis impetrare. Nos igitur certiorari volentes, si sine alieno praeiudicio,
praemissis annuere valeamus, vobis mandamus, quod voluntatem magnatum terrae
illius, in proximo Parliamento nostro ibidem tenendo, super hoc cum diligentia
perscrutari facias, and de eo quod inde inueneritis, vna cum vestro consilio
and aduisamento, nos distinct and aperte cum celeritate, qua potestis,
certificetis, hoc breue nostrum nobis remittentes, etc.

2 Inter communia placita. 28. Edw. 3. in Archiuis Castri Dublin. Simon Neal
quaeritur de Willielmo Newlagh, de placito quare vi and armis, apud Clandalkan
in Comitatu Dublin, die lunae proxime post festum sanctae Margaretae virginis
anno regni Regis nune 28. Clausum ipsius Simonis fregit, and herbam suam ibidem
cum bestijs suis, viz. afris, vitulis, and bidentibus conculcauit and
consumpsit, contra pacem, etc. Vnde dicit quod deterioratus est, and damnum
habet ad valentiam, 20. s. and inde producit sectam, etc.

Et praedictus Willielmus modo venit, and dicit, quod praedictus Simon est
Hybernicus, and non de Quinque sanguinibus, and petit iudicium, si ipse ei
respondere teneatur.

Et praedictus Simon dicit, quod ipse est de Quinque sanguinibus, viz. de les
Oneyles de Vltonia, qui per concessionem progenitorum Domini Regis libertatibus
Anglicis gaudere debent, and vtuntur, and pro liberis hominibus reputantur, and
hoc offert verificare, etc.

Et praedictus Willielmus dicit quod ipse Simon est Hybernicus, and non est de
les Oneyles de Vltonia nec de Quinque sanguinibus, and de hoc etc. Ideo fiat
inde iurata, etc.

Qui iurati dicunt super Sacramentum suum, quod praedictus Simon est de Natione
des les Oneyles de Vltonia, and sic est de Quinque sanguinibus, etc. Et
assidunt damna ad sex denarios, ideo consideratum est quod praedictus Simon
recuperet versus praedictum Willielmum damna sua praedicta, and praedictus
Willielmus committatur Gaalae quousque, etc.

Per cest Idgement appiert, que fueront Linque principal septs ou sangues del
Irisbry, enable per grant del Roy, d'aver le benefitt del ley D'engleterre,
and appiert per un auter record queux fueront les dits Linque Septes ou langues.

3. 3. E. 2 Inter placita coram domino Iustitiario, etc. in Archiu. Turr.
Bremingham in Castro Dublin. Frater Philippus de Mo^sterworth, and frater
Richardus de Abbedley Canonici del Anthony iuxta Gloucester, Richardus Fox, and
Willielmus de Stowell attachiati fuerunt ad respondendum Willielmo o Kelly de
placito, quare, cum dominus Rex cepisset in protectionem suam specialem
praedictum Willielmum o Kelly, homines, terras, tes, redditus, and omnes
possessiones suas, inhibens omnibus and singulis, ne quis ijs inferret, vel
inferri permitteret iniuriam etc. I^dem Philippus, Richardus, Richardus, and
Gullielmus, in ipsum Willielmum o Kelly apud Duleek, vi and armis insultum
fecerunt, ac ipsum ibidem torstallauerunt, ceperunt, and imprisonauerunt, and
alia enormia ei intulerunt ad damnum, etc. and contra pacem and protectionem
domini Regis, etc.

Et praedictus Philippus, Richardus, Richardus, and Willielmus ven. and
defendunt vim and iniuriam quando, etc. and dicunt quod non tenentur praedicto
Willielmo ad hoc breue respo^dere, quia dicunt, quod praedictus Willielmus o
Kelly est Hybernicus, and non de sanguine aut progeny eorum, qui gaudeant lege
Anglicana, quoad breuia portanda, qui sunt Oneil de Vltonia, O Conoghor de
Connacia, O Prien de Thotmonia, O Molaghlin de Midia, and Mac Murghogh de
Lagenia, and petunt iudicium, etc.

Et praedictus Willielmus O Kelly dicit, quod reuera ipse est Hybernicus, sed
de progeny de Oneil de Vltonia, habens ortum suum de sexu Masculino eiusdem
progeniei, and petit instanter: iudicium and praedictus, Philippus. Richardus,
Richardus, and Willielmus dicunt, quod idem Willielmus O Kelley admitti non
debet ad dicendum quod sit de praedicta progeny de Oneil, quia si esset de
progeny illa, hoc appareret in eius cognomine, quia tunc diceretur Willielmus
Oneil, and non Willielmus O Kelley, and vnde dicunt, quod ipse non est de
progeny de Oneil, etc. Et hoc parati sunt verificare, etc. Ideo inquiratur per
patriam. Et praeceptum est vic. quod venire faciat coram, etc. a die Paschae in
15. dies vbicunque, etc. duodecim, etc. qui nec etc. per quos etc. ad
recognoscendum, etc. Idem dies datus est partibus praedictis, etc. Postea ad
diem illu^ venerunt praedicti Philippus, Richardus, Richardus, and Willielmus,
and praedictus Willielmus O Kelley, primo, secundo, tertio, and quarto die
solemniter vocatus non venit, etc.

Apres cest temps viz. anno 40. Edw. 3. en le Parliament tenus al Kilkenny
devant Ltonel Duke de Liarence, fuit enact, que null compaternity, nurture des
enfants, ou marriage soit fait enter les Anglois, ou auters esteant a la peace
del Roy, ove les Irish, sur pain de vie and member, and coment que pur mesine
l'estatut de Kilkenny le Brehon ley, que fuit le common ley del Irisbry, soit
declare destre null ley mes un lewd custom, vncor ceo ne fuit tout oustetment
abolish enter les Irish, mes tautsolement detend and prohibit desire use enter
ceux queux fueront de English race, and les Irish fueront less alarge, destre
rule per lour barbarous customs, come devant.

Et apres le fesans de cest statut de Kilkenny, en touts auters statutes faites
en temps del several Royes, iusques al temps de Henr. 8. ou aseun mention est
fait des trobles and guerres en cest Realm, les Englois sont appell Rebels,
and les Irish sont appell Enemies.

Mes apres l'Act de 33. Henr. 8. cap. 1. per que est recite, que coment que le
Roy D'engleterre per le nosme del Seignior de Ireland, avoit tout manner de
Royal power, and Irisdiction en cest Terre, vncor pur ceo que il n'ad assume
le nosme and style del Roy, les Irish enhabitants de cest Realm navoent estre
cy obedient al Roy D'engleterre, and ses leyes come de droit it is devoent estre:
Pur que est enact, que le Roy Henr. 8. ses heirs and successors serront a
touts tours Royes de Ireland, and avoent le nosme, style, and Title de Roy de
cest Terre, ove touts honors, prerogatives, and dignities apperteinant al State
and Majesty del Roy, come unite and annex al Imperial Lrown, D'engleterre,
etc. Apres le fesans de cest Act, le dit difference de English Rebels, and
Irish Enemies, nest destre trove de Record, mes touts les mere Irish fueront de
horsenavant accept and repute subjects and liege homes a les Royes and Roynes
D'engleterre, and avoent le benefitt and protection de la ley D'engleterre,
quant ils violent vser on demander ceo.

Et al intent eve la ley D'engleterre puissoit aver un free course in and per
tout le Realm de Ireland (come est express en l'estatut de 11. Eliz. cap. 9.
fuit provide en several Parliaments, viz. 3. and 4. Phil. and Mary cap. 3. and
11. Eliz. c. 9. que commissions serront agard, de reducer en Shyres and
hu^dreds, touts les Irish countries que ne fueront Shyre ground devant: and
accordant a ced en les several governments de Thomas countee de Suffex, Sir
Henry Sidney, and Sir Io. Perrott, non solement les Irish territories en les
confines de Leymster, mes auxi les entire provinces de Conaght, and Vlster,
esteant horse de tout shyre ground devant, fueront divide and distinguish en
several counties, and hundreds, and several vicounts, Coroners, Istices de
Peace, and auters officers, and ministers de la ley D'engleterre ont estre de
temps en temps constitute en ceux counties, per several Patents and
Commissions desouth le grand Seal de Ireland: and per cest mean la common ley
ad estre communicate a touts persons, and execute per tout cest Realm per
plusors ans passees.

D'arcainment, nostre Seignior le Roy que ore est, per un special proclamation
in anno 3. de son reign, declare publish, que il ad receave touts les natives
de cest Realm en son Royal protection, etc. Per que fuit cleerment resolve,
que la common ley D'engleterre est ore establish vniversalment per tout cest
Realm d'Ireland, and que touts persons and possessions deins cest Realm doent
estre govern per les rules de cest ley, and que chescun subject enheritera son
terre en Ireland, per mesme la ley, per que le Roy en herit la Corone de
Ireland, viz. per le just and honorable ley D'engleterre. En cest manner, and
per ceux degrees, le common ley fuit introduce and establish en cest Realm.

Et qua^t al cest Terre en question, ceo gist en le cou^tie de Cork, que est
un des ancient counties fait per le Roy John, and en que le common ley
D'engleterre ad sa course pur le space de 150. ans al meins apres le Conquest.
Per que, coment que per l'incursion del Irishry le course del common ley
D'engleterre fuit interrupt and discontinew en cest county per un long space
de temps, vncor l'execution del common ley esteant revive and restore, le
custom de Tanistry and touts auters Irish customs nient agreeable al rules
del common ley, sont anients and abolish, come ils fueront sur le primer
introductio^ de la ley D'engleterre en cest cou^ty.

Et coment que cest custom de Tanistry ad estre custom d'un particular liew
tantsolement, vncor esteant repugnant a les rules del common ley, serroit
abolish per le introduction and establishme^t del common ley en cest Realm:
and nest semble al Case de Wales Dier. 21. Eliz. 363. b. on particular custom
de Denbigh continue nient obstant le statut, que establish le common ley en
Wales: car l'entent del fesors de cest statut appiert d'estre, que les customs
de Wales agreeable al ascun cu^stomes d'Engleterre serront preserve, car per
mesme l'estatute est provide, que commission issera d'examiner les Welsh
customs, and que ceux que serront trove reasonable, sur certificate des
commissioners serront allow.

Auxi cest custom ne poet estre resemble al custom de Gauelkind en Kent que
a^oit continuance apres le Norman Conquest: car le common ley D'engleterre ne
fuit introduce per le Conqueror, come ad estre observe, and prove tresdoctement
per le Seignior Cook en le Preface al tierce part de ses Reports.

FUit auxi resolve, que rien pass per le grant de la Royne Elizabeth fait al
Conoghor O Callaghan, come ceo est trove per le verdict: car le grant est fait
en consideration de son surrender, and il ne claymoit eins mes come Tanist que
ad null estate don't la common ley prist notice, and issint son entry fuit
forsque abatement apres le mort del Donogh mac Teig le piusne, per que le
Grant del Royne fait en consideration de teil estate surrendered, est void en
ley, Barwicks Case 5. part des Reports del Seiuior Cook 93. b. le Case del
Alton Woods. 1. part des Reports del Seignior Cook 43. b. 18. Eliz. Dier. 252.

Et quant al statut de 12. Eliz. cap. 5. pur accepting surrenders del Irish
Seigniors, ceo ne fait le grant von. Car rest grant ne fuit fait per force de
cest statut, ne accordant al form prescribe en cest statut. Car le statut
require diverse necessary circumstances, queux fueront omit, en le obteyning
and passing de cest grant. Car primerment, le pretended Irish Seignior doet
offer de surrender, donques cest offer doet estre advertise al Royne, and sur
ceo la Royne doet signifier sa pleasure al Deputy, ou auter chief Governor per
ses letters ou instructions desouth sa signature, que le surrender serra
accept, and grant fait al tiel pretended Seignior per letters patents. Et sur
ceo, le Deputy and gre^nder part del Counsel de cest Realm doent fair warrant
al Chauncellor d'accepter le surrender, and passer les letters patents,
accordant a tiel letter ou instructions. Ceux circumstances ne sont trove per
le verdict desire observe en le passing de cest grant, and pur ceo ne lerra
entend destre fait per force de cest statut, and per consequence ne serra fait
bon and effectual per ceo.

DArrainment, ou fuit object per un del Counsel ove le plaintiff, que la Royne
Eliz. serra dit en possession de cest terre, per virtue del primer Conquest de
Ireland, envers Donogh mac Teig O Callaghan le fe^^or, que ne puissoit deriver
ascun title al cest terre de la Corone, and pur ceo, son feoffment, per que le
def. claim, fuit void, esteant fait per intrudor sur le possession de la
Royne: fuit resolve, encounter cest objection, que la Royne Eliz. ne serra dit
en actual possession de cest terre per virtue del primer Conquest, si ne
appiert per ascun record que le primer Conqueror ad seisie cest terre al temps
d^l Conquest, and appropriate ceo particularment a luy mesme, come parcel de
ses proper demesnes.

Car les Royes D'engleterre ont toutsfoits claim, and eu deins lour Dominions,
un Monarchy Royal, and nemi un Monarchy Seigniorall ou Tyranny. Et desouth un
Monarchy Royal les subjects sout franck-homes, and ont property en lour biens,
and francktenement and enheritance en lour terres: mes desouth un Monarchy
Seigniorall ou Tyranny, ils sont touts come villeins ou esclaves, and
proprietors de rien forsque a volunt de lour Grand Seignior ou Tyrant, come en
Turkey and Moscony. Et pur ceo quant teil Monarch Royal que voet governer ses
subjects per un just and post five ley, ad fait novel Conquest d'un Realm,
coment qu ipso facto il ad le Seigniory Paramount de tou^s les terres deins
teil Realm, issint que touts les terres sont tenus de luy mediate vel
immediate, and il ad auxi le possession de touts les terres queux il voet
actualment seiser, and retainer en ses proper mains, pur son profitt ou
pleasure, and poet auxi per ses graunts distributer teil portions que luy
plerra, a ses serviteurs and gens de guerre, ou al te^^s Colonies queux il
voile planter immediatment sur le Conquest: come les ancient Romans, sur
lour conquests, out use d'appropriate le septiesme part del territory
conquered, pur plantation de lour Colonies: and les Vandalls en Italy prisoent
le tierce part: vncor Sir James Ley chief Justice disoit, que si tiel
Conqueror receave ascun de les natives on ancient enhabitants en son
protection, and avow eux pur ses subjects, and permit eux de continuer lour
possessions, and de mourir en son peace and allegeaunce, que lour heirs
serront adiudge eins per bon title sans grant ou confirmation del Conqueror,
and enioteront lour terres solonque les rules de la ley, que le Conqueror ad
allow, ou establish: sils violent submitter eux mesmes a la ley que est allow
ou establish per le Conqueror, and tener lour terres accordant al rules de
ceo, and nemi auterment. Et sur cest reason, ou William le Conqueror ad grant
al Warren un Norman de principal quality, le Castle de Shirbourne in
Northfolk, their de Shirbourne l'auntient enheritor de cest Castle, monstre al
Conqueror, que il fuit son subject and liege home, and enheritoit le dit
Castle per mesme la ley que le Conqueror ad allow and establish en Engleterre,
and pur ceo pria, que il poet tener le dit Castle en peace: le Conqueror, en
cest. Case dona Idgment put Shirbourne encounter Warren. de quel Idgment Camden
fait mention en le description de Northfolk, and Calthrop Istice disoit que il
ad vien un authentic Copy de cest Idgement en le Library de Sir Christopher
Heydon al Baconsthorp en Northfolk.

Car reuera le Norman Conqueror (coment que il fesort plus absolute and entier
conquest D'engleterre, que Henr. 2. fesoit de Ireland) vncor il ne seisist
tout, ne avoit le actual possession de touts les terres deins le Rea^me
D'engleterre vest en luy per le Conquest, mes le contrary appiert per le liver
de Domesday, que est exact description de tout le Realm, fait en temps de cest
Roy. Car per cest record est manifest, que le Conqueror avoit certain terres
en Demesne, viz. les terres queux fueront en la Main de Saint Edward and sont
la entitle, Terrae Edwardi Regis, and auters terres, queux il mesine ad seisie
sur le conquest, and sont entitle Terrae Regis sans pluts, come est note ea 49.
Edw. 3. 23. 2. Et ceux terres sont ore appell les Aunc ent demesnes del Roy, ou
le ancient demesne de la Corone D'engleterre. Fitz. N. Br. 14. Mes en cest
liver les possessions des auters Seigniors sont express and mise en certain,
cybien que les possessions del Roy, and ceux terres queux sont desouth auters
titles, come Terrae Episcopi de Excester, etc. Et touts auters terres queux
fueront en auter main, and nosines en cest liver, sont franckfee, 40. E. 3. 45.
Fitz. N. Br. 16. D.

Et pur ceo Bodin ne fuit bien inform, quant il escrit, libr. 6. de Republ.
cap. 2. que Guiliaume le Conquerant apres avoir Conqueste la Roialme
d'Angleterre, declaira tour le pais en general, and les heritages de chascun en
particulier, aluy acquis, and confisques per droit de guerre, traitant les
Anglois come ses Fermiers, etc.

Et issint est Renatus Choppinus deceave en son liver de Domanio Franciae ou il
parlant de moderation use per les ancient Romans, and Lombards en lour
conquests, Quanto iniquius, dit il Willielmus ille Britannicus, lata lege
Agraria, se omnium possessionum Dominum iactabat, vt non modo priuatorum bona
censerentur, sed quicunque in futurum possideret, grave annuum vectigal quasi
nudus fructuarius exuolueret, vt a Polidoro traditum est. Mes nostre record de
Domesday est, en cest point, de melieur credit, que touts les foreign discourses
ou Chronicles de mounde.

Auxi le Roy Edw. 1. fesoit un conquest de Dominion de Wales, and chaungeoit
lour leyes and customs, come il ad express en son Charter ou statut de
Ruthland, ou il dit, Diuina prouidentia terram Walliae cum incolis suis prius
nobis iure feodali subiectam, in proprietatis nostrae Dominium totaliter and
cum integritate conuertit, and Coronae Regni nostrae annexit, and quant a lour
leyes and customs il dit, quasdam illarum de consilio procerum regni nostri
deleuimus, quasdam permisimus, quasdam correximus, ac etiam quasdam alias
ad^ciendas and faciendas decreuimus, etc. Coment que cest Roy ad donques gain
le propriety de cest Dominion, issint que les inhabitants de ceo ont submitt
eux mesmes a son volunt de Alto and Basso, come est recite en mesme le Charter,
vncor il appiert, que il admit ceux queux voloent estre rules and govern per
le common ley D'engleterre, que il ad establish enter eux per mesme le Charter,
d'aver francktenement and enheritance en lour terres: car la il prescribe un
form de brief d'assise de nouel disseisin, de Mordancester, and de Dower,
destre port de terres en Wales ^olonque le course del common ley D'engleterre.
Vid. Bulkleyes Case Plow. Comment. 125.

Cest case dependoit en Bank le Roy per le space de 3. ou 4. ans, and fuit
argue plusors forts, and les Istices al several temps, ont deliver lour
opinions en les several points avantdit. Mes apres, Sir Humfrey Winch esteant
chief Istice, les parties, ove conge del Court, descendoent al agreement, per
que reasonable division fuit fait de cest territory enter eux, en quel division
le Castle and terre en question, enter auters, fuit allott al Cahir O Callaghan
le defendant. Et ore, preter lour mutual assurances, ils ont obtain several
graunts del Roy per virtue de commission pur strenghtning de defective titles.
Et issint cest country est bten settle. Bolton Recorder de Dublin and Io-Meade
fueront a counsel ove le plaintiff, and l'Atturney general ove le defendant.

Pascae 5. Iacobi. En Bank le Roy.
Le Case del Deane and Chap. de Fernes, sieve, De Capitulariter Congregatis.
EN eiectione firmae port per Richard Pemerton plaintiff verse John Allen def.
lur special verdict trobe, le case en substance fuit tiel.

Le Deanery de Fernes que est Donatiue per le Roy, and nemi Elective, esteant
void, la Royne Eliz. anno 20. de sa reign, done and grant cest Deauty per
letters patents al Walter Turnor Clerk, sans limitation del ascun estate, pur
vie, ou auterment.

Apres Turnor est deprive per sentence del Hugh Allen adonques Evesque de
Fernes, pur cest cause, viz. pur ceo que le dit Turnor fuit mere lay home and
nient capable de teil dignity.

Apres ceo la Royne Eliz. anno 26. de sa reign, done and grant mesine le
Deanery al un Campion durant son vie. Puis, le dit Evesque de Fernes fist lease
del Manor de Fiddert en le county de Wexford esteant parcel del temporal
possessions del dit Evesquery, al John Allen le defendant: quel lease fuit
confirm per le Deane and Chapter de Fernes, en cest manner, viz. le Chapter
adonques consistoit de 11. persons en number, viz. le Deane and 10. prebends
Turnor and Campion esteant ambideux eu plein vie, Campion fist un Gray, esteant
en mere lay home, son proctor ou substitute pur doner son assent al touts
leases and grauntes, etc. Cest proctor and 3. des Prebends tantum convenont
ensemble, and fixont le Chapter seal al Confirmation de cest lease, quel
consirmation fuit fait en le nosme del Deane and Chapter. Apres ceo, 3. auters
des Prebends al several iours, chescun aperluy, subscribont lour nosmes al dit
Confirmation. Puis, l'Evesque que feso^t le lease morust, and Thomas Ram est
fait Evesque de Fernes, que enter sur le def. and fait leas al plaintiff. Et si
le primer leas fait al defendant soit bien confirm per le Deane and Chapter,
ou soit void pur fault de bon Confirmation, fuit le question. Et fuit adiudge,
que le leas fuit void apres le mort del Evesque que fesoit ceo, pur fault de
bon Confirmation del Deane and Chapter.

Et en cest Case 3. points fueront move and debate. 1 Si le donation del Deanery
fait per la Royne Eliz. al Turnor sans limitation del ascun estate, soit void,
ou quel estate il avera. 2 Admit, que le Deanery soit bien grant al Turnor
sans limitation del estate, si le sentence de deprivation fait luy null Deane,
issint que le Deanery estcant void per ceo, le donation fait al Campion serroit
von. 3 Admit, que Campion fuit loiall Deane al temps del Confirmation fait, si
le Deane and le greinder part del Chapter ont bien confirm cest leas, ou nemi.


ET primerment fuit object per le counsel del defendant, que le grant de le
Deanery per la Royne Eliz. al Turnor sans limitation del estate, fuit void tout
ousterment pur l'incertenty del grant: car l'intent de la Royne nest express
en'certein, sil avera le Deanery pur vie, a volunt, ou auterment. Come si Roy
grant terre al IS habendum a luy and ses heirs males, sans dire, de son
corpse, le habendum ou limitation de l'estate en cest grant esteant void pur
l'incerteinty, tout le grant est tenus void a touts entents, issint que le
grauntee ne serra tenant a volunt le Roy. Alton woods Case en le 1. part des
Reports de le Seignior Cook, fol. 43. b. and 49. a. 18. Henr. 8. Br. Patents
104. le Seignior Louels Case.

Mes admit, que le grant ne fuit ousterment void, le melior estate que passa
per ceo, fuit for^que a volunt del Royne, come appiert per le liver de 17. Edw.
3. fol. 45. que est authority direct e^ le point. Car la, scire facias fuit
port verse un Deane del frank Chapel del Roy, d'a^er execution del Annuity
recover verse son predecessor: Thorp, ^ous vous diomus que le Roy per son
Charter, que cy est, a nous dona le Dean^y, and ^n la Charter nest pas termine,
coment, and come longement a tener, issint que ceo ne poet estre intend forsque
a volunt le Roy: Idgement, si le brief gi^e verse nou^. R. Th. il ne claim null
estate en certeinty, and ne dit pas cause pur que le brief ne girroit verse
luy, Idgment, and priomus execution. Tho. Si auter person face tiel fait, and
done en non certain, certum est que franektenement passa, mes quant al Roy, il
nest pas issint, car si il done terre o^ tenement per le manner, il navera
forsque a volunt.

Accordant a cest opinion de Thorp, fuit tenus pur ley in Camera Stellata 1.
Mar. Dier. 100. a. que si la Royne per sa Charter grant terre probis hominibus
villae de Islington, sans dire, habendum eijs haeredibus vel sucessoribus suis,
rendant Ren^, que ceo est bon Corporation a cest intent, mes que ils ne sont
forsque tenants a volunt del terre. Vid. 5. Edw. 4. 8. b. le Case del Garter
Roy des Heralds, ou cest office fuit grant al un sans limitation del estate,
and est tenus que il fuit Officer a volunt del Roy.

Donques si Turnor fuit Deane forsque a volunt del Royne, el ad determine sa
volunt, per sa second grant fait al Campion, pur ceo que cest second grant
fuit a comencer in praesenti: and ne besoigne de signifier le determination de
sa volunt per express parols, come est tenus, 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. Dier.
107. en le Case del Almoner, and en le Case de Alton woods cite devant fol. 50.
a. Et ceo appiert auxi per le Idgement del Parliament en l'Act de 6. Henr. 8.
cap. 15. que provide, que le second patent recitera le primer patent fait per
la Royne durante beneplacito, auterment le primer ne serroit void, come fuit
per la ley, devant le fesans del dit Act. Mes cest Act nest en force icy.

SEcondment, fuit object, que admit que le grant fait al Turnor serroit bon
durant son vie, vncor il fuit deprive per le sentence del Evesque, per que le
Deanery deveignoit void, devant le second grant fait al Campion: quel sentence
de deprivation, coment que le Deanery soit Donative per letters patents del Roy,
nest void, mes estoit en force tantque soit revers per appeal. Car un Deanery
est spiritual dignity, come (...) tenus en Goodmans Case, 10. Eliz Dier. 273.
Et l'Evesque per common entendment ad Ordinary Irisdiction sur touts
Ecclesiastical causes deins son Diocese, and coment que il ad committ contempt
en visiting le Donative del Roy, and en donant le sentence del deprivation,
come Barlow Evesque de Bath encurroit le penalty de praemunire en teil Case.
Brook. Praemunire 21. vncor la sentence nest void. Et a cest intent est le
difference prise per Parning 13. Ass. p. 2. que si home ad nosme de dignity,
and soit ouste per celuy, que ad color de luy ouster de sa dignity, come per
Ordinary, mesque ceo soit per deprivation ^ent due, la il covient suer d'aver
restitution de sa dignity, devant que il po^t suer per cest nosine, aliter est
sil soit ouste per auter. Et accordant a ceo, est l'opinion de Herle and
Scroope 8. Ass. p. 21. vid. auxi le Case de Vere and Ieffreys en le 5. part des
Reports de le Seignior Cook fol. 30. a.

TIercement fuit object, que le Confirmation fait en teil manner come est trove
per le verdict est assetts bon. Car primerment le Deane poet bien doner son
assent, and fixer le seal del Chapter per proctor ou substitute, and serra cy
avayable, come s'il ad estre personally present. Qui per alium facit, per
seipsum facere videtur. Et issint les Barons en Parliament donont lour assent
per lour Proxies. Et coment que cest very point soit fait un question 3. and 4.
Philip. and Mar. Dier. 145. b. ou Evesque ad grant fee farm de terre que il
en droit de son Evesquery, and Confirmation suit fait per Decanum and
Capitulum, absente Decano in remotis, sed praesente Praesidente Decani, quem
per simplex verbum Decanus constituit suum locum tenentem, and tradidit ei
claues suas, vna cum voce and autoritate Decani, and hoc intratur in registro
iuxta antiquam consuetudinem. Si le successor poet avoider cest grant, fuit
move coram iusticiarijs, etc. Coment que lour resolution en cest point ne
appiert, vncor appiert que fuit un ancient custom que le Deane puissoit fair
un substitute en teux cases, and si tiel custom ad estre use, les acts fait
per teil substitute serront bon and avayleable en ley, purle reason mise en ^e
Case de Corporations, en le 4. part des Reports de le S^igoior Cook fol. 77. b.

Auxi le Confirmation est assets bon, coment que les parparticular prebends,
queux fesoent le greinder part del Chapter, ont done lour assents al several
^ours. Car sicome en fesans de lour common acts ils ne sont lies al ascun lieu
certain, come a lour Chapter House, car chescun lieu en queux ils voylont
assembler pur fair lour common acts, est bon Chapter House, 21. Edw 26. 9. Edw.
4. 39. 14 Henr. 6. 16 Issint ils ne sout lies al ascun Temps certain pur doner
^our consents. Mes si lour consent appiert pre teil demonstration que la ley
require, cest sufficient. Et quel demonstration est ceo? certes, le fixing de
lour Common seal. 14. Henr. 6. 17. a. car la est dit, que le fixing del seal
monstre lour agreement, and la Paston dit, coment poet lour assent estre mieux
prove, que per ^ensealer de lour common Seal. vid. 4. Edw. 2. fitz. obligation
16. Et coment que ils expressont lour assents al several iours, per pa^ol, ou
signature, vncor le sixing del Seal unite les several assents, and fait un
joint assent de touts.

Et le fait d'un Corporation ne besoigne delivery, come le fait d'un natural
person, mes l'apposition del common Seal, done perfection a ceo solement. Auxi
en plusors Cases assent apres un act fait, ^onera force a ceo, come Atturnament
done force al grant de reversion fait devant, and si disseisin soit fait al
use de IS son agreement apres, faira luy disseisor, sicome il ad estre present
al temps del committing de le disseisin. 37. Ass. p. 8. 38. Ass. p. 9.

MEs d'auter part, fuit respond per le Counsel del plaintiff, and resolve per
le Court, primerment, que le done ou grant de le Deanery de Fernes fait per la
Royne Eliz. al Turnor sans limitation d'ascun estate en ceo, fuit bon, and que
il ad cy large estate en cest Deaury per cest grant, come ascun Deane que est
Elective poet aver en son Deanery que il ad per election.

Et pur clearing de cest point 3 diversities fueront prise: un surdant sur le
difference des persons queux sont grauntors, auter, horse del diverse quality des
chooses granted, and le tierce del different capacities en queux des grauntees
poent prender les thoses.

1 Pur le primer difference: si common person grant rent, ou auter chose que
gist en grant tantum, sans limitation del ascun estate, per delivery del fait
tantum francktenement passa 17. Edw 3. 45. a. Et le reason est, pur ceo que le
grant del common person serra prise plus fort envers le graunter 7. Ass. p. 1.
Mes si le Roy grant rent ou terre sans limitation del ascun estate, le grant
est meerement void pur l'incerteinty, and le grauntee ne serra tenant a volunt
al Roy, come est rule en le Case de Altonwoods cite devant: and la reason est,
pur ceo que le grant del Roy serra pris plus fort pur son benefitt and
advantage, and si poet estre prise a double intent: serra adiudge void pur le
doubtfulnes de ceo. Et cest diversity surd sur le difference des persons queux
sont grauntors.

2 Le difference que result horse de diverse quality des chooses granted, est
tiel.

Si le chose grant soit de teil nature, issint que diverse estates poent estre
limitt de ceo, come de terre, Seigniory, rent, and huiusmodi, si le Roy en son
grant de tiel chose no limitt ascun certain estate al grauntee, rien passer^
per cest grant, mes serra adiudge meerement void pur l'incerteinty, come est
monstre devant: Mes si le chose granted soit tiel don't diverse estates ne poent
estre limited, mes un estate tantum est incident a ceo, que la ley limitt, sans
ascun limitation fait per le grauntor, de teil chose le grant del Roy ne poet
estre doubtful, ou uncertain, le Roy ne poet estre deceave, ne poet err, car
Error est in biuio, and null error poet estre, ou est forsque un voy destre
prise.

Mes quel chose est ceo a que un estate tantum est incident per la ley, and de
que diverse estates ne poent estre limitt? Certes, ceo est un office. Mes quel
office? Certes, tiel office, que per la ley courge en perpetual succession,
and nemi en course de descent, and don't l'Officer est toutsfoits corpse
politic: and de cest nature, sont touts offices Ecclesiastical, Grendons
Case Plow. Commen. 497. a. Cat de diverse secular offices several estates poent
el^ce lunict, come des offices de Constable D'engleterre, Marshall, Uicount,
Gardeyn del Fleet, etc. queux poent estre grant, en fee, en tail, pur vie, ou
a volunt. Et la reason est, pur ceo que teilr temporal Officers ont lour
offices en lour natural capacities, and le Roy en policy poet suppresser, and
reviver ceux offices pro loco and tempore, and per consequence poet limitt
temporary estates en iceux.

Mes Ecclesiastical offices come Evesquery, Deanery, Rectory, queux sont
institute pur le government de la Saint Esglise, besoigne destre continue en
course de perpetual succession, vsque ad finem saeculi: Et pur ceo null home
poet prender teil office en son natural capacity, mes chescun tell
Ecclesiastical Officer est corpse politic ipso facto, come Person est
encorporate per le common ley 40. Edw. 3. 27. Et issint est Evesque, and Deane,
etc. and touts ceux ont lour offices en politic capacity, and en course de
succession, and ceux sont les offices do^t la ley determine un estate certain,
and don't diversity des estates ne poet estre limitt.

3 Et issint le tierce difference appiert. viz. ceo que surd horse del diverse
capacities des Grauntees. Car grauntee del temporal office, come del office de
Constable, ou Marshall, poet prender ceo en son natural capacity, and son heir
po tprender ceo en course de descent, si estate d'enheritance soit limitt be
ceo, mes grauntee de spiritual office, viz. d'Evesquery, ou Deanery, etc. ne
poet ceo prender en natural capacity, ne en course de descent, mes en
politic capacity, and en course be succession solement, car auter estate il
ne poet aver en ceo, ne autir estate poet estre limitt de ceo. Evesque ne poet
aver estate a volunt, pur ans, ou pur vie, ou en tail en son Evesquery, ne
Deane poet aver ascun tiel particular estate en son Deanery, mes ils ont estate
en fee al meins: mes ceo nest a eux and lour heirs, mes solement a eux and
lour successors.

Pur cest reason, quant le Roy grant and done Evesquery (car touts Evesqueryes
en cest Realm sont done and grant per letters patents per l'estatut de 2.
Eliz. cap. 14.) ne besoigne ascun limitation del estate en le donation, nient
plus que en l'investiture per Annulum and Baculum fait perles ancient Royes
D'engleterre devant le Norman Conquest, and apres. Car le Roy John fuit le
primer Roy que per son Charter Dat. 15. Iannuary anno 16. de son reign
grauntoit power and liberty al touts Esglises Cathedral and Conventuall en
Engleterre de fair Canonical election delour Prelates, petita prius de luy ses
heirs, and successors licentia eligendi, etc. quel Charter est trove en Matthew.
Paris. histor. magn. fol. 253.

Mes ou le Roy a cest iour en cest Realm, done and grant Evesquery ou Deanery
per ses letters patents, la ne besoigne ascun limitation del estate, car la let
ad limitt l'estate devant, come en assignement de Dower al widow del Roy null
estate est limitt, N. Br. 263. c. Car la ley create sa estate devant. Issint
sur Presentation, Institution, ou Induction del person al Rectory est null
limitation del estate que le person auera en le Rectory, vncor la ley done a
luy fee in iure Ecclesiae.

Et sicome en grant del Deanery fait per le Roy, ne besoigne d'aver ascun
limitation del estate, issint si particular estate serroit limitt, come pur
vie, ou pur ans, ceo serroit repugnant and contradictory al grant. Car le
Deanene poet prender le Deanrymes a luy and ses successors que est estate en
fee, and pur ceo tiel limitation serroit void. Come si feoffment soit fait al
IS and ses heirs, habendum pur vie, cest habendum est void, car est contrary a
les premises 21. Henr. 8. Br. Estates 50. vid. 11. Henr. 7. 12. a. Siterre
soit grant al Mayor and Commonalty sans pluis dire, ils averont fee simple.

Auxi Deanery que est donative ne poet estre grant purans, ou a volunt tantum
pur reason d'un graund inconvenience que ensueroit. Car le francktenement des
terres qneux le Deane ad en droit del Deanery tantum serroit percest mean en
perpetual abeiance quel inconvenience la ley ne voet suffer.

Auxi Deanery ou Evesquery ne poent estre grant pur vie tantum, pur auter
inconvenie^ce, car Deane ou Evesque poe^t aver breef de droit Litt. 143. b.
quel brief ne poet estre port percestyque ad estate forsque pur vte, and pur
tell mean l'Esglise serroit dishenherit, and sans remedy, que la ley ne boet
permit.

2 QUant al second objection, viz. que Turnor fuit deprive per sentence oel
Evesque, quel sentence ne fuit vnques reverse per Appeall, and tssint le Deanery
fuit void, quant le grant fuit fait al Compion, per que Campion fuit loiall
Deane, quant le lease en question fuit confirm, fuit fortement argue per le
Counsel del plaintiff, que le sentence de deprivation fuit tout ousterment
void, and que Turnor remaynoit Deane nient obstant cest sentence.

Car cest Deanery est Donatiue per letters Patents del Roy, nient visitable per
l'Evesque, and per consequence horse de son Irisdiction, and issint le sentence
del deprivation est void, esteaut Coram non Iudice. Come Idgement de fraack see
en Court de ancient Demesne 7. Henr. 4. 17. Idgement done en le Marshalsie sur
contract fait horse del ^ierge, and ou null des parties est del hostel del Roy,
and Idgement en le Court del Admiralty, De re facta in corpore comitatus 19.
Edw. 4. 8. 20. Edw. 4. 15. Et Idgment done en le common Bank sur Appeall de
murder port la 22. Edw. 4. 33. teilx Idgments sont void ou les Idges n'ont
Irisdiction en teilx causes: per que cest sentence fuit void en cest case icy,
pur ceo que cest Deanery esteant un Donatiue del Roy est exempt and horse del
Irisdiction del Evesque.

Car l'Ordinary and rien a Medler ove un Donatiue que port passer per done de
lay Patron sans institution ou induction come est dit 8. Ass. p. 31. Et que les
Donatives del Roy sont nors del Irisdiction del Ordinary, and nient visitable
per luy, vid. 20. Edw. 3. Fitz. Excomm. 9. 16. Edw. 3. Fitz Breef. 660. 21.
Edw. 3. 60. 6. Henr. 7. 14. Cawdreyes Case in le 5. des Reports de le Setgnior
Cook fol. 15. a. Mes le visitation de touts donatives del Roy appent
properment al Seignior Chauncellor del Realm N. Br. 42. a. ou auttrment le Roy
poet fair special Commissioners a cest purpo'e 6. Henr. 4. 14. and Goodmans
Case 10. Eliz. Dier. 273 ou l'Evesque de Bath and Wells ad special Commission
agard a luy per le Roy Edw. 6. de visiter le Deane and Chapter de Wells, per
force de quel auctority Goodman fuit deprive. Mes en cest Case l'Evesque de
Fernes ad null Commission de visiter le Deane, and pur ceo coment que il ad
committ contempt envers le Royne, pur que il fuit punisbable, vncor esteant un
nullity en le sentence de Deprivation, ceo ne greevera le Deane, nient plus que
un Idgment al Common ley esteant done Coram non Iudice greevera le party verse
que tiel Idgement est done. Et le reason del Idgement en Vere and leffryes Case
semble destre un rule de cest point. Car la est tenus, que si Ordinary d'un
Diocese committ administration de biens d'un intestate que ad bona notabilia en
diverse Dioceses, teil administration est meerement void, cibien quant al biens
deins son Diocese, come aliors: pur ceo que per null mean il poet aver
Irisdiction del cause. Isint en cest case le sentence de deprivation est
meerment void, pur ceo que l'Evesque come ordinary poet per null mean aver
Irisdiction sur le donative del Roy, que est exempt de son Jurisdiction tout
ousterment per la ley.

Mes quant a cest point Ley chief Istice haesitauit, and fuit plus toft
d'opinion que le sentence de deprivation fuit effectual en ley tantque futt
reverse per appeal. Et sur Vere and Ieffreyes case il prist difference, enter
Ministerial act and Judicial act. Committall d'Administration nest que
Ministerial act, and pur ceo serra void en le Case avantdit, mes deprivation
est Judicial act que ne serra void forsque per auter Idgement sur Appeal. Auxi
ou Fitz. N. Br. 42. a. dit que prohibition serra direct al Ordinary que il ne
visitera les donatives del Roy, ceo prove que l'Ecclesiacall Court ad
Irisdiction en causes de mesme le nature, and issiut ad color de proceeder al
sentence, and si prohibition ne vient devant le sentence, ceo esloiera, tanque
soit adnul sur appeall.

MEs quant al tierce point, fuit resolve per tout le Court, que coment que
Turnor ad estre bien deprive, and Campion ad eslre loiall Deane al temps de
Confirmation fait, vncor le leas fait al def. ne fuit bien Coufirme, ne per le
Deane, ne per le gremder part del Chapter, come devoit estre per la ley, en
teil Case.

1 Primerment null Confirmation fuit fait per le Deane. Car il ad fait un
proctor que fuit mecrement estraunger al Chapter, and uient capable de tiel
procuration, and pur ceo tout que il ad fait est void, per le rule de Canon
ley, and per le rule del Common ley. Le rule del Canon ley en cest Case est.
Absens non potest demandare votum suum nisi vni de Capitulo. Instit. luris Can.
lib. 1. cap. Electionibus. Et est auter rule. Oportet quod procurator semper
institutus sit de Collegio. Et auter, Votum dari non potest per literas.

Le rule del common ley est agreeable al Canon ley en cest point. Car en le
hault Court de Parliament, come ad estre dit devant, les Barrons poent doner
lour votes per procuracy ou proxy. Mes lour proctor covient estre Barons, and
members de mesme le meason, Car es^raunger nest capable de teil proxy. Mes ou
corporation passara ascun interest, le common ley ne voet suffer que les
members del corporation doneront lour assent per proctors ou substitutes. Et
pur ceo 11. Henr. 4. fol. 64. Sur composition pur Dismes, un person grant
aunuity al Abbe de Battle, quel grant est confirm per Euesque, Deane and
Chapter esteant Patrons. Et (...) applert per le fait del Confirmetion, que le
Deane fuit absent, and ne mist le seal a ceo, mes le Chauntor fuit son
Commissary and misoit le Scale pur luy. Et la est tenus, que coment que le
Deane poet aver un President ou Commissary, per exerciser son spiritual
Irisdiction, vncor tell Commissary ne ^oet charger les possessions del Esglise.
Et issint le question move en 3. and 4. Philip. and Mar. Dier. 145. Cite
devant, est resolve per le rule de cest liver.

2 Secondment, le mayor part del Chapter nont done lour consent al ce^
Confirmation Car l'entier Chapter consistoit de 11. persons, and 3. d'eux
tantum ove le proctor del Deane fueront present quant le Seal fuit affix al
cest Confirmation. Et que le Mayor part del corporation doent cousenter al
touts acts queux lieront le corporation, est manifest auxi per rules les del
Canon and Common ley.

Le rule del Canon ley app^ert en Panormit. cap. cum in cunctis, ou est dit,
que Authoritas and potestas capituli consistit in maiori part eius and
saniori, and sic totum capitulum facere dicitur, quod facit mayor and sanior
pars. Et hoc verum est in omnibus actionibus and electionibus, praeterquam in
electione Romani Pontificis, vbi oportet quod duae parts consentiant.

Le common ley ad mesme le rule 14. Henr. 8. 29. ou est dit, que le Deane and
le mayor part del Chapter font le Corporation, and lour act est l'act del
Corporation, coment que les auters ne agreeont. Issint 21. Edw. 4. 27. est dit,
vbi mayor pars ibi tota 15. Edw. 4. 2 a. 9. Henr. 6. 32. a mesme l'entent.

Et cest difference fuit prise, viz. que en colleges and corporations le mayor
part des members doent doner lour voices in numero distincto: mes en confused
and incertein numbers, come en election de Chivalers al Parliament, ou de
Coroners ou Uerderours en le county de Court, le greinder voice ou acclamation
est sufficient, pur monstrer l'assent del greinder part des freeholders queux
font l'election. Plow. Comment. 126. a. Et sicome le mayor part del Chapter
doet consenter en fesans de cest Confirmation, and cest consent doet e^re
express per le fixing del Seal, come est tenus 14. Henr. 6. 17. Issint ils
doent ceo fair en un lieu and al un tiemps, car auterment poet estre dit
Assensus, mes nemi Consensus, ou le leas doet estre confirm cum Assensu and
Consensu del Deane and Chapter. Car sicome un corpse natural ne poet fair ascun
persect act, si soit dismember, viz. si le test soit en lieu, and les mains en
auter lieu, and sic de caeteris, issint est ^e corpse politic, les persons
queux sont members de ceo doent estre Capitulariter congregati en un lieu
certain, auterment, si ils sont scatter and disperse en several lieues, ceo
que ils font ne serra dit l'act del corporation, mes serra dit factum
singulorum. Et pur ceo Panormitan. dit, Vniuersiras vel corporatio non dicitur
aliquid facere, nisi id sit collegialiter deliberatum, etiamsi mayor pars id
faciat. Vid. 15 Edw. 4. 2. a. ou le mayor part des Moignes ont subcribe lour
nosmes al un fait del Abbe, mes ne fuit express que ceo fuit fait ove assent
and consent del covent, ceo serra dit destre fait per les particular persons
queux ont subscribe, and nemi per le corporation, and teil fait ne liera le
meason.

Uncor fuit agree, come ad estre dit devant, que le Deane and Chapter ne sont
consine a lour Chapter house, mes que ils poent assembler, and fair lour acts
aliors. Et pur ceo est tenus 21. Edw. 4. 26. que ou fait port date in domo
capitulari, averment poet estre, que cest fait fuit deliver en auter lieu. Et a
cest intent est 27. Ass. p. 23. le Case de Prior Alien. Uncor il covient que
ils s'assemblont en ascun certain lieu, and que le mayor part soit present en
cest lieu quant ils donont lour consent al ascun common Act. Et pur ceo
l'election des Coroners doet estre fait in pleno comitatu come appiert per le
brief de Coronatore eligendo? Quia nuper vnus Coronatorum in comitatu tuo diem
clausit extremum, etc. Tibi praecipimus, quod si ita sit, tunc in pleno
comitatu tuo de assensu eiusdem comitatus elegi facias, etc. vid. Registr. 177.
a.

Auxi le Consent del mayor part del Chapter doet estre done al un temps, simul
and semel, and nemi scattringly, and al several iours. Car nest Consensus si
ne soit simul. Car Consensus est voluntas multorum ad quos res pertinet, simul
iuncta. Et pur ceo Panormit. cap. cum in Ecclesia dit, si consentiant singuli,
vt singuli and non collegialiter, cum actus per communem consensum debeat
expediri, non valet. Et en institut. Iuris Canon libr. 1. cap. de electionibus
est dit en le gloss Electio quae a principio fuit nulla, quia facta a minori
part capituli, non potest conualidari per consensus particulares
superuenientes.

Agreeable a cest rule est le reason del Case mise en le Doct. and Stud. Br.
Idgments 148. que si femme suffer recovery de sa ioynture encounter le statut
de 11. Henr. 7. sans l'assent del cesty en reversion, and apres cesty en
reversion releas al recoveror per fine, cest assent vient trop tard, and ne
voet fair le recovery bon, que fuit vnforts void. Issint en cest case, quant le
fait del confirmation ad le chapter Seal fix a ceo, donques ceo fuit void pur
fault del consent del mayor part del chapter, and pur ceo per le straggling
assents de 3. auters prebends done apres, ue serra fait bon, ou fuit void
devant.

Et sur cest derrain point principalment, apres plusors arguments, le Court
donoit Idgment per le plaintiff. Et per cest Idgment l'Evesque de Fernes
recoveroit un meason pur son habitation, ou devant routs les manors and
mansions del Evesquery esteant alien perses predecessors il navoit, vbi
reclinaret caput suum. L'Atturney general and Bolton Recorder de Dublin
fueront a Counsel ove le plaintiff, and le Solicitor general, and Io. Meade
del Middle Temple ove le defendant.

Hill. 3. Iacobi.
Le Resolution des Justices touchant le Irish Custom de Gauelkind.
PRimerment est a scauoir, que les terres possess per les mere Irish deins
cest Realm, fueront divide en several Territories ou Countries: and les
enhabitants de chescun Irish country, fueront divide en several Septs ou
linages.

Secondment, en chescun Irish Territory fuit un Seignior ou Cheefetaine, and un
Tanist que fuit son successor apparent. Et de chescun Irish Sept ou lineage fuit
auxi un Chief, que fuit appell Canfinny, ou caput cognationis.

Tiercement, touts les possessions deins ceux Irish Territories (devant que le
common ley D'engleterre fuit establish per tout le Realm, come ore est)
curgeont toutfoits, ou en course de Tanistry, ou en course de Gauelkind.
Chescun Seigniory ou Cheefry ove le portion de terre que passoit ove ceo, aloit
sans partition al Tanist, que toutsfoits veignoit eins per election, ou fort
main, and nemi per descent. Mes touts les inferior Tenancies fueront partible
enter les males, en Gauelkind.

Uncor l'estate que le Seignior avoit en le Cheefry ou que les inferior Tenants
avoent en Gauelkind, ne fuit estate d'enheritance, mes un temporary, ou
transitory possession. Car sicome le prochin heir del Seignior ou cheeftain, ne
enheriteroit le Cheefry, mes le plus eigne and plus digne del Sept (come est
monstre devant en le Case de Tanistry) que soventfoits fuit remove and expel
per un auter que fuit plus ac^^ue ou fort que luy: issint les terres de nature
de Gauelkind ^e fueront partible enter les prochein heirs males del cesty que
morust se^sie, mes enter touts les males de son Sept, en cest Manner.

Le Canfinny ou chief de Sept (que fuit communement le plus ancient del Sept)
fesoit touts les partitions person discretion. Cest Canfinny, apres le mort de
chescun Tertenant que avoit competent portion de Terre, assembloit tout le
Sept, and aiant mise touts lour possessions en Hotchpotch fesoit novel
partition de tout: En quel partition il ne assignoit a les fitz de cesty que
morust, le portion que lour Pere avoit, mes il allottoit al chescun del Sept,
solonque son antiquity, le melieur ou greinder purpartie.

Ceux portions ou purparties issint esteant allott and assign, fueront
possess and enjoy accordant, tantque Nouel partition fuit fait, que al
discretion ou volunt del Canfinny puissoit estre fait sur le mort del chescun
inferior tenant. Et issint per reason de ceux frequent partitions and
removentes o^ translations des tenants del un portion al auter, touts les
possessions fueront uncertain, and ^unce^teinty des possessions fuit la very
cause que null Civil habitations fueront erected, null enclosure ou improvement
fuit fait des terres, ^n les Irish countries ou cest custom de Gauelkind fuit
en v^e, specialment en Vlster, que sembloit per tout destre un wilderness,
devant cest novel plantation fait per les English undertakers la. Et ceo fuit
le fruit de cest Irish Gauelkind.

Auxi per cest Irish cu^^ome de Gauelkind les Bastards avoent lour purparties
ove les legitimate, les femmes fueront tout ousterment exclude de Dower, and
les files ne fueront enheritables, coment que lour Pere morust sans issue male.
Issint que cest custom differoit del custom de Gauelkind en Kent en 4.
points. Car 1. per le custom de Kent le terre del nature and Ternure de
Gauelkind est partible enter les prochien heirs males tantum: and tiels
coperce^ers apres partition avoent certain estate d'enheritance en lour
purparties. 2 Les Bastards ne sont admit d'enheriter ovelment avesque les fitz
legitimate. 3 La femme de chescun terretenant en Gauelkind est endowable del
moitie. 4 Pur default des males les heirs females enheriteront. vid. Lambert
en le Peramb. de Kent. fol. 570.


Et pur ceo cest custom de Gauelkind use in Kent ad estre toutfoits allow and
approve pur ^o^ and loiall custom per la ley D'engleterre.

Mes cest Irish custom de Gauelkind fuit aggreeable en plusors de ceux points
al custom de Gauelkind que fuit en use en North Gales: quel custom fuit
reprove and reform per le statut de Rutland fait 12. Edw. 1. Car la est dit,
Quia hactenus mulieres non extiterant dotatae in Wallia, Rex concedit quod
dotentur. Et apres ceo est dit, quod aliter vsitatum est in Wallia, quam in
Anglia, quoad successionem haereditatis, eo quod haereditas partibilis est
inter haeredes masculos, and a tempore cuius non extiterit memoria, partibilis
extitit: Dominus Rex non vult, quod consuetudo illa penitus abrogetur, sed quod
haereditates remaneant partibiles inter consimiles haeredes, sicut esse
consueuerunt, hoc excepto, quod bastardi non habeant de caetero haereditates,
ac etiam quod non habeant propartes cum legitimis, n^^ sine legitimis. Etsi
forte haereditas aliqua extunc, pro defectu haeredis masculi, descendat ad
legitimas mulieres haeredes vltimi antecessoris sui inde seisiti, volumus de
gratia nostra speciali quod eodem modo mulieres legitimae habeant propartes
suas sibi inde in Curia nostra assignandas: licet hoc sit contra consuetudinem
Wallensicam ante vsitatam. vid. le statut de 34. Henr. 8. cap. 28. Rastall
Wales 32. ou le custom de Gauelkind en Wales est tout ousterment abolish, ove
diverse auters vsages semblable al auters customs des Irish.

Pur ceux reasons, and pur ceo que touts les dits Irish countries, and les
inhabitants d'yceux de horse en avaunt fueront destre govern per les rules de la
common ley D'engleterre, fuit resolve and declare per touts les Istices, que ^e
dit Irish custom de Gauelkind fuit void en ley, non solement pur
l'inconvenience and unreasonableness de ceo, mes pur ceo que fuit un mere
personal custom and ne puissoit alter le descent d'enheritance.

Et pur ceo touts les terres en ceux Irish countries serront ore adiudge be
discender accordant at course de common ley, and que les femmes serront endow,
and les files serront enheritables de ceux terres, nient obstant cest Irish
usage ou Custom.

Et ou les femmes des Irish Seigniors ou cheeftaines, clamont d'aver sole
property en certain portion de Biens durant le coverture, ove power de
disposer tiels biens fans l'assent de lour Barons. Fuit resolve and declare per
touts les Istices, que le property de teils biens serroit adiudge destre en
les Barons, and nemi en les femmes covert, come la common ley est en tiel Case.

Cest resolution des Istices, per le special order de Seignior Deputy, fuit
register enter les Acts del Counsel: mes la cest provision fuit ad a ceo, que
si ascun de les mere Irish ad possess and enjoy ascun portion de terre per
cest custom de Irish Gauelkind, devant le commencement del Reign de nostre
Seignior le Roy que ore est, que il ne serroit disturb en son possession, mes
serroit continue and establish en ceo. Mes que apres le commencement de sa
Majesty's Reign, touts tiels terres serront adiudge de discender ales heirs
per la common ley, and lerront dehors en avaunt possess and enjoy accordant.

Mich. 9. Iacobi. En le Court de Castlechamber.
Le course del Trial de Legitimation and Bastardy.
UN information fuit exhibit en le Castle Chamber envers le Evesque de K. and
C. B. and auters, queux per practice and combination enter eux, and per undue
course de proceeding, out endeavor de prover le dit C. B. que fuit tout temps
devant reputed un bastard, desire le legitimate fitz, and heir de G. B.
esquier, al deherison, and defamation, del E. B. que fuit la sole file and
heir, del dit G. B. Et sur le Dier de cest cause, le Case appieroit destre
tiel.

Environ 26. ans devant le bill exhibit, le dit G. B. ad issue le dit C. B. sur
le corpse d'un Irrois Damosel, la quel durant la vie de G. B. ne fuit repute sa
feme, mes sa concubine: and le dit C. B. pur tout le temps avantdit, fuit
solement accept, pur le natural fitz de G. B. Mes nemi pur legimate.

Apres ceo, viz. 16. ans depuis la naissance de C. B. sa Mere esteant en pleine
vie. G. B. prist al femme un dame de bonne estate and reputation, ove l'assent
de ses Am^es, and ad issue per luy la dit E. B. and morust. Apres la mort del
dit G. B. C. B. son reputed fitz, ne sa Mere, que est vncor en vie, ^e parlont
riens per le space de 9. ans, mes ore tard, ils ont practice and combine ove le
dit Evesque de K. esteant de lour consanguinity, and ove plusors auters, de
prover le legitimation del dit C. B. per un irregular, and undue course, al
intent de bastardise and desenherit le dit E. B.

Accordant a quel practice and combination l'Evesque sans ascun suit comence ou
move en ascun temporal Court del Roy, ou ascun brief direct a luy, de
certifier Bastardy ou legitimation en cest Case, and que plus est, sans ascun
^^bell exhibit en son Ecclesiastical Court touchant cest matter, de son test
demesne, privatement, and nemi conuocatis conuocandis, 9. ans apres le mort del
dit G B. prist dispositious de plusors ^esmoignes, a prover que le dit G. B.
29. ans devant ad loialment marry, and prist al feme la dit Irrois Damsel
Mere del dit C. B. Et que le dit C. B. fuit le legitimate fitz and heir del
dit G. B. Et ceux depositions issint prises, le dit Evesque causast destre
engrosse, and reduce en form de un solemn Act, and a^ant mise son signature
and Seal a cest Instrument, deliver ceo al C. B. que publish ceo, and per
color de cest Instrument ou Act, declare luy mesome, destre le fitz, and heir
legitimate del dit G. B. etc. Et pur cest practice and misdemeanor, le dit
Evesque de K. and auters fueront censure, and sur ceo ceux points fueront
resolve.

1 Coment que touts Matrimonial causes ont estre de long temps determinable en
les Ecclesiastical Courts, and sont ore properment deins le Irisdiction and
conusans del Clergy, vncor ab initio non fuit sic: car ^ibien causes de
Matrimony, que causes Testamentary, sneront Civil causes, and apperteignont al
Irisdiction de Civil Magistrate, come est bien conus al touts Civilians:
tantque les Christian Emperors and Royes, pur fair honor al Prelates del
Clergy, ont grant, ou allow al ^ux co^^sans and Irisdiction en ceux Cases.

Et pur ceo, le Roy l'engleterre, que est, and toutsfoits de droit fuit le
fountain de tout Istice and Irisdiction en touts causes, ci^ien
Ecclesiastical, que Civil, deins ses Dominions, coment que il allow les
Prelates del Esglise, de exerciser lour several Irisdictions, en ceux causes,
queur properment appierteignont a lour conusans, vncor per les rules del common
ley, il ad superintendency sur lour proceedings, ove power de direction, quant,
and coment ils proceederont, and de restraint, and correction, sils ne
proceederont duement en plusors Cases: come est manifest per les breefes de
several natures, direct al Evesques per queux le Roy command eux de certifier
Bastardie, Excommunication, Profession, accouplement en loiall Matrimony, de
admitter Clerks, de cautione admittenda, etc. Et auxi per les breefes de
Prohibition, Consultation, and Attachment sur Prohibition.

2 Fuit resolve, que le question de Bastardy, ou legitimacy, doent estre
primerment move en le temporal Court del Roy, and issue sur ceo doet estre
join la: and donques doet estre transmitt al Ecclesiastical Court, per brief
del Roy destre examine and try la: and sur ceo l'Evesque faira certificate al
Court del Roy, a quel certificate esteant fait en tiel due manner, la ley done
tiel creditt, que tout le monde serra lie and estoppe per ceo. Mes d'auter
part, si ascun Suit a prover Bastardie o^ legitimacy soit primerment comence en
l'Ecclesiasticall Court, devant que ascun question soit move de tiel matter en
le temporal Court del Roy, prohibition gist de restrain tiel suit, and si
soit accompaine ove practice and fraud, come en cest case, ceo est, un
misdemeanor p^nishable en le Starchamber.

A cest purpose, le Case de Corbett fuit mise, 22 Edw. 4. fitz. Consultation 6.
Sir Robert Corbett ad issue 2. fitz, Robert and Roger, Robert le fitz esteant
deins le age de 14. ans, prist al femme Matild, ove quel a son pleine age, il
cohabit, and cogniti and reputati sunt pro viro and vxore palam. Uncor apres,
Robert le fitz, demitt de luy la dit Matild, and viuant la dit Matild, espouse
un Lettice, and aiant issue per Lettice un fitz, morust, apres que mort Lettice
preach and declare overtment, que el fuit la loiall semme de Robert, and que
son fitz fuit mulier and legitimate. Sur que Roger le puisne fitz del Sir
Robert Corbett commence suit en le spiritual Court a reverser les espousels,
enter Lettice and Robert, and a metter Lettice al silence, etc. per que Lettice
purchase prohibition, and sur ceo Roger monstre tout cest matter and pria
consultation, que suit a luy deny, pur cest reason principalment, viz. que
l'entent del suit, en le spiritual Court, ^uit de Pastardizer le issue enter
Lettice and Robert, and de prover Roger heir al Robert, and l'Action and
Original de bastard home, ne serra primes move en le spiritual Court, mes eu
le temporal Court, etc. Et pur fair cest point plus clear, 2. Cases mise per
Bracton, libr. 5. titul. de Exceptionibus cap. 6. fueront remember.

1 B. aiant issue del corpse d'un feme enheritrix nee devant espousels, per
color de ceo claim destre tenant per le Courtesy, mes est^ant pur cest cause
bar en Assise port per luy verse A. il obtain Bull del Pape, and per authority
de ceo comence suit en Ecclesisticall Court, de prover ^on issue legitimate,
quod facere non debuit, come Bracton la dit, and pur ceo prohibition fuit grant
de staier cest suit, monstrant tout le matter, and quod praedictus B. ad
deceptionem Curiae nostrae and, ad infirmandum iudicium in Curia nostra factum,
trahit ipsum A. in placitum coram vobis, in Curia Christianitatis, authoritate
literarum domini Papae, ad praedictum puerum legitimandum, etc. Et cum non
possint iudices aliqui de legitimitate cognolcere, nisi fuerit loquela prius in
Curia nostra incepta per breue, and ibi bastardia obiecta, and postea ad Curiam
Christianita^is transmissa, vobis prohibemus, quod in placito illo vlterius non
procedatis, etc.

2 En mesme le Chapter, Bracton mist le form d'un auter prohibition, que fait
le difference avaunt mise, plus evident, Rex talibus iudicibus, etc. Ostensum
est nobis ex part A. quod cum in Curia nostra, coram iustitiarijs nostris
itenerantibus, in tali com^tatu, arraniauit quandam Assisam mortis antecessoris
versus B. de quadam terra in N. idem B. timens sibi posse oppon^ notam
bastardiae in eadem Assisa, and ante praedictum aduentum iustitiariorum, and
antequam ei bastardia opponatur in Curia nostra in dicta assisa, and antequam
fuerit per nos ordinario loci Inquisitio, de legitimate probanda, secundum
regni nostri consuetudinem, demandata, literas domini Pap^ ad vos directas
impetrauit, vt de legitimatate sua cognoscatis, and ad probationem illius,
testes admittatis, vt per hoc remaneat haereditas and successio contra
consuetudinem regni nostri, quae huc vsque obtinuit, vt approbata, and Sede
Apostolica confirmata, quod in causa successionis, and haereditatis petitione,
debet prius moueri placitum in Curia nostra, and cum ibi obiecta fuerit
bastardia, tunc deinde transmitti debet Recordum loquelae, and cognitio
bastardiae ad Curiam Christianitatis, vt ibi ad mandatum nostrum de
legitimitate inquiratur, quod quidem in hac part non est obseruatum, and cum
hoc sit manifest contra consuetudinem regni nostri, quod habita vel habenda
inter alios contentione de iure successionis, debeatis ad inquisitionem de
legitimitate procedere antequam a nobis hoc fuerit vobis demandatum, vobis
prohibemus, etc.

Per que est assets manifest, que si l'Ecclesiasticall Court proceed al
examination de Bastardy ou legitimation, sans direction del temporal Court,
serra restrain per prohibition, and si soit fraud o^ practice en tiel
proceeding, que ceo est censurable in le Starchamber, le notable Case del
Babington Chauncellor de Litchfeild, Trin. 3. Iacobi est direct President en le
point.

3 Sicome l'Ecclesiasticall Idge ne poet enquire de Bastardy ou legitimation
sans special direction ou mandement del Roy, issint quant il ad receave le
brief del Roy pur fair cest inquisition, il ne doet surcease, pur ascun
appeal ou inhibition, mes doet toutsfoits proceed tanque il ad certify la
Court del Roy: and ceo auxi appiert, en Bracton. libr. 5. cap. de Exceptiombus,
14. Cum autem iudex Ecclesiasticus inquisitionem fecerit, non erit ab ^o
appellandum, nec a petente, nec a tenente: a petente non, quia talem
iurisdictionem and talem iudicem elegit, a tenente non, quia sic posset causam
in infinitum prorrahere de iudice in iudicem, vsque ad Papam, and sic posset
Papa de laico feodo indirecte cognoscere. Mes cest point est plus manifest, per
un notable record compernant un Case de cest Realm, in Archiu. Turris claus.
8. Henr. 3 membr. 29 in dorso, en cest form. Rex Dublin Archiepiscopo
Iustitiario Hyberniae Salutem: ad ea quae vobis nuper dedimus in mandatis, vt
nobis reseriberetis, quatenus fuislet processum in causa Nicholai de la Felda,
qui contra Abbatem and Canonicos Sancti Thomae Dublimensis in Curia nostra,
coram Iustitiarijs nostris, peti^t duas carucatas terrae cum pertinentijs in
Kilredhery, per Assisam demorte antecessoris, cui etiam coram eisdem
iustitiarijs, obiecta fuit bastardia, per quod ab ipsis iustitiarijs nostris ad
vos fuit transmissum, vt in foro Ecclesiastico de Bastardia sieve legitimitate
agnosceretis: nobis per literas vestras significastis, quod cum in foro civilly,
terram praedictam peteret per literas nostras de morte antecessoris, versus
memoratos Abbatem and Canonicos, obiecta fuit ei nota bastardiae, quare in foro
eodem tunc non fuit vlterius processum: memoratus etiam Nicholaus de mandato
iustitiariorum nos^rorum, in foro Ecclesiastico coram vobis volens probare se
esse legitimum, testes produxit, and publicatis attestationibus suis, post
diutinas alterationes and disputationes, tam ex part Abbatis, quam ipsius
Nicholai, cum ad calculum diffinitiuae sententiae procedere velletis,
comparuerunt duae puellae minoris aetatis, filiae Richardi de la Felda Patris
praedicti Nicholai, and appellauerunt ne ad sententiam ferendam procederetis,
quia in hoc manifestum earum verteretur praeiudicium, eo quod alias
praecluderetur eis via pete^di haereditatem petitam, nec possit ^is subueniri
per restitutionem in integrum. Vnde de consilio virorum prudentium (vt dicitis)
appello deferentes, causam secundum quod coram nobis agitata est, domino Papae
transmisistis instructam, de quo plurimum admirantes non immerito mouemur, cum
de legitimate praedicti Nicholai per testium productiones and attestationum
publicationes plene vobis constiterit, vos propter appellationem puellarum
praedictarum, contra quas non agebatur, vel etiam de quibus nulla fiebat mentio
in Assisa memorata, nec fuerunt aliquae parts illarum in causa praedicta,
sententiam diffinitiuam, pro eo distulistis pronuntiare, and male, quia nostrum
declinantes examen, id quod per nostram determinandum esset iurisdictionem, ad
alienam transferu^t dignitatem, quod valde perniciosum esset exemplo. Cum,
etiamsi adeptus esset praedictus Nicholaus possessionem terrae praedictae, per
Assisam praedictam, beneficium petitionis haereditatis praedictis puellis plane
suppetat in Curia nostra per breue de recto, maxim cum per literas de morte
antecessoris agatur de possessione, and non de proprietate, and ex officio
nostro in casu proposito, nihil aliud ad nos pertinebat, nisi tantum de ipsius
Nicholai legitimitate probationes admittere, and ipsum cum literis nostris
testimonialibus, ad iustitiarios nostros remittere. De consilio igitur Magnatum
and fidelium nobis assistentium vobis mandamus, quatenus non obstante
appellatione praemissa, non differatis pro eo sententiare, ipsum ad
iustitiarios nostros remittentes cum literis nostris testimonialibus, vt de
loquela coram eis agitata postmodum possint secundum legem and consuetudinem
terrae nostrae Hyberniae iustitiae plenitudinem exhibere. Test H. apud
Gloucester. 19. die Nouembris, vid. auxi a cest intent 39. Edw. 3. 20. a. o^ en
brief de Dower, ne vnques accouple en total Matrimony fuit plead, and issue
sur ceo join, per que mande fuit al Evesque de certifier, que certify que il
ne poet riens fair per reason d'un inhibition que a luy vient horse del Arches,
cest return fuit tenus insufficient, car la est dit, que il ne doet surceaser
de fair le commandment del Roy pur null inhibition.

4 Darraiument fuit dit, que le verry cause and reason pur que
l'Ecclesiasticall Idge ne poet enquire de legitimation ou bastardy, devant que
il ad receave direction ou mandment horse del temporal Court del Roy, consist
^n ceo, que le Court Christian navoit vnques Irisdiction ou power de
entermedler ove temporal enheritance, direct ou indirecte. Car fuit note, que
Christ mesme re^uso^t de medler en cause de tiel nature, quand sur petition
fait a luy Luc. 12. Magister dic fratri meo, vt diuidat mecum haereditatem, il
respond. Quis me constituit iudicem, aut diuisorem super vos? Et pur ceo en le
temps del Henr. 3. quant le usurped Irisdiction del Pape fuit elevate plus
hault, que vnques devant, ou puis, en les Dominions del Roy D'engleterre, le
Pape Alexander 3. aiant grant commission al Evesques de Winton and Exon de
enquire de legitima natiuitate del Agatha Mere del un Robert de Ardenna, and si
el serroit trove legitimate, de restorer le dit Robert al possession de
certain terres, don't il fuit dispossess, esteant inform que le Roy
D'engleterre fuit graundment offend ove cest commission il revoke and
countermaund ceo en cest point del restitution de possession, conusant and
confessant que le establishment de possessions appertient al Roy, and nemi al
Eglise: quel Case est report en le Canon ley, Decretal. Antiquae collectiones
1. libr. 4 titul. qui filij su^t legitimi cap. 4. and cap. 7. en le 4. Chapter,
le commission est express, mes cap. 7. la revocation ou countermaundment
appiert en cest form. Causam quae fuit inter Fr. and R. de Ardenna, super eo
quod matter iam dicti R. dicitur non fuisse de legitimo Matrimonio nata,
experientiae nostrae commissimus terminandam verum, quia in literis nostris
inseri fecimus, vt praefatus R. possessionibus, quarum possessor extitit,
faceretis restitui, si eadem possessione spoliatus esset, nos attendentes quod
ad Regem, non ad Ecclesiam spectat, de talibus possessionibus iudicare, ne
videamur iuri and dignitatibus charissimi in Christo filij Henrici Regis
Anglorum detrahere, qui, sieut accepimus, motus est, and turbatus, quod de
possessionibus scipsimus, cum ipsorum iudicium ad se asserat pertinere, volumus
quod Regi possessionum iudicium relinquentes, de causa principali cognoseatis,
etc.

Mich. 8. Iacobi.
Le Case del Royal Piscarie de le Banne.
EN le river de le Banne en Vlster, que divide le county de Antrim, de le
county del Colrane, enviren 2. leagues de la Mer, ou le stream est nauigable,
il y ad un rich piscarie des Salmons, que fuit parceil del ancient inheritance
de la Corone, come appiert per plusors Pipe Rolls, and surveies, ou ceo est
trove en chardge come several piscarie: mes ore ceo est grant per le Roy al
City de London en fee ferme. Le profitt de cest piscarie, per le space de 200.
ans passes, fuit pris and share enter les Irish Seigniors queux ont fait
incursion, and intrusion sur les possessions del Corone in Vlster, and ont
possess per fort main les territories adioinant al dit river de le Banne,
iusques al primer an del reign del nostre Seignior le Roy que ore est.

Anno primo Iacobi, Sir Randall mac Donell ad obtain un grant a luy and ses
heirs per letters patents de le Territory del Rout, que est parcel del county
de Antrim, and Adioinant al river de le Banne, in ea part, ou le dit piscary
est, and ad tout temps estre. Per ceux letters patents le Roy grant a luy
omnia Castra, mesuagia, tofta, molendina, columbaria, gardina, hortos, pomaria,
terras. prata, pascua, pasturas, boscos, subboseos, redditus, reuersiones, and
seruitia, piscarias, piscationes, aquas, aquarum cursus, etc. Ac omnia alia
haereditamenta in vel infra dictum territorium de le Rout in comitatu Antrim,
exceptis and ex hac concessione nobis haeredibus, and successoribus nostris
reseruatis, tribus partibus piscationis fluminis de le Banne.

Et sur cest grant, Sir Randall mac Donell fait petition a le Seignior Deputy,
destre mise en quiet possession del quart part del dit piscarie, que adonques
per special ordel del Counsel Table fuit mise en sequestration. Le Seignior
Deputy esteant inform per l'Atturney del Roy, que null part de cest piscarie
passoit al Randall mac Donell per cest grant, requiroit le resolution de les
chief Idges esteant del privy Counsel en cest matter, queux sur view de
plusors Pipe-Rolls, en que cest piscarie fuit trove severallment en chardge,
come parcel del ancient enheritance de la Corone, and sur consideration ew
del dit grant fait al Sir Randall mac Donell, certifiont lour opinion and
resolution, que null part del dit piscarie passoit al dit Sir Randall mac
Donell, per les letters patents avantdit. Et en cest Case diverse points fueront
consider, and resolve.

1 Primerment, coment que le rule del Civil ley soit, que Flumina and portus
publica sunt, ideoque ius piscandi omnibus commune est in portu fluminibusque,
quel rule est trove en Bracton. libr. 2. cap. 12. Uncor per le common ley del
Engleterre home poet aver proper and several interest, cybien en un caw ou
river, come en un piscary: and pur ceo un eaw poet estre grant 11. R. 2. Plow.
Comment 154. a. Si un grant al auter aquam suam, le piscary en ceo passera,
per ceo que est enclude in ceo paroll aqua. Et N. Br. 123. quod permittat gist
de libera piscaria, en tiel form: Praecipe A. quod permittat B. habere liberam
piscariam in aqua ipsius A. in N. que monstre que A. ad interest in le eaw.
Auxi piscary gist en grant and en tenure, and per grant de ceo, le soil
passa: car 40. Edw. 3. 45. Monstraverunt gist d'un piscary, que imply, que ceo
contain terre and demesne: Car auterment distress ne poet estre prise en ceo,
come est noate Plow. Comment. 154. a. vid. 34. Ass. p. 11. grant del piscarie
en le river de Tese, al Abbe de Riuaux saluo stagno molendini. Auxi piscarie
est demaundable per praecipe. N. Br. fol. 2. c. Et assise gist de piscarie N.
Br. 179. l. Car home poet aver estate de francktenement en piscary, Fitz. Ass.
422. temps Edw. 1. en assise de nusans, le plaintiff count que per lever de
Gors, il est disturb de son piscarie: exception fuit pris al count, pur ceo que
null francktenement fuit assign, a que le piscarie fuit appendant, and la est
dit, que piscarie est francktenement per soy, per que ne besoigne de monstrer a
quel francktenement ceo est appendant. Vid. auxi fitz. Ass. 427. 12. Henr. 3.
assise de libeto tenemento, and se pleint d'un piscary, and recover. Auxi home
poet fair bailife de son piscary 11. Henr. 7. 20. a. 10. Henr. 7. 24. b. Not.
br. 88 H. vid. auxi 23. Henr. 3. Brook assise 450, and 34. Ass. p. 11. Et de
prouentu fluminum decimae solui debent. Linwood. fol. 101. (vncor Pisces non
offerebantur in templo, Thom. Aquin. 1. 2. q. 102.) and est noate per Linwood
supra, quod fluuius est perennis decursus aquarum, flumen vero proprie est ipsa
aqua. Et la gloss sur le rule del Civil ley avantdit est tiel, flumen ipsum,
nisi alueum mutet, semper in eodem loco manet, sed aqua profluens est communis,
quia non manet, sed procul fluit extra ditionem eius cuius flumen est, vt ad
mare tandem perueniat.

Secondment il yad 2. kinds de rivers: nauigable, and nient nauigable: chescun
nauigable river cy hault que le Mer flow and reflow en ceo, est flumen regale,
and le piscary de ceo est auxi piscary Royal, and appent al Roy per son
prerogative: mes en chescun auter river nient nauigable and en le piscary de
tiel river, les Tertenants ex vtraque part aquae, ont interest de common
droit. Le reason pur que le Roy ad interest en tiel nauigable river, cy hault
que le mer flow and reflow en ceo, est, pur ceo, que tiel river participate del
nature del Mer, and est dit brache del Mer tant avaunt que el flow. 22. Ass. p.
93. 8. E 2. fitz. Corone 399. Et la Mer neft solement desouth le Dominion del
Roy, come est dit 6. R* 2. fitz. protection 46. La mer est del ligeance del
Roy, come de son Corone D'engleterre: mes est auxi son proper inheritance: and
pur ceo le Roy avera le terre que est gained horse del Mer, Dier. 15. Eliz. 226.
b. 22. Ass. p. 93. Auxi le Roy avera les graund poissons del Mer, Balenas and
Sturgiones etc. queux sont pisces regales, and null subject poet eux aver sans
special grant del Roy, praerogatiu. Regis cap. 11. Stanford. 37. 38. Bracton.
lib. 3. cap. 3. 39. Ed. 3. 35. a. Et le Roy avera wild Swannes, come volatilia
regalia sur le Mer and braches de ceo. Le Case de Swannes, en le 7. part des
Reports del Seignior Cook? issint wreck del Mer est perquisit Royal 5. Cook
107. Sir Henry Counstables case: and sur cest reason, devant le Statute de 18.
E. 3. null subject puissoit passer oustre le Mer, sans special license del Roy:
mes la est enact, que la Mer soit overt a touts merchaunts. Et touts Ports and
havens, que sont ostia and ianuae regni, apperteinont al Roy, pur ceo que il
est custos totius regni: and fitz. Na. Br. 113. a. le Roy doet de droit saver
and defender son Realm, civien verse le Mer, que verse ses Enemies: and que le
Roy ad mesme le prerogative and interest en les braches del Mer, and nauigable
Rivers, cy hault que le Mer flow and reflow en eux, que il ad in alto mari, est
manifest per plusors authorities and Records.

1 Le Roy per ses letters patents fait al graund Admiral D'engleterre, grant
a luy non solement Irisdiction and power de determine maritime causes, mes
omnia bona, wauiata, Flotzon, Ietzon, and Lagan, ac omnia bona, mercimonia, and
Catalla in mari deperdita, seu extra mare proiecta, ac omnia and singula
casualia, tam in vel super mare, vel littora, crecas, vel costeras maris, quam
in vel super aquas dulces, portus, flumina, Riuos, aut alia loca superinundata
quaecunque, infra fluxum and refluxum maris, seu aquae ad plenitudinem, a
quibuscunque a primis Pontibus versus mare, per totum regnum Angliae, aut
Hyberniae, etc. Emergentia, Contingentia, seu Prouenientia, etc.

2 Le commission de Sewers, que fuit agard per le Roy, per virtue de son
prerogative Royal, devant ascun statute fait en tiel Case, extend non solement
al walls and banks del Mer, mes auxi del nauigable Rivers, and freshwaters,
Registr. fol. 127. a. b. N. B. 113. a. Et est recite en le statute de 25. Henr.
8. cap. 10. que le Roy per reason de son dignity and prerogative Royal, doet
provider, que nauigable streams sont fait passable, etc.

3 Le City de London per un Charter del Roy, ad le River de Thames grant a
eux, mes pur ceo que fuit conceave, que le soil and ground del River ne
passoit per cest grant, ils purchasont un auter Charter, per que le Roy grant
al eux solum and fundum del dit River, per force de quel grant, le City a
cest iour receave rents de ceux, queux ^^ixont posts, ou font wharfes, ou
auters edifices, sur le soil del dit River.

4 Enter les pleas del Corone, 40. Edw. 3. in Archiu. Castri Dublin, cest entry
est trove, Domini Reges Angliae and domini Hyberniae de Iure Coronae habent per
totam aquam de Boine a Villa de Droghedagh, vsque ad Trim, filum aquae
vulgariter vocatum le Watershard, continens in latitudine 24. pedes in loco
profundiore eiusdem aquae, ita quod Batellae, Maremium, and Marchandizae per
huiusmodi filum, hinc atque illinc, ire and redire possint per filum aquae
praedictae, absque impedime^to etc. and la un Idgment est enter en mesme le
Roll, que un wear erect per l'Abbe de Mellefont en le dit River serroit abate,
and fine impose sur l'Abbe, etc. Et ceo agree ove Glanuill que dit, que un
perpresture poet estre fait civien in aquis Regijs, quam in vijs Regijs, vid.
19. Ass. p. 6. que le River de Lee est trove per Inquisition le hault stream
del Roy, and 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. Dier. 117. a. Le Thames est appell le
Kings stream, and en le statute de 28. Henr. 8. c. 22. enact en cest Realm,
les Rivers de Barrow, Noyr and Suir, sont appell the Kings Rivers and les
wears erect en eux sont appell purprestures: and coment que le Roy permit son
people pur lour case and commodity d'aver common passage sur tiel nauigable
Rivers, vncor il ad sole interest en le soil de tiels Rivers, and auxi en le
piscary, coment que le profitt de ceo nest communement pris and appropriate per
le Roy, sine soit de extraordinary and certain annual valcw, come cest
piscary de le Banne ad tout foits estre. vid. en le Case de Swannes 7. Cook
16. a. le Roy Henr. 8. grant al Strangewayes totam illam liberam piscariam
vocatam le fleet en Abbotsbury, que est un bay ou creek del Mer, and come^t
que l'Abbe ad piscary la devant le dissolution, est desire entende, que l'Abbe
al commencement avoit ceo per grant del Roy, esteant un several piscary sur
brach del Mer, and per consequens un piscary Royal. vid. Plow. Comment. 31. 5.
b.

Per que fuit resolve, que le River del Banne, cy avaunt come le Mer flow and
reflow en ceo, est flumen regale, and le piscary del Salmons la un Royal
piscary, que appent al Roy come un several piscary, and nemi al ceux queux ont
le soil ex vtraque part aquae. Mes d'auter part fuit agree, que chescun
Inland River nient nauigable, appertient al ownors del soil, ou il ad son
course. 28. Ass. p. 93. Et si tiel River courge anter 2. manors, and est le
Meare and boundary enter eux, l'un moity del River and piscary appent al un
Seignior, and l'auter moiety al auter, and ceo appiert libr. Intrac. fol 666.
b. en trespass quare piscatus fuit in seperali piscaria, and piscem inde, viz.
2. Salmones, etc. cepit, etc. le defendant dit, que il fuit seisie del manor
de B. quod se extendit vsque ad finem aquae de W. quae est eadem piscaria, in
qua supponitur piscationem praedictam fieri, ex australi part, and quod le
plaintiff eodem tempore quo, etc. fuit seisitus de manerio de A. cum
pertinentijs quod se extendit ad medium fili aquae praedictae ex part Boreali
eiusdem aquae, maneriaque praedicta ab Orient aequa longitudine versus
Occidentem se extendunt, and quod ipse le defendant, and omnes illi quorum
statum ipse habet in manerio de B. a tempore quo non extat memoria, seisiti
fuerunt de part Australi praedictae aquae, vt de seperali piscaria sua, sua,
vt de parcella manerij sui praedicti, and similiter habuit communiam piscariae
in praedicta part Boreali eiusdem aquae, dicto manerio de A. pertinentem. Le
plaintiff reply, quod aqua praedicta ex vtraque part est son several piscary,
sans ceo que le defendant ad common de piscary in Boreali part dictae aquae.
Vid. 2. R. 2. fol. 5. a. que brief de rationabilibus diuisis gist de tiel
piscary.

3 ^iercement fuit resolve, que null part de cest Royal piscary de le Banne
poet passet per le grant del terre adioinant per general grant de touts
piscaries: car cest Royal piscary nest appurtenant al terre, mes est piscary
en gross, and parcel del enheritance del Corone aperluy. Et general: parolls
en grant del Roy ne passeront tiel special Royalty que appent al Corone per
prerogative, come mines Royal, americaments Royal, Escheats Royal, ne
passeront per general parolls de touts mines, amerciaments, and Escheates. Eta
cest intent sont plusors Cases direct en le point, en le Case de Mines. Plow.
Comment. 333. b. 334. a. and 9. and 10. Eliz. 268. 269.

Darrainment fuit agree, que ou le Roy ad grant al Sir Randall mac Donell tout
le territory adioinant a cest river, and touts piscaries deins cest Territory,
exceptis tribus partibus piscariae de le Banne, que le quart part de cest
piscary ne passera a luy per cest grant, car le grant del Roy ne passera rien
per implication, 2. H7. 13. and.

Ceux points fueront resolve en cest Case, per les rules and authorities del
common ley. Mes ouster ceo, diverse rules del Civil ley, and custumary ley del
France, agreeable al nostre ley, en cest point, fueront cite horse de Renatus
Choppinus un tresbon auteur en son Tractate de Domanio Franciae libr. 1. titul.
16. de Fluminibus. Fluminum sunt duo genera, dit il, Regalia quaedam, alia
Bannalia, sieve priuata. Regalia dicuntur, ex quibus Princeps iure patrimoniali
vectigal capir, and in quibus modum and tempus piscationis constituit, vid.
Stat. W. 2. cap. 47. Et non solum regalia flumina nuncupantur, quod Regum
dominio sunt attributa, sed etiam quod little curam sibi Reges ac Principes
assumpserunt, nec non ex eo, quod piscarias, caeterosque publicorum fluminum
redditus, qui aerarij publici fuere, in fiscum suum redigerunt. Sunt and lacus
publici regales, fluuiorum superiorum instar: nam lacus publicos locant, and
vectigalia in fiscum suum referunt, ideoque publicano, qui lacum vel stagnum
conduxit, si piscari prohibeatur, vtile interdictum competit. Iustissimum enim
est ob vectigalis fauorem, interdicto eum tueri. Et quant al auters rivers
queux courge per confinium praediorum, il dit que per prescription, ou
permission des Princes, aut alio iusto titulo, omnia talia flumina facta sunt
priuata, quae natura publica erant, and quod piscatio in certa part fluuij
potest expacto constitui, vel continenti multorum annorum vsu acquiri: and sic
potentiores amnis accolae, si pluribus annis soli piscati sunt, caeteros pari
iure vti prohibent, quamuis Mari, quod natura omnibus patet, seruitus imponi
priuatorum cautione non potest. Et ouster il monstre, que les ancient Royes de
France piscationi in fluminibus publicis modum praescripserunt, and piscarias,
ac reliquos fluminum prouentus, qui aerario publico olim ascribebantur, passim
in fiscum suum retulerunt. Pur le prerogative del Roy deins le Mer il cite un
verse de Iuuenal. Quicquid conspicuum pulchrumque ex aequore toto est,

Res fisci est vbicunque natat. Et Cuiatius de feodis fol. 205. a. fuit auxi
cite, ou il dit. regalia sunt viae publicae, flumina nauigabilia, and ex quibus
fiunt nauigabilia, portus, vectigalia, monetae, etc.

Trin. 9. Iacobi. En l'eschecquer.
Le Case del County Palatine de Wexford.
FUit trove per Office en le county de Wexford, que un Prendegrast anno 27.
Henr. 8. fuit seisie en fee de certain terre en le dit county, and ceo teignoit
del George donques countee de Salop and Waterford, and Seignior de Wexford, vt
de persona dicti Comitis existen. Commit. Palatin. Comitatus Wexford.

Fuit trove ouster, que per l'estatute de 28. Henr. 8. cap. 3. que est entitle
Le statut de Absenrees, fuit enact, que le Roy Henr. 8. ses heirs and
successors averont and enioteront come en droit del Corone D'engleterre, touts
Honors, Manors, Casiles, Seigniories, Francheses, liberties, counties
Palatine, Irisdictions, Fees de chivaler, advonsons, etc. queux le dit countee
de Salop avoit deins le Realm de Ireland. Apres que, le dit Prendergrast
morust seisie de cest terre, son heir esteant de plein age.

Et si ore, sur cest office, le terra serra seisie en mains del Roy, pur primer
seisin, fuit le question. Et sur ceo un point solement fuit consider, viz. si
l'heir del dit Prendergrast* ^endra del Boy in Capite, ou per quel tenure il
tiendra le dit terre. Et fuit resolve, que ore il tiendra cest terre del Roy en
Capite.

MEs fuit object per le Counsel del Prendergast, que le tenure que est trove
per l'office ne serra ore un Tenure del Roy in Capite, mes Tenure en common
Socage per fealty tantum, pur 3. Reasons.

1 Tenure en capite covient estre ab antiquo de Corona, come est express en le
statute de praerogatiua Regis cap. 1. Et est dit 30. Henr. 8. Dier. 44. a. que
Tenure en chief co^menceoit en ancient temps, sur Graunts del Roy pur defense
de son person and sa Corone: mes cest Tenure est nouelment devenus al Roy Henr.
8. per l'act de Absentees, and pur ceo ne poet estre Tenure del Roy en Capite.

2 Tenure en Capite est toutsfoits Tenure de Person del Roy. N. Br. fol. 5. Et
est de cy hault nature, que null home poet creater ceo ou aver ceo, forsque le
Roy mesme. Carnul subject est able de reserver tiel Tenure, ou capable del
grant de tiel Tenure. Car si le Prince l'eigne fitz del Roy, devant le Statute
de Quia emptores terrarum, ad fait feoffment de terte, a tener de son person,
ceo ne serroit Tenure en Capite. Come est tenus 30. H. 8. Dier. 44. b. and ou
les Tenant de un ancient honor, come Berkhamsted teignoit del Roy en Capite,
coment que le Roy grant le dit honor al Prince, and a ses heirs Royes
D'engleterre, vncor le Prince n'avera le prerogative del Capite Tenure en cest
Case, durant le vie del Roy. 21. Edw. 3. 41. b.

3 Null Tenure create per subject, coment que soit Tenure en gros de son person
(car subject poet aver Tenure en gros de son person 8. Henr. 4. 1. 19. Edw. 4.
9. 13. Eliz. Dier. 290. b.) poet per ascun possibility grow ou aspire d'estre
un Tenure en Capite del Roy. Et pur ceo, si le Prince, ou auter subject create
teil Tenure de son person, and apres est fait Roy, ceo ne devient Tenure en
chief. Et si le Roy vient al Seigniory en gros per attainder d'un subject de
felony, ou per common Escheat, ou per descent, ou per purchase, le tenant ne
tiendra de luy en Capite, mes come il teignoit devant 30. H. 8. Dier. 44. b.
Issint si le Roy purchase un Manor de que I. S. est tenant, si le Roy grant le
Manor al auter reservant les services de I. S. ore I. S. tient del person del
Roy, car les services sont en gros, vncor il ne tiendra en Capite. 29. Henr. 8.
Br. Tenures 61 and Br. Livery 57. Et le Case 17. Eliz. Dier. 345. a. semble
plus sort que le case en question. Car la fuit trove devant l'escheator de
Carnaruan, que certain terre en Gales fuit auncientment tenus del Prince de
Gales, per le service de alex en guerre del Prince, ales charges del Prince,
and que un Owen ap David teignoit la dit terre del Royne Elizabeth come de sa
principality de Gales en Capite: vncor fuit tenus per counsel del Court de
Wards null Tenure en Capite. vid. le Statut de Magna Charta cap. 32. and le
liver de 28. Henr. 6. fol. 11. b. a cest purpose.

Mes d'auter part fuit argue per le Counsel del Roy, and resolve per Sir Io.
Denham chief Baron and tout le Court, que cest Tenure, come ceo est trove, est
Tenure del Roy in Capite. Et en l'argument de cest point plus alarge 2. chooses
fueront principalment consider, 1. le Original, and nature de county Palatine,
2. le nature and quality del Tenure in Capite.

Et pur le primer, fuit primerment observe, que Comes ^u Countee, est un noime
ou title del honor, and dicitur a comitando, vel sequendo Principem: and ceux
persons queux fueront advance a cest title fueront Summi Proceres, and a Rege
proximi, come Cassaneus in Catologo gloriae Mundi dit. Et cest nosme ou title
de honor fuit ab initio accompaine ove un honorable Office. Car cesty que fuit
Comes ad vnterritory assign a luy, pur garder and governer, que fuit appell
Comitatus. Cest title ne commenceoit destre frequent, tanque le declination del
Roman Impire, cestascavoir en le temps del Charlemaine, que ordain and
institute diverse countees in Germany, Italy, and France, and done a eux non
solement un absolute command in Martial affairs deins lour several
territories, mes auxi ordinary Jurisdiction in Civil and Criminal causes: and
pur ceo est dit en le Imperial law, Quod Comes est iudex ordinarius, and Grave
en Dutch, signify un Idge, cybien que un Earl.

Mes ceux Countees ne fueront touts de equal degree: car fueront de 2. sorts,
viz. Comites simplices, and Comites Palatini, ou del primer and second order.
Car coment que Comites simplices avoient tiel command and Irisdiction, come
avaunt est monstre, vncor Comites Palatini, fueront de plus hault Rank, and
avoent diverse Royal Francheses and privileges, que ne fueront graunts al
simple countees. Cest nosme and office de Countee fuit introduce en Engletere
horse del Cermany, per les Saxons long temps devant le Norman Conquest. Mittons
Case 4. Cook 34. and le Record de Dome^day prove ceo, que fait mention de
several countyes en Engleterre. Mes le primer county Palatine, viz. le County
Palatine de Chester fuit erect en temps de Will. le Conqueror. Cambden. 464.

Pur le nosme del Countee en nostre ley, certes, ceo est le plus ancient nosme
de dignity and honor, and devant le te^ps del Edw. 3. fuit le sole nosme de
dignity and honor en Engleterre. Car le nosme and title de Duke, Marquis, and
Vicount sont de puisne temps. Car le primer Duke fuit create en temps Edw. 3.
le primer Marquis en temps R. 2. and le primer Viscount en temps Henr. 6. and
le nosme ou title de Baron, nest nosme de dignity ne addition. 8. Henr. 6. 10.
a. le Seignior Louels Case. Mes Countee est parcel del nosme, and del
substance del nosme, and si soit omit en brief, le brief abatera 39. Edw. 3.
35. le Case del Gilbert Vmfreuill Countee de Angus, and 14. Edw. 3. Brief 278.
le Case de Hugh de Audelay Countee de Gloucester. Et cest title de Countee est
instar cognominis, and ne besoigne de vser auter surnosme, come si action soit
port verse Io. Countee de Oxford, sans auter surnosme est sufficient 7. Henr. 6.
27. 12. Edw. 3. Brief 454. Auxi cest title nest merge ou confounded per title
de Duke, car si Countee soit fait Duke pendant le brief, ceo ne abatera le
brief. Come ou le Countee de Lancaster fuit fait Duke de Lancaster 25. Edw. 3.
39. brief. 409. issint ou action fuit port verse countee de Richmound, il plead
que il fuit Duke de Britain, and non allocatur 11. Edw. 3. Br. 473.

Pur l'office, del simple ou Ordinary Countee per nostre ley, il avoit
custodiam comitatus, and authority de raiser, posse comitatus, a suppresser
rebellions, and riotts, etc. que fuit un Martial command: il avoit auxi
Jurisdiction, in civil and criminal causes, and a cest intent, il avoit 2.
Courts 1. son Turn ou view pur criminal causes 2. le county court pur civil
causes. Le primer fuit le Court del Roy, car pleas del Corone ne poent estre
tenus en ascun Court forsque en Court del Roy: le second fuit le Court del
cou^tee mesme, and pur ceo est appell le County Court: mes pur ceo que il fuit
auxi immediate officer al Court del Roy, pur fair execution del breefes del
Roy, and le Comes ou counted mesme comitabatur Principem, and fuit pur le plus
part attendant sur luy, ou en son Counsel, du en ses guerres, le Roy fesoit un
Lientenant ou Deputy a luy, come Fineux dit, 12. Henr. 7. 17. b. cestascavoir
le Vicount, que ore execute mesme l'office en touts points. Et est destre note,
que en touts counties que sont simple counties, and subject al ordinary
Irisdiction del Courts del Roy, le Roy mesme fait le Vicount: mes deins
counties Palatine, ou le countee ad iura regalia, le countee mesme, and nemi le
Roy fait le Vicount 12. Henr. 7. 17. and 18. and 4. Cook 33. Mittons case. 22.
Edw. 4. 22. Et tout ceo fuit note sur l'Originall del countee in general and
sur le nosme and office del Ordinary countee.

PUr l'originall, nosme, and prerogative del Countee Palatine que fuit un
extraordinary cou^tee: 1. fuit noate and observe, que fuit appell Palatinus,
vel Comes Palatij pur ceo que il fuit theife officer and Cou^sellor en le
Palace del Emperor, and est dit que il ne fuit solement companion del person
del Prince, mes comes curarum. Par extans curis, solo diademate dispar: and pur
cest reason, le Prince communcate a luy plusors de ses Royal prerogatives. 2.
fuit observe, que cest honor de cou^ty Palatine fuit primerment institute per
l'Emperour, apres que le Empire fuit translate al Germany. Et pur ceo les
Doctors del Imperial ley teignont, Quod solus Princeps, qui est Monarcha and
Imperator in regno suo, ex plenitudine potestatis, potest creare Comitem
Palatinum. Baldus titul, Rescript. 6. de precibus Imperatori offerendis.

FUit auxi resolve, que accordant a cest rule, le Roy del Engleterre poet bien
creater un countee Palatine: car il est Monarcha and Imperator in regno suo:
come est apparent per plusors records, and Idgementes en Parliament.

En le Preface del Seignior Cook al quart part de ses Reports, un ancient
Charter del Roy Edgar que rerire le style del Roy, est tiel, Ego Edgarus
Anglorum Basileus, omnium Insularum Oceani quae Brittaniam circumiacent,
cunctarumque nationum, quae infra eam includuntur, Imperator and Dominus, etc.

Et a cest intent Matthew. Paris. in historia maiori fol. 17. a. dit que quant un
difference surdoit perenter le Roy William Rufus, and Anselme Archevesque de
Canterbury touchant le Irisdiction del Pape en Engleterre, Rex Willielmus
allegauit, quod spectabat ad officium Imperatoris, quem vellet Papam eligere,
and ob candem rationem, quod nullus Archiepiscopus vel Episcopus regni sui
Curiae Romanae vel Papae subesset, praecipue cum ipse omnes libertates haberet
in regno suo, quas Imperator vindicabat in Imperio.

Per l'estatute de 28. Henr. 8. cap. 2. enact en cest Realm, est declare, que
les Royes de Engleterre, are lawful Kings and Emperors of the said Realm of
England, and of this land of Ireland.

Issint per l'act de 16. R. 2. cap. 5. communement appell le Statute de
Praemunire est auxi declare, That the Crown of England has ever bin so free,
as that it has bin subject to none, but immediately unto God; and per le
Statute de 25. H. 8. enact en Engleterre and establish en cest Realm 28. Henr.
8. cap. 20. ou est recite que les Realms d'Engleterre and de Ireland,
recognizing no Superior under God, but only the King, have bin and yet are
free from subjection to any man's laws, but only to such, as have bin made and
ordained within the faid Realms, etc.

Darrainment, la Corone D'engleterre en plusors auters acts de Parliament, est
appell Imperial Crown, and la Corone de Ireland est appendant a ceo 28. Henr.
8. cap. 20. and unite and knitt al Imperial Corone D'engleterre 33. H. 1. cap.
1. Car coment que Brittany fuit vnfoits subject al Empire de Rome, que Ireland
ne fuit vnques, vncor ceo fuit abandon, and tout ousterment relinquish per le
Emperor de Rome Anno Domini 428. and quant ceo fuit apres reduce al Monarchy,
tiel Monarcha fuit, and vncor est, un absolute Emperor: accordant a ceo que
Cassaneus in Catologo gloriae Mundi, dit, Reges absoluti habent Imperium, and
dici possunt Imperatores. Et il cite le text 1. Regum cap. 8. Hoc erit ius
Regis qui imperaturus est vobis, auxi il dit, Rex Angliae est absolutus
Monarcha in Regno suo. Et pur ceo le Roy D'engleterre esteant un Emperout deins
ses Dominions, poet accordant al rule avantdit, creare Comitem Palatinum.

Et sicome le Roy D'engleterre ad absolute power de creater countee Palatine,
issint il ad create plusors countees Palatines en ambideux Realms. 1. En
Engleterre, le countee Palatine de Chester suit create en temps del Williain le
Conqueror. Camden fol. 464. Et Matthew. Paris histor. magn. 406. appell le
countee de Chester Comes Palati^. 2. le county Palatine de Durham, qui statim a
tempore conquestus comitatus Palatinus iudicatus est, Camden fol. 600. Mes le
common opinion est, que R. 1. create l'Evesque Pudsey le primer countee
Palatine de Durham. 3. le county Palatine de Lancaster, que fuit erect en temps
Edw. 3. Plow. Comment. 215. b. Et ceux 3. counties tantsolement ont estre
counties Palatines en Engleterre. Lar Ely, coment que fuit un liberty d'aver
conusans de touts causes secular, grant per le Roy Edgar appell Saint
Etheldreds liberty, ne fuit vnques county Palatine: and les Seigniors Marchers,
sur les Marches de Gales, coment que ils avoent Royal Seigniories en lour
several Territories 19. Henr. 6. 12. and 152. 11. Henr. 4. 40. vncor null d'eux
avoit touts les privileges del countee Palatine.

En Ireland 3. Palatinates fueront create en temps H. 2. le primer en Leinster,
que fuit grant al county Strongbow per tout cest Province: le second en Meth,
grant al Sir Hugh de Lacy l'eigne: le 3. en Vlster, grant al Sir Hugh de Lacy
le puisne. Mes apres quant William le Marshall D'engleterre, aiant marry le
file and heir de Strongbow, ad issue 5. fitz and 5. files, and le. 5. sitz
esteant morts sans issue, le Seigniory de Leinster discendoit a les 5. files,
sur partition fait enter eux, chescun ad entire county allott a luy viz. le
county de Catherlogh fuit allott al eigne, le cou^ty de Wexford al second, le
county de Kilkenny al tierce, le county de Kildare al quart, le Territory de
Leix, que est ore le Queens county, al cinquesme: and sur ceo chescun de eux,
ad un several county Palatine, and touts les liberties and prerogatives en sa
several purparty, come Strongbow and le Marshall, avoent en l'entier Seigniory
de Leinster. Come si 3. parceners sont d'un Manor, queux font partition,
chescun d'eux avera Manor and court Baron deins sa purparty 26. Henr. 8. 4.
Ily avoit auxi certain Royal liberty deins le county de Kerry and Desmond
grant per Edw. 1. al Thomas fitz Anthony: and autiel en county de Typperary
grant al countee de Ormound per Edw. 3. que solement continue a cest iour, ou
touts les auters sont resume ou extinguish.

AUxi chescun countee Palatine create per le Roy D'engleterre, est Seignior del
un entier county, and ad en ceo iura regalia, quae iura regalia consistont en
2. principal points, viz. en Royal jurisdiction, and en Royal Seigniory. Per
reason de son Royal jurisdiction, il ad touts les hault Courts, and Officers
de Justice, que le Roy ad: and per reason de son Royal Seigniory, il ad touts
les Royal services, and Royal Escheats que le Roy ad: and pur ceo cest county
est meerement disioine, and separate del Lorone, come est dit en le Case del
Duchy Plow. 215. b. Issint que null brief del Roy courge la, forsque brief de
Error, que estea^t le dernier ressort and appeall, est solement except horse de
touts lour Charters. 15. Eliz. Diet. 321. and 345. and 34. Henr. 6. 42. Issint
en Ireland, que est realm aperluy, erroneous Idgement done en le chief place
la, serra revers en Bank le Roy en Engleterre. Et Bracton lib. 3. titul. de
Corona cap. 8. dit, que Comites Palatini regalem habent potestatem in omnibus,
saluo Dominio domino Regi sicut Principi.

Le Royal jurisdiction de countee Palatine app^e^t en l^ Charter del Edw. 3.
grant per authority de Parliament per que le Palatinate de Lancaster est
erect: ou le Roy grant al John de G. Duke de Lancaster, quod habeat infra
comitatum Lancastriae Cancellariam suam, ac breuia sua, sub sigillo suo pro
officio Cancellariae deputando, consignanda: Iustitiarios suos tam ad placita
Coronae, quam ad quaecunque alia placita communem legem tangentia tenend. ac
cognitiones corundem, and quascunque executiones per breuia sua and ministros
suos ibidem faciend. and quaecunque alia libertates and iura regalia ad
comitatum Palatinum pertinentia, adeo libere and intogre, sicut Comes Cestriae
infra ^undem comitatum Cestriae dignoscitur obtinere, etc. Lest Charter de
Lancaster ad relation al Royal liberties del county Palatine de Chester, que
avoit mesme les Courts and jurisdiction, coment que le Charter del Will. le
Conqueror que fait Hugh Lupus le primer countee de Chester, soit general,
viz. d'aver and tene^ tout cest county a luy and a cest heirs, ita libere ad
gladium sicut ipse Rex tenebat Angliam ad Coronam. Leit ancient grant, per
ancient allowance done touts les liberties and prerogatives del county
Palatine (...) issint le countee ad Royal Irisdiction la, coment que les
Courts del hault Istice ne sont express en le dit Charter, and sur cest
reason, come semble, est dit 12. E. 4. 16. que le countee Palatine de Lancaster
fuit per Parliament tempore Ed. 3. mes Chester and Durham sont per
prescription: mes ceo nest desire ente^d meerement per prescription, car null
Franches que se exaltat in praerogatiuam Regis, poet estre gain per
prescription, 1. Henr. 7. 23. b. Mes pur ceo que ti^l general parols en ies
ancient graunts per usage and allowance douont royal Irisdiction, ou tiels
graunts a cest iour ne passeront cy ^ault liberties. 1. Henr. 7. 13. b. vid.
lib. Intrac. 419. a. ou est plead que Chestor fuit county Palatine per
prescription, and demurrer sur cest plea.

Mes que Chester and Durham sont counties Palatine, and ont touts les Courts de
Istice, and mesme le Irisdiction Royal, que est particularment grant al Duke
de Lancaster per le Charter del Edw. 3. est apparent per plusors authorities,
Pur Chester 22. Edw. 4. Fitz Irisdiction 61. 34. Henr. 6. 42. 19. Edw. 3. Fitz
Irisdiction 29. 15. Eliz. Dier. 321. a. b. Pur Durham 5. Edw. 3. 58. Fitz
Irisdiction 30. ou est dit que le countee Palatine de Durham ad ses Istices and
Chauncery demesne, 1. E. 4. 10. 45. Edw. 3. 17. 5. Edw. 2. Fitz Quare impedit
165. 12. Eliz. Dier. 288. per que est manifest que touts les countees Palatine
en Engleterre avoent Royal Irisdiction deins lour Territories.

2 Ils avoent auxi un Royal Seigniory, que consistoit en 2. points, 1. en
Royal services. 2. en Royal Escheates. Quant al Royal services, il avoent
power de creater Tenures en capite de eux mesmes, and auxi per graund s^rianty:
car ils avoent power de creater Barons: come le primer countee de Chester
immediatment sur son creation substituit Barons viz. le Baron de Haulton, le
Baron de Malbank, le Baron de Malpas, le Baron de Kindreton, etc. Camden
Cheshire 464. and issint les auters Palatines avoent tiels Barons deins lour
counties, come le Baron de Walton en Lancaster, and le Baron Hilton en le
Bishopric. Et chescun Barony est tenus per graund Serianty. 2. Cook, le
Seignior Crownwells Case 81. a. and cest capite Tenure del county Palatine est
accompany ove les prerogatives, que sont incident al Tenure en capite del Roy:
car le heir suera liuerie horse del Chauncery del Seignior, and (...) enter
devant livery, il serra adiudge intrudor, and rendra (...) mean profits, etc.
Et auxi pai^ra (...) pur alienation. 14. Henr. 4. fol. 5. and 6. and 26. Henr.
8. 9. De terre tenus deins le county de Lancaster liuerie serra sue, car le
Duke la, ad iura regalia. 28. Henr. 8. Br. titul. Livery 55. liuerie serra de
terre en le county de Lancaster parcel del Duchy, contra de terres horse del
county. 13. Eliz. Dier. fol. 303. a. Office trove per commission horse del
Chauncery al Westminster, del terre tenus in capite del county Palatine de
Chester, est void: Mes serra trove per commission horse del Chauncery in
l'Eschequer la, 19. Eliz. Dier. 359. b. James Manley tenuit de Arthuro Principe
vt Comite Cestriae, and avoit livery fait a luy, que fuit imperfect and void en
ley, per que il enter, and fuit tenus intrudor sur possession del Roy, apres le
mort de Prince Arthure.

Quant al Royal Escheates, le countee Palatine avoit les Escheats de Treasons,
que le Roy per son prerogative avera, de terres tenus de touts auters
Seigniors: mes ceo est destre entend des Treasons que fueront al temps quant le
countee Palatine fuit erect, and nemi de novell treasons per Act de Parliament
apres. 12. Elizab. Dier. 288. b. 289. a.

Et sicome chescun countee Palatine en Engleterre avoit tiel Royal
jurisdiction, and tiel Royal Seigniory come appiert per les authorities devant
mises: Issint chescun county Palatine en Ireland, avoit mesme les prerogatives,
come appiert per plusors records de cest Realm.

PUr le Seigniory de Leinster, don't le county de Wexford fuit parcel, le
countee Strongbow aiant gain ceo cibien per conquest, que per marriage del
(...) and heir de Mac Morough Prince de Leinster, surrender tout le dit
Territory al Roy Henr. 2. and reprist grant del Roy de tout que il ad
surrender, forsque del Litty de Dublin cum cantredis adiacentibus, ac Villis
maritimis and Castris: de quel surrender and grant, Giraldus Cambrensis fait
mention, libro primo de Hybernia expugnata cap. 28. Et coment que cest
Original grant nest trove de Record icy, vncor est manifest per plusors
Records, que William le Marshall countee de Penbroke que marioit la file and
heir de Strongbow, and ses 5. fitz successivement, and apres ses 5. files
Coperceners en lour several purparties de cest graund Seigniory avoent iura
regalia cibien en point de jurisdiction, queen point de Seigniory.

Le Charter de Callan un vill en le county de Kilkenny dat. 20. Martij 40. Edw.
3. prove ceo expressment, que fuit monstre avaunt, en cest form, Lionellus dux
Clarentiae, Radulphus Comes Stafford, and Anna la Dispenser domini libertatis
de Kilkenny, omnibus ad quos praesentes literae peruenerint salutem. Inspeximus
chartam Will Mareschalli comitis Pe^broke domini Lageniae Burgensibus villae de
Callan, non rasam, non abolitam, nec in aliquo viciatam, sub hac forma, viz.
Sciatis quod ego Willielmus Mareschallus Comes Pen broke, etc. concessi
Burgensibus meis de Callan, omnimodas libertates quas decet Burgenses habere,
and mihi licet confer, viz. quod nullus Burgensis, trahatur in causam, vel
respondeat de vllo placito, quod proueniat infra metas Burgi, in Castello, vel
alibi, nisi in Hundredo villae, exceptis placitis quae sunt de hominibus
hospiti^ mei: concessi etiam eisdem Burgensibus matrimonium contrahere sibi and
filijs, and filiabus, and viduis, sine licentia dominorum suorum, nisi forte
forinseca tenementa tenuerint de me in Capite extra Burgum, etc.

Auxi le Charter de noua Rosse alias Rossepontis en le county de Wexford grant
al dit vill per Roger le Bigod countee de Northfolke, que marriot la file eigne
del William le Marshall, ad mesme les clauses, come appiert per l'enrolment de
ceo en le Chauncery icy. Et ceux Charters fueront monstres a prover que le
Seignior de Leinster avoit Tenures en capite, and per consequens un Royal
Seigniory deins cest Territory.

Et a prover auxi que il avoit Royal jurisdiction que est auter mark de
county Palatine 2. auters Charters fuero^t produce 1. fuit inspeximus portant
date 1. Henr. 4. en tiel form, Inspeximus quasdam libertates vsus and
consuetudines per Burgenses villae de Kilkenny in eadem villa habitos and
vsitatos, ac inter caeteras libertates, ijs per chartas Willielmi Mareschalli
quondam Comitis Pembroke concessas, and sub magno sigillo, quo Domini
libertatis regalis de Kilkenny in Cancellaria sua ibidem dudum vtebantur
consignatas, and coram nobis in Cancellaria nostra ostensas in haec verba, etc.
per que appiert, que il avoit hault Court de Chauncery, and graund Seal, que
est un certain argument, que il avoit jurisdiction Royal, en touts auters
points, come les countees Palatines en Engleterre.

Et a cest intent fuit auxi monstre le Charter de foundation del Abbey de
Dusque, en mesme le county de Kilkenny, per que le dit William le Marshall ad
done al dit meason diverse Francheses and liberties, Et quod habeant sibi
omnimodam forisfacturam hominum suorum: sola iustitia vitae and membrorum mihi
and haeredibus meis retenta. queux parols monstront que il avoit power de
exerciser hault justice en capitalls causes, ou pleas del Corone, que est auter
manifest proof de Royal jurisdiction.

Et coment que ceux records parlont tantsolement del county de Kilkenny, vncor
est bien prove per eux, que le Seignior de Leinster ad mesme les prerogatives
en le county de Wexford, car il avoit forsque un entier Palatinate per tout le
Territory de Leinster, don't Wexford est parcel, tanque le partition avantdit
fuit fait.

Mes a prover expressment, que le Seignior de Wexford, apres le partition fait,
avoit iura regalia deins cest county, le Statute de Absentees 28. Henr. 8. cap.
3. fuit monstre, per que le Seigniory de Catherlogh, que fuit l'enheritance del
Duke de Northfolke, and le Seigniory de Wexford que fuit l'enheritance del
countee de Salop, fueront resume, and vest en la Corone: car en le preamble del
act est recite, que les dit Seigniors en dits several counties avoent power de
tener touts manner de pleas, issint que les breefes del Roy ne courgeont pas
la, and en le corpse del act, touts counties Palatine and Royal jurisdictions
sont per express parols resume. Et un auter act fait en mesme le Parliament de
28. Henr. 8. cap. 24. nient printed, fuit auxi produce, per que le Royal
liberty de Wexford esteant extinct per le dit act de Absentees, fuit revive en
touts points, forsque en le power de graunter pardons, and ove prouiso, que
serra loiall al Istices de common Bank al Dublin de tener plea sur brief
d'entry en le post, and accepcepter conusans des fines des ascuns terres deins
le county de Wexford. Et plusors auters records fueront monsire avaunt, per que
fuit manifest, que Wexford fuit un absolute county Palatine, and per consequens
le Seignior la avoet cibien un Royal Seigniory, que un Royal Jurisdiction.
vid. les Plea Rolls del Eschequer 3. Edw. 3. in Breminghams Tower, ou Adam le
Rous and sa feme pleadont license de alienation de terres tenus de Seignior de
Wexford, quant le dit Seigniory fuit en mains del Roy. vid. auxi in Archiu.
Turris London le livery fait al Laurence Hastinges countee de Pembroke and
Seignior de Wexford de touts ses terres en cest Realm, en que son countee
Palatine and iura regalia sont speciallment express and mention.

ET a prover cest point plus pleinment, diverse auters records fueront
monstres, per queux fuit manifest que les auters countees Palatine avaunt
mention en cest Realm av^ent mesme les prerogatives del Seigniory and
Jurisdiction Royal, 1. Come le Seigniory de Meth, que coment que fuit grant
per Henr. 2. al Sir Hugh de Lacy en general parols en cest form, viz.
Henricus Rex, etc. Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse Hugoni de Lacy pro
seruitio suo terram de Midia, cum omnibus pertinentijs suis, pe^ seruitia
quinquaginta militum sibi and haeredibus suis, tenend. and habendum a me and
haeredibus meis sicut Murchardus O Melaghlin (que fuit le Irish Roy de Meth
devant le conquest) eam tenuit, vel aliquis alius ante illum, vel postea. Quare
volo and firmiter praecipio, quod ipse Hugo and haeredes sui post cum iufra
praedictam terram habeant omnes libertates and liberas consuetudines quas ibi
habeo, vel illi dare possum, etc. quel Charter fuit enroll en le Court del
common pleas 1. E. 2. al petition de Geff. de Geneuill, que avoit marie un des
coparceners de cest territory, and est ore trove enter les Records de
Breminghams Tower. Uncor les Seigniors de cest Territory, tantque cest
Seigniory discendoit al Roy Edw. 4. ont en iura regalia la, come le countee
Palatine de Chester, que avoit auxi son Palatinate grant a luy per general
parols, come devant est monsire, cibien en point de Seigniory, que en point de
Jurisdiction.

Et a prover ceo le Charter de Geff. de Geneuill avantdic facta magnatibus suis
Midiae, fuit monstre, esteant registered en le Lidger Book de Tristernagh en
ceux parols. Sciant praesentes and futuri quod ego G. de Geneuill, auditis and
intellectis chartis and munumentis magnatum meorum Midiae, and antecessorum
suorum, ipsorum, viz. qui cum Hugone de Lacy seniore ad conquestum suum primo
venerunt in Hyberniam similiter and eorum qui de Waltero de Lacy filio and
haerede dicti Hugonis sunt feoffati, per assensum and consensum Matildae de
Lacy vxoris meae, concessi and hac praesenti charta confirmaui pro me and
praedicta Matilda and haeredibus praedictae Matildae, magnatibus supradictis
and haeredibus eorum, placitum Namij vetiti de omnibus tenentibus in eorum
terris, in curijs suis terminare, and si per aliquem dictorum magnatum placitum
de vetito Nauio moueatur per querelam alterius magnatis, qui de nobis tenet in
capite, in Curia mea, vel praedictae Matildae vel haeredum praedictae Matildae
huiusmodi placitum ibidem terminetur: praeterea si in terris dictorum magnatum
Hutesium leuari contingat, vel clamor, Vicecomes de Trim inquisitionem capiat,
vtrum tales transgressiones spectant ad Coronam vel non, and si transgressiones
illae spectant ad Coronam in Curia mea vel dictae Matildae vel haeredum dictae
Matildae omnino terminentur, and si non spectant ad Coronam in ipsorum Curijs
terminentur in quorum tenementis oriuntur. Cest Charter prove ambideux points,
scilicet le Royal jurisdiction, and le Royal Seigniory: car appiert pet ceo
que le Seignior de Meth avoet power de determine touts pleas del Corone, que
est principal point de jurisdiction Royal, and que il ad auxi Tenures en
capite, and magnates, deins son Territory, queux magnates sont tiels Barons
come le countee de Chester ad create deins son county Palatine come est
avantdit. Et pur ceo plusors gentlehomes cybien en Meth que en auters
Territories, queux avoent tiels Royal liberties, avoent le title de Barons,
come le Baron de Skreene, le Baron de Nauan, le Baron de Galtrim en Meth: le
Baron de le Narow, and le Baron de Rhebane in Kildare: le Baron de Idrone in
Catherlogh: le Baron de Burnchurch in Kilkenny: le Baron de Neuill in Wexford:
le Baron de Loughmo in Typperary: le Baron Misset and le Baron Savage in Vlster.

Et pur ceo, tout temps depuis que cest Seigniory de Meth deveignoit al Corone
per descent al Edw. 4. c^o ad estre tenus come un certain ley en l'Eschequer
i^y, viz. que si trove soit per office que ascun terre deins le county de Meth
soit tenus del Roy come de son Manor de Trim per regale seruitium, que ceo est
un Tenure en capite, and ^out^oitz liueries ont estre sue de tiels terres: come
appiert per innumerable records de cest Court, pur ceo que cest regale
seruitium fuit Tenure en capite del Seignior de Meth quant le county Palatine
fuit en Esse la.

Et ouster ceo, a prover le Royal jurisdiction del Seignior de Meth, un record
fuit monstre del tout le proceeding en Assisse de novell disseisin port per
John countee de Salop versus Willielmum Nugent and sa feme, pur certain terres
en Moyrath: per quel record appiert, que Anno. 25* H. 6. Rich. Duke de York
adonques Seignior de cest liberty, grauntoit le commission de prender cest
Assisse, desouth le test de son Seneschall en cest form: Richardus dux
Eborum, Comes Marchiae, and Vltoniae, dominus de Wigmore, Clare, Trim, and
Connaght, dilectis and fidelibus suis Willielmo Boys iustitiatio suo ad placita
coram Seneschallo suo libertatis suae Midiae, Richardo Bath milit. Edwardo
Somerton armigero, Willielmo Sutton armigero, and Roberto de la Field armigero
salutem. Sciatis quod constituimus vos iustitiarios nostros, vna cum ijs quos
vobis associauerimus, ad Assisam nouae disseisiuae capiendam, quam Johannes
Talbot Comes Salopiae arraniauit coram vobis, per breue nostrum versus
Willielmum Nugent armigerum and Ioannam vxorem eius, de tenementis en Moyrath,
etc. Ideo vobis mandamus, quod ad certos diem and locum quos ad hoc
prouideritis, assisam illam capiatis, facturi inde quod ad iustitiam pertinet,
secundum legem and confuetudinem libertatis nostrae praedictae. Saluis nobis
amerciamentis inde prouenientibus. Mandamus etiam Vicecomiti nostro libertatis
nostrae praedictae, etc.

Per quel record, and infinite auters de mesme le nature, trove en chesc^n
Court de record al Dublin, est manifest, que le Seignior de Meth fuit un County
Palatine, and ad ius regale en point de Irisdiction.

Ouster ceo, tout le Territory de Vlster fuit un county Palatine, and avoit
touts les prerogatives avantdit, tant que ceo discendoit al Roy Edw. 4. and a
prover ceo un record horse del Breminghams: Tower fuit produce que remain enter
les common plea Rolls la. 3, Edw. 2. membr. 26. ou cest entry est fait. Hugo
de Lacy quondam Comes Vltoniae tenuit totam Vltoniam, exemptam and seperatam a
quolibet comitatu etc. Et placitauit in Curia sua omnia placita quae ad
Iustitiarios, and Vicecomitem pertinent, and habuit propriam Cancellariam,
absque hoc quod reciperet returna alicuius Vicecomitis.

Darraimment, le Royal liberty de Kildare avoit continuance tantque
l'attainder del Gerald countee de Kildare, per act de Parliament. 28. Henr. 8.
cap. 1. Mes apres quant son fitz fuit restore a son ancient enheritance per
letters patents dated. 1. Maij. 1. and 2. Philip. and Mar. coment que touts
liberties, privileges, honors, Irisdictions, conusans de pleas, etc. fueront
regraunt a luy, vncor cest special exception fuit fait. Magna Curia de
recordo; and liberate Comitatus de Kildare tantummodo exceptis. Leux records
and auters a mesme le intent fueront monstres avaunt a prover le Royal
jurisdiction and les Royal Seigniories des countees Palatines en Ireland:
queux records sont les sole authorities queux avomus icy, come^t la ley ad
estre prise avaunt ceux heures, en cest realm: Lar devant cest temps null
Reports ont estre fait and preserve des cases argues adiudge icy, come ad
estre use en Engleterre.

Et issint sur consideration del nature de county Palatine, and des
prerogatives incident a ceo, fuit resolve, que tiel countee aboit un Royal
Seigniory ^ybien en Ireland, que ^n Engleterre, and que tiel Royal Seignior
poet bien aver un Tenure en capite de son person.

SEcondment, sur consideration del nature and quality del Tenure en capite del
Roy, fuit argue and resolve, que cest Tenure en question, que fuit del person
del countee Palatine de Wexford, esteant vest en la Corone per act de
Parliament, serra ore un Tenure en capite del Roy.

Lar coment que fuit agree, que Tenure en capite est properment del person del
Roy, ou del Corone del Roy immediatment, pur ceo que le service incident a cest
Tenure fuit primerment ordeine pur le defense del person del Roy, and sa
Corone, and issint est properment un Tenure en gross, and memi del honor ou
del Manor. N. Br. fol. 5. k. Et coment que cest Tenure ne poet estre create
per un subject, estea^t meerement en condition d'un subject, car le Prince le
sitz ^igne del Roy ne poet creater Tenure en capite. 30. Henr. 8. Dier. 44. b.
Uncor, ^^come le Roy per annexing del honor ou Manor al Corone, done a ceo
tiel prerogative que ses Tenants de cest honor ou manor teignont de luy in
capite, come le honor de Raliegh, que fuit annex al Corone. 11. Henr. 7. 33.
Henr. 8. Br. Tenures. 94. Et issint fuit le honor de Berkhamsteed en ancient
temps, devant ceo que fuit annex al Duchy de Cornwall. 21. Edw. 3. 41. and ^n
cest Realm le manor de Trim est auxi annex al Corone, come appiert per
l'estatute 10. Henr. 7. cap. 15.

En mesme le manner le Roy, per exempting and seperating un county, ou auter
graund Territory del Corone, poet fair le Seigniory de ceo cy Royal and
absolute, and issint qualify le person del Seignior per communicating a luy
ses Royal prerogatives, que les Tenures de son person serront Tenures en
capite: and tiel Seigniory est chescun county Palatine, que esteant horse del
ordinary Irisdiction de Corone, fait le Seignior ^n cest respect, plus hault
que un ordinary subject, and per consequens horse del Maxim ou Rule de nostre
Ley: que un subject nest capable d'un Tenure en capite: Lar accordant al rule
del Civil ley que est mise per Cassaneus in Catologo gloriae mundi, qui habent
regale feodum sunt reguli quidam: and ove ceo come est devant express, Bracton
agreea. libr. 3. titul. de Corona cap. 8. Comites Palatii regalem habent
potestatem in omnibus, saluo Dominio domino Regi sicut Principi.

Fuit auxi resolve, que ne besoigne de necessity que chescun capite Tenure soit
ab antiquo, nient obstant les parols de praerogatiua Regis cap. 1. que declare
que le Roy avera primer seisin de ipsis qui tenent ab antiquo de Corona. Lar si
le Roy a cest iour grant terres, tenendum de luy sans expresser ascun service
certain, ceo est Tenure en capite de son person 29. Henr. 8. Br. livery 57.
Issint poet le Roy per express parols reserver Tenure per service de Chivale^
de son person, que est auxi Tenure en capite.

Auxi nest un general rule sans exception, que null Tenure create originalment
per un lubiect poet deveigner un Tenure en capite. Car coment, que la ley soit
issint come est tenus 30. Henr 8. Dier. 44. b. que s^ mesnalty soit tenus del
Roy in capite, and le Tenant tient del mesne pet service del Chivaler, si ceo
mesnalty escheat per mort del mesne sans heir, le Tennant ne tiendra en capite
del Roy, mes per service del Chivaler come devant: Issint si le Roy Purchase
tiel mesnalty, ou ad tiel mesnalty per descent: Uncor ou le mesnalty est tenus
del Roy in capite, and le tenancy vient en lieu del mesnalty per l'act del
tenant, il tiendra, come le mesne teignoit, en capite. 19. Eliz. Dier. 349.
Seignior, mesne, and tenant, le Roy est Seignior, le mesne tient del Roy in
capite, and le tenant tient de luy in Socage, si le Tenant obtain releas del
mesne, ou foriudge le mesne, il ore tiendra en capite: Car volenti non fit
iuiuria. Et serroit injurious al Roy, sil perdroit son Tenure en capite per
^'act del Tenant, and averoit en lieu de ceo tant solement un Tenure en Socage.

Darrainment, un manifest difference fuit mise enter le Case de Principality de
Gales. 17. Eliz. 345. a. and cest Case de county Palatine. Car ou devant le
subjection de Gales al Corone D'engleterre, home teignoit terre del Prince de
Gales per service de al^r en son guerre, ceo ne fuit Tenure don't la common ley
poet prender notice: Car cest Principality de Gales ne fuit govern per la
common ley, mes fuit dominion aperluy, and avoit ses proper leyes and customs:
and pur cest reason quant cest pais fuit reduce desouth le subjection del
Corone D'engleterre, tiel Tenure que fuit del person de Prince de Gales, ne
poet devenir un capite Tenure del Roy D'engleterre: Mes chescun county Palatine
cibien en Ireland, que en Engleterre, fuit originalment parcel del mesme le
Realm, and derive del Corone, and fuit toutsfoits govern per la ley
D'engleterre, and les terres la fueront tenus per services and tenures don't la
common ley prist notice, coment que le Seignior avoit several Irisdiction, and
Seigniory separate de la Corone: and pur ceo le Tenure en capite del countee
Palatine, est de mesme le nature que le tenure en capite del Roy, and issint
esteant devenus al Corone serra Tenure en chief del Roy, come ceo fuit devant
del county Palatine: and le reason de cest difference appiert pleinment. 19.
Henr. 6. fol. 12. Cest Case fuit argue per l'Atturney general pur le Roy, and
per Io* Meade and Edw. Fitz. Harris pur Prendergast.

Pascae 9. Iacobi. En le Common Bank.
Le case de Commenda.
EN quare impedit port per le Roy verse Cyprian Horsefall and Robert Wale, sur
special plea plead per Wale l'encumbent, l'Atturney del Roy de^urre en ley:
and sur ceo le Case en substance fuit ^iel.

Le corporation de Kilkenny esteant patrons d'un Vicarage deins le Diocese de
Ossory, ont present a ceo un Patricke Fynne, que sur lour presentation fuit
admit, institute, and induct. Apres ceo, durant l'encumbency del dit Fynne,
Adam Loftus Archeuesque de Dublin, and Ambrose Forth Doctor del Civil ley
esteant Commissioners Delegates pur granting de faculties and dispensations en
cest Realm, accordant al statute de. 28. Henr. 8. cap. 20. per lour letters de
Grace dat. 9. Octobr. 33. Elizab. grauntont al lo. Horssall adonques Evesque
d'Ossory, que le dit Evesque vnum vel plura beneficia, curata, vel non curata,
sui vel alieni iuris patronatus, non excedentia annuum valorem quadraginta
librarum, adtunc vacantia, vel quae imposterum vacare contigerint, perpetuae
Commendae titulo, adipisei, occupare, retinere, omnesque fructus ad familiae
suae sustentationem conuertere possit, iuribus sieve institutis quibuscunque in
contrarium non obstantibus: quel faculty ou dispensation fuit apres confirm
and ratify per letters patents descuth le graund Scale de Ireland, accordant
al dit Statute de 28. Henr. 8. cap. 20. Apres c^o, viz. 20. Maii. anno. 38.
Eliz. Patricke Fynne l'incu^^^nt moru^^, per que le d^t Uicarage esteant void,
and iss^nt continuant void per tempus semestre, per que l'Evesque ad title de
collater a c^o p^r laps, le dit Evesque, per virtue del dit faculty ou
dispensation, adeptus est, occupa^it, and retinuit le dit vicarage perpetuae
Commendae titulo, and ^rist les fruits de c^o a son use, ^usques al 13. iour de
Febr. Anno Domini 1609. aquel iour le dit Ev^sque morust. Apres que mort, le
dit Cyprian Horssall a^ant purchase le prochein avoidance de cest U^carage,
present le dit Wale, que fuit admit^, institute and induc^: (...) a^res le ^oy
present un Winch, que est^ant disturb per l^ dit Hors^all and Wale, le Roy port
Quare impedit.

Et si le dit Evesque, quant il ad obtain and occupy cest Uicarage per virtue
de cest faculty o^ dispensation, fuit fait per ceo perfect incumbent de ceo,
issint que l'Es^lise esteant p^^in de luy, null t^t^e per laps puisto^^ devolver
al Roy durant le v^e del Eveique, fuit le principal point move and debate en
cest Case.

Et ^n l'argument de cest point (que fuit argue al Bar prim^rment per le
counsel al common ley, and apres per 2. advocates b^^n aprise ^n le Canon ley,
and al B^nch per touts les Istices, 2. chooses fuero^t principalment consider
p^r ceux queux arguont pur le Clarke del Roy. 1 (...) Evesque puissoit, per
ascun ley, aver and tener cest benifice sans t^el dispensation ou faculty. 2
Quel effect ou operation cest faculty ou dispensation avera per la ley.


QUant al primer, ils teignont pur clear ley, que un Evesque, per l'auncient
Ecclestasticall ley D'engleterre, ne puissoit tener un auter benefice ove Cure
deins son Diocese: and sil avoit tiel benefice dev^nt son promotion al
Eveschery, que ceo devient void, qua^t il est create ^n Evesque. Et ceo est
l'auncient ley D'engleterre, come est soventfoits dit en le case del Evesque de
S. David's 11. Henr 4. and 41. Edw. 3. 5. b. accord a ceo. Et le reason est,
pur ceo que l'Evesque ne poet visiter luy mesme, and cesty que ad le office de
Sovereign, ne retiendra l'office de subject, come Hankford d^t en le dit ease
de. 11. Henr. 4. and su^ cest reason est dit en. 5. E. 3. 9. que si Person soit
f^it Deane, le personage devient void, pur ceo que dignity and benefice ne sont
compatible. Auxi null Ecclesiastical person, per les ancient Canons and
Counsels, puissoit aver. 2. benefices ove cure simul and semel, mes le primer
fuit void per le prisel del second: and ceo fuit l'auncient ley del Esglise use
en Engleterre long temps devant l'estatute de. 21. Henr. 8. que fuit fait en
affirmance de cest ancient ley, come ap^^ert en. Hollands case, en le 4. part
des Reports de le Seignior Cook: and ove ceo accordont les l^^ers de. 24. Ed.
3. 33. 39. Edw. 3. 44. a. Et N. Br. 34. l. E^ le text del Canon ley, que est le
proper fountain de cest learning, libr. Decretal. titul. de Praebendis and
dignitatibus cap. de multa, prove ceo pleinment, ou est dit. De multa
prouidentia fuit in Lateran^nsi Concilio prohibitum, vt nullus diuersas
dignitates Ecclesiasticas, vel plures Ecclesias parochiales reciperet, contra
Sanctorum Canonum instituta. Et quia vero propter praesumptiones and quorundam
cupiditates, nullus hactenus, aut rarus de praedicto statuto fructus prouenit:
nos euidentius and expressius occurrere cupientes, praesenti decreto statuimus,
vt quicunque receperit aliquod beneficium curam habens animarum annexam, si
prius tale beneficium habebat, eo sit ipso iure priuatus, and si forte illud
retinere contenderit, etiam alio spolietur, etc. Circa sublimes tamen and
literatas personas quae maioribus beneficijs sunt honorandae (cum ratio
postulauerit) per Sedem Apostolicam poterit dispensari. Et ove ceo accord le
Text in libr. Deeretorum causa 21. quaest. 1. in duabus Ecclesijs Clericus
conscribi nullo modo potest. Et issint est apparent, que l'Evesque, per null
ley, poet aver ou retainer cest benefice deins son Diocese, sans Dispensation,
que est relaxatio iuris, and permit ceo destre fait, que la ley ad prohibit
devant. 12. Henr. 8. 6. a.

SEcondment ils arguont, que le faculty ou dispensation avantdit grant a^
Evesque d'Ossory fuit void a touts entents: and si ceo prendroit effect v^cor
ceo ne fait l'Evesque perfect encumbent de cest Vicarage, quant il prist and
occupy ceo esteant void per virtue de cest faculty, mes que ceo continue void,
issint que le Roy ad title a presente^ p^^ laps. Et pur clearing de cest point.
1. l'originall and l'inconvenience de Dispensations and non obstantes tuit
consider. 2. fuit enquire quant, and en quel manner le Canon ley de Rome fait
introduce and admit en les Dominions del Roy D'engleterre: and le quel le Roy
ou le Pape puissoit de iure dispenser ove l'Ecclesiasticall ley en cest, and
auters cases, devant le fe^ans de cest statute de faculties.

Et fuit dit, que le non obstante fuit invent and primerment use en le Court
del Rome pur que Ma^sil* Pat. pronounce un vae envers la dit Court, pur
introducing cest clause de Non obstante: que ad estre un malveys precedent, and
mischeevous al touts commonweals de Christendom. Carles temporal Princes
perceavant que le Pape dispensoit ove ses Canons, en imitation de luy, ont use
lour prerogative de dispenser ove lou^ penal leyes and statutes, ou devant ils
out cause lour leyes desire religiousment observe, come les leyes de Medes and
Persians queux ne puissont estre dispensed with, come est dit le liver de
Hester. vid. le Case de Penal statutes. 7. Coke fol. 36. b. Et pur ceo un
Canonist dit, Dispensatio est vulnus, quod vulnerat ius commune. Et un auter
du, que touts abuses ferront reform, Si duo tantum verba, viz. Non obstante,
non impedirent. Et Matthew. Paris. in Anno Domini. 1246. aiant recite certain
decrees fait en le Counfell de Lions queux fueront beneficial pur l'Eglise
D'engleterre, fed omnia haec, and alia, dit il, per hoc repagulum, Non
obstante, infirmantur.

Et pur monstrer quant, and coment le Canon ley fuit introduce en Engleterre,
and quel person de iure puissoi^ dispenser ove l'Ecclesiasticall ley en cest
case, devant le fesans del statut de faculties: ^uit noate and observe, que
apres que l'Euesque de Rome ad assume sur l^y des^re spiritual Prince ou
Monarch de tout le Mounde, il ad attempt auxi de do^er leyes al touts nations,
come un Real mark de son Monarchy. Mes il sachant bien quod vbi non est
condendi authoritas, ibi non est parendi necessitas, ne unposeses leyes, al
primes, peremptoriment sur touts gents fans distinction, mes offer eux timide
and precario. Et pur ceo primerme^t il causast certain rules des^re collect
pur le government del Clergy tantum, queux il appell Decreta, (...) nemi leges
vel statuta. Ceux Decrees fueront publish en l'an. 1150. que fuit durant le
Reign del Roy Stephen: and pur ceo ou le Seignior Cook ad noate en le Preface
al. 8. part de ses Reports, quod Rogorus Bacon, frater ille per quam eruditus,
in libro de impedimentis sapientiae, dicit, Rex quidem Stephanus allatis
legibus Italiae in Angliam publico edicto prohibuit, ne ab aliquo detinerent^r,
fuit probablement conjecture, que ceo est destre entend de ceux Decrees, queux
fueront adonques novelme^t compile and publish. Uncor ceux Decrees esteant
receave and observe per le Clergy des Western Esglises tantum (car le East
Church ne vnques receavoit ascuns de ses rules ou Canons. Kellawayes Rep. 7.
Henr. 8. fol. 184.) l'Evesque de Rome attempt auxi de trahir le Liaty al
obedience de ses ordinances per degrees: and a cest intent, primerment il
propound certain rules ou ordinances pur abstinence ou iours de fasting, destre
observe per le Laity cibien que per le Clergy, queux fueront sur le primer
institution, appell per un gentle parol, Rogationes, come Marsilius Pat. libr.
Defensor. pacis. part. 2. cap. 23. ad observe, and inde come semble, le
semaigne de abstinence prochein devant le feast de Penthecost fuit appell le
Rogation week, cest temps de abstinence esteant appoint al comencement per
tiel Ordinance que fuit appell Rogatio, and nemi praeceptum vol statutum. Quant
les lay homes de lour devotion avoent receave and obey ceux ordinances
d'abstinence, donques l'Euesque de Rome passoit ouste^ (de vna praesumptione ad
aliam transiuit Romanus Pontifex, come Marsil. Pat. la dit) and fesoit plusors
rescripts, and orders, per nomen Decre^alium, queux fueront publish en l'An.
1230. que fuit Anno. 14. Henr. 3. aut eo circiter. vid. Matthew. Paris histor.
magn. 403. and ceux fueront fai^ de lier tout le laytie, cybien Sovereign
Princes, come lour subjects, en tiels chooses queux concernont lour civil and
te^porall estates. Come que null lay home averoit le donation del
Ecclesiastical benefice: que null lay home marrioit deins certain degrees,
ouster les degrees limitt per la Leuiticall ley: que touts enfants nees devant
espousels serront adiudge apres les espousels legitimate, and capable de
temporal enheritance: que touts Clerks serront exempt de secular power: and
auters de mesine le nature.

Mes ceux Decretalls esteant publish ne fueront entirement and absolutement
receave and obey en aicun part de Christendom, mes solement en le temporal
Territory del Pape, que est appell per les Cano^isis, Patria obedientiae. Mes
del auter part, plusors de ceux Canons fueront tout ousterment reject and
disobey en France, and Engleterre, and auters Christian Realms, queux sont
appell patriae consuetudinariae. Come, le Canon que prohibuit le donation des
benefices per manum laicam, fuit toutsfoits disobey en France, en Engleterre,
le realm de Naples, and diverse auters Countries and Commonweals. Et le Canon
de fairles enfan^s leg^timate, queux sont nees devant espousels, fui^
specialment reject en Engleterre, quant en le Parliament tenus al Merton* omnes
Comites and Barons vna voco responderu^t, nolumus leges Angliae mutari, quae
huc vsque vsitatae sunt, etc. Et le Canon que exempt Clerks de secular power ne
fuit vnques pleinment observe en ascun part de Christendom. Kellaway. 7 Henr.
8. 181. b. que est un infallible argument, que ceux ordinances navoent lour
force per ascun authority que le Court de Rome ad de imposer leyes sur touts
nations sans ^our consent: Mes per l'approbation and usage del people, que ceux
ad receave and use. Car per mesine le reason que ils puisso^t (...) er un
Canon, ils puissont reiecter touts les auters. vid. Bodin. lib. 1. de Rep. cap.
8. on il dit, que les Royes de France, sur erection de ^onts Universities la,
^nt declare en lour Charters, que ils voylent receaver le profession del Civil
and Canon leyes pur vser a lour discretion, and nemi desire oblige per ceux
leyes.

Mes quant a ceux Canons queux fueront receave, accept, and use en ascun
Christian Realm ou commonweal, ceux, per tiel acceptance and usage, ont
obtain le force de leyes en tiel particular Realm ou slate, and sont deveigne
part des Ecclesiastical leyes de tiel Nation. Et issint ceux que fueront
embrace, allow, and use en Engleterre fueront fait, per tiel allowance and
usage, part de les Ecclesiastical leyes D'engleterre. Per que,
l'interpretation, dispensation, ou execution de ceux Canons, esteant devenus
leyes D'engleterre, apperteignoit solement al Roy D'engleterre and ses
Magestrates, deins ses Dominions, and il and ses magistrates avoent sole
Irisdiction en tiels cases, and l'Evesque de Rome n'ad ^ien a fair en
l'interpretation, dispensation, o^ execution de ceux leyes en Engleterre,
coment que fueront primerment devise en le Court de Rome. Nient plus que le
chief Magesirate del Athens ou Lacedaemon puissoit claimer Irisdiction en
l'auncient City de Rome, pur ceo que les leyes de les. 12. Tables fueront
apprompt and import de ceux Cittyes de Greece. Et nient plus que le Master del
New College en Oxford avera command ou Irisdiction en le Kings College de
Cambridge, pur ceo que les private statutes per que le Kings College est
govern, fueront, pur le plus part, borrow and prise horse del liver de
foundation del New College en Oxford. Et certes per cest reason, l'Emperour
puissoit claimer Irisdiction en Maritime causes deins les Dominions del Roy
D'engleterre, pur ceo que nous avomus, de long temps, receave and admit
l'imperiall ley pur le determination de tiels causes. vid. Cawdreys Case en le
5. part. des Reports dele Seignior Cook: and Kellawayes Reports. 184. a.

Uncor l'Evesque de Rome perceavant que plusors de ses Canons fueront receave
and use per diverse nations de Christendom, per color de ceo, il claimoit
d'aver Etclesiasticall Irisdiction en chescun Realm and State, ou ses Canons
fueront receave, and misoit ses Legates ove several commissions, en several
realms de Christendom, de over and determiner causes, solonque ceux Canons:
queux Canons, coment que le Pape, ne ses ministers, sur le primer venting and
utterance, n'oseront appeller leyes, Ne committerent crimen laesae Maiestatis
in Principes, come Marsil. Pat. ad bien observe libr. Defensor. Pacis. part. 2.
cap. 23. que dit auxi la, que ceux Canons, entant que sont fait per le Pape,
neque sunt humanae leges, neque diuinae, sed documenta quaedam, and
narrationes: Uncor, quant il perceavoit que ceux Canons fueront receave, allow,
and use en part, per several nations, il compile eux en volumes, and appell
eux, Ius Canonicum, and ordain que serront lies, and expound en publik
Schools and Universities, come l'Imperiall ley fuit lie and expound, and
command que serront obey per touts Christians sur pain de excommunication,
and contend sovent foits de metter eux en execution per coactive power, and
assume sur luy de interpreter, and abrogater, and dispenser ove ceux leyes en
touts les Realms de Christendom a son pleasure: i sint que les Canonists
ascribont a luy cest prerogative, Papa in omn bus pure positiuis, and in
quibusdam ad ius diuinum pertinentibus dispensare potest, quia dicitur omnia
iura habere in scrinio pectoris sui, quantum ad interpretationem and
dispensationem. libr. 6. de Constable. cap. licet.

Pur le temps. Anno. 25. Ed. 1. Simon un Moigne de Walden commen^^oit de lier
le Canon ley en le University de Cambridge. vid. Stow, and Walsingham en meime
l'Au and le Manusc. libr. 6. Decretal. en le Library Noui Coll. Oxon. ad cest
inscription in front: Anno Domini. 1298. que fuit l'An 26. Edw. 1. 19.
Nouembr. in Ecclesia fratrum Praedicator. Oxon. fuit facta publicatio lib. 6.
Decretal. per que appiert quant le Canon ley fuit introduce en Engleterre. Mes
le Irisdiction que le Pape per color de ceo claimoit en Engleterre, fuit un
mere usurpation, a quel les Royes D'engleterre, de temps en temps, fesoent
opposition iusques al temps del. Henr. 8.

Et certes le Idgment del Parliament express en le Preamble de cest Statut de
faculties est notable a cest purpose. Ou est recite que l'Evesque de Rome ad
deceave and abuse les subjects del Corone D'engleterre, Pretending and
persuading to them that he had full power to dispense with all humane laws,
uses, and customs of all Realms, in all causes, which be called Spiritual:
which matter has been usurped and practiced by him and his predecessors, for
many years, to the great derogation of the Imperial Crown of England. For
whereas the said Realm of England recognizing no superior under God, but the
King, has been, and yet is, free from subjection to any man's laws, but only
to such as have been devised, made, and ordained within this Realm, for the
wealth of the same, or to such other, as by suffera^ce of the King and his
progenitors, the people of this Realm have taken at their free liberty, and
by their own consent, to be used among them, and have bound themselves by
long use and custom to the observance of the same, not as to the observance of
the laws of any foreign Prince, Potentate, or Prelate, but as to the accustomed
and ancient laws of this Realm originally established as laws of the same,
by the said sufferance, consent, and custom, and not otherwise: it stands
with natural equity and good reason, that all such humane laws made within
this Realm, or induced into this Realm by the said sufferance, consent, and
custom, should be dispensed with, abrogated, amplified, or diminished by the
King and his Parliament, or by such persons as the King and Parliament should
authorize, etc. vid. 21. H. 7. 4 a. ou est dit, que certain priests fueront
deprive de lour benefices per Act de Parliament en temps R. 2.

Per que fuit conclude, que le Roy D'engleterre, and nemi le Pape, devant le
fesans de cest Statute de faculties, puissoit de iure dispenser ove
l'Ecclesiasticall ley en cest, and auters cases. Car coment que plusors de
nostre Ecclesiastical leyes ont estre primerment devise en le Court de Rome,
vncor ceux esteant establish and confirm en cest realm per acceptance and
usage, sont ore devenus English leyes, and ne serront amplius repute Romish
Canons ou Constitutions. Come Rebuffus parlant de regula Cancellariae Romanae
de verisimili notitia: haec regula, dit il, vbique in regno Fra^ciae est
recepta, and est lex Regni effecta, and obseruatur tanquam lex regni, non
tanquam Papae regula: and Papa eam reuocare non potest.

Et pur ceo, l'Ecclesiasticall ley que ordain que quant home est create en
Evesque que touts ses inferior benefices serront void, est soventfoits dit en
le Case del Evesque de S. David's 11. Henr. 4. destre l'auncient ley
D'engleterre. Et 29. Edw. 3. 44. a. en le Case del Praebend de Oxgate, est dit,
que le constitution que ouste pluralities comenceoit en le Court de Rome, vncor
un Esglise fuit adiudge void en Bank le Roy pur cel cause. Per que appiert,
que depuis que cest Constitution fuit receave and allow en Engleterre, ceo fuit
devenus ley D'engleterre. vid. statutum de Bigamis cap. 5. ou le Roy and son
Counsel en Parliament declaro^t coment un Canon fait en le Counsel de Lions
serroit interpret and expound. De Bigamis quos Dominus Papa in Concilio suo
Lugdunensi omni priuilegio suo Clericali priuauit, per constitutionem inde
editam, and vnde quidam Praelati illos, qui effecti fuerunt Bigami ante
praedictam constitutionem, quando de felonia rectati fuerunt, tanquam Clericos
elegerunt sibi deliberandos: concordatum est and declaratum, coram Rege and
Consilio, quod constitutio ista intelligenda sit, quod sieve effecti fuerint
Bigami ante praedictam constitutionem, sieve post, de caetero non liberentur
Praelatis, sed fiat de ijs iustitia, sicut de laicis.

Uncor touts les Ecclesiastical leyes D'engleterre ne fueront dirive and
apprompt del Court de Rome. Car long temps devant que le Canon ley fuit
authorize and publi^^ (que fuit depuis le Norman Conquest, come devant est
mo^stre) les ancient Royes D'engleterre, viz. Edgar, Athelstan, Alfred, Edw.
le Confessor, and auters, ont, ove l'advise de lour Clergy deins le Realm,
fait diverse ordinances pur le government del Esglise D'engleterre: and depuis
le Conquest, diverse Provincial Synodes ont estre tenus, and plusors
constitutions ont estre fait en ambideux Realms D'engleterre, and Ireland:
touts queux sont part de nostre Ecclesiastical leyes a cest iour. vid. le
Chart. de William le Conqueror dat. Anno Domini 1066. irrot. 2. R. 2. enteries
Charters in Archiu. Turris London. pro Decano and Capitul. Lincoln. Willielmus
Dei gratia, Rex Anglorum, etc. Sciatis, etc. quod Episcopales leges, quae non
been, nec secundum Sanctorum Canonum praecepta, vsque ad mea tempora in regno
Angliae fuerunt, communi consilio Episcoporum meorum, and caeterorum
Episcoporum, and omnium principum regni mei emendandas iudicaui, etc. vid. auxi
Girald. Cambren. lib. 2. c. 34. en temps Henr. 2. un Synod del Clergy
d'Ireland fuit tenus al Castle, en que fuit ordain, Quod omnia diuina, iuxta
quod Anglicana obseruat Ecclesia, in omnibus partibus Hyberniae amodo
tractentur. Dignum enim and iustissimum est, vt sicut dominum and Regem ex
Anglia diuinitus sortita est Hybernia, sic etiam exinde viuendi formam
accipiant meliorem.

Et pur ceo les Royes D'engleterre, de temps en te^ps, en chescun age devant le
temps del Henr. 8. ont use de graunter dispensations en causes Ecclesiastical.
Car ou la ley del Esglise est, que chescun spiritual person est visitable per
l'ordinary, le Roy William le Conqueror per son Charter exempt l'abbey de
Battle del visitation and Irisdiction del ordinary, en ceux express parols,
sitque dicta Ecclesia libera and quieta imperpetuum ab omni subiectione
Episcoporum, and quarumlibet personarum dominationes, sicut Ecclesia Christi
Cantuariensis, etc. per que il dispense o^e la ley del Esguse. en cest case.
vid. libr. de vera differentia Regiae potestatis and Ecclesiastic^, edit. 1534.
ou tout le dit charter e^^ tecite alarge. Et tiel charter fuit grant al abbey
de Abingdon per le Roy Kenulphus. 1. Henr. 7. 23. and 25 and Cawdreys Case. 5.
fol. 10. a Issint chescun appropriation comprist en ceo un dispensation al
person impersonne ^a^er and retainer le bene^ice en perpetuity, come appiert en
Grendons Case Plow. Comment. 503. en quel act le Roy per le common ley serra
toutfoits actor, non solement come Supreme patron, come est auxi note e^
Grendons Case, m^^ aux^ come Supreme ordinary. Car le Roy sole sans l^ Pape
poet fait appropriation. 7 Edw. 3. Fitz. Quare impedit. 19. issint en le dit
case del Evesque de S. David's. 11. Henr 4. fol. 213. b. Hankford. mist cest
question, si le Royv^^ grant, devant le creation del Evesque, que il pur^oit
tener un bene^ice and l'Evesquery ensemble, s^come l'Apostle ad fait, ne serra
my le grant bon? Norton and Skrene bon asse^s. Issint en 11. Henr. 7. 12. a.
en le case de malum prohibitum, and malum in se, est la tenus, que le Roy poet
dispenser ov^ un Priest de tener 2. benefices, and ove un bas^ard que il secra
priest, nie^t obstant les Ecclesiastical leys queux sont al contrary. Et
s^come il po^t dispenser ove ceux leyes, issint i^ poet pardon touts offenses
encounter ceux leyes, and son pardon est bar en touts suits pro salute
animae, ou reformatione morum, and touts suits ex officio en l'Eccles^asticall
Cour^. Halls case en le 5. part de les Reports del Seignior Cook. fol. 51.

CEst point donques esteant issint probe, viz. ^ue l^ Roy D'eugleterre solement
puissoit de iure dispenser ove l'Ecclesiasticall ley en cest case, and ^^^ers
deins ses dominions, devant le fesans del Statute de faculties, l'ef^ect and
validity de cest faculty (...) dispensation e^eant grant vt supra fuit
consider. Cest faculty ^uit ^raunt p^r Commissioners authori^e per letters
patents del Royne Eliz. de graunter faculties and dispensations in cest Realm
accordant al State de. 28. Henr. 8. cap. 20. enac'ed en cest Realm. Per quel
act tiels Commissioners ont me^me l'authority que l'Archevesque de Canterbury
ad an Engleterre, per force del Statute de. 25. Henr. 8. cap. 21. enacted en
Engleterre. Quel Statute de. 25. Hear. 8. done authority al Archevesque de
Canterbury de graunter touts faculties and dispensations, etc. pur causes nient
contrary ou repugnant al Saints Scriptures and ley de Dieu qutux ont use en
temps parauant destre ew and obtain en la Court de Rome: and touts auters
faculties and dispensations que serront pur le honor del Roy, and profit del
Realm, issint que loent pur causes que ne sont repugnant al leyes de Dieu. Et
que touts acts destre fait and executed accordant al tenor de tielx faculties
and dispensations, serront firm, and tematnecont en force nient obstant ascun
foreign ley, decree, Canon, ou decretall, etc. per que appiert, quel power and
authority ceux Commissioners avoent de graunter facultiet and dispensations.
Mes ne appiert que ils avoent power de graunter ascun faculty ou dispensation
en tiel form come le faculty supra est plead destre grant al Evesque
d'Ossory, Car test faculty nest garrant per le dit Statute, pur 2. principal
reasons. 1. Pur ceo que null tiel faculty ou dispensation suit accustom destre
grant en le Court de Rome. Car les faculties grant la, fueront d'auter form,
and different de cest faculty en diverse material points: issint que cest
faculty, si ceo ad estre obtain en le Court de Rome, ad estre void per le rule
del Canon ley. 2. Admit que tiel faculty ad use destre grant en le Court de
Rome, vncor le cause pur que ceo est grant est repugnant al les saint
Scriptures and ley de Dieu, and per consequence, nest, en ascun sort, garrant
per le dit Statute.


1. Pur le form de cest faculty oue est tiel, viz. que l'Evesque d'Ossory,
vnum vel plura beneficia, curata vel non curata, sui, vel alieni
iurispatronatus, adtunc vacantia, vel quae imposterum vacare contigerint, and
non excedentia, etc. perpetuae commendae titulo adipisci, occupare, retinere,
omnesque fructus ad familiae suae sustentationem conuertere possit: iuribus
sieve institutis quibuscunque in contrarium non obstantibus. Ceo est trop
general, and pur ceo est irregular, and fault certain material clauses, queux
fueront toutsfoits mise en tiels faculties esteant grant and obtain en le
Court del Rome. Car en tielx faculties grant la, fuit toutsfoits vu particular
derogation, ou Non obstante del droit de patronage des lay patrons, and del
droit del Roy per express nosme, ou le patronage appertient a lay: aute^ment
le faculty ad estre void. (car per le Canon ley les lay patrons doent estre
appell de doner lour consents en touts cases de cest nature and si tiel
particular: Non obstante ne fuit add en le faculty, un auter clause fuit mise,
viz. Dummodo patronorum expressus aceedat consensus. Auxi pet un auter clause,
authority fuit toutsfoits done al official, ou Archedeaton, ou auter
Ecclesiastical minister de metter cesty a que le faculty est. grant en
possession del denefice cum accederit. Ou en cest faculty grant al Evesque
d'Ossory, est null particular Non obstante ou derogation del droit de patronage,
ne del Roy, ne des auters lay patrons, ne ascun mention fait de consent del
Roy, ou del ascun auter patron. Auxi per cest faculty cesty que ad obtain ceo
ne vesoigne destre mise en possession per ascun Ecclesiastical minister, mes
il poet, come semble, prender le possession del ascun benefice que serra void,
de soy mesme, immediatment, and quasi per saltum, sans praesentation,
institution, ou induction, and sans ascun auter formal ou legal collation.

Et a drover que les clauses avantdit fueront toutsfoits mise en tielx
faculties grauntes ou purchase en le Court de Rome, Rebuffus de Praxi
beneficiorum (un tresbon authority a cest purpose) fuit vouch: ou traitant
alarge de Papae prouisionibus, il dit, quod cum Iuspatronatus laicis a iure
reseruatum sit, ob id Papa non solet confer beneficia sub Iure patronatus
laicorum existentia, nisi cum speciali derogatione iurispatronatus laicorum,
and non est suae intentionis, vt valeat collatio non facta speciali
derogatione, vt dicit: Io. Andreas (que fuit un ancient Canonist long te^ps
devant le Statute de faculties) se de hoc vidisse Bullam directam Praelatis
Angliae (quod nota) alias prouisio Papae tanquam subreptitia non valet, quia
citra intentionem Papae. Et ouster il dit, quod clausulae genetales
derogatoriae non sufficient ad derogationem Iurispatronatus laicorum, etiamsi
adesset clausula motus propril. and generalis clausula, non obstante (come est
en cest faculty) aut clausula, ad quamcunque collationem, praesentationem, vel
prouisionem pertineat, quia illa verba intelligerentur de Clericis, non de
laicis. Il auxi dit, quod specialis mentio Regis fieri debet, quia si prouisio
a Papa facta fuerit non obstante Iurepatronatus laicorum, si spectaret ad
regem, non valeret prouisio, and Rex se opponere posset. ^ncor il dit, que cest
special non obstante ne vesoigne, si cest conditional clause soit mise en le
provision, dummodo patronorum accedat consensus.

Et est destre note, que commenda est quaedam prouisio, and pur ceo Gomes in
regula de Idiomate, dit, quod commendare est prouidere, and quod commenda
comprehenditur subquibuscunque regulis de prouisione loquentibus.

Et que per le Canon ley le content d^l patron est requisite, ou benesice est
done en commendam, vid. lib. 6. Decretal. cap-Nemo, ou ie Gloss dit. Ad
commendam vocabitur patronus, and si qui alil ex tali commenda laeduntur. Et in
legitimis constitut. Othobon. titul. de commendis (queux constitutions sont
annex al Linwoods provincials) est dit, quod consensus patroni ad huiusmodi
commendam requiritur. Et pur mesme le reason en thesenn faculty, ou license
grant per le Pape de fa^r permutation, union, ou appropriation des Esglises,
ceux pa: ols fueront a^ toutsfoits, vocatis quorum interest que est entend
principalment d^l Patron come Rebuff. and les auters Canonists diont, and que
union and appropriation ne serront fait sans asient del Patron est manifest per
nostre livers. viz. 11. Henr. 7. 8. 6. Henr. 7. 13. 46. Ass. p. 50. E. 3. 26.
40 E. 3. 28. Grendons Case (...) low. Comment. 498. a.

A prover auxi, que en chescun tiel faculty grant per le Pape d'aver and
reteiner beneficium vacans seu vacaturum, un clause executory fuit toutsfoits
mise, per que l'officiall, ou Archedeacon, ou auter Ecclesiastical minister
fuit authorize de meiter cesty que ad tiel faculty grant a luy en corporal
possession de tiel benefice, Rebuffus fuit cite, ou il declare le form de cest
faculty, and la il dit quod intrusus dicitur, qui intrat beneficium propria
authoritate. Car il ne enter en loiall manner, and ideo non intrat per pottam.
Et accordant a ceo Hankford, dit, 11. Henr. 4. 229. a. que si home ad obtain
Bull de provision, sil n'ad executors de son Bull, queux luy parront metter
eins per authority, and per course del ley, ne serra adiudge eins per provision
del Pape, mes intrnoor.

Per que appiert que cest faculty grant al Evesque de Ossory vary en diverse
material points del form des faculties grant en le Court de Rome devant le
fesans de Statute de faculties, and pur ceo nest garrant per le dit Statute en
cest respect.

2 Admit que tiel faculty fiut use and accustom destre grant and obtain en
le Court de Rome, vncor, nest garrant per le Statute, pur ceo que le cause de
cest faculty nest agreeable est al saint Scripture and ley de Dieu. Car ou
l'expresse text de Scripture est. 1. Timoth. c. 2. quod oportet Episcopum esse
Doctorem and Hospitalem: experientia docet (dit Innocent. 6. Extrauagan. cap.
pastoris) occasion commendarum, Cultum diuinum minui, curam animarum negligi,
hospitalitatem consuetam and debitam non seruari, ruinis aedificia supponi,
etc. Et ou est dit en mesme le Text, que Evesque serra vnius vxoris vir, per
que est entend (come les Canonists expound ceo) que il avera forsque un
Eveschery, on un Cure, ils diont que per commendam Bigamia contrahitur in
Ecclesia. Et pur ceo un bon and pious Evesque disoit, (quant un auter benefice
fuit offer a luy a tener en commendam) absit, vt cum sponsa habeam concubinam.

Mes per nostre ley, un faculty grant and execute en tiel form come le
faculty, grant vt supra al Evesque d'Ossory est fairoit manifest tort and
injury aux lays Patrons. Car est express license done al Evesque de fair
usurpation sur lays Patrons, and de toller le benefit de lour advonsans
esteant iour droit and enheritance. Et ceo esteant tort est malum in se, and
encounter la ley de Dieu: and pur ceo ne puissoit estre dispensed with devant
le Statute, ne per le Roy, ne per le Pape, and ore tiel faculty ou license nest
confirm ne entend destre confirm per le Statute de faculties.

Et pur ceo quant al Roy est dit. 11. Henr. 7. 12. a. que le Roy ne poet
dispenser ove ascun de fair nuisance en l'hault chimin, and sil ceo fait, tiel
dispensation est void, and 8. Henr. 6. 19. Roy ne poet grant que si home fait
trespass a moy, que ied n'avera action verse luy: ou que home serra son Idge
demesne. Et pur ceo est soventfoits dit en nostre livers, que prerogative del
Roy ne faira Tort al subject 13. Edw. 3. 8. a. 35. H. 6. 29. b. 5. Cook. 55.
b. Knights Case. Auxi coment que le Roy poet dispenser ove un Statute que
prohibit indifferent chose destre fait, vncor il ne poet chaunger le common ley
per son Patent. 37. Henr. 8. Br. Patents. 100. 6. Henr. 7. 4. Et ne poet
dispenser ove le common ley ove Non obstante. 4. Cook. 35. Bozoms Case. Et
quant al Pape, est soventfoits dit en le dit notable case del Evesque de S.
David's. 11. Henr. 4. que les Bulls del Pape ne poent chaunger la ley
D'engleterre. Et ceo accord ove les rules de Canon ley. Non valet declaratio
Papae vel Regis in praeiudicium tertij. Rebuffus in praxi beneficiorum titul.
de non tollendo ius quisitum. Et alibi il dit, per clausulam motu proprio etc.
Papa non tollit ius tertij. Talis praesumitur men's Papae concedentis, qualis
est iuris. Donatio Principis intelligitur, sine praeiudicio tertij.

Si donques tiel faculty, ou dispensation en tiel form ne puissoit estre
grant per le Roy, ne per le Pape, devant le Statute de faculties, certes les
fesors de cest Statute ne vnques entendoent de fair ascun faculty von, que
fuissoit unreasonable, and enconter common droit devant le Statute. Come les
Statutes queux confirmont les customs de London ne confirmont ascun
unreasonable custom que ad esire use en London. Et issint come Litt. dit. 165.
a. le Statute de Gloucester serra entend, que provide, que si baron esteant
seisie de terre en droit sa feme alien la terre ove garranty en la vie del
feine, ne serra bar al heir del feme, si null fine soit levy en le Court del
Roy: ceo est destre entend and expound si null loiall fine so it droiturelment
levy en Court del Roy en que le Baron and feme ioynont. Car si fine ove
garranty soit levy per le Baron sole sans sa feme ceo ne serra bar al heir
del feme.

Mes pur fair cest point vncor plus clear, le nature and difference de les
Commendaes warrantable per le Canon ley fueront declare and consider. Et quant
a ceo, fuit dit quod commenda Ecclesiae, est rien forsque commendatio Ecclesiae
ad custodiam alterius. Et pur ceo Decret. causa. 21. q. 1. titul. qui plures,
le Gloss dit, commendare, nihil aliud est quam deponere. Cest commenda seu
commendatio Ecclesiae est diverse, solonque le nature del Esglise, and le
limitation ou continuance de le commenda. Car commenda poet estre Ecclesiae
Curatae, vel non Curatae, and poet estre ^^poranea, viz. pur temps certain,
come pur. 6. mois, ou perpetua, viz. durant le vie del commendatary. Esglise
ove cure ne poet estre done en commendam, si ne soit pur evident necessity, ou
profit del Esglise, viz. de supplier le Cure tantque provision soit fait del
sufficient incumbent. Et pur ceo fuit provide per le Counsel de Lions, que un
Parochial Esglise ne serroit done en commendam, nisi ex euidenti necessitate
vel vtilitate Ecclesiae, and quod talis commenda vltra semestris temporis
spacium non duraret, and quod secus factum fuerit sit irritum ipso iure, etc.
6. Decretal. cap. Nemo. Mes benefice sans cure poet estre done per le Canon ley
pur sustentation del Commendatary vel ad mensam. Et en cest sense les Canonists
diont, quod commenda est quasi comedenda, quia Ecclesia quae traditur in
commendam quasi comeditur and deuoratur. Et tiel benefice properment poet estre
done en perpetuam commendam. Summa summarum, titul. Commenda, articul. 1. and
2. Per que appiert, que le dit Uicarage esteant benefice ove cure ne poet estre
done en perpetuam commendam per le Canon avantdit. Et coment que le Gloss sur
le dit Canon. 6. Decretal. cap. Nemo, dit, quod ista constitutio non
comprehendit Romanum Pontificem, ideo Romanus Pontifex potest in perpetuum
commendare, vncor appiert auxi, per ceo que est monstre devant, que le Pape ne
vsoit, ne puissoit doner commendam en tiel form come le faculty on
dispensation avantdit est done, per que fuit conclude que cest faculty ou
dispensation fuit void a touts entents.

MEs admit que cest faculty prendroit effect and serroit perpetua commenda,
vncor ceo ne fait l'Evesque perpetuum Vicarium, issint que soit perfect
incumbent del dit Esglise, and que l'Esglise soit plein de luy durant son vie.

Car per le rule de nostre ley, un Esglise ne serra dit plein verse common
person si l'incumbent ne soit eins pet presentation, institution, ou per
formal collation que amount al presentation and institution. Mes verse le Roy
serra null plenarty sans presentation, institution, and induction, 22. Henr. 6.
27. 44. Edw. 3. 3. 11. Henr. 4. 7. 24. Edw. 3. 30. Et pur cest reason v^ person
enpersonnee ne piedra pienarty verse estraunge patron, pur ceo que il ne vient
eius per presentment. 38. Henr. 6. 20. 39. Henr. 6. 21. 46. Ass. p. 4. 14.
Henr. 8. 30. vid. auxi te Statute. W. 2. cap. 5. pet que cesty que plead
plenitudinem Ecclesiae doet monstrer de quel presentment. Et en Heckers Case.
13. Henr. 8. 12. ou master del Hospital ad present luy mesine al Esglise, de
que l'a^von^on app^^t addit Hospital, coment que l'ordinary ad luy admit,
vncor fuit adiudge la, que le presentation esteant void, null plenarty fuit gain
per suy en le dit Esglise. a fortiori en cest case, cest Vicarage ne serra dit
plein del Evesque d'Ossory, ou il mesme enter, and prist possession de ceo,
sans estre vnques present, institut, ou induct, and sans ordinary coliation, ou
ascun legal ceremony.

Et pur ceo per le rule del Canon ley auxi, cesty que vient eins per commendam
non est Praelatus, sed procurator tantum, and est nisi custos, seu
administrator, and ius in Ecclesia non habet. 6. Decretal. cap. Nemo and
constitut. Othoboni, cap. de Commendis Ecclesiarum, fol. 65. Et ove ceo accord.
27. Henr. 8. 15. ou est dit que le Cardinal de York ad l'Abbey de Saint
Albons en Commendam, and vncor ne fuit Abbe.

Vncor cest difference fuit agree, que si clerk soit present al benefice ove
cure, and soit ad^^tt, institute, and indu^t a ceo, issint que l'Esglise soit
plein de luy, si apres il soit present al auter benefice incompatible, on elect
al Evesquery, and devant que il soit institute al second benefice, on soit
create en Evesque, il obtain faculty ou dispensation de retainer le primer
benefice perpetuae commendae titulo, que est durant son vie, cest faculty on
dispensation serra de tiel effect, que le primer benefice ne serra void per le
acceptance del second, on per le promotion al Evesquery, mes que il remainera
plein and perfect incumbent del primer benefice durant son vie.

Et le faculty on dispensation en cest case ne fait ascun Tort ou injury al
patron. Car le Patron ne presenteroit arrere tantque le prochein avoidance, and
l'Esglise en cest case ne devient vnques void, per reason del dispensation, que
prevent l'avoidance. vid. Rebuff. de praxi beneficiorum. 3. part. signatur. Si
Papa dispensat cum promoto ad Episcopatum vt retineat sua beneficia, poterit
retinere etiam quae sub patronatu laicorum sunt, quia non agitur de praeiudicio
Patroni, cum non vacet beneficium, que ad estre adiudge dit il, in Decis.
Rotae. 331. Car la ley que ordain que ^e primer benefice serra void per
acceptance del second, poet estre dispensed with, and issint est de la ley que
ordain que quant home est fait Evesque, que ses auters benefices serront void,
come Thirning dit. 11. Henr. 4. 213. b. Car ceux leyes fueront faits per
Ecclesiastical policy, and pur ceo mesine le policy poet dispenser ove ceux
leyes. Mes la ley que prohibit ^ort on injury al tierce person, ne poet estre
dispensed with pur les reasons avantdit. Et pur ceo le benefice que est vnfoits
void, and le prochein avoydance de ceo eschew al Patron, ne poet estre prise
and occupy per virtue del ascun tiel license on faculty. Er accordant a cest
difference sont plusors cases ruled en nostre libers.

11. Henr. 4. 170. 213. 229. en le notable case del Euesque de Saint David's
soventfoits cite devant, est resolve per Thirning, Hankford, and le melior
opinion de cest liver, que quant un prevendary de Sarum fuit elect al Evesquery
de Saint. David's, and devant que il fuit create en Evesque, il obtain
dispensation del Pape de retainer touts ses auters benefices nient obstant,
etc. Et apres il est create and consecrate Evesque, que le Roy en cest, case
n'avera Quare impedit verse l'Evesque pur le prebend, ne action sur le Statute
de. 25. Edw. 3. que done presentment al Roy, ou le Pape per provision done
ascun benefice don't le Patronage appent al spiritual person. Car en ambideux
cases il covient estre un avoydance del benefice devant que le Roy poet
presenter, ou en cest case devant, l'Esglise ne devient void, mes l'incumbent
continue eins de son eigne title. Et put ceo Hankford la dit, que l'Evesque,
sur cest dispensation de retainer, ne paiera first fruits arrere pur cest
benefice. Et si le Roy ad primer and prochein avoidance d'un benefice, and
apres grant tiel faculty ou dispensation al incumbent de retainer cest
benefice, nient obstant que il serroit create en Evesque, and apres l'incumbent
est fait l'Evesque, vncor ceo ne amount al presentation, mes que apres le mort
del incumbent le Roy presentera un auter Clerk a ceo: eat null aboidance fuit de
cest benefice, dcvant le mort del incumbent: mes de auter part fuit cleerment
resolve en le dit case del Evesque de Saint David's, que si le dispeniation ad
estre fait apres que le prebendary vst estre create Evesque, que le prebend ad
estre void, and null faculty puisloit luy ennabler de retainer ceo envers le Roy.

Et pur ceo en temps Henr. 6. quant Henry Beaufort graund uncle del Roy esteant
Evesque de Winchester tuit fait Cardinal, and apres ceo il purchase del Pape
un Bull declaratory, que meant obstant que il fuit fait Cardinal, que son
Evesquery de Winchester ne fuit void, pur que il puissoit ceo retainer come
devant: vncor fuit tenus que le Sea del Winchester fuit void per l'assumption
del Cardinalship, que exempt l'Evesque del Iriediction de son Metropolitan. Et
pur ceo le Cardinal fuit en Case de Praemunire, per que il purchase son pardon
cue est destre trove enter les Charters. 4. Henr. 6. in Archiuis Turr. London.
6. and 7. Eliz. Dier. 233. a Io. Packhurst esteant elect al Evesquery de
Norwich, devant que il fuit create Evesque, obtain dispensation d'Archevesque
de Canterbury (per bertue del Statute de faculties) de retainer un perlonage,
que il avoit devant, in commendam, pro tribus annis, viz a festo sancti
Michaelis in Anno Dom. 1560. vsque adidem festum que serroit en l'An. 1563.
devant le primer feast de Saint Michael, Packhurst est create Evesque, and puis
il resign le benefice: and le question fuit, si cest benefice vacauit per
resignation del Packhurst, ou per son promotion al Evesquery: and fuit adiudge,
que l'Esglise se voida per son resignation: que prove que per virtue del dit
dispensation il continue person tant que il ad resign. vid. N. Br. 36. h, si
person que ad dispensation de tener son rectory, soit cree on Evesque, and puis
le Patron present auter incumbent que est institute, and induct, ore l'Evesque
avera spoliation verse cesty incuinbent, que prove, que son real possessien en
le personage tout sfoits continue per virtue del dispensation. Issint que
faculty ou dispensation a tener benefice en perpecuam commendam est bon and
effectual a tiel person tantum que est plein and perfect incumbent al temps
del dispensation fait aluy, and nemi a cesty que n'ad riens en le benefice.

Ce^ appiert auxi per Hollands Case en le. 4. part de les Reports del Seignior
Cook. 75. Car la Io. May aiant le personage de Northcreake que fuit ouster le
annuel value de 8. li. accept auter benefice incompatible, issint que le
primner benefice fuit void. Apres il fuit elect al Evesquery de Carlisle, and
devant son creation, il obtain faculty de retainer le personage de Northcreake
in commendam, and fructus and emolumenta ad vsus suos conuertere, etc. Uacor
fuit aiudge, que cest faculty ne luy aydera pur le benefice que fuit void, car
il ne fuit person al temps del dispensation grant a luy.

Ame^me l'entent est Digbyes Case en le. 4. des Reports del Seignior Cook. 79
un Merrick person de Norton que fuit del annuel value del. 8. li. fuit present
al Esglise de Stanes and admit, and institute a ceo, per quel institution le
primer benefice fuit void, vncor devant induction, il obtain qualification and
dispensation, Ecclesiam de Stanes recipere, and retinere, quoad vixerit, etc.
Uncor ceo vient trop tard de preserver le primer benefice, que fuit void
devant, vid. 18. Eliz. Dier. 347. Doctor Westons Case.

Sur touts ceux reasons and authorities ils concludont, que cest faculty ou
dispensation de prender un void benefice en perpetuam commendam fuit void. Mes
si benefice soit plein d'incumbent, faculty post estre grant a cest incumbent
de retainer ceo in perpetuam commendam, nient obstant que il prist auter
benefice incompatible. Et pur ceo les Bulls de provision grant per le Pape,
queux fueront en nature de faculties de prender beneficia vacantia, vel
vacatura, ne vnques fesoent le prouisor able de prender and occupier un
benefice que serroit void de sa test demesne, sans institution, admission, ou
induction. Car sil ad enter en tiel manner, la ley vst adiudge luy abator, and
disturbor, and quare impedit gisoit bers luy. Mes si tiel prouisor ad estre
admit, institute, and induct, donques serroit remove per l'estatut de
prouisoribus. 29. Edw. 3. 44. a. and 11. Henr. 4. 213. 229. Mes le Roy
removeroit tiel provisor per Quare impedit, apres institution and induction.
19. Edw. 3. Fitz. Quare non admisit. 7. 8.

Et issint horse de tout ceo que est dit devant, result cest difference enter
faculty de prender benefice, and faculty de retainer benefice viz. que faculty
grant al un que nest incumbent de prender un void benefice, est void: and
faculty al un que incumbent d'un benefice, de retainer mesine le benefice, est
von. Et per consequence cest faculty grant al Evesque d'Ossory esteant void,
le Uicarage abantdit ne fuit vnques plein de luy, per que le Roy ad bon title a
presenter a ceo per laps.

MEs del auter part, fuit argue per le Counsel des defendants. 1. que cest
faculty grant en le form avantdit, fuit bon, and doet estre approbe and allow
pur bon en cest Court. 2. que cest faculty fuit bien execute per l'entry del
Evesque en le Uicarage sans aseun presentation, institution, and induction. 3.
Que l'Evesque aiant enter and occupy cest benefice per virtue de cest faculty,
l'Elglise fuit fait plein de luy, issint que null title puistoit devolver al
Roy per lapsum temporis durant le vie del Evesque.

Quant al primer point, ils arguont, que cest faculty fuit bon, and doet estre
allow pur bon in cest Court, pur eco que est bien garrant per un positive ley
del Realm, viz. per le Statute de. 28. Henr. 8. cap. 20. per que les
Commissioners ont power and authority a doner and graunter per lour
discretions, tielx dispensations, licenses, ou faculties pur causes nient
repugnant a les saint Scriptures, and leyes de Dieu, come en temps paravant ont
estre use and accustom destre en obtain al See de Rome: and que chescun
dispensation, license, ou faculty grant per virtue de cest act, serra approve
pur bon and effectual en ley en touts Courts and Irisdictions eibien
Spiritual que Temporal, etc.

Et a prover, que cest faculty ou dispensation grant al Evesque d'Ossory fuit
bien garrant per le dit Act de Parliament, fuit monstre, 1. que tiel faculty ou
dispensation ad use and accuslome destre grant and obtain en le Court de Rome
devant le fcsans de cest Statute, 2. que la cause pur que cest faculty ou
dispensation est grant nest repugnant ou contrary a la saint Scripture ou ley
de Dieu, 3. que le faculty en cause de ceo nest unreasonable, ou meerement
encounter ley, mes est aggreeable, and poet bien estoier, ove les rules de la
ley D'engleterre.

1 Et pur monstrer que tielx faculties ou disponsations ont use destre grant
en le Court de Rome, devant le Statute, l'originall del Commenda fuit
primerment enquire. Et suit dit, que le Pape Leo 4. Anno Domini. 848. aut co
circiter primerment invent le Commendam. Come appiert libr. Decretorum causa
23. quaest. 2. ou est dit, vnde Leo 4. scribit, qui plures Ecclesias retinet,
vnam quidem titulatam, alteram vero sub commendatione tenere debet. Car ou per
les ancient Canons and Counsels, un home ne puissoit aver forsque un
benefice, and vncor per experience tuit trove convenient que ascunfoits, viz.
en case de necessity ou vtility del Esglise, un home averoit le charge and les
fruits de plusors benefices, cest distinction fuit invent and allow, que coment
que home naveroit forsque un benefice in litulo, vncor il puissoit aver auter
benefice in Commenda, viz. que auter benefice puissoit estre commend and
committ a son custody and cure, tantque un able incumbent fuissoit provide pur
ceo.

Mes apres, grand abuse esteant trove en le granting de ceux Commendas per les
Ordinaries (car omnium rerum, quarum est vsus, potest esse abusus, virtute
solum excepta, dit, Aristotle) un auter Canon fuit fait en le Counsel de Lions
Anno Domini 1274. pur reformation de ceo, come appiert libr. 6. Decretal. de
Elect. and Elect. potestate, cap. Nemo. Nemo deinceps parochialem Ecclesiam
alicui non constituto in legitima aetate, vel sacerdotio commendare praesumat,
nec tali, nisi vnam, and euidenti necessitate vel vtilitate Ecclesiae suadente.
Huiusmodi autem Commendam rite factam declaramus vltra semestre temporis
spatium non durare, etc. Mes la glo se la dit (come est monstre devant) ista
constitutio non comprehendit Romanum Pontificem, ideo Romanus Pontifex potest
perpetuo commendare, issint que le Pape, nient obstant rest Canon, ad power de
doner benefices in perpetuam Commendam.

Et reuera depuis le dit Counsel de Lions, sicome lc Pape ad reserve a luy
mesme le sole power a doner benefices in perpetuam Commendam, issint il
reducoit cest power in actum, and vsoit and practisoit ceo en touts Realms de
Christendom. Specialment les Papes queux fueront resident al Auignion en
France en le temps Henr. 2. Ed. 1. Ed. 2. E. 3. suerout fort liberal, non
solement en granting des Provisions (encounter queux nostre statutes fueront
fait en temps Ed. 1. and Ed. 3.) mes en donant touts sorts d'Ecclestasticall
benefices in Commendam perpetuam. Et coment que primerment ceo fuit fait pur
supporter le dignity des Cardinals, come fuit protesse per le Pape Clement. 6.
en son Epistle al Ed. 3. que est en le history de Walsingham fol. 150. b. Uncor
apres, ceux Graces fverant purchase per auters Ecclesiastical persons de touts
degrees, en touts nations de Christendom. Et specialment en Engleterre, and
Ireland. Car domesticis exemplis abundamus en ceit point viz. que tiels
faculties ou dispensations a tener Ecclesiastical dignities and benefices in
Commendam perpetuam fueront grant and obtain en le Court de Rome.

En temps Henr. 3. viz. Anno Domini 1253. Matthew. Paris. histor magn. 848. le
grand Clerk Rob. Grosthead Evesque de Lincoln, que se opposoit fortment
encounter les provisions del Pape, complain la de cest novel provision per voy
de Commenda. Caeterum, dit il, quod videre non consueuit, concedit Papa, vt
aliquis Episcopatum obtineat, nec tamen Episcopus existat, sed electus
sempiternus. Et per mesine cesty Matthew. Paris. en mesine l'history 914. est
record, que Anno Domini 1257. Aegidius de Bridleford Electus Sarisburiensis,
manifestauit palam, quod Romae strenue impetrauerat, vt scilicet liceret ei
pristinos redditus retinere, ac etiam Decanatum, quod nuper nouum habebatur,
sed iam toties permistum nulli stuporem generauit.

Apres ceo, appiert per le liver 41. Edw. 3. 5. que un W. aiant un Prebend en
le Cathedral Esglise de Sarum, and que le Pape, devant son consecration, ad
done a luy ses benefices queux il avoit devant, and le Roy recitant cest done
del Pape ad grant a luy ses temporalties, sur que fuit adiudge que cest
Prebend ne devient void, mes que l'Evesque retiendra ceo apres son consecration.

Il appiert auxi en le dit Case del Evesque de S. David's. 11. Henr. 4. sovent
foits cite devant, que en temps del Edw. 3. Edmund le Moigne de Bury, que fuit
attendant en le Court del Edw. 3. avoit plusors benefices per tiel
dispensation, come est noate la per Thirning. fol. 229. b. Auxi Hankford dit en
mesine le Case fol. 191. a. que il ad estre view, que un home ad estre Abbe de
Glastonbury and Evesque auxi d'un auter Esglise simul and semel, and avoit le
possession d'eux and les dignities a un mesine temps.

Auxi le dit principal Case en 11. Henr. 4. monstre, que Henr. Chicheley (que
fuit apres Archevesque de Canterbury) esteant un prebend en le Cathedral
Esglise de Sarum, fuit elect Evesque de Saint David's, and devant son
consecration, le Pape recitant per son Bull, que il fuit elect Evesque de Saint
David's, grant a luy faculty and power, de tener and enioyer touts ses auters
benefices, tantque le Pape ad auterment ordain, etc. vid. Nou. Decision.
Rotae. 331. mesme cesty point, que fuit argue. 11. Henr. 4. bien debate.

Et que ceux faculties ou dispensations a tener benefices in Commendam fueront
grant en le Court dei Rome en temps del Henr. 5. appiert en Linwood libr. 3.
de Praebend. cap. Audistis, verb. Dispensatione. Et en temps Henr. 6. Henry
Beaufort le graund uncle del Roy, esteant fait Cardinal obtain dispensation
del Pape de retainer l'Evesquery de Winchester en Commendam, come devant est
monstre, and coment que fuit tenus adonques que cest dispensation veignoit trop
tard esteant grant apres que l'Evesque fuit create Cardinal, vncor apres, en
temps Henr. 8. le Cardinal Wolsey aiant devant que il fuit create Cardinal,
obtain Bull del Pape de retainer l'Archevesquery de York come perpetual
administrator, and l'Abbey de Saint Albons en perpetuam commendam, il teignoit
ambideux durant son vie, per virtue de cest dispensation vid. 27. Henr. 8. 15.
b.

Per ceux examples and auctorities est manifest, que devant le fesans de cest
statut de faculties, tiels dispensations fueront eu and obtain en le Court de
Rome, a tener in Commendam Ecclesiastical benefices en Engleterre.

Et quant a cest Realm de Ireland, ceux dispensations de Pape fueront cy
frequent icy, que en temps Edw. 4. un special act de Parliament fuit fait
encounter les Commendams grant per le Pape al Ecclesiastical persons de cest
Realm. vid. l'estatut de 7. Edw. 4. cap. 2. per que est recite, That now of
late diverse men of holy Church suing to the Court of Rome, have purchased Bulls
from the holy father the Pope, to have as well Abbeyes, Priories, and other
dignities, as Personages, and Vicarages in Commendam, to the extinguishment of
divine service, etc. per que il est ordain, That whatsoever man of holy Church
do purchase any manner of dignity, Personage, or Vicarage by Bulls of the
Pope, to hold in Commendam, and the said Bulls, Personages, or Vicarages do
accept, he shall be out of the Kings protection, etc. And that no pardon or
license of the King made, or to be made, be avayleable in this behalf, but
be vterly void, if it be not by act of Parliament. Et cest special act
encounter les Commendams dei Pape fuit fait en cest Realm pur ceo que les
Statutes faites encounter Provisors en temps Edw. 3. parlont tant solement de
Reseruations, Collations and Provisions del Pape queux parols n'extendont al
Commendams come Hankford tient 11. Henr. 4. 213. a.

2 La cause pur que cest faculty ou dispensation fnit grant nest repugnant ou
contrary al Saint Escripture ou ley de Dieu. Car plurality de benefices nest
prohibit per le Scripture ou ley de Dieu, mes e contra est un express Text que
dit, 1. Timoth. c. 5. Qui been praesunt presbyteri duplici honor digni
habeantur, dicit enim Scriptura non alligabis os boui trituranti, etc. Et est
alter Text que require, vt Episcopus sit Hospitalis. Et le principal cause de
granting cest faculty fuit pur enabler le Evesque a maintener hospitality,
come touts appropriations and unions fueront fait pur mesme le cause. Auxi
l'Office que l'Evesque ad en l'Esglise est de grand dignity, quel dignity ne
poet estre preserve sans countenance and maintenance. Pur que quant les
revenewes del Evesquery ne sont sufficient, l'Ecclesiasticall policy, que done
competent addition per voy de Commendam, ne serra dit repugnant ou contrary al
ley de Dieu.

Auxi il poet bien estoier ove reason and religion, que un Evesque avera and
retainera un particular benefice ove Cure deins son Diocese demesne, pur ceo
que il ad le general Cure de touts Esglises la: habet curam Curarum, pur que
sur chescun institution il dit, accipe curam tuam and meam. Et sur cest reason
en ancient temps plusors Rectories ove Cure ont estre appropriate al
Evesqueries: come les Rectories de Eastmeane and Hambleden sont appropriate ad
mensam Episcopi Winton, and l'Evesque de Sarum ad plusors Rectories appropriate
a son Sea: en mesme le manner avoent le Primate de Armagh, and l'Archevesque de
Dublin en cest Realm certain Rectories appropriate ad mensam en lour several
Dioceses. Et reuera devant le division de parishes, chescun Evesque avoit le
destribution de touts les dismes deins son Diocese, come Beda dit en son
Ecclesiastical history. lib. 1. cap. 28.

3 Cest faculty ou dispensation (coment que dispensationes non debent trahi ad
communem legem come les Canonists diont) nest repugnant al rules del Common ley
D'engleterre. Car la Common ley D'engleterre ne prohibit pluralities, ne fait
l'inferior benefice void, si incumbent soit create en Evesque, mes l'auncient
l'Ecclesiasticall ley D'engleterre, ove que le Roy puissoit toutsfoits
dispenser per le rule del Common ley, come avaunt est monstre. 11. Henr. 4. 213.
a. b. Plow. Comment. Grendons Case. 503. b. 11. Henr. 4. 12. a.

Et nota que le dit statute 7. Edw. 4. cap. 2. enact en cest Realm, que
ordain que cesty que purchase Bull del Pape de tener benefice en Commendam
serra horse del Protection del Roy, provide auxi que pardon ou license del Roy
ne serra availeable en cest Case, que imply, que le Idgment del Parliament
adonques fuit, que license del Roy serroit availeable per le rule del Common
ley en tiel Case, accordant al opinion de Hankford. 11. Henr. 4. cite devant.
Et estoit ove bon reason que le Roy dispensera ove l'Ecclesiasticall ley
touchant benefices, pur ceo que le Roy and ses lay subjects fueront les donors
de touts benefices al Ecclesiastical persons, and pur ceo Marsil. Patauinus
appell les benefices del Esglise Eleemosinas laicorum.

Mes la verity est, que tielx faculties ou dispensations grant per le Pape
touchant Ecclesiastical benefices en Engleterre, fueront toutfoits encounter
la ley del Realm, car fuit mere usurpation sur la Corone D'engleterre devant
les statutes faites encounter Proui^ors. Et ceux statutes fueront fait en
declaration del common ley en cest point. 12. Edw. 2. Fitz. Quar. Imp. 169. 19.
Ed. 2. Fitz. Quar. non admisit. 7. 15. Edw. 3. Fitz. Quar. Imp. 160. 21. Fdw.
3. 40. 11. Henr. 4. 230. a.

Et quant al injury que est suppose destre fait al Patron per le granting and
executing de cest faculty, en cest Case, est manifest, come cest Case est, que
le Patron nest prejudice. Car l'Evesque ne enter en le Uicarage, tantque ceo ad
estre void per tempus semestre, and issint title accrue al Evesque mesine a
collater per laps. Et sur cest reason Rebuffus libr. de praxi beneficiorum mist
un rule quod quando laici patroni non praesentauerint infra tempuc a iure
praefixum, ita quod collatio dcuoluta sit ad superiorem per lapsum temporis,
Papa de iure prouidere potest, sine derogatione iuris patronatus laicorum.

SEcondment fuit argue per le counsel des defendants, que cest faculty fuit
bien execute per acceptance and enter del Evesque en le dit vitarage, sans
presentation, institution, ou induction, car ceux acts ou ceremontes ne sont
toutfoits de necessity destre use en conterring d'un personage ou U carage, que
poet estre bien tait diverse voies sans presentation, institution, and
induction. 1. per Roy d'appropriation. 2. per voy de voion. 3. per voy de
permutation. 4. per voy de Commendam, and en temps. parabant, quant (...) Pape
vsurpoit jurisdiction in Engleterre, fuit un. 5. voy viz. per voy de Provision.
1. Quant al appropriation, vid. Plow. Comment. Grendons Case. 500. a. 503. a.
ou appurt que ie Roy (que ad sufficient authority a fair teo, come Plow la dit)
ad en son patent d'appropriation la, dispense ove admission, institution, and
induction, and ad done power al Deane and Chapter de Wigorn a que
l'appropriation fuit fait, d'enter en le personage, and de retainer ceo sans
auter ceremony and ceo fuit resolve and adiudge bon dispensation en cest case.
vid le ^orme del patent d'appropriation en le dit Case de Grendons Plow.
Comment 494. a. and compare ceo ove le faculty supra. Car est graund
resemblance, come semble, enter Commendam perpetuam, and appropriation le
difference est en le temps de continuance, car Commenda perpetua est durant le
vie del commendatary. tantum, and appropriation est en perpetuity,

2 Quant al union, vid 11. Henr. 7. 8. ou Chapel esteant plein d'un incumbent
fuit unite al Magdalen College en Oxford, and apres l'incumbent resign, le
President and Scholars entront en le Chapel, sans auter donation ou
induction: and ce^ agree ove Rebuffus in regula de vnionibus ou il dit,
possessio apprehendi potest propria authoritate in union vid. auxi. 50 Edw. 3.
27. 40. Edw. 3. 48.

3 Quant al permutation, vid. 2. Henr. 4. 11. a. ou est dit. que sur
permutation entry est loiall sans pluis, vid. auxi. 21. E. 3. 6. 7. vid.
Rebuffus in praxi beneficiorum titulo de collationibus. 663. quot sunt
requisita in permutatione beneficiorum.

Et fuit dit, que tiel faculty de prender beneficium vaca^rum apres le mort del
encumbent, fuit semble al grant del un reversion de terre apres le mort del
tenant pur vie, en quel case coment que tenant pur vie besoigne d'aver livery
de Seisin, vncor le grauntee del reversion apres le mort del tenant put vie
poet enter propria auctoritate sans tiel ceremony de livery.

Fuit auxi dit, que la iey dispensera ove formal institution, collation, and
induction en cest case, pur ceo que l'Evesque mesme est destre invest en le
benefice, and pur ceo son acceptance and entry est sufficient. Come la common
ley dispense ove express Atturnament, ou reversion est grant al cesty que
doet atturner, and ove actual delivery del legacy ou legatary est fait
executor (que poet auxi payer luy mesme per voy de retainer) and ove
assignement de Dower ou feme est gardein en Socage, and voet endower luy mesme
de la pluis Beal.

Et sicome en ancient temps provision del Pape amanto^ al collation, and sur
ceo le prouisor puissoit enter, come est tenus per Plow. en Grendons Case. 500.
and 11. Henr. 4. 220. Hankford dit, que provision est come institution and
acceptan^^ come induction: issint cest faculty de prender le benefice, ove
acceptance and entry del Evesque, amount al collation and induction.

DArrainment, fuit argue per le counsel des defendants que quant l'Evesque ad
enter and occupy cest benefice per virtue de cest faculty, que immediatement
l'Esglise fuit fait plein de luy, and issint null Title de presentation fuit
devolve al Roy per lapsum temporis, durant la vie del Evesque.

Et a prover cest darrain point, ils diont que ce^^y que ad un benefice per
Canonical title, est plein and perfect incumbent, and l'Esglise est plein de
luy. Mes cesty que ad benefice virtute commendae perpetuae ad ceo per
Canonical title, and pur ceo tiel commendatary est plein and perfect
incumbent, and l'Esglise est plein de luy. A prover cest argument Linwood. fuit
cite de Filiis Presbyt. cap. cum a iu^e. verb. vllo titulo, ou il define
Canonical title en cest manner. Titulus Canonicus est ius spirituale, sieve
causa habendi beneficium Ecclesiasticum, qui potest esse per viam
Institutionis, Collationis, Electionis, Commendae, vel alterius prouisionis. Et
in Constitut. Othoboni annex al Linwood. cap. Miserabilis, verb. Commendare,
fol. 65. est dit, quod habens commendam habet titulu^ Canonicum approbatum a
iure propter necessitatem vel vtilitatem Ecclesiae, and ideo concessa Commenda
Ecclesia non vacat.

Et pur ceo, sicome admission, and institution tantum est bon Title, and fait
plenarty enter common persons, and institution and induction ou installation
est bon Title verse le Roy. 22. Henr. 6. 27. 44. Ed. 3. 3. and sans tiel Title
home navera brief al Evesque en Quare impedit. 33. Henr. 6. 1. 12. Henr. 4.
11. 22. Henr. 6. 44. 45. 19. Edw. 4. 9. Issint Commenda que amount al admission
and institution, and l'entry del Commendatary virtute Commendae est bon Title,
and fait plenarty en cest Case Et cest ius spirituale, sieve causa habendi
beneficium Ecclesiasticum est appe^l Title, pur ceo que qui titulum habet ad
beneficium come Rebuffus dit, potest nominari and subscribi sub titulo illius
beneficii, adeo vt beneficium suum dici possit. Et habet in eo plenum ius, and
fructus suos facit, vt maritus habet ius in vxore and omnibus bonis eius.

Mes ou est dit, que home ad Canonical Title per virtue del Commenda, ceo est
destre entend del Commenda perpetua, and nemi del Commenda temporalis. Car
Commenda temporalis est forsque sequestration, and poet estre grant per
quescun ordinary pur tempus semestre, come est monstre debant. Et pur ceo tiel
Commendatary non est Praelatus, nee Maritus Ecclesiae, nec facit fructus suos,
sed est administrator tantum, and custos Ecclesiae. Et tiel Commenda non est
titulus, nec facit titulum, sed est quoddam depositum, iusques a ceo que
sufficient encumbent soit provide pur l'Esglise, and pur ceo tiel Commenda est
communement grant, quant le patron ne present un able person, ou quant
l'Esglise est litigious.

Mes Commenda perpetua que continue durant le vie del Commendatary, ne poet
estre grant per ascun inferior ordinary, mes solement per le Pape en tiel pais
ou il ad jurisdiction, ou per le Roy ou ses Delegates en cest Realm, and cest
Commenda est titulus Canonicus, nam militat eadem ratio in perpetuis Commendis
quae in aliis titulis libr. 6. de Electionibus cap. Nemo, and issint ad estre
sovent foits adiuge in Rota, come Gomes dit, in regula de Triennali possessore
ou il argue cest point pro and contra alarge, ou il dit, que le faculty del
perpetua Commenda est amplissima dispositio, and habet vbertatem verborum, viz.
licentiam and facultatem fructus omnes percipiendi and in proprios vsus
conuertendi, etc. Quae verba important collationem and titulum, and non simplex
depositum. Et ouster il dit, ille dicitur verus and legitimus titulus qui a
lege, vel homine potestatem habente est concessus, and signa very and legitimi
tituli sunt, perpetuitas, and fructuum dispositio, quae duo concurrunt in
Commenda perpetua. Il dit auxi la, quod permutatio potest esse de Commenda
perpetua ad commendam perpetuam, and de tiel Commenda ad titulum, and quod
talis Commendatarius potest locare omni a bona Ecclesiae: quod Commenda est
instar Collationis, and sicut reseruatio Papae vacat per Collationem, sie per
Commendam perpetuam, secus per temporalem: quodque per Commendam perpetuam
beneficium desinit vacare, and fit plenum, quasi per viam Collationis.

Rebuffus auxi in libr de praxi beneficiorum. 135. agree ove Gomes, ou il dit,
per mortem Commendatarii perpetui beneficium vacat, non vt prius, sed per
mortem, and haee est praxis in Francia. Commenda perpetua permutari potest cum
titulo, quod saepius vidi. Commendatarius perpetuus fructus recipit, confert,
locat, ac alia omnia facit, sicut habens titulum. Commenda perpetua non potest
reuocari.

Fuit ouster note and observe, que en le Canon ley il y ad 2. sorts de
Uicarages, Vicaria temporalis, and Viearia perpetua. Vicaria temporalis fuit
compare al Commenda temporalis, pur ceo que tiel temporal vicar non habet
titulum, sed seruit alieno nomine, and proprie curam non habet. Secus est de
Vicaria perpetua, quae est incompatibilis cum alio beneficio and habet curain
animarum, and talis Vicarius habet titulum Canonicum, and Quar. impedit gist de
tiel perpetual vicarage. Fitz. N. Br. 32. h. Registr. 31. a. Et tiel vicar
avera iuris vtrum de terres annex on done a luy perpetualment, per le Statut
de. 14. Edw. 3. cap. 17. vid. 40. Edw. 3. 28. b. ou Finchden dit, que comment
que ad estre tenus que vicar navera action de ses possessions verse null person,
vncor la ley est change en cest point, and per reason, quant il est endow a luy
and ses successors perpetualment.

Et ceo fuit le substance des arguments ex vtraque part fait en cest Case. Car
null Idgement est vncor (...) one en ceo. I Attorney general and Bolton
Recorder de Dublin and Oliver Eustace ^e Ciuilian suero ^t a Counsel le o^e
Clark del Roy and William Talbot, ^ames Briuer, and John Haly Doctor del Civil
ley ove les defendants.

Hill. 4. Iacobi
The Case of Praemunire or The Conviction and Attainder of Robert Lalor Priest,
being endited upon the statute of 16. Rich. 2. cap 5.
Of what quality, and credit Robert Lalor was.
THis Robert Lalor being a Native of this Kingdom received his Orders of
priesthood above 30 years since at the hands of one Richard Brady to whom the
Pope had given the title of Bishop of Kilmore in V^ster, and for the space of
twenty years together his authority and credit was not (...) within the
Province of Leinster. He had also made his name known in the Court of Rome,
and held intelligence with the Cardinal who was Protector of this nation, by
means whereof he obtained the title and jurisdiction of Vicar general of the
Sea Apostolic within the Archbyshopricke of Dublin, and the Pyshopricks of
Kildare, and Fernes. This pretended jurisdiction extending welny over all the
Province of ^einster, he exercised boldly and securely many years together,
until the proclamation was published, whereby all Jesuits and Priests
ordained by foreign authority were commanded to depart out of this kingdom
by a certain time prefixed. After which time he began to lurk and to change
his name, howbeit at last he was apprehended in Dublin and committed to prison
in the Castle there. His apprehension and first examsnation.
Upon his first examination taken by the Lord Deputy himself, he
acknowledged that he was a Priest and ordained by a popish Titulari Bishop,
that he had accepted the title and Office of the Popes Vicar general in the.
3. Dioceses before named, and had exercised spiritual jurisdiction in foro
conscientia, and in sundry other points he maintained and iusti fied the Popes
authority, only he said, he was of opinion, that the Pope had no power to
excommunicate or depose his Majesty, because the King is not of the Popes
Religion.

His first in ^^ment and conviction.
The next term after, he was indicted upon the statute of 2. Eliz. enacted in
this Realm, against such as should wilfully and advisedly maintain and
vphould the jurisdiction of any foreine Prince or Prelat in any Causes
Ecclesiastical or Civil within this Realm. By which statute the first
offense of that kind is punished with loss of goods, and one years
imprisonment, the second offense incurreth the penalty of the Praemunire. And
the third offense is made high Treason Upon this Indictment he was arrained,
convicted, and condemned, and so rested in prison during the next two Terms
without any further question. His second examination.
He then made peticion unto the Lord Deputy to be set at liberty, whereupon
his Lordship caused him to be examined by Sir Olliuer Seint John, Sir James
Fullerton, Sit Iefferie Fenton, the Attorney and Solicitor general At first he
made some euasiue and indirect aunsweres, but at last voluntarily, and freely
he made this ensuing acknowledgement or confession, which being set down in
writing word for word, as he made it, was advisedly read by him and subscribed
with his own hand, and with the hands of those who took his examination, and
afterward he confirmed it by his oath before the Lord Deputy and Connsell.

The confession or acknowledgement of Robert Lalor Priest made the 22. of
December. 1606.
His confession or acknowledgement.
FIrst he does acknowledge that he is not a lawful Vicar general in the
Dioceses of Dublin, Kildare, and Fernes, and thinks in his conscience that
he cannot lawfully take upon him the said Office.

Item he does acknowledge our Sovereign Lord King James that now is, to be
his lawful, chief, and Supreme governor, in all causes, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, and that he ^is bound in conscience to obey him in
all the said causes, and that neither the Pope, nor any other foreign Prelate,
Prince, or Potentate has any power to control the King in any cause
Ecclesiastical or Civil within this kingdom, or any of his Majesty's
Dominions.

Item he does in his conscience believe, that all Bishops ordained and made by
the Kings authority within any of his Dominions, are lawful Bishops, and that
no Bishop made by the Pope, or by any authority derived from the Pope within
the Kings Dominions has any power or authority to impugn disanull, or
control any Act, done by any Bishop made by his Majesty's authority as
aforesaid.

Item he professes himself willing and ready to obey the King as a good and
obedient Subject ought to do, in all his lawful commandments, either
concerning his function of priesthood, or any other duty belonging to a good
subject.

After this confession made, the State here had no purpose to proceed against
him severely, either for his contempt of the proclamation, or offense against
the law: So as he had more liberty then before, and many of his friends had
access unto him, who telling him what thy heard of his confession, he
protested unto them, that he had only acknowledged the Kings Civil and
Temporal power, without any confession or admittance of his authority in
spiritual causes. This being reported unto the Lord Deputy by sundry
gentlemen who gave faith unto what he said, his Lordship thought sit, that
since he had incurred the pain of Praemunire by exercising Episcopal
jurisdiction as Vicar general to the Pope, that he should be attainted of
that offense, as well to make him an example to others of his profession (for
almost in every Dioces of this kingdom there is a Titulary Bishop ordained by
the Pope) as also, that at the time of his trial a just occasion might be
taken, to publish the confession and acknowledgment which he had voluntarily
made, signed, and confirmed by oath before the Lord Deputy and Counsel, who
have likewise subscribed their names as witnesles thereof.

The indictment of Lalor upon the statut of 16 Rich. 2.
Heerevppon, in Hillary Term 4 Iacobi, an indictment was framed against him in
the Kings Bench upon the statute of 16. Rich. 2. cap. 5. containing these
several points.

1 That he had received a Bull or Brief purchased or procured in the Court of
Rome, which Bull or Breeue did touch or concern the Kings Crown and dignity
Royal, containing a Commission of Authority from the Pope of Rome unto
Richard Brady and David Magragh to constitute a Vicar general for the Sea of
Rome, by the name of the Sea Apostolic, in the several Dioceses of Dublin,
Kildare, and Fernes within this Kingdom of Ireland.

2 That by pretext or color of that Bull or Breeue he was constituted Vicar
general of the Sea of Rome, and took upon him the style and title of vicar
general in the said several dioceses.

3 That he did exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction as Vicar general of the
Sea of Rome, by instituting diverse persons to benefices with cure of souls by
granting dispensations in causes Matrimonial, by pronouncing sentences of
divorce between diverse married persons, and by doing all other acts and things
pertaining to Episcopal jurisdiction within the said several Dioceses,
against our Souerainge Lord the King his Crown and dignity Royal, and in
contempt of his Majesty, and disherison of his Crown, and contrary to the
form and effect of the statute etc.

To this indictment Lalor pleaded not guilty, and when the issue was to be
tried, the name and reputation of the man, and the nature of the cause, drew
all the principal gentlemen both of the Pale and Provinces that were in town
to the hearing of the matter. At what time a substantial lury of the City of
Dublin being sworn for the trial, and the points of the Indictment being
opened and set forth by the Kings Seriant, the Attorney general thought it not
impertinent, but very necessary, before he descended to the particular
enidence against the prisoner, to inform and satisfy the hearers in two
points.

Why Lalor was indicted upon the old statute of 16 R. 2.
1 What reason moved us to ground this indictment upon the old statute of 16
Richard 2. rather then upon some other later law made since the time of King
Henr. 8.

2 What were the true causes of the making of this law of. 16. Rich. and other
former laws against Prouisors and such as did appeal to the Court of Rome in
those times, when both the Prince and people of England did for the most part
acknowledge the Pope to be the thirteenth Apostle, and only oracle in matters
of Religion, and did follow his doctrine in most of those points, wherein we
now dissent from him.

1 For the first point, we did purposely forbear to proceed against him
upon any latter law, to the end, that such as were ig^onorant, might be
informed, that long before King Henr 8. was borne, diverse laws were made,
against the vsurpat^on of the Bishop of Rome upon the rights of of the Crown
of England, welny as sharp and as severe as any statutes which have been made
in later times, and that therefore we made choice to proceed upon a law
made more then 200. years past, when the King, the Lords, and Commons which
made the laws, and the Judges which did interpret the laws, did for the most
part follow the same opinions in Religion, which were taught and held in the
Court of Rome.

the tre^ causeof making the stattute of (...) R 2 and other statuts against
pouisors.
2 For the second point, the causes that moved and almost enforced the English
nation to make this, and other statutes of the same nature, were of the
greatest importance that could possible arise in any state. For these laws
were made to uphold and maintain the Soueraingtie of the King, the liberty of
the people, the common law, and the commonweal, which otherwise had been
undermined and viterly ruined by the usurpation of the Bishop of Rome.

For albeit the Kings of England were absolute Emperors within their
Dominions, and had under them as learned a Prelacie and Clergy, as valiant
and prudent a Nobility, as free and wealthy a Commonalty as any was then in
Christendom, yet if we look into the stories and records of these two
Imperial kingdoms, we shall find, that, if these laws of Provision and
Praemunire had not been made, they had lost the name of Imperial and of
Kingdoms too, and had been long since made Tributary Provinces to the Bishop
of Rome, or rather part of S. Peter's patrimony in demesne. Our Kings had had
their Scepters wrested out of their hands, their Crowns spurned of from their
heads, their neckstrod upon, they had been made Laquaies or footmen to the
Bishop of Rome, as some of the Emperors and French Kings were, our Prelates had
been made his chaplains and Clearks, our Nobility his vassals and servants,
our Commons his slaves and villains, if these Acts of manu-mission had not
freed them. In a word, before the making of these Laws, the flourishing Crown
and Commonwealth of England was in extreme danger to have been brought into
most miserable servitude and slavery, under color of religion and devotion to
the Sea of Rome. And this was not only seen and felt by the King, and much
repined at, and protested against by the Nobility, but the Commons, the
general multitude of the Subjects did exclame and cry out upon it. The
statuts of praemunire made at prayer of the commo^s
For the Commons of England may be an example unto all other Subjects in the
world in this, that they have ever been tender and sensible of the wrongs and
dishonors offered unto their Kings, and have ever contended to uphold and
maintain their honor and Sovereignty. And their faith and loyalty has been
generally such (though every age has brought forth some particular monsters of
disloyalty) as no pretense of zeal or religion cold ever withdraw the
greater part of the Subjects to submitt themselves to a foreine yoke, no not
when Popery was in her height and exaltation, whereof this Act and diverse other
of the same kind are clear and manifest testimonies. For this Act of. 16.
Richard 2. was made at the prayer of the Commons: which prayer they make not
for themselves, neither show they their own self love therein (as in other
Bills which contain their greeuances) but their love and zeal to the King and
his Crown. When after the Norman Conquest they importuned their Kings for the
great Charter, they sought their own liberties: and in other bills preferred
commonly by the Commons against Shiriffs, Escheators, Purueyors, or the like,
they seek their own profit and ease: but here their petition is to the King,
to make a law for the defense and maintenance of his own honor. The effect of
the statut of. 16. R. 2. cap. 5.
They complain, that by Bulls and processes from Rome the King is deprived of
that jurisdiction which belongs of right to his Imperial Crown: that the
King does loose the service and counsel of his Prelates, and learned men by
translations made by the Bishop of Rome: That the Kings laws are defeated at
his will, the Treasure of the Realm is exhausted and exported to enrich his
Court, and that by those means the Crown of England which has ever been
free, and subject unto none, but immediately unto God, should be submitted unto
the Bishop of Rome, to the utter destruction of the King and the whole Realm
which God defend, say they: and therevppon out of their exceeding zeal and
feruencie they offer to live and die with the king in defense of the liberties
of the Crown. And lastly they pray and require the King by way of Justice, to
examine all the Lords in Parliament, what they thought of these manifest wrongs
and usurpations, and whether they would stand with the King in desence of his
Royal liberties, or no: which the King did according to their petition: and
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal did all answer, that these usurpations of
the Bishop of Rome were against the liberties of the Crown, and that they were
all bound by their allegiance to stand with the King and to mantaine his honor
and prerogative. And therevppon it was enacted with a full consent of the three
Estates, that such as should purchase in the Court of Rome, or elsewhere, any
Bulls or Processes or other things which might touch the King in his Crown and
dignity Royal, and such as should bring them into the Realm, and such as
should receive them, publish them or execute them, they their Notaries,
Proctors, Mantainors and Counselors should be all out of the Kings
protection, their lands and goods forfeited to the King, their bodies attached
if they might be sound, or else process of Praemunire facias to be awarded
against them. Upon these motives, and with this affection and zeal of the
people was the statute of 16. Rich 2 made, whereupon we have framed our
indictment.

Now let us look higher, and see whether the former laws made by King Edw 3.
and King Edw. 1. against the usurpation of the Bishop of Rome, were not
grounded upon the like cause and reason. The effect of the statut of 38. Edw.
3 cap. 1.
The statute of 38. Edw. 3. cap. 1. expressing the mischiefs that did arise by
B^^eues of citation, which drew the bodies of the people, and by Bulls of
provision and reservation of Ecclesiastical benefices which drew the wealth
of the Realm to the Court of Rome, does declare, that by these means the
ancient laws, customs, and franchises of the Realm were consounded, the
Crown of our Sovereign Lord the King deminished, and his person falsely
defamed, the Treasure and riches of the land carried away, the Subjects of the
Realm molested and impouerished, the benefices of holy Church wasted and
distroyed, Divine service, Hospitality, Almesdeeds and other works of
Charity neglected.

The statute of 27. Ed. 3. cap. 1.
Again 27 Edw 3 cap. 1. upon the grievous and clamorous complaint (for that
phrase is there used) of the great men, and Commons touching Citations and
Provisions, it is enacted, that the offenders shall forfeit their lands, goods,
and Chattels, and their bodies be imprisoned and ransomed at the Kings will.
The statute of 25 Ed. 3. reciting the statute of 25. Ed. 1
But in the statute of 25. Edw. 3. wherein the first law against Prouisors
made. 25. Edw. 1. is recited, there is a larger declaration of these
inconveniences, then in the two last Acts before mentioned. For there all the
Commons of the Realm do grievously complain, that where the holy Church of
England was first founded in estate of Prelacio by the Kings and Nobility of
that Realm, and by them endowed with great possessions and revenues in lands,
rents, and Aduowsons, to the end the people might be informed in Religion,
Hospitality might be kept, and other works of Charity might be exercised
within the Realm. And whereas the King and other founders of the said
Prelacies were the rightful Patrons and Adowees thereof, and upon avoydance
of such Ecclesiastical promotions had power to advance thereunto their
kinsemen, friends, and other learned men of the birth of that Realm, which
being so advanced became able and worthy persons to serve the King in Counsel,
and other places in the Commonweal. The Bishop of Rome usurping the Seigniory
of such possessions and benefices did give and grant the same to Aliens, which
did never dwell in England, and to Cardinals which might not dwell there, as if
he were rightful Patron of those benefices: whereas by the law of England
he never had right to the Patronage thereof: whereby in short time all the
spiritual promotions in the Realm would be engrossed into the hands of
Strangers, Canonical Elections of Prelates would be abolished, works of
Charity would cease, the founders and true Patro^s of Churches would be
disenherited, the Kings Counsel would be weak'ned, the whole kingdom
impouerished, and the laws and rights of the Realm destroyed. Upon this
complaint it was resolved in Parliament, that these oppressions and greeuances
should not be suffted in any manner: and thereore it was enacted that the King
and his Subjects should thenceforth enjoy they rights of Patronage, that free
elections of Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates elective should be made
according to the ancient graunts of the Kings progenitors and other founders,
that no Bulls of Provision should be put in execution, but that the Prouisors
should be attached fined, and ransomed at the Kings will, and withal
imprisoned till they had renounced the benefits of their Bulls, satisfied the
party grieved, and given suerties not to committ the like offense again.

These laws made by such as did profess the Romish Religion.
Now, Master Lalor, what think you of these things? did you believe that such
laws as these had been made against the Pope 200. 250. 300. years since? was
King Henr. 8. the first Prince that opposed the Popes usurped authority? were
our Protestants the first Subjects that ever complained of the Court of Rome?
of what Religion, think you, were the propoundors and enactors of these laws?
were they good Catholics? or good Subjects? or what were they? You will not
say they were Protestants, for you will not admit the reformed Religion to be
so ancient as those times, neither can you say they were vndutiefull for they
strove to vpohold their liege Lords Soueraignety. Doubtelesse the people in
those days did generally embrace the vulgar errors and superstitions of the
Romish Church, and in that respect were Papists as well as you, but they had
not learned the new doctrine of the Popes Supremacy, and transcendent
authority over Kings. They did not believe he had power to depose Princes, and
discharge Subjects of their allegiance, to abrogate the fundamental laws of
kingdoms, and to impose his Canons as binding laws upon all nations without
their consents: they thought it a good point of Religion to be good Subjects,
to honor their King, to love their country, and to mantaine the laws and
liberties thereof, howsoever in other points they did e^re and were mislead
with the Church of Rome.

So as now (Master Lalor) you have no excuse, no evasion, but your conscience
must condemn you as well as the law: since the lawemakers in all ages, and
all religious Papists and Protestants do condemn you, unless you think your
self wifer then all the Bishops that were then in England, or all the Judges
who in those days were learned in the Civil and Canon laws as well as in the
Common laws of England. Laws against Pro^isors made in Ireland.
But you, being an Irish man, will say perhaps these laws were made in England,
and that the Irish Nation gave no particular consent thereunto, only there was
an implicit consent wrapped and folded up in general terms given in the
statute of. ^0. Henr. 7. cap. 22. whereby all statutes made in England are
established and made of force in Ireland. Assuredly, though the first Parliament
held in Ireland, was after the first law against Prouisors made in England,
yet have there been as many particular laws made in Ireland against
Provisions, Citations, Bulls, and Bre^ues of the Court of Rome, as are to be
found in all the Parliament Rolls in England. What will you say if in the self
same Parliament of. 10. Henr 7. cap. 5. a special law were made, enacting,
authorizing, and confirming in this Realm all the statutes of England made
against Prouisors? if before this the like law were made. 32. Henr. 6. cap 4.
and again. 28 Henr. 6 cap. 30 the like. And before that, the like law were
made. 40. Edw. 3 cap. 13. in the famous Parliament of Kilkenny. If a statute of
the same nature were made. 7. Edw 4. cap 2. and a seuerer law then all these.
16. Edw 4 cap. 4. That such as purchase any Bulls of Provision in the Court of
Rome as soon as they have published or executed the same to the hurt of any
incumbent, should be adjudged traitors: which Act if it be not repealed by
the statute of Queen Mary, may terrify Master Lalor more then all the Acts
which are before remembered.

But let us ascend yet higher, to see when the Popes usurpation, which caused
all these complaints began in England, with what success it was continued, and
by what degrees it rose to that height, that it weiny over topp't the Crown:
whereby it will appear whether he had gained a title by prescription by a
long and quiet possession, before the making of these laws.

When the Pope began first to usurp upon theliberties of the Crown of England.
The first encrochment of the Bishop of Rome upon the liberties of the Crown
of England, was made in the time of King William the Conqu^ror. For before that
time the Popes writ did not run in England, his Bulls of excommunication and
provision came not thither, no citation, no appeals were made from thence to
the Court of Rome. Our Archbishops did not purchase their Palls there, neither
had the Pope the inuestiture of any of our Bishoprics. A comparison of the
spiritual Monarchy of yt Church with the te^porall Monarchies of the world.
For it is to be observed, that as under the Temporal Monarchy of Rome,
Brittany was one of the last Provinces that was won, and one of the first
that was lost again, So under this spiritual Monarchy of the Pope of Rome,
England was one of the last countries of Christendom that received his yoke,
and was again one of the first that did reject and cast it of. And truly, as
in this, so in diverse other points, the course of this spiritual Monarchy of
the Pope, may be aptly compared with the course of the temporal Monarchies
of the world. For as the temporal Monarchies were first raised by intrusion
upon other Princes and Commonweals: so did this spiritual Prince (as they
now (...) him) grow to his greatness by usurping upon other States and
Churches. As the temporal Monarchies, following the course of the Sun, did
rise in the East, and settle in the West, so did the Hierarchy or government
of the Church. Of the four temporal Monarchies the first two were in Asia,
the later two in Europe, but the Roman Monarchy did surpass and suppress
them all: So were there four great Patriarchs or Ecclesiastical Hierarchies,
two in the East, and two in the West, but the Roman Patriarch exalted himself
and usurped a Supremacy above them all. And as the rising of the Roman Empire
was most opposed by the State of Carthage in Africa (amula Romae Carthago:) So
the Council of Carthage and the Affrican Bishops did first forbid appeals to
Rome, and opposed the Supremacy of the Pope. And does not Daniels image whose
head was of gold, and legs and feet of iron and clay, represent this
spiritual Monarchy as w^ll as the temporal, whereas the first Bishops of Rome
were golden Priests, though they had but wooden Chalices, and that the Popes of
later times have been sor the most part worldly and earthly minded? And as the
Northern Nations first revolted from the Roman Monarchy, and at last brake it
in pieces, have not the North and Northwest Nations, first fallen away from the
Papacy, and are they not like in the end to bring it to ruin?

The Pope had no jurisdiction in England in the time of the Brittons.
But to return to our purpose. The Bishop of Rome before the first Norman
Conquest had no jurisdiction in the Realm of England, neither in the time of
the Brittons, nor in the time of the Saxons. Eleutherius the Pope within less
the 200. years after Christ, writes to Lucius the British King, and calls him
Gods vicar within his kingdom: which title he would not have given to that
King, if himself under pretense of being Gods Vicar general in earth had
claimed jurisdiction over all Christian kingdoms.

Pel^gius the Moncke of Bangor about the year. 400. being cited to Rome,
refused to appear upon the Popes citation, affirming that Brittany was
neither within his Dioces, nor his province.

After that, about the year. 600. Augustine the Moncke was sent by Gregory the
great into England to convert the Saxons to Christian Religion, the British
Bishops then remaining in Wales regarded not his Commission nor his doctrine,
as not owing any duty, nor having any dependancie on the Court of Rome, but
still retained their ceremonies and traditions which they received from the
East Church upon the first plantation of the faith in that Island, being diverse
and contrary to those of the Church of Rome, which Augustine did endeaunor to
impose upon them.

The like does Beda write of the Irish priests and Bishops* For in the year
660 he reports, that a convocation of the Clergy being called by King
Oswif, there rose a disputation between Colman one of our Irish Saints, then
present in that Synod, and W^lfrid a Saxon priest, touching the observation of
Easter wherein the British and Irish Churches did then differ from the Church
of Rome. Colman for the celebration of Easter used in Ireland, affirmed it was
the same quod beatus Euangelista ^oannes, discipulus specialiter a Domino
dilectus, in omnibus, quibus praerat, Ecclesijs celebrasse legitur. On the
other part Wilsrid alleged that all the Churches of Christendom did then
celebrate Easter after the Roman manner, except the Churches of the Brittons
and Picts, qui contra totum orbem (said he) stulto labor pugnant. Whereunto
Colman replied, Miror quar^ stultum laborem appellas, in quo tanti Apo^^oli qui
super pectus Domini recumbere dignus suit, exempla sectamur. Nunquid
reuerendissimum patrem nostrum Columbam, and eius successores, viros a Deo
dilectos diu^nis pag^^^s contraria sapuisse aut egisse credendum est? In this
disputation or dialogue, two things may be observed: first, that at this time
the authority of the Bishop of Rome was of no estimation in these Islands: next,
that the Primitive Churches of Bri^tany and Ireland were instituted according
to the form and discipline of the East Churches, and not of the West, and
planted by the disciples of John, and not of Peter. Thus much for the time of
the Brittons. The Pope had no jurisdiction in England in the time of the Saxons.
For the Saxons, though King Ina gave the Peter pence to the Pope partly as
Alms, and partly in recompense of a house erected in Rome for entertainment of
English pilgrims, yet it is certain, that Alfred, and Athelstane, Edgar and
Edmund, Canutus, and Edward the Consessor and diverse other Kings of the Saxon
race did give all the Bishoprics in England Per annulum and baculum without
any other ceremony, as the Emperor and the French King, and other Christian
Princes were wont to do. They made also several laws for the government of
the Church: Among others Saint Edward begins his laws with his protestation,
that it is his Princely charge Vt populum Domini, and super omnia, sanctam
Ecclesiam regat and guber^et. And King Edgar in his Oration to his English
Clergy, Eg^ (says he) Constantini, vos Petri gladium habetis: iungamus
dextras, and gladium gladio copulemus, vt ci^ciantur extra Castra leprosi, and
purgetur sanctuarium Domini. So as the Kings of England with their own
Clergy did govern the Church, and therein sought no aid of the Court of
Rome. And the troth is, that though the Pope had then long hands, yet he did
extend them so far as England, because they were full of business nearer
home in drawing the Emperor and the French King, under his yoke. The first
vsurpatio^ of the Pope upon the crown began in the time of king William the
Co^querour.
But upon the conquest made by the Norman he apprehended the first occasion to
usurp upon the liberties of the Crown of England. For the Conqu^rour came in
with the Popes Banner, and under it won the battle which got him the
garland: and therefore the Pope presumed he might boldly pluck some flowers
from it, being partly gained by his countenance and blessing. Heerevppon he
sent two Legates into England, which were admitted and received by the
Conqueror. With them he called a Synod of the Clergy, and deposed old
Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, because he had not purchased his Pal in the
Court of Rome. he displaced many Bishops and Abbots to place his Normans in
their Romes. By sending Legates into England
And amongst the the rest it is to be noted, that the King having earnestly
moved Wolstan Bishop of Worcester, being then very aged, to give up his staff,
his answer was, that he would give up his staff only to him of whom he
first received the same. Inter Epist. Lanfr Archiepiscopi Cant. M. S. in
Archi^. Robert Co^^on Eq. Aur.
And so the old man went to Sanit Edwards Tomb, and there offered up his staff
and Ring, with these words, Of thee, O holy Edward I received my staff and my
Ring, and to thee I do now surrender the same again: which p^oues, that
before the Norman Conquest the King did inuest his Bishops per annulum and
baculum, as I said before.

In the time of William Ruffus the Pope attempted to draw appeals to Rome but
pr^uailed not.
Thus we see by the admission of the Popes Legates, the first step or entry
made into his usurped jurisdiction in England. Albeit the King still retained
the absolute power of inuesting Bishops, and seemed only to use the advice and
assistance of the Legates in Ecclesiastical matters, for that no dec^ee
passed, or was put in execution, without his Royal assent thereunto. Besides,
how far forth he submitted himself to the Pope, it appears by a short
Epistle which he wrote to Gregory the. 7. in this form. Excellentissimo
sanctae Ecclesiae Pastori Greg^rio, gratia Dei anglorum Rex, and Dux
Normannorum Willielmus, salutem cum A^icitia, Hubertus Legatus t^us, Religiose
Pater, ad me ve^iens ex tua part me admonuit, vt tibi and successoribus tuis
fid^l^tatem facerem, and de pecunia quam antecessores mei ad Roman^^ Ecclesiam
^^^ere solebant, melius cogi^arem. Vnum admisi, alterum non admis^. fidelitatem
facere nolui, nec volo, quia ^^c ego promisi, ncc antecessores ^^os
antecessoribus tuis id secrsse comperio. Pecu^ia tribus fere annis, in Gallijs
me agente, negligentur collecta est, nunc v^ro di^ina misericordia me in Regnum
meum reuers^, quod Collectum est per praefatum Legatum mittetur, and quod
reliquum est, per Legatos Lan^ranci Archichiscopi ^^delis nostri, cum
opportunum fuerit, transmittetur, etc.

But in the time of his next successor King William Rufus they attempted to
pass one degree farther, that is to draw appeals to the Court of Rome. For
Anselme being made Archbishop of Cauterbury, and being at some difference with
the King, besought his leave to go to Rome, under pretense of fetching his
Pall. The King knowing he would appeal to the Pope, denied him leave to go,
and withal told him, that none of his Bishops ought to be subject to the
Pope, but the Pope himself ought to be subject to the Emperor, and that the
King of England had the same absolute liberties in his Dominions, as the
Emperor had in the Empire: And that it was an ancient custom and law in
England, used time out of mind before the Conquest that none might appeal to
the Pope without the Kings leave, and that he that breaks this law or
custom does violate the Crown and dignity Royal, and he that violates my
Crown (says he) is mine enemy, and a traitor. How answer you this, quoth
the King? Christ himself answers you, says the Archbishop, Tu es Petrus, and
super hanc petram, etc. Wherewith the King was nothing satisfied: And
therevppon Anselme departing out of the Realm without license, the King seized
his temporalities, and became so exasperate and implacable toward the Bishop,
as he kept him in perpetual exile during his Reign, albeit great
intercession were made for his return, as well by the Pope as the King of
France. In the time of king Henry the first the Pope usurps the donation of
Bishoprics etc.
In the time of the next King Henr 1. though he were a learned and a prudent
Prince, yet they sought to gain a further point upon him, and to pluck a
flower from his Crown of greater value, namely the patronage and donation of
Bishoprics, and all other benefices Ecclesiastical. For Anselme being
reuok't and reestablished in the Sea of Canterbury, the Bishoprics of
Salisbury, and Hereford fell void, which the King bestowed upon two of his
Chapleins. But Anselme their Metropolitan did refuse to consecrate them, so as
the Archbishop of York was feign to perform that Office, who with the Chief
of the English Clergy stood with the King, and withstoode Anselme. Herevppon
the King requires him to do his homage: the Bishop denies it: the King
demands of him whether the patronage and inuestiture of all Bishoprics were
not his rightful enheritance: the Bishop said it was not his right, because
Pope Urban had lately made a decree that no lay person should give any
Ecclesiastical benefice. This was the first question that ever was made
touching the King of Englands right of patronage, and donation of Bishoprics
within his dominions. This new question caused many messages and ambassages to
Rome. Histor. Ioranalensis. M. S in Archiu. Rob. Cotton Eq. Aur.
At last the King writes plainly to the Pope, Notum habeat sanctitas vestra,
quod me viuente (Deo auxiliante) dignitates and vsus regni nostri non
minuentur, and si ego (quod absit) in tanta me dei^ctione ponerem, magnates
mei, imo totius Anglia populus id nullo modo pateretur. Besides, William de
Warrenast the Kings procurator in the Court of Rome, told the Pope that the
King would rather loose his kingdom then he would loose the donation of
Bishoprics. The Pope answered, know you precisely Sir, I speak it before
God, that for the redemption of my head I would nor suffer him to enjoy it.

After this, Anselme being received into the Kings favor, in a Synod of the
English Clergy holden at London in the year. 1107. a decree was made, Cui
annuit Rex Henricus, says Matthew. Paris. that from thenceforth nunquam per
donationem Baculi Pastoralis vel annuli quisquam de Episcopatu, vel Abbathia
per Regem, vel quanlibet laicam manum inuestiretur in Anglia. In recompense
whereof, the Pope yielded this favor to the King, that thenceforth no Legate
should be sent from the Popes side into England, unless the King required it:
and that the Archbishop of Canterbury for the time being should be for ever
Legatus natus, and Anselme for the honor of his Sea, obtained, that the
Archbishop of Canterbury should in all general Counsels sit at the Popes
foot tanquam alterius orbis Papa. Notwithstanding, as the succeding Popes kept
not their promise touching the sending of Legates, so this self same King,
after the death of Anselme, broke the decree touching the inuestiture of the
Bishops. For he gave the Archbishopricke of Canterbury to Rodolph Bishop of
London, says Matthew. Paris. Et illum per annulum and Pastoralem baculum
inuestiuit, as before he had invested Willielmum Gifford in the Bishopric of
Winchester, contra noui Concilij statuta as the same author reports.

In the time of King Stephen the Pope gained appeals to the Court of Rome.
The times of the next succeeding King Stephen were full of Civil dissentions,
which made the land welny waste so as Saint Peter's successor could not take any
fish in such troubled waters. Yet during this Kings reign they won that
point of jurisdiction which they attempted to get, but failed thereof, in the
time of King William Ruffus: namely, that appeals might be made to the Court
of Rome. For in a Synod at London summoned by Henr. Bishop of Winchester the
Popes Legate, it was decreed, that appeals should be made from Provincial
Counsels to the Pope: before that time appellationes in vsu non erant, says
a Moncke of that time, Donec Henricus Winton Episcopus malo suo dum Legatus
esset, crudeliter intrusit. Thus did the Pope vsurp three maine points of
jurisdiction upon three several Kings after the Conquest (for of William
Ruffus he could win nothing) namely upon the Conqueror, the sending of
Legates or Commissioners to hear and determine Ecclesiastical causes, upon
Henr. 1. the donation and inuestitures of Bishoprics and other benefices,
upon King Stephan the appeals to the Court of Rome.

In the time of King Henry. 2. the Pope claymed exemption of Clerks from the
secular power.
Now are we come to king Henr. 2. in whose time they made a further
encroachment upon the Crown, whereby they endeauored to make him but half a
king, and to take away half his Subjects by exempting all Clerks from secular
power. A brief of ^h Beckets troubles or rather treasons.
Here upon rose that long and great contention between King Henr. 2. and
Thomas Becket, which on Beckets behalf may be rightly termed rebellion and
treason: the just cause and ground whereof was the same, that made the late
difference between the Pope and the Venetians. For a priest had committed a
foul murder, and being thereof indicted and convicted, prayed the benefit of
his Clergy, which being allowed unto him, he was delivered to the Bishop of
Salisbury being his ordinary, to make his purgation: which the murderer failing
to do, should by the law have been degraded, and delivered back to the
secular power. But the Bishop contemning the law of the land, to enlarge the
liberties of the Church, sent his prisoner to Thomas Becket then Archbishop of
Canterbury who shifted him into an Abbey, and so rescued him for the capital
punishment he had justly deserved.

This gapp of impunitie being once opened, the Clergy grew so outrageous, as
the King was informed of a hundred murders committed by Clerks, and yet not
one of them executed for the same, for that the Archbishop had protected them
all after the same manner. For this the King was justly incensed against the
Archbishop, who justified his doing herein. The constitutions of Claringdon
Whereupon a common counsel as well of the Bishops, as of the Nobility was
called, wherein they did revive and reestablish the ancient laws and customs
of the kingdom for the government of the Clergy, and ordering of causes
Ecclesiastical, whereof these were the principal heads or articles. 1 That no
Bishop, nor Clarke should depart the Realm without the Kings license, and that
such as obtained license, should give suerties that they should procure no hurt
or damage to the King or Realm during their absence in foreign parts. 2 That
all Bishoprics and Abbeyes being void should remain in the Kings hands as
his own demesnes, until he had chosen and appointed a Prelate thereunto, and
that every such Prelate should do his homage to the King before he were
admitted unto the place. 3 That appeals should be made in causes
Ecclesiastical in this manner: from the Archedeacon to the Ordinary, from the
Ordinary to the Metropolitan, from the Metropolitan to the King, and no
further. 4 That Peter pence should be paid no more to the Pope but to the
King. 5 That if any Clarke should committ felony he should be hanged, if
treason he should be drawn and quatered. 6 That it should be adjudged high
treason to bring in Bulls of Excommunication whereby the Realm should be
cursed. 7 That no decree should be brought from the Pope to be executed in
England upon pain of imprisonment, and confiscation of goods.


To these and other Constitutions of the like nature made at Claringdon, all
the rest of the Bishops and great men did subscribe and bound themselves by
oath to observe the same absolutely, only the Archbishop would not subscribe,
and swear but with a Saving, saluosuo ordine and bonore sancte Ecclesi^. yet
at last he was content to make the like absolute subscription and oath as the
rest had done, but presently he repented, and to show his repentance
suspended himself from celebrating Mass, till he had received absolution from
the Pope. Then he began to maintain and justify the exemption of Clerks
again: whereat the Kings displeasure was kindled a new: and then the
Archbishop once again promised absolute obedience to the Kings laws. (See the
ficklenes and mutability of your constant Martyr.) The King to bind fast this
slippery Proteus, called a Parliament of the Bishops and Barons, and sending
for the Roll of those laws, required all the Bishops to set their seals
thereunto. They all assented, but the Archbishop, who protested he would not
set his seal, nor give allowance to those laws. The King being highly
offended with his rebellious demeanor, required the Barons in Parliament to
give Judgment of him, who being his subject would not be ruled by his laws:
Cito facite mihi iustitiam de illo, qui homo meus ligeus est, and stare Iuri in
Curia mearecusat. Whereupon the Barons proceeding against him, and being ready
to condemn him: I prohibit you (quoth the Archbishop) in the name of Almighty
God to proceed against me, for I have appealed to the Pope: and so departed in
contempt of that high Court, Omnibus clamantibus says Houenden, quo
progrederis proditor? expecta and audi iudicium tuum. After this he lurked
secretly near the Sea shore, and changing his apparel and name (like a Jesuit
of these times) he took shipping with a purpose to fly to Rome, but his
passage being hindered by contrary winds, he was summoned to a Parliament at
Northampton, where he made default wilfully, for which contempt, his
temporalties were seized, and his body being attacht, he was charged with so
great an account to the King, as that he was found in arreare thirty thousand
marks, and committed to prison, whence he found means to escape shortly
after, and to pass out of the Realm to Rome. He was no sooner gone but the
King sends writts to all the Shiriffs in England to attach the bodies of all
such as made any appeals to the Court of Rome: herevppon many messages and
letters passing to and froe, all the suffragans of Canterbury join in a letter
to the Pope, wherein they condemn the fugitive Archbishop, and justify the
Kings proceedings. Upon this the Pope sends two Legates to the King being then
in Normandy to mediate for the Archbishop. They with the mediation of the
French King, prevailed so far with King Henry, as that he was pleased to
accept his submission once again, and promised the King of France, that if he
would be obedient to his laws, he should enjoy as ample liberties as any
Archbishop of Canterbury ever had: and so sent him into England with
recommendation unto the young King his Son then lately Crowned, who hearing
of his coming commanded him to forbear to come to his presence, until he
had absolved the Archbishop of York and others whom he had excommunicated for
performing their duties at his Coronation. The Archbishop returned answer that
they had done him wrong in usurping his office, yet if they would take a solmne
oath to become obedient to the Popes commandment in all things concerning the
Church, he would absolute them. The Bishops understanding this, protested they
would never take that oath unless the King willed them so to do. King Henry
the father being hereof advertised into France, did rise into great passion and
choler, and in the hearing of some of his servants uttered words to this
effect: Will no man reueng me of mine enemies. Whereupon the four Gentlemen
named in the stories of that time passed into England, and first moving the
Archbishop to absolve the Bishops whom he had excommunicated for performing
their duties at the young Kings Coronation: and receiving a peremptory answer
of denial from the Archbishop, they laid violent hands upon him, and slew
him, for which the King was feign not only to suffer corporal penance, but
in token of his humiliation to kiss the knee of the Popes Legate. And this is
the abridgement of Beckets troubles, or rather treasons, for which he was
celebrated for so famous a Martyr. Four points of jurisdiction usurped upon
the crown of England by the Pope before the reign of K. John.
And thus you see, by what degrees the Court of Rome did within the space of one
hundred and odd years, usurp upon the Crown of England four points of
Jurisdiction, viz. First sending of Legates into England. Secondly drawing of
appeals to the Court of Rome. Thirdly donation of bishoprics and other
Ecclesiastical benefices, and fourthly exemption of Clerks from the secular
power. And you see withal, how our Kings and Parliaments have from time to
time opposed and withstood this unjust usurpation.

Now then the Bishop of Rome having claimed and welny recovered full and sole
jurisdiction in all causes Ecclesiastical, and over all persons
Ecclesiastical, with power to dispose of all Ecclesiastical benefices in
England, whereby he had upon the matter made an absolute conquest of more then
half the kingdom (for every one that could read the Psalm of Miserere was a
Clarke, and the Clergy possessed the moytie of all temporal possessions.
There remained now nothing to make him owner and proprietor of all, but to ge^^
a surrender of the Crown, and to make the King his Farmer, and the people his
Villains, which he fully accomplished and brought to pass in the times of King
John, and of Henr. 3.

The cause of the quarrel between K. John and the Pope.
The quarrel between the Pope and King John which wrested the Sceptor out of
his hand, and in the end brake his heart, began about the election of the
Archbishop of Canterbury. I call it election, and not donation, or inuestiture:
for the manner of inuesting of Bishops by the Staff and Ring after the time of
King Henr. 1. was not any more used, but by the Kings license they were
Canonically elected, and being elected the King gave his Royal assent to their
election, and by restitution of their temporalties did fully inuest them. And
though this course of election began to be in use in the time of Rich. 1. and
Henr. 2. Yet I find it not confirmed by any Constitution or Charter before the
time of King John, who by his Charter dated the fifteenth of January, in the
sixteenth year of his Reign granted this privilege to the Church of England
in these words, viz. Quod qualiscunque consuetudo temporibus praedecessorum
^ostrorum hactenus in Ecclesia Anglicana fuerit obs^r^^t^, and quidquid iuris
n^bis hactenus vindicauerimus, de caetero in vniuersis and singulis Ecclesijs
and Monasterijs, Cathedralibus and Conuentualibus, totius regni Angliae liberae
sint in perpetuum electiones, quorumcumque Praelatorum ma^orum and minorum.
When C^^^nicall election began first in England.
Salua nobis and haer^dibus nostris custodia Ecclesiarum and Monasteriorum
vacantium quae ^d nos pertinent. Promittimus etiam quod nec impediemus nec
impediri permittemus per ministros nostros, nec procurabimus, quin in vniu^rsis
and singulis Monasterijs and Ecclesijs postqua^ vacaucrint praelaturae,
quem^^que voluerint libere sibi praeficia^^ electores Pastorum, petita tamen a
nobis prius and haeredibus nostris licentia eligendi quam non denegabimus nec
differemus: Et similiter post celebratam electionem, nosler requiratur
assensus, quem non denegabimus, nisi aduersus ^andem rationale proposuerimus,
and legitime probauerimus propter quod non debemus consentire, etc.

But to return to the cause of his great quarrel with the Pope. The Sea of
Canterbury being void, the Monks of Canterbury sudenly and secretly without
the Kings license elected one Reignold their Subprior to be Archbishop, who
immediately posted away to be confirmed by the Pope. But when he came there,
the Pope rejected him because he came not recommended from the King. Here upon
the Monks made suite to the King to nominate some fit person to whose
election they might proceed. The King commends John Gray Bishop of N^rwich his
principal Counselor, who was afterward Lord Justice of this kingdom, who
with a full consent was elected by them, and afterward admitted and fully
invested by the King. These two elections bred such a controversy, as none
might determine but the Pope, who gave a short rule in the Case, for he
pronounced both elections void, and caused some of the Monks of Canterbury who
were the^ present in the Court of Rome, to proceed to the election of Stephan
Langton, lately made Cardinal at the motion and suite of the french King: who
being so elected was forthwith confirmed and consecrated by the Pope, and
recommended to the King of England with a flattering letter, and a present of
four Rings set with precious stones, which were of great value and estimation
in those days. King John's round and Kingly letter to the Pope.
Howbeit the King more esteeming this Jewel of the Crown, namely, the
patronage of Bishoprics, returned a round and Kingly answer to the Pope,
that inconsideratly and rashly he had cassed and made void the election of the
Bishop of Norwich, and had caused one Langton a man to him unknown, and bred
up and nourish't amongst his mortal enemies, to be consecrated Archbishop,
without any due form of election, and without his Royal assent, which was
most of all requisite by the ancient laws and customs of his Realm. That he
merueiled much, that the Pope himself and the whole Court of Rome did not
consider, what a precious account they ought to make of the King of Englands
friendship, in regard that his one kingdom did yield them more profit and
reuenew then all the other countries on this side the Alps. To conclude, he
would maintain the liberties of his Crown to the death, he would restrain
all his subjects from going to Rome. And since the Archbishops Bishops and
other Prelates within his dominions were as learned and religious as any other
in Christendom, his subjects should be judged by them in Ecclesiastical
matters, and should not need to runn out of their own country, to beg Justice
at the hands of strangers.

The Pope curses the King, and interdicteth the realm.
But what followed upon this? The Pope after a sharp reply, sends forth a
Bull of malediction against the King, and of interdiction against the Realm,
whereby all the Churches in England were shut up, the priests and religious
persons were forbidden to use any Liturgies, or divine service, to marry, to
bury, or to perform any Christian duty among the people. This put the King
into such a rage, that he on the other part seized the temporalties of all
Bishops and Abbots, and confiscated the goods of all the Clergy. Then does
the Pope by a solemn sentence at Rome depose the King, and by a Bull sent into
England discharges his subjects of their allegiance, and by a legate sent to
the King of France gave the kingdom of England to him and his successors for
ever.

These things brought such confusion and misery to all estates and degrees of
people in England, as the King became odious to all his subjects, as well to
the Laytie as to the Clergy. For as the Bishops and religious people cursed
him abroad, so the Barons took arms against him at home, till with much
bloodshed they forced him by granting the great Charter to restore King
Edwards laws containing the aun^ient liberties of the subjects of England. The
Pope being a spectator of this Tragedy, and seeing the King in so weak and
desperate estate, sent a Legate to comfort him, and to make a reasonable motion
unto him; to wit, that he should surrender and give up his Crown and
kingdom to the Pope, which should be regraunted unto him again to hold in
Feefarme and vassallage of the Church of Rome: And that therevppon the Pope
would bless him and his Realm again, and curse his rebels and enemies in
such sort as he should be better established in his kingdom then he was before.
King John sends his crown to the Pope and became his farmer.
In a word, this motion was presently embraced by that miserable King, so as
with his own hands he gave up the Crown to the Popes legate, and by an
instrument or Charter sealed with a Bull or seal of gold, he granted to God
and and the Church of Rome the Apostles Peter and Paul and to Pope Innocent
the third and his successors the whole kingdom of England, and the whole
kingdom of Ireland; and took back an estate thereof by an instrument sealed
with Lead, yielding yearly to the Church of Rome over and above the Peter
pence a thousand marks sterling, viz. seven hundred marks for England, and
three hundred marks for Ireland; with a flattering saving of all his liberties
and Royalties. The Pope had no sooner gotten this conueyance, though it were
void in law, but he excommunicateth the Barons, and repeales the great Charter,
affirming that it contained liberties too great for his subjects, calls the
King his vassal, and these kingdoms Saint Peter's patrimony, graunts a
general Bull of Provision for the bestowing of all Ecclesiastical benefices,
and takes upon him to be absolute and immediate Lord of all. And thus under
color of exercising jurisdiction within these kingdoms, the Pope by degrees,
got the very kingdoms themselves. And so would he do at this day, if the
King would give way to his jurisdiction.

In the time of King H. 3 the Pope conuerteth the whole profits of both realms
to his own use.
But what use did the Pope make of this grant and surrender of the Crown unto
him? what did he gain by it, if our Kings retained the profits of their
kingdoms to their own use? Indeed we do not find, that the Feefarme of a
thousand marks was ever paid, but that it is all runn in arreare till this
present day. For the troth is, the Court of Rome did scorn to accept so poor
a reuenew as a thousand marks per annum out of two kingdoms. But after the
death of King John, during all the reign of Henr 3 his Son, the Pope did not
claim a Se^gniory or a rent out of England and Ireland, but did endeavor to
convert all the profits of both lands to his own use, as if he had been
^^^sed of all in deme^ne* For whosoever will read Matthew. Paris. his story of
the time of King Henr. 3. will say these things spoken of before, were but the
beginnings of evils. For the exactions and oppressions of the Court of Rome
were so continnuall and intolerable, as that poor Monk who lived in those
times* though otherwise he adored the Pope, does call England Baalams ass
laden, beaten and enforced to speak does call the Court of Rome Charybdis and
barathrum auaritiae, the Popes Collectors Harpies, and the Pope himself a
stepfather and the Church of Rome a stepmother. He shows that two third
parts of the land being then in the hands of Churchmen, the entier profits
thereof were exported to enrich the Pope, and the Court of Rome which was done
for the most part by these two ways and means. First by con^erring the best
Ecclesiastical benefices upon Italians, and other strangers (...) entan that
Court, whose farmers and factors in England took the prosits, turned them into
money, and returned the money to Rome. Secondly by imposing continual taxes
and tallages (worse then Irish ^uttings) being sometimes the tenth, sometimes
the fifteenth, sometimes the third, sometimes the moytie of all the goods both
of the Cleagie and Laytie, under color of maintaining the Popes holy wars
against the Emperor, and the Greek Church, who were then said to be in
rebellion against their Lady and mistress the Church of Rome. Besides for the
speedy leuying and safe return of these monyes the Pope had his Lumbards and
other Italian Bankers and usurers resident in London and other parts of the
Realm, who offered to lend and disburse the moneys taxed, and return the same
by exchange to Rome, taking such penal bands, the form whereof is set down
in Matthew. Paris and such excessive usury, as the poor religious houses were
feign to sell their Chalices and Copes, and the rest of the clergy and la^ty
had their backs bowed, and their estates broken under the burden. Besides the
Pope took for perquisits and casualties, the goods of all clerks that died
intestate, the goods of all usurers, and all goods given to charitable uses.
Moreover he had a swarm of Friars (the first corruptors of religion in
England) who persuaded the nobility and gentry to put on the sign of the
Cross, and to vow themselves to the holy wars, which they had no sooner
done, but they were again persuaded to receive dispensations of their vows,
and to give money for the same to the church of Rome. I omit diverse other
policies then used by the Popes collectors to exhaust the wealth of the Realm,
which they affirmed they might take with as good a conscience as the Hebrews
took the Jewels of the Egiptians. Breefely whereas the King had scarce means
to maintain his Ro^all famely, they received out of England seventy thousand
pounds sterling at least yearly, which amounts to two hundred and ten
thousand pounds sterling of the moneys current at this day. Besides they
exported six thousand marks out of Ireland at one time, which the Emperor
Frederick intercepted. Lastly the King himself was so much dejected, as at a
Royal feast he placed the Popes legate in his own Chair of Estate, himself
sitting on his right hand, and the Bishop of York on his left, non sine
multorum obliquantibus oculis, says Matthew. Paris.

Thus we see the effect of the Popes pretended jurisdiction within the
dominions of the King of England. We see to what calamity and servitude it
then reduced both the Prince and people. Was it not therefore high time to meet
and oppose those inconveniences? Assuredly if King Edward. 1. who was the Son
and heir of He^r. 3. had enherited the weakness of his father, and had not
resisted this usurpation and insolency of the Court of Rome* the Pope had
been proprietor of both these Islands, and there had been no King of England
at this day.

King Edw. 1. opposes the Popes ^surpation.
But King Edward. 1. may well be styled vindex Anglicae libertatis, the Moses
that delivered his people from slavery and oppression: and as he was a brave
and victorious Prince, so was he the best P^ter patriae that ever reigned in
England since the Norman Conquest, till the Coronation of our gracious
Sovereign. At the time of the death of his fathet he was absent in the war
of the holy land, being a principal commander of the* Christian army there,
so as he returned not before the second year of his reign. But he was no
sooner returned and crowned, but the first work he did, was to shake of the
yoke of the Bishop of Rome. For the Pope having then summoned a general
Counsel, before he would license his Bishops to repair unto it, he took of
them a solemn oath, that they should not receive the Popes blessing. Again
the Pope forbidds the King to war against Scotland the King regards not his
prohibition: he demands the first fruits of Ecclesiastical livings, the King
forbidds the payment thereof unto him. The Pope sends forth a general Bull
prohibiting the clergy to pay subsidies or tributes to temporal Princes. A
tenth was granted to the King in Parliament, the clergy refused to pay it:
the King seiseth their temporalties for their contempt, and got payment
notwithstanding the Popes Bull. After this he made the statute of Mor^main,
whereby he brake the Popes chief nett, which within an age or two more would
have drawn to the Church all the temporal possessions of the kingdom, etc.
Again, one of the Kings subjects brought a Bull of excommunication against
another, the King commands he should be executed as a traitor, according to
the ancient law. But because that law had not of long time been put in
execution the Chauncellor and Treasurer kneeld before the King and obtained
grace for him, so as he was only banished out of the Realm. And as he judged
it treason to bring in Bulls of excommunication, so he held it a high contempt
against the Crown, to bring in Bulls of Provision, or breeses of citation, and
accordingly the law was so declared in Parliament. 25. Edw. 1. which was the
first statute made against Prouisors, the execution of which law, during the
life of King Edw. 1. did welny abolish the usurped jurisdiction of the Court of
Rome, and did revive and restore again the ancient and absolute Sovereignty
of the King and Crown of England.

His successor King Edw. 2. being but a weak Prince, the Pope attempted to
usurp upon him again, but the Peers and people withstood his usurpation: E.
2. suffers the pope to vsurp^ again.
And when that unhappy King was to be deposed* among many articles framed
against him by his enemies, this was one of the most heinous, that he had given
allowance to the Popes Bulls.

Again, during the minority of King Edw. 3. and after that, in the heat of the
wars in France, the Pope sent many Breefes and Bulls into England, and at
last presumed so far, as that he gave an Italian the title of a Cardinal in
England, and withal by his Bull gave him power to bestow all Ecclesiastical
promotions as they should fall void from time to time. E. 3. resists the vsur
pation of the pope.
This moved the King and Nobility to write to the Pope, to this effect: we and
our ancestors have richly endowed the Church of England, and have founded
Abbeyes and other religious houses for the instruction of our people, for
maintenance of hospitality, and for the advancement of our countrymen and
kinsmen. Now you provide and place strangers in our benefices, that come not to
keep residence there upon, and if they come, understand not our language, and
some of them are subjects to our mortal enemies: by reason whereof our people
are not instructed, hospitality is not kept, our scholars are vnpreferred,
and the treasure of the Realm is exported. The Pope returns answer, that
the Emperor had lately submitted himself to the Church of Rome in all points,
and was become the Popes great friend, and in menacing manner advised the King
of England to do the like. The King replies, that if the Emperor and french
King both should take his part, he was ready to give battle to both, in
defense of the liberties of his Crown. Herevppon the several statutes against
prouisors besore recited, were put in execution so severely, as the King and
his subjects enjoyed their right of patronage clearly, and their exemption of
clerks took no place at all, for that the Abbot of Waltham, and Bishop of
Winchester were both attainted of high contempts, and the Bishop of Ely of a
capital offense, as appears in the Records of this Kings reign. King Rich.
2.
Yet during the nonage of Richard. 2. they began once again to encroach upon
the crown by sending Legates, and Bulls and breefes into England, whereof the
people were so sensible and impatient, as that at their special prayer this
law of 16. Rich. 2. Whereupon our indictment is framed, was enacted, being
more sharp and penal, then all the sormer statutes against prouisors. And yet
against this King, as against Edw. 2. it was objected at the time of his
deprivation, that he had allowed the popes bulls to the enthralling of the
Crown.

Aster this in the weak time of King Henr. 6. they made one attempt more to
revive their usurped jurisdiction, by this policy. The Commons had denied the
King a Subsidy, when he stood in great want of monyes. The Archbishop of
Canterbury and the rest of the Bishops offered the King a large supp^^e of his
wants if he would consent, that all the laws against prouisors* and specially
this law of 16 Rich. 2. might be repealed, But H^^frey Duke of ^^^c^ster, who
had lately before cast the popes Bull into the si^e, did likewise cause this
motion to be rejected: So as by special providence these laws have stood in
force even till this day in both these kingdoms.

The evidence against Lalor.
Then the Attorney general descended to the evidence, whereby he proved fully
all the parts of the indictement. First, it was proved by Lalors own
confession upon several examinations taken besore the Lord Deputy, and Lord
Chauncellor and others, that he had accepted the office and title of Vicar
general in the Dioceses of Dublin, Kildare, and Fernes, by virtue of the popes
Bull. Secondly, it appeared by the copies of sundry letters found among his
papers at his apprehension, that he styled himself the popes Vicar in this
form. Robertus Dublinien. and Kildaren. and Fernen D^o^^s. Vicarius
Apostolicus. Thirdly there were produced the copies of diverse Acts, and
Instruments, written for the most part with La^ors own hand, some of
institutions of popish priests to benefices, others of dispensations with
marriage within the degrees, others of divorces, others of dispensation for non
payment of T^ethes. Whereby it was manifestly proved, that he did execute the
popes Bull, in usurping and exercising Episcopal iu^^sdiction as Vicar
general of the Sea Apostolic, within the Dioceses before named.

To this evidence he made a threefold answer, first that he was no suitor for
the office of Vicar general, but it was imposed on him, and he accepted it
virtute obedi^ntiae, only to obey his Superiors, next, that he did exercise
the office of Vicar general in foro conscientiae tantum and not in foro
iudicij. And lastly, that those copies of institutions, dispensations, and
divorces were many of them written with his man's hand, as precedents of such
acts and instruments, without his priuity or direction. Herevppon Sir James Ley
chief Justice told him, that he could not well say, that he accepted that
unlawful office virtute obedientiae, for there was no virtue in that
obedience: that he owed an obedience to the law, and to the King, who is the
true Superior and Sovereign over all his subjects, and has no Peer within
his dominions, and that the Superiors, whom he meant and intended, were but
usurpers upon the Kings jurisdiction, and therefore this excuse did aggrauate
his contempt, in that it appeared he had vowed obedience to those who were
apparent enemies to the King and his Crown. And though it were manifest that
he exercised iur^sdiction in foro iudicij (for every institution is a
judgment, and so is every sentence of divorce) yet were his offense nothing
diminished, if he had executed his office of Vicar general in foro
conscientiae tantum, for the court of man's conscience is the highest tribunal,
and wherein the power of the keys is exercised in the highst degree.

Lalors confession publikly read*
Hereunto the Attorney general took occasion to add thus much, that Lalor had
committed these high offenses not only against the law, but against his own
conscience, and that he was already condemned in ^oro conscintiae. For that he
upon his second examination had voluntarily acknowledged himself not to be a
lawful Vicar general, and that he thought in his conscience he could not
lawfully take upon him the said office. He has also acknowledged our
Souerainge Lord King James to be his lawful, Chief, and Supreme Governor,
in all causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil and that he is in conscience
bound to obey him in all the said causes, and so forth as it is contained in
his acknowledgment or confession before set down, which being showed forth by
the Attorney general, the court caused it to be publikly read, and therevppon
demanded of Lalor, if that were not his free and voluntary confession signed
with his own hand, and confirmed by his oath, before the Lord deputy and
Counsel. He was not a little abashed at the publishing of this acknowledgment
and confession, in the hearing of so many principal gentelmen, to whom he
had preached a contrary doctrine: therefore said he the showing forth of this
confession is altogether impertinent and besides the matter. Howbeit he could
not deny but that he made it, and signed it and swore it, as it was testified
by the Lord deputy and the rest.

Then was it demanded of him, whither since the making of this confession he
had not protested to diverse of his friends, that he had not acknowledged the
Kings supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes: his answer was, that indeed he
had said to some of his friends who visited him i^ the Castle of Dublin, that he
had not confessed, or acknowledged, that the King was his Supreme Governor in
spiritual causes, for that the truth is, in the confession there is no
mention made of spiritual causes, but of Ecclesiastical.

This is a subtle evasion indeed, said the Attorney general, I pray you what
difference do you make between Ecclesiastical causes, and spiritual causes.
This question said Lalor is sudden, and unexpected at this time, and therefore
you shall do well to take another day to dispute this point, Nay, said the
Attorney general, we can never speak of it in a better time, or fitter place,
and therefore though you that bear so reverend a title, and hold the
reputation of so great a Clearke, require a further time, yet shall you hear,
that we laymen that serve his Majesty, and by the duty of our places are to
maintain the jurisdiction of the Crown, are never so unprovided but that we
can say somewhat touching the nature, and difference of these causes.

When the distinction of Ecclesiastical and spiritual causes from Civil and
temporal causes began in the world
First then let us see, when this distinction of Ecclesiastical or spiritual
causes, from Civil and temporal causes, did first begin in point of
jurisdiction. Assuredly for the space of three hundred years after Christ,
this distinction was not known, or heard of in the Christian world. For the
causes of Testaments, of Matrimony, of Bastardy and Adultery, and the rest
which are called Ecclesiastical or spiritual causes, were merely civil and
determined by the rules of the civil law, and subject only to the
jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrate, as all Ciuillians will testify with me.

But after that the Emperors had received the Christian faith, out of a zeal
and desire they had, to grace and honor the learned and godly Bishops of that
time, they were pleased to single out certain special causes, wherein they
granted jurisdiction unto the Bishops: namely in cases of Tieths, because they
were paid to men of the Church, In causes of Matrimony, because marriages were
for the most part solemnized in the Church, In causes Testamentary, because
testaments were many times made in extremis, when Churchmen were present,
giving spiritual comfort to the testator, and therefore they were thought the
fittest persons to take the probates of such testaments. Howbeit these Bishops
did not proceed in these causes, according to the Canons and decrees of the
Church (for the Canon law was not then hatched or dreamed of) but according to
the rules of the Imperial law, as the Civil magistrate did proceed in other
causes, neither did the Emperors in giving this jurisdiction unto them, give
away their own Supreme and absolute power, to correct and punish these judges,
as well as others if they performed not their several duties. This then is
most certain, that the primitive jurisdiction in all these causes, was in the
Civil magistrate, and so in right it remains at this day, and though it be
derived from him, it remains in him as in a fountain. For every Christian
monarch (as well as the godly Kings of Judah) is custos vtriusque tabul^, and
consequently has power to punish not only Treason, Murder, Theft, and all
manner of force and fraud, but incest, adultery, usury, perjury, simony,
sorcery, idolatry, blasphemy: neither are these causes in respect of their own
quality and vature, to be distinguished one from another, by the names of
Spiritual or Temporal. For why is adultery a spiritual cause rather then
murder, when they are both offenses a like against the second table, or
idolatry rather then perjury being both offenses likewise against the first
table. And indeed if we consider the natures of these causes, it will seem
somewhat absurd, that they are distinguished by the name of spiritual and
te^porall, for to speak properly, that which is opposed to spiritual, should
be termed carnal, And that which is opposed to temporal should be called
eternal. And therefore if things were called by their proper names, adultery
should not be called a spiritual offense, but a carnal: But shall I express
plainly and breefely, why these causes were first denominated some spiritual
or Ecclesiastical, and others temporal and civil?

Truly they were so called not from the nature of the causes, as I said
before, but from the quality of the persons, whom the Prince had made judges
in those causes. The Clergy did study spiritual things, and did profess to
live secundum spiritum, and were called spiritual men, and therefore they
called the causes, wherein Princes had given them jurisdiction spiritual
causes, after their own name and quality. But because the Lay magistrates
were said to intend the things of this world which are temporal and
transitory, the Clergy called them secular or temporal men and the causes
wherein they were judges, temporal causes. This distinction began first in the
Court of Rome, where the Clergy having by this jurisdiction gotten great
wealth, their wealth begott pride, their pride begott ingratitude toward
Princes, who first gave them their jurisdiction, and then, according to the
nature of all ungrateful persons, they went about to extinguish the memory of
the benefit: for whereas their jurisdiction was first derived from Caesar, in
the execution whereof they were Caesar's judges: so as both their Courts, and
causes, ought still to have borne Caesar's image and superscription, as
belonging unto Caesar, They blotted Caesar's name out of the style of their
Courts, and called them Courts Christian, as if the Courts holden by other
magistrates had been in comparison but Courts of Ethnickes, and the causes
which in their nature were merely Civil, they called Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical. So as if the Emperor should challenge his Courts, and causes
again, and say, Reddite Caesar^, quaesunt Caesaris, they would all cry out on
the contrary part and say, date Deo quaesunt Dei, our courts bear the name
and title of Christ, the superscription of Caesar is quite worn out, and not
to be found upon them. And this point of their policy is worth the observing,
that when they found their jurisdiction in matrimonial causes, to be the most
sweet, and gainefull of all other (for of Matrimony they made matter of money
indeed) to the end that Caesar might never resume so rich a perquisite of
their spiritual jurisdiction, they reduced Matrimony into the number of the
seven Sacraments. After which time it had been sacrilege, if the civil
magistrate had intermedled with the least matter that had relation to
Matrimony, or any dependancy there upon. So then yet appears, that all
causes whereof Eccicsiasticall or spiritual persons have cognisans, or
jurisdiction by the graunts or permission of Princes, are called
Ecclesiastical or spiritual causes. And as all their courts are called
spiritual courts, so all causes determinable in those courts are called
spiritual causes. And therefore where Master Lalor has acknowledged the
Kings Majesty to be Supreme governor in all Ecclesiastical causes, he has
therein acknowledged the Kings supremacy in all spiritual causes wherein he
has but re^dered to Caesar but that which is Caesar's, and has given unto his
Majesty no more, then all the Bishops of England have yielded to his
predecessors, not only in this later age, but also in former times both before
and since the Conquest, as has been before at large expressed.

Here the day being far spent, the Court demanded of the prisoner, if he
had any more to say for himself, his answer was, that he did willingly
renounce his office of Vicar general, And did humbly crave his Majesty's grace
and pardon. And to that end, he desired the Court to move the Lord Deputy to
be favorable unto him. Then the ^ury departed from the Bar, and returning
within half an hour, found the prisoner guilty of the contempts whereof he
was indicted. Where upon the Solicitor general moved the Court to proceed to
judgment: And Sir Dominicke Sarsfield knight, one of the Justices of his
Majesty's chief place gave judgment, according to the form of the statute,
where upon the indictment was framed.

Printed at Dublin by John Franckton printer to the Kings most excellent
Majesty for Ireland. Anoo 1615.


