THE MVSES-TEARES FOR THE LOSS OF THEIR HOPE; HEROIC AND NE'RE-TOO-MVCH
praised, HENRY, Prince of Wales. etc.

Together with TIMES Sobs for the untimely death of his Glory in that his
Darling: and, lastly, his Epitaphs.

CONSECRATED To the high and mighty Prince, Frederick the fifth, Count-palatine
of Rheyn. etc.

Whereunto is added, Consolatory STRAINS to wrest NATVRE from her bent in
immoderate mourning; most loyally, and humbly wished to the KING and QVEENES
most excellent MAJESTY'S.

BY JOHN DAVIES of Hereford, their Majesty's poor Beads-man, and Vassal.

AT LONDON, Printed by G. Eld, for John Wright; and are to be sold at his shop
near Christ-Church Door. 1613.

THE MVSES-TEARES, for the high, Heroik, and neuer-too-much praised, HENRY,
Prince of Wales, etc.
THe HAND of heaven (as quick, as it is strong,
And moves this ALL, to all it moves unto:)
Has turned our hopes, to fears, (and griefs among)
In his Life's LINE, which it did late undo.
Princely-perfection being past the prime,
And, near the highest grow'th (O dismal turn!)
Is turned into the Root, this Wintertime,
Never to retire till GOD in Flesh return!
He, upon whom the Nations Eyes were bent
As on a most auspitious blazing- Star
Is now extinguished; yet, the light he lent,
Fore-shew'd he would have thundered loud, in War*
For, in his Ears no music sweet did sound,
But Trumpets, Drums, and Phifes: and, at his meat,
(While they did others hearing but confound)
They solac'd his; and made his stomach great!
Th'expertest Fortifier, and Engineere
He sought; who taught him either skill, so young,
That he his Teachers taught: so, did appear
Too ripe, too soon, to last (so ripe) too long!
And, in all exercise of Arms he was
Vnmatch'd by any of his years: For, He
Past subjects so, as he did subjects pass,
In Birth, Mind, Virtue, Glory, and Degree!
The Doing-Horse (all Eyes can witness it)
He made much more than Do: yet; sat so sure
As they (but where are they that so can sit?)
That back the wildest Beasts, yet, sit secure!
In few; no Feate of such Actiuity
As graced Action, and the Actor too,
But it (with most admired Agility)
He did past all that best, so young, could do!
With Arts and Letters he so stored his MIND
That both knew all therein, y'er Youth could know:
So, Art and Nature were as Cursed, as Kind,
To Cleave so to him, and to Leave him so!
His Spirit and Body were at endless strife
Which should be Actiu'st in all Princely Parts:
For, both were full of Grace, as full of Life;
Both which win Glory, with both Hopes, and Hearts!
That active Spirit his Meditations raised
Above the Sphere of GREATNESS; that does rise
From those Perfections that do perish praised,
To seek PERFECTION praised; and never dies!
And, like a Soul (that naught on Earth can fill)
Seeking for al-suffizing Aliments,
Still mounts above her self (in Mind, and will)
Till she has found what fully her contents:
So, his rare Soul, (being ever on her VVings,
Soon cloide with whatsoever the Earth holds dear)
Sought to suffize her with eternal Things;
Which made her stay so much the shorter here!
The World could not contain her; not as He
To whose ambition Earths Rotundity
Seemed but an Angle: no; but She did flee
The World, and such vain Pride; yet, fled more high!
She fled to Him whose Center's every where,
And Circle no where: for, true Eaglet, She
On Justice SON (her Eyes being strong, as clear)
Still loved to look, to show her Dignity!
But, while She kept within her Prison-walls
(Or Iaile of Flesh) She, through the windows, saw
To all that in Discretions Compass falls;
And, ordered all that All by Reasons Law.
His Servants so he swai'd (and that alone,
Himself being under Tutors) as appeared
That they were governed by some Solomon;
For which he was no less Beloved, than Feared.
Reward and Punishment (being as the weights
By which our Horologe of life is moved)
Fell ever through Him (from Celestial Heights)
On none, but whom true virtue loathed, or loved!
If then, his Private in such order stood,
How had the public done when he had swai'd?
They had been like for Grace, in likelihood;
And (for our Common-good) as Good, as stayed!
The Highest all good things has in Essence still;
Ill, in his Vnderstanding-pow'r; but Man
Has good things by Intelligence; but ill
He has in Essence: for, no Good he can!
But He, whose goodness ravished him from hence,
Was Good, in Nature; by his BEING, blessed:
But Ill he had but by Intellingece;
Which he, with Grace, corrected, being best!
Some Kings are more than Men in their belief;
But, in their lives such Beasts as never lived:
The chief Offenders than, are often the CHIEF:
But this, Beloved, lived well, and well believed!
The Simile twixt God and Man is such,
That God is said to be immortal Man;
And Man a mortal God: He was so much;
Whose want we wail much more than sorrow can.
His Princely looks composed so rarely were
Of venerable gravity and grace,
That one did Love provoke, the other fear;
And both, in one, still showed a sacred Face!
His Ire was temperate, since he knew so well
How ill it was in Warm Fortunes to be hot;
Since, like great Ruins, those it quite does quell
On whom it falls; and, lights on equal Lot!
It is to rash; (and so must needs offend)
To do ought well: For, it cures ill with ill:
Then, to refer a Vice to Ire to mend,
Is Vice to cure by Vice (outrageous) still.
Great Minds in Choler, should be ever like
The highest Planets, that are slowest moved;
And never use (how ever moved) to strike,
Till they indulgent means have thoroughly proved.
The fire of Ire, that from cold fear proceeds
Prouoks the Subject, put past fear, in hate
To make attempts (although for it he bleeds)
To free his fear, that makes him desperate.
Nor is he quiet kept, to keep him low,
(As some affirm) for every hope that gives,
Least like-li-hood to raise his ouer-throw,
Under new Lords, for such he plots, and strives.
Then as from love proceeds a State more sure,
(Though moderate) so, that that comes from fear,
Although more absolute, does less endure:
For fear, grown des'prate, it will ouer-beare.
For, Cruelty from Cowardice does spring,
Since still courageous Minds their force employ
But on resisting foes; then he is no King,
(But Tyrant) that but prostrate Friends destroys.
It is a weakness of great Power, and Will,
To love them least that most they do offend:
Whom Kings offend, they will offend them still;
And, never for-giue the offended till their end,
But hate to see them; since (perhaps) their sight
But minds them of the wrongs they do them still:
In this, this Gaul-lesse Prince took no delight,
But did quite otherwise in Deed and Will! The Surgeons that embalmed, and
embowelled him, found no Gaul at all in him, as it is confidently reported.

Ambition, (the Souls Shirt, since that is the Vice
She last puts off) no more transported his
Than Caesar's was with glories avarice;
For, his Ambition wholly aimed, at This!
Kings should have innocence Columbine,
To do no more than harmless Creatures should;
With which they should have Wisdom Serpentine,
To do no less then Circumspection would:
And ever, with the wakefull'st Will and Wit,
To stretch their power beyond their power (though great)
But only for the publike-benefit,
For which they smell most sweet, when most they sweat!
A Prince that ties himself himself unto
Does much mistake himself: For, he is not his;
Nor, is the STATE his: but, he still must do,
As if he were the STATES: for, so he is.
From Benefits, come Obligations: and,
From such more such: and, so it is Sire, and Son,
Effect, and Cause; Yet still does, moving, stand
In Will and Power of Natures, like the Sun.
Such was this Prince, who looked with watchful Eyes
To all that might with State, in Time, have stood:
He awed the Great, and (justly, most precise)
Discount'nanc'd such as Greater were than good.
For, such as will be Sheep, the Wolf deuoures:
Then, sheepish Kings must flee all Beasts of prey,
Or keep Presumption down in subject Pow'res,
Lest long conniuence make it long for sway.
Contempt t'a Prince, more dangerous is than hate:
For, Hate, by fear, is held from bold Attempt:
But, SCORN does make it daring; then a STATE
In danger stands, that stands, so, in Contempt!
Lightnings put by with wind but of a Cap;
And often great STATES (that might the world comman'd
Fall with the smallest accidents that hap:
Then, if Contempt they bear, they cannot stand.
This made this Prince betimes to have an Eye
To all that saw but how they high might grow
By wrong and scorn of PRINCIPALITY,
Since well he knew they ill themselves did know.
His Deeds did evermore exceed his words
In Virtue, and Effect: nor, would He speak
But still with Caution fit for sovereign Lords,
Who know they bruize their Crowns, when Words they break!
For Princes safer Prisoners are, by far,
Under their words almighty-binding power
Than they are under strongest Bolt or Bar;
Because their Words (like Gods) are ever sure!
If otherwise, we cannot call them Gods
(As God himself does style them) if they be
Unlike through that injustice; and (like Clods)
Do naught but soil the seat of their Degree.
No: Tongues, and Pens will wound their Names to death;
Nay, past, since past, sharp Tongues and Pens can give
Them black Reproach: for, with their harmeful breath,
Their Vices die; but still their shames may live!
For, seeing Justice cannot touch their lives,
Its reason it should touch their Names (too naught)
For fear whereof a TITUS often strives:
To be not what he is, but what he ought!
For, it is hard to play an After-game
Of Reputation well: or, not to loose
By every cast, though well we play the same,
Since all our Gain to our first Losses goes!
But Virtue made our Heroes to preserve
His Name from blemish; not these by-respects:
He Virtue served, that so She Him might serve
With fullest Glory void of all Defects.
Not like the Stars (that yield but little light
Because they are so high) with him it fared:
But (like the Sun) was bright'st at greatest height;
And still his Mind unto his Fortunes squared.
BEING, without well Being, cursed is;
And, so, the greater Being, the greater curse:
But, he being Great, was ever blessed in this
That he did Grace, by Nature, kindly nurse!
Nature in HIM, admired what she had wrought,
At least she might, if She, (most wonderful
Of things created) could admire at ought
That Is made good, great, stout, wise, and beautiful.
He was the richest Trophey FORTVNES Power
Could rear in HONORS Theater; for, still
NATVRE did doat on Him (her Bellamoure,
Or Masterpiece) the Wonder of her skill!
Beauty, TIMES flower, though delicate it be
Yet soon it dies: so holds comparison
With Phydias colors; which (though fair to see)
Were blemished with each Breath that breathed thereon
But that immortal beauty of the Mind
Wherewith He was endowed, was so ingrain'd
In his Souls Faculties, that by no wind
Or blast of Envy, it can e're be stained!
No: He most strictly ey'de his better Part;
And in the Glass of Heavens eternal LAW
Righted the Apparel of his royal Heart
As best became his FORM, which there he saw:
For, no Man's Fortunes, nor his high renown
Can possibly be worthy for his End;
Which has made Kings of Yore to quit their Crown,
That they to better Ends might wholly tend.
Life's but a Supposition, or Non-ENS;
That Is not perceptible; because it IS;
Then, straight IS not, but by Intelligence;
And, while it IS, it is but most amiss!
Nothing is certain, but uncertainty
Beneath the Moon; which varies like our Minds:
For, Man's a Maze of Mutability,
Wherein both Sin and Grace still turns, and winds!
It Is good to die than, yer we die; because
A life too lively proves too deadly often:
He shootes not well that up his Arrow draws
And eyes no Mark below, nor that aloft.
But some mis-doe themselves, themselves to hide
From cruel Fortunes most impetuous Blows:
But never Kings, but Cowards, so have di'd;
Yet Emper'ours (base, as bad) have been of those!
It is an act of Charity to long,
Ever to live for others good: than they
That both to God and Nature do such wrong,
(As hateful Monsters) seek their both decay!
And some so long do live that they interre
Their Glory y'er they die; and die but when
The World does hate them deadli'st; or some War
Takes them away; as Beasts, from civil Men!
Yet, Life's but Bondage, were not freed by Death;
Nay, Life's a Sickness that so mortal is,
That who so lives, must die: and strongest Breath
Is not still long'st; but, often more amiss!
Life may be taken from Man, by any Man;
But Death by no Man; none dare him abide:
Nor, Power, nor Art, nor Love, Life lengthen can:
For, if they could, this Prince had never di'd!
Ye Isles, (whereof He was the Hope) with Fears
Shake where ye stand; or with sighs shift your Clime;
And be inuirond with a sea of Tears,
Where never Sun may see the face of TIME!
Or, settle else, where still his Beams may burn
Our frozen Hearts; and, turn us all to Black;
That even our Skins as-well as Hearts may mourn
For him whose want turns all our comforts back.
Black's but a mere Privation, and no Hue,
As Darkness is of Light: that is fitt'st for us,
Whom Griefs Cimerian darkness does subdue,
Being quite deprived of Light of comfort, thus.
The feeling- sense alone for mortal life
Is necessary: but, the rest not so;
For, Life may BE without them: then, let Grief
And Sense to feel it, never our lives forgo!
For Him that might the death of Grief have been
Had Heaven not enui'd Earth his longer stay;
But (ah) he grew so mellow, being green,
That he, by nature, soon did fall away!
With whom our Hearts are fallen; and with the fall,
(On Craggy Cares) are swol'n so full of woe
That they can hardly hold: but, O, this ALL
Is at this stay, that stays but falling so!
What hold, or hope, or help is than, in ALL,
But He that is All in ALL? since such a PROP,
(So young, so strong, and sound, till he did fall)
Is Feauer-shaken down from HIGHNESS Top!
Floate heauiest Grief on Times eternal Tears
T'a Deluge turned; and sink all Joy therein:
Floate Grife to Death: sink Joy to depth of fears;
Since, in the Hau'n, our hopes so sunk have bin!
So fail their hopes that hope, by Sin, for Grace:
Heavens hate we urge; and yet (so, urge it more)
We look for love: But, O, such Life, such ^^se!
A desperate Salve, must cure a desperate SORE!
We thought our CROWN so staid with many Props
(So Young, and strong) that no cold Puf of fear
(How ever strong) could once but shake our Hopes,
Which now this Blast does reele, and backward bear!
But yet to fear too much is to receive
Ill fortunes y'er they come; and, that is ill:
Our fears as well as hopes may us deceive:
Than fear we so, as hope may hold us still.
Fear bears Hope backward to a forward Stay;
So forward, as we fear more going back,
When in our Souls (besides) our Sins we weigh,
Which threate (auert it Heaven) our utter wrack!
But be; O be propitious, highest POWER,
To us: and make our Royal PLANT to spring
Unto that Greatness that may long'st endure;
And Branches bear, that may bear many a KING!
But yet ( O Death!) GRIEF will not leave us so;
It turns again; and Passion (which does swel,
Say Reason what it will) will with us go
Unto the Grave, which Heaven is to this Hell!
Why from the Surgeon do we turn our Eye
When, with his Probe, we see him search a wound,
But that we know our Senses sou'raignty
Over our Reason, might us, with it, confound!
Than, can we see the Hand of DEATH to gage
His HEART, (being ours; and so, through ours should go
And not auert our Eyes, in ruthful rage?
If so we can, we can be cruel so!
But, O, we needs must see this dismal DEED,
(At least in Mind) for which our Hearts are rent:
The letting of him blood did make them bleed:
For which we curse the CAUSE, and Instrument*
It is, almost, a Miracle to find
A great, and lively Spirit well governed;
But his rare Spirit (be'ing such) did turn, and wind
As the Physician still, it managed!
Indiffrent Spirits, for Rule, far better do
Than Spirits too mighty, who are good for naught
But to torment themselves, and others too:
Yet His, being great, he ruled as he ought!
The Spirit does owe the Flesh a Sou'raignes care
Not a Slaves service: for, if Flesh be free,
'Twill make the Spirit but servile, base, and bare;
But if the Spirit; the Flesh shall honored be!
And, look how when the Heart is sick, the HEAD
And all the Members, of the grief have part,
But never die, until the HEART be dead;
So, HEAD and Members die with this our HEART!
We die, though yet we move, with grief conceau'd
For this his death; whose Life gave all our Parts
Their lively motion; which they had received
From his rare virtue, Life of all our Hearts.
Nor can we ( ah!) live other-wise than dead
(Although, in Death, we live; or, lifelesse plight)
For him that gave us Heart; and Life, our HEAD;
So live we now, without or Life, or Sp'rit!
It is a kind of joy in case of moan
Not to be single: Common-miserie
(Though heauiest) lighter weighes on one alone,
Then does his private light adversity!
As Peace is War to men impo'urisht grown;
Who, in the total ruins of the STATE,
Had rather be overwhelmed, than in their own;
So, each man's Cross seems most unfortunate!
But in our Case, it is not so, we see:
For this our common loss so sad does lie
Upon our Souls, that naught can heavier be;
Although it were, with torment, often to die!
Yet, it is highest Courage lowly to sustain
The heauiest Plagues which for our sins are sent:
And to be patient qualifies the pain;
And, makes us, at the low'st, most excellent!
But, to resist, rage, murmur, or complain,
Is as effeminate as Men may do:
Than to be subject so, is so to reign
Kings of our selves; and Saints with Angels too!
Humility, of Men, does Angels make;
And Pride, of highest Angels, makes Devils:
In Pride, all Evils did beginning take:
But, in Humility, release from Evils!
We Are borne to Sorrows: would we than be free?
That were injustice: Than, we needs must bear
The laws to which all Flesh must subject be,
Unless we would above all Flesh appear!
Our highest pleasures still do tend unto
The deepest sighs: those Wrinckles of the face
That serve for Laughing, serve for Weeping too;
And, extreme Laughing sheddeth Tears apace!
GREATNESS (as we mis-stile it) how e're stout,
And glorious too it be) is, as we prove,
But like a Lightnings- flash soon in, and out
Of Life and Light, that gets more Hate, than Love!
Our All Is but Nothing than: For, that which IS
Must be eternal: For, what IS, must stay
Such as it is a Thought (at least) but this
Is with a Thought, or changed, or gone away!
Now since the dearest of these Mundane things,
Do fall so cheap from highest Holds they have,
And that both Semy-gods as well as Kings
Do but engorge the most insatiate Grave;
What Sense have such that see this daily done,
And yet rely on life, that but appears
As does a Vapor rising with the Sun
But straight to vanish, in a Vale of Tears!
For, Kings none other-wise than Mists descend
Down from the lofty Mountains to the Vales
Where they through Fortunes Sunshine soon ascend,
And vanish straight like dew the Sun exhales.
Thus can Discretion teach Grief what to say
To ease it self; but Griefs if great they are
Will still be mute; or else (as mad) will bray:
And so our Griefs (as mad) do make us fare.
Our LOSS so far transcends the highest Bounds
Of humane-wisdome, patiently to bear,
That it our Sufferance, and our Selves confounds
With all distraction, joined to grief, and fear;
Saint James, thy house, (late house of joys extreme.
Is now an House of Mourning; since this Mate
Of Angels, di'd therein, yet lives with them;
And, left that hapless House to endless hate.
Those costly Pictures (curious Proofs of skill.
Wherewith that House (like Heaven) he late did grace)
There may they hang in Vtter-darknes till
The fowlest Sp^^ners scarf their fairest Face!
That if, here-after, any curious Eye
(That would to Hell to see a Curious sight)
Come there to see them, it may look awry,
As lothing to belold their ugly plight.
Their Co-inhabitants be ever grimme,
Grym Desolations, stern Consociates;
Black ougly Bats, ^say. 13. 21. 22.
and Owls; with Zim, and Iim;
T'affright all Flesh with horror from the Gates!
This, for the Place wherein he di'd: The Time,
(Since much more dismal) much more still b'accurst:
Let never Sun the steep Meridian climb
On that black Day, but clad in Sable first!
Let all the Stars that are maleuolent,
Lend all the light that Day (like Night) shall give;
That Men may see but only to lament
With wofull'st action, that may move to grieve!
And since great Kings their Birth-daies celebrate
With all that Pomp can yield; or Pleasure prove;
On this black Death-day still, (through public hate)
Let never the least pomp stir, nor pleasure move!
Music, be ever silent on this Day;
Or with Chromatick Dumps our loss lament:
And, O ye heavenly Spheres, sound so, or stay;
And, all confuse beneath the firmament!
For, Common-griefe's not capable of form*
Our Grief is common; then, confound all Mirth
On this cursed Day; let DEATH then, ever storm,
Yea, make the Sun, himself, lie hid with Earth!
If ought be else, Poetick-rage, or worse,
Or Love (that can do all) can move to hate
This cursed day, to add unto this curse,
Let it fall on it, as most reprobate!
Henry (dear Henry!) O that Words we had
So steept in Brine that all, through them, might see
That We, with Reason, are grown justly mad:
Since Reas'n does rage, most justly, but for Thee!
For, souls that have Intelligence and Will,
And by the first discern what they have lost,
Can, through the Last, but last distracted still
With Rage that Reason rectifieth most!
If GOD we lose, what Reas'n can be so great
(For, greatest Reas'n best knows the greatest loss:)
But it, with Grief, will quite it self forget,
Remembering such a Soule-confounding CROSS!
Then, when we loose a Prince, like God for State,
Style, Virtue, and Effect, what Reason can
But fare as it were rightly reprobate?
If not; such Reas'n must be in more then Man!
If well, we take a CROSS of so great weight
That breaks the Back of suffrance, with a Thought,
(Though propt with strongest grace) our dull conceit
Of Goodness lost, shows we are good for naught.
No: sooner can our Souls discourse forbear,
And cease to take Reports from Wit and Sense
Than we (like Blocks) such Blows of Fate can bear
As maime our Souls through their Intelligence!
If He of HVS, Job.
whose patience (being crossed)
Endured the shock of Hels first mortal charge,
Yet* in the second, found his patience lost
Among but Blaines, that did but Blood enrage;
Then how should flesh, less fenced with Grace, sustain
So many Wounds, which through our Princes Heart
Death fastens on our souls, such hurt, such pain,
Makes Outrage seem to act but Judgments Part.
The Prophet being but in prison cast I^r. 20. 7. 8. 9.

For speaking what he ought, and as he should
Vowed never more to mention heaven, and past
So far in heat, that he the Highest contrould.
Then, though we may not, from the slips of Saints,
Take warrant flat to fall, yet, for such CAUSE
To use Poetick-rage in our Complaints,
(Falling past fury) stands with Reasons Laws:
Oh! that Wits forces than, that Reas'n controules,
Could fall into this sacred Rage; and make
All Times to come, to suffer with our souls;
Or, force the props of future Worlds to shake!
For, passion being in our souls conceived,
Forthwith is formed in our speech; and so*
Passing from us, by others is received;
And, makes in them impression of like Woe.
Oh! Eloquence, (the Routher of our Mind,
Swaying the Affects thereof, which way it lists)
Join with our sighs (now) like resistlesse Winds
To lose our souls in sorrows endless Mists:
For, Grief enforced by Fate, and Eloquence
(Oh FORCE that still the own desires fulfils!
Than Tyrants sway, has no less violence
Ore our weak souls, that works but what it Wills!
Yet nought's more eloquent than TRVTH (most strong!)
Than our true Grief (that seas of sorrow weeps)
Must move al Minds, by the Engine of our Tongue,
To floate to endless Woes on DOLORS Deepes.
Men must be wrought like Ir'ne; that is first made soft
With fire, yer water cooles it: fires of Wit
Must make them more then supple (sure* and often)
Y'er Tears can cool strong passions burning-fit.
Than, if my Wit were great, as is the CAUSE
Of this our sorrow, it should so inflame
The World with passion as it never should pause
To shower forth streams of Tears to quench the same!
But so this Grief distracts it, that it can
But make imperfect Offers; it is too cold
To thaw the frozen Hearts of every Man:
For, Death (not Dolor) has all hearts in hold.
Oh words! O sense! how senseless both we hold
(Though most significant) that cannot curse
This Day past execration; would ye could
(And I had you to use) do that, or worse!
But why, O why! do I accursed fend,
So curse the Day wherein He so was blessed
For whose cause so I curse? My knees I bend,
And beg for Grace, since it was in Mind distressed.
Then I retract my Curses; and I bless
That blessed God that gives and takes (so free)
The best Things ever: for, we must confess,
This was as good as could, in Nature, Be!
For, if in nature, there could be a Prince
Above the pitch of highest Hopes; then He
Was more then such, in our experience:
Then, can our Griefs be less than now they be?
Yet Art, and Adulation (making Eight
Of seven) that make so many samouzed*
But yet the eight make more for state, and weight)
Do ost, in ouer-righting, wrong the dead!
But few, if dead, are flattered, if their friends
Live not in Wealth, or Greatness: so, the scopes
Of all such Clawers scratch for private Ends:
Yet, Kings will flatter, to attain their Hopes!
But, who for private Grace, (and Gifts among)
Of wicked Princes do renown their Names
Do private- Justice, so, with publike-Wrong;
So, both is wrong, done right to both their shames.
Then, here is our happy infortunity,
To praise him, dead, so strong in lyuing-Might;
Whose erned praise seems hired flattery;
But this we cannot shun; and do him right!
Then, O! receive, great Prince of Palatines,
Our Muses Tears (true records of our Harm)
In these sad Numbers of her blubbred Lines,
Even for his sake, of whom thou have lost an ARM
If not much more! for, never could two Hearts
As the had, been one, long since, and cleft in two;
Till now, at meeting, straight reioyn'd their Parts:
So did your Hearts at your first meeting do.
But death, too envious death, disseuer'd them
As soon as joined; than we may judge by this,
Thy causeful Sorrows needs must be extreme
Like ours: whose heart was ours, and ours was His!
And to what season had as spightfull Time
Reserved this seu'ring? but even then, when thou
(To make that Knot more sure, in your youths prime)
Came to espouse his HALF; wo-wedded now!
So, when thy joys were flowing, near the full,
It, past the lowest ebb, fell headlong-wise;
And were not Fortune thee did yet not lull
In Cradle of sure hope, it near could rise!
Thy Fortunes highest aim (naught can be higher
That on the Earth is found) is the rar'st Iemme
That er'e was cased with flesh: then, to aspire
That to enjoy, is joy beyond extreme!
A Sister suitable to such a Brother;
The highest desire of mightiest Potentates:
Good in the Abstract, there is not such another
Now to be matched; nor in the power of FATES!
Fame that best knows her; prompts me what to speak;
All, that attend her, Fames report mainetaines;
And, all in all, into her praises break;
Yea, love the ground that this Beloved, sustaines!
But, o, we cannot look upon her Worth
But must reflect on His that is gonne; since He
Was as her Self; and one Womb brought them forth,
Which, for these BLESSINGS, euer-blessed be.
But (ah) he Was, and is not; WAS! (o word
Able to strike the Soul of Patience dead)
And why not IS? He IS, and is a LORD
Whom Angels serve, and with their Food is fedd,
He di'de indeed; it is true: nay, false it is;
He did not die, that changed but life's annoy
For life of comfort in eternal BLISS:
Yet, thus he di'de, that thus yet lives in joy!
Dear Vault, that veil'st him, mummanize his Corse
Till it arise in Heaven to be crowned:
Since (though on Earth he rarely ran his course)
No Crown, for Prize, though it he touched, he found.
But Breath no sooner left him but it was
Inuolu'd with air of FAME, and blown so high,
That it does Ariadneis CROWN surpass,
And made a FLAME new kindled in the Sky.
He di'de in show than, but yet lives in Deed
In Heaven and Hearts of all that honor Grace,
In HIGHNESS Heart: he di'de then, so to speed
Of Glory here, and in that surer Place.
Even when his Grand-dames Corpse was re-inshrin'de;
As if his Corpse, in shades of Death, through love,
Had longed to meet with Hers that seemed so kind
To seek to meet with his, through her remove!
Even then (the will of Heaven so fore-assign'd)
He left his Breath, ye'r he the Crown possessed;
And went in Person, (Princely still inclined)
To meet and greet her in eternal rest!
But so he spent, and left his breath, (we hope)
That Is praise, in Bliss, still breaths Eternity;
As it does fill the Earth, and heavenly Cope:
For such a hopeful life did never die:
Then, die he never can while Virtue lives;
For, HE, and SHE are still Corelatiues!
Fear, and the Pit, and the Snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of the Earth!
Esaias. 24. 17.

SOBS FOR THE LOSS of the most Heroic Prince HENRY.
Nonfrustranascitur, qui been moritur.
NOw; all we see, of worth, go all in black,
For Him whose worth all times shall love and lack.
The hopefull'st heir apparent to a CROWN,
That Grace could give, yet, call the gift her own.
Some, wail the loss of private friends till death;
Then when so many closed were in his Breath,
How should that some, (nay all) his loss deplore?
That Sorrowes-Sea, no bottom has, nor Shore!
All praise is shut in Bounds, save that of ONE
Who nere is lost, but of the lost alone:
But none that is lost in show, not deed, or name,
Could e'rne more praise than this true Soul of FAME!
He Is gone; but, going, left such light behind
As does the Moon eclipse, the Sun so blind
With splendour, that the light they yield* us now,
Is far less good in deed, less great in show!
The Heavens, that lent him, are grown poor; or we
Deserve no trust, (since we bad detters be)
To take him ere the time by Nature set,
Yet, for short intrest, keep us still in debt!
Celestial Sprits, are ye so greedy grown
So soon to give and take (from us) your own?
Or did you envy that we should have had
A Head so good to Members al so bad?
Say, we were Merchants that nere kept our day,
Or (at the best) but pray when we should pay:
Or (yet if better, when no faith we keep)
Fall on our knees, and for grace sigh and weep:
Yet since ye swim in all celestial STORE
Ye might a while have borne with Spirits so poor!
But were we poor in spirit, we had been rich
In your account: but O we are not such!
Our Pride (that makes us beggars every way)
Make ye mistrust our faith (too poor to pay.)
Well; it is ill with us (poor Souls, profane)
And worse, (much worse) for that which you have taken
Yea, (which is worst) will never lend Him more:
O Spirit (Celestial Spirits, which we adore)
For-beare the rest we owe, to grace incline;
Trust us upon a pawn of Angels wine,
Which from the heavy Vessels of our eves
Shall run till you shall say It does suffice!
And Lord of Hoastes (their Lord and ours) beseige
Our Hearts with fear till Love does give this Pledge.
And so dispose the goods we have of thine,
( In and Without us) as we may resign
All to thy praise; that (though in debt we stand)
Thou may supply our wants still, on our Band!
On which, we humbly pray thee lend us health,
And Heads and Hands t'vphold the Commonwealth
Of our own Stock: or, if in future-time,
(As heretofore) some stranger up do climb
On Ladder of our Branches to our CROWN
He may be such as nere may put us down!
AN EPITAPH ON THE Death of the immortal HENRY Prince of Wales.
MVch Briefly said, and clearly too,
Is hard: yet that much Art can do:
But here much grief and little Art,
Is forced to act so hard a Part.
Nature and Art, with Grace, and Fortune too,
Sought Time, and Death to conquer, (as they do)
In this Heroic PRINCE, who, through those fou'r,
Orethrowes Times force, and Deaths almighty Power!
All that was in Him, was much more than all
That Is found in Flesh, if young, and natural!
Can Wit say more for his true glory here?
Yes: for, he was a Prince without a Peer!
What more? why this: He di'de but in his prime;
Yet, in perfection, elder was than TIME!
And more complete than PLACE: for fame that grows
From his great WORTH alone, no lymit knows!
If Time, and Death, and Place than, be to seek
For such another; He to none is like
But him who has no like; yet like in MIND;
And, for they have no like in either kind!
This King of Princes, and that God of Kings:
Are like themselves than, and none other things!
And, like themselves, they live in Heaven, and Us,
In spite of Envy, Time, and Death: Than, thus.
(In brief) we bound their boundles EXCELLENCE:
One, no such GOD; the other, no such PRINCE!
ANOTHER.
FOrtune, and Art, and Nature straue
To give much more than er'e they gave
To Him that lies hear underneath
The grace of Nature, Time, and Death!
Three CROWNS were near Him; and the forth,
He might, by RIGHT, have wone by WORTH!
Which, in his youth, presaged his spirit
Would ren'd, in age, from WRONG, his RIGHT!
That Spirit (like his, that is most complete)
Sought naught but what was good and GREAT!
He soon was ripe; too soon to win,
What Time, much toyld, and Art draws in.
Who casts for Crowns, must have no small
Might, right, skill, will, and Time with all:
But whose perfection Time out-goes
Winnes but LAVD'S Crown yer life he lose!
His Gain and Loss then, are so even,
As he is pleased with both in Heaven.
Teaching all Heirs to CROWNS, and KINGS
To be the best of Earthly things!
Far-well (rare PRINCE!) nor Time, nor Death
Shall stint thy glory with thy breath:
For when, with them, loud fame decaies,
Silence shall whisper out thy praise!
CONSOLATIONS for, and to the King.
GReat King in sorrows, now, as well as STATE,
Whom Fortunes grace makes most unfortunate:
For, no more favor could of FATE be had,
Than such a Son, whose loss makes Fate as bad.
This string sounds deadly, I Will not touch it more,
Least that my Salve more hurt then heal the SORE.
Be now a KING of Kings: for, Sorrows reign
In Thee, over whom become thou SOVEREIGN.
The more like GOD Kings be, the less they grieve
Or joy, for ought that joy or grief does give.
For, highest power in weakness best is shown:
Than; since no weakness can uphold a CROWN,
Let thy high virtue, that does three sustain,
Repress strong griefs, that but in weakness reign,
The more th'affront of FATE, the more appears
The virtue of the power that well it bears!
No King should be (how ever he be distressed)
Less than himself, or like himself at least:
But no King breathing more distressed could be
Than thou have been, yer thou could breath to see
Thy mortal danger: And, when, after-ward,
Thy Case, by horrid treasons, was more-hard,
As being in the very Mawe of DEATH,
Yet, in concoction, Fate preserved thy BREATH.
And, yet its said of thee, even then thou were
In show, a Caesar, and a King in Heart!
Than thus being used, beyond thy birth, unto
The deep'st distress, and Seas of Sorrows too,
Say to thy Pilot Hope (in Storms extreme)
Thou Have Caesar, and his Fortunes; go with them.
Thy desprat Plight, of yore, yet safe restored
Should make thee think thee safe, though over Board.
And thy like Sorrows (such as Kings do kill)
Should keep out others, be they what they will.
No Heaviness that Atlas-Mind or'ethrowes,
That can Heavens joy uphold in worlds of woes.
Nor that Herculean Spirit that can support
In Hell of Ills, a Heaven of good- report.
As far as Heaven does Earth; nay, more by odds,
Gods thoughts transcend the thoughts of mortal- gods.
Then, by proportion, theirs should so are more high
Than highest thoughts, not raised by MAJESTY.
The Heart of Heavens great MONARCH still is free
From Passion: so should SOV'RAIGNES likewise be
That would be like him: no Ambition higher
Yet iuster far, in deed, than in desire.
But, Oli'ts easy, well, by force of Art,
To prompt the sick to Speak and Act their part;
Yet, hard (most hard) to do it, after-ward:
But, to highst powers should naught but Ill be hard.
Severe Torquatus, did his Son mis-do
For charging,'against his Chardge, his brauing Fo,
Though he wan fame and conquest: than, since HE
That was as daring (yet was ruld by Thee)
Is, for our breach of Heasts, much more divine,
Taken hence, by highest Justice, not by thine,
Be thou the Patient, since the Agent Heaven,
Thee, of thy Son, has, for it self, bereau'n.
And let no Pagan, pass a Christian, Prince,
For Morall-Grace, or pious excellence!
Th'all-seeing Soul of Judgment, so long knit
Unto the active Body of thy Wit
Knows more then WIT can think to ease thy Grief;
Then let that Soul, now, animate Relief.
And weigh, dear Sovereign, on your Life depends,
The weal of many stangers, subjects, friends:
If sorrow then, should waste your Powr's of life,
You soon might leave them in a World of strife:
And, make the STATE, that now you hold in peace,
From Union, fall to Faction, piece by piece.
That y'er it stand as now it does, it may
From Faction fall to Action, and decay.
Then, all that are committed to your charge
With Eyes, that fears and Tears do ouer-charge,
On you do look, and by those looks say thus;
Pity your self if you will pity us!
And still we Hope you make a Conscience, too,
Us, in your self, with dolor to undo.
Since, of you, JUSTICE, will our lives require,
If through your fault, they should in Yours expire,
Philip of Spain, but for his Commons good,
(So sai'd by some) to death, on his own BLOOD
Did floate his SON, and HEIR to al his Crowns,
So, for his Subjects peace, his son confounds.
Nay God himself, his dear Son did to death
To save his servants: O! then, shall the BREATH
By which we breathe, be spent, in SIGHS, because
Thy Son, to Death, obai'd great NATVRES Laws;
When of the FOVNT of Grace, and Glory, Thou
Have such a GLASS thy self to see, and know!
Than, with thy self, thy Subjects love thou so
That, with thy self, thou do them not overthrow
Through thy much Grief (which makes them most to smart)
For see'ng thy Son but mortal, as thou art.
NATVRE (we wot) by her too wayward course,
Will fall (if not vpheld by Sour'aigne force)
To Grieefs redundance, for less CAUSE (by ods)
But Kings above her be, since they are Gods!
Then, though thou fre'st be through the DIGNITY,
Thou art most Bound to Grace, and Majesty!
When NATVRE, then, would make thee err, as Man;
Thou can not stir from these, do what She can
Unless thou will infring the Bonds of GRACE
That put, and holds thee in thy powrefull PLACE.
KINGS (sacred Things) have other Minds and Hearts
Than others have, that play inferior Parts:
For, some will, for their Subjects good, define!
Than, for their good, will thou not live with thine?
Codrus, who ware the Athenian DIADEM,
Did (as thou know) die willingly for them.
Than shall a King, inferior far in State,
In virtue pass a greater Potentate?
Great God fore-fend; that HE who is so GREAT,
His Subjects Hope in's power should so defeat.
On this Worlds stage, thou plaist Gods Part
And at thine Action every Eye does fling (KING!) Great
The sharpest Beams of Observation! Than
If thou would have applause above a Man,
Or not exposed be to base esteem,
Be as thou Art (a God!) at least, so seem!
Be strong then (God-like KING) and act this Part
Of sorrow so, as (though it move thy HEART)
It may no Action move unfit for POWER
Of greatest Brittans greatest Governor!
God proves His thoroughly, y'er he them approues:
So, tries before he trusts; likes y'er he loves.
Yet none can take the foil, that combats WOE,
Unless he yields before the Overthrow:
For, if to fight he, but in will, be pressed
Heaven gives his courage force; his force, the best!
To such, their Wish achiues that Victory
Whose glory far beyond their wish does fly:
For Grace will nere be wanting to our will,
If, to our selves, Will be not wanting still.
That thou retir'st thy self, when Heaven does frown,
Does rather raise then sinck thy high renown:
For, Clossets must enclose us, when, in Woe,
We reckon with our God for what we owe.
Good Kings are leaft alone, when most alone;
For stillness is the staidness of their THRONE.
Henry the Fourth, of France, had he been still;
Rauilliack then, had found no King to kill.
And all the World had from his WORTH, reposed
In pious acts, the better been disposed:
For, as a Beacon, on an hill aspired,
Although it stand alone, yet, being fired,
Lights the whole country, far off from the flame,
And makes Night Daylight near unto the same:
So, solitary Kings, that are retired
For virtuous causes, do (like Beacons fired)
Give light to all their Subjects, far, and nie;
So, good the public by their priuacy.
Good King, thy foes (if thou have any such,
If not; thy Savior could not say so much)
Cannot but say (and do thine Honor right)
Thou Art Good, as Great; in Nature, as in Might!
Than, in that goodness, our just Jealousy
(Of common intrest which we have in thee)
Convert to Confidence, through thy due care
Of thy Healths state, and this STATE, which we are.
Thy Health is ours; thy Sickness is our Pest.
Thy rest's our Toil; thy Travail is our REST!
If from the Helm of this so mighty ARC
That bears our Commonwealth, in private Carke,
Thy most wel-practiz'd HAND in rule of STATE
Belong withheld, by sorrow, ease, or Fate;
It must (for all the Masters helps within)
Run back in Grace, or else quite sinck in sin.
The Masters Eye does fat the Horse (they say)
And Coyne-made- Pastors let the flock decay.
Those Officers, that buy, or rent their Rooms,
Will sell, or make a RENT of all that comes.
All will stand crooked, if thy Head, and Hand
Be not applied to make it upright stand.
Thou being the cunning'st Architect of STATE
Can raise this, maugree puffes of Spite or Fate,
That, it (rare Masterpiece of Kingly SKILL)
Shall stand for Kings to imitate it, still.
Then, O! take comfort in thy Commonwealth
Whose comfort is in care but of thy Health.
As when the sick (sore sick) are spoken too
By friends for good, yet grieve in what they do:
So, least my chat might thee (perhaps) offend,
I at thy foot fall prostrate for the end: Regis ad exemplum. etc.

And thus there set the Period of my speech:
Do as thou will, thou will all others teach.
To the sacred Queen of England her most excellent Majesty be all comfort
after the CROSS.
GOod Queen (for, greater STYLE, Truth, Grace, nor Wit
Can give to Greatness for Man's Goodness fit)
Bless with thy Rays these Lines, drawn out at length
To give thy Mind, repose; thy Patience, strength:
Yet, come from want of wit, which justly vaunts
None truer speaks then truest Ignorants!
You see, beneath the Circuit of the SVNNE,
All that is made best, is instantly undone!
Are all things vain then, in that Compass? No:
The lightest Thing therein, is nothing so:
That Is TRVTH; which still is best; yet still unmade:
Which GOD cannot undo, though Fiends invade!
Than TRVTH, so perfect, tells you by her Fool,
(Her plainest Tongues-man) you are in a School
That teaches many Lessons; good, and bad:
The bad, delight; the good, but make too sad:
Then, since now sad you are, the last you learned
Was passing good, though it be ill discerned.
You take it ill (perhaps) by so great loss,
To learn to bear a far more heavy CROSS
(Which Heaven long defer) if long you live,
(For which I pray) then O be glad to grieve
For what you do, when you do grieve to prove
Your Souls best Physic in what least you love.
It Is ill to be too well; ease, is disease:
And deadly too, in Parts that Death does seize.
Then when, in any Part of us, we joy
More than we should, lest that might us destroy
Heaven takes it quickly off (as it were by stealth)
And, by that Want supplies our want of health!
The greatest Cross that Greatness then can bear
Is that of Pleasure, freed of Grief, and Fear.
Yet to content Desire, and fear exclude,
Is the whole Sum of Heavens BEATITVDE!
But, here, not so; where pleasure, as a Crime,
Ends ill, if fear prevent it not in time.
Yet Nature droopes, if pleasure, in a mean
Sustain it not to act Life's tedious Scaene.
Thus with, nor without pleasure, long can we
Live as we should, so strongly weak we be!
Than gracious Queen when you reflect upon
This light of TRVTH, it will be day anon
With darkest PASSION, that but Reason blinds;
Then leave your Chance to Fame, and Fortunes winds
While you your self repose (blow how they please)
In HONORS Heaven (or'eruling SORROWS Seas!)
Wherein sits VERTVE throned, Crowned with Stars,
Above black Days, made such by Clouds of Cares.
There, Royal Lady, is their sovereign SEAT,
That will, in all Affronts, be Good, and Great:
For, naught is Great on Earth but that Great Mind
That Is moved with nothing great produced by KIND!
But, in an Heavenly calm of Minds repose,
Looks least dejected when it most does lose.
Than Minds are Motes, unless they think they be
Above all State and Fate, in their degree.
VERTVE, as Sovereign, royal Minds still rules;
But FORTUNE (as a Slave) waits most on Fools.
This life is but a War-fare against OFFENSE;
And either fortune, breeds the DIFFERENCE,
Be It Black, or Bright, its clear, not clear they are,
From equal Danger, and from equal, Care!
Soft-fortune is a Bog, or dancing- Death,
Where soon the careless do ingulph their breath!
Then must the foot of sober-care go soft,
Yet swiftly over, to keep Life aloft.
While high CONTENT, in what so-euer Chance,
Makes the brave Mind the Stars out-countenance!
CONTENT, does feast our Fates, which still is found
In Minds, by Grace, (like Heaven) made Great, and Round:
What Wave can surge above highest Providence
In Deluge of Distress, or Eminence?
What Leaden-Hap can fall from adverse Fate,
To sink the Mind that VERTVE does Elate?
If She then CENTER be of our Defense,
Be roundest Vengence the CIRCVMFERENCE
It skills not; since it shall no more annoy
Than Hell the Man-god did, who there did joy!
Than, let Fates Snuffes and Puffes, as winds of Grace,
Serene the Heaven of your Maiestick Face
From frowning Clouds, condensed by DEATHS despite,
To reaue fair VERTVES Firmament of light.
So shall you mount from West of Woe to the East
Of GLORIES Heaven; and ( Sunn-like) light the rest!
For, such strange Members NATVRE never bred
As lie at ease while Thorns do Crown their HEAD!
Entombe your Passions in HIS Passion, then,
(To be beloved of Angels, praised of Men!
And, with a roiall-smooth-erected front
Bear up the CROSS; and, ever look upon it
As on the only KEY of Heavens fore-gate,
That opes it maugree Envy, Death, and Fate:
For, Fate and Death our Nature does salute
Y'er we can breathe on Blossoms of LIFE'S Fruit.
Then, if we flourish afterward, it is
A grace we merit not, but use amiss.
We use amiss; or (at the best) the Best
So use it still, as all the interest
Comes from the poorness of their Spirits, with strife;
So, but in Grace, deserve the love of Life!
Yet, Spirits of richest temper, are but poor;
But, in their indigence, abound with store
Of Heavenly Treasures, which the World does scorn
Yet they the brauest Mind do most adorn!
A brave Spirit is a Particle of HIS
That Is Lord of FATE, Triumuirate of BLISS!
And, (as a Flame) she still, by Nature, sties
Where her ORIGINAL reposed lies.
Than, sacred Majesty, disdain to veil
Thy height to Nature, if she fall to wail:
Though weeping with thy Sex does best agree;
Yet Tears so drown the Rays of Majesty,
As, through those troubled streams, when they would peep,
They, sadly, look like Prisoners in the deep.
But, can a Mother, good, as great, forget,
A SON so dear, and not pay Natures Debt
In Liquid Pearl, disbursed by those Eyes
Where Majesty with Love and Virtue lies?
O! no, She cannot: but She still may mind
Her Son, in DEED; yet, put the SHOW behind,
Where it may never shadow GLORIES sight,
That, in the Streams of Sorrow, sinks her light.
Now (as a fool) foole-hardy I have been
TO encounter thus, the Passions of a QVEENE;
Which commonly are strong as is the state
Of those that all but them, predominate!
What is my reach herein? Is it to show
My Hand, or Heart, or what a fool may know?
To pick her Mouth of thanks; her Purse of coin:
Or, praise (at least) from her (so charmed) purloine.
For Note, for Coat, for Countenance, for ought
Like these; or none of these? or, else, for naught?
For none of these it is: yet, is it not
For naught; but, for Her good, I play the Sot.
To make Her (Sorry) merry, as I could,
None other-wise than Grace, with Nature, would
Even for Her self: wise-folly telling me
Even for Her self, should VERTVE served be.
Than, if that one of Gods Fools, on his Face,
(Most wise in that) may beg, and have the grace
Of good acceptance of this service; he
Will fool it, thus, for nothing, till he be
Nothing, that is not something, still to serve
A Queen, whom Fates did for our weal reserve.
Whose private Womb, has been the Fountainhead,
Whence all the Issues of our Hopes are lead.
By Graces guidance, and by Natures might,
Still to refresh the Red-rose, and the White,
For that, and for thou, sweetest Eglantine,
About the Flow'res of all our Crowns do twine
To keep them from quite falling, (as our own)
By adverse Puffs, that else might blow them down.
We, (mixed, conioyn'd in peace and unity)
Enshrine thee in our souls Infinity,
Till all good souls shall meet, where they shall Rise
To Glory in secure FELICITIES.
Here, heavy Muse, stoop low thy high ascent;
And say, in deepenesse of the low'st desent:
Good Queen (as it began, your STYLE defines)
Bless, with your Beams of grace, these graclesse Lines.
FINIS.

