The MUSES Sacrifice



TO THE MOST NOBLE, and no less deseruedly-renowned Ladies, as well Darlings,
as Patronesses, of the Muses; LVCY, Countess of Bedford; MARY,
Countesse-Dowager of Pembrooke; and, ELIZABETH, Lady Carry, (Wife of Sr. Henry
Carry:) Glories of Women.
THE Muses, sacrifice; I, consecrate;
They, unto Heaven; I, to you, heavenly THREE:
They, my poor Heart; I, my Loves rich Estate,
together with my Rimes, that rarer be.
But what can be more rare than richest Love,
since so rich Love is, now, so rarely found?
Yes; measur'd-words, that, out of measure, move
the Soul to Heaven, from Hell that is most profound!
A vexed Soul for Follies, that betray
the Soul to Death, some call the nether Hell:
Thence move my Measures; and, do make such way,
that they all Lets to give way, do compel.
These Rarities, which my poor Soul confines,
her treble- Zeal to you (three Graces) brings
For Grace, as glorious as the Sun that shines
(as bright, as cheerful) on inferior Things.
Such Grace you have, by Virtue, and by Fate,
as makes you Three, the Glory of these Times;
The MUSES Darlings, and their Chaires of STATE;
Shapers, and Souls of all Soule-charming Rimes!
BEDFORD, the beaming-glory of thy HOUSE
that makes it Heaven on Earth, thy Worths are such,
As all our WITS make most miraculous,
because thy WIT and WORTH do work so much.
For, WIT and SP'RIT, in Beauties Livery,
do still attend thine all-commanding EYES;
And, in the Achiuements of thine Ingenie,
the gloss thereof, like Orr, on Sable lies.
The Womb that bare thee, made thy noble Breast
abound with Bounty, yer thou knew'st thy Fate;
Where furnished was that Bounty with the best
of Honors Humors, giving Her the Mate.
For which, all Poets Plowes (their Pens) do plow
the fertil'st Grounds of ART; and, in the same,
Thy still-increasing Praises (thick) do sow,
to yield Aeternitie thy Crop of Fame!
PEMBROKE, (a Paragon of Princely PARTS,
and, of that Part that most commends the Muse,
Great Mistress of her Greatness, and the ARTS,)
Phoebus and Fate makes great, and glorious!
A Work of Art and Grace (from Head and Heart
that makes a Work of Wonder) thou have done;
Where Art, seems Nature; Nature, seems Art;
and, Grace, in both, makes all outshine the Sun.
So sweet a Descant on so sacred Ground
no Time shall cease to sing to Heavenly Lyres:
For, when the Spheres shall cease their gyring sound,
the Angels then, shall chaunt it in their Quires.
No Time can vaunt that ere it did produce
from femine Perfections, so sweet Strains
As still shall serve for Men and Angels use;
then both, past Time, shall sing thy Praise and Pains.
My Hand once sought that glorious WORK to grace;
and writ, in Gold, what thou, in Incke, had writ:
But Gold and highest Art are both too base
to Character the glory of thy Wit!
And did thou thirst for Fame. (as all Men do)
thou would, by all means, let it come to light;
But though thou cloud it, as does Envy too,
yet through both Clouds it shines, it is so bright!
Where bright DESERT fore-goes; a spur is Praise
to make it run to all that glorifies:
Of such Desert, i^ ought eclipse the Rays,
it ever shames FAMES public- Notaries.
CARRY (of whom Minerua stands in fear,
lest she, from her, should get ARTS Regencie)
Of ART so moves the great-all-mouing Sphere,
that every Orb of Science moves thereby.
Thou make Melpomen proud, and my Heart great
of such a P^pill, who, in Buskin fine,
With Feet of State, do make thy Muse to mete
the Scenes of Syracuse and Palestine.
Art, Language; yea; abstruse and holy Tongues,
thy Wit and Grace acquired thy Fame to raise;
And still to fill thine own, and others Songs;
thine, with thy Parts, and others, with thy praise*
Such neruy Limbs of Art, and Strains of Wit
Times past never knew the weaker Sex to have;
And Times to come, will hardly credit it,
if thus thou give thy Works both Birth and Grave.
Ye Heavenly Trinary, that swayes the State
of ARTS whole Monarchy, and WITS Empire,
Live long your Likes (unlike) to animate
(for all Times light) to blow at your Arts Fire.
For, Time now swells, (as with some poisonous Weed)
with Paper-Quelkchose, never smelt in Schools;
So, made for Follies Excess; for, they feed
but fatten not; if fatten, it is but Fools.
What strange Chime^aes Wit, (nay Folly) frames
in these much stranger Times, weak Wits t'affright
Besides themselves! for, Wits Celestial Flames,
now spend much Oil, yet lend but little Light!
And what they lend, is (often) as false, as small;
so (to small purpose) they great Pains do take
But to be scorned, or cursed, or loathed of all
that, by their false-light, foulely do mistake.
For, to give Light that leads light Men awry,
is Light that leads to Darkness; then such, Light
Were better out, than still be in the Eye
of Men, that (so) do, lightly, run from RIGHT.
For, while such Light does shine, the Multitude
(like Moates in Sun) with their Confusion plays;
Not weighing, over their Heads, how Errors Cloud
the while, does threat, t'o'er-whelme them many ways.
By pouring down the Hail of hard Conceits
against God and Goodness, that do batter both:
Or else, by saddest Showers of dark Deceits,
borne as the fickle Wind of Fancy blowth:
By Lightning; that does still more hurt than good;
while Errors Thunderclaps make sour the sweet
(Yea, sweetest) drink of Nature (our best Blood)
that does with Melancholy-madnesse meet.
By all that may (at least) give some offense
to complete Virtue, Wisdom, Wit, and Art:
For, Ignorance, has often more Insolence,
than puffing Knowledge to take Errors part.
Disease of Times, of Minds, Men, Arts, and Fame,
vain Self-conceit, how do thou ply the Press
Of People and the Printer, with thy shame,
clad in the Coat of Fustian-foolishnesse?
For, all that but pretend to have Art or Wit,
so travel with Conceit, amiss conceived,
That, till the Press deliver them of It,
their Throws are such as make them Wit-bereau'd!
Yet, if the Issue of their crazed Brains
do chance (though monstrously) to com^ to light;
Lord! how they hug it, like the Ape that strains
her young so hard, in love, as kills it quite.
What Piles of Pamphlets, and more wordy Books,
now farse the World! wherein, if Wisdom look^,
She shall see nothing worthy of her Looks,
unless the idle Likeness of a Book!
But WIT's most wronged by privilege of School:
for, Learnings Drunkards now so ply the Pot
(Of Incke I mean) Posterity to fool,
as shames Wits Name, although they touch him not.
Some that but look into Divinity
with their left Eye, with their left Hand do write
What they observe, to wrong Posterity,
that by this Ignis fatuis roame by Night.
Some search the Corpse of all Philosophy,
and every Nerve and Vein so scrible on,
That where it should be Truths Anatomy,
they make it Errors rightest Scheleton.
Some others on some other Faculties,
still (fondly) labor, but to be in Print:
(O poor Ambition!) so, their Folly flies
abroad the World, like Slips, that shame their Mint.
But Poesy (dismal Poesy) thou art
most subject to this sovereign Sottishness;
So, there is good Cause thou should be out of heart,
since all, almost, now put thee under Press.
And Wit lies shrouded so in Paper-sheetes,
bound Hand and Foot with Cords of Vanities:
That (first) with all Obscurity it meets;
so, it is impossible it ere should rise.
But you^ Three Graces, (whom our Muse would grace,
had she that glory, that our Philip had,
That was the Beauty of Arts Soul and Face)
you press the Press with little you have made.
No; you well know the Press so much is wronged,
by abject Rimers that great Hearts do scorn
To have their Measures with such Nombers thronged.
as are so basely got, conceived, and borne.
And, did my Fortunes not expose me to
contempt of Greatness, since so mean I am,
I should, with Greatness, greatly scorn it too,
since Fame for Versing, now, is held but Shame.
But, in that Vein lies not that Malady;
no, It is sound, and holds Arts purest Blood,
Which therein flows to each Extremity
of Arts whole Body, for the publike-good.
Here-hence it came, that divine Oracles
( Apollos Dialect, great God of Art)
Were still expressed in measured Sillables,
since squarest Thoughts most roundly they impart.
In which respect it is meet'st to make Records
of memorable Accidents of Time:
Of Princes Lives, and Actions of great Lords:
which Poets, first, did Chronicle in Rhyme.
Nay, they were first that Natures Works observed,
and Bookt it out for young Philosophers:
Yea, they were first, by whom, is still conseru'd
the knowledge of Heavens motions, and the Stars.
Who sought to find each Substance separate,
and, in their curious Search, sound what they were;
And, to the Life, did them delineate
on Arts fair Front, that there, more fair, appear!
Then, Poets were the first Philosophers;
first State-obseruers, and Historians:
First Metaphickes, and Astronomers,
yea, first Great-clarks, and Astrologians.
And, therefore, were they, in the Worlds first Age,
pow'rfull'st Perswaders; whose sweet Eloquence:
(That ever, staidly, ran from holy Rage)
was the first Rethoricke sprung from Sapience.
For, should we give this Empress but her due,
(Empress of speech that Monarchizeth Ears)
We must confess, she can all Souls subdue,
to Passions causing Joy, or forcing Tears.
It is a Speech of most Maiesticke state,
that makes Reas'ns Forces not to be with-stood:
The Tethys, that does still predominate
th'outragious Ocean of our boiling blood!
For, it does flow more fluent from the Tongue.
and, in the flowing, carries all with it,
Which but attempts the Torrent to impugn
and Rocks of Art remoues, to Seas of Wit!
Succinct it is, and easier to retain
(which with our Wits and Wills does ^est agree)
Than Prose, less subject to just Measures Reign:
for, Prose from Measures Rule is (loosely) free.
And, for it is ofter used, it cloyes the ^a^e;
nor so composed of Measures Musical;
And not allowed that Beauty Verse mu^^ bear,
nor yet the Cadence so Harmonicall.
It Is not adornd with choice of such rich Words,
which heavenly Poesi^ gracefully does hear;
Nor licensed that fine phra^e* Art Verse affords,
then, to diuinest Spirits it should be dear:
For, it is the Honey of all Rethoricks Flow'ers,
the Quintessence of Art, and Soul of Wit;
Right spirit of Words, true phrase of Heavenly Powers;
and, in a Word; for Heaven, all-onely, fit.
But Time these Times, it seems, in Malice chose,
to mischief Poets; for, it never brought ^orth
To this wild World (mad-merry still in Prose)
such worthy Poets, yet so litt^e worth.
And, how should they be otherwise? for, they
can twist no Lines, that hold eternal Rhyme,
On Rocks of Art; but much Time turns away;
so, get but Fame and Famine in that Time.
For, Time they spend in that which none regards,
but such as would, but can no Larges give:
While other Arts, more poor, get rich Rewards:
so, Phoebus Sons, by Luster, only, live!
The Painter, that is Master of his Skill,
and but with Earthly Coulors paints (alone)
Mere Forms of Beasts, has often Reward at Will;
but, Poets Paintings, though divine, have none.
But Painters, since to Poets they draw nigh,
(save that they draw inn Gold (unlike them) still)
And, paint so lively in dumb Poesy,
I wish their gain as great as is their Skill.
For, Pictures speak, although they still be dumb;
and what they cannot speak, they recompense
With Demonstration; so, can Souls o'er-come,
as soon by silence, as by Eloquence.
But Trades (that do but Case the Corpse aright
with our own Cost, (which often they tei^h, at least)
But ask and have: when they that clothe the Sp'rit
in Virtues Robes, are paid but with a Jest.
Which Iesters Memories I wish may be
among Trencher-Bustons, Fools, and Naturals,
Preserved by Poets for Posterity
to weep or laugh at, as the Humor falls.
For, Poets best preserve the fame or shame
of good or bad* since with their powerful Pen,
They give the Virtuous an immortal Names;
but, make the vicious live, still loathed of Men.
No earthly Matter (howsoever wrought,
though it (withal) be raised above the Clouds)
Can Fame uphold, but it will fall to naught:
for, Earth, in Time, her brauest Buildings shrouds.
Those Threatners of the Sky, proud Ilium,
Byrza of Carthage, Tower of Babylon,
Where are they now, with all their state, become?
are they not all, to all Confusion gone?
Where Is Neroes golden-Palace, that drew dry
(had it been^ liquid) freest Founts of Gold?
Asinius Pollioes Court of Liberty,
so rare for state, are now turned both to Molde.
Nay, that proud Pyramed is come to naught,
that, pight near Memphis, seemed to proppe the Sky,
Whereon, three-hundred-threescore-thousand wrought
full twenty Years, before it rought so hie!
Some Authors say, the Groundwork of the same
took up an hundred Furlongs in the Round:
Which higher rose, aspiring, like a Flame,
yet now, of this, no Spark is to be found.
Much less does any Author testify
what King (of Fame desirous) raised the same:
A most just plague to check their vanity,
that so-in Lime and Stone, entombe their Name.
What rests of Scaurus Amphitheater,
than which, I wot not whether all the Cost
Caligula and Nero did confer
on all their Buildings, most admired, were most!
The Scene whereof, three Stages did contain,
whereon three hundred Collumnes and threescore
Of rarest Marble (decked with many a Vein
of orient Coulors) held up either Floor.
Which Pillars, eight and thirty Foot in height,
were each but of one Piece, in each Degree;
Wherein an hundred thousand people might
be placed, secure, the Spectacles to see.
And (in the midst) the Stage was all of Glass,
made thick, to bear the Actors weight thereon;
Three Thousand Copper-statues all did grace;
besides some Gold, and some refulgent Stone!
And only for a Month (no longer then
the Plays were playing) was it to endure:
Yet, being but a Roman Citizen
that made it such, his Fame still suits his power.
The rather since he, to adorn the Muse,
this Cost bestowed; or else (perhaps) his Fame
Had been, with Neroes, much, but monstrous;
the Muse alone then, well renownes a Name.
Yet, now her Agents are so poor become
in Mind and state, that, for an abject Fee,
They Will honor (to their shame) but HONORS skum;
yea, Deifie a Diu'll, if he be free.
But, strong Necessity constraines the same,
(as Isreal's Singer did the Shewbread eat
By like constraint) yet, they are Lords of FAME;
and, where they charge with it, there is no retreit.
For, though Time-present see it mis-bestow'd,
yet if Wits Engine it do rarely raise,
Of Times to come, It shall be so allowed,
that both the praised and praiser, they will praise!
Yet, speak a Language ^ew do apprehend;
so few affect it: for, we naught affect,
But what our Understandings comprehend;
no marvel then the most this Art neglect.
Nay, were it but so, yet Poesy still should find
some grace with some, whom Art makes great, of vile:
But now such think, it but distracts the Mind;
for, broken-Braines such great-Ones Poets style.
Unfit for serious use, unfit for all
that tends to perfect Man's Felicity;
Light, idle, vain, and what we worse may call,
yea, though it were the Skumme of Vanity.
And would these Truths were all true Falacies,
(though Poets used to none of these incline:
For, personal faults are not the Faculties,
that is not only faultlesse, but divine.)
But it is too true in many that profess
the Art; though Leaden Lumpes: for, none can swim
In Helicon without that Happiness,
which, from his Mothers Womb, he brought with him.
And, it is as true if Grace and Government,
do not contain the Mind, in Raptures high,
But it, of Wit, may make so large extent,
as it may crack the strongest Ingenie.
So may it do in other Mysteries,
and that which we most praise, may most impeach:
Divinity it self may soon'st do this,
if Grace withold not from too high a Reach.
Then, let this Art (which is the Angels speech)
(for, to the Highest they speak in naught but Hymns,
Which, in the Womb, they do true Poets teach)
be freed from speech, that but her glory dimmes.
Then let the ignorant-great-highly base
revile her never so much, they but bewray
Their own Defects thereby, and give but grace
to Folly, darkened with Arts glorious Raie.
But no great Spirit* (whose temper is divine,
and dwells in real- GREATNESS) but adores
The Heavenly MUSE, that in Arts Heaven does shine
like Phoebus, lending Light to other Lores.
To you therefore (that Art predominate
great in your Virtue, Skill, and Fortunes too)
My Muse held meet'st these Flights to consecrate,
since you most grace the Muse in most you do.
And as the Sun does glorify each Thing
(how ever base) on which he deignes to smile:
So, your clear Eyes do give resplendishing
to all their Objects be they never so vile:
Then, look on These and Me, with such a Glance,
That both may shine through your bright Countenance.
The unfeigned lover, honorer, and admirer of your rare Perfections, John Dauies
of Hereford.

The Sacrifices of God are a contrite Spirit: A contrite and a broken Heart, O
God, thou will not despise. Psalm. 51.17.
A Broken Heart (dear LORD) thy Grace respects,
as Loves best Sacrifice; the, break my Heart
To make it sound thereby, in his Affects;
and Sin (that wounds It still) from It to part.
How is it (Lord) that who so seeks thy Face
must with the whole-heart se^ke the same to see?
Yet Broken-hearts as soon do get thy Grace;
so, whole or broken, are all One to Thee.
Then, break my heart, to make it whole; that so
(being broken quite, and made whole afterward)
It, in thy Kingdom, still may current go,
made flat to take thy Print, with Pressures hard:
That, though the Fiend abuse thy Form in me,
It, through thy Test, may current pass to Thee.
Another of the same.
AS in the Sacrifices of the Law,
there was an Alter, Priest Host, Fire and Wood:
So This to That, in likeness near does draw;
and wants but holy- Fire to make it good.
The Alter, is my Hope; the Host, my Heart;
the Priest, my Faith; my Love, the Fu^ll is:
All these (o Lord) are ready; but the Art
to fire the Fuel, wants; then, do thou This.
I am but Passive in this holy Act,
Thou the sole Agent: yet, o make me fi^
To work with thee together in this Fact,
with all the Forces of my Will and Wit:
And since (dear ^o^d) all things so ready be,
Give Fire, to sacrifice my Heart to Thee!
Another.
DEscend sweet hallowed Fire from that high FLAME
that ever burns in LOVES eternal Breast;
consume this Sacrifice, and let the rest
Lick up my Tears for Sin about the same:
That Mis-beleeuers thereby still may know
There is no GOD but he that fired it so.
I am no Prophet, Seer, Saint, nor ought,
that may expect such Favor; but a Wretch
made meek by Sin; yet Hands of Faith do stretch
To thee, whom men profane, do set at naught:
If Faith then, with thee work this wondrous Feate,
They will confess my God as good, as great!
To ouer-curious Critiques.
Ye ouer-curious Eyes (that naught can please
produced by Art or Nature) o auert
Your All-deprauing-banefull looks from these
pure Flames, that sacrifice our dying Heart.
Here are no Nouels (which ye most d^s^re)
nor ought unusual; but, here shall you see
What has been said of old, in new Attire,
with our Thoughts interlac'd; so, ours they be.
The Spider-webbe, which in her Womb is bred,
we prize no more for that: nor, estimate
Pure Honey less, for being gathered
from many Sweets; nay, more (much more) for that:
What we have gathered, is from others Flowers;
And, what is added, is from sweet'st of ours.
To the Indifferent Readers.
TO pray, in measured Sillables, is strange,
Familiars with perverseness may conceive:
But PIETY her self, allows this Change;
and, for our Learning, does Example leave.
Her Friend (sweet Psalmist) sung his Soules-Conceits
in sacred Numbers; and, the Heavens did Charm
With powerful Verse: so, those commanding- Heights,
he wanne but with his Muses mighty Arm!
All Christian- Churches (howsoe'er a^ ods)
with Psalms and Hymns beat Heavens resounding Wall:
Nay, more, the Pagans sing unto their Gods;
and, which is most, the Angels most o^ all:
Then, since both Heaven and Earth This still do use,
He shames himself that for this blames our Muse.
The Author, of, and to his Muse.
MY Muse is tirde with tyring but on Leaves
that fruitless are; yet, leave ill fruits behind:
She only works for Air, that but deceiues:
so, works for nothing, but deceitful Wind.
And what she seiseth, as her Subject, is
but vain, if it be light; and lightly what
She preyes upon, is such: then, now on This,
she needs to pray, for preying so on That.
O Muse, did thou but know thy native kind,
(being all divine) thou never would wave thy wings
In that which does but only mar the Mind;
but, endlesly, about Celestial Things.
Th'wilt be deplum'd for pluming so on Trash,
and (like a Flesh-^lye) lighting but on Sores;
Then, in Arts fairest Founts, thy Feathers wash,
to fly to him that Heaven and Earth adores!
Thy Raptures else, are but such Rauishments,
as are reproachful, penal, lewd, and light:
But Raptures far above the Elements,
do show thy Virtue in the fairest ^light.
O then, thou great vnlimitable Muse,
(that rests, in motion, in th'ETERNALS Breast)
Inspire my Muse, with grace her power to use
in naught, but what to thee shall be addressed:
So shall that Spirit that made thy David sing,
Make Dauies too, (a Beggar) like a King.
THE MUSES SACRIFICE.
A Confession of sins, with petition for grace.
O Trinall Union, God creating Gods,
O sole resistles all-effecting Power,
When wilt atone twixt me and thee the ods?
Till when, eternal I account each how'r.
I am (O Lord) thy Creature re-created;
Made, marred, re-made, by Love, by Sin, by Grace:
Shall Love, and Grace, by Sin be so defeated,
That Love should lose her labor; Grace, her place?
Thou art the Salve, and I the mortal Sore;
Yet with one touch, thy virtue can revive me:
To heal this Sore, a Spear thy heart did gore,
(Kind Pelican) that thy Blood might relieve me,
Thy Hands that formed, reformed, and me conformed
Were to a Cross transfixed for my sake,
To help my hateful hands that sin inorm'd;
Then can those helping Hands their Cure forsake?
Thy Head was crowned with Thorny Diadem,
To cure mine, crowned with Sins sweet-pricking Roses:
Thy body (ah) did blood and water stream,
To wash away Sins soil which mine encloses.
Thy Feet was crosse-wise nailed to a Cross,
To heal mine, swollen with running into vice:
On thy saire Skin whips did my Crimes engrosse,
So freedst thou me from them with bloody price.
Then can such Love now leave the thing it loved?
Is Sin so sour to turn sweet Love to Hate?
To dye for Sin, it thee alone behou'd,
And yet shall Sin thy Deaths desert abate?
O God forbid; since Sin, and Death, and Hell,
Thou on the Cross did conquer through thy death,
And by the power thereof their power did quell
To lowest deepes, and it restrained beneath.
Besides, thou say (but Truth what can thou say?)
A Gulf is set the two Extremes between;
Twixt Heaven and Hell no entercourses may
(By means thereof at any time) be seen.
I am in Heaven; for, in thy glorious Wounds
By Faith I hide me, from Sin, Death and Hell:
If Satan (for my plague) would break his bounds,
Those Gulphes of grace to stay will him compel.
Then keep me in thy Wounds (my souls sole heaven)
From whence if outcast, I to Hell must fall;
Where out-cast-like of Hope shall be bereau'n:
If reft of Hope, then reft of Help withal.
But help me (Lord) else hopeless shall I be;
Thy help the hopeful never faild at need:
Then, since my hope of help alone's in thee,
Let speedy help my ready hope succeed.
Upon thine Hand thine hand has writ my Name;
Then read thy Hand, and save me by the same.
A Sinners acknowledgement of his Vileness and Mutabilitie.
SPare me (dear Lord) my days as nothing be,
Consumed in Sin, then which is nothing worse:
Yet Sin is nothing: yet can well agree
With nothing but thy vengeance and thy curse.
Yet is it that, without which none can live,
Sprung from our Proto-parents (roots of strife)
Linckt to that Curse; that Life a cross does give,
not cross of Life, but cross in Book of Life.
Then happy that, that Life yet never had;
( Life that still subject is to such a cross)
And hapless I that live in life so bad,
Where life is found with life's eternal loss.
Ah what am I, but slime, dirt, dounge and dust,
Graue-monste^s food, Worms pittance (most impure)
Sprung from the earth and unto earth that must?
How, where, or when, I (sure) am most unsure.
Abortiue Brat of damned Concupiscence,
Hels heir, Heavens hate, eternal food for Fire,
A Gulf of grief, and Sincke of foul offense,
Scum of vain Pride, and froth of damned Desire:
Copesmate of Beasts, and to a Beast transformed,
A Dungeon dark, a loathsome Lump of Earth,
Fardle of filth, prodigious, foul, deformed,
Dishonours vassaile, cursed child of Wrath:
Pattern of Vice, and Mould of Vanity,
Made of the Molde that marres what ere it makes;
Errors misse-maze, where lost is Verity,
Or blinded so, that still wrong course it takes:
A Bramble Bryer, an vse-lesse barren Plant,
A Dog, a Hog, a Viper most unkind,
A Rock of wrack, dry Well of every Want,
A Weather-cocke, more wau'ring then the wind:
A thing of naught, a naughty thing, that marres
What Goodness makes; a damned incarnate Devil;
Contentions Source, Loves hate, still causing iarres,
A banefull weed, and Root of every evil:
What shall I say? A Map of misery,
Confusions Chaos, Frailties Spectacle,
The Worlds disease, Times vgli^^^ Prodigy;
The Abuse of Men, and Sh(...) ^btectacle.
Mortal, and to a Bubble suitable,
Whose slesh as Flowers, whose life as Hours consumes,
Of matter made, more then most mutable,
Yet (sure of certain death) of life presumes:
Frail life, which more it lasts, the sooner worn,
The longer drawn, the shorter is the date,
Hedged in with cares, as with an Hedge of Thorn;
Whose piercing pricks the mind do vulnerate.
If merry now, anon with woe I weep;
If lusty now, forthwith am water-weake;
If now alive, anon am buried deep;
That hour that glads the heart, the heart does break:
One while I laugh, another while I lowre;
Now joy in Grief, and then in Joy I grieve;
Now wake in Care, then sleep I straight secure,
Now I despair, then Hope does me relieve;
Now sigh for sin, then sin, so sigh in vain;
Now mind I Heaven, then Earth excogitate;
Now fast and pray, then feast and prate again;
Now labors end, then labors renouate;
Now am I loose, then lose I liberty;
Now sound, then sick; now up, then down I fall;
Now am I safe, and then in ieopardie;
Now ouerco(...) then, put to the wall;
Now I discourse, then (mute again) I muse;
Now seek the World, then search I for thy Ways;
Now am abused, and then I do abuse;
Now hate, then love; now praise, then straight dispraise;
Now This I long for, by and by for That;
This now delights me; then with that am cloid;
Now would have this, and then I wot not what:
And thus with This, and That, am still annoid.
To count the count-lesse vain varieties
Wherewith this mortal life surrounded is,
Or to recite our veins in vanities,
I may (as of the Stars) the reckoning miss.
All that this earthy Boowle on breast does bear
Is subject most to most unconstant state:
One moment makes as if they never were,
And every minute draws them to their date.
The heat, the cold* the hunger, thirst, and all
The miseries that life (frail life) annoy,
(Which swarming hide this Globe terrestrial)
No Tongue can tell, though all their powers employ.
Death seconds these, (if not the second Death)
Who with his fatal Fan sweepes all away,
At All (says he) whose nostrils bound their breath;
Thus carelessly (at All) with All does play.
One dies with Sickness, Thought another kills;
With Hunger this, with Thirst that man does pine:
Some Water choakes, an Halter others spils:
Some Fire consumes, some Beasts devour in fine.
This man he murders with the ruthlesse Sword;
That man with Poison he does suffocate:
With Bullet this; that with a bitter Word
He ends; and others end with worser Fate.
No Flesh (though framed in height of Natures skill,
With composition more then half divine)
But it is subject made to death, until
The Immortal do that mortal flesh refine.
Thus all he ends; yet none their ends foreknow,
A secret it is, to Death himself unknown:
Whom he must strike thy finger (Lord) must show,
Nor dares he shoot til thou the Mark have shown.
To some he is thy mercies Minister;
To other some the Engine of thy wrath:
This sadness to my Soul does minister,
For, bleeding Conscience many faintings has:
But wash the same with thy sweet mercies dew,
And it anoint with unction spiritual,
Then health, and rest, and peace shall straight ensue,
Which to my Conscience will be cordial:
I have discourst to thine all-hearing Ears
My dismal plight, in doleful Elegy,
With Tragic accents, accents causing tears,
(Sad tears) attending matchless misery:
Thy pitties Ear therefore, bow down, O Lord,
To these most pensive, and most just complaints:
Let mercies Eyes, with pitties Ears accord,
To cheer the conscience that with bleeding faints:
In hope were of my soul shall rest in peace,
Till thou vouchsafe to send her full release.
A Confession of a Sinner, acknowledging the misery of humane frailty.
Celestial Lord, Creator of this ALL,
Embracer, Prop, and Ruler of the same,
Whose unseen Eye beholds the general,
And singly see at once this double Frame,
O veil that Christall-cleere all-seeing eye,
On vtter-darknesse, that, Lord, that am I.
Mine Intellect is dark, dark my souls sight;
My body dark (dark dungeon of my soul)
Is opposite (for darkness) to thy light,
What can be darker, or more ugly foul?
Thus darkness striving much more dark to be,
(Hell being too light) infused it self in me.
O Justice Sun with Taper pointed beams,
Dart through this Darkness, open loopes for light,
By which the influence of thy lights leames
Through my dark soul may be dispersed quight:
For what is that which extreme darkness cleares
But extreme light of lights, when it appears?
Where extreme darkness harbors, there is Hell,
In me (dear Lord of Heaven) that hell is placed,
My heart (hard heart) wherein all horrors dwell,
With vexing thoughts (like Fiends) away does wast:
My Conscience quite confounded with my miss,
Is lowest Hell, where highest Anguish is.
Descend sweet Christ, and harrow with thy Cross
This hell of Conscience, flee my soul from thence;
It is thine own (dear Lord) it is thy loss,
If it do perish through my sins offense:
Why, sin is nothing; then for thing of naught
Lose not my soul (poor purchase) dearly boght.
In Deaths dark shade (o'er-shadowed with my sin
Upon the black pit brinck of deep Despair)
I lie, (dear Lord) half out, but more half in;
Help, help, o help, Lord hear, Lord hear my prayer
Now, now, o now, if ever, help me now,
I sincke, I sincke, help ere I sincke too low.
Remember Lord, Lord call to mind again
The drops (strange drops) of Water mixed with Blood
Which from thy paine-prest Body ran amain,
What time on ground it lay in pensive mood:
If then thou praid'st that Cup might pass from thee,
I well may pray let this Cup pass from me.
A Cup of cares, confected by sour sin,
Baning my Soul with bitter operation:
Let this Cup pass before I do begin;
Least it effect my crazed souls damnation.
O thou that felt'st frail man's infirmity,
Respect frail Me, else in despair I die.
Whose Faith (too like a feather in the wind)
Is tossed with the least temptations blast:
With doubtings daunted; when the faithful find
A calm in conscience till such storms are past:
But I (vile wretch) am tossed to and fro,
With every Storm that rise, or Blast that blow.
See Lord (ah see) see, see, how all my Veins
Do pant with pain, through sense of my misdeedes:
Behold my Heart, wherein all sorrow reigns,
(Griefe-wounded heart) behold it how it bleedes:
O pour therein thy precious Balmes of grace,
That from thy wounded Heart do run apace.
Where Is Much forgiu'n, Love must there be much;
Forgive me Much, much more shall be my loue^
I have Much to forgive, no sinner such;
My Sin surmounting, Love shall be above:
Forgive me then, and I in Love will strive
To match that more then Much thou do forgive.
Be thou for me unto the Old of days,
My Daysman so, to stay his angers heat;
That for thy sake he would vouchsafe to raise
His vengeance siege, which my Souls wrack does threat.
O tell him to his Grace, I (weakling) yield,
And give him praise and glory of the Field.
O pray him bend his pu'sance on the proud,
Whose brazen Necks will rather break then bow:
I, creeping on my knees, do seek for shrowde,
Till Tempests of his fury ouer-blow:
And like a Spaniell at his Masters threat,
In humble wise fall prostrate at his feet.
With eyes vp-lifted slowly by degrees,
And lifted so, are thrown down straight again,
With face confounded on his humbled knees,
Inuoking mercy, yet does mute remain:
O so, even so, do I (poor wretched I)
At foot but of his Foote-stoole crowching lie.
If this may move, and moving may provoke
Thy sans-beginning Sire in Love to stay
Of his just vengeance the resistlesse stroke
(A touch whereof does Rocks to po^der bray)
I will ascribe the praise (o Christ) to thee
Since for thy sake alone, he spares me.
My strength's not stony, nor my flesh yet brass;
O no, then weakness much more weak it is;
Apt still to fall, more brittle far then glass;
Composed of that, that is more then most amiss:
O how unable then am I to bear
His heavy vengeance stroke, that rocks does tear?
With hands of Mercy stay my sincking Soul,
Which were, in mercy, mercilesly wounded,
For me (vile wretch) and for my trespass foul,
That Grace might over abound where Sin abounded.
They are not shortened since they racked were
For Sin, that Sin might sinnelesse so appear.
With those same hands (dear Lord) my Soul sustain
Oppressed with Po^se that made thy manhood groan:
My load's as great, though far less be my pain,
Whose sinne's as great as all the worlds, alone:
Then Worlds of Sin when on my back I bear,
What meruell is it I faint, if not despair?
Froth of Infirmity, and Weakness skumme,
I am no other; how then should I bear
The heavy sentence of true Justice doom
If to this Load of Sin it added were?
None but a God and Man can bear that weight,
Since God and Man bowed underneath that freight.
I am far spent, o be not far from me,
I panting labor near the latest gasp.
My Soul dismayed, not knowing where to flee,
With hands of Hope (wan Hope) at thee does graspe.
Fasten their fingers, give them strength to hold,
As Ancors sure, in roughest Tempests would.
Kind Lord, sole comfort, hope of each poor wretch,
With Eyes converting Peter, look on me:
Those glittring Suns their beams of comfort, stretch
To cursed'st sinners if they contrite be:
Then, let those sacred Sunbeams gild with grace
My black dispairing Soul, and rue her case.
The longing of the Soul to be with God.
SOule-searching Lord, and sole selfe-searching God;
Let my poor Soul thy unknown sweetness know.
Thy staying Staff, and sin-correcting Rod
On me, on me (sweet Love) in love bestow.
Strength of my weakness, my great weakness strength,
guide thou my Goings, stay my stumbling feet:
My stumbling feet establish ( Lord) at length,
in paths that are as pure, as sure and sweet.
Eye of mine Eye, let my dim Eye behold thee;
(Dimmed with the hellish mist of damned desires)
Joy of my heart, o let my heart i^fold thee,
and take my Spirit, that still to thee aspires.
O Beauties Beauty, wound my heart with Love:
Life of my life, let my life live in thee;
In thee I have my being, live and move,
Of me but thou, then who should mouer be?
Celestial Bridegroom, kiss thy Spouse, my Soul,
With kisses sweet of vnconceiued peace;
On thy transpierced palm her name enrowle,
With thy sinne-purging blood my sins release.
Mellefluous Sweetness (sweetning sweetest sweets)
Sweeten my Sour (sour Leaven of offense)
Season my fleshes Lump with matter meet
For Sacrifice sweet smelling to thy sense.
O Goodness, let me ( Badnesse) thee embrace
With hold-fast arms of euer-lasting love:
O Well of Life, in this dry barren place,
Quench thou my thirst for thee which here I prove.
Be thou to me a plague preventing Tower,
When plagues ^ngirt my Soul with fierce assault:
My forcelesse force, then strengthen with thy power,
that if o'er-borne, yet not through my Wills fault.
Do open the entries of my deafned Ears,
Deaf with the dinne of words, breathed by despair:
O thundering Voice, that Hell from Heaven hears,
Break through the bars that let thy words repair.
O let the deepes, in dreadful harmony,
Their Billows tune unto that awful voice;
Let Heaven and Earth (in joint conspiracy)
with it accord, to drowned Sins hellish noise.
Turn thou mine Eyes, with fearful Lightnings flash,
From Eye-bewitching Objects of offense:
Deaden my flesh, my bones to ponder dash,
That dead to Sin, may quick in thee, have sense.
Increase thy Streams, lay open the water-springs,
That Earths foundations (proplesse) may appear;
My earthly thoughts, all soild with earthly things,
Thy troubles streams (through mercy straind) will clear.
O light unseen (enlightening all that see)
Lighten mine eyes that they may see thy light,
That light that with no darkness can agree,
O light of lights present that to my sight.
Savor of life, give new life to my smell;
That on the sent of thy divine perfumes,
I may run after thee through Heaven and Hell,
Through comfort, or through care that life consumes.
O touch my sensual ill-affected Taste
With finger of thy sweet life-giuing Love,
That it may prove the sweetness which thou have,
Which may thy sweetness to my soul approve.
Give me a Mind to mind thee, Heart to love thee;
Soul to adore thee, Spirit to discern thee:
A Reas'n that may in reason most approve thee,
And Reason most, for that does most concern thee.
O lively Sweet! o sweet Life-giuing Life;
O let my Love in thy Loves life be bounded,
The life of love portcullized from strife,
which lively life, with lovely love's surrounded!
O life! my life, life without which I die,
( O laborinth of life, o maze of love!)
Where shall I find thee? sweet love, when shall I
my love to love, and life to life remove?
O where art thou, thou great all-mouing mouer?
Can clouds encompasse thy vncompast Greatness?
(Thou endless life, vnlimitable lover)
No, no sweet love, then show to me thy sweetness!
Be near me in my heart, my mind, my mouth,
Near in my hearing, and each other sense:
Near in mine age, and near me in my youth,
near in mine end, to end without offense.
Through ardent love, I pine away for thee;
For want of thee (dear sweet) my Soul is sad;
Then longd-for lovely love, appear to me,
And with thy glorious presence make me glad.
Thy sense-refreshing sent my Spirit reuiues;
To mind thee's Nectar to my thirsty Soul,
Thy Inspiration, Consolation gives,
Such consolations as all cares control.
But yet, o yet, even as the chased Heart
For water thirsts, so thirsts my Soul for thee;
For thee (sweet love) for my souls soul thou art,
Without which soul can my soul living be?
O when shall I (dear Lord) unworthy I
Appear in thy pure Palace Christiline?
My mounting Spirit (winged with Desire) does fly
Above it self, to see that Court of thine!
Joy of my soul, when, when (aye me) o when
Shall I with eyes immortal, see thy glory?
Alas I live a dying life till then,
Till when my longing soul can be but sorry.
O why turnst thou (my Joy, my hearts desire!)
Thy Sunne-ecclipsing glorious face from me?
Where art thou hid? Earth, Water, Air or Fire
Cannot contain the smallest glimpse of thee!
Then where art hid? (o changelesse fairest Fair)
For whom my ravished soul, in love does languish,
The smell of whom life's ruins does repair,
Though life assailed be with mortal anguish.
But ah (aye me) I see, I see thee not,
And that I cannot, kills my loving heart;
Yet when I hear thy voice I have forgot
What me annoid, and joy suppresseth smart.
But why (ah why) from me hid'st thou thy face?
Perhaps thou ^aist, Man cannot, living, see it:
Be It so (sweet Lord) I feign would death embrace,
To see the same; so be it, o so be it.
Here let me dye, that I may see thee There,
There, where my Soul so much desires to see it:
That life as death I hold that holds me here,
Then let me dye, so be it, o so be it.
Feign would my Soul this fardle of my Flesh
Lay down at ghastly Deaths vnfleshy feet,
That, being consumed, I may resume afresh
^mmortall flesh, for thy pure presence meet.
O Christ, my Jesus, take my spirit to thee,
(My spirit aspiring clogged with fleshes weight)
It Is jaild too long, it longs let loose to be,
And every moment for release does wait.
My Joy draw thou my heart, that joys in naught
but in thy joy sole joy of blissful hearts:
To thy true joy, whose griess such bliss has bought,
which bliss my griefs (with joy) to bliss conuerts.
Enter into me, Sweetness, make me sweet,
Sweet Joy possess me, make me (sad) rejoice:
Eternal light shine on me, make me meet
To see and know, and love thee as my Choice.
The cause I love not, is, I know thee not:
I know thee not in not perceiving thee;
I not perceive; for, darkness light does blot,
Light shines in darkness, yet It cannot see.
Who sees thee, knows; who knows thee still does love thee,
Who sees, and knows, and loves thee, loves his soul:
To see, to know, to love thee, grace must move me;
For flesh does fancy by-pathes, filthy foul!
Who knows thee, shall of force himself forget,
Who loves thee as his life, his life will loath;
Yea, lose his life, that he his life may get,
Immortal making Soul and Body both.
But I alas (accursed that I am)
For externe joy, from interne bliss does range;
My fairest sollace, is my foulest shame,
My sense betrayed, the best for worst does change.
Here-hence it is, I like not that thou love:
I (wretch) love outward, but thou inward Joy:
I fleshly pleasures, spiritual thou approu'st;
I abject things, which things thee most annoy.
Thou art in Heaven, and I in Earth do dwell,
Nay, Heaven of Heavens is thine abiding place;
But I in Earth, as low as lowest Hell
Remain, and joy in pain, in senseless case.
Thou light, I dark; thou good, I passing bad,
Thou Joy, I grief; thou love, I lump of hate;
Thou wise, I fond; thou meek, with pride, I mad;
Thou rich, (most rich) and I in staruing state.
Then how (dear Lord) should so great difference
Be reconciled, and linckt in unity?
Ah here is my fear, here is all my diffid^nce!
Then help, o help, help holy Trinity.
In that all-doing powerful power of thine,
Mend mine amiss, and me to Thee combine.
The Complaint of a Sinner.
IN the vexation of an humbled Spirit,
Devoured in the depth of wretched State:
With fear and trembling I approach thy fight,
As one, dear Lord, as poor, as desolate!
Near to thy mercies floods, my self I set,
Upon the Banckes of thy rich Graces streams;
That my dry Soul may so therewith be wet,
Before the Sun of Justice scorching Beams.
Lo, I a mass of rude unformed Clay,
Present my self to thine All-making skill;
To do all my deformities away,
And to inform my Wit, reform my Will.
Great is my boldness so to tempt thy Grace
With such presumption; but (dear Lord) let me
Make bold thy love (still tendered) to embrace,
Lest strange to It, I might be strange to Thee.
Yet, when I weigh mine own unworthiness,
Together with thy Loves high dignity;
I am too bold with It, I do confess,
To entertain It to such misery.
I am too vile to love, or to be loved
Of thee (dear Lord) the life of dearest Love;
Yet by thy Love, to love I still am moved,
Though I thy love, to hate, do ever move.
Thou do command (give, what command thou do,
Then what thou will command, It shall be done,)
That I should love beyond mine uttermost,
As thou do love beyond comparison.
In Love thou made me, only but to love;
And me re-mad'st in love, to love alone:
Thou threatnest me, if I unloving prove;
And would that we, though two, should be as One.
Yea, for my love thou (ceaselesse) so do woo me,
That seeing me (in love) quite dull and dead,
Thou give me Thee; that I should give me to thee,
In form of Flesh, as thou in form of Bread.
Lord, what am I, that thou should woo me so.
And seek t'inflame my love with thy Loves heat?
What am I to Thee, but a world of woe?
A little World, of Sin, past measure great!
A Cross of Crosses; for, so cross I am,
That every thing I do, is quite a thwart;
And, that which is most cross, I bless the same
As that which most agrees with my curst-heart.
And what art thou to me but peace and rest,
Salvation, Joy, and whatsoever is good?
By whom I (most accursed) most am blessed,
Who made me blameless in thy blessed blood.
Then of such pledges of thy Love possessed,
And that but love alone thy love does crave:
O give me that which thy love does request,
And I will give thee what thy Love would have.
Ill, I can give Thee; that, is only mine;
But Good, I have from Thee, thy gift it is:
If thou will none of mine, then give me thine;
Take that from me, dear Lord, and give me this.
Thou art not pleased but with what is only thine;
Yet, I am thine; and yet not pleased thou art:
If thou have naught with me, but what is mine,
Although I gave to thee me dearest heart.
For, as it is my Heart, it is most unclean;
And all uncleanness thou do most detest:
Then, thou art both the cause, effect, and mean,
That thou do love it, as thine interest.
Yet, as mine own I have (what have I not
with it, that is not absolutely good?)
My Christ; but, ah, alas I have forgot
Thou gave him first, and bought'st me with his blood.
But yet that is all I have, (that is all in all)
To give thee, as goods common us betwixt;
To me He came from Thee; to thee He shall
For me, in passion, with my passions mixed.
If mine be such, as make his much the more,
They his are much more meritorious:
And yet if Mine be covered with his gore,
Then will deserve thy love and fasten us!
Then take him Lord, I have none other shift
To show my Love, but with thine only Gift.
The thirst of the Soul after God, the Fountain of Life.
MIne heavenly Head, give me, thy Member, grace
Thee to desire; desiring, thee to secke:
Seeking, to find; finding, to love thy face:
And, loving, loathe what is thee most unlike.
To my Heart, Faith; to mine Eyes floods of tears;
To my Soul, grief; to that grief, joy of Spirit:
To my Faith, Hope; to my Hope, Love and Fear;
And, unto all, give all direction right.
O Love essential! increated Love!
Love infinite! the Fount of Love and Grace:
With power overflowing all the powers above;
Or whatsoever is in blessed case!
How can I choose but love thee? how can I
But with such flaming Love be fired quite?
That fires the whole Worlds University,
Yea, well-nigh burns, and melts the same outright!
O God! thou art the most abstracted GOOD;
Which, yet abstracted, art much more abstract!
Which is Loves Object, and Life's liuelihood:
Which does my Love to Love, in Love, coact!
How can I choose but flame, so set on fire
With love, which burns what ere, in love was made?
What, but that Love, can quench my Loves desire?
Or me, to Love, so pow'rfully persuade?
And if I cannot love Thee for thy Love,
Nor for thy goodness being more then GOOD,
Yet, me thereto should Profit more then move;
For, of all Good thou art the boundless flood.
Youth loves the Eld, from whom it Being draws;
The Members love the Head, by whom they live:
And all Effects, by nature, love their Cause;
Since It to those Effects does Essence give.
Then since thou art my Cause, my Head, my Sir^,
Look what Those owe to These, by whom they be,
(Nay, more; for, thou art all in all entire)
That LORD, and more then That, I owe to Thee!
Thou gave me Being, ere my Sire it gave:
For, with Thee was I, ere I was of Thee!
And now preseru'st the Being which I have,
Better then by the Head the Members be.
Thou do effect what in me wanting is;
(And from my second Cause my wants proceed)
Then what can cause so good effect as this,
But thou whose Will is still in act and dead?
Look what I am at best, I am by Thee;
And when at worst, in thee my hope still is:
For, as no one, but Tho^, could fashion me;
So none, but Thou, can mend my least amiss.
Then what I am in deed or else in hope,
(When I am best in both) of thee I am:
Thou art my Soul and bodies utmost scope;
Thou made them both, then oughst to have the same.
If then Thou be my Beauties beauty; yea,
The beauty of my Souls diuinest Part,
(For Thou of beauty art the bancklesse Sea)
Who then but thou should wholly have my Heart?
O Love, that burn'st in Heavens eternal Breast!
O Dart that woundest the whole Tr^nitie!
O more, much more, then Crosse-wound me at least;
And let that Fire still burn me till I die.
O let my Soul melt Lord in thine applause,
Through holy-raging Flames of quenchlesse Love;
O cause of causes, this vouchsafe to cause;
And let these Flames their force upon me prove.
O holy, holy, holy Trinity!
Most holy Father! and most gracious Son!
Most loving Holy Ghost, in Unity
A Trinity, and but one God alone!
When, when, o when will you three dwell in me?
And make me one with you, as one you are?
Of three make, four; and one of one and three:
Your Essence keep, let me your goodness share.
When will it be? o when? o were it now!
Shall I never see it? o how long delay!
O tedious tarrying! how, o LORD, o how
Shall I straight rest in thee, mine only stay?
Haste thee, my Jesus* haste (dear Love) make haste,
I cannot stay; then come (my Joy) o come;
My haste is great, and I but Time do waste,
Till I thy Love, and Time do overcome.
O my Souls Center! my Wills sweet repose!
Light of my Minds Eye! my Thoughts Paradise!
Heaven of my Heart! Companion of my Woes!
Salve of my Sores! Cure of my Maladies!
Joy of mine Exile! and my Guide therein;
Breath of my Nostrils! End of my Desires!
Judge of my Life, Forgiuer of my Sin!
O all in all, whereto mine All aspires!
If thou be these, and all in all to me,
Can I forget thee during but a Thought?
If so I should, let me remembered be
With pinching plagues to mind thee as I ought.
If I so much forget my self and thee,
Let my right Hand forget her cunning quight:
Nay, let me not remember what I see;
That Memory so wronged, may mind thy right.
No sleep mine Eyes, no rest mine Head shall have,
Till thou my Head, within my Heart do rest:
Then enter Love, to enter o vouchsafe,
It is but what thou offer'st I request:
Then let this offer of my Will and Love,
Move me to that, to which thou me do move.
An acknowledgement of Gods gifts, with desire of union with the Giver.
IF we for fading Gifts are ever bound
To love our Friends (for Gifts still love do breed)
And if the Fire do more, or less abound,
According as the Fuel It does feed:
Then o! how great a Flame of endless love
Should (o dear Lord) still feed upon mine All:
Since past all measure I thy bounties prove;
And feed'st this Fire with Vnction-spirituall!
If the whole frame of Nature; nay, sweet Lord,
If Heaven and Earth, and all they do contain,
Be but mere Gifts, which thou do me afford,
Then how should Love but in me more then reign?
And that so much the more, because there be
In thee, besides, all Causes causing love;
Which, in their highest perfection, are in thee!
Then, can such Motives but much more then move?
If Goodness I respect, in thee it is
As far from Limit as Similitude:
For thou art (LORD) the boundless Sea of Bliss,
Because thou art the highest Beatitude.
If Beauty I regard, then thou art He
That art the Fount from whence all Beauty flows:
Whose Face the Angels still desire to see,
Whose Influence their Faces ouer-flowes!
If Bounty; then, who is so liberal
As thou (self- bounty) that do, gratis, give
All, and much more (in deed) then all, to All:
By which they more then liberally do live.
If Riches; who so rich as he that owes
What not? If Being; or what can be beside:
If Friendship; who so kind? who, for his Foes,
Did Death, with torment, willingly abide.
If Likeness be a cause that love effects;
Then who like that, by which I am, but thou?
For thou made it like thee ^n all respects,
Save that, like thee* it knows not where, nor how!
And, if the END; for which we all things do,
(The Final END) be infinitely loved;
Then who mine ALPHA, and OMEGA too,
But thou, to whom, by Nature, I am moved?
From thee to Thee, by only Natures skill,
I come, and go; but go not as I came:
For, I came from thee just, as thou art still,
But do return oppressed with sin and shame.
If then to be thine Image, with the rest,
Be seu'rall motives (strong) of Love entire,
Then what ought that to be bred of the best
Nay bred of all, but Loves eternal fire?
For, as the Sea is greater then each Flood,
Which from, and to her Bosom ever moves:
So, is thy Goodness greater then each Good;
And thy love more then other lasting loves.
Ah Lord! what made thee make me, but that love?
What to redeem me but that tender mood?
Of naught thou made me (which can nothing move
Being Naught) and me redeemest, to make me good.
O let me stretch the arms of mine Affects,
To hold thee to the Breast of my d^sires:
O cause of sweetness, cause these sweet effects;
And make my Breast the Furnace for these Fires.
The Iuy still does clip her neighboring Tree,
Because thereby it is ^d^anced often:
Then will I cling to that on Caluaree;
Because, thereby, I shall be raised aloft.
The Iuy spreads her branches not so far,
Nor by a Cedar so advanced can be,
As my Souls powers increast in virtue are,
And made to mount by virtue of this Tree.
Then o that all my bodies Limbs were Arms,
That I, on every side, might it embrace!
Thy Cross (o Christ) does bless al thine from harms;
And with joy comforts them in woeful case!
O Christ that did the Crosses Tree ascend,
That so thou might draw all things unto thee;
O draw me then, let my life with thine end;
That so my life, with thine, may endless be!
Thou that did Deity to Manhood knit
(Two Natures so in Nature different!)
Making one person of them, infinite,
To make me one with the Omnipotent,
Grant that the virtue of that UNION
May ever make us more entire then ONE.
A thankful remembrance of our preservation notwithstanding our manifold
sins.
WIth wounded Spirit I salute thy Wound^,
O all-bewounding Sacrifice for Sin!
For, my Souls health from thy Hearts hurt redounds,
Because thou dyedst to live my Heart within.
With what love shall I quite such wondrous Love,
That comes from such unheard of Clemency?
Who art thou, and who am I, that can move
Heavens God t'immure himself in misery?
That thou whose Glory, Glory it self admires,
Sholdst deigne to dwell in dirt, more vile then dung:
Since Holiness, sweet Lord, thy House requires,
Which hardly rests where many vices throng.
Heaven is thy Seat, the Earth thy Footstool is;
(For Heaven and Earth thy Majesty does fill!
Then why, great God, art thou well pleased with this
That thou art made but Mud for mire so ill?
For, if the Heaven, nay, Heaven of Heavens be
But too too small thy greatness to contain;
Then how can my heart, less then naught, hold thee?
How in a Bit of Wormes-meate can thou reign?
O Wonder! that all Maruels far surmounts,
He that upon the Cherubins does ride,
And viewes all Deeps from thence, himself dismounts
That he may in my Heart, (deep Hell) abide!
It not suffiz'd thy glowing Charity
To give me Angels for my Guards and Guides,
Nay, wast not only pleased for me to dye,
But dwelst in me to give me life besides!
There do thou visit, in the kindest kind,
The Sick (sore sick!) to give him health thereby?
Sore sick in Body, but more sick in Mind:
And raise the Dead, that willingly did dye.
My Soul exulteth (with joy ravished)
When as I mind that Miracle; how once
A Prophets dead Bones raised to life the Dead,
Only by touching those life-giuing Bones!
If those dead Bones had such reviving power,
Then, what shall not Gods living Body do?
The living Body of Life's Governor,
Must needs give endless Life and Glory too.
And if dead Bones, conceived in Sin, have might
To give life to a sinful Body, dead;
What shall that do conceived by thy Spirit?
That, must needs life-inspire even senseless Bread.
My Soul though dead in Sin, yet touching Thee
By Faith; and in thy blood being sanctifide,
Can it but more then live in Thee and me,
When Thou therein do more then still abide?
And since that Corpse was raised that craved not life,
By touching those dead Bones; then, Lord let me
(That, as my Husband, clip thee, as thy Wise)
Be raised to life, that beg the same of thee.
I cannot think (because I think of thee
as more then Grace it self!) that thou have borne
My sins, and in my sins, do bear with me;
that of thy Grace I shall be quite forlorn.
O! can my Soul but melt to think how often
thou might have slain me, yet did use thy knife
To prune, and make me grow in Grace aloft,
and ^lu'st my Foes therewith that sought my life?
How many thousand Souls now burn in Hell,
that have (perhaps) sinned less then sinful I?
Who held thy Hands when I did so rebel,
that I should live when Souls less sinful dye?
My sins cry to thee, and thou stop'st thine Ears
lest thou sholdst hear them; and the more they cry,
The more thy deafness to them still appears,
as if thou did their clamorous suite deny.
I do but sin, and thou do me but save;
if I fly fast from thee, thou followest faster:
Though I be tired with Sin, thy Mercies have
no mean to tire; but means my Sins to master.
The more I sin, the more thou humblest me;
so, make me know my self, by knowing Sin:
Nay more, it pulls me from my self to thee;
so, though I lose my self, yet thee I win.
O strange disposing of the worst of Ill!
mere Concord of maine Contradiction:
That which pulls from, does draw together still,
where love draws Discords to make Union.
So then, my Faults, as if they Virtues were,
wrought for my good, by thee that have the skill
To bear with men, to make them sin forbear;
and so, through Grace, to pull good out of Ill!
Yet did thou whisper in my Souls right Ear,
that I should do no ill for such good end;
But made me (sinning) Sin to hate and fear;
(in love) for that it did thee (LOVE) offend.
With Thorns thou do hedge-in my narrow Way,
that if I ere so little step awry,
They straight do prick me, and so make me pray
for help to thee, in whom all help does lie.
And as the Hunter stops up each Gap,
wher-through the wild Bore may escape vncaught:
So, do thou stop my way with each misse-hap,
when I would run away from thee to naught.
Am I escapt from out thy mercies Hands?
thy Hand of Justice pulls me in again:
So, Mercy holds me, by which Justice stands
to help to hold me safe by ease and pain.
Have I a Will, by Death, to damn my Soul,
(by desprate Death to damn, not mine, but thine?)
Thou do that Will with thy good Will control,
And make my Will thy Will in spite of mine.
Am I resolved to sin presumptuously,
and, that of purpose to despite thee too?
Thou make the Will without the Deed to dye;
and, make me damn the Deed ere it I do.
Would I, for any indiuine respect,
sell Heaven for Earth, and God (so) for the Devil?
Thou God do make that Would work good effect;
for, when it proves the Ill, it shuns the evil.
Is my Hand stretched out, my faith to plight
to black Perdition? twixt my hand and It
Thou putst thy hand of Justice, which does smite
away my hand, before that knot be knit.
The Weapons me thou gave my self to save,
I (monster) did against thy Goodness bend;
And with thy glorious gifts I thee did brave;
so, did I shame my self, and Thee offend.
The Tongue thou mouedst that blasphemed Thee;
thou rul'dst the limbs that did thy Members rend:
Thou gave Wit power with Thee to disagree;
and gave Will force the giver to offend.
So, that not only I ingrate have bin
for thy good gifts, but have the same imployd
As weapons of unrighteousness, in Sin,
and so with thine own Grace have thee annoid.
Thou made all Creatures for mine only use,
t'allure me to thy gainful Love thereby;
But, I abused thee, by their abuse;
so, with thy Good deeds did thee damnifie.
So, that through whom the seeing of thy Face
was to be taken, through them I could not see:
For I, as Gods, did them (in Love) embrace
which thou had given, to guide me unto Thee.
That I might serve thee, me did all things serve;
I did command, that me thou might entreat:
They did me Good, when I did ill deserve;
and when I made thee small, they made me great.
Thou gave me Faith, and Hell the Fruits has had;
thou gave me Grace, and Sin has used the same;
Thou gave me Wit* which Will abused, as mad;
thou gave me Sense, wherewith my self I shame.
Thou gave me Health, which, sickely, I have used,
in riot, surfeit, and in all excess:
Thou gave me Strength, which I have still abused
in waging war with thine own Mightiness.
Thou, for my profit, plaguedst other men;
that so, from Sin, I might be kept, with ease:
But I (vnplagued) plagued my Brethren,
so far off was I from remorse by These.
These Gifts I (most ungrateful) gratis had;
which (though abused) I used when I would:
And, being Gifts too good, made me too bad;
For, they made me too proud, and too too bold.
The rage of Lions, Tigers, and the like,
Is lenified with gifts, and turned to love;
But, with thy gifts, to grieve thee I did seek;
Yet still thou made me their increase to prove.
Thou Man becam'st to make a God of me;
(at least a God, that Heaven and Earth do serve:)
And I became a Devil, in Deed, to Thee;
that wronged thee more, the more thou did deserve.
Highest Justice, shining through thy Passions Cloud,
could not enforce me it to love, or dread:
Thou had no hole, wherein thy head to shroud;
but, all this All Is too little for my head.
Though thou art God, Foes Fists thy face enorme;
if any touch my Coat, I touch them home
By word, and deed; that yet am but a Worm;
thou striu'st for lowest, I for highest Room.
Thou would be slain, to slaughter Sin in me;
but, by thy death, I life-inspir'd the same:
So, thy great Mercy made me martyr Thee;
and, with the Jews, I made thy griefs my game.
The Medicine, so, thou gave to cure my Wounds,
I venomed to make my hurt the more,
Which both with Sin and shame my Soul confounds,
since Sin, by Grace, I made more sinful sore.
If from the Law, to take a cause to sin,
is much more damned then sin without the Law;
What is it then, when Grace so used has bin:
and force to fight with Grace, from grace to draw?
The wilde-fire of my Passions burned me;
my Thoughts Distractions did me quite divide;
The Worm of Conscience raged, where thou would be
yet these I did (as one in thee) abide!
For, mine Affections cried naught but Peace,
when those Affections most did Peace impunge;
And when I was in Hell, they seemed in ease,
so much the old misled Affections young.
And, Fury-like, toward hell I always made;
but, thou more ways then all ways broughtst me back.
The Trade of Virtue, I held Vices Trade;
since, more then Vice, she seemed to live in lack.
How often have I been at the gates of Hell
and could not enter, though I went about:
Thou did the Devil from his charge compel;
so, Porter wast thy self to keep me out.
Nay, when I have been even in his Jaws,
and that his Fangs were entering in my Soul,
Till thou did pull me thence, thou made him pause;
so, came I, as from Heaven, as Meek, as Whole.
O! how can I such powerful Grace requite;
that forces Justice with Her force to join
From wrack to save me in mine own despite,
and made restore, who did my self purloyne?
Had I the lives of Angels and of Men,
and, offered all to thee in sacrifice,
And, if those lives were thrice resumed again,
and, offered up as often, it would not suffice.
It Would not suffice to recomp^^ce thy love;
it were too cheap to quite t^y dear deser^;
O then can I (wretch) so ungrateful prove,
as not to give thee one poor wretched Heart?
Can I, o can I be so much besides
Grace, Faith, Sense, Mother-wit, my self and all,
That having yet these gifts to be my guides,
do yet but stand by these, by these to fall?
If I be lost, it must not be in Hell,
(though never so dark) for there thou foundst me out:
It must be somewhere, which no where can tell;
for where that is, both Time and Place do doubt.
It cannot be in Hell; for, thou art there;
then Heavens thy Seat (ah! would I there were lost)
Nay, not in Place; for, thou art every where!
Then not in Time, which, ere It was, thou know!
If then in Heaven, nor Hell, in Time, nor Place,
where then? in my self lost, I cannot be:
Yet, lost I am, if I do lose thy grace;
which found me when I stole my self from thee!
But yet, if needs I will be lost, at last,
(for grace, at last, saues none against their will)
No Lost-child ever was locked half so fast
from losing; and, deserves half so ill.
The worst of Ill, m^^e worse with Ill made Whole,
is too too good for one made worse then That:
Too little he does lose, to lose his Soul,
that, maugre grace, still does he cares not what.
Therefore (dear Lord) let me not enter in
this strict reuisall of my Sin and grace
The less to make excusable my Sin,
but, thereby more, much more, thy Love embrace.
For these Confessions written by my Hand
against my self, against my self will go
To thy Tribunal; and against me stand,
if now I do not ever Sin forgo.
Then let thy W^unds be once more opened
(dear Christ) to wash me in thy reeking blood:
Revive me, by thy death, that being dead
(still dead) to Ill, I may still live to good.
O! iuycie Bunch of Soule-refreshing grapes,
(hard pressed in the Wine Press of the Cross!)
Make druncke my thirsty Soul, that (gasping) gapes
for thy pure blood, to purge mine, being too gross.
Mine Ire, Pride Lust, Presumption* Hate and Scorn,
yea, all my Sins* which I can never recite)
I cast into thy wounds which wide are torn;
O keep them There then, from thy Fathers sight.
As much as those confound* these comfort me;
nay, more, much more, since more thou can forgive
Then I can sin, although I quartred Thee,
if when the deed is done, through grace I grieve.
Mellefluous Sea of Comforts most divine,
Meridian Light, whence springs true glories Day,
With both over whelme me, till through both I shine
in perfect glory by thy glories Ray.
Let not my Deeds, or inofficious Sloth
do or omit, what should not, or be done:
For, both are cursed by thy blessed mouth,
since Ill to do, and good omit, is one:
But, let this league be constant to the end;
For they but mend to mar, that mar to mend.
And Wisdom, at our wisdom* does but scoff,
When we do ill, that good may come thereof.
The sighs of a Pensive Soul, groaning under the burden of sin.
WHo art thou Lord? thou Lord whose magnitude
admits no Name! and what, or who am I
That dare but think of such an Altitude,
far past the reach of highest Angels Eye?
What am I but a Sack of sickenesses;
Immodestie it self; Dust, Clay, Dirt, Dung:
Slyme, Food for Worms, less slymie Carcasses;
with filth, much more uncleanly, mixed among!
Mere gall of bitterness, true Heir of Hell,
begot twixt Sin and Satan, life of Death:
Rebellion in the abstract; Vices Shell:
the breath of Sin, that baneth but with breath.
Gods grief, Men's plague, and Angels sole annoy,
since sad I make them by incessant sin:
Let to the sorrow which does cause their Joy
since mine example hinders some therein.
In Counsel, blind; in Actions, most unwise;
In thought, unstaid; unconstant in desire:
Then Nothing, less; yet great in mine own Eyes:
for, past my self my self would feign aspire!
In sum; I am the total sum of Ill;
ill in my flesh, and evil in my sp'rit,
Worse in my Wit, and worser in my Will:
this, Lord, is he thou would to thee unite!
But what? and who art thou? thou namelesse GREAT!
since thou art great, beyond all quantity!
How good art thou? thou goodness most complete,
for, thou art great beyond all quality!
Beyond all measure, thou art (only) wise,
thou art (alone) eternal without Time:
In power almighty, with all-seeing Eyes;
in Judgment, deep; in Counsels, most sublime.
But what! go I about to bring thee here,
within the compass of description:
Thou art as far past Compass, as past Peer,
being immense and infinite alone.
If Men or Angels could, nay more, could thou
by deed or word, thine Essence once define,
Thou art no more thy self, in deed, or show;
for, thou all Bounds do in thy self confine.
Of Thee, therefore, no search can notice give,
further then that thou art most infinite;
And that to know, is only to believe
that so thou art in wisdom, grace, and might.
The Sun, Moon, Stars, with bright beams glorifide,
in presence of thy glory, lose their Light:
The Cherubins (like Bastard Eaglets) hide
their Eyes, that cannot brook thy glories sight.
The sturdy Pillars of th'Etheriall Frame
do trembling stand, when thou but knitst thy brow;
Yea, all the Powers therein s^rincke at the same,
and (with those Props) with fear and reu'rence bow.
Whose Voice does make the Mountains melt like
whose Check confounds the order of this All^ wax,
Whose Breath consumes thy foes, as fire does flax;
in few; thou art what thou thy self can call.
Then how dare I (vile Clod of base Contempt)
approach the presence of such Majesty:
That is from all impuritie exempt,
and, I a Sincke of all sordiditie?
To touch the Arc was death; and, one did dye
for touching It, being at the point to fall:
Then woe is me, how dare I (wretch) come nigh
they sacred self, that stand staying All?
The Bethshamites received a mortal check,
for prying on that Arc too curiously:
And many thousands, for it, went to wrecke;
then dare I (Worm) cling to thy Deity?
How can thy grace so vile a Vermin brook?
much less embosome such a lothed Thing;
That leaves offense behind but with a look;
and, like a Viper, with a touch does sting?
What Concord can there be twixt Contraries?
can good and evil be incorporate?
Then how should thou self- goodness me comprise,
that am self- evil, which thou most do hate?
For I have been, o Lord, I shame to say,
what, in times past, I did not shame to do;
Who (worse then Treas'n it self) did (ah) betray
God unto Man, and Man to Satan too.
There was a Time, I was that Frantic Fool,
that said (at least in Heart) there is no God:
But since thy grace my Heart did better school
I think not so, by reason of thy Rod.
Thy Rod recou'red that my straying thought,
reducing It into the way of Truth:
I to my self, and thee, by force was brought;
and made repent that madness of my youth.
Thanks kindest Rod, I kiss thee, for thy grace,
which, like a Potion, did with Nature strive,
To conquer that which Nature did disgrace;
and made me (dead in Sin) in grace to live.
But Lord, how blessed, and better had I bin,
if thy smooth Staff had staid me in the Way;
For, thy rough Rod does Love, by terror, win;
and, Love is lame, that does by terror stay.
But yet let terror (as loves Harbinger)
make way to lodge thy Love within my Heart;
Which of thy Love would feign be Harbourer,
because thou make it feign by force of smart.
But let thy love be of my Heart embraced
merely for Love; and kept with loving fear:
Let not my Love with terror be disgraced,
but let It, free from terrors Let appear.
O let me love thee, as thou love me,
thou love me for my self and thy Loves sake:
Then for thy self (alone) let me love thee,
without respect of what Love lame does make.
I now desire (with more then hot desire)
to be new molt, and cast into the Molde
Of all perfection, by Afflictions fire;
since, for thy Temple, That, refines the Gold.
Lord, if thou will, thou can; then make me clean:
Draw me with Cords of Love, made fast by Fear:
Though my Sins measure pass, thou have no mean
in mercy; then, let mercy make me clear.
If thou requir'st contrition for my faults,
with Sin and Sorrow, lo, I labor ^ore;
A iarring Twin, each other that assaults
(within the womb that breeds them) more and more.
If Satisfaction thou of me require,
Lo, here I offer up my Flesh to thee,
To be consumed in Afflictions fire,
so thou vouchsafe to save the Soul of me.
Pour out thy Vengeance Vials all there-on;
make, it like Vapor, to euaporate
The Humors ill, wherewith it is ouer-gone,
that Flesh from flesh, may so be separate.
O thou whose Love enflames all good desires,
quench thou the thirst of my desire, that flames
To be consumed in those thrice sacred fires,
which mend the forms of mind, and Spirits frames.
Give me thy Love, and throw me into Hell;
for, there thy Love will pleasure me in pain;
Yea, pains, to bring me pleasures, will compel;
and make me Heaven by Hell so to obtain.
This only Boon I crave, by Grace to be
armed with Patience, most invincible,
In all thy fiery Trials made of me;
that Sense make brook them as insensible.
Which Patience still consociates constant Love;
which can endure more then Pain can inflict:
O then let me that Love, in mercy, prove;
then prove me with all proofs though never so strict.
Thy will be mine, and mine be ever thine;
give me no power to will or not to will
But as thou will: and let no will be mine,
but that which, maugre Flesh, may thine fulfill.
Thou know what is best for me; then, is that best,
which thou (what ere it be) for me shall do:
Then, let me lock my cares within thy Chest,
when they, too strong, would my weak Chest undo.
Be thou the Center of my Souls desires;
and, let them rest in Thee in all unrest:
Be thou the Unction, still to feed those fires,
till of eternal Light they be possessed.
To which, as to the utmost of their hope,
Bring thou them (Lord) that art their utmost scope.
Of Life's brevity, the Fleshes frailty, the Worlds vanity, and the Devils
tyranny.
THou Eld of Days, teach me my days to count,
(dear Lord) mine End, learn me mine end to know;
That of the same I may yield rust account*
These secrets (Lord) to me, in secret, show.
To think of long life, is, in death, to live;
To think of Death',s long life, which Death does give.
My Time is in thy hands; then It display,
That I may know It, so to use It well:
A thousand years, with thee, is scarce a day;
But they are more with me then Time can tell:
In twice five Ages, Time can tell no more,
Then, no Man's time thrice trebl'd, tells such store.
Are not my Days few? and mine end at hand,
Whose life is like the shadow of a Dream?
What Substance is it, by which such shadows stand?
Is It ought but Nothing, in the great'st extreme?
If less then Nothing then, be all my Days,
Can I love Life, which Truth does so dispraise?
A Ship, a Shaft, a Shuttle were too slow
(Or whatsoever else does swiftly glide)
The flight of Time in this short life to show;
But, It, as less then Nothing, must abide:
Then ah! shall less then Nothing make me lose,
Thee, Thing of Things, that do each Thing enclose?
And, what a less then Nothing is this Life?
It Is worse then Naught, that is lesser then That L^sse:
So fraught with Mischief, Sorrow, Sin and Strife,
That It (like Hell) is Hold of Heaviness:
For who so has most ease and rest therein,
Are most diseased (most often) with restless Sin.
No foot of Ground, Earths dismal face contains,
That is not ouer-laid with treble Snares;
A Flies foot rests not on It without Pains;
Besides Deaths danger, and a World of cares:
I speak, but speak with grief, what I have found
On Earth; then, Earth of grief is but the Ground.
For scarce is one Temptation ouer-past,
But in the Neck thereof another comes;
Like Circles, that Stones cause in Waters cast,
Which chase each other, till the last o'er-comes:
So and none otherwise Temptations strive,
Which, by the spoil of others, best shall thrive.
Nay, so each other to succeed were ease,
(More then temptation uses to admit)
But, while the first endures (like swelling Seas,)
Another rises worse, much worse, then It:
Then in temptations Seas, with Waves thus driu'n,
How hard is it t'attaine the Hau'n of Heaven!
The treble Snares (forementioned,) three fell Foes
Do lay for me, to catch me if they can;
The Flesh, the Devil, and the World are Those,
Which three still watch to catch me careless Man:
The least of which has skill exceeding great;
Then how should I (poor Wren) their drifts defeat?
On this side fights my Flesh; the World on that;
The Devil at my Back; and, all as One
Do me assail; nay, do they care not what,
So I (thereby) may quite be ouer-throwne:
And thus, like cunning Foes, they compass me,
That I may have no way, away to flee.
I cannot from my Body flee; because
It is my Clogge, and I am tide thereto:
Nor must I It undo, for any cause,
For, so undone, I do my soul undo:
If I do feed the same, my foe I fat,
That will assault me much the more for that.
Then must I needs my Body bear about,
Though feign I would forsake It, knew I how;
And yet the same is always running out;
Yet draws me with it, as Colts do draw the Plow:
It tires my Spirit, that toiles to keep it in,
From being tir'de in running out to sin.
Besides, th'iniurious World beleaguers me
This, that, and every way, with maine and might;
And through the Loope-holes of my Senses, He
With my weak Soul, continually does fight:
Which still, though faintly, fights to keep out death,
And often (poor Soul) quite she is out of breath.
If at those Loopes the World repulse does take,
He sets his Slaves to watch me, in my way;
That they may, through my slippings, me o'er-take;
And so to wound my Fame, with sharp Dispraise:
Or, draw me else before Authority,
Where I may know what it is to slip awry.
But, that is a favor done, against his will:
Herein his malice mends me; makes me watch
My sinful self from running into ill;
Lest that these Fiends should me in evil catch:
For (Lord) thou know, they watch not for my good;
But how, by mischief, they may suck my blood.
If thee I serve, they call me Hypocrite;
If I do not, then Atheist am I named:
If I give Alms, it is that beg praise I might;
So, do I good or evil, I am blamed:
Then this thrice wayward World, by his good will,
Will have me to be Nothing; good, nor ill.
The Devil is a Spirit which is unseen,
Then how should I avoid his mortal Blows?
Whose weapons are as long, as strong and keen;
And sends flaming Shafts from fiery Bows:
The least of which to death my Soul will wound,
If thou confound them not ere they confound.
So then these three strong armed Enemies,
Me ceaselessely assail to make me fall:
The Flesh suggesteth to me Luxuries;
The World obiecteth Sweetes; the Devil, Gall:
And all, as most entire, conspire in this,
To make me ill to live, to die amiss.
The Flesh importunes me with dainty food;
With Sleep, Sloth, Lust, and carnal Liberty:
The World does move me to ambitious mood:
The Devil to Malice, Ire, and Treachery:
Thus all in seu'rall sort, in one agree
To pare my Crown, if not to conquer me.
Behold (o Lord) with whom I live, perforce;
I dwell with Scorpions, Vipers, and the like:
Which kill, by Nature, without all remorce;
And with their stings, they good and bad do strike:
O Lord how long, how long (dear Lord) shall I
Endure this Death, the Life of misery?
Atheists and Infidels do neighbor me,
Beside these foes; and with them still do join,
To work my wrack; for, they still boring be
Betwixt thy Spirit and mine, them to vnioyne:
Among the Tents of Kedars, thus, I dwell,
Whose In-mates are as Serpent-wise, as fell.
Example, more then Precept, makes us good;
And, is there none that does good? no, not one,
Then ah! what can live with this Vipers Brood
That is not brought to naught, no not a Stone?
Then I being Flesh, how can I hurt avoid
By them, by whom, even Stones are often annoid?
In these sore Conflicts if I should retire
Into my self, I find me fraught within,
With fleshly,-worldly,-diuellish-damn'd desire,
The threefold Bastard of these Foes, and Sin.
Who will with them conspire to conquer me,
Then in my self, I least secure shall be.
My Heart's more moveable then Motion is;
Unconstant, fugitive, vain, light, lewd, blind;
Wandering each way, and yet the way does misle;
Yet still holds on that Course, by course of kind:
Agent and Patient it is, in Sin and Shame,
That both effects and suffers for the same.
And, as a Mill does grind what it receives,
Else grindes it self, if naught be thrown thereon;
So, does the Heart grind what the same conceiues;
Else grindes it self, till it to naught be gone:
But it (by Nature) still conceiueth Sin,
Then Sin (by Nature) still is ground therein.
But, if thy Grace (Lord) thou therein infuse,
It grindes the same, like flower of finest Wheat,
To make sweet- Bread, unleavened, to use
When as the Soul does grind thee as her meat:
And as the heart does grind, the Soul to feed
With good, or bad; so, our lives haps succeed.
Sometimes it grindes but griefs, infused by Sin;
And often but Dusty thoughts, and Earthy cares:
Thou, when such Griefs it grindes, pour'st Joy therein:
And me, for thee by griefs* that Joy prepares:
Then may I say, when so the Mill does run:
I had been, if I had not been undone.
But, for the most part; it is ever cloid
(Like an hard Mi^l-stone) with the softest things:
As fleshly lusts, and vain Joys ouer-ioyde;
And with that harts-case which most torment brings
So, that my Heart, to them, my Heart betraies,
And all, to spoil it, seek by all assaies.
It is the Shop where base Affections frame
The Emb^ion of Sin; which, growing great,
Breaks out to Action, to the Actors shame;
Unless thy Deed (o Lord) the Deed defeat:
Then in the heart, the Seat of Peace and Life,
I find the certain'st Death, the surest strife*
Lord help, Lord help me to subdue my Heart,
Before these Foes my Heart do quite o'er-throw:
O let it labor with a World of smart,
It self to conquer, and it self to know:
They that so fight, great Hearts, and Glory have;
Then let me fight, my Fame and Heart to save.
To save my Heart, which, though it little be;
Yet naught but thine own Greatness can suffice:
For it is a Kingdom only made for thee;
Though Traitors to thee, do it often surprise;
But chase from thence the traitors to thy Crown,
That thou may still, in peace, possess thine own.
O take away these Scandals of thy reign,
Thieves of thy Glory (most vainglorious Thieves)
For, Tyrant PRIDE would be my Sovereign;
Which (for rejecting her) me ever grieves:
For, Pride (dear Lord) is of that spightfull vain,
That where she most seeks love, she most does pain.
Then Lust, Ire, Envy, Malice, Scorn, and Hate,
Strive, in me, for me; but, as much as I
Am holp by thee, do strive to keep my State
From usurpation of their Tyranny:
Which freely I surrender up to thee,
That freely, twice, did render me, to me.
For, I no King recognize but my God
Worthy to sit as Sovereign in my Heart:
Before all Scepters I adore thy Rod;
Which drives to endless pleasure, though it smart.
O then away from me, ye cursed Crew,
Ye have no part in me, His only due.
And come (dear Lord) destroy the^ in their strength,
Confound their Councels, all their Drifts defeat;
That I, through thee, may win my self at length
From out their Hands, that make me as their Meat:
And let me (so won) lose my self in thee:
Where, to be lost, is still most safe to be.
Give me (o Lord) that empire over my Heart
That It thy Beck and mine may still obey:
For, that, and more is due to thy desert;
Since that due is much more then I can pay:
For, I can pay no more then what is mine,
And I have naught but sin, but what is thine!
Then as I am oblieg'd thee to obey;
So, Equity and Profit do persuade
That I should walk no Way, but in thy Way;
For, that is the Way by which good Men are made:
Then till I go away for good and all,
Let me run in this Way, and never fall.
For that is to run that so we may obtain,
Else get we pain eternal for our pain.
If many run, and labor lose,
How easy is it to be of those?
The Soul desires to know God.
FRom out the Soul of my most happy Soul,
I praise thee, migthy Maker of this All,
For that when I was nothing (fair nor foul)
thou made me of thy Creatures Capital!
For, to thine Image did thou fashion me,
giving my Soul Intelligence, and Will;
That so, at least, she might b'in love with thee,
since all things love their like, by Nature, still.
Thou might have made me some detested Worm;
some Toade or Viper, or some Croc^dile:
Or else some Monster, both in mood and form;
or ought what is most harmefull and most vile.
And, that thou did not, it was of thy grace;
for, what could I deserve when I was not?
No, not a Being in the basest place,
much less Earths Lordship, which is now my Lot!
And, lest a Creature, so resembling thee,
should instantly to nothing fall again,
Thou me endu'dst with immortality;
that I might, in all Worlds, still live and reign.
Yet seemed that nothing to thy boundless Love,
unless, of nothing, thou had made my Soul
But little less, if not some way abo^ue
the Angels; for, they serve, and I control.
Oxen and Sheep with Grass are satisfide;
Fish, Foul, and Worms with Food of baser kind:
But my Souls Meat is more then Deifide;
for nothing but her God contents her Mind!
For, She is made of that Capacity
(because like thee She is directly made)
That Heaven and Earth her cannot satisfy,
since She shall flowrish most, when these shall fade.
For, though she once began, yet now she is
eternal made, and truly infinite;
Then naught but thou that have these properties,
can satiate her insatiate appetite.
Wretch that I am, this World, why do I love?
or seek the fading glory of the same?
Why do I riches s^eke and pleasures prove,
that do the Soul vnioynt, and Mind vnframe?
These Husks suffice not; and, these painted Fires
warm but the bare imagination:
While the So^le starues through cold, with vain desires
bred by that powers misinformation.
O no, her Food's much more substantial,
( Supersubstantiall I should rather say)
Because it is so passing spiritual,
as none but purest Spirits it relish may.
Then know my Soul, know what (by kind) thou art
thy Makers Type, and viue Similitude;
Whole in the Whole, and whole in every Part;
another God, of boundless magnitude!
How can thy Palate then, taste any thing
(without distaste) that is not most divine?
Why drink'st of this Worlds Dike, and leau'st the Spring,
that ever ouer-flowes with Angels Wine?
All under Heaven is too unsweet for thee;
for, it is but Elementall; still, in strife:
Nay, naught in Heaven, but the sweet Trinity,
can feed thee fat, or keep thee but in life.
That food, whose sweetness rauisheth the sense
of sweetest souls diuinest Faculties,
Must feed thy Will, and thine Intelligence,
else can they not to grace or glory rise.
That Lord, whose Beauty Sun and Moon admires,
whose Majesty the Hoasts of Heaven adore:
Whose Grace is praised by the Angels Quires,
He that was, is, and shall be evermore:
God, infinite in power and Majesty,
has made thee but to fill thee with his Love;
Which being infini^e in quantity,
thine All, and Parts (all whole in each) can move.
He, only He, can thy desires fulfill,
albe't they did exceed Immensitie:
And, being Three in One can fitly fill
thine Understanding, Will and Memory!
Then, o my Soul run out, this Guest to meet;
and him into thee gladly introduce:
Who is as sweet as great, and good as sweet;
that used augments, and fades for want of use.
Then, lock him in the Closet of thine Heart,
where thou, in secret, may unfold thy Love:
There clip him fast, let him not thence depart,
till He with him, from hence, do thee remove.
Who will be soon entreated There to stay,
because it is the rest of his desire:
And needs he must take thee with him away,
if Nuptial Love do make you two entire.
Which dignity, of my Celestial Soul,
when well I weigh (dear Lord) I marvel not
Though in my Mud, thy Son himself did roll,
to seek, in my true shape, to knit this knot.
But muse I may at mine ingratitude,
my madness, dullness, and gross impudence;
That do neglect they Loves beatitude,
and prostitute my Soul to foul Offense.
That I should, carelessly, his Love neglect,
that is the beaming beauty of thy State;
And woo the ugly Devil, in effect,
thy sacred Image to adulterate.
This does exceed all wonderments excess;
this Prodigy, is more then monsterous;
That any Soul should love mere ugliness,
before mere beauty, more then glorious!
How can I think upon thy boundless Love;
and not pursue my self with endless Hate?
That, for my sake, did hels of torments prove,
to pull me out of Hell, and damned state.
And, when I view my Bodies Edifice,
I find so many of thy bounties there,
As might the Heart of Hate to Love entice;
for, in each haire-breadth of it they appear.
The Arteries, Sinews, Nerves, Veins, Ligaments,
Heart, Lungs, Lights; and, in few, the All, in All,
Are thy Loue-tokens, and kind Complements,
that make thy self, through Lordly love, my thrall.
Wherein if I should still Philosophize,
I should find matter still to praise thy name;
For this Minds Organ yields such Harmonies
as still in silence celebrate thy Fame.
This Wonder is the Worlds Epitomie,
a little World, true abstract of the Great,
Yet greater then the Great in dignity,
though that in quantity be more complete.
O! how should I to grace thy Grace be glad,
for that thou made me not in deed, or sight,
Blind, lame, deaf, epilepticke, mute, or mad;
but sound in Soul and Mind; in Body, right.
Yet (Lord) o yet I want, (for nothing is
brought from Not-being to a Being blessed
Immediately) since yet I am amiss;
but all things, by degrees, attain their best.
For, in the Work of Nature, Sense perceiues
that first of all the Matter she prepares;
Then fits it to the Form which it receives;
but forms it not perhaps in many years.
Yet she does not, as lacking Power, or Art,
leave ought imperfect which she takes in hand;
Yet, out of hand, she perfecteth no Part;
but, that she does in time, in Sea, and Land.
Then thou that art her Soueragine, can thou lack
of her perfection in thy Works begun?
Can thou, Almighty, see Them go to wrack?
or, through neglect, to leave them half undone?
Effects unto their Causes only look,
that they from them Perfection may receive;
Then, of their Causes, if they be forsook,
they make a show but only to deceive.
Thou art my sole beginning, and mine end;
then end that well which thou have well begun:
Thou art my Cause; then me, the Effect, amend;
that I from grace, to grace may ever run.
Thine Eyes, all-seeing, see great Wants in me;
supply those wants (dear Lord) and let me want
Nothing but wants that wanting are in thee,
since what thou want, to thee is discrepant.
Let no Block be more dull to apprehend
that thou would have escape, untried, then I;
Let my Wit for thy foolishness contend;
and, let that Folly be my Wisdoms Eye.
Then, in the Egyptian darkness of this life,
I shall behold the glory of thy Son:
And shape my course, by him, in Storms of strife:
for all thy fools do strive to him to run.
Then, with that Protomartire, shall I see
(the Canopie of Heaven being opened wide)
The beaming beauty of the Trinity;
that by none, but such fools, can be espide.
Let me be wise in deed, and not in show,
since never shades have substances begot;
And they know nothing, as they ought to know,
that know not they are fools that know thee not.
The Fool has said, in heart, No God there is:
so says he, since he knows not otherwise:
Then, Truth and Wisdom calls him Fool for this;
because true Wisdom in this Knowledge lies.
The Pagan-wisedome, though it knew, what not?
that was beneath the Circuit of the Sun;
Yet was that wisdom fondly ouer-shot,
since all was vain It knew, when all was done:
For, under Heaven (as says thy sacred Truth,)
remains naught that is not more then vain:
What wisdom then, from knowing it ensu'th;
but such as Fools, by knowing Bables, gain?
Then let the World still make a Fool of me,
So I may only know my self and Thee.
A Thanksgiving for our Being.
LEst Thankelesnesse should close thy Bounties hand,
(which it alone (kind Lord) has power to do)
And since thou give what thou do command,
if we but stretch our Good-wils hand thereto:
Kind lib'rall Lord, give me an able will
to thank thee for thy gifts; that by one gift
I may be grateful for another still;
which is of Willing-want the only shift.
I thank thee then, not only for my Being,
(being as I am the lively form of thee)
But for that thy high Providence all-seeing
does strive to make me ever better Be!
For, should thy hand be but a moment closed,
I should to naught resolve, as once I was;
For thou my time of moments have composed,
the last of which I cannot ouer-passe.
Then look how many moments I exist,
so many blessings do thou give to me;
Preventing me with others ere I wist,
that so my Being might right blessed be.
From my Conception, to Nativity
thou keptst me saf^ (though strait kept) in the womb,
My Mothers Bowels might have strangled me,
but that thy Mercies hand still made me room!
Wherein I felt (ere I could feel, or see)
the blessings of thy tender Providence:
And, lest I should (perhaps) abortiue be,
thou gave me there, full nine Months residence.
Where, how thou fedd'st me, by the Navle-string,
I may admire, but never the same express!
And how thou did my Parts together bring
(confused in slime) it is no wonder less!
The longings of my Mothers appetite,
her food, fears, griefs, falls, and such accidents,
Might have enforced her, ere my Frame was pight,
eft to diffuse me in the Elements.
For, when I was an Embrio, but a thought
might have redrown'd me in Not-beings Pit;
But then thou thoughtst on me, and so have wrought
that Danger, from her Mouth, me, safe, did spit.
How happily-vnhappy had I bin
to be made Man in possibility,
And marred, even as my making did begin;
so, straight to find, and lose Humanity.
That which we never had, we never lost:
therefore for loss of that we cannot grieve:
But, rare things had, to lose, does grieve us most;
for better still dead, then but now to live.
Then to be borne within no Pagan Clyme,
adds no small weight to this great Benefit:
But, come of Christians, in good place and time,
and, am a Christian, much more makes it.
And am a Christian! o that so I were
as I am named; and still desire to b^;
That I might say I am; and so appear:
since but to seem good, is too bad with thee.
For thou great GOOD, that call'st thy self I AM,
do love I am; not was, nor yet will be:
Then, let me say I am (in deed, and name)
thy Servant, that but lives to honor thee.
For, since I have such Being, let me be
such as I AM, not as I am; that is,
Such as Thou art, most perfect Piety:
for, thou art, wast, and ever wilt-be this.
Besides, thou have and do preserve me still
from all misse-fortunes, and from so daine Death:
Which, in this World (that dangers ouer-fill)
is more then Fortune can to Man bequeath.
How many have I seen the Wars to wear!
and might have seen ha^g'd, drowned, starved, burnt, and torn!
How many poisoned! spill themselves, with fear,
with Pox, Plagues, Pestilence how many worn!
The thousands blind, deaf, dumb, lame, leperous;
besides the Millions otherwise distressed
In Mind and Body, with griefs dolorous,
make me to see how much my State is blessed.
For, that which fell to any one of these
might me befall, be'ing evil as they be;
And, that I have more soundness, joy, and ease,
it is (to win my love) thy love to me.
If any mortal King should for one crime,
many condemn; and save but one or two:
And, I, of those condemnd, should be the prime,
yet first of those two saved, should be too:
How would my Heart be ravished with his Love?
and how would all my Powers strive him to serve?
Then, no less Grace thy grace does make me prove;
nay, more, much more, thou do my love deserve.
For, double thou deseru'st, in treble kind;
thou sau'dst my Soul and body, doomed to Death;
And from all frantic passions keep'st my Mind:
therefore I owe thee Mind, Soul, Body, Breath.
For, it is thy Grace, we be not all consumed;
but, most of all my self, that most does sin:
Since on that Grace I have, to sin, presumed;
yet still, by grace, seek'st me, from sin, to win.
A Body thou have given me, that does lack,
all that thou give me to continue life:
And, lest, through want thereof, It should to wrack,
with me those gifts are no less rich, then rife.
All things thou made for me; and me, for Thee;
for me Ground, Grain; Trees, Fruit; Mines, Metal bear:
Air, Foul; Seas, Fish; and Fish and Foul, for me,
produce most glorious Pearl, and Plumes to wear!
For me, Seas, Ships; Ships, Sails; Sails, Winds endure,
to bring me Benefis from foreign Lands:
For me, Floods, flow; Wels, spring; Springs, Water pure
do yield; that I should yield to thy commands.
Sheep, Oxen, Kine, Goats, Buckes, and other Beasts
yield Flesh, Fleece, Fels, Milk, Oil, and Horns for me:
For me, the Hound does cry, the Spaniell quests,
to teach me how to cry, with hope, to Thee.
The Horns of Unicorns (that precious be)
are mine, though they do wear them for my sake:
Plants Virtue have, not for themselves, but me:
so, things of every suite me Prime do make!
What would I more? there is naught has being got
on, or in Earth, in Water, or in Air,
That either feeds, or heales, or sports me not:
so that this World does naught but me repair.
If I the Elementall World transcend,
to view the Heavenly Orbs; what Wonders There
Sun, Moon, and Stars, I see, who all attend
but for my good, for which they framed were.
For me, alone, they influence impart
to these inferior Bodies, serving mine;
For me, does Time himself in pieces part,
that I, beyond Time, might be wholly thine.
Nay, let me pass the nine-fold Orbs of Heaven,
and to thy sacred Mansion let me flee;
For whom had all thine Angels essence given,
But for thy service, and to wait on me?
To back me, and defend me from my Foes;
to hold me up, when ere I did decline:
To comfort me in Soule-afflicting Woes;
and, to thy presence bring my Soul in fine.
Now if the Ends, for which Things formed were,
be better then the Things (for, so they be)
Then, better than the Angels Men appear;
since they (it seems) for men were made by Thee.
And, Men, and Angels fell through only Pride;
but, for dear Man's Redemption thou didd'st die:
Yet, for no one of the Angels have thou di'd;
which much augments man's hope, and dignity!
O then what Heart can once but thought-conceiue
in what strict Terms I stand obleig'd to thee;
Since me thou made most Glory to receive
through me; as, through the Eye, Men glory see.
Wake, wake thy self, my Soul; why sleep'st thou still?
see who it is that has thus done: for whom?
Not for the Angels, which obey his Will;
but, for thee, sinful Soul, his choicest Home!
Cast, if thou can, a Number numberless;
and, count his gifts with Stars, or with Sea-sand:
The bottom gage, of his Grace bottomless;
Or, if thou can not, wonder-mazed stand!
Yet, stand thou with, and for Him, while thou art;
that is, as long as he himself exists:
That is, while GOD has but an humane Heart;
which is, but while Eternity consists.
As God is GOD, he has no Heart at all;
but, as true Man he is, he has Man's Heart:
Then, GOD, and MAN can never asunder fall;
though Men from GOD themselves too often part.
But GOD, that have Man's Heart (and, so, have mine;
since I am Man, although a sinful one:)
Still let thy Heart be mine, and mine be thine:
that I may have no Heart to grieve our own.
I greatly do desire, with great desire*
to praise and love thee GOD (Man's hearts repose!)
But Praise and Love, in Mouth, and Heart of mire
(through foulenes of that filth) their grace do lose.
But, since all Creaetures thou have made for me,
(for, whatsoever is made, I owe the same!)
I Will call on them, with me, to call on THEE,
to give me grace to love and praise thy Name.
Then, o ye all his Works, your voices rear
(with man his masterpiece) that He would grant
To me his Grace, to sound his praises clear:
and to supply, in Love, my louings want.
To make my Mouth pure, fit to hold his praise;
and make my Heart clean, meet to lodge his love:
That Heart and mouth may so his glory raise,
while I his Grace, in grace or glory prove:
That I in Grace, and Glory may be known,
To live but for that praise and love alone.
A Meditation gratulatory for our redemption.
WHen I excogitate the great Good-turnes
thou have done for me, o extremest Good!
With heat of Zeal, my seathing Marrow burns;
and, flames of seruent Love do boil my blood!
Especially, for that when thou had formed
my Soul and body, I deforming each,
Thou, with thine own dierewrack, have me reformed
and, with thy precious blood becam'st my Leach.
Thou might, for ever, have banished me thy sight,
with the proud Angel, and his cursed Crew:
For, my fault was like his; but, more unright:
then, to the same a greater Plague was due!
And, that thou have not only spared my Pain;
but, therewithal, bought endless bliss for me:
(So that my Fall does fall out to my gain!)
I am in straightest bonds oblieg'd to Thee.
And, for thou made me, me to thee I owe;
since thou redeemed me, much more owe I thee:
And, would, o would, I could my self bestovv
to pay that More, that is less then due from me.
And, so much more thou ought to be beloved,
by how much greater were thy griefs, and state;
And how much less then ought to be reprou'd,
whose life was more then most immaculate!
Who, What, and Wherefore, do thou suffer, Lord?
and, who art Thou, that suffer'st for man's sake?
O tell me; for, I will diuulge thy Word
that all things made, men marred to re-marke.
First, for thy self, with what rich terms of Art
shall I express Thee, inexpressable!
I Will say, as thou said, Thou art, what Thou art;
because, Thou know, Thou were ineffable!
Thou art a BEING more then infinite;
and, being of thy self, proceed'st of none:
Without thee, can no being chance to light;
for, Chance, and being light by Thee alone.
Thy matchless power, of nothing, all things made;
thy Goodness saues all without other aid:
And, if thou would, to nothing They should fade;
for, in, for, and by thee, they all are staid.
Thou only art that art! and, nothing is
besides thee, in comparison of thee!
The Lamps of Heaven their light before thee miss,
whose brightness bright'st Eyes are blind to see!
All beautie's Foulness; Power, infirmity;
Wisdom, Gross Folly; Goodness, worse then naught;
Weighed with thy more then All sufficiency:
more fair, strong, wise, and good, then can be thought.
More then most fair, since self- Formositie;
and, more then powerful, since Omnipotent!
Much more then Wisdom, since her Souls right eye;
exceeding Goodness, since her Continent!
Yea, good thou art, both to the good and bad;
for good and bad suck sweetness still from thee:
With good gifts, good Souls, thou do ouer-lade;
and good'st the bad, to make them better be.
Without distraction, thou do all in All;
Thou All contain'st, yet art in every place:
And yet, art all alike in great and small,
yet here then there much greater by thy Grace.
Thou ever work'st; yet, ever art at rest,
resting in endless doing thy good Will:
Thou all vphold'st; and yet, art not suppressed:
thou art Good alone; and yet, thou suffer'st ill.
Thou Cause of Causes art; yet caused art
to punish sin; yet, did for sinners die:
Thou art impassible; yet sufferd'st smart:
lower then Hell; yet, more then Heaven hie.
What shall I say of thy dread Majesty?
Thou Earth behold'st, and It does trembling stand!
Touch but the Mountains, and they smoke thereby,
then Seas and Winds do rest at thy command.
The Sun (with gloomy Clouds enueloped)
does hide his head, when thou (his head) do frown:
The Moon and Stars, with Cloud-cloakes covered,
in their confusion (shamed) do, then, lie down.
Thou spread'st the Heavens, and marchest on the deep,
whilst her deep Base yields dreadful harmony:
Thou make the Spheres both Time and Tune to keep,
maugre their Discords, and variety.
Thou call'st the Stars by name, who come at call,
and like true Sentinols keep well their watch*
Hiperion, that guides the Capital,
(to thee subordinate) does key their Catch.
Thou anglest for the huge Leuiathan;
and through his Nostrils, make thy Hook appear:
Which being hanged thou playest with him than,
as with a Fish, that hangs but by an Hair.
Hell quakes when thou do volly forth thy voice,
which Bandies Earth as twere a Racket- Batt:
The Heavens shall melt and pass away with noise,
when thou thy Creatures to account shall call.
Upon the Necks of Monarchs thou do tread;
and pau'st the Pauement with their Diadems.
The dreadful Powers of thy Power stand in dread;
and Glory it self, is blinded by thy Beams.
The Seraphins (though glitt'ring-glorious Spirits)
in thy bright presence seem but Butterflies:
Thou rid'st upon the Cherubins, whose sights
thy Beauty blinds, with rates that thence arise.
To thee the Gates of Death lie open wide,
which, on their Hinges, play as thou do will:
Nay, Death himself does quake, when thou do chide
as if it would his Soul, immortal, kill.
The Heavens declare thy glory; Fire, thy brightness;
the Air, thy subtiletie; the Sea thy Dread:
The flowers of the Field, thy Beauties brightness:
thus, all in All, thy praise abroad do spread.
Such, and so great! such, and so great (quoth I)
nay, Lord much more then such, or so, Thou art:
For Words defective are; so, needs must lie;
but, thou (Lord) art deficient in no part.
And now, let me recount the wretched wrongs
which so great Majesty has borne for me;
And, whiles I count, let Men and Angels Tongues
sound endless Peales of Praises unto Thee!
Who, being so sublime, in dignity,
did from the height of Majesty descend
Into this vale of deepest misery;
and, clothed thee with my flesh, the same to mend.
Wherein thou suffer'dst, for my sinful sake,
Hunger and Thirst, in famishing excess:
With Plagues and Persecutions; which did make
to seem accursed thy true blessedness.
The Passions of the Air, thou did abide,
as Prologus to thy PASSIONS Tragedy;
For, Heat, and cold thy Body damnifide,
(as needs they must) that had no where to lie.
Whose Poverty was such, that Birds and Beasts
were much more rich, that Neasts, and Holes enjoyed
But thou (dear Lord) had neither Holes nor neasts,
nor ought besides, wherein thy Head to hide.
Borne in a Stable; Cradel'd in a Cratch;
begging the breath of beasts to keep thee warm;
Wrapped in Rags, that coursest Clouts did patch;
which did thy tender flesh less warm then harm.
O sight of force to wonder-rap all Eyes!
Ye Angels all admire this Novelty*
For lo, your Lord, in base Rags wrapped lies,
to show the riches of Humility!
And, eight days after, took'st a Sinners Mark,
that came, indeed, to abrogate the same:
Soon after, wast constrained to use the Dark
to hide thy Flight, that fledd'st to hide thy Fame.
Therefore thou sought'st the silence of the Night
to be the Triton of thy Lowliness:
Yet, now the World began thy Fame to spite,
and in the rise did seek It to suppress.
Herod, thy Hunter, like a Bloud-hound fell,
did hunt for Thee, that He on Thee might pray:
For, what thou were, he, by and by, did smell;
and, hunted after Thee a likely way.
But, to a Nation, most Idolatrous,
thou wast constraind, from his p^rsuite, to fly:
So, Innocence Life preserved thus:
for which, dear Innocents were forced to dye.
Then, Innocence, Innocence slew:
how then could It therein be innocent?
For, both are innocent; yet both is true:
the first in deed; the other, in event.
They lost their blood for Him; He, his for Them:
so, both did bleed; and for each other bled:
And, both, as Innocents, their bloods did stream;
He, as their Head; They, Members of that Head.
O! had I been so blessed, ere Sin I knew,
to have di'd for thee, among those Innocents:
Or, that I could my sins, to death, pursue;
or, make them live like banished malcontents.
Then would I dye for thee, an Innocent,
if cursed Herodian hands would bless me so:
O let me try this dear Experiment,
(although it cost my Heart-bloud) er^ I go.
For when, before my Minds Eye, thou do come
in all thy Passions, my desire does melt
My very Marrow, to taste Martyrdom;
and Sense feels pain till it such pains has felt!
It may be, that I do but, now, desire
to do that; then, I may desire to fly;
For, he that was thy bodies hardiest Squire
so thought, and said; but did It, then, deny!
Flesh, is a Traitor, worse then he that sold thee;
it will, for Meede, or Dread, the Soul betray:
Nor, in fire, is it willing to behold thee;
in fiery trials then, it shrinckes away.
Therefore, when it a Champion, of such might,
betrayed to fear, I dare not say, I will;
(No, that is Presumption) but I wish I might:
for, willing well, without thee, we do ill.
Then, be with me, strong Power, and I will say
I will; and will perform, that will, in Deed:
For, where thou art, by Power, it is but a play
in greatest torments (then) to burn, or bleed.
Now, as thy Body grew, so grew thy griefs;
for, who (dear Lord) can possibly express
Thy Persecutions, void of all relief,
save Praying, Fasting, Watching, Weariness!
They spoke against thee, who sat in the Gate;
and common Drunkards ballads made of thee:
That thou might say (in worse then David's state)
being poor, I labor from mine Infancy.
These were the griefs (dear Love) thy life did brook,
but, in thy Death what Sense ere understood
What pains thou felt'st; when (like a rising brook)
thy body, more and more, o'erflow'd with blood
Freedom, made Captive; Mercy, Misery;
Grace, quite disgraced; beauty, vilifide;
Innocence, strooken; Justice, doomed to dye;
Glory, quite shamed; and, Life, crucifide!
O Heavens! what can amaze, with Wonderment,
the Sense of Man more then this? what shall I
Call this so strange unheard of Loves extent,
that ouer-fils all Names Capacity!
In few: now Grace, alone, seems Sin, alone;
Life, dies; State's, whipped; and, Power bound to a Poast
The Glory of the Father spet upon!
and, in a word, God, seems to be lost!
In this Deep, further, may my Soul not wade,
my strength is spent; for, my heart bleedes in me:
O glorious Grace! O Majesty unmade!
is this for me, O boundless Charity!
If I, for my Redemption, am so tide
to love, and honor thee; What shall I be
For that thou did so many Deaths abide,
(when one would serve) to make me more than free?
With what love shall I quite this, more then, Love?
with what life shall I imitate thy life?
With what tears shall I my repose reprove?
and, with what Peace shall I conclude my strife?
I owe thee more for my redeeming (Lord)
(since in the same thou Death of deaths did prove)
Then for my Making; (which was with a Word!)
for, more, much more, thy Passion showde thy love!
For, if for Cherubins, or Seraphins
thou had thus di'd, t'had been less meruellous:
But, thou have di'd for me (a Sincke of sins!)
which, of all Wonders, is most wondrous!
What are we, Lord? or what our Fathers House,
(we Sons of wretched Men) that Gods dear Senne
Does in such love and mercy visit us,
as, through Death, to re-make us quite undone,
If in the balance of thy Sanctuary
thou weigh our body, it will be found more light
Than Vanity; more grave then Misery*
as if It did consist in Natures spite!
And, if our Conversation thou respect,
what is it but a Chaos of Offense!
The Goodness of whose All, is all Defect!
whose very Sou^'s but Hell of Conscience!
Do thou, o God, then for such Devils die,
(the Sons of Satan most opposed to thee!)
For the Subuerters of all Honesty!
for breakers of good Laws that blessed be?
For thy Contemners, for thy Gloryes Clouds!
for thy Deprauers, for the worst of Ils!
For mere cu^st Thwarts, of all Beatitudes!
for thy Tormentors that thy Soul would kill!
Whose Hearts, no gifts, can once allure to love,
much less, with Menaces, are terrifide!
Nor moved with heavy Plagues, that Rocks would move;
nor yet, with sweet'st Indulgence, mollifide!
For Fiends, who not sufficed with their own vice,
the Earth do compass; so, to compass more!
And, not contented others to entice
diue to the Devils to augment their store!
Where, robbing those Egyptians of their wealth,
to weet, Pride, Envy, Malice, blasphemy,)
Away they steal (so, all they do by stealth)
to make them Idols for their Fantasy.
Who, when they have rak'^ Hell for every Evil,
and, got as much as Hell can hold, or yield,
They then devise themselves (worse then the Devil)
new kinds of sins, that Hell yet never held:
Adding thereto obduracie of Heart;
and, do, their Conscience, more then cauterize:
Pleasing themselves (like Fiends) in others smart;
and, for that end, do many means devise:
Are these (dear Lord) the things for which thou
the things (I say) for, (no Name is so ill
As they deserve;) What, only must the Highest die?
dye for vile Vipers, that their Maker kill?
My Heart does fail, my Spirit is extinct,
when thus I weigh thy Mercies with my Sin:
And were not for thy graces mere instinct,
I should despair (dear Lord) and dye therein.
Yet, since I have begun to speak to thee,
O be not angry if I yet do speak:
Let Dust, and Ashes once so saucie be
to ask their God what He, hereby, does seek?
Seek'st thou the love of such mere Lumps of Hate?
or else the service of such Vermin vile?
Alas (great Lord) it stands not with thy State,
since where they come, by nature, they defile.
If thy desire of Marriage did so burn,
that Thou thy Creatures would needs espouse,
Why then did Seraphins not serve thy turn,
that are more Noble, and thee better use?
Why of a prepuce Nation took'st a Wife,
which afterward did Thee betray and kill?
So, marriedst, as it were, the very Knife,
that cut thy throat; so, seem'dst thy self to spill.
What answer'st (Lord) to these too high Demands?
I would have this, because I would have this:
This is thine Answer; and, the reason stands
upon thy Will, which cannot will amiss.
Then be it (Lord) according to thy Will;
for, so it mu^^ be, be it how so ere:
By life, or death then, let me It fulfill;
that do by both, thee, so, to me endeere.
For, since Man's fall, none pass to Paradise
but by the dreadful burning Cherubins;
To Canaan none, but by where Marah lies;
since there the inheritance of joy begins.
And none unto the happy City goes,
that goes not by the Babel-Riuers side:
And, none Jerusalem or sees, or knows,
that through the vale of Tears nor go* ^orride.
The way to Heaven, is by the Gates of Hell;
and Wormwood-wine, though bitter, wholesome is:
Thy Cross (o Christ) does Heavens strong (...) compel
to open wide; for, it is the Key of bliss!
And, since for me, so well thou loud'st that Cross,
Let me, for thee, count all things else but loss.
A Thanksgiving for our Vocation.
WIth all the power and virtues of my Soul
I do adore thee holy Lord of All!
That when I had no name in thy check-rowle,
thou wrat'st it on thy Palm, and me did call.
I dwelt, sometimes, in black Obliuions Land,
where, in the shade of Death, I sadly sat;
But, thou (kind Lord) did reach me, then, thy hand,
which, from thence, drew me to a glorious state.
When as I wandered, in the crooked ways,
that, too directly, led to endless pain,
Thou did thy forces, then, against me raise,
to put me in thy way, perforce again.
When thou had plunged me in the Font of Grace,
so clens'd the filth I was conceived in,
Though there I vowed to keep me in that case,
I brake my vow and me re-suncke in sin.
So that sweet Temple which thou sanctifi'dst
in me, for thee, I, cursedly, did bless:
Raising therein, that which thou least abid'st,
namely, the Idol of Voluptuousness.
Then, lived I as an Outlaw; when, it seemed
by Law, or Fiend, or Foe might me surprise:
But, I, of thee yet, then, was so esteemed,
that thou, by Law, did quit me, in this wise:
The Law required Death, or Obedience;
then, thou, for me, did more then Law required:
Which di'dst for sin, yet liu'dst in innocence:
so thou, thereby, did more then It desired!
Yet, ere I once did think upon thy Grace
I lived as loose, as if I had been bound
To nothing but to Persons, Time and Place
that sought my Soul and body to confound.
So, past my Days that rather looked like Night;
nay, rather like the Dark that may be felt;
Wherein my self never came within my sight,
although I might mine unsweet life have smelt.
Then, like blind Baiard, being bold as blind,
I ran, as Fancy led me, every where,
To do the Deeds of darkness, in their kind,
and, with me, others blinded so, did bear.
Then, what was it the Devil could devise
to clog a Soul with Sin, exceeding Sin,
But I to do it was as quick, as wise?
the rather, since my Soul did joy therein.
Then, carnal beauty was the only Sun
that warmed me at the heart; and lent me light:
A Light, and Heat by which were quite undone
mine Eyes, and Heart; nay, Body, Soul, and Spright.
For, all confounded were, as they had bin
no more themselves, but beauties shadows vain;
Attending her in whatsoever Sin,
as Toys, that had bin stitched to her Train.
Then, were my Feet as swift as swiftest Roes
Man's blood to shed; and, so thy Form deface:
My friends to wrong, and treble wrong my foes;
to shun the good, and bad men to embrace.
Then, those things only, pleased best my taste,
that were distastiue to thy sacred Sense:
And, that time (only) I esteemed waste,
that to thy Service had most reference.
Thy Name, to my uncircumcised Ear,
was harsh, and filled the same with all offense:
Which I did deadly hate, through servile fear;
but, served thy Foes with treble diligence.
The World, the Flesh, and thy Competitor
(that for my Soul with Thee do aye contend)
Made me their Slave, and seruil'dst Seruitor;
so, gave my Mind, thy Kindome, to the Fiend.
Thy Word to me seeem'd most ridiculous,
as full of Crackes, as Contradiction:
And, no less witless, then most barberous;
so, made I it a Ground to play upon.
The fairest Church (then) seemed the fowlest Iaile;
a Preacher, like an Headsman, killed me quite:
Words, least divine, with me did most prevail;
and Peace of Conscience still in me did fight.
In brief, I was, for which my self I hate,
such, as on whom VICE showed what she could do
When she did light but on a low estate:
for, what Deeds she devised, my Hand was to.
In this time of my young, yet doting, Age,
thou did expect me (Lord) and lent'st me breath:
Yea, did attend me, like that Princes Page,
that always put his Lord in mind of Death.
O altitude of Grace surmounting Grace!
o magnitude of Mercy most extreme!
How many settings-out, in such a Race,
have been o'er-taken with thy Furies Stream?
Yet, I, most blessed-cursed-blessed I
have (by the Mercy, more then most divine)
Been suffered to be tired with vanity,
and, yet preserved, till brought to Grace in fine.
Had Justice hands, which, then, still urged were,
drawn me before her High Tribunal Throne,
And, by a Quest of Angels, tried me there,
I had been cast, and more then overthrown.
But, blessed be thine unconquered Patience,
that me forbore, till I to sin forbear:
And, blessed be thy Mercies prepotence,
by which, I warded was, and bid beware.
Forcing into my Soul the fear of Hell,
the sight of Sin, Life's vain and short expense,
With thy Laws strictness; all which still impell
my Heart, though Steel, to melt in penitence!
Yea, when my feet were fast in Follies Stocks,
thou did by Grace (past Grace) extort from me
Whole Floods of Tears, from two most flintie Rocks,
(my Heart, and Eyes) for, so, offending thee.
And, when I fled from thee, as if it had
been matter of small moment Thee to flee,
Thou follow'dst me (I being worse then mad)
to keep me from the Furies following me.
Thus, long we straue, and, striving long, at length
thou did prevail, and tamed my Coltish Will;
Yet it was by holy Fraud, and mighty Strength,
which clawed me while they did restrain me still.
For, no less was thy Mercies skill herein,
then thy Powers force: for, sinful Souls to cure:
Shows skillful Grace: and, Men that most do sin
to justify, bewraies almighty Power.
And, o how many Graces give thou me
with this mere guilt of my Vocation!
Firm Faith, sure Hope, and perfect Charity,
with all the Virtues that attend thereon.
And though I cannot be assured Lord,
to serve thee to the end, and meek withal:
Yet, do my Faith, and Hope rest on thy Word;
which sure does stand, though often (unsure) I fall.
Thy Sp'rit likewise, does witness to my Sp'rit,
that thou do love me more than tenderly:
Since in thy Love, thou make my Love delight;
which love erst lothed thy Love mortally.
Blessed be thou, therefore, great Lord of Grace,
for giving me thy dear adopting Spirit
To nurse, and teach, and rule me in my Race,
and, thee and me, vnioynde, to re-vnite.
And, blessed be that euer-blessed DAY,
wherein that Ghest did make my Soul his Inn:
And be that Hour, and Moment blessed aye,
wherein my Will gave way to let him in.
That Day was the true Sabbath of my rest;
that Day I left the Egyptian servitude:
That was my second Birthday, truly blessed,
who, then, was borne to all Beatitude.
It was mine Easter Day, wherein I rose
from Death of Sin, unto the Life of Grace!
It was the Day my Heavenly Husband chose
to marry me; and, Coort me face, to face.
Let Job and Jeremy ban their Birthday,
this will I bless with Heart Mind, Mouth, and Pen;
Since, then, the Angels, in their best array,
saluted me, as their Co-cittizen.
Wherein God called me Son, and Christ dear Spouse;
the Holy Ghost his Temple; and when all
The Holy TRINITY did trim the House
of my poor Soul, that teady was to fall.
Dear Lord! with what dear Words, or dearer Deeds
no, dearest Words and Deeds are all too weak
To match thy Mercies; but my Soul must needs
quite break, if not into thy Praises break.
I Will sing to thee as David once did sing,
O Lord, how glorious are thy Works of Grace!
And as the Angels Peales of Praises ring,
so, will I praise thee though my voice be base.
The work of my Creation showed great Love;
and that of my Redemption, more expressed:
Yet that of my Vocation most did move;
but, that, that Iustifide me past the rest!
The gift of Glory (still to Saints assigned)
is great, so great, that none may greater be;
Yet to be justified, is, in his kind,
as great a gift, and no less laudeth thee.
To make Men just that are in sinful case,
is more then to make just Men glorious:
Since greater ods there is twixt Sin and Grace,
then is twixt Grace, and Glory; God and Us.
My Making and Redemption had but made
m'excuse the less, and my Damnation more;
Except my Soul thou had made justly glad,
in justifying me that sinned sore!
Whiles, therefore, on these things I meditate,
my Soul entranced lies; as if she were
No more my Senses; or my bodies Mate,
but, were transformed to Admiration here.
What shall I render Lord? o how shall I
remunerate, (o that can never be done:)
Or how shall I but praise thee worthily?
but, such praise does my power no less out-runne.
O that the Organs of my Soul were such,
as, with thy praise, they Heaven and Earth might fill;
I would therein rejoice much more then much,
but, Lord, accept the freedom of my Will.
For, could it make thee more then what thou art,
(though more cannot be wished, much less conceived)
I would perform a right Well-willers part,
and make thee what it could, for Grace received:
Then, let my Will be aided by thy Might,
That Will, in Deed, may praise thy Name aright.
Of Gods unutterable Being, with desire of the Soul to be swallowed up with
the love of his Majesty.
O Past-beginning, and immortal Sp'rit;
eternal, and incomprehensible:
Incircumscrib'd in Majesty and Might;
seen all in All, yet most insensible:
Immutable, impassible, most just;
inscrutable; in mercy, most complete:
From whom they came, and unto whom they must
that do believe thou art as good, as great:
Who by thy ne'er-too-much applauded Word
have framed whatsoever created is;
One blessed TRINITY, in true accord
of perfect Unity, and boundless bliss!
If that great Patriarcke, Father of the Just,
(who albeit thou deign'dst to call thy Friend)
Yet in respect He Ashes was, and Dust,
did fear to speak to Thee, that Ear did lend:
Nay, if the highest Orders of those Sprights,
that, in thy presence, burn, through love of thee,
Dare not, upon thine Essence, fix their sights,
lest they, through glory, should confounded be:
If these so pure, so dear, so holy Ones,
so fearful are to speak, or look on thee,
Who albeit they sit themselves on Thrones,
yet, in thy sight, through love, so awful be:
How shall a Shorelesse Sea of Misery,
a Sincke of Sin, a Sack of filthiest dung,
(All which, ah woe therefore, dear Lord, am I!)
once dare, to thee, to stir or Eye, or Tongue?
But, since (sweet Lord) I can no way obtain
that awful reu'rence, which is due to thee,
Unless mine Eyes still fixed on thee remain,
and made amazed with thy Majesty:
Vouchsafe me leave (dread God) vouchsafe me leave
to lift mine Eyes unto thy Throne of Grace;
O let thy brightness, mine Eyes, splendour give;
and blind them not that long to see thy Face.
I see (dread Lord) thou, only, thou art He
that do transcend our understandings reach;
And yet, by understanding, well I see
they see thee best, to whom thy beams do stretch.
Then, o most bright, fair, wise, kind, liberal;
most stable, simple, subtle, gracious;
Secret, yet known; vnscene, yet seeing All:
unmoved, yet moving; in rest, making us:
Whom Latitudes dilate, nor Bounds restrain;
Variety does change, nor Passions move:
Rest makes not idle, nor Work puts to pain,
who art not hurt by Hate, nor holp by Love.
From whom, Oblivion, nothing can detract;
to whom, Remembrance, can as little add:
Who art Dilated most, yet most Compact:
not grieved in Sorrow, nor in Solace glad:
To whom there is nothing past, much less to come;
since Time and Place still present be with thee:
Of all this All thou art the total Sum;
beyond which nothing is, much less can be!
For, thou art in all things, yet art not included;
but yet, in all things, art thou, by sufficing:
Thou art without all, yet art not excluded;
but, without all things, thou art, by comprising.
Thou Art under All; yet subject unto none;
but under All, that All might rest on thee:
And far above All, yet not proud thereon;
but, All, above; that All might governed be.
Perfect in All, in none deficient;
Great without bounds, and Good without compare:
Present in each Place, yet in no Place pent;
yet, whole in All, and parts, in All that are.
In Power, and Wisdom, most-most infinite!
in Counsel, wonderful; in Judgment, just;
Secret, in thoughts; in word, and Promise, right:
glorious in Deeds, which glorify our Dust!
Past all extent, thy Love does far extend;
whose Mercie's more, then most indefinite:
Thy Patience more, than Power can comprehend:
because it is no less then is thy Might!
What shall I say, great-good, good-great-great Lord!
I fear, in these my Words, I do offend:
To seem to circumscribe thee in a Word;
that art without all measure, mean, or end!
Thou art, (o sacred Spirits Angelical,
(that have fruition of Him face to face)
Lend me a Name by which I Him may call;
and may express some measure of his Grace!
Thou art too great, for GREATNESS, never so GREAT!
and far too good, for GOODNESS, ever so GOOD!
Who (were it possible) art more complete
in GOODNESS, then thine own Trin-vnionhood*
Yet thou (thou nameles Good! who, though thus great)
do bid us seek thee, for, who seeks finds:
Who, though not to be seen upon thy Seat,
yet sitt'st thou, seen, in Eyes of humble Minds.
Thou, thou art He, whom, to forsake, is death;
and, for whom life to leave, is life alone:
In whom, to breathe, is to breathe blessed Breath;
and, for whom to contend, is Union.
No man fosakes thee, but the forlorn Fool:
and, no one seeks thee, but whom thou do seek:
Nor none can find thee, but whom thou do school;
and, thou school'st none, but whom thy Lessons like.
What should I say of thee? or how shall I
thy Goodness praise? how shall I celebrate
The glory of thy, back- parts, Majesty,
though never so much thou it extenuate?
I Will say as those, whom thou taugh'st what to say,
thou measurest the Waters with thine Hand;
Upon thy Palm thou do the Heavens weigh:
and, on thy Finger all the Earth does stand!
Thou art that Ancient, ancienter then Days,
whose Throne is like a bright ay-burning Flame;
The Wheels whereof, like Fire that Sparks does raise;
upon whose Thigh is writ a glorious Name:
Thy Body, like a beaming Chrisolite;
thy Face, like Lightning; thine Eyes, Lamps of Fire!
Thine Arms, and Feet, like Brass, all burnisht bright;
thy Voice like Thunder, but It sounds high'r.
A fiery Stream, still flows from thy Throne;
a thousand thousand minister to thee:
Ten thousand thousand wait on thee alone;
and, Millions, by the Thousands, ready be!
Who, with a Beck, nay less, but with a Thought,
rul'st Heaven, and Earth, according to thy Will;
Which, tho most glorious both, thou made of noght
and, if thou would, a thought again would spill!
Help, Lord, for I am in a groundless DEEP,
or endless Maze, that has no coming out!
My Wits from drowning, and distraction keep;
and, let me go no more, this Gulf, about.
For; he that goes about to tell, with Words,
what one thou art, does even as if he would
Quite drown the Sea, within the shallow'st Foords;
nay, more, since thou art much more manifold.
Who ere assisted thee? or thee advised?
who brought thee up in Lore? or gave thee Wit?
And who thy Power, at any time surprised?
or, what Foe was not dashed to Dust by It?
With whom the Sea seems scarce a Water-drop;
the Islands, and maine Lands, a little Dust:
The highest Heaven is but thy Foot-stooles Top;
and, but into a Prick, thou Earth do thrust!
The Woods of Libanus cannot suffice
to make Religious Altars fume to Thee:
Nor all the Beasts can serve for Sacrifice
that on a thousand thousand Mountains be!
All Nations, nay, all Creatures whatsoever
(be they Celestial, or Terrestrial)
Stand in thy sight, as if they Nothing were;
and, in respect of thee, are not at all.
For if, in the bright presence of the Sun,
the Stars seem not to be, although they are;
Then, in thy sight, must All to nothing run;
since, in the same, the Sun cannot appear.
Therefore, with all created Essences,
o holy, blessed, and glorious TRINITY,
I do adore, with all obseruances,
the Scepter of thy dread Divinity!
Thy Being's universal; most exact!
then, being such, what should my homage be?
And, being Grace, and Goodness, most abstract,
how can I, wanting both, serenize thee?
Agnizing, then, the Wonders of thy Worth,
(prostrate, before thy sacred Mercies seat,
With whatsoever Loves fear can utter forth)
I more then celebrate thy glory great.
With those thrice blessed Spirits, who laying down
their Crowns of Glory, at thy sacred Feet,
Prostrate adore thee; lo, I veil the Crown
of all my Glory, to thee, blessed SWEET!
My Glory, Lord? alas! what do I give?
if I have any, it is more than vain:
Then may thou not that Gift of me receive;
since it must needs thy sacred Glory stain.
Return It then (dear Lord) my gift put back;
and, I will give thee what thou gave to me:
That Is Love, and Fear; thou do no Glory lack;
yet, if thou give it me, I Will give it thee.
But not to us (dear Lord) o not to us,
but to thy gracious NAME all glory give;
Which was, and is, and shall be glorious,
as long as God is God, or LIFE does live.
But, unto us, Confusion onely's due;
for, Flesh and Blood has naught to glory in,
But (that which may decayed shame renew,)
a bleeding Conscience, and a world of Sin!
But why does Sol give Light, the Fire give Heat?
why's Water cold? Earth, thick? or Air so thin?
The reason's clear; by kind, they do that feate:
so, thou, by kind, (kind Lord) forgiuest Sin.
Where Sin abounds, there Grace does oe'er-abound;
for, it is thy glory (God) Sins to forgive:
For should thou Sinners, with the Sin, confound,
then, none should live; so, none should glory give.
For, in the nether Hell they praise thee not,
since it is the Hold of hedious Blasphemy:
There is the Land where all things are forgot
save sad Despair, and Death which cannot dye.
But, in thine euer-blessed Hierarchy,
the holy, holy, holy Lord of Hoasts
(In Soule-inchanting Heavenly Harmony)
is ever heard through those Celestial Coasts.
Then, make me such that, in the Life of grace,
I temp'ra^^ly may glorify thy Name:
And, in the Life of glory, face to face,
I may, for ever, much more do the same.
Consume the cloudy Fancies of my Mind
with sacred flames of thine eternal Love;
That, being by that purging fire refinde,
thou may if, on thy Trials Touch, approve.
Then, let thy Glories zeal quite eat me up,
that all my Being may consist therein:
So, I Will carowse thy bitter Passions Cup;
since to my Health (kind Lord) thou did begin.
O let my life (poor life) naught else appear
but a sweet smelling Sacrifice to thee:
Or rather let it be an Offering here,
that, with thy Loves fire, may consumed be.
Then, metamorphose me into thy Love,
let me be quite transmuted to the same:
That I may ever upwards, flaming, move,
as does, by Nature, a material flame.
O! bottomless Abyss of Charity,
engulph me in thy Bowels, let thy Womb
Receive Sins seed, that longs for sanctity;
Then, let it still lie, buried, in this Tomb:
That so, I may, quite dead to Sin, and Shame,
Still live in LOVE, to love and praise thy NAME.
A Repetition of Gods many Benefits, and Preseruations, with desire of the
continuance thereof.
Upon the bended knees of my poor Sp'rit,
(made poor by thy rich Mercies showered thereon)
Thy Virtue I adore, with all my might,
o divine VERTVE, Isreal's Holy ONE!
Since thou, of thy vnlimitable grace,
have deigned to make me know thy grace and power.
Nay, showed to me the splendour of thy face,
which does my love, much more then much allure.
For giving me my Being, being naught
before; and since, and since, for mending me:
Though yet (dear Lord) I am not as I ought;
yet, as I am, I am most bound to thee.
For that thou do conserve me in such case;
that, as a lively Member, I do feel
Thy lively Members dolor, or disgrace;
and sinck in Soul, when they (near falling) reele.
For that thou do my Natures essence keep
from running to the wrack of grace and nature:
And, of a Wolf, for making me a Sheep;
and, of a Castaway, a costly Creature.
A costly Creature I right well may say;
since it thy Heart-bloud cost to make me such;
Even, then, when I was worse then cast away:
for, I was damned before I knew so much.
By thee I am, in sinful state, preserved
from sinful state; which stands where Sin does reign.
By thee I am from prides contrect conseru'd;
that feign would take out of thy hand thy reign.
If I do fall, it is when Thou stai'st me not;
if I do rise, it is by thy helping Hand:
But, I never fall but when I have forgot
that by thy Rod, and Staff, I rise, and stand.
As many good thoughts as my heart ere held,
he held, in Capite, of Thee his Head:
If well my little-World I ere did weild,
I did it with thy Power, but in thy stead.
If none can say Lord Jesus but by Thee,
much less, without thee, thee can any serve;
No more then Boughs yield Fruit, cut from the tree:
then what we work for (Lord) thou do deserve.
Therefore, if I have fasted, watched, or praid,
if I have Crosses borne, with Back unbroke,
If I have shed Contritions Tears, unstaid,
or crossed my Will, or up thy Cross have took:
If in my prayers I have thought on Thee,
or that they have prevailed, or I relieved;
Or if my Will to Virtue has been free;
all these, as gifts, from Thee I have received.
How many virtuous Friends, and Ghostly Guides,
how many good Examples, Lights of life,
What like Books have thou sent me, these besides,
as Loue-signes whilst thou woo'dst me for thy Wife?
All which, to thee, I freely do refer,
that they, from thee, more freely may reflow:
For, since thou did all these on me confer
ere I was thine; now all Thine I do owe.
But, to recount the Perils I have past
(thou being present, pointing out the way)
Is more then well Arithmetic can cast,
which do thy mercies, numberless, bewray!
And, into what, more than prodigious, Crimes
I might have fallen, had thou not me vpheld,
(Yea, had thou not prevented me be times)
appears by those that have in sin excelled:
For, never did the Devil sin so much,
but that a frail Man may commit as great
If, with thy grace, his Heart thou do not touch,
and, with thy Power, the power of Sin defeat.
As many Means, then, as I had to sin,
and, fit Occasions as I had to fall;
So many might my Sins, and Falls have bin,
if I by thee had had no help at all.
Occasions, are so violent, in Power
that they could Giant-foyling David fall:
For, they once took him up into his Tower,
from whence he fell, in part; and after, all.
Occasion is a Ianus, which does look
to Vice and Virtue most indifferently;
But, by Sins watching him, he often is took,
and made the mean of much Impiety.
He Is feigned to stand upon an upright Bowl,
to show his course is most indifferent:
Except he meets with rubs, which make him roll
out of the way, which way those Rubs are bent.
But, o! how often have thou, with strong hand,
^ane him out of my way, lest I should fall,
By reason he, in my way, right, did stand:
for often I stumble at Occasion small.
How often have Thou the FOES hand manacled,
because he should not fight, or if he should
I should be Victor, and not vanquished;
and so get Grace, since (tried) I held my Hold?
How often have I marched upon my Foes,
(the Adder, Viper, and the Cocatrice)
And never was once stung, or hurt by those,
(thou had so charmed the malice of their vice!
How often have thou walked hand, in hand, with me,
through Fire and Water, all untouched of either;
Nay, so their Powers were tempered by thee,
that they wrought for my comfort altogether!
And, how often have they quite consumed bin
who (for not worshipping their senseless Sawes)
Have, in Afflictions Furnace, kept me in,
the whiles I sang, for joy, in Sorrows Jaws!
That with the Psalmist, I may justly say
I was sore thrust at, that I (so) might fall;
But, thou o'er-threw'st my thrusters, with my stay;
as Bals quite break, thrown hard against a wall.
How often have my Sins sold me to thy wrath?
how often have I fallen, yet never fell!
For, in thy Mercy, which no measure has,
(though I did passing ill) I have done well!
Though I gave, that, to Nature, due to Grace,
and, to my self, that, which belonged to Thee;
(Who might have graced Thee (then) with my disgrace
yet gave thou grace, not shame, even then to me!
And, though the Angels fell for less offense,
and, that proud Babel-Monarch, for the same,
Yet I, as one of more pre-eminence,
escaped vnskarr'd, in Body, Goods and Name!
I Perils loved, yet perished not therein;
by many by-ways I found out the right:
With Grace familiar was I made by Sin:
so, foild I Sin by Sin, and not by fight.
Was ever Love so won? was ever Man
so wooed by GOD! or can my Soul conceive
How much thy Mercies may, that so much can!
or can I thee of Love (dear Love) deceive!
O rather of my Being quite bereave me,
and, turn me to my pristrin^ Nihil-hood,
Then I should, so, of but mere Love deceive thee;
that make mine Evils do me so much good.
Burn me (kind LOVE) to Nothing, that of naught
thou mai'st, in Love, make something, good for thee:
Of naught, thou made me good; mine Ill, I wrought:
then, now, of naught, good make me ever be.
Perfect, great Master Builder of mine All,
thy Work begun; and let my Nothing be
Apt to be-come, in Form, material;
and, be conformed to matter loved of Thee.
Breathe on this CHAOS (Lord) and let thy Spirit
walk on the Waters of my Humors, vain:
My Darkness, palpable, covert to Light;
so, my Confusion shall, in Order, reign.
Over Sin, and Death, and darke-darke Ignorance,
in datelesse Terms of all Eternities;
The value of thy Virtue to advance,
which, of thy self, above all Heights does rise!
This is my Hope, which is, because thou ART
Just in thy Word, and Deed; in All, and Part!
For Power and Grace to withstand the Flesh, the World, and the Devil.
WHen I look up and see the Heavenly Spheres
roll on my Time, and my Life's Line therein,
Thus say I to my Soul; Vain Soul thy years
are nothing, since thou nothing do but sin?
Yet art thou made eternal (like thy Sire)
and all conceiu'st (like him) beneath the Sun;
Thou Art in my Whole and Parts (like him) entire;
and have (like him) right Reason Ill to shun!
And yet, o yet, thou do, but Ill withal;
so all that good thou turn'st to Evil still:
Who, through Infirmity, to Sin do fall,
when thou stand'st highest in grace of Powers goodwill.
Then Lord of Power and Grace, with both so arm
my falling Soul, that she thereby may stand
Against the Assaults of all that would her harm:
for, she can foil but with thy Forces Band.
Great Lord of Hosts, Jehovah, God of Power,
then leave me not alone among my Foes;
But strengthen me from thy Strengths trusty Tower,
that I, by Thee, may ever vanquish those.
The Flesh the World, the Devil, with their Bands
of strong as fraudfull Foes, me still assail;
While all my Power lies only in thy Hands,
which when I hold, I foil; withheld, I fail!
If then thou would I still should Victor be,
give me those helps that in thy hand still lie:
Flesh fights not with it self; but thou in me
can foil it quite, and make it Mercy cry.
The World does love it self (and, so, her Own)
too well t'endamage either; and does charge
Too strongly on me to be overthrown
by my small power, if thou it not enlarge.
And Satan, in himself, is not divided,
though, in himself, still turbulent he be:
He is too crafty, strong, and well-prouided,
for me t'encounter, if thou help not me.
Then o estsoones (again, and still again)
I thine assistance humbly do inuoke;
That so I may still vanquish, so, still reign
over these our Foes that ever us provoke.
So will I yield the glory unto Thee,
That foilst such strength by Weakness; that is by me!
The Sinner, confessing his sin, strives with God (by importunity of
Prayer) for Grace.
GReat God! from who^ no thought can be concea'ld
since it thou know ere thought; and searched have
All Hearts ere they, in Nature, are revealed,
forgive my thoughts, that give thee but distaste.
To my Confusion needs I must confess,
my thoughts and Sin are One; and, so, most base:
And though so base they be, yet n'erthelesse
often Grace they mind; so, Sin presumes on Grace.
Lord! how am I deprau'd by Sin, that can
scarce think a thought, but I do sin therein?
Then blessed Lord, how can thou chose but banne
so vile a Slave, so subject unto Sin?
I must not leave Thee thus; no, though my Heart
be well-neere Flint, I must not leave thee so:
With thee, for Grace, I Will wrestle ere we part,
then let me find it in mine Ouer-throw.
And if such Sin thou do forgive by Grace,
and that where much is pardoned, Love is much,
My Love shall ouer-fill all Time and Place;
such is my Sin, my Love shall then be such!
Deny me not (dear Lord) for I will take
no nay of thee; no; thou do me inuit,
Being heavy laden, to thee;, o then make
me free therefrom, lest it do quell me quite.
And learn me (Lord) to woo thee for thy Grace;
and win it, by my wooing, to relieve me;
Thou can soon lighten this my heavy case;
then, thy Will's good, with good will then, forgive me.
Make my Heart feel, although the while it ache,
some Sign of Grace, that thereby I may know
Thou love such wooers as no nay will take;
and Wrastlers such, as will not let thee go!
Though speak I cannot as I would, my Spright
still woos thy grace with sighs, then words more deep:
Thou know her speech, and do therein delight;
then o let thy kind Answer make me weep.
Thy Louing-kindnesse has the power to strike
her dumb with joy; and after make her shrill
In thine applause: for, whom thou (Lord) do like,
thou still make drunk with joy through thy goodwill!
Then if I have found Favor in thy sight,
or else wilt give me any hope of Grace,
Make druncke my Soul with thy sweet loues-delight,
and let her so (ioy-rauisht) thee embrace.
I sue to thee, for that I needs must have;
I cannot be without It, since within
It Is all mine All: then, It I still will crave,
until by ceasely begging it I win:
Then, grant me grace from Sin me still to free,
Else, by thy grace, I Will cry for it still to thee.
The Sinner confessing he can neither will, think, nor do any good thing
without Gods preventing and assisting Grace, importunes the same.
O Thou that from the Bottom of Not-being
did raise me to BE thus, a MAN, like Thee;
And, ere I WAS, through thy divine Foreseeing,
did more then see what would become of me;
Give, give me leave (thou God of endless Grace)
to enterplead with Thee without thine ire:
Why AM I, if thou turn'st from me thy Face,
since so a Brand I am but for Hellfire?
I could not choose but Be when thou would have me;
for how could nothing cross Almightinesse?
And now I Am am lost, unless thou save me;
but, none thou sau'st that still thy Will transgress.
Nor, can I do thy Will, without thou will;
and if thou will, thy Will no Power can cross,
Much less my Weakness; then, if I be spilt,
it seems thy Will, although my blame and loss.
And yet thou sai'st, thou will no Sinners Death;
thy Word is Truth it self; then, if thou would
That I should live, o let me spend my Breath
as those whom thou, by Grace, from sin with-hold'st.
So in thy Will (which no Power ever impugnes)
consists mine everlasting Weal or Woe:
Then, not to me, so much as thee belongs
to save me from eternal overthrow.
I can but Will; but, well I cannot Will,
if thou first will it not; nor ever shall:
Then, will it first; for, I can will but Ill
without thy Grace; so, Grace does all in All.
I cannot think, then much less can I do
ought pleasing thee, without thy Grace first got:
And yet to do it, still thou me do woo;
which, yet, I cannot, if thou do it not:
For, look what good I do, it is not I
but thou that do it in and by me still:
Then still I can do all things in and by
thee ( Lord of Power) agreeing with thy Will.
O then incline my Will thy Will to do;
and give me Power, with Will, else Will will fail:
Will thou but this, then me thou need'st not woo,
because thy Will with mine must needs pr^uaile!
So, shall there be but one Will twixt us two:
Grant this (dear Lord) for this I thee do woo.
The Sinner because of the darkness of his understanding, confesses his
inabilitie to come to the knowledge of Gods will by his Word; and desires to
be holp and enlightened by Gods spirit therein.
THou have commanded ( Lord) in every Want,
that Man, thy Creature, still should call on thee;
And thou his just desires have said to grant,
then now (o now) thy Promise keep with me:
For now, even from the Bottom of the Deep,
I cry to thee that art all Heights above;
I, crying, call; or rather, calling, weep
for what I want; that is, thy Grace, and Love.
Then, as thou art still soothfast, grant them me
that by them still I may thy Heasts perform;
Then if thou would I should obedient be,
let Love and Grace my will to thine conform.
Lo, I entend, and by thy holy Grace
will still contend, thy holy Will to do;
Then through the luster of thy brightest Face,
show it, that I may know, and do it too.
Give that which thou have given me Power to crave,
and Promise to obtain; thy guiding Spirit:
Thou still do tender that which I would have;
yet cannot take it, if I lack thy light.
A Chaos (Lord) of Darkness still I am,
without th'inlightning Spirit still move thereon;
Then let thy Spirit with light so clear the same,
that it may be an Heaven for thee alone.
Vnseele mine Eyes, that long thy Light to see;
for, they are blinded with black Ignorance:
Then, Light of Lights, to Heaven direct thou me
the rightest way with thy bright Countenance.
Men are of various minds about this Way;
some this, some say that way the way does lie:
And to it Scripture ( Truths right Rule) do lay;
but Truth never lay in such diversity.
For, Truth is one, but these are manifold;
then lead me in this way, else stray I shall:
Incline my Will this rightest way to hold
(how ever strait) and in it never fall.
O trade me in thy Paths, I beg of thee
with all the forces of my mind and mouth;
And when I step awry, straight show it me
by inspiration of thy Spirit of Truth.
If in thy Word I look for help herein
from all Presumption keep my private Spright:
For, many Doctors so deceived have been;
then make my Soul still see, and take the right.
Thy Word's a Lantern to direct their steps,
that are as humble, as intelligent:
Yet often the Wise thy meaning ouer-leapes,
while it is revealed to the innocent.
Thou spak'st therein to all Capacities,
and lispst to Babes, to make them know thy mind:
Yet if thou guide them not, and open their eyes,
the Wonders of thy Law they cannot find.
Thy Will then ( shown and hidden in thy Word)
is hid, though shown, from those not prompt by thee:
Though Camels there may swim, and Gnats may ford,
yet both may drown, if (there) too bold they be.
In shallow'st places, there, great Clerks have suncke
into the depth of Heresy, and drew
Whole Nations after them; yea, made Kings drunk
therewith, while they Beleeuers-right pursue.
So then, as none could ever see the Sun
but by the Sun; so, none can rightly see
Thee in thy Word, but by reflection
of that pure Light of Lights that comes from thee!
If so, then light me in that Light (thy Word)
since thou art Light of lights; else may mine Eyes
Be daz'led, and (so) drown me in each Ford
of those pure Rivers of thy Paradise.
Thy Word is Truth; but those it does misguide
that know not well thy Language, nor will know;
Since they will learn but of them- selves and Pride;
so, not thy Word, but they are erring so.
None can be saved without they do thy Will,
which none can do, unless the same they know:
And none can know it, much less it fulfill,
if it, by special grace, thou do not show.
Then, if thou will that I shall saved be,
(for thou will no man's Death that seeks thy face)
Let me be taught to know thy Will by thee;
and made to do it by thy Power and Grace:
So shall I find what I am seeking still,
To know Thee well, and well to do thy Will.
An Invocation against use of offending, or bad Custom.
Dear Lord! while I bethink me of the Ils
that me surround; and weigh the Woes I feel
Through mine own fault (which me with Sorrow (fills)
from Life to Death I ready am to reele.
The Sun of my Care-clouded life has past
his full Meridian; and, does now decline
To Seas of griefs, where Age does sincke at last;
and, at each breath, Death seeks it to define.
Use of offending, in my passed Days,
does pass my strength to change, though feign I would
Custom (to Nature turned) my Nature swayes;
and of my self, the while, I have no hold.
Yet, if, I dye ere so bad use I leave,
my life must leave me hopeless at my death;
For, what I give to GOD I shall receive;
and, as I spend, so shall I yield my Breath.
I mind to mend; but still procrastinate;
for, my Familiar, Sin, is loath to part;
And does my halfe-dead body animate
to use her still; so, wounds, and heales my Heart.
But since I am not sure to breath once more,
and that my life and death are well-neere met,
And Death t'eternall Weal or woe's the Door,
why sin I now, my life's Sun near is set?
What is in Sin, that it should so be witch?
A bitter-sweete (if Sweet it be) and makes
The Body glad, but still the Soul to grutch;
and even from life the vitall-vertue takes.
The wisest yet, that ever breathed this Air
of Humane Race, well tried it to be so,
Whose equal Wealth and Wisdom did repair
to all in Nature, but this Sweet to know.
And yet he found the Sow'r excelled the Sweet:
the Sweet but short, the Sow'r surmounting Time:
We want his Means, his high Delights to meet;
yet hazard we our souls to them to climb!
Lord, make me wise by his experience,
who, in great wealth and Wisdom, played the Fool:
And for mere Folly was at huge expense;
then, let his follies me still wisely school.
Yea, let me learn of Him that all does teach;
of whom the wisest learn Sins snares to shun;
He was a King, and Preacher; and did preach
that All is vanity beneath the Sun.
If all be vain beneath, and true he says,
let me above the Sun seek true delight;
Which I shall find by walking in thy Ways*
so thou (dear Lord) consort me with thy Spright.
O then consort me so, and with his power
enable me all lets to overrun;
Let me not stay one Minute of an How'r
to joy in any thing beneath the Sun.
But in thy Sun of Justice let me joy,
which fills the Heavens and Earth with purest light:
Then, let all other joys my soul annoy,
that so in him I may alone delight:
Thou can do this; then doubt I not thy Will,
Which still is good, then my good will fulfill.
The Sinner refers his Will to Gods will in all things* desiring help for
perseverance therein.
Dear Lord, and God, true Lover of my Soul,
in my desires, I wholly do resign
unto thy blessed Will this Will of mine
To form, reform, direct, and still control.
And as my Soul my body moves alone
without whose motion it would still be still:
so let thy Sp'rit still move my soul and will.
Else, let them have no motion of their own.
Let me forsake my self for thy dear sake;
yea, truly hate my self for love of thee,
and let no pleasures please or profit me,
If thou (dear Lord) at them displeasure take.
I offer unto thee mine All, and more
(had I much more than All) to mortify
my senses and affections; that thereby
I may (so mortifide) live evermore.
My self I (likewise) offer to the lack
of sensible devotion, grace, and love,
so it may humble me, and make me prove
Thy might the more in my sins utter wrack.
I offer (too) my self, with prompt desire,
t'indure all loss, in name, fame, goods, and friends,
all pleasure, pain, and what else flesh offends,
That by their weight, my sp'rit may mount the higher.
In sum; I offer up my self above
my self, to all mischance that can befall
save sin alone; yet, if thy goodness shall
Put me in Hell, I Will brook it for thy Love.
And though it be impossible for Flesh
to suffer it; yet, should my Will be pressed,
If thou would have it so, in Hell to rest;
For Love in quenchlesse flames can sense refresh.
Then love me (Lord) and still my love inflame;
then put me where thou will, I Will there abide
without repining, ire, or ghostly pride,
With Martyrs, that, in torments, laud thy Name.
But since by reason of my Flesh (too frail)
I cannot be so prompt these pains to brook;
then, help me (Lord) but with a loving look,
And over Death and Hell I shall prevail.
Look kindly on me then (dear Lord) and so
Our Wills shall still be one in weal and woe.
The Sinner desires fruition of the Deity; and that his Soul should be ever
the habitation thereof.
Eternal LORD, who art more prompt to hear
then Faith to pray; of that great grace of thine
Regard the Boon I ask in Love and Fear;
and to mine humble suite thine ears incline.
Grant me fruition of thy DEITY
that all my Soul may so be satisfied;
For less then that can her not satisfy,
though all else (boundless) were still amplifide!
Those gifts and graces that thy Grace may move
t'inhabit my poor Soul, vouchsafe thou me:
That with thy gifts thy grace may be in Love;
and love my Soul for harbring them, and thee.
But, in those gifts O let her be reposed
none outherwise then as they fashion her
To harbor Thee; (that is, make her well disposed)
else let her rest be restless ever there.
My Son (says thou, dear Lord) give me thy heart,
o small request! my Heart, Lord! what is it
But one poor bit of wormes-meate? can no Part
of me delight thee, but so vile a bit?
Why, thou did wholly give thy self to me:
shall I return thee then but that alone?
O it is (sweet Savior) most unworthy Thee;
for which (thou know) it is, meekly, wo-begon*
Yet gladly would I give it; but, it is
so small, unclean, unquiet, and accursed,
That I do fear to give it so amiss,
since, of all gifts, it is worser than the worst.
Yet take it ( Lord of Love) it is thine own,
how ever I have abused it; make it such
As thou would have it; let it still be known
fit for thy Stamp, upon thy Trials Touch.
O glorious King, what grace is it to our Hearts
to be accepted, and desired of thee?
Then take my Heart, yea, all mine other parts;
for they are safe in thee, but lost in me.
And is this all thy gain (o kindest Lord?)
and is this all our gift, one wretched Heart?
And for the same do thou thy self afford?
then take it to thee (Lord) through joy, or smart.
For, nothing can I give thee, but the same
augments my gain and glory endlesly:
Then take it wholly, set me all on flame
to melt me into thee by Charity!
For, were my Heart as great as is the Heaven
that all includes; and, that past price it were,
It should to thee (desiring it) be given,
since, I have thee for it, who have no Peer.
Then, World be silent, call it not again;
Flesh be as still, permit it still to go;
And Devil strive not; for, it is in vain;
my God will have it, then it shall be so.
Vade, vade; for, all you cannot fill my Heart,
my God alone can do it; and He must
Have it to fill: then from me all depart,
that seek to fill it but with wind or dust.
And sole Sufficer, chain it still to Thee
with Adamantine Linckes of endless Love;
That through those Straites which thou have past for me,
it may be drawn to thee, if slow it move.
Let it attend thee to the Iudgement-Hall,
where thou wast doomed to death; and to the Hill,
Whereon thou suffer'dst; let it taste thy Gall;
and; on thy Cross let it be fixed still:
That be'ing with thee thus plagued, disgraced and slain,
It may with thee be raised, and crowned, and reign.
A sovereign Salve against Sin and Despair out of S. Augustine.
Dear Lord, when sinful thoughts do me assail
to thy dear Wounds then let me hye with speed;
When burning lust against my thoughts prevail,
quench it, by minding me how long they bleed!
In all Extremes I find no Mean so good
as thy wide Wounds to keep my Soul still whole*
They cannot dye that drowned are in thy blood;
for, that is Aqua vitae to the Soul!
Thy Death is my desert; then do I not
lack merits; since thy Death destroys my Sin:
Thy Mercy is my merit; and, my Lot
is glories Crown, through my firm hope therein:
For, if thy grace be great; then is it clear
my glory shall be great: and, the more power
Thou have to save, the less I ruin fear:
for, Grace abounding, makes Loves hope secure.
Yet I acknowledge mine iniquities;
and, Conscience, with her thousand Witnesses,
Accuse me of extreme impieties;
yet will I hope of mercy ne'erthelesse:
For, where Sin has abounded, there has grace
abounded more; so, love enflaming in
The grieved delinquent: who does enterlace
sweet tears of Joy, with bitter Tears for Sin.
For, who dispaires, God, utterly denies;
deny his Attributes, himself deny:
His Justice we provoke; his mercies rise
but from him- self, who is self- Clemency!
Then, let my thoughts still murmr while they will,
and ask, why such a Sinner grace should seek?
Yet in firm hope I will continue still,
since he has promised that cannot break.
Who can do what he will; and he will do
what he has sworn: which is; he will make whole
The broken Heart for sin, and grace it too;
yea, help contrition in the willing Soul.
My Sins (though great) then, me no whit dismay,
when his dear Death I mind: for, all my Crimes
Can never o'er-match his Mercies, if I pray
for grace, to hope in his sure help betimes.
His Thorny Crown, and Nayl^s, that him transpierc'd
assures my hope that He and I are One:
Which have his Iudgemeuts against my sins reuerst,
if I but grieve for what I have misdone.
Longius has cleared the sad coast to his Heart
with his fell Spear; that (kind to me) made way:
There rest I now in Joy and joyful smart,
of safety sure, while there, in hope, I stay.
Upon the Cross he does his Arms extend,
to embrace the Contrite: then, between those arms,
Devoutly will I throw me till mine end;
so, safe I shall be there, from foes, and harms.
He bowed his Head, before Death brake his Heart,
to kiss his Lovers with the kiss of Peace;
Then, still I Will kiss him: so, shall I depart
in peace to him that is my Sins release.
Sweet Christ embrace me then, and kiss me till
I dye to live, to clip and kiss thee still.
The crazed Soul being almost in despair, desires Grace to hope in Gods
mercy.
LOrd, in thy Love, let me be none of them
that love but in a Calm; a time believe;
But when a Storm arises, do blaspheme;
and with infernal S'prits, thy Sp'rit do grieve.
Thus what I need, I crave; but what I fear
thou know (dear Lord:) I fear I am too bold
To seek thy love, because I do appear
no correspondence with thy love to hold:
For, he that merits hate (Lord) how can he
straight look for love? and who has shame deserved
Seek for immortal glory? or, to be
from shame and pain, which he deserves, preserved?
He moves but his Judge to iustest wrath
that, being faulty, looks he him should clear,
Without meet satisfaction for the scath
which he has done; all these my hopes do fear.
For, he that is to shame and death condemned
small reason has to look for highest respect;
If but his death by grace might be redeemed,
in sense, it should be all he could expect.
But why, o why, do I now call to mind
what I have done, to make my fears more rife?
Death I deserve; yet seek I life to find,
that live but to offend the Lord of life.
Can I still vex my Judge, yet look for grace?
and still provoke my King, yet seek his love?
Nay, still but buffet my sweet Jesus face,
and yet expect he should my Jesus prove?
Alas! how should he? much less how can I
such favor seek, that so his Favor wrongs?
Can wrong expect such right, in equity?
o no: for, vengeance to the same belongs!
Vengeance belongs to wrongs so great, so plain,
as so to wrong a MAJESTY so great!
Then Fear persuades me I seek grace in vain;
yet Grace makes hope some Favor to entreat.
I have neglected to foresee the woes
that follow sin, and now would grace for-goe:
I often have taken mortal overthrows,
yet scarce have felt a mortal overthrow.
I have encreast my scars that feared not
to add still sin to sin, and grave to light:
Fresh Wounds have opened those before I got,
to make the Cure most hard, or curelesse quite.
And what the Ba^mes of Grace had closed before,
I, through the itch of sin, have opened wide:
Which, through corruption, now are grown so sore
that scarce I can so sore a Cure abide.
The Skin, which growing over, hid my Wounds
through breaking out of the corruption, gape;
For, sin the grace once granted quite confounds:
so that I fear I hardly can escape.
For, if the righteous man shall perish in
his sin committed: how much more then shall
Repentant sinners turning eft to sin?
the thought whereof more grieves me then my fall.
The newly dead, Christ quickly raised to life;
but he must groan in spirit, weep, cry and pray,
Yer Lazarus be raised: for, mortal strife
Death made with life, to leave so long a Prey:
So, it is in Regeneration; for,
the less the Soul's defiled with sins delight,
And the more she the least sin does abhor;
the less wind of Gods Sp'rit reuiues that sp'rit,
What shall I do? I can but sin (dear Lord)
if so; thou can but plague, yea, plague with Death:
Since still I sin then, in thought, deed, and word,
cut off my sin, or else abridge my breath:
For, Breath it is that kindles sin in me
with blowing at the coals of damned desires;
These, through my banefull breath, still raging be;
and quite consume the grace that me inspires.
Then, if I did not breathe, I should not sin;
yet should I loose my breath ever sin bewail
I by that loss should but damnation win:
then, let me rue my faults yer Breath does fail:
But, if thou will that I should longer live,
Let me no longer sin, or longer grieve.
A desire of the loving Soul, of God, to be kissed with the kiss of Peace.
Kiss me, o kiss me, with Loves honyed Kiss,
o dearest Love, and sweet'st-Heart of my Soul:
Whose love is like pure Wine that cordial is;
and does sour cares, with Comforts sweet, control
Thy Name is like to sweet suffused Balm;
which makes chaste Souls even sick for love of thee:
Whose Passions (striving in a blessed calm
on Sorrows Seas) to thee still rolling be.
Draw me (dear Love) then, after thee I Will run
upon the sent of thy divine Perfumes:
My Love's impatient (since it first begun)
of this delay, which quite my Soul consumes:
Then, o, delay no more to marry me;
But wed my Soul that pines for love of Thee.
Since all Gods Creatures are against those that are against GOD, in action, the
Sinner desires to be in unity with him.
AS when a Master has most mortal Foes,
his Servants, and men, made by him, will be
Most persecuting Enemies to those,
till with their Lord and Master they agree.
So, all thy Creatures (Lord) do rise in Arms
against great Sinners (if impenitent)
To plague them with all kind of killing harms,
till they be ruined quite, or made repent.
But being one with Thee, our Enemies
shall seek our Favor, and themselves submit:
For, when they see our Succour's in the Skies,
they will adore us, and acknowledge it:
Then make me (Lord) my foes straight put to flight,
By being one with Thee, for whom they fight.
The Sinner desires to have the bent of his Will, made appliable to Gods.
THe Way to Heaven (that truest Port of Peace)
is strait and straight until at Hell we be:
Where, on the right hand then, we turn with ease;
for, when we pass that Point; then, well are we.
But, being strait, but few that Way do wend;
and being straight, the crooked miss it still:
Then, to this Port, but few their course do bend,
since most are crooked; ever bent to Ill.
Then, make us straight (dear Lord) with handling strait;
or, bring us to thy bent with other Art;
We know thine upright Compass has the slight
to bow us to the bending of thy Heart:
That we may shoot (and still may winners prove)
The Shafts of our Endeavors at thy Love.
The Sinner inueighes against his fleshes frailty, desiring God to strengthen
it with his power, and Grace.
VIle Flesh, why do thou so my Spirit impugn,
That still the Son of Righteousness I wrong
who di'd to make you live?
No Moment breathe I, but I breathe out Sin
That ends with shame, where Sorrow does begin,
which makes me glad to grieve.
In thee frail Flesh, I feel my blood to boil
With heat of such desires as make the Soil
but Sin, in grain, to bear.
My Spirits (that in that Blood do swim with pain,
Yet floate they, since false pleasures them sustain)
are near the wrack I fear.
I fear the Rock of refuge to the Just:
For, how, in Truth, should Treason put her trust?
Then, truthlesse Traitor, I
May justly fear, that Grace, in Justice, will
My graceless Soul, for Fleshes Treasons, spill,
which makes me (living) dye.
I living dye, not as one mortifide
To sin; wherein, as dead, alive, I bide;
The more my grief and blame:
I feign would dye to live; but, Flesh does draw
My Life to Death, since I observe the Law
of Sin, which is my shame.
O thou, whom Jacob wrastled with a space,
Strengthen my Faith to wrestle with thy Grace,
that it may set me go
(Although it lame my Loins, and crack my Thighs,
Wherein strong Sin still domineering lies)
into thy Weal through Woe.
The Sinner recounting his manifold transgressions, and finding himself
thereby in danger of perdition, desires Grace, through a world of sorrows, to
avoid both Sin, and damnation.
MY Soul (still faint in doing well: and strong
in working ill) now, now thy self retire
From outward Cares: or else amidst their throng
pour out thy Sorrows to thy heavenly Sire.
Thy scattered thoughts (in Fancies lewd, as light)
gather together; and with all thy Powers,
(United) show thy sin and cursed plight;
since meek Confession grace, for sin procures.
Weighing my deeds, I find too light they be;
yet, more then I can bear; nay, me they quell:
So, am far lighter, if thou balance me;
and yet my lightness weighes me down to Hell!
Shame shall not let me (though it boil my Blood)
t'vnfold the foul diseases of my Soul
To him, that can and will (so) do me good;
and, make her Angell-faire, though ougly-foule.
My Time then, to my shame I must confess,
(unto my Souls Physician, grace to win)
Has all in sin been spent; yet, ne'erthelesse,
too short I thought it for my shortest sin!
If I, at any time, did seeming-good
it was but corrupt, or counterfaite at least:
And, so, it was but well done in likelihood,
being but a sin well-coulored, at best.
My deeds with ill have (then) depraved bin,
or else of good deprived; so, both accursed:
And, if my best be naught but cloaked sin;
what are my worst, but worse than what is worst!
Not for committing odious sins in act,
but for omitting deeds of Charity;
(Which Justice, at her Judgment, will exact)
the Reprobate are damned; and, so, may I:
For, it is but half the duty of my whole
to do no ill; but, still, I good should do
With all the care and forces of my Soul;
else ill I may be doomed; and, damned too.
God gave me life, but for his Service; than
I must account how I each moment spend;
And, sinned I not; yet, since I am a Man
that does no good, it is damned in the end.
And, were my deeds united, and (withal)
cleared from pollution, and from all defect,
Yet are they naught to gifts mere corporal,
which I have had, and yet have, in effect.
So that too like an idle beast I am,
that still deuoureth more then he does earne;
And looks for food ere he deserves the same;
nor, does the giuers gifts, from Fates discern.
O! out upon me (most ungrateful beast
abusing Reason, as if I had it not)
What shall I say (dear Lord) I must, at least,
confess I have thy goodness most forgot.
O! with what Marble Eyes, or flintie Front
shall I the glory of thy presence brook,
Who art both Judge (of me to take account)
and Witness too, as witness will thy Book!
And yet (alas!) less power I have to shun
thy presence, then have heart the same to abide;
For, thou art all in All: then, can I run
from thee, when thou do compass all, beside!
Yet have I bin (but in Civility)
more loath to offend my meanest mortal Friend,
Then (in good Conscience) so great majesty
that fills All, and All does comprehend!
And have (I shame to say it) more shamed to sin
in sight of men, then in thy dread aspect:
My Soul is blind; so, saw thee not within:
and mortal Eyes, but mortal things respect.
And for the Graces which thou gave to me,
to glorify the Giver, I (vile wretch)
Have to my self the glory taken from thee:
so, with thy gifts, I do thee still impeach.
I have not loved thee for thy mercy; nor,
have feared thee for thy Justice: yea, thy might
(Though most almighty) I did most abhor
when it, in Justice, on me (wretch) did light.
Thou have to me revealed thy Will; but look
how often I have glost it with mine own,
(Were it within, or else without thy Book)
so often has thine, by mine, bin overthrown.
And if, I reckon right between thy Law
and mine observance; (though I fear thy Rod)
I must confess near David's fool I draw,
that said in Soul (at least) There is no God.
I have observed naught but what my sense,
(depraved sense) being Ill, did hold for good;
Which Ill (with all the Storms of foul Offense)
still wrought upon the Current of my Blood.
Mine Eyes, are sharp, as eager, still to pry
into men's worst parts rather than their best;
And wrench that little much, that is awry;
and, what is most right, to make it less, at least.
Apt to detract from others; and exact
praise to my self from others: this is it
That makes me envy every witty Tract,
unless it be composed by my Wit.
As apt (most apt) to give, as take offense;
hard to be pleased, displeased too easily:
As prompt to Choler, as to violence,
but, fearing death; yet (desperate) pressed to dye!
In reasoning rash; and yet soon (rudely) round
to compass Faith to falsehood (soon) thereby:
And where Truth stands, to throw her on her ground
in beastly rage, until she seem to lie.
False in Humility, and true in pride;
in jesting, rough; and rash in censuring:
To govern, I have made my Heart too wide;
to obey too strait, through griefs strait governing.
More then the Mount Vesuuius have I burned
in vain Ambitions euer-raging flame;
And, all good gifts and graces have I turned
to Fuel; burning in desire of fame.
Thou gave me gifts where of the praise I sought;
so, robbed thee ( Lord) of glory, and (with speed)
I wages seek, for that which thou have wrought:
for, for thy Works in me, I look for meede.
More proud than Lucifer (the Fount of Pride)
for, he, being glorious mac'e, might soon o'erweene;
But I, being bred of but Slime-putrifide,
usurped thy praise; so, much more proud have been.
Wherein, if thou have crossed me, I have stormed
worse than that Hell-hound: for, he fell to Hell;
Then easily might fume, being so enorm'd;
but I on Earth, at ease, against thee swell.
The lightest pleasures make me (lighter) doat:
but, easiest pains do press me down to death:
If Fates but smile, in pleasures Seas I floate;
and if but frown, it even expires my breath.
I foulest Vices, under virtuous Names,
do patronize: as, extreme Cruelty,
For upright Justice; Love of lightest Dames,
for perfect Zeal; Selfe-^oue, for Charity:
Craft, for true Wisdom; Pride, for Cleanliness;
Baseness, for Meekness; Doubt, for Holy Fear;
Mere Cowardice, for discreet Wariness;
R^shn^sse, for Manhood; Couetize, for Care.
And so of others (in none other sort)
I vaunt their vice, with virtuous terms inuolu'd;
And have an eye but only to Report
while I, but right to seem, am wrong resolved.
All good Instructions fall into my Soul,
as Aprill-showres into the Sea do fall;
Whose swelling surges do their drops control;
and ever turn their sweetness into Gall.
When I have been reprou'd for ought unright,
I would deny, excuse, or it defend:
Or else reproach my just reprouers straight;
and so, without offense, would feign offend.
If I have vowed devotion; and (withal)
have taskt my self with holy Exercise;
I soon infringed it (were it never so small)
so, loathed I Manna, Leekes to gurmandize.
And look how one that takes fire in hand,
but out of hand straight thowes it; cannot hold
The heat thereof; so, I do understand
but small effect of Prayer made so cold.
As Cates vnchewed, have they past from me
without concoction, not without annoy;
For, when I think they went away so free,
my Soul is sick with grief, and grieved with joy.
Thus lose I still my time in going on,
and coming off from every good attempt:
So, purpose without prosecution,
leaves my best actions (idle) in contempt.
With but beginnings have I worn my days;
and often have failed, but in the mere assay:
Yet, for but failing, have I looked for praise;
(o shame!) since I good motions did obey.
I (likewise) have been light in my Dsiere;
now this, now that, and then the other face
( Sparks of thy beauty) set my Heart on fire
with Beauties grace to sin, for want of grace.
So, could not walk abroad, but that (anon)
my wandering sight would give thy sight offense;
For, every sparkling Eye mine lighted on,
through mine, straight kindled my Concupiscence.
For, this (too often) I have abused the Muse
thou gave me, but to woo thee, for thy Love;
But I (lewd Lover) did her Measures use
to mete frail motions, strongly, so, to move.
Thus Beauty (that should make me love thee more)
I made the wrest, to rend my love from thee:
So, both with mine, and others gifts, did gore
the Giuers heart, erst split for love of me.
And if I made (as seldom so I did)
a Cou'nant with mine Eye that it should gaze
No more on Beauty; yet (the more forbid)
the more, thereby, it glanced on Beauties Blaze.
Alas! how brutish have I bin the while,
that (like a Beast) have swayed been by sense;
And made my Reason obey Affections vile,
repugnant to mine own Intelligence!
O life (dead life, deprived of life of grace)
how stirr'st thou so, without that vital power?
Thou art too proud, and yet too beastly base:
at highest height but like a fading Flower.
O Lord of life, a death it is to me
to mind my life so drowned in deadly sin!
Which though it Be, and move, and live in Thee;
yet (as without thee) it has curs^d bin:
For, I have made no scruple to offend;
but with such boldness have I sinned as it
Had been a mean but to a blessed end;
so, seemed to sin with Will, enforced by Wit!
Nay, should I bring my best deeds to thy Test,
they will prove but dross of m^e^e Hy^ocrisie;
Or Vice in Virtues habit, at the best,
which is too bad for bas^st Piety.
With Jacobs voice, and Esaus hands I held
my Soul to sin, and good opinion too:
The wicked (so) the World, at will, do weild;
which feign I would, but that I cannot do.
The World's t'vnweildy for my feeble gripe;
it still falls from me since I cannot hold;
And, at each fall, thou give me (Lord) a stripe,
since, though I cannot weild it yet I would.
Yea, would much rather then my wild affects,
or ought that holy men do take in hand:
For, my best doings, my just doubt suspects,
since they in doubt of doing ill do stand.
How tedious Time has seemed when I have praid!
how wearisome the practice! tired how soon!
How much distracted! and how well apaid
when it was done, though done ere well begun!
So was I like but one of Pilates Slaves,
that croucht to thee (o Christ) but to offend:
So my best actions are but holy braues,
that have more show then strength to foil the Feend.
Have I done good to any? if I have,
it was but of debt; and though it were but lent,
I prizde it more, and bragd of what I gave;
so, all my good was done with ill intent.
Have I discoursed of things that heavenly were?
In curious Questions (lightly it was done:
As where Heaven stands? and Hell (it local) where?
not how to come to Heaven, and Hell to shun.
I have been prompt to learn, what Wisdom would
abhor to teach; and I have Ears and Eyes
To hear and see, but what she scorns t'vnfold;
for, I attend to nothing that is wise,
What shall I say (that have so much to say;
for, endlesle plaint holds endless Sin in chase)
My first, was filth; my progress, Sin; my stay,
is double death, without Gods treble grace.
O Sin (the Souls death; and, of Death, the life)
I would not shun thee, when (at first) I might;
And now I cannot without endless strife;
then, help me Grace, with strong sin still to fight.
My Soul is tired with vanity and Sin;
I loath to live; and yet I fear to dye:
Then (wretch) what should I do but now begin
to dye to live, since liuing-death is nigh!
But, ah (alas) could I weep endlesly,
it were but meet mine endless sins to clear:
But though I should lament them ceaselesly
in longest mortal life, too short it were.
Yet, will I not despair; no, God forbid:
seau'n times a day, the iustest men do fall:
And though, from men, the fall and bruise be hid,
yet, thou do see them both, who see All.
At all hours no man's wise: for, sober Noah,
may be oe'er-come with Wine: stout Abraham too
Through terror lie: Meek Moses may destroy
the Egyptian in his ire; and, so, misdo.
Religious Joseph, irreligiously
swear by the life of Pharaoh (faith to bind)
Gods Darling David, hide Adultery
with murder of his Servant, true as kind.
Wise Solomon, the veriest Fool became,
when Pharos Daughter, and his Pagan- wives,
(Through gross Idolatry) made him defame
Gods truth: so Blots, the clear'st have in their lives.
Saints, so are called; as every thing is named
of whatsoever therein most worthy is:
As Golden-mines are styled so, though framed
more full of Dross then Golden- rarities.
And so the best men, though inherent Vice
may ouer-weigh their Virtue; yet, we see,
They Are called virtuous by their Virtues price,
that does out-price the Vice, though more it be.
Then give me courage (Lord) t'aduance my Hope
to thy great mercy (that does equal thee)
And let All, couerd with the Heavenly Cope,
for thy dear Love, be but as Doung to me.
Vain pleasures pack, Preferments-vaine, auaunt,
that would but make me quite forget to dye;
My Soul, ye Sirens, do no more enchaunt:
for, if you do, I Will break your strongest Tie.
And all my joy shall now but be in grief*
grief for the Joy which I conceived in sin:
So, naught but dying shall be my relief:
for, life well lost, immortal life does win.
Lord, give me strength to offer violence
to wicked Custom, till I break it quite:
And, still to strive with Nature, Sin and Sense,
until they strive no more in Peace nor fight.
And, for my Sins, come all annoy^s on me
in royall-armies till you blow me up.
Above the ^unne; and all dispights that be
fall fre^ly on me from my Saviors Cup.
Scorn me, proud World, still look on me ascance;
deride me, Devil, plague me, do thy worst:
Nay (Lord) from me conceal thy Countenance;
so thou, in fine, wilt bless me so accursed.
And, for I have despised thee ( Lord of All)
let all that Is, despise me till I dye;
Nay, let disgrace, with death, upon me fall;
so I may rise to grace, and life thereby.
O thou, my cursed Nature, swollen with Pride,
swell not against contempt (though never so vile)
Take all and more, if more can be beside
contempt of all; and, joy therein the while.
For, being nothing, of my self, but Sin;
or else (besides that But) I Nothing am;
How can or sin, or Nothing, Glory win
but through a World of woe, contempt, and shame?
Skill, will, and power then give me (Lord) to break
this headstrong Jade, my Flesh; and, make it glad
To bear a World of woe; to make it meek;
and, but for falling under it, be sad.
I am thy Work^, then, work thy Will in me;
And, make my Carriage (Lord) from falling ^ree.
That the virtuous have the Promises of this life, as well as of that to come.
THy Friends (dear Lord) are too much honored;
thy Persecutor to thee reconciled,
Had Sacrifices to him tendered:
so much the World is forced to adore thy Child!
The People freely their possessions sell,
to lay the Price at thine Ap^stles feet:
To whom the worst of Ils do fall out well;
and Gall it self, to them made Sugar-sweet!
Then, what but Gall it self will Honey seek
besides the Honey of thy sweetest Love?
For, who are more exalted then the meek,
since Heaven and Earth of them do most approve?
Then, if thou make me meek, thou make me more,
Then Heaven and Earth: for, both will me adore.
For perfect Union with God, and Grace to shun all Lets that may hinder it.
WHen I (sweet Savior) mind the Orison
thou made thy Maundy-night (with strong effect
When as thou praid'st for perfect union
between thy Father, thee, and thine elect.
I am thereby encouraged to pray,
that in that Union (though too base I be)
I may b'included, if so be I may
(being so vile) so inward be with thee.
Which can be hardly (if at all it can)
without my Soul forsake the Flesh and Fiend
And all besides thee, be it Angel, Man,
or what soever, for Thee her only END!
But, this she cannot do without thy Grace,
thy grace preventing, and assisting both:
Then grace her so that she may thee embrace;
and in respect of thee, all others loathe.
By that dear unexampled Love that made
thee hang all naked on the Cross, vouchsafe
That I may live with thee, as naught I had
besides: though I the World besides, should have.
And if it may be (Lord) o let me live
without the least Sin: for, the least that is
Does let our Union, and does ever strive
to sever me for ever from thy Bliss.
Then, grant that I my body so may keep
from all transgr^ssing, that I may not move
One Joint t'vnioyne us; but my Soul to sweep
from all Pollution, that does let thy Love.
That, from offending, it may be as clear,
as it was made by thee (in Thee to rest)
And though she cannot be so perfect here,
yet make Her still desire the same, at least.
Yea, make me will no Joy (for that is none)
that is not in thee: and, the Bread I eat,
Let it no more delight me than a Stone,
but only, but to serve Thee, take my meat!
And, when my Palate proves some Food too sweet,
then let me think how much more sweet thou art,
That made it such; so, make me make it meet
to make me taste thy Sweetness in my Heart.
So let me use all Creatures, pleasing Sense,
to send me to Thee, Cause of that Effect.
So, in them still, taste but thine Excellence;
and, by them still, the more the same affect.
Yea, let no Sweet (of whatsoever kind,
that is but created) once my Soul allure
From thee (sweet Lord) or from continual mind
of thy dear Sweetness, that all Sweetes procures.
But, Love and Meekness are the only two
to m^ke us one (^eare Sweet) that diverse be:
Then let highest Love, and lowest Meekness too
make one of tw^; that is, one of thee and me.
And, meek to make me, let me ever mind,
I am naught, have naught, know naught, naught can do,
And naught desire; nor se^ke but Grace to find
to love thee highly and be lowly too.
Then make me rich in Soul and poor in spirit;
rich in good deeds, and yet most poor in thought:
When I do best, to ween I worst do mer^^;
and, when most good, to think I am most naught.
So, by the By-path (that but Fools do find)
of true Simplicity, that is just, and free,
To run to Thee, and leave the World behind
to think me mad, for running so to Thee.
But let me so be still besides my self,
and still besides the Way the World does roame,
Though it with Flowers be strowde, and pau'd (...),
yet set me fly it in my hying home.
The Heau'n-rapt Saint was so himself beside:
for, he all eartly Dainties held as Doung;
And while, as mad, the most did him deride,
he went to Thee a narrow way and long.
Nay, thou thy self (dear Lord that all do school)
because thou did elect this Way to go
And that reject, attired wast like a Fool,
and so esteemed: then let me fool it so.
But hide my life in thee; so, shall I live
a light to all that walk in wayward mood;
For, them thou hid'st that good example give
from every Ill; then let me give this good.
But when I give it, let me think I give
the good thou gave: for, all good gifts are thine:
So shall I rightly think, while ^o I live;
and all the praise thereof to thee resign;
So let me do and think; so shall I gain
True Unity with thee, in Joy and Pain!
The Sinner in great sorrow for Sin, relyeth on God for grace and comfort.
ON thy help (Lord) I rely,
then, poor I
Perish must, if thou restrain it:
O then stretch thy helping-hand,
or command.
That I may with speed obtain it;
For, as one forgotten quite,
out of sight,
I (forlorn) in sorrow languish.
Help, o help me then with speed:
for, I feed
(As on Bread) on naught but Anguish!
If I sin, I sigh therefore,
and deplore
That I have in ought offended;
Yea, my Soul does waste with woe,
since I know
Sin does mar what Th^^s have mended.
Feign I would, then, cease to sin,
and begin
Now to live as thou have willed:
But, if by Thee (that did fire
that desire)
It be not, of me, fulfilled;
I, at best, but well shall will.
doing ill,
Then I shall for it be vexed:
So shall I but sin and grieve
while I live;
And in Conscience be perplexed.
It is tedious to my Sp'rit
day and night,
Thus to sin, then pine in passion:
For, being staid, yet still to fall,
is no small
Sign of death or reprobation.
Help, then help me (Lord) lest I
doubtful dye:
Make my sorrows pass my sinning;
That I may so cease to sin,
so to win
Better end then my beginning:
For, in sin, conceived I was,
so (alas)
Sinful am, since so conceived:
Then, of force, since I am such,
do not grutch
I should be to Grace received.
With more grief my Sin I wound,
than I found
Pleasure in the sin committing.
O then let my sorrows still
sinning kill,
While thy Graces us be knitting.
Blessed God then make me grieve
while I live,
For my grieuing thee so blessed:
Let my Tears still quench the fire
of thine Ire,
Till I be of Grace possessed.
So shall I (to shun thy wrath)
tread the Path
Of thy Biddings, till my dying;
Or, on wings of Loves desire
still aspire
To thee; then, o take me flying.
The Sinner acknowledging repugnant desires in himself; desires to be enabled
to perform his good desires.
I Would be thine, and I would have thee mine
(dear Lord) and yet I cross mine own desires:
For still I sin; then, cannot I be thine;
yet feign I would with thee be still entire.
Then, I desire what my desires resist:
o strange repugnance! would I thee enjoy,
And yet in that, which seuers us, persist?
then, my desires do my desires destroy.
True (Lord) how ever false this seems to be;
it false but seems; but, it is too true herein:
For, my poor Soul would nothing more then thee,
and yet my Soul does nothing more then sin.
Lord help me in this strange extremity
of cross desires, which in my Soul are found;
My Will is bound to Sin, but would be free;
then, if it would, how should my Will be bound?
Were it my Flesh alone, desired to sin
(my Soul resisting) it were not so amiss:
Such cross- desires in thy best Saints have bin;
but in my Soul my Sin conceived is.
And yet she is barraine, gauly, and impure;
of emptiness not empty; and thereby
A soulelesse Soul; so, lifelesse does endure;
yet lives in Death, because she cannot dye.
Then empt mine empty Soul; for, Sin does fill
with naught but vacuum her capatious thought:
For, Sin is nothing, since thou made not Ill,
without whom naught was made; then, empt this naught.
For, it is that Law (though naught) that still rebels
against both grace and natures Government;
This lawless Law my members still compels
to bow as Sins unrighteous Rule is bent.
Lord, I believe; yet, help mine unbelief;
and well do will; yet, better my desire:
Cure thou the Wound my Will received (in chief)
through Adams Fall; and make our Wills entire.
Give me both Will and Power to do thy Will;
and let me neither have to cross the same:
For, when I see my Will would thine fulfill
yet does it not, I pine with grief and shame.
I cannot will aright (but right resist)
without thy grace prevent my crooked will:
And, willing well, without thy grace assist,
I cannot (for my blood) my will fulfill.
So, thy preventing, and assisting grace
makes my Will work: for, of my self, I am
So frail, by nature, and so beastly base,
that my best thoghts are more then much too blame.
Then let thy Grace my wayward Will prevent;
and help me to perform it, so prevented:
Yea, make my thoughts and deeds most innocent;
else, let me joy in naught but them lamented:
Nay, make my Heart (dear Lord) so apt to wail
That it may weep, when I to weep do fail.
The Sinner desires, not to be as he is; but, as he ought to be.
TO be all naught, is naught at all to be;
and to be sinful still, is to be naught:
Yet Sinners ARE (though dead in sin) we see;
as Men ARE, though they are not as thy ought.
Deliver me (dear Lord) from being such;
(such being take from me that sinful is:)
For, better nothing be, then be so much;
because so much is more then most amiss!
Then let me be, not as I am; but what
I ought to Be; or take me as I am:
Take me to Thee, and then I will be that
I ought to be: thine own in Deed and Name:
For, then I am, when I am wholly thine;
But, I am not, while I am Sins or Mine.
In respect of the brevity and uncertainty of mortal life; the Sinner
desires grace, in time, to prepare for Death.
MY stupid Soul, now recollect thy powers,
and weigh in Judgments Scales thy present state;
Thou, in thy Iaile, my Flesh, but some few hours
have now to stay, by nature, near her date.
My Pilgrimage is almost past; o then
it thee behooues to look with steadfast eyes
Toward thy Country ( Home of Happy-men)
least, ere thou look, in straying paths thou dye.
Now faints my force, my sense impaires, my flesh
like withered fruit now falls with each breath:
Some Birds o'er-aged do their youth refresh;
but Man grown Tw^-childe is at door of death,
The Young Man may dye quickly; but the Old
can not live long: misse-haps may wrack the one;
But naught, in Art or Nature, long can hold
the other here; for, they are almost gone.
Then if green years should sometimes mind the grave,
the Gray must still, that there are with a breath;
For, Age to Death is but the Gally-slaue,
that on a moments flux, whafts life to death.
To serve the World (although I able were)
small cause have I to will it; since it is
The ground which naught but ranckest Ils does bear
and where men most esteemed, are most amiss.
I long have cultured this but flinty-field,
which yields but Crops of Cares, Woes, wrongs, and spite;
Yielding the more annoy the more they yield;
whose very Joys are Tares that pine the Spright!
Then, it is time to change (by heavenly Art)
the thriftlesse course of so course Husbandry;
And with Remorse to furrow up my Heart,
melting the Clods with tears, that are too dry.
And so to sow Loves seeds that fair increase,
to fat the Soul in virtue, till she melt
In flames of Charity (till Faith does cease)
to give more taste of heavenly pleasures selt.
And since my Spring is spent, my Summer past,
and to the Fall of leaf my Time arriues:
Nay, since his frost Time on my Head has cast,
I must prepare for cold that life depriues.
My negligence has made sins Earth (my Heart)
to yield but poisonous Weeds of thoughts impure;
Which do but bane my Soul, and get the start
of Virtue, in their growth, by Customs power.
Mean while, my flesh (with heat of youth, and blood)
has shrunk from cherishing their root: yet, lo,
The Marrow of my Bones does yield them food;
so, though I shrink, they, through that compost, grow.
And, as one tossed at Sea with Storms and fears
makes little way, though much he be turmoild;
So, he in vice, that past has many years,
has had long time, but life as short, as soild.
For, Life is measured by the good we do,
not days we spend; since some, by many days,
Get many Deaths; as some have come unto
Eternal Life by short Life, spent with praise.
What is a Soulelesse Body, but a Clod?
and what is the Soul without her cause and life,
But quick to Sin, and dead to Grace and God;
Hell to it self, selfe-Hell, or Hell of strife?
He is the Way, besides which all are wide;
the Truth, against which all in error dwell:
The Life, without which, all in death abide:
in whom to be, is only to be well.
O then (dear Lord) let me begin to live
now, in my dying, though hard, late it be;
Yet better late then never, to revive
me, dead in sin, by mortifying me.
It Is hard (I grant) that after life's near spent
in mortal Sin, immortal life t'expect:
Yet Lord (how ever late) let me repent
while Air I breathe, and do it not reject.
Yet Love must cause remorse and hate of Sin;
for, true contrition (which true life dorh give)
Is caused by Love, since we so bad have been
t'a God so good; that di'd to make us live.
Then love (my Soul) for no ends but thine END;
By-purposes are purposelesse: for, ONE
That knows all Hearts, Remorse does but offend
that is not for his Love conceived alone.
Then, to be truly contrite, hard it is;
since it respects but Love, that Grace allures:
Whereof, in but a scruple, if we miss;
it is but Attrition, which less Grace procures.
O Death! how sour is thy rememberance
to him whose Soul is swollen with sweetest Sin,
And has thereof a feeling? I (perchance)
have so in show; but more (much more) within!
My Lifes-bud blasted was with heat of blood;
the Flower then needs must fade and Fruit decay:
Nay, leaves and Branch have perished with the Bud;
and now the Truncke is turning into Clay.
Lord, how shall I thus soild with Sin, for shame
appear before thy Glory? I (alas)
Am but Confusion, ever out of frame;
and was at best ere fully framed I was.
The least of all my Sins will be (at least)
a most severe Accuser: but, the whole
(Equal to that which thou do most detest)
(with but a thought) confounds my thoughtfull Soul.
O Christ, thy Wounds, renewed by my Sin,
still bleed to my Confusion: for, I faint
At that which others still are strengthened in:
so, thy all-sauing blood does me but taint.
Sweet Christ, yet be my Jesus, (though I be
thus quite o'er-whelm'd, with sins co^founding flood)
And in thy blood, I shed, still rince thou me
until thine Ire be quenched in thy blood.
Yea, in thy Wounds (as Jonas in the Whale)
save me from drowning in thy doomes-profound:
Let Mercies Beams my filth of sin exhale;
and it dispieese, that it no more be found:
So shall I, cast on Safeties Shore by thee,
Still praise thy Grace for so securing me.
The careful Soul because of the momentany condition of transitory life,
desires to wash away the filth of sin with the tears of continual penitencie.
Since on this moment of frail Life depends
the eternal weal or woe of humane Breed,
And that no means can long defer their ends,
let Tears still feed me ( Lord) till Worms I feed.
For, Tears for Sin, does Sin, through grace, destroy;
(so kill their Cause) whereon who feeds shall live,
Where they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy;
then let my Tears me (dead in Sin) revive.
They were they food (o Christ) that could not sin;
and yet, for others sin, still weptst; then I
That live a life that is quite overwhelmed therein,
had need to weep till (drowned in tears) I dye.
Happy that Soul that on a Sea of Tears
sails (in Faiths Ship, by Hopes securest Cape)
Unto the Port of Peace; and with her bears
Good-workes that make the Worker wrack escape.
This World's but Sorrows Sea, whereon mankind
is tossed with Storms of Troubles, that arise
By Envy, Malice, or Fa^es wayward wind,
whiles Life to Death, more swift then Swallow flies.
If, in the way, a Calm the Course prolongs,
it holds us but to grief, resembling Joy;
While Pleasure, with her charming Syren-Songs,
o'erwhelme us (in the end) in deep'st annoy.
Twixt Silla and Charibd^s ( Joy and Griefs)
frail life still floates; and wrackes in Either often;
(Which equally to Death betrayeth Life)
but low estate less sinckes then that aloft.
Why should we then prize worldly things so much
which have no good, but as they us respect;
And lightly weigh those Treasures without which
we have no Goodness, but are mere Defect?
Honor and Power, Health, Beauty, Strength, and Wit
are but as Smoke, that comes from troubled fire:
The more it grows, the less continues it;
and, comes to naught when ^t does highest aspire!
To be in Princes grace (which all desires)
procures but Pride, which blindes our Judgments sight,
While like a siled Dove, we (Lord) aspire,
till sovereign heat, at height, does sink us quite.
Then it is in vain, to trust in Princes grace,
which pleasure or their profit may procure;
And when these fail, they straight auert their Face;
but Lord, thy Grace is ever free as sure.
Then let me wholly on thy Grace depend;
yet so, as still I work it to increase;
So, it with me shall work too, to the end;
and, at the end, with me, shall rest in Peace:
To which (dear Lord) vouehsafe thy Grace may go
With my toiled Soul, that cannot rest but so:
A short Meditation of the brevity of life; with an Incitation to make good
use of the present time.
WOldst thou be spurred to run the way of truth?
then, see how time does run with thee away:
Youth comes on Childhood; Manhood comes on Youth:
on Manhood, Ages; and Age at Death does stay:
So, Time ascends and descends with such haste
upon the Scale of Lifes-gradation,
That lived we but to mend our misses past,
yet death would cease our work ere half were done.
Time-past, is gone; in it we cannot mend;
Time-future, is uncertain; then, therein
We are unsure our ill bents to unbend;
the Present-time is ours, to cease to sin:
Yet that Time cease while we think thereon;
Then, if we mend not now, now, Time is gone.
A short meditation of Man's Misery.
WHat was I, am I, or what shall I be?
I was naught, am naught; and, for ought I do,
Shall be far worse then naught! o wretched me!
why? was I borne for naught; and worser too?
This makes me to deplore my Day of Birth;
(since I was borne to so hard exigent)
As all men do, that do enjoy the Earth;
yet, so enjoy it, as they are never content.
We hold that Infant but a Prodigy
that in his Birth does not the World salute
With note of Present-future misery:
for, that is his Birthright clear and absolute.
In Sin Original was I conceived;
in actual Sin I live; and I may taste
Eternal pain for that I first received;
with that I live in now; and that is past.
I, in the Womb was loathsome; in the World,
a Sack of all Corruption; in the Grave,
A Prey of Vermin; and may thence be hurled
to Hell: if what Sin spoils, Grace do not save.
When I was nothing, then was I without
Hope to be saved, or Fear condemned to be:
Now, of the first I hope; but, more do doubt:
and, of the last stand still in ieopardie.
I was such, as I could not then be damned;
but, now am such, as hardly can be saved:
For at the first I was in cleanness framed;
but now by me its more then most deprau'd.
Erect (dear Lord) my pristrine Purity;
correct my present Vices; and direct
My future steps: direct them Sin to fly,
and, to attain the Grace of thine Elect:
So shall I praise thy Name (with them) and say:
Blessed be HIM that so inspired my Clay.
That our Salvation comes from God.
LOrd, thou have said, thou made not death; the^ let
that which thou made not, never signiorize
Over me that thou have made: but Watches set
to keep death from me, when from Death I rise.
If thou be sorry for my Death; then who
shall let thy Joy in giving life to me,
If thou will, thou can save me: I not so;
I can but dye, unless I live by Thee:
For, I can will, but can perform no good;
nor yet will good, without my Will thou move*
In thy good will then, lies my liuelihood;
and yet thou bidst me labor for thy Love!
But, Lord, I cannot, if thou help me not;
that is make me willing, and work with me too:
Nor can I move a Man, but I must blot
without thee; so, my Pow'r's but to undo.
For, I would, sometimes, that I can; but then
I know not what I can or would; unless
Thou make me see (beyond my Natures ken)
what I should do, and it, in deed, express.
And if I should have, with my Power and Will,
Knowledge to guide me; yet, if that be mine,
(Without thy Wisdom) It will wander still;
for, all that tread true Steps, must tread in thine:
Then (o dear Lord) do all for me; yet so,
As I may rest with thee, and with thee go.
A serious Meditation of the last Judgment: worthy to be often minded, and
repeated.
DRead Lord, by whom all Souls are sentenced,
when I bethink me of that dreadful Day,
Wherein thou come to judge the Quick and Dead,
I faint, as falling quite, with Fear, away.
When all this All shall be reuerst, and made
a Chaos suncke in all-deuouring Flames:
For, Vengeance shall the Universe invade;
and, change her Fabrickes though they keep their Names.
A chill-cold Blood (still flowing from Dismay)
fleets through my veins, when through my brains does glide
But even the naked thought of that black Day,
wherein all Flesh shall be most strictly tried.
When Christ upon a Throne of Suns and Stars,
reflecting Beams against each other so,
As Glory with her self shall seem at Wars,
shall doom all Flesh to endless weal or woe.
For, he shall shake the Sanctuaries of Heaven;
and, with the Shocke, appear with flames of fire,
And Millions of his Angels, to make even
with good and bad; in favor, or in ire.
Aray'd with all Eye-blinding Majesty,
infernal Angels (his dread Throne beneath)
Waiting, with ougly Forms, and hedious Cry,
to execute his Doom of second Death.
Where Hell still gapeth (greedy) to receive
condemned Caitifes into quenchlesse fire,
Without light flaming, only but to grieve;
and grieve, but to torment, not life expire.
All on a flood of Fire shall (sinking) floate
to cleanse them from corruption: n'erthelesse
The most corrupt, though scowr'd, without the Boat
of Divine safety, sincke in deep'st distress.
As high as Water in the Flood did rise,
so high, nay, higher shall this Fire ascend:
For, it shall scowre the Planets and the Skies;
for, new must Heaven and Earth be, in the end.
Rivers, shall pa^tch; Founts, fail; and Mountains fade;
not that their proper substances shall cease;
But all the Universe shall then be made
most pure, to last, eternally, in peace.
The Sea, shall boil, and all her scaly Host
therein shall seath; and floate upon her froth;
The Earth unto this Sodde, shall be the Roast;
and Sky and Air shall baste, and burn them both.
Then shall the Heavens bright Studs, the golden Stars,
drop from their Spheres; and shower down thick as Hail
With flames inuolu'd, like fiery Meteors;
for, then shall fire against Heaven and Earth prevail.
The Sun and Moon to Blood (o wonder) grown
boiling and broiling twixt sulphurious Wings,
Shal'through the glowing air come whizzing down
like to a fire-wing'd Ball that, flying, sings.
The names of Heaven and Earth shall yet abide
after their Conflagration; but, they shall
Be changed in Qualities, and purifide;
for, both shall be much more Celestial.
For, lo, the Judge shall come with flames of fire
in Chariots like a Whirlewinde, and shall burn
On every side, till all things do retire
into themselves, and cleanse them in the turn!
Our Sins have so the Elements defiled
that they with Fire must needs refined be:
Nay, more; our sins the Heavens themselves have soild;
then melt they must, from soil to set them free.
Sin all things subject made to vanity;
then must they be dissolved, since in that vein
They vnrefin'd (that is, most vnpure) do lie,
that so they may their first pure plight obtain.
For, if the Heavens, sin soiled, must not stand,
much less must Man, whom filth does ouer-flow;
Both must be purged before the Judgment; and
immortal made, to come to Judgment so.
The Subjects of the Highest are Saints (at least)
if so: then Men vnsanctifide are none:
Then must a Man, in show; in deed, a Beast,
be made a perfect Man, ere he be one.
The Citizens of Heaven are (like the Place)
as pure as precious: for, what enters here
Must be as full of Glory, as of Grace,
else down it must, with shame, another where.
Then, in this life, how ought we mind our ends,
since on this life (that is counted but a spanne,)
Eternity of weal or we depends,
which ends the Race that formerly we ran.
One Age does go, another comes; and both
Time of their time, at unawares depriues;
Man's but a Shade, a Vapor, or a Moth,
that straight consumes the Time wherein he lives.
Too like a Torch, whose light and lasting both
answers his Substance; and the long'st can last,
But while the last drop of his moisture does
the least spark of his glory ouercast.
Flesh is but dust, made dirt, with blood transfused;
which with a fillop, or less force is spoiled:
And, in the Elements be'ing eft diffused,
lies there, like something, next to nothing, soiled.
The World (like Ice) is slippry, brittle, cold;
and, apt to melt, and quickly shift his Forms;
They stand still falling whom he does uphold;
and who goes careless, curelesse he enormes.
What ere it holds is past; and, that is past cure:
or Present; and, that momentarie is:
Or else it is to come; and, that is unsure:
then all it holds are naught but falacies.
Yet here (o grief) fond Man seeks sure repose;
even here where Nothing rests but in unrest:
Where most men stand by others overthrows;
and where the worst in life, in state are best.
Where Pleasure pain fore-runs; where life's the brook
that glides into Life's Sea, all-swallowing DEATH:
(Sweet Streams to bitter) where Hels mortal hook
lies hid to hold, or draw us underneath.
Like Herod's glory that is devoured of Worms;
(our constantest companions in the end)
Where all the smoothest Calmes prove roughest storms,
and all in all to wrack, unawares, do bend.
Where Princes Palaces (the pride of Cost)
are but rude Earth, which skill imperfect forms:
Their Gold but worst Earths Marrow, at the most;
and, all their daintiest Silks but doung of Worms.
Riches, but Runnawayes; Favors, but lies;
good words, mere wind, that lightly comes and goes:
Where Generation to Corruption hyes;
and all is but a dream of naught but shows.
Such as the end is, such must be the mean
that tends thereto; Corruption is our end:
Then, all that leads thereto, is most unclean:
so, in uncleanness rise we, and descend.
This makes the Heavens so often to drown in Tears
the Earth, defiled by our uncleanness; and
So drowned, as dead, she bears but dearest years,
or Ears that are as dear as is the Land.
So, with remorse, revenge to execute;
so, stroke and strike at once; to make us feel.
Our dissolution, since so dissolute,
in love and ire, that stays and makes to reele.
While our Life's Twine upon the heavenly Spheres
is reeled up strait; and Time (whose turns they cause)
Does all o'erturne: so, Water all appears,
which Time to cast down quickly, still vp-drawes.
Time steals away, as he would give the slip
to all that breathe; yet, in so stealing, he
Takes all things with him (like a fraughted Ship)
that he does hold, when he does (fearelesse) flee.
Upon the World he steals, and, with him brings
a world of years, wherewith the World does wear;
As Men can witness, and all earthly Things:
for, now they be but moates to what they were.
Those she produced when she was in her youth,
were Ceders to these shrubs: for, she was then
In her full vigor; and gave greater growth
to all she bare; for, Giants were her Men.
None otherwise then as a Wife in years,
bears none so goodly Children as in youth;
No more this World (now ouer-aged) bears
such as in youth she did, for Grace nor growth.
She Giants brought in youth; but now she ages
she bears but Pigmies, men that scarce appear;
Too little to be Pages to their Pages
that first she bare; which shows her end is near.
And so say all that strictly do observe
Divine and Humane Writings, and the State
Of all things past and present; which do serve
for signs and demonstrations of her date.
Within six days God made the Universe
a thousand years with whom is but a day:
Then it is thought such six days shall reuerse
his six days Work, that moves but, so, to stay.
But, for the Elect, the foot of this Account
shall be cut off; then, now the end appears:
For, all the passed years do near amount
to those six days, that make so many years.
The Worlds Parts are decaid (as does appear)
Etna, Parnassus and Olympus too
Are not so eminent as erst they were;
and all that is done, seems quite now to undo.
Now swells the Sea, where erst fair Cities stood;
so, where Men walked, now huge Sea Monsters swim:
And, where the Earth was covered with her Flood,
now Cities stand, vnneere the Oceans Brim.
Hills suncke, Floods dride, the Planets lose their force,
and Plants their virtue; yea, the total Frame
Of Nature's out of frame: the Sun in's course
is out of course, with age suncke in the same:
For, since the days of Ptolomey it is found
many degrees more nigh the Earth he stoupes:
So, like an aged Drunkard, runs round,
till flat he fall: for, more and more he droupes.
The Articke and the Antarticke Poles shall wrack
the Climes they cover: and the Host of Heaven
Shall join their Forces to break Natures Back;
and, all confuse to which was Order given.
The Astrologers will have it end, when all
the Stars possess their first place in their Spheres,
Which Platos year they style: the Hebrew Caball
will have it but endure six thousand years.
Whereto agree Elias Oracles
and many a sacred Saints, of times more late^
Which Seers saw them through the Spectacles
of Heau'n-holpe Ghesses, clear as most elate!
The World shall last (say they) two thousand years
without the Law: two thousand years within:
Two thousand under Grace: and then appears
the God of Grace, to clear the World of Sin.
Then thou that sleep'st (my drowsy Soul) awake;
pray, and be sober; watch, the end is near:
Sins fruit full ripe, the Kirnels never so black,
and Justice Sun begins even hot t'appeare.
That there shall be a Judgment general
the most believe; heavens Oracles affirm;
Divines auerre; the Sybils too; and all
the ancient Poets constantly confirm.
Then shall the Creatures showt, the Angels call,
the Trumpets sound, and all Men, dead, arise:
Then shall the God of JUSTICE sentence all;
yea, be they Powers or Principalities!
This Sentence shall be strict, and shall condemn
the Ill to Hell, where Pain, it self, exceedes.
(For, when it meanest is, it is most extreme)
and where the Worm that gnawes the Conscience breeds.
And all, for ever! Ever! that is it,
that makes All most intolerable: for,
It Sense confounds, with grief; distracts the Wit;
and which self- Patience cannot but abhor.
Which to the Atheist seems impossible,
that Bodies so infirm, so soon destroid,
Should ever brook such Pains immensible,
and not consume; yea, utterly made void.
Whereto if it be said, the Almighty will
at last, raise bodies from defect so clear
That (cleared so) they shall continue still;
and all Hels wasting woes, vnworne, shall bear!
Yea, Souls (though incorporeall) shall, the while,
of true material Fire be pained still;
How ere it makes our Humane Reason reele,
yet he can do it, that can do what he will.
For, they shall deem they in their Bodies be;
and feel all Torments comprehensible:
For, Souls then Bodies better f^ele and see
since by them only, Flesh is sensible.
As when we dream, without our Bodies we;
deem us within; since Sense us not forsakes:
Nay, without Ears and Eyes we hear and see,
more lively far, then when our Sense awakes:
So, do the damned suppose they in their Flesh*
do suffer; that but suffer in their Sp'rit,
Since Sense in them so li^ely is, and fresh,
in entertaining Dolor or Delight.
Which in the Fount of Truth does clear appear:
for, Dives had a Tongue that was enflamed
As he supposed; though but his Soul it were:
but Atheists will not know this till they are damned.
For, they except against Divinity,
Religion, Faith; and only do appeal
To Reason, Sense, and frail Humanity,
which ne'erthelesse this veiled Truth reveal.
For proof whereof; the Salamander lies
and lives in fire, which he desires to touch;
Yea, most is joy de when most therein he fries;
for, he is most cold, and cooles the fire as much.
The Adamant; yea, Gold it self, if pure,
endures all force of fire, and never does waste:
Shall Stones and Metals then, the Fire endure,
and shall man's flesh refinde, in Fire, not last?
A Peacockes flesh, though dead, corrupts never;
(try it who list) and shall it still remain,
And Man's flesh, made by Death to last for ever,
not last? it shall, though it still live in pain!
Lime in it self has fire; yet wears it not:
and when it is killed, it is quickened; then, shall we
Say Flesh revived must waste, if still too hot,
when Death, as from his death, from it does flee?
By Water that does cool all other Heates,
the Lime is fired; but pour some Oil thereon,
(Though Oil feeds fire) it neither burns, nor sweates,
but rests as cold as any other Stone!
If then the nature of quick- Lime be such
as Fire to hold, and yet not dye with it;
Why should not flesh immortal, do as much,
when it is enabled by Power infinite?
Some Salt in Sicily, cast in the fire,
straight melts to Water; and, in Water thrown,
Crackes like Fire: o! who can then aspire
to know the Cause, that yet was never known?
The Arcadian Asbest, being once enflamed,
will never be quenched: but, lasts an endless flame:
Then why not those that endlesly are damned,
being made immortal to endure the same?
And in Epyrus is a Fount, wherein
a Torch may lighted be, and quenched too:
If these things are, and more, more strange have bin,
why should we think but God can stranger do?
Before Man's fall, he could not dye; for, Death
came by his Fall: Then, cannot that high Power
That fashioned him of naught, and gave him Breath,
make him, re-made, eternally endure?
The Wonders which he works continually,
are not admired, since they familiar be:
For, Admiration's dulled by frequencie;
else should we wonder at what still we see.
The Face of mankind were not uniform,
men could not be from beasts discerned and shown:
And yet had All, in all respects, one Form
One from another hardly could be known.
Thus, Likeness with great Difference rests we see,
in one self Thing; which for such common are
We never admire them; but we muse when we
see but two Faces like: for, that is rare!
And at the Lodestone we do wonder less,
that nail by nail, does many nails uphold,
By touching but the first; yet since it is
so common, we admire not; as we should.
I might be endless in recounting such
most strange Effects, whereof no Cause is known:
Then were it madness not to grant as much
Power to the Almighty and to Natures Crown.
No: he has said It, by whose only WORD
all is that is: and All has made of naught:
Whose Power is Infinite; which can accord
Repugnancies themselves, but with a Thought!
For, there is nothing that does argue Power,
but he can do it: what he cannot do
Is frail, inglorious, base, and most impure;
else can he do it, and undo it too!
If Gods Prerogative were crushed so close
that he no more then Man had power to effect;
How were he God? nay, God himself he shows
in that his Works far pass our Intellect!
Then, let us believe, Omnipotence can speak
no Word it cannot do; how ever to us
It seems impossible: for, we are weak,
and weakly judge of hard things to discuss.
But, let us rest on that ne'er-failing WORD,
nay, so put up our Rest that even our Souls
Yea, all our All may thereby be assured,
in so fair Hazard that no Chance controules.
For, should we rest but on those restless Stays
that Reason (betrayed by sense) erects, we shall
But rest on that is betrayed, and betrays:
so, in right sense and Reason, needs must fall.
But say there were no rising after Death:
by virtuous life, what do or can we lose,
But spend our Time in gaining longer breath:
for, Virtue (Life's foes) Passions does repose?
And if there were no Hell to punish sin,
yet we, in Reason, should not sin; since it
Is so obsceane; and thereby naught we win
but selfe-condemning of our Will and Wit.
But we that do believe we eft shall rise,
have great advantage of the rest: for we
Have what they have (though fewer vanities)
and, by our faith, in case far better be.
For, if there be another Life than this,
wherein all weal or woe we must sustain;
Then, by Good works, and Faith, we shall have bliss:
but faithless men all labor for their pain.
For, impious Atheists take more pains for Hell,
tiring themselves with joys that vex their Spirits,
Then pious men, still praying in their Cell,
do take for Heaven; for, That the Sp'rit delights.
Dear Lord, then so dispose my Wit and Will
that I may rest upon thy Word, which makes
Me blessed; and work, in rest, thereafter still
with more delight then Sense in pleasure takes.
In sacred Raptures take my Soul to thee;
and, her embrace with kiss of endless Peace:
That being so familiar still with me,
I, at thy Doom, may hopeful be through these.
That though the horror of that day be such
as may all Sense confound with fear, past fear;
Yet may I hope (though yet I fear too much)
thou will not damn him who^ thou heldst so dear.
Mean while, so bind my Sense with virtues bands,
that it may never move, but as she shall
Loose or restrain it; or, thy sacred Hands;
all whose restraints are free from pain, or fall!
And let that Trump (as with a Saint it did)
still in the Organ of my hearing sound
That shall to Judgment call both quick and dead;
that so Ieuer may be ready found.
For, yet I do but doat on false Delights,
Delights? alas! that style they ill sustain,
Though false be added: for, they vex the Spirits
of all that taste them: so they are but pain.
Vncharme the Charms then, of these grievous joys,
that still allure my sense of them to taste;
And let my pleasure be in all annoyes,
for, thy dear Love, until I breath my last.
For, were I here to live as many a year,
as years have moments in extreme annoy;
Yet it unworthy of Heavens glory were,
since it is infinite in time, and joy.
But now, by Nature (though it should extend
my life beyond my life) I cannot last,
Longer then one that is making now his end:
for, my best part of life, long since, is past.
My best (said I) o sname! if so it were,
I should despair; or, if I did not so,
I should be frantic with distracting fear,
that my best time in madness did bestow.
But Thou that of the worst can make the best,
make this my worst time best; my later Age
Make better then my first: for, I detest
to think on That so fond, so full of rage.
Let me relapse no more, in word, nor deed,
Relaspses more do vex me then my sin:
And yet my sins still make my Conscience bleed:
but my Relapses ranckle still therein.
Relaps in sickness, fleshes death does threat;
Relaps in Heresy, the death of Sp'rit;
In Error, it makes falsehood hugely great;
and so in sin it makes it infinite!
In Grace (sweet Savior) there is never stay,
a Progress or a Regresse still there is:
But from a Regresse let me ever stray,
although thereby I go about to bliss.
What boots it me to day to fight with sins,
if I to morrow follow Satan's Flagge?
It is th'vnwearied fighter glory winnes;
the weary, but base Baggage and the Bag.
Then let the dreadful day of mine Accounts
be so annexed unto my Heart and Brain,
As if they were one Essence, and the founts
of tears (mine Eyes) still far out-flow the Maine!
And fix mine Eyes still on my Mother Earth,
to mind from whence I came, and where I must.
Or else on Heaven (from whence my Soul had birth)
but look on no mean Things for them to lust,
Although such Continence be not without
their outward spite, that Virtue inly Hate:
For, when we first, to live well, go about,
we are crossed and recrost by the Reprobate.
As thy dear Servant (walking on the Maine,
upon thy bidding) fainted (when he saw
A sudden Gust make rough th Oceans Plain)
inuokt thy help, near sincking through that Flaw.
So, in this World, a Sea of woes and spite,
thou bidst us come to thee; but as we hie,
Huge Storms of troubles threat to sink us quite;
then help we crave, with fear, at point to dye.
Yet Constant Lord, let me no more relapse,
no more, no more, once more would kill me quite;
Rather then so, let thy fierce Thunderclaps
dash me to dust, so thou receive my sp'rit:
But let my sp'rit how ever I dye (dear Lord)
Wade through thy deepest Judgments on thy Word.
The Sinner acknowledges and admires his own frailty: desiring Grace and
strength to stand in V^rtue, and with-stand Vice.
AFfliction still lies heavy on my Soul,
which makes her stupid, dry, and dull to pray;
Then ( Lord) unless thou do her power control,
she needs must sink to Hell beneath her sway.
O Sin (that with high Hand do hurl so low)
thou art sole Cause of his so bad Effect:
Thou NOTHING, that do all things overthrow
not staid by Grace, why do me thus deiect?
O had I been abortiue, and dead borne;
or, if not so, the Font had rest my breath:
Then had I made a quick and safe return,
that now must pass in peril to my death!
I can but sin, then Justice can but scourge;
so, Sin and Scourges, wheeling, over me go:
Yea, Sin being quiet, I it often do urge;
so, on me, with it, pull a World of woe.
Lord! what am I, that am so rarely frail?
that can do nothing: that is, sin I can:
For, Sin is Nothing; yet, it does prevail
against me, Something: that is, marres a Man!
When I do mind the strange Austeritie,
familiar with some (reclus'd from this life)
The watching, praying, fasting, charity,
the fights with Flesh, with Sin, the endless strife,
I am amazed with wonder; grieved with shame;
nay, waighing theirs with mine, my conscience bleeds
To see the ods: o fie, I am to blame,
to call it ods, since it all ods exceedes!
For white and black do far less disagree
then theirs and mine: mine being, lighty, dark;
Theirs, darkly, light; and lights the dark to see:
notorious I, for sin; they, Saints of mark.
So that I am confounded but to mind
the ods (surmounting ods) between the two:
For, in my self, with Pride, all ill I find;
in them all good, and yet most humble too.
Then, since Comparisons are but too blame
between things so repugnant (for, they do
But show the ods unto the worsers shame)
I will forbear, and bear the blemish too.
For, all reproach (though infinite it were)
comes short of endless sin, in foul offense:
Then, may I well that All (as nothing) bear,
which Centers but my sins Circumference!
For, weak as frailty is my strongest force
in fight with vices, and in ghostly wars:
At best no better then a living Corse;
and that the Vrne that but my Soul interres!
I fight, but faint, the first Encounter trying;
yet, often by standing on my strength too much
I quite am foiled, that might have foiled by flying;
such is my rashness, and my weakness such.
If I over come, (as seldom so I do)
my spirit grows proud, and confident withal:
So this far worse then that does me undo;
for spiritual pride still takes the lowest fall.
But, when I fall, thy help ( Lord) I inuoke,
to raise me: raised, I fall to worser ill:
So seem but leave to crave, (though it I cloak)
but still to fall, and to be raised still.
But to thee ( knower of all thoughts) it is known
such Boones are sins that beg but leave to sin:
My Boones no better be; for, being down,
I crave to rise by Grace, to fall therein.
And though my Prayers aim at no such end,
yet, in the end (since I but rise and fall)
It seems I did but by the same entend
to make my self thy Mercies Racket-ball.
Which falling hardest, highest does rebound;
but, to do ill, that good thereof might rise,
Is Ill, so ill, as may the Soul confound;
then, all that good in Soule-confounding, lies.
To sin of purpose, but to make us meek,
augments the fault; for, it is presumptuous Sin:
And who, by Error, Heavenly Truth shall seek,
shall lose her quite, and Hell, with Error, win.
Then, Lord of Truth, when I have taken a fall,
let me desire to rise, to fall no more:
So though thou bandy me from wall to wall,
yet, keep me up, at least, with beating sore.
And, if, by weakness, I shall sometimes slip,
so stay me then, that down I fall not quite:
Let me, at most (if so at least) but trippe;
then, take the faster footing through thy might.
So shall I praise that Power that stays me so;
And, ever overcome an Overthrow.
THE DOLEFVLL DOVE: OR, David's 7. Penitential Psalms; somewhere
paraphrastically turned into Verse.
Domine ne in furore. Psalm. 6.
When David by his sins had provoked Gods wrath; and now felt, not only his
hand against him, but also conceiueth the horrors of death everlasting, he
desires fornesse, bewailing that if God took him away in his indignation, he
shall lack occasion to praise him as he was wont to do, whiles he was among
men. Then, suddenly feeling Gods mercy, he sharply rebukes his enemies,
which rejoiced in his affliction.

IN thy just rage (dear Lord) reprove me not:
(for, just it is, since so unjust I am)
Nor chasten me when thy fierce Wrath is hot,
lest I should be extinguished yer the Flame.
Let thy strong Grace against my Weakness stand;
(thy Grace so strong, as it vpholdeth All)
And heal me (Lord) with thine all-helping Hand:
for, even my bones are bruised with my fall.
My Soul's afflicted more then griefs afflict:
(for griefs but pine; but this does quite undo)
Then Lord, how long shall I (a poor Relict)
endure these plagues, that pain and pine me too?
O turn thy now auerted Face, to me
(to me that fades as flowers for want of Sun)
And let my Soul be safe, and saved by thee,
through Grace, that has to thee most glory won:
For Deaths fell torments are so violent,
that they constrain the Sense to mind but them:
Who then in Hell, through hellish discontent,
can once but mind thee, in such pains extreme?
My sorrow has my Soul so ouer-fed,
that it conuerts mine Eyes to founts of Tears:
For, every night in tears I rince my Bed,
and drown my Couch in streams of griefs and fears.
Mine Eyes are so overcast with clouds of Cares,
that they see naught, but through those Water-streames:
My beauty's gone, while I away do wear,
among my Foes, and these confused extremes.
But yet I feel thy Grace (Lord) work with me:
then leave me, leave me, ye too idle Crew,
That yet still work, but work iniquity;
for, God has seen my Tears, and heard me rue.
You are my Foes, that (yet) would seem my friends;
but Foe-like friends, and all mine enemies
God will cut off by diverse fearful ends;
and soon confound you, and your Trecheries.
To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
three Persons, and one God; all glory be;
As it was, is, and shallbe in each Coast,
thoughout all worlds in all eternity.
Beati quorum. Psalm. 32.
David punished with grievous sickness for his sins, counts them blessed, to
whom God does not impute their transgressions. And, after that he had confessed
his sins and obtained pardon, he exhorts the wicked men to live godly; and
the good to rejoice.

MOst blessed are they (how ever cursed they be)
whose Crimes out of Gods Note-Booke clean are crossed;
Whose sins are covered so with Clemency,
that they are hid; so, seem they to be lost.
And blessed is he to whom the God of Grace
imputes no Sin; (for, so he shall be clear
How ever defiled) and in whose sp'rit no base
deceit, shall once so much as but appear.
For, while I held my peace (that caused my War;
for Death with Silence in such passion strives)
My bodies Props (my Bones) consumed are
while all the day I groan in Sorrows Gives.
For, day and night thy Hand (great God) does lie
like Lead upon my weakness: who have bin
Converted into self- Calamity,
whiles the Thorn pricked me (or, my stinging sin)
But, lo, my faults to thee I have revealed,
and have not clockt my crimes, which thou do hide:
But I confess those Sins, thou have concealed
since my misdeedes shall (so) be iustifide.
Thus shall each pious person pray to thee
in fitting time (yer Mercies Gate be sparr'd)
But when the Inundations swelling be
of many Waters they from Him are barred.
My fence (o Lord) lies only in thy Hands,
when troubles me assail with fiercest woe:
Then o preserve me from the impious Bands
that me enclose, in death to close me so.
I will say thou (dear Sweet) instruct thee still,
and guide thee in thy way (o homed Words)
Thine Eye (thou say) shall me defend from ill,
and watch to guard me from my foe-mens Swords.
Then be, o be not like an Horse or Mule,
that are as rude as vnintelligent:
Lord, bridle them, thy Snafle will not rule,
till they be ruled, or else be made repent.
The Plagues are great (most great) and manifold,
that do the Sinner evermore attend;
But who with Hands o^ Hope on God lays hold,
his boundless Mercy him will comprehend.
In Him therefore (ye Righteous) still be glad;
(for, he in Grief still glads the righteous Soul)
Exult all ye, that for your Sins are sad;
and all true Hearts, that stoop to his control.
To God the Father glory be therefore,
and to the Son, and their coequall Spirit,
As it was, is, and shall be evermore
World without end: for, they are infinite!
Domine ne in furore. Psalm. 38.
David lying sick of some grievous disease; acknowledges himself to be
chastised of God for his sins, and therefore prays God to turn away his
wrath. He utters the greatness of his griefs by many words and
circumstances: as, wounded with the arrows of Gods ire, forsaken of his
friends, ^uill entreated of his enemies. But in the end, with firm confidence
he commends his cause to God, and hops for speedy help at his hand.

LOrd check me not, until thy rage be past,
nor chastise me in thine incens^d ^re;
For, in my Flesh thy Shafts are fixed fast;
and thy Hand quels me, that would feign aspire.
Thy Wrath has filled my Flesh with all annoy,
(for, Sinne's the sore; the salve, sore-sicknesse is:)
And, in my bones I can no rest enjoy,
because their Marrow them has moved amiss.
For mine ambitious Sins climb over my Head,
and, as a breake-necke Burden, me oppress:
My wounds (which they have made) with filth are fed,
and ranckled sore, through my worse foolishness.
I am made crooked underneath this load,
deformed, and wretched; yea, it breaks my back:
So, all the day with grief I make abode,
or mourning go, as those that comfort lack.
For, (ah) my Ioynes, that lodged but Sin before,
now harbor naught but restless Malady:
No health is in my flesh; for, all is sore:
so sore that anguish makes me (roaring) cry.
But, Lord, thou know the Sum of my desires,
because my Plaints still tell it in thine ears;
My Heart is vexed, my strength from me retires;
nay, more, mine Eyes are blinded with my tears.
My friends (in show, when thou did favor me)
like foes (in deed) now me (poor me) withstand:
Nay, those, in blood that were my nearest, be
now furthest off; and lend nor heart nor hand.
And they that seek my life, lay Traps to take
that life; or (at the least) me to undo:
And but of guile and spoil they ever speak;
and put in practice what they speak of too.
But I (poor I) as deaf, would nothing hear:
(for poor Souls must not hear what must offend)
And, as one dumb, I still my self did bear,
that gave no more reproves then ear did lend.
Yet is my hope in thee that hear all
my sighs and groans, since they increase for Sin.
Then let mine Enemies never see my fall;
who, when I do but trip, triumph therein.
I am at point to perish; and my Woes
and cause thereof, I ever bear in mind:
For, I, with grief, confess mine overthrows,
that lost thy Grace, which now I seek to find,
But, still my Foes do live, and strong are made,
strong in their friends, their places, purse and arms,
And they that hate me ( causeless) and invade
me (forcelesse) many be; the more my harms.
They (monsters) likewise, that do ill for good
oppose me still, since goodness I ensue:
Then, haste thee (Lord) to help me (so withstood)
and leave me not among this cursed crew.
To God the Father (which we do adore)
and to the Son, and to their blessed Spirit,
All glory be, as it was heretofore,
is and still shall be through Worlds infinite.
Miserere mei Deus. Psalm. 51.
When David was rebuked by the Prophet Nathan for his great offenses, he did
not only acknowledge the same to God, with protestation of his natural
corruption and iniquity, but also left a memorial thereof to his posterity
Therefore first he desires God to forgive his sins, and to renew in him his
holy Spirit; with promise that he will not be unmindful of those great graces.
Finally, fearing lest God would punish the whole Church for his fault, he
requires that he would rather increase his graces toward the same.

GReat God of Gods (whose Mercy is as great)
have mercy on me (wretch) whose Sin exceeds;
Yet after thy compassion so complete,
wash out the blots of my too foul misdeedes.
O cleanse me from the filth of mine offense,
that ranckles in my Conscience, all defilde
With all that may deprave both Soul and Sense;
that (purged) I may to thee be reconciled:
For, I acknowledge mine iniquity,
since still my Sinne's the object of my sight;
And, by the power of mine impiety,
I wrong thy grace and still impugn thy Sp'rit.
Against thee only I in sin abide,
and done what does condemn me in thy sight;
That in thy Words thou may be iustifide,
and overcome when thou art judged unright.
For, naught but wickedness prepared the way
to my conception; which to worse did pass:
Then, ere I was, I stood at sinful stay;
and, when I fell to Being, worser was.
This (Lord) is true; confessing which, does move
thy Grace to me thy Wisdom (hid) to show:
Then sprinckle me with Isop, in thy Love;
and so, I shall be whiter far; than Snow.
Unto mine Ears (invred but to hear
what Ears corrupts) thou shall but Joy object:
So shall the bones, which by thee broken were,
rejoice; and, sin, wherein it joyed, reject.
O then from my foul sins thy Face auert;
and wash me from the filth they cast on me;
In me create an undefiled Heart,
with such a spirit as may be just to thee.
And cast me not, o cast me not away
out of the Way still brightned by thy beams;
Nor, from me take thy Spirit, my Guide and Stay,
in hardest passages of all Extremes.
Restore to me the gladness of thy bliss;
and, with thy chiefest Spirit, still strengthen me;
Then those I Will teach that now thy ways do miss:
so, Sinners shall converted be to thee.
Save me from blood, that vengeance does implore;
so shall my Tongue thy Justice highly raise:
But more thy Mercy, since it glads me more.
Then, open my Lips, and they shall show thy praise.
Had thou desired Sacrifice, I had
offered it to thee; but, thou take delight
In no burnt Offerings; but, art ever glad
to take the Offer of a contrite Spirit.
A Broken Heart, with sorrow but for Sin,
thou will, nor can thou, for thy Word, despise;
Then, let mine, broken so, thy Mercy win;
and, from it still auert thine Angers Eyes.
With Sion, o deal gently; that the Walls
of razed Jerusalem rebuilt may be;
And still withstand Hels fiery darts, and Bals,
to keep thy Foes out, only but for thee.
Then shall thou take the Sacrifice in gree,
of Justice in thy Mercy; then, shall they
Offer Oblations still in flames to thee;
and Calves upon thine holy Alter lay.
To God the Father, praise and glory be;
and to the Son, and to their blessed Sp'rit;
(A Trinity in strictest Unity)
as it was, is, and shall be infinite.
Domine exaudi. Psalm. 102.
It seems that this Prayer was appointed to the faithful to pray in the
Captivity of Babylon. A Consolation for the building of the Church: whereof
follows the praise of God to be published unto all Posterity. The Conversion
of the Gentiles: and, the stabilitie of the Church.

ATtend my Prayer (Lord) and let my Cry
ascend to thee, from whom all grace descends.
From my distress turn not thy Mercies Eye,
but bow thine Ear to me, that downward bends.
When ever I call, make answer; for, my days
like Vapor vanish; and, my parched bones
Wax weak and dry, as is the flame that plays
about the Snuff, at point to quench at ones.
Thou Have smitten me (as Grass by Lightning smit)
so that my Heart is withered quite away:
And through my grief, for that, I further it:
for, I forget to eat, for Natures stay.
And through my groaning voice, my bones, that burn,
to my consuming flesh, will hardly cleave:
And, like a Pelican alone, I mourn:
or, like an Owl I live, while life I leave.
I wear out Time in strictest vigilance,
and, as a Sparrow, on the Houses Crest,
I sit alone; to mind my sins mischance:
so (idly) resting in the most unrest.
The while my Foes (backbiting) me revile;
yea, he that praised me, against me swears:
But I, as Bread, did Ashes eat the while;
and still my Drink did mingle with my Tears.
Because thy Wrath grew hot against my sin:
for, thou have raised me up, to cast me down:
My days are past, as if they never had bin;
and (like Hay withered) I from thee am mowne.
But thou (immortal Spirit) do still endure;
and thy Memorial ever lasts in prime:
Thou shall arise, and down thy Mercies pour
(by showers) on Sion, in this promised time.
For, even the Stones of that fair Edifice
delight thy Servants; and her sacred Ground
They pity, as they do her prejudice,
which with the sharpest grief their hearts does wound.
So shall the Heathen fear thine awful NAME;
and, all the Kings on Earth thy glory fear:
For, Sions Fabric thou do still re-frame,
and in thy fullest Glory shall appear.
Our Lord the prayers of the meek approues,
and not dispie their Suites, in wretched case:
So future times to write this, this does move,
that Babes unborn, may praise this God of Grace.
Who, from his high as holy Place, does veil
his Eyes to Earth (whereon they still remain)
To hear poor Captives plaints, and such as wail;
and, loose the Sons of them (unjustly) slain.
That they in Sion should diuulge his NAME;
and in Jerusalem his earned Praise:
Yea, in the Assemblies celebrate the same,
when Kings consorted, sing sweet Sions Lays.
He, in the way of his great power and grace,
^hath answered them: but, show (Lord) show to me,
How long or short shall be my mortal Race;
that so, for thee, I still may ready be.
And take me not, o take me not away,
(at unawares) yer half my Days be done:
As for thy years they stand still at a stay;
but mine more swift then thought away do run.
In the Beginning, thou the Earth did found,
the highest Heavens thy glorious Hands did rear:
But they shall perish; thou, continue sound
while they wax old, and like a Garment wear.
And, as a Vesture, thou shall change their Frame,
and they shall changed be; but thou, alone
Do still continue One, and aye the same:
whose years remain the same, and ever One!
Thy Servants sons inhabit shall the Land,
their seed shall be directed in thy Ways:
And while they walk therein, they fixed shall stand
in Heaven and Earth to celebrate thy praise.
To God the Father then, all glory be;
to his Son, and to their Spirit, which we adore;
(Coequall in their Essence and Degree)
as it was, is, and shall be evermore.
De profundis clamaui. Psalm. 130.
The people of God, from their bottomless misery, do cry unto God, and are
heard. They confess their sins, and fly unto Gods mercy.

FRom depth of Grief (wherein my Soul does lie)
I do and will (dear Lord) still call on thee:
Then, let thine ears attend mine inward Cry,
and, listen to my Prayers, and to me.
If thou frail Flesh wilt call to strict account,
what flesh and blood then, in thy sight shall stand?
But Mercy is with thee, as in the Fount:
then, I expect thy Mercyes Helping-hand.
My Soul upon the Faith, which thou have plight,
has ever staid; and still does hope in thee;
Then from the Morning-watch, till that of Night,
let Israel still rely on Thee with me.
For, with this God of Glory and of Grace,
is Grace as much as Glory; and, therein
He will redeem the sad in sinful Case;
with his true Israel, from all their sin.
To God the Father (which we do adore)
and to the Son, and to their blessed Spirit,
All glory be, as it was heretofore,
is, and still shall be through Worlds infinite.
Domine exaudi. Psalm. 143.
An earnest Prayer for remission of sins, acknowledging that the enemies did
thus cruelly persecute him by Gods just judgment. He desires to be restored
to grace. To be governed by his holy Spirit, that he may spend the remnant of
his life in the true fear and service of God.

LOrd hear my prayer with thine all-hearing ears;
and, for thy truths sake, note mine humble suite:
O hear me in thy Righteousness, which hears
All those that mourn, although they still be mute.
And into Judgment enter not (O Lord)
with me, frail man: for I, nor none beside,
(Because of sin which we have all incurred)
in thy clear sight shall then be iustifide.
For, the enemy (the Fiend, our common Foe)
has long pursued my Soul (that flesh misse-led)
My Life in Earth, his Fury has brought low;
and hid the same in darkness, with the dead.
My Spirit (therefore) is vexed, my Mind, and Heart
are greatly troubled; yet, I minded still
Thy days of old (thy Works and thy Desert)
which did my Muse with Joy and Wonder fill.
My hands to thee have still outstretched bin,
my Soul (that thirsts (as earth that water wants)
For drops of grace, to quench her flames of sin)
I lift to thee, the while, for grace she pants.
Then (kindest Lord) with speed attend my cries;
because my fainting spirit has failed me:
Auert not from me thy converting Eyes,
lest I be like to those that burying be.
And in the dawning of the longed-for Day,
(the Day when Justice Son shall Comfort give)
Let me the voice of mercy hear, I pray;
since still I hope that thou will me relieve.
And since so many Heads, so many Ways
are said to lead to thee, by Heads of Sects;
Show me the Way that straight to thee conueyes,
since my poor Soul both thee and it affects.
And from my Foes preserve me (weakling) still:
to thee alone I fly in all distress:
Then teach me to perform thy blessed Will:
for thou art only all my blessedness.
Thy Spirit that cannot err, nor yet deceive,
shall bring me to the Land that Justice bears:
And, for thy Names sake thou shall me receive,
according to thy grace (that never wears.)
From Trouble thou shall bring my Soul to rest;
and, through thy Mercy shall destroy my Foes:
Yea, all annoy that do my Soul molest,
since as thy Servant, I on thee repose.
To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
three Persons, and one God; all glory be;
As it was, is, and shallbe in each Coast,
thoughout all worlds in all eternity.
FINIS.
RIGHTS OF THE LIVING, AND THE DEAD: Being, A proper Appendix to the precedent
Meditations.

OBIT-RIGHTS.
A Funeral Elegy, on the death of the most virtuous, and no less lovely,
Mirs. Elizabeth Dutton; eldest Daughter of the Worthy, and generally beloved
Sir Thomas Egerton Knight, eldest Son to the right Honorable, Thomas, Lord
Elesmere, Lord Chancellor of England: which Elizabeth was, at the age of eleven
years, married to John Dutton, of the age of fifteen years, Son and Heir
of Thomas Dutton, of Dutton, in the County of Chester Esquier: which John,
deceased about the age of seauenteene years, and left the said Elizabeth a
Virgin-Widow: who so lived till she died the first of October, at the age of
six teene years and a half, in Anno 1611.

A Virgin, Wife, and Widow, three that One
Held rarely perfect in like Union,
Incites my Muse; nay, more, does her co^strain
To empt my Pen of Praise, of Wit my Brain
In her deserved honor: she whose all
Was naught but good; yet so, as we may call
That good but naught (and justly) if the same
Give not her goodness glory more than fame!
A Maid, in whom Virginity gave place
(Though most exact) to Modesty and Grace.
A Wife (who like old Joseph's blessed Bride)
Though wedded, but vnbedded till she did,
Yet from her came, on her by Grace begot,
Faith, Fear and Duty, in a True-loue knot,
Till his decease, to whom these three she bare:
And after, for him, nursed them still with care.
She lived a Widow; but it was hard to know
Whether she lived or did when she was so:
Since when she lost her Pheare, she lost her Breath;
For, Turtle-like, she mourned and droupt to death.
But while it was losing she such Patience wanne
(By his Death mortifide) as she began
(Before her end) her Heaven on Earth thereby,
In hope to live with Him when Life should die.
So, in her Patience, she her Soul possessed
Her God; in whom her Soul, with his, did rest;
Yet rested so, that still (unseen) she moved
to both devoutly, whom so much she loved!
Poets can shape of things that grace forsakes
Far rarer things than grace or nature makes.
But let all Poets all their Art unite
To fable praise, the moral is her right.
Nature profusely had on her bestowed
(Borrowing of grace) more grace then ever she owed!
And grace (as envying Natures Gifts, so rare)
Unlocked the Heavens where all her Treasures are,
And showered them down so on this dearest Maid,
As she for worth, an Angel should have waide.
Wit for her worth can never hiperbolize;
Much less a Poet in it Poetize;
Since what or Wit or Poetry can praise
(With their best Art) was found in her: then raise
Her up my Muse, ere she be raised, at last;
And her enthrone in glory high as fast:
That when the Virgin, whom all Virgins bless.,
Shall, for her graces, see her gloriousness
In Heaven and Earth, she may (as worthy her)
Enbozome her, or fix her in a Star,
Whose Name and Fame while mortal Virgins live,
To them, with hers, may Light and Virtue give!
For this, her Soul still labored to be gone,
T'returne her Errand of Creation:
As fiery Matter working in a Cloud
Breaks through, for want of Matter it to shrowde:
So Souls, with stirring much, are said to fire
The best Complexions; and (so) home retire.
But, Sickness (ah too sweet-lipt) sucked her Blood,
That she had none to fire in likelihood:
And so her vitall-flame, vnnourished;
Her Soul through coldness, left her body dead.
A short life made her Virgin, Widow, Wife,
But, well she l^u'd, which is the Well of life.
This old World was unworthy such a Iemme,
Therefore she shines in new Jerusalem!
I best can witness how her time she spent,
Who taught her hand to show her hearts intent:
Then may I best renown (for known desert)
The Pupil of my Hand that had my Heart.
Thou had my Heart (dear Pupil) since in thee
Was all that might entirely master me.
And did my Power but equal half my Will,
Laura should be thy Foil: for, I (by skill)
Would set thee so above her, that thy light
(With poynant Beams) should thrust through Earth and Night:
For, when Formositie and Virtue strive
In one sole Subject for Prerogative,
That Subjects praise must reign (all Terms above)
In height of Glory, Memory, and Love!
The Grand-sire of thy Flesh in Earth's renowned;
And thy spirits Grand-sire King of Heaven is crowned:
Thou living, then, as coming from such Sires,
Our Songs must answer the Celestial Quires,
That chant the praise of Virtue in their King,
In whom thou art, then we on earth must sing
Thy praise in his, since his all praise contains:
So thine in his. eternal glory gains!
To thee then sing I, as I sing of Thee,
Who art sole Base of this high Harmony:
For, knowing Tombs have ends as well as wastes,
And that strong Rhyme their ruin far out-lasts,
My Muse shall labor on this ground of Fame,
To raise a Pile of Rhyme, whereon thy Name
Shall ever shine, through Wits Celestial Plashes,
Until another Phoenix of the Ashes
Produced be; that when it eft shall burn
In those eternal flames, it eft may turn
To pristine plight; and by such alteration,
Live Phoenix-like (still bright) in admiration!3
We wail their want whose Lives our wants supplide,
Not weighing how they lived, but when they did:
For, the best livers here, do living dye;
But after death they live immortally.
Children and Fools are angry still with those
That, to distill, disleaue the fairest Rose;
Not pond'ring how the sweetness in the Juice
Is so increast, and longer lasts for use:
So, we that see this Rose (whose hue and breath
Celestial were) divided so by Death,
Though it for heavenly purposes be done,
Yet still our thoughts but on the spoil do run.
But o be it far from us, to think thee spoiled
In living blessed, and dying so vnsoil'd:
No: we thy Memory will celebrate;
Whose weal we wail not, but rejoice thereat.
If in this Paper Monument there be
One Ornament of Art that is worthy thee,
Or any Work of Wit that may retain
Thy Memory; my Labor for my Pain
Is too great Meede; since by the same I show
Times future, what will better them to know.
So, shall I in thy Praise include mine own;
And making thee so known still, still be known:
For, if this Shrine chance to be visited
By any, that regard the worthy dead,
It may be they will think me worthy Love,
That on this Pile did all my cunning prove.
The Egyptians with their Pirameds did strive
(Against the Heavens) to keep such, dead, alive:
And Artemisia with a matchless Tomb
Makes her Mausolus live until the doom:
Though It be now demolished and gone;
Yet is he known by It, as It was known.
And Wit, but with mere Words, has often raised
A Monument of Praise, far longer praised.
Then may this Work, which but weak words erect,
(Upon so sure a Ground) work like effect.
The Name of Egerton she does renown;
And Dutton.
that by which she last of all was known:
Nay, had she had, by Fortune, all the Names
That Wit for Natures vilest Creatures frames,
Sh'had so much Grace consorting still her Blood
As to have made them all as great as good!
The Days of old did lay their Macchabes
Under Worlds-wonders, huge Piramides!
Semiramis, in her bright Polymite:
And Cyrus, in his Obelisk as bright.
In his Columna they Augustus shut:
And in his Mole-magno, Hadrian put.
Alaricus, the Gothe that ruinde Rome,
In his rich Rubico they did entombe.
Those, dead, yet lived by these: and these again,
Live yet by those, though naught of them remain!
But, were I able, I my Saint would shrine
Within the mouths of Angels most divine;
Since they out-last all Worlds, that Time does end,
And have (of creatures) best mouths to commend!
But live (sweet Saint) in mine immortal Rhyme
(Made by thy virtue such) past Tombs and Time:
For, if eternal Virtue cannot dye,
Then thou must live, till She does ruined lie.
Farewell, dear Maid (whose body (like a soul)
Had power t'inflame the Love it did control)
Farewell while we, by thy dear loss fare ill;
That is; while griefs do grow the Heart to fill:
For she that held all Hearts (by her deserts)
To her entire, her Death must break all Hearts.
Ye Ladies (that (alive) do inly love
So much o'er-weening that does mortal prove)
Look not ascue, nor turn the Head aside
(As if you could no Praise but yours abide)
At these just Praises (Relickes of the Dead)
But learn by them to be so honored.
,, Envy does leave the Enui'd at the Grave;
That Fort from Envy should the Virtuous save:
Then (o) exalt these Lauds, unless you will
Be rather pitied, then enuide still.
Poets (I grant) have liberty to give
More height to Grace, then the Superlatiue:
So has a Painter license too, to paint
A Saint-like face, till it the Saint out saint.
But Truth (which now mine Art to shadow strives)
Makes license larger by the grace she gives.
But yet,
To say thou wast the Form, (that is the soul)
Of all this All; I should thee misenroule
In Book of Life; which (on the Earth) they keep
That of Arts fountains have carowsed deep,
Nay, so I should displease and wrong thee both:
For, unjust praise thou can not chose but loathe,
That lothed'st it here; then there, more (past compare)
For, he is the Soul of All by whom they are.
But I may say, (and none the same gainsayes)
Thou art the soul of this thy World of Praise!
Whose soul did animate thy small-world too
To be the soul of all that here I do.
Often have I seen thee, (nay I see thee yet,
Whose face and manners I shall never forget)
When as thine ears had heard, or eyes had seen
Ought that to Virtue had offensive been,
Thy face and breast with that fair blush overflow
Which Modesty (not Bashfulnesse) does owe.
In these bold Times it is held a Trick too fresh
Of vnbred Indians, so to paint the flesh
For any cause: but, this is but the effect
Of Impudence, the Times souls chief affect.
No Parts (i^ laudable) at Court required,
But they attired thee in thy state retired:
Yet thou so modestly did act them still
As that the light'st seemed grave against their will!
What shall I say? in thee was naught so small
That was not greatly praised and loved of All!
This shows thy Mother true unto thy Sire,
Whose worths, in love, set all the World on fire!
Thou, his true Daughter, likewise do the same,
While thou go through Oblivion by the flame!
The Soul a twofold action has; that is,
Original, and Isntrumental; this
By Nature does the like produce; but that
( Mere Intellectual) does not generate.
Though Nature yet, could not so high aspire,
Thou, in thy spirit, wast like thine honored Sire
By special grace of Heaven; for, in your Birth
Such Planets met, as decked and ioyde the Earth.
But o! too soon the earth quite lost that Joy;
And in that loss found infinite Annoy.
Such is the staylesse state of Things below,
That do but vanish while they seem to grow!
Beneath the Moon, all is but like the Moon,
Constant in nothing but in changing soon:
And so will be while they remain beneath;
Resting from changing only but in Death:
As when the Whirle-windes (in their wheeling play)
Pursue their Turns, till, in their Center, they
Return into themselves: so, Nature goes
On in her Course (which first from form arose)
Until this World of form be dispossessed,
And Nature in the Chaos, takes her rest.
That Time runs round, by this dark Riddle's bright;
A Father has twelve sons half black, half white,
And every son has thirty, which still live;
And when their sires decease, they them revive:
So sire and sous still die, but die in vain;
For, still the thirty them revive again,
And yet these thirty every Month do die;
Yet every Month they live immortally!
Thus, by a Year (which evermore does raise
Twelve months (like sons) and each month thirty days)
Time turns over All, and All does ouer-turne,
Till in the later day himself shall burn;
And then Eternity shall take his Room,
In which is nothing past, nor yet to come;
Wherein the subject of my Song still is
A glorious Angel in the height of Bliss!
Atheist, stand far from this her sacred shrine:
For, thou art foe to all that is divine:
Thou do believe where ere her Corpse consumes,
There perishes her soul, which never assumes
The same again: but (o her flesh shall rise
(As does her fame) above both death and skies.
And why shoudlest thou the Resurrection doubt,
When Clouds of Proofs so compass it about?
Some write that Swallows drowned are in the Deep,
In Winter; and, in Summer, rise from sleep,
The Fly in Winter, dies; in Summer, lives;
And, being drowned, warm Ashes her reuiues.
The Vrchin of the Sea, in pieces rent,
Re-water'd, ioynes, and lives incontenent!
Each Grain that rots before the same does spring
Is a true figure of this real thing.
Each Plant, which in the Winter (seeming) dies,
And springs in Summer, shows men, dead, shall rise.
Say a man famisht, into Air were past,
Yet Air shall yield what it receives at last
As well as Earth, and Seas shall yield their dead;
Though on them (vanished) Worms or Fish have ^ed.
At first, they gave, what they did not receive;
Then, what they take, shall they not rather give?
He that, but with a Word, made Man of naught,
Can he not raise him, dead, now he is ought?
If no: his Arm wants wonted power, and length;
Or else wants knowledge to employ his strength.
But in the Almighty none of th^se appear,
That knew our smallest Portions ere they were.
If Nothing were the point from whence did rise
Creation, it may be the Point likewise
Of Resurrection; but it Something is
That shall be raised: the easier then is this.
Say Men eat Men, through some hard exigent,
And them converted have to nutriment,
Yet shall their Excrement (how ere unmeet)
At last yield up their Relickes pure as sweet!
For, at that Day each man shall put on fresh
Flesh of his own, and not another flesh.
And though he fed of others, that shall be
Restored the owner, be it he or she.
And Beasts of prey, that often on Men do feed,
Do die; and of them Flies or Worms do breed.
Those Flies and Worms are often food for Fish,
And they again come often to our dish;
All this may be: and so a Man may go
Through Beasts, Fish, Foul, and Vermin too and fro,
And never rest, though he be dead, till he
From that base Progress lastly raised be.
Yet he that w^ll knew All ere ought was made,
Knows where what ere created is, does vade;
And, can, but with a thought re-gather it;
And make it in the proper figure knit!
For, if it were worthy Gods Creation erst,
To make Man subject to a fall at first;
It Is far more worthy for his powrefull hand
To raise him, dead, eternally to stand:
For, Death is but a sleep: and as a Man
Can wake Men, sleeping: so, the Almighty can,
Raise up the dead so much more easily
As matchless Power does pass Infirmity.
If Heaven be just, and there be Providence;
Then we shall rise when we are fallen from hence:
For, if the good, in this Life, find but Woes,
And no Joy in the next, most cursed are those.
Nay, most bruit Beasts more happy are than they
Who here do most of all Watch, fast and pray.
The Rod of Moses turned to a Snake,
Shows God of one thing, can another make.
And shall he not (so, fail us in our trust)
Restore man to himself, when he is dust?
O Heaueus fore-fend, we should once so conceive;
For, God can neither alter nor deceive!
Our Bodies are his seed; Churchyards and Graves
Are all his Seed-plots, where his Seed he saues
By sowing to corrupt, to rise again
Most incorrupt; and so, by loss, to gain.
In the Cadauer, some have thought some Bon^
Retains the Seed of Resurrection;
Which kept from rotting by the Almighties force,
Should raise, at last, the Worme-consumed Corse!
Some say, that in the Teeth that Seed does lie,
Since Earth, Air, Fire them hardly putrify.
But we believe this Seed (and do not doubt)
Is not within the Body, but without:
For, when the Trumpe shall sound, the dead shall peep
Out of their graves, as newly wakt from sleep.
By that great Power that, there, asleep them laid:
Then in that Power that Seed is solely staid.
But, some do say, our Bodies cannot rise
From Earth to Heaven, for that above the Skies
No nasty Body can remain; because
Such to the Center Nature ever draws.
Fond men! they know not, then our Flesh shall be
Not changed in Substance, but in Quality.
Our Bodies shall be Heavenly; so they shall
Agree with any place Celestial.
Our blessed Saviors Body, once like ours,
(Save that it could not sin) those heavenly Towers;
Do now enwall: then; in that Heaven of bliss,
Why, by his Power, may ours not stay with his?
That Water hangs in the Air who does not know?
And by the Lodestone heavy Iron does so.
If Nature can do this; what can persuade
Gods Power is less then Natures, which he made?
No, no, his Power, that does all power comprise,
Can flesh refine, t'inhabite (so) the Skies!
By which high Power and his diuinest Grace
There rests my Saint, as in her proper place.
Her Soul there rests; and in those heavenly Bowres
Her Body shall, when it shall rise with ours.
Which while (too short a while) it soiourn'd here,
It did celestial to all Eyes appear.
Then, may a little mending make it fit
For Heaven, that was so heavenly out of it!
Thou wast (rare Maid) alive, s' Angelical,
That, dead, thy dust is Metaphisicall.
If some shall muse why I contemplate Thee
Among his Praises that most praisefull be,
Let if suffice them, it was of purpose done,
To praise thee, Star, for light had of this Sun,
Within the Volume that includes his praise
(That naught includes) so his in thine to raise:
As when we laud the light the Sun does give
We praise the Giver in the Gift; and strive
(When most we praise the Taker) to renown
The Giuers praise, for gracing so his own:
So, and none otherwise, I praise the Grace
Appearing in the Soul, Limbs, Eyes, and Face
Of Natures Maister-piece this goodly Maid;
Of whom all good, can never ill be said.
If so much heavenly Grace, and Gifts of Nature
(As Virtue, Beauty, rarest Form and Stature)
Should not be graced by them they good; then I
May say, the bettered are the worse thereby:
For, still th'ungratefull for a Benefit,
(Though bound) are free from Honesty and Wit.
And though the virtuous, for their Virtues sake,
Look not for praise; but strive it to forsake,
(To keep them humble) yet each virtuous Wit
Should honor Virtue for selfe-benefit.
And since Posterity does light receive
To run to Honor by the Lines we leave
From Virtue drawn; we should be drawing still
The Lines that (drawing) lead up Honors Hill.
The Highest Power and Grace, by oath, has vowed
To honor them (among the multitude
Of Men and Angels) that are good; then she
That was so good, of both must honored be!
Celestial Maid, if from the heavenly Sphere,
What Mortals do, thou can or see, or hear,
Be not displeased that my vntutor'd Pen
Should teach thy praise, to teach all Maids and Men
The way to Honor: nor, that in its Mouth
(That often does fable) it should take this Truth.
I was thy Teacher, though (unworthy) I
Might ( old) learn of thee ( young) to live and die.
Yet since it is the Oblation of my zeal,
Which I do offer for the Commonweal
In thy dear Memory; thou will (I hope)
Acquit me from Presumption; since my scope
Was but thy glory, and the Peoples good,
Which in great light, go right in likelihood.
I must confess a Priest of Phoebus, late,
Upon like Text so well did meditate,
That with a sinlesse Envy I do run
In his Souls Progress, till it all be DONE.
But, he has got the start in setting forth
Before me, in the Travel of that WORTH:
And me out-gone in Knowledge every way
Of the Souls Progress to her final stay.
But his sweet Saint did usher mine therein;
(Most blessed in that) so, he must needs begin;
And read upon the rude Anatomy
Of this dead World; that, now, does putrify.
Yet greater Will, to this great Enterprise
(Which in great Matters solely does suffice)
He cannot bring than I: nor, can (much less)
Renown more Worth than is in WORTHINESS!
Such were they both: for, such a worthy PAIR
(Of lovely virtuous Maids, as good as faeire)
Self- Worthiness can scarce produce, since they
Lived like Celestial Spirits, immured in Clay!
And if all-powerfull Love can All perform,
That in it has rare Matter, or like Form,
Then should my Lines have both so'accomplished,
As from the Grave to Heaven should draw the Dead:
Or, with her Taper-pointed-beaming Name,
Nail her to Heaven, and in Heaven clench the same!
Hold Muse, no more: (thou have too large a scope,
To prove thy Pinnions: for, the Heavenly Coape
Infolds no more) and take thy leave anon
Of Her thou never shall leave to muse upon.
Thou may be tired; but never can fly about
The Inside of her praise, much less the out.
Then stouping here, with reverence, grief and love,
Bid her adue; and, with that bidding, move
Thy self to tears; but, if thou can not so,
Show thy self willing by the dryest woe:
For, never had I greater cause of grief;
Since while she lived, I joyed, in painful life:
But now, am left all solitary-sad
To wail her death, whose life made Sorrow glad!
O! had it pleased the Heavens, by their Decree,
To Have made my Pupil learned to have did of me,
(And mine example) I had been at rest,
And she live blessed long, to dye as blessed.
I, like a withered Pine, no fruit produce;
Of whom there is no Care, no hope, no use.
I burden but the Earth, and keep a place
Of one (perhaps) that should have greater grace:
Oppressed with Cares that quite crush out the Sap
That feeds my Life; now thrown off Natures Lap.
I solely sit, and tell the saddest hours,
That ever yet impeached vital powers.
Obscured by Fate, yet made a Mark by fame;
Whereat fools, often, shoot their Bolts, in game.
Yet, live as buried (that I learned of thee
Dear Pupil) while the World goes over me.
Praying for patience still to vnder-ly
The heavy weight of this Worlds injury.
Often have I been enbozomed by Lords;
But all the warmth I found there, was but Words.
And though I scarce did move, yet scarce they would
There let me lie, though there I lay acold;
But, as I had some biting Vermin bin,
Out must I, moved I but for warmth therein.
Or else so lie, as I were better out;
Since there I lay as dead, yet lived in doubt:
In doubt I should have nothing but a place
In the outward Room but of their Idle Grace.
In doubt black mouths should blot me in their Books
That make few Scholars; and in doubt my Hooks
Would hold no longer to hang on (o Grief!)
This hanging's worse then hanging of a Thief!
An Halter loone abridgeth bale and breath;
But hanging on men's sleeves, is double death.
To hang in hope of that which doubt does stay
Is worse then hanging till the later-DAY.
Doubt stays that meede that merit hopes for, often,
Lest Meede should but make Merit look aloft;
Or, quite leave working, since it has no need;
Therefore the great do still withold this Meede:
For, to them selves they say; If we should fill
The well-deseruing-empty (working still)
They would but rest: than, well we will them entreat
Yet keep them hungry still to work for meat.
Fate, but to State this privilege affords;
And but the mean, without means, work for words.
Yet work they must, since Air the great do give:
For, if they have their hate they cannot live.
Their Love does little boot; but o their breath
Blows down, in hate, a poor Relict to death.
These miseries I ran through, and did try
These dear Conclusions but in misery;
Hoping for that which but my hopes deceived;
And me of hope and life, almost, bereaved.
Till I (to stand) from these was feign to fall
To serve two Lords that serve me, now, withal:
The one immortal, the other mortal is:
Who serve my turn for what my life does miss
Which, for it is still amiss, still misseth that
Which makes men gracious, and (so) fortunate:
But he, who knows all, knows (perhaps) it is best
For me to live with little, in unrest:
For, never since I first could move, had I
A better life than those that (living) dye.
I never yet possessed one day of joy
That was not lined or hemmed with some annoy.
The Kingly Preacher in his weal found woe;
But I in thwarts, for those alone I know.
These made me old in youth: for, Sol had run
Scarce thirty years before my days were done;
And to his course ere five more added were,
Black Days (like Nights) in gray had did my Hair.
Yet never Cross on me so sad did sit
As this dear loss; whereof this benefit
To me acrewes, that (now) each pressing woe
Stands far without this, and this keeps them so.
I say I greatly grieve; yet seem to feign:
For, great griefs never greatly could complain:
That is, when Sorrows flood the Banckes does fill,
It noiselesse runs, and smoothly glideth still:
But if the Current once the Brimmes get over,
Twill roughly run; or, stopped, will rage and rore.
But, o, that tyrant Time will silence me
Before my griefs are vtter'd as they be:
Farewell then, my griefs Cause, who wast the effect
Of all the joy my life did well elect:
Farewell, in Him, on whom who sares is well;
And, while I live, I Will be the leading-Bell
That shall thy lowdest Peales of praises ring
Which in the Clouds shall never leave ecchoing!
Or, be the Trumpet of thy Fame to fill
The Aetheriall Lofts with Strains more lofty still!
That when Times wings his Funeral flame consumes
Thy Fame shall soar with fair vnsinged Plumes!
An Epitaph on the death of the right virtuous Lady Liegh; sole Daughter of the
same right Honorable, Lord Elesmere, Lord Chancellor of England: which Lady
deceased the third day of April, Anno Dom. 1612.
HEre dead she lies; who while alive she was,
was Graces Inn; Wits Home, and Virtues Rest:
Whose WORTH was of true Worthiness a Mass:
yet well proportioned for her humble Breast.
A Wise and Mother! as it is hard to say,
whose loss was great'st, her childrens, or her phoares:
To either wisely kind; to each a stay;
that made one, love; the other, love and fear.
To her all-honour'd Sire, she was as dear,
as she was virtuous; which was as the blood
In his Hearts Center; which to him is near;
yet dearer held his flesh in one so good!
Who did (as live she did) in grace and peace,
more laden with good-deeds then idle-dayes:
Leaving her worth (for worthiness increase)
for Wives unborn, to imitate and praise.
Who had at once, two Husbands; yet she lived
of Wisely truth a constant Paragon:
One Husband heavenly was; who has deprived
the Earthly of her, for himself alone.
Yet, yer he had her, bought her with his Blood:
But, with her, bought a World of Womanhood!
Then, maugre Time, and Death these Lines, tho weak,
May lead all Times all good of her to speak!
Here Muse, now close the Paper-tombes of these
Two virtuous Souls, and Bodies; Aunt and Niece.
with this,
A good Name is better then a good Ointment: and the
day of death, then the day that one is borne. Eccles. 7.3.
The Picture of an happy Man.
HOw blessed is he (though ever crossed)
that can all Crosses Blessings make;
That finds himself ere he be lost;
and, lose that found for Virtues sake.
Yea, blessed is he in life and death,
that fears not Death, nor loves this Life;
That sets his Will his Wit beneath;
and has continual peace in strife.
That strives but with fraile-Desire;
desiring nothing that is ill;
That rules his Soul by Reasons Squire;
and works by Wisdoms Compass still.
That naught observes, but what preserues
his mind and body from offense:
That neither Courts nor Seasons serves:
and learnes without experience.
That has a Name as free from blot
as Virtues Brow; or, as his life
Is from the least suspect or spot,
although he lives without a Wife.
That does (in spite of all debate)
possess his Soul in Patience;
And pray, in love for all that hate;
and hate but what does give Offense.
Whose Soul is like a Sea, too still,
that rests, though moved; yet, moved (at least)
With love and hate of good and ill,
to whaft the Mind the more to Rest.
That singly does, and doubles not;
but is the same he seems; and is
Still, simply so, and yet no Sot;
but yet not knowing ought amiss.
That never Sin concealed keeps;
but shows the same to God, or more;
Then ever for it sighs and weeps;
and joys, in Soul, for grieuing so.
That, by himself, does others mete;
and, of himself, still meekely deemes;
That never sat in Scorners Seat;
but, as himself, the worst esteems.
That loves his body for his Soul;
Soul, for his Mind; his Mind for God;
God, for himself; and does control
CONTENT, if It with him be odd.
That to his Soul, his Sense subdues;
his Soul, to Reas'n; and Reas'n to Faith:
That Vice in Virtues shape eschewes;
and both, by Wisdom, rightly waigt'h.
That rests in action, acting naught
but what is good in deed and show;
That seeks but God within his thought,
and thinks but God to love and know.
That all unseen, sees All, (like Him)
and makes good use of what he sees;
That notes the tracts and tricks of Time,
and flees with the one, the other flees.
That lives too low for Enuies looks;
and yet too high for loathed Contempt;
Who makes his Friends Good-men, and Books,
and naught without them does attempt.
That lives as dying; living yet
in death, for life he has in hope:
As far from State, as sin, and debt;
of happy life the means and scope.
That fears no frowns, nor cares for fawnes
of Fortunes fauorits, or foes,
That neither checkes with Kings, nor Pawnes;
and yet still winnes what Checkers lose.
That ever lives a light to All,
(though often obscured) like the Sun:
And though his Fortunes be but small,
yet Fortune does not seek nor shun.
That never looks but grace to find;
"nor seeks for knowledge to be known:
That makes a Kingdom of his Mind,
wherein, with God, he reigns alone.
This Man is great with little state,
Lord of the World Epitomized:
Who, with staid Front, out-faceth Fate;
and, being empty, is sufficed:
Or, is sufficed with little; since (at least)
He makes his Conscience a continual Feast.
This Life is but Death.
Though Fire by warmth cheers life; great heat brings death;
though good Air life detaines; bad, life defines:
Though Water stays our thirst, it stops our breath;
though fruitful Earth does feed; the barren, pines.
Too-much o'er-fils; too-little, feebles life:
Wealth wants not Cares; and Want, wants all but Cares:
Solenesse, brings sadness; Company, but strife;
and sudden Joys do kill, as well as fears.
Mean mirth, is rational; extreme, is mad;
no good so good, but here it is mixed with ill:
Nay, too much goodness is exceeding bad;
yea, bad, if blind it be, is true Good Will:
And, save the Highest, our highest gain is loss;
Then, life's but death where al things are so cross.
True Wealth.
THat Grace that neither wonders, grieves, nor joys
at Fortunes utmost, seeking but to find
What Bounty (still in action) best imployes;
nor wailes the want that beggars not the Mind:
That neither, grieuing, sighs; nor, ioying, sings:
that shines most glorious, in most gloomy days;
Pleased with the state her own endeavor brings;
that droupes not with defame; nor swells with praise:
That scorns Disdain, disdaining naught but vice;
and Greatness rates by Goodness: doing naught
But good for ill; and that for avarice
of goodness only; by her only sought:
That Time and Wealth well spent, does not deplore:
This is that Wealth, without which Wealth is poor.
An Angel-like Man.
HE which (prouokt) endures, as borne to bear;
and looks alike in greatest weal and woe;
That so loves good, that ill he naught does fear;
and ebbes in Mind when Fortunes most do slow.
That bounds Desire with less than he enioyes:
(for, only nothing's less then Nature needs)
That holds all Virtues dear; all else but toys;
and, meekely, scowres Prides rust, from his bright deeds.
That Is better than he seems, yet seems the best:
but, without scandal, seeks to seem the worst:
That, quelled with Crosses, thinks him highly blessed;
and, for the Bliss of all, would dye accursed:
In sum: that would do all that All should do
For love of All: this Man's an Angel too.
A sick Minds Potion for all in Tribulation in Body: or for the saving of
their Soul.
THou that do joy or grieve beneath the weight
of his dear Cross, who did on it for thy sake,
View and reuiew these Lines with more delight
then Patients do the Potions which they take:
How ere they sense displease, they wholesome be;
so wholesome, as they often whole do make:
So may this Potion work the like in thee:
My Muse desires to make it grief expel;
And, all she seeks, is but to take it well.
Yet this I do as often the sick do talk
of Health; not for they have, but would have it;
So, I exhort to Patience, though I balke
her Way; and only wish the same to hit:
Yet, as a sick Physician soon may find
a Potion for another Passion fit:
So may a sick Mind cure a sicker Mind:
No Mind more sick then mine; yet well I know
What Is good for Minds so ill; and, that I show.
The Soul that sins, vnplagu'd, wild quickly grows,
as Trees vnprun'd; and, but sour fruit produce;
The heavenly Planter then, no cost bestows,
but it abandons as unfit for use.
Why weep'st thou then, sad soul? what thou endur'st
a blessing is, no beating for abuse:
Or, if it be, since it thy self procur'st,
Thy patient bearing this thy Sourge (or Cross)
Does make it score less; nay, thy Score does cross
Regard not then thine anguish, in the Rod;
but, in thy Fathers Will what place thou have:
If thou will share the pleasures of thy God,
then, of his Cup thou must, with pleasure, taste.
The Ox assigned for slaughter well is fed,
and lies at ease; while others labor fast,
And still are yokt, tired, pricked, and punished.
"Not all that stroke are friends, nor foes that strike;
"but strokes that maime from either, we mislike.
The Wounds, a friend does give, are sweeter far
than suger'dst Kisses of a fraudfull foe:
The first, often make; the last, more often mar;
for, Surgions Bands do pinch, to solder so:
Who binds the Mad, or wakes the Lethargicke,
how ere he seems, thereby, t'awake their woe;
Yet, he to both's a friendly Empericke.
" Severity is Mercy oftentimes,
"And Mildness cruel, that increases Crimes.
To weane us from this World, an unkind Nurse,
God (only good and wise) annoints her Teates
With Gall of troubles, spights, and what is worse;
and as a Mother well her Child entreates;
But makes her Servants use it ill; that so
finding of all, save her, but blows and threats,
It may to her, the much more willing, go:
So, God permits that All should us molest,
That we may fly to Him, and love him best.
The flatt'rings of the World, the Flesh, the Fiend,
are but the kisses of worst Enemies;
And though the Fiend to Heaven seems to ascend,
like Jove's own Bird that nestles in the Skies;
Yet is he but a greedy Bird that towers
to Heaven, while on the Earth he nearely pryes,
To watch his Prey, whereon forthwith he poures:
For, he but seems in Virtue to excel;
And flies to Heaven, to bear his Prey to Hell.
Out of close-Prison, and much closer Chains
many do travel; but, their Iourneyes end
An endless Kingdom is; whose greatest Pains
are endless Joys; these sincke, but to ascend,
Unlike the Fiend that mounts, to fall more low;
and, ruin that, on which he does descend;
But, low these stoop, to shun an Ouer-throw:
"To bear high Sails in Tempests, is to have
"Our Keele turned up with every Gust and Wave.
If Crosses heavy be; o yet (at least)
they make the Soul as sober as discreet:
If we be fellows of our Lords unrest,
we shall be of his rest and comforts sweet:
He wounds; but h^s are wounds but of a Friend,
that in no fortune once from us will fleet;
And lanceth but ^o cure, and make us mend:
"I^ is a Pain, that is free from all annoy,
"To die with torment still to live in joy.
He that had seen just Joseph in his Chains;
in Sackcloth Mordocheus (his Iyb^t nie)
Susanna going to her mortal Pains,
would have bewailed their infortunitie:
But, had he known that Joseph should be rid
from Gives to Rule; and Mardochs ieopardy
Conclude in Honor, as Sasannaes did,
He would have though them blessed in great mishap,
since so great Comfort was the after-clap.
So much the Fiend shall tempt, when thou do dote*
as shall enforce ^hy mind to mind her m^sse:
If Christ we serve, Affliction is our Coa^e;
his Cross, our Badge, to make us known for his:
His nakedness, how we should cloth us, shows;
his Gall, how we should feed on Agonies:
B'his hanging on the Cross, how to repose:
And by his Death (wherein all pains were ri^e)
How to esteem the pleasures of this life.
Worlds- weale's our woe; and yet we will not see it:
young Toby walked securely in the Mire:
But at the River when he washed his Feet,
a Fish was like to swallow him entire.
He that, on pain of life, must watch the Foe,
wakes best when he is neer'st Afflictions fire;
But, on the Bed of ease he does not so:
In this Worlds hell, if ease be good for ought,
It Is Poesy; yet too much makes it naught.
Besides, the better mind, the worse is tempted:
Pirates to charge the empty Ship, forbear,
But richly laden, and from fear exempted,
they charge it home, and give it cause of fear:
Even so the Fiend, while we are void of Grace,
lets not our Voyage, but our Helm does steare:
But when we take in truest Goods apace,
With Storms of troubles then he seeks to reaue
Us of our freight; and, over Bourd us to heave.
Of Joseph, Benjamin was loved best;
in his Sack, therefore, Joseph's Cup was found:
So does the Cup Christ drank of, ever rest
with those to whom his love does still abound:
On Beds of Roses lies Lasciviousness,
which Virtue hates, since she corrupts the sound;
But Virtue lives, too often; in all distress:
For, she respects not Fortune; nor disdaines
To lie with those, that often lie in Chains.
When God had praised Job, the Fiend straight praid
that he might prove him with Affliction:
And when the heavenly Voice, of Christ, had said;
This is my dear, and wel-beloued Son,
He, in the Desert, was, soon after, tried.
"They find most Lets that most aright do run;
"And they left Rubs that most do run aside:
"But, straight to run, dispight each spightfull Let,
"Does Glory gain, while Shame the rest do get.
When holy David did his People count,
a great Mortality his Coasts did scowre:
But when Augustus did this Sin surmount,
taxing the World (by his usurped Power)
He never was with least Punishment annoid:
So, Jonas, fly'ing, a Whale did him devour,
While Pagan-Passengers a Calm enjoyed:
But, though the Whale did Jonas (so) enjoy,
He swallowed, but to save, and not destroy.
And as a Scarre a Son takes in the Face
in his Sires quarrel, though the Face it marres;
Yet it procures the Fathers love and grace,
and so gets glory by such graceless scarres:
So, God desirous more to have us kind
than comely Children, thrusts us in his Wars,
As we were but to fire and sword assigned:
He takes more pleasure in the great'st annoyes
We have for him, then in our ghostly joys.
Each Danger, for our Mistress, vnder-tane,
seems most secure; and pleasant, deadli'st pain:
The Wounds both for and from her (though but bane)
seem honied-sweet; and loss, for her, is gain:
The colors that she likes; we most do love:
her words, mere Oracles; her spot, no stain;
Her actions, Patterns, ours to shape and prove:
All her perfections past Superlatiues;
And imperfections, least Diminutiues.
And shall we do and think all this, and more,
but for a shade of Beauty; and endure
Nothing for Beauties Substance? nor adore
the CREATOR but in the Creature?
O! it is a shame that Reas'n should be so mad
in men of mind: for love (if it be true)
Will most affect what is rarest to be had.
"The Object of true Love is greatest GOOD;
"If less she loves, it ill is understood.
With our Souls Eye, if Christ, our peace be viewed*
true love shall see a Soule-afflicting sight;
His head with blood (that thorns do broach) imbrude;
his Ears, with Blasphemies; his Eyes, with Spite:
His Mouth, with gall; his Members all, with wounds;
his Heart, with grief; and all in all unright:
Yea, so unright, as Justice quite confounds:
Yet, man's Ingratitude does griue him more
Then all these Plagues, as manifold as sore.
And, o, for whom does he the same endure?
for Man, begot in filth; in darkness, formed;
With throws, brought forth; and brought forth most vnpure,
whose child-hood's but a dream, with pains enorm'd,
His youth, but rage; his manhood, ceaselesse fight;
his Age, mere sickness, all his life unsure:
And, worst of all, his death is full of fright.
This, this is he, for whom Heavens God endures
All shame and pain, that pain and shame procures.
We Are no where safe, where we may fall to sin;
in Heaven, nor Paradise; with men much less:
In Heaven fell Angels; Paradise within,
the first man fell, through whom, all men transgress:
In the World Judas, from his Lord did fall:
so no place can defend from Wretchedness,
But he that place confines, and holds up All:
For who from worse to better falls, he may
From better fall to worse, without his stay.
If Crosses trauerse not our Comforts, then
we ought to cross our selves as many did
That were Men Angel-like; or, Gods with men;
who hardly lived, in Dens and Deserts hid:
Fed little, and slept less; in Sacke-cloth clad;
to mind them that to mourn they here were bid;
So, chose fo^d, place and suite as suites the sad:
To sing in Babylon, being Abraham's Seed,
Is to forget our Bondage and our Creed.
Heaven is our native Home, our Canaan;
Earth's but the shade of Death, or vale of Tears:
Then mirth in place of moaue, but kills a man:
at point of Death he is mad that Music neares:
Therefore those Saints, (discreet, sad, ^ob^r Souls)
rejected all that Sense to Life ende^r^s;
And live (as buried quick in ^aues) lik^ Mo^es.
"I^ Weapons l^s^e do w^und th^n s^arpe^t praise,
"Les^e hu^ts lamenting, then the Sirens ^ayes.
And as Men longing, at Noonday, to see
the Lamps of Heaven, descend into a Well
As deep as dark* that so their sight may be
the more contracted, smallest Stars to tell:
So, pious m^n, that feign would fix their Eyes,
still on the Stars (the Saints in Heaven that dwell)
Descend (in Earth) to low'st Obscurities:
"For, to a loving Soul all labor's sweet
"That tends (although in Hell) her Love to meet.
Low is our Way; but, our Home most sublime:
if home we wou^d, th^n this low Way is best,
Which yet, grows steep ^omewhere, and hard to climb;
yet, Love o'ercomes it, and eternal Rest:
Vain pleasures are like Gold thrown in our Way;
and, while to gather it, we stoop, at least,
It let us us, and our Judgments does betray:
But if on Heaven our minds be altogether,
Nothing shall let our Bodies going thither.
Which way go you says Christ to those that stray?
I am the WAY* and whither will you wend?
I am the TRVTH: or else where will you stay?
I am the LIFE: that is, your Iournyes end.
Now if this Way do lead over steepes and plains,
If this Truth teach us, rising, to descend,
If this Life be not got but with our pains,
Then, woe to them that laugh, since weep should al;
And blessed they that weep; for, laugh they shall.
We should be, therefore, like the Egytian Dogs,
that drink of Nilus running, lest they should
By staying much, to drink like greedy Hogs,
the Crocodile might have them, so, in hold:
Nature does teach them, reas'nlesse, what to do:
then, shall not grace work much more manifold
With humane Creatures, that divine are too?
It should: then, we are mad, or reason lack,
to quench our thirst of having with our wrack.
What is it to have much more than Nature needs;
but, to have more then Nature well can bear:
Like one that is deadly drunk, or ouer-feedes,
whose excess makes his Death excessive cheer!
Enough, then, should be better then a feast,
since more is mortal, howsoever dear;
For, Nature cannot well so much digest.
"Much less then little (only) makes her grutch;
" Enough maintains her better than too much.
Besides; in us, Sin is more odious grown,
then in the Devil: for, his was but one sin:
Ours, numberless: his, yer Revenge was known;
ours, when we knew it; and might favor win:
In Innocence created, sinned he;
but we, when to it we had restored bin:
In malice he, of God forsook; but we
when GOD recalled us to his saving- Grace:
He damned, we saved: yet were in worser Case*
For we were saved in possibility;
but he condemned; so, could not saved be:
He sinned against one that him did straightly tie;
but we (worse f^ends) against one that made us free:
Against one he, that doomed him second-death;
but, we against one that did for us: so, he
Sinned less than we; which Hope quite banisheth,
Did not the time we live in, stir us ( thrals)
To call for Grace, that comes, if grief but calls.
He that of Sin, does know the large extent
and Hell of Hels the Soul incurres thereby,
Shall little feel his Bodies punishment,
though he, in life, a thousand d^athes should dye:
Which borne with Patience, for his Saviors love,
quite abrogate his passed impiety:
And future sins and pains from him, does shoue:
"Immortal pains, extreme in quality,
"Annihilate all mortals quantity!
Our Faith, in the beginning, thin was sown
in the afflicti'on, shame, and death of Christ:
And then with Martyrs Blood it was ouer-flowne;
nor, can it grow (or prosper) to the highest
Without showers, ceaseless, gushing from their wounds:
then, what art thou, that soon thy Faith deni'st
For fear of death, that but thy Judge confounds*
O! I am he, the frail'st of flesh and blood,
That lives for ill, and fears to die for good!
Yet for Christ it is more glory to be crossed,
then of him to be crowned an earthly King:
The last may be, by chance or Treason, lost:
but, from the Cross, immortal Crowns do spring:
To be in glory may proceed of Grace
without the glorifide his meriting:
But well-borne Crosses alter (quite) the case.
" Virtue consists in doing hardest things;
"And, vicious Fools have too too often been Kings.
Who suffers straight, has but one victory;
but, he that always does encounter pain,
And yet o'er-throwes the strong'st Extremity,
is crowned every day, and still shall reign:
And what is Death but our best earthly friend,
which kills our Flesh, our deadliest enemy?
So, friendly is both to and in the end.
Then Crauen, why do I so fly his force,
That saues me when he makes my corpse a corse!
For, if the pining of the body be
the pampring of the Soul; than, must this friend,
(That, with his pains makes virtuous Souls to fly
where they are pampered without mean or end)
Be still embraced, no^ fled: but, o frail flesh
this dying doctrine does but thee offend,
That hold'st it most erroneous, fond, and fresh:
Thou can not poise these treasures of the Sp'rit;
for, they are weighty and, thou art too light!
Thou must have all that may thy Senses charm
with sweet, as most effeminate, delights;
And fly'st from Death to honied pleasures swarm;
yea, follow'st them in their unconstant flights:
Austeritie, nor can, nor will thou brook,
since it quite mortifies thy lively spirits;
And, for thy life, still put'st thee to thy Book:
But, thou do long for all that makes thee light,
As well within, as (gaudy still) in sight.
Mean while thou burn'st to naught with flames of sin:
for, as the Lightnings flash, although it spares
The painted sheath, it melts the Blade within;
(which is the thing more worthy) so it fares
With sins pernicious fire-flash: for, it leaves
the goods and body sound: but, unawares,
The Soul, more precious, it of life bereaues:
"But, who to spare a Thing of naught, will spend
"Gods Goape (his Soul) he is mad, and cannot mend
Many (though Princes) poor, are in their store;
in Honors, abject; malecontent, in mirth:
Their flesh, self- frailty; their spirits, basely poor;
their Soul's the sinck^ of all the sins on Earth;
The Moths of Mankind sores of Sou'raigntie;
vnhappily-happie in their base-high Birth;
Who live like Monsters, and like Devils dye:
"The rich, possess; the meek, the Earth enjoy:
"For they have most, that have the lest annoy.
Look in the Graves, survey the Emperors,
Kings, Dukes, and Worthies of the Ages past;
Then look on those whom life and death obscures;
(poor Beggars) tell me then, who is first, who last;
Who rich, who poor, who fair, foul, high, or low:
but, if thou can when burnt be diverse Woods,
Their Ashes well distinguish; then, may thou
distinguish of their bodies, states, and bloods.
Then wherefore weigh we so our Flesh (misled)
That Is light as vanity alive, and dead?
And life, at best, is but a golden sleep,
lined but with silver, or more earthly dreams;
Or else a Tragedy (that moves to weep)
of ceaselesse troubles, and most dire Extremes;
A passing but from life is life; for, still
in stay'ing, it goes; yet unlike Water-streames,
That, running, stay alike, by Natures skill:
Streams, running, rest the same, and not the same;
But, still unlike, does burn our vitall-flame.
Things future, are beginning endlesly;
Things present, ever ending; and Things past
Quite dead or done: for, while we live, w^ dye;
and, dead, we live: so life is first and last:
Then, better dye to life, than live to death;
for, mortall-life (in Death) but time does waste:
And Death does gain of ^ime he shorteneth:
Who, for our good, our bodies still assailes;
And frees our Souls by ruining their Iayles.
It is but Natures necessary wrack:
then let us make it voluntary, that
Is necessary; and still bow our Back
under the burden of our common state
With all alacrity; and give to God
his own; which were most damned to alienate,
Since he, of Dolor^, paid for it, his lode.
Then, it were Sacrilege not to restore
That which he made and lent, and bought, and more*
Death's dreadful but to those that know him not;
to those that know him well, he is not so:
The Old, before their faces him have got;
the young, behind; while he does all o'erthrow*
Acquaintance with the Wars, estrangeth fear;
they dread not waves at Sea, though high they go,
that used are to them, (though they all orebeare)
And with them fight in front, or in the rear:
Then, not to fear Death, is with him to be
Familiar made; and, bring Sense under lee.
The Pilot, while he is his Ship to guide,
sits at the Stearne; for, there he most preuailes:
And, so the virtuous (maugre wind and Tide)
when through this stormy Sea of life he sails,
Sits at the Stearne; that is, life's hinder-piece;
where he, in Tempests (bearing lowest Sails)
Conducts it safely to the Port of Peace:
"To bear high sails, and still forbear the helm,
"Is Ship, and Freight (so) quite to ouer-whelme.
Death is the door, whereby we must go out
of straitest Bonds to freest Liberty;
Then as the Prisoner that of Death does doubt,
yet waits the while for his delivery,
Most joys in sitting at the Prison door,
that, when it is opened, he may instantly
Get out, t'enioy his freedom, as before:
So should our Thoughts be fixed on life's last step,
To which we soon may iump, but not o'er-leape*
Thoughts mortifide the ashes are, wherein
the fire of Virtue, being raked up close,
The longer lasts, and greater heat does win,
to kindle courage in our cold dispose,
That when Death comes, and those shall be vnrak't
we may rejoice our flame so freely goes
Unto her Sphere; then should it not be slack't
In Chimney of our flesh, where it does lie,
Like to be quenched with our iniquity.
And, as a flood that from a mountains top,
does (rolling) run, with strange* as ceaseless, noise;
And over many cr^ggy* Lets does hop,
till in the Val^ beneath, it rest enioyes:
So, fares it with our life; which we begin
with ceaseless outcries, for our felt annoyes;
Then down Times hours we run, through lets and sin,
Till in the end we rest in vale of Death,
To which we blow our selves by spending breath.
Then Death's our rest* for, since the same has past
through life's pure Veins, or rather Lords of life,
Of the least bittern^sse it has no taste;
but, freshest sweetness therein still is rife*
It is the virtuous peaceful Paradise;
but, to the vicious, it is a World of strife:
For, naught is plagued in Death, but mortal Vice:
Then he may well be styled a Martyrs Peer,
That virtuous Death does rather seek than fear.
Death to a Thiefs's compared; who, if he finds
the Man, he means to rob, upon his guard,
He speaks him fair; else him he binds and blindes:
so, Death is kind to those for him prepared:
But, cursed to them, that, careless, spend their breath:
for, all that watch for him, he does reward
With endless Life; the rest, with double death:
But, they that dye for Virtue or good note,
Though he o'er-throw them, yet they cut his throat!
And why should his worst look more irke, or fear
a Man resolved that he can dye but once:
Goliath bought a little Stone as dear
as Sampson did the House that chrusht his bones:
And, from a Chair to fall, the Neck can break
as well as falling high, as Thunder-stones*
And, all is but one Death, (be ^t strong or weak)
Deaths sharpest sting, the Heart but enters in,
Which dies with that, and so it will with a pin.
Why grudge we then, to endure for endless life
that, for vainglory, freely we endure?
Repine we not to dye in damned strife,
and, grudge to dye to make our life secure?
Is Death so sweet, when it the Diu'll commands;
and when God wills it, is the same to sow'r?
What manhood's this, whereon* now, manhood stands?
O ougly valor (if it valor be)
To flee to death; yet, fearing, life to flee.
Live well, and, so, dye well, perhaps, we may;
but live still, and not dye, we never can:
Life is not short, that, soon, goes well away;
and, longest life Truth calls but a spanne:
He dies old (though young) that well does die:
and Life well lost is better then ill wanne;
For, so to win we lose eternally:
Then, what can counteruaile eternal loss?
Nothing that is; no Patience bears that cross.
If we for virtue do our life forgo
our Pitcher's broken over the fountaine-head,
From whence, what filled it, came; and, where does flow
the Aqua vitae, that reuiues the dead:
Our liquor is not lost, but run into
the proper Fount, by Nature thither lead,
And heavenly Grace assisting Nature too:
Our life's a war, where patience guards from loss:
Our Captain, Christ; our Standard is his Cross!
But, seems God long, thy labors to content;
the more forborne, the more will be thy meede:
He takes on Intrest what before he lent:
and, takes delight t'o'er-guerdon each good-deed:
If in our Vs'ry, then, we wish delay;
fear we the Lord of All should fall to need,
That, on his Bond, we dare not give him Day?
And, shall we trust a Merchant, that may break;
More than that King, of whom all Kings do seek?
Admit thou should be rackt to strain the Truth,
(though Racks are made the truth to gain not strain)
Yet, if thou her believe, let never thy mouth
deny it for the cracking of a vein*
We owe so much to Truth* as should we pay
the real debt, to us should naught remain;
No, not our lives, which must, for her, away:
For, God and Truth are Relatiues. Not so:
For, God is Truth; then, for him All must go.
If Truth-pretending Turks or Infidels
should on our Plagues, which we for her endure,
Triumph; and make our Pains so many Hels,
alas* (poor Souls!) they (so) do but procure
Their own perdition: for, that God we serve
is God of vengeance; and the same will pour
On Good-pretenders that so ill deserve*
"To be for truth reprocht; yea, p^agu'd, or slain,
"Is to be glorious, free from Death and pain.
The red-hot It'n into the Water thrown,
thunders therein, as if it did it harm,
Yet, so, the force of burning's ouer-throwne;
the while the Water, cold before, is warm:
Like Thundrings Tyrants use, in every Age,
who, though against the Truth themselves they arm;
And with the blood of Martyrs quench their Rage,
Yet all their triumph's nothing but the noise
Of their own quenching, and the Martyrs Joys,
Then, if they show us Honors, Gold, or Iemmes,
t'intice us to their Faith; they shall but show
The Lion Chafe, which (chasing) he contemnes:
and if with Torments then, they us pursue;
The Salamander they but threat with fire;
which makes her rather to rejoice then rue:
So, that the worst they can do, we desire:
Then, through the Red Sea of our blood, thus shed,
Unto Heavens Holy Land we soon'st are led.
Saints on the Earth resemble Babes dead borne;
that are no sooner borne, but borne they be
Unto their graves; so, straight to Ashes turn:
but Tyrants (Viper-like) do live to ^ee
Their own Confusion; and the death of those
which they have martyred: so, from death, made free;
And, manumiz'd from this Worlds mortal woes.
The first, are borne to dye, to live in joy;
The last, to live, to dye in all annoy.
When Thieves an house do break, to rob by night;
(since it is a Work of darkness) first, they will
(That they may not be known) put out the light;
and so the good are handled by the ill
Lights of the World the Good are said to be;
but bad-men ( Sons of darkness) put out still
Those lights, lest men their darkest deeds should see;
For, all that evil do, the Light do loathe:
So, love they darkness; and, do darkly both.
Unto the light it is no reproach at all
though Bats and Owls abhor it; nor, is it
Disgrace to Wisdom, if but Idiots shall
condemn the same for Polly: they want Wit:
To judge of Wisdom, which is too too bright
for men to look on that in darkness sit;
To judge of coulors, blinde-men have no light:
The fault's not in the coulors they are so;
But in their Eyes that can no coulors know.
Far sweeter are the Tears of them that mourn,
then is their laughter that in mirth are lost:
All crosses by the virtuous so are borne,
that most they joy in that which grieueth most:
Like Roses mong the Thorns, their pleasures are
most sweet, when as they are most sharply crossed;
And, being at the worst, they best do fare!
But, put the least cross on a sensual Soul,
And it will (blaspheming) grudge, nay, cry, and houle.
The greater Ox the yokes worst part does bear,
(that is, the heauiest) Christ (that is, thy God)
Thy yokes most heavy part with thee does wear,
that so thou may, with him, the lighter plod
Through thick and thin: for him thou can not do
that he did for thee; he feels the Rod,
Yet he does all in us, and for us too:
"Mates in afflictions, make Affliction less:
Then, if Christ bear, with us, naught can oppress!
This life is but a lie; true life's not here;
it seems, but is not: so, it is not true:
Than, for a lie, or what does false appear,
let us not lie to God, or break our vow
We made in Baptism; but to cleave to him,
although for it, it might (perhaps) ensue
That we to him, in our own Blood should swim*
That water's strong; it will not let us sincke,
And, to engrosse sure Deeds, the only Inck^!
The life of David was but Tears and moan;
but Salomon^ was joy and Mirth through-out:
Yet David (sure) is saved: but, Solomon
whether he be, or no, Believers doubt.
Poor Lazarus lived here in dying-plight:
Dives in all that reueld with the Rowt
Of honied Pleasures, and extreme delight:
But he that lived in death, in joy now lives;
And he that joyed in life, in death now grieves.
As sweetest Wine does soonest boil our blood:
so, this Worlds favor works us most annoy:
The Water of Detraction then, is good
to mingle with it, lest we should be coy:
For, being gracious in the great Ones sight:
when Cunning clawing makes us doat, with joy,
We Are best remembered by the tongue of Spite:
"So, foes do often make those, that friends do mar;
"As many live most warily in War.
He that should pass a Foord, that swift does glide,
(so to prevent his giddiness of Brain)
Should fix his sight upon the further side;
not on the Water, and himself sustain
By one more strong, that, as his guide, should go,
lest that the Current, running so amain,
Should ouer-whelme him by an Ouer-throw:
Then, rest on Christ, and fix thine Eyes on bless*
while thou go through all Torrents of distress.
Through fire and water we must pass, before
we can arrive where nothing can distress:
Our flesh in both should purged be more and more;
for, in the p^r'st it is full of filthiness
In double kind: and, makes clean Souls the while
^o loathe their Lodge, so full of slut^ishnesse,
Consorted with all vices that defile:
" Pride, Envy, Wrath, Lust, Hate, with all amiss,
"The Speci^s are, and Flesh the Genus is.
For, flesh is earth; so, in our souls it sets
foul thoughts: (as earthly, as voluptuous)
The World as vain as c^rious thoughts begets;
the Fiend, malicious thoughts and envious:
Who on the flesh for help does much rely,
since household enemies may soonest hurt,
She being here freedeniz'd specially;
and we in bondage toiling here in dirt:
Then, does the World rely upon the Devil
To make flesh love the World: and, so, all evil*
So these procure us Worlds of Enemies:
if Avarice be quail'd; Lust, seconds her:
If Lust be foiled; Ambition straight does rise:
If she be down; then Anger wageth War:
If it be cooled, Pride, Envy and the like
give fresh encounters in this mortal Jar;
And all, with all their might, our ruin seek:
Then, where the fight's so fell and ceaseless too,
Were not for grace, most would themselves misdo.
Then, if we weigh our flesh how frail it is,
how full of all disease, in life, how dead!
In Death, how foul! (as naught so foul as this)
how then can we be light with so much Lead?
Or how can we be pleased such filth to feed
as in our Nature naturally is bred;
And, whence so many Prodigies proceed?
Then if we may be rid from such annoy,
But with one death, it is the life of Joy*
And what is Honor but a lie, like life?
for, as a Ship at Sea, with swelling Sails,
By winds, that for her peace are still at strife,
dancing upon the Waves with merry Gales
Allureth every Eye her pride to praise:
but when to the Haven she comes with her auailes,
She Is by the Searcher sacked, or Custom paies:
So they, in life* that are most honored,
Are often most dishonored being dead.
And likewise, while some sail on Surges high
of puft-vp vanities; and still ensue
The Tide of Times, armed with Authority,
are praised, and followed of the worldly Crew:
But if, by grace, they do themselves withdraw
into a virtuous life: then, straight their due
Is searched or sacked, by Custom, or by Law:
O th^n how blessed are they that most are cursed
(For their so blessed retiring) of the worst.
The Libard bears to man such mortal hate,
that in his face he flies when him he sees:
Therefore they use a man to figurate,
and show i^ him, at which forthwith he flees,
And piece-meale tears it; so, his wrath t'asswage.
showing thereby how ill with man he'agrees:
So Satan and his Members being too weak
To tear our God, to spoil his Pictures seek.
As Grapes unto the Wine Press all do come,
that come to Virtue in Faiths outward House:
They shall be crushed with many an heavy doom
of Justice n^m'd, but most injurious:
But, though their Pressures squize out all their blood,
yet in Gods Seller shall it find a Room,
And there made Rose of Sollace, sweet and good:
Then, let us still be pressed so pressed to be;
For, running loose, we soon run to our lee.
The more huge Billows beat upon a Rock,
the more they break; and so, to froth are turned;
The while the breaker seems their spite to mock,
that hurt themselves, not him, that so they spurned:
So, let the spightfull spurn us while they will*
our Rock stands sure; while they are ouerturn'd,
Whose blows, for us, Christ bears, or breaks still!
So, hurt themselves they may, but never us;
Since still, in him, we are victorious.
Yet it is too true, some wise and wicked too
(if possible the wi^ked may be wise)
May, if a King will do what they bid do,
undo a Realm with Legal Tyrannies;
And all the guilt thereof shall still be gilt
with guilefull gloss of Conscience, most precise;
Till all be as they would, though all be spilt:
"For, that is but spilt that stands but on the fall
"Of sacred Virtue, that vpholdeth all.
To carry Pagan hearts in Christian breasts,
is no new thing, though many (new) do use it:
"On fairest pretense the foulest purpose rests:
yet Beautie's good; but foulely some abuse it:
The heart of man so many windings has,
that for a Maze of skill none can refuse it;
Since hard it is to turn to every path.
O Christ! were thou on Earth as once thou were,
How would thou, now, behypocrit man's heart?
Such fair pretenses we may well compare
t'Egyptian Temples; fair, but most profane:
Garnisht with Gold, and Columns, rich as rare,
in the outward Rooms: but, if a view be taken
Of the inward, where their God is still confinde,
some lothed Viper, full of deadly Bane,
Or Snake or Cockatrice, we there shall find:
So, in such fair Pretense we (often) see
The Devil himself, as GOD, adored to be.
With Christ's plain Coat to hide vice (which enormes)
is to disgrace the Owner: or it is
The Devils virtue, that himself transformes
t'an Angel bright, to do the more amiss:
But, every Age has groaned with this Disease;
yet never Age, for that, was eased of this,
Groan while we will, it will us still displease:
Then make w'a virtue of necessity;
And, what we needs must bear, bear willingly.
For, these; and like afflictions, still must prove,
and purge our manners from the dross of blame;
From Earth to weane, to God to increase our Love;
like Smithes Forge-water that augments the flame:
And, pleasure is most pleasant unto those,
that have been least acquainted with the same;
As heavenly Joys are after earthly woes:
And, Griefs grow senseless in a virtuous Will,
Or rather sensual; for, they ravish still!
If in our foot, much more if in our Head,
a thorn be thrust, our Heart, nay, Soul will grieve:
Then fly we pleasures, as they us have sled;
and rather wish for pains that ease might give:
Then since our HEAD is thorned over all,
if we his Members be, shall we be fed
With honied pleasures while he tastes but Gall?
God shield we should: then let us only joy
In his sowre-sweetest Cross, and his annoy.
Moses did see him in the midst of fire,
and fiery Thorns: and in the mount among
Lightnings and Thundrings: Daniel did aspire,
to see his Throne, which fiery wheels did throng:
Then shall we look for more Prerogative,
than had these friends of God? then him we wrong
T'expect what he, in Justice, cannot give:
For, we must see him as the others did;
Else may we seek him, but he will be hid.
For, as the Sires delight to have their Sons
resemble them in favor: so it joys
Our heavenly Sire, to see us (wayward Ones)
like him, in patient bearing all Annoyes,
Which, for our good, his grace on us inflicts:
for, when we bea^e what beauty quite destroys,
(The wemmes and wounds of all his sore conflicts)
In his fair Eyes we are most lovely, then;
And foul'st, when fairest but in the Eyes of men.
We see a Dog, that but with crusts we feed,
will in our quarrel fight while he can move:
And Servants which we hire for little Meede,
will ne'erthelesse die often for our love:
Then shall we Christians be less kind then Beasts*
or thankful less, than those we hire for need
To him that gives us all that Faith requests?
O no: no, no, it were too great a blame
The dignity of Manhood so to shame!
The Flower of Iesse did most sweetly smell,
and came to perfect growth upon the Cross:
The fruit of life could not be gathered well
without sharp Thorns that stooke unto it close:
And Gall was tasted, in a deadly fit,
by the best Taster; who, by his life's loss,
Wanne Life to all that dye in him, and it;
And, till he rose from Death, he did not eat
The Hony-combe; but, fed on sower meat,
The Waters of Affliction are the streams
whereat our heavenly Gedeon still does try
Who are ^it Soldiers for his Wars Extremes;
and seu^rs such as on their Bellies lie,
To drink as thirsting that they, full, may rise;
from those that, for their mee^e necessi^ie,
Reach out their Hands to take what does suffice:
"Great Wealth and Virtue no agreement have,
"Since Virtue makes it serve her as a Slave.
Though Prisons, of themselves, be Satan's folds,
wherein, for slaughter, his best Sheep he keeps:
Yet may the Cause make them the safest Holds,
(yea, Heavens of Saints) for, tho the Linnet peepes
(When she is encag'd) at every loope and Chincke,
as longing to be gone, and often weeps
That she is restrained; yea, leaves her meat and drink;
Yet in the Cage she is from danger sure
Of Fowlers Snares, and Kites that would devour.
But those in Patience that their Souls possess,
(while they, in bonds, do Tyrants wrath assuage)
The sweeter sing, the sowrer their distress,
like well-taught Lynnets used to the Cage,
There learn they sweeter Notes than Nature gave,
when they abroad were in their Pilgrimage;
New exercise of Virtue, there they have:
Where may we sing with Quires of Angels then,
More free, then when most fast from mortal men?
Then out of Prison go we, when we be
put into Prison, so the cause be good:
For, Liberty is but Captivity;
that (lightly) makes more loose frail flesh and blood;
Kings Courts; yea, Heaven it self must yield, with awe,
t'a Prisons glory (though defiled with Mud)
That keeps Gods Servants safely for his Law.
"A Princes Presence makes a Cote a Court;
"And, that Pris'n's Heaven, where Saints and Angels sport.
The Coriander-seede, in pieces cut,
each piece brings forth as much as all would do:
And so a Martyr into Prison put,
and there first b^uiz'd, then, cut in pieces too,
No drop of blood, no piece (though turned to mould)
but it has force the Devil to undo;
And works more (often) then the Owner could:
For, if in private Iarres effused Gore
For vengeance cries; his can do that, and more!
Of all parts of a Tree the Root seems worst:
for, it is deformed, and most offends the sight:
Yet, all trees virtue thence proceeds first,
stem, branch, and leaves, flowers, fruit; yea, life, and might
The Root alone may challenge as her own:
for, by the same they are both borne and nursed,
Which in the Root (as in the womb) was sown:
So some like Roots, be'ing ragged in the Eye,
Dying for Christ, makes Christians multiply.
Some Trees there are, that, if their Rind be rent,
cut, pricked, or braiz'd, a precious Balm it bleeds,
In sight and savor fair and redolent:
but neither yields, till outward it proceeds:
So, Martyrs when their Flesh is gasht or torn,
out flows the Balm that cures their own misdeeds,
And others heales, that (so) to Virtue turn:
This balme's so sweet that it the World perfumes,
Whereby the Pagan Christ's sweet Name assumes.
The Roses sweetness, if untouched it be,
soon with the leaves does wither quite away;
But by the Fire when it is stilled, we see
it yield sweet Juice that hardly will decay:
Nay, more; the Leaves so baked into a Cake,
do long make sweet both where they lie, or lay;
And all that neighbors them, most sweet do make:
The leaves, so parcht, delighting still the Nose,
Immortal makes the Sweetness of the Rose.
So, Martyrs sweetly live, with Brambles keen,
since in their conversation they are pure;
Yet few can see it, since they live unseen:
but still from worldly Comforts make them sure,
Bolt them, nay, bray or burn them if you will
then will their virtue sweetly all allure:
And Heaven and Earth with divine savor fill:
Had they, by Nature, did, their leaf nor iuce
Had not been half so sweet, nor meet for use.
Dark is the Water in the Airy Clouds,
yet that, the Rose and Lilly brings to light,
Mantling the Earth with all that Nature shrowds
within her bowels yer the Waters light:
What are these Clouds (of which the Psalmist sings)
but Clouds of Witnesses (as black as bright?)
Grave Martyrs that give Truth true witnessings:
Their Blood the Water: and when out it poures
The Time looks black, but Saints spring with the showers.
With blood the Churches Bud came forth at first,
as earnest of the fruits she was to bear;
Who was no sooner'spoused unto Christ,
but in their blood her Infants drowned were,
To show her future throws in bearing young:
your years (sweet Lambs) could not believe nor fear;
But yet your flesh could dye to right Faiths wrong:
Thus did the Church as soon as she was wed,
With chastest blood forgo her Virgin-hed.
Then to our blood the Gates of Heaven fly open;
and, with our blood Hell-fire's extinguished:
Our Bodies blood does scowre our Souls like Soap;
and with our blood our Body's honored:
The Devil shamed, and God glorifide:
for when, in Truths defense, the same is shed,
It makes our deeds most glorious in it did:
The seed of Virtue, and the bane of Vice
Is blood so shed: " No price to'a bloody PRICE!
The resurrection of Truth, Faith and Fame,
did flowrish most when soakt in Martyrs Blood:
Whose Palms with weight grow higher, and their flame
does wax more strong, the more it is with-stood:
Their Spice, by pounding, yields sweeter sent,
and Lets to Truth are borne down with this flood:
Which let abroad, does grow more violent;
And, while it runs, it rores, and after cries
For vengeance on their Foes, Truths Enemies.
With Tyrants Thundrings, Errors Cloud is cracked,
th'inclosed light of Truth's disclosed so;
And showers of blood (that then for Truth are wrackt)
makes Martyrs more and more on Earth to grow:
For, still their Side by God, himself, is backed;
they ( Sampsons) with their Death, do quell the foe,
And most torment him, when they most are rackt:
then, good Cross (blessed sheep-crooke) Saints still keep
to Christ, whose Hook thou art, to catch his Sheep.
For, as a feate Embroderer, that has
a piece of Velvet brackt, t'embroder on,
So draws his Work, that he, to hide the scath,
embroders richliest in that place alone:
So* GOD upon the Velvet of our flesh,
all torn in time of Persecution,
Couers the Bracks with Beauty fair, as fresh:
So, that the other Parts are beautifide
By those rent parts, by GOD so glorifide!
And as the Paper-mill, of rotten Rags
taken from the Dunghill, by still mauling it,
Makes so white Paper, as the filthy Iagges
may now infold the purest part of Wit,
Or purest things that come from Heart, or Hand:
so, we by Martyrdom, are made most fit
(How ever base) in glory still to stand:
And made more apt (divinely) to comprise
Gods glorious Graces, and his Rarities.
Though th'vpper heaven does turn (by violent sway)
the lower, out of course, from East to West;
Yet, of themselves, they wheel the other way:
(for, they, by Nature, turn from West to East)
So, though from the East, where Truth begins to shine,
her Foes would force our Faith, or course, at least,
To Errors West, where Truth does still decline;
Yet must we stir, as Grace and Nature moves
Unto the East, where God our course approues.
A Martyr's like a Dye, which though it fall
this or that way, it falls no way amiss;
It flat will lie, or cannot lie at all;
so, Martyrs lie with Truth, where ere she is:
They will lie level with the Earth; nay, more,
In, or above it lie, or stand for this;
Hang, burn, or starve, all is one; they feel no sore:
Then when God throws at all, with them, to win,
At every throw, he draws some others in.
Abel he cannot be that is not taught
true patience by the malice of a Caine:
And happy he that like a Cole is caught
out of Afflictions fire with God to reign
While he is bright, and glowes with Charity:
for, whether to be white or red, in grain,
The Church were best, is uncouth to discry:
The Churches flowers the Rose nor Lilly want,
But both adorn, and make her triumphant.
The martyred Body of our Lord and God
is the main Rock from whence his Saints are hewne:
For, from his flesh they rent are with the Rod;
and by the rentings of the Rod are known
To be true flesh of his torn Flesh, and so
to be his Types, by which him self is shown
To Heathen-folke, that him desire to know:
"O! it is a glory past the height of FAME,
"To be like Christ in sufferings as in name.
The ancient Romans used, their force to try,
t'incounter Bears and Lions; and the Scarres
That came by savage Tuskes, they valued hye;
and piercings of their Paws so many Stars:
If in vainglory they such Dents endured;
what should we do in Christ, our Captains, Wars,
Be'ing of true glory, for our fight, assured?
We should (with Patience armed) encounter death;
And, for that gain, with torment, lose our breath.
Shall Saints fear Men, whom Angels ought to fear;
for, Saints shall judge the Angels; and, the F^end
Has cause to fear them; for, they rule do bear,
over his Legions; yea* his Forces rend:
The World should likewise fear them since the Saints
shall, with heavens Vmpier, judge it in the end;
Than he that at his threats, or torments, faints
Can be no Saint; but must be Judged of them
(A Coward) to foul shame, and pains extreme.
Elias must not fear, nor fear disguize,
to let the Mantle of his flesh to fall,
To fly in Coach, ^lame-wing'd; to Paradise:
Gedeon must break his earthly Pots, since all
Their Light's so seen to put his foes to flight:
Joseph must leave his Cloak, or else he shall
Be moved to wrong his Master in his right:
" Life leads to Care; but, Death to Comfort leads:
"Then Death, in Syons cause, in Sion treads.
At Sea, decays the Sailer; in his Tent,
the ventrous S^uldier; in the Court decays
The virtuous Courtier; Justice, in Judgment;
true Faith, in Friendship; Skill, in Arts Assaies;
In Manners, Discipline: so, we, alone,
(that, dying, live in these too nightly days)
Under the ruins of the World do groan:
All is quite or ^erlesse; which does portend
The World, with us, is even at an end.
And o what should I say, when Courage makes
the Cause nor good nor bad; for, Falsehoods Friends
Have did in Errors cause, at flaming Stakes,
as stout as Martyrs in their constant ends?
Witness that Legate, sent from Powers beneath,
who late in Smith-field, Error so defends,
That he out-fac'd Truth, men, flames, dread and death:
And Anabaptists there for Error stood,
A^ stout as those that, for truth, lost their blood.
But, Legate, though thou can no answer yield,
yet let me question thee as many do
Question the dead for Error which they held;
tell me, who gave thy false Faith Courage too,
That thou for Error should so stoutly burn,
for Error that must needs thy Soul undo,
If, on the Coals from it, she did not turn?
Can Satan counterfeit our GOD so nigh
In's Gifts, that men, for him, should stoutly dye?
But thou might answer; Faith, though false it be,
yet, if the Soul persuaded be it is true?
Upon the Heart it works morrally,
as Faith does, which to Heavenly Truth is due:
This made the Priests of Baal their flesh to wound;
and many Indians sense of pain subdue;
Yea, burn with those, whose Faith, they hope, was sound:
Then not to suffer much; nor Constancy
Proves Error, Truth, which fire's too cold to try.
Then Truth must try her self by Reas'n and Faith;
but, where Faith bids believe, Reas'n still must be
Obedient to believe what ere she says;
though she say, Three are One, and One is Three:
A Maid's a Mother, that a Man had wiu'd:
true God, unmade, made true Man, really:
And that the Dead shall rise, as here they lived:
All this, and more, of Faith, must Reas'n believe;
But God (the Fount of Reas'n) this Faith must give.
Death is the worst of Ils, yet best to those
that dye for Faith well tryde: and who they be
The Conscience of the Dyers never knows,
if with the Rules of Faith they disagree:
Then God knows who are his: and Men may know
that all are his, his ^reest Spirit does free
From life, by death be it violent quick or slow:
A Saint as Man, may sear and faint in death,
As Christ did (dying) yer he yielded Breath.
Let this Cup pass, was Terrors proper voice,
yet vtter'd by our Saviors sacred Tongue:
Our flesh (he took) annoi'd, did make that noise,
fore-feeling it should be with Torments stunge.
My God, my God, why have forsaken me?
unto our Flesh entirely did belong;
Then may true Martyrs in Death drouping be
With sense of pain; but God, that gave them strength
To stand to him, through him, preuailes at length.
For, it is not hard when Gods soft comforts cheer
our Soul to suffer, torments to endure;
But when such favors are turned all to fear,
and in distress of Mind to hold us sure
To God, and for him all annoyes to bear;
that is a Miracle performed by Grace,
Past Natures best performance; and is dear
Unto the Doner; then, who does the same
Goes straight to glory through Afflictions flame^
For, Works of Justice we should rather do
than those of Grace: now Justice wills that we
In Truths defense should dye, with torment too,
though Grace, to us, a stranger seem to be:
" Obedience far excels Sacrifice;
the first, is duty, in the highest degree;
The other, in our Wills Devotion lies;
Then courage in our Death is no true Sign
Of life elsewhere, without the Cause divine.
For, through Vainglory some in Death have seemed
as bravely resolute, as Saints have bin:
Nay, often the first have been the better deemed
by outward-sight, that sees naught within:
Leaena being but a Curtezan^
tyring her Tortures, though she did for sin,
Spat out her Tongue, that to accuse began:
And many more, of like sure, so have did:
Then, by brave dy'ing, plain Truth's not iustifide.
But dye they how they can that dye for Truth,
they stoutly dye, since they dye willingly;
But much more they that dye in sportfull youth;
and though Deaths ougliest face may daunt their eye
When they behold him; yet, if they endure
that fear, and pain, which after they must try,
They stoutly dye, though saint be all their power;
Nay, more they do, since they so little can;
" Flesh is but mire, the Mind does make the Man.
But see what ends the Tyrants erst have made,
that of Gods Saints made ceaselesse Butchery:
Nero, the chief, that first did them invade,
in his own blood his murdring hands did dye,
And while he bled his last, he (crying) said;
Foulely I lived, and dye more filthily:
Thus, for his pains, in paining, he was paid:
Domitian, by his Servants being slain,
For doing like, the like reward did gain.
Fell Maximinus, with his Sons, was brought
to self same issue: Decius, with his Frye,
Incurred the like: Valerianus, caught
by him that swaid the Persian Monarchy,
Was cag'd in Iron, more fast then Lions are,
who, in the end, being flaid, did wretchedly;
But Dioclesian worst of all did fare:
For, he fell mad; ^o, made himself away,
While fire from Heaven his House did level lay.
So of the like, in life, and their Degrees,
I^ might count many dire and awful deaths;
All drank Gods vengeance Vials to the lees:
and, in their blood overwhelmed, they lost their breaths
For, God vnstings such angry Waspes and Bees,
since each their Stings in Saints too often sheathes:
" God burns his Rods when he has paid his fees:
Yet Stings of spite, in The Head of Power, with wit,
Can sting the World to death, if Heaven permit.
But howsoe'r the Almighty throws his Rods
into the fire, when he his Ire does cease;
Yet, often the scurged fall to greater ods
with Goodness, than before: The Churches peace
Makes her more loose then when she is bound to fight
(incessantly) with foes that her disease;
"For, they live wrong that rest to much in Right,
" Metal (though Silver) resting long vnscowr'd,
"Will canker; or, with filth, be quite obscured.
For (ah) this Witch (the World) with pleasing charms
so lullabies our Sense in soft delights,
That though we be, upon our guard, in arms,
yet we are taken in our Appetites;
And made to serve the Devil, and our Flesh
in strictest Bondage; while their Parasits,
Sinne-soothing Pleasures, do our Sense refresh,
To serve them with the more alacrity;
So, ^lee lets Grace our Sense to mortify.
A Parable.
Wee' are like a Man chaste by a raged Bull,
who in his flight into a Well does fall;
And, in the fall (by chance) he lights full
upon a Tree, that there grows in the Wall:
And, resting there, there sets his Souls delight:
but looking better on the place, withal,
He spies two Mice, one black, the other White,
Who still the Root of this his rest do gnaw,
And more and more asunder it do saw.
Then, underneath he looks, and there espies
a gaping Dragon threatening to devour him:
And at his feet four striving Serpents rise;
yet, looking up, he spies (what does allure him;
And makes him deem, he is from dangers free)
a little Honey (which he ever tryes)
Cleaues to a branch of that untrusty Tree:
For which, these dangers he neglects; and still
That Honey sicks, yet never can lick his fill.
The Moral.
The Bull, is Death; the World, the Well; the Tree,
our time of life; the white Mowse and the black,
The Day and night: the striving Adders be
the Elements, that strive us still to wrack:
The Devil, the Dragon: and, the Honey is
our whitest Pleasures, that are lined with black;
And, black within, for loss of Glories Bliss:
Who, therefore, would not deem that man were mad
That in such dreadful dangers can be glad?
What comfort can we have then, in a place
that is by the Prince of darkness governed?
Where every thing is in a cursed case;
and, by Gods foes and good-mens, peopled:
Where Pains be ri^e, extreme, and infinite;
but Pleasures few, and false, frail, dull, and dead,
Which, at the best, at least, do vex the sp'rit:
Where Plentie's full of peril; Want, of woes;
And (in a word) where all, that ill is, flows.
Then, cast we off these pleasures, that but cast
a mist before our Eyes, and mock our Sense:
But let us hug those pains, and hold them fast,
that bring eternal joys for recompense:
Now, if this Potion work not in sicke-mindes,
at point of death is their Intelligence;
Nay, Death the power of all their forces binds:
In few: Great things by greatest minds are sought:
The small but seek for shades, the shells of Naught.
To attain a quiet Life.
WHo would in quiet spend his life,
must shun the Cause of strifes Effect;
And yet with Vice still live in strife:
so, Strife retain, and it reject.
1
Hold no Conceit against that Conceit
the King maintains; unless it be
Against that Faith, whose form and weight
with TRVTH, well tried, does still agree.
2
Find never Fault, but when the same
concerns the Honor of the Highest:
Or else the Kings; to hear whose blame,
is blame which often to Death is nigh'st.
3
No Wager lay: for, that but stirs
the Losers heart to hate and ire;
Which often enflameth Ciuill-warres:
then, give no Fuel to this Fire.
4
Nor make Comparison: for it
is odious; and, works like effect:
Why should thy Will, t'aduance thy Wit,
another Wit or Worth deiect.
To praise thy self, is but Dispraise,
unless Spite wrongs thine Honor (known)
If others Shame thy Glory raise,
let their Shame raise it, not thine own:
For, it is but Shame, to glory in
another Shame, because we yet
Are free from blot: but Praise we win
by hiding both our praise and it.
This is the way to earthly Peace;
Without which grows all strifes increase.
A Cordial to cheer the Heart under the Cross of Confinement: written to a
great Lord, once a perpetual Prisoner.
WHile yet thou lie in Afflictions fire,
more bright to make thee, and increase thy worth,
From mine Inventions Mud, I send this Mire,
to cast upon the flames, if they break forth.
Then, deigne t'accept (vnhappy-happy Lord)
this Muddy Stuff, my creeping Muses Meat;
The rather, since some ease it may afford
in plaistring Patience if it scorch with Heat*
For, greatest Spirits do greatest Passion feel
in bearing Crosses, though but small they be;
But under great, great Men do weakly reele,
though greatest Men from weakness should be free.
But thou (to thy true glory be it said)
do cross expectance, bearing so thy Cross,
As those that are by Hands of Angels staid;
so, draw'st much winning out of little loss!
For, Liberty to lose, or terrene trash,
(the Mind being free) is better lost than found;
Which often, on Waves of Weal, their Owners dash
on Rocks unseen, which either part confound.
Now be'ing thus staid, thou can not rise to fall,
Fortune has bruiz'd thee, but on Safeties Base;
That now thou can no longer be her Ball,
to strike thee in Life's Hazard, for her Chase.
Now may thou sit securely where thou art,
and see (unseen) the Worlds Reuoluings still;
And how men live by industry, or Art;
and what events ensue the greatest skill.
So sitting, bound to Safeties Shore, at ease,
thou may with ioyfull-Sorrow freely see
How other Folk are tossed on Dangers Seas,
as they that bear the highest Sails still be.
Now on the top of some proud Billow borne
as high as Heaven (while Billow-like they swell)
Then, by a Crosse-Sea is that Billow torn
be'ing at the highest; so, straight they sincke to Hell.
And they that have the Wind and Tide at will,
each Moment fear the Wind may turn about;
And so their good is never free from ill,
because their Hopes are ever bound to doubt.
But now thy Will (familiar with thy Cross,
all Storms of Passions being ouer-blowne)
Has ever Calmes that never threaten Loss,
that more then now, thou never did hold thine own.
Now Mischief cannot see thee, though she would
look never so narrowly to glance at thee:
For, thou art hid in Britains strongest HOLD,
where safe thou holdst thy self and thy degree.
And some that Life immurde, would have to chose,
although, as Monarchs, they might all control:
As greatest Charles his Empire did refuse,
and shut his Body up, t'enlarge his Soul.
For, that great Priest of Hyppo held but right;
who rather out of Hell his GOD would see,
Than be in highest Heaven, and miss that sight;
then Bondage, with that Sight's divinely free!
And long I wish (great Lord) thou may be so;
(though short I wish thy Troubles) and that God
That has perhaps t'vplift thee, brought thee low,
will make a Staff of that that was thy Rod.
The Hearts of all, in his all-holding HAND,
he wields at will, and Patience will requite;
Then, thy Commanders Heart he may command,
(in time) Sunne-like, to fill thy Moon with light.
Then, when thou have regained this Comforts Sun,
thou w^ll may say (as some have said of yore)
"The had been undone, had thou not been undone
since then thy Moon shines fuller then before.
For, even as when the Moon is at the full,
she from the Sun is most remote we see:
So, in thy Wane (perhaps) this Sun may pull
thee to him near, to light thy Heart, and thee.
That so it may I Will pray; and pray that thou
may Grace attract by virtue of thy Grace;
Meek Patience can the Heart of Highness bow,
and make self Wrath to show a cheerful Face.
For, when our lives do please the Lord of Life,
he will make our greatest Foes our greatest Friends:
Then shall our Troubles cut the Throat of Strife,
and make our peace to make our pains amends.
Long life is promised those that live aright,
then may thou all disfavors ouerliue:
" Patience o'er-comes what naught o'ercomes by might,
even God himself, and makes him to forgive.
But say the worst should hap (which hap's the best)
that thou should live and die in state confinde,
Thy state's most blessed, since so little blessed
with Freedom, that to Earth enthrals the Mind.
Yet Liberty thou have as large and free
as highest Virtue (Angel-like) does crave;
For Men like Angels love with Christ to be
in's blo^dy-sweat alone, or in his Grave.
And, if that fellows in Affliction make
affliction less, thou have thy fellow- Peers
In worser plight, whom Death did even forsake,
that they might live with thee to ease thy Cares.
"A good-mans state scorns Pity howsoe'er:
for, though it be engulph'd in deep'st distress,
Yet his high Virtue him aloft does rear,
that no Calamity can him oppress.
And though he be coupt up in Little-ease,
his spacious Mind to him a Kingdom is;
Wherein he wanders Worlds that most do please^
for, Heaven and Earth holds that great Mind of his!
While in his Conscience Theater is played
the Comedy twixt his Souls Spouse and her,
How can his Soul but wander all unstaid
through worlds of joy, although he cannot stir!
When as a Caesar (in all liberty)
bathing in Pleasures, or more sanguine Streams,
Upon the Rack of Conscience bound, does dye
extremest Deaths, in midst of Sports extremes!
O did thou know some poor spirits Rauishments,
when as (entranced) they feel unbounded Bliss,
Crowns thou would loathe, as crossing those contents,
and let the Cross quite break thy Back for this!
It is not; no, it is not high estate
has highest Pleasure; but it is only those,
That, for those Pleasures, fading pleasures hate:
"but they in Hell, no other Heaven suppose.
While outward Comforts compass us about
in Griefs pursuit, we to those Comforts fly;
But when they break the King, we straight run out,
to find more sixed joys, or (ioylesse) dye.
Then is that sour Affliction highly blessed
that more Perfection brings (like Ligatures,
That hurt to heal, and wring but for our rest
so, they are blessed whom Walls from wrack immures
We Prisoners are within Heavens outward Walls,
and are, by Nature, all condemned to die;
To Death we must, when Death (our Heads-man) calls,
some to dye gently; some, more violently.
And though our Prison be as wish we would,
and may, perhaps, therein go where we will,
Yet (like the stricken Fish) we are in hold;
and are in hold to him that sure will kill.
But here is the ods; those in close-prison pend,
are there with Death much more familiar made;
So that, in favor, he their griefs does end
for endless joys and peace which cannot fade!
But, those that (loosely) have the World at will,
do take their swinge, as Fish (if hanged) desire,
Till they be tirde with Pleasure, paining still,
then gently come to Hand; so, to the Fire.
And see how those that (care consumed) do climb
at Sternes of State (still menaced to be riu'n)
How public Toils engrosse their private time,
that they can scarce a Moment spare for Heaven.
And public Persons (if they mighty be)
the public state, and theirs, they still must eye:
So, to their Souls they scarce have time to s^e;
which, so neglected, often unawares do dye.
Then (noble Lord) if in thy self confinde,
thou art most happy thus confinde to be:
And since our Bodies do but Iaile our Mind,
while we have Bodies, we can never be free.
Then, if thou weigh'st the volubilitie,
of Time or Favor, Fortune, or this ALL,
Thou will but loathe their loose uncertainty:
for, hardly Ought does rise, but soon to fall.
Who ruled this Realm three thousand years agone?
so many ruled it since, that none does know.
"A Plow-mans blood, in time, ascends a Throne;
"And Royal Blood descends unto the Plow.
Yet, that King knows not from the Cart he came;
much less that Carter knows he came from Kings:
"But Times vicissitude is Fortunes game,
whose Rest puts up and down all eathly Things!
Then if we look on Life; how frail is that?
resembled to a shadow of a Dream;
To smoke, t'a thought, to naught, t'I wot not what,
far less then naught, that can so much as seem!
A Grape-seede one, an Hair another spils:
some Smoke does choke; mere nee^ing some destroy:
Some other Choler; and, some laughter kills:
some fear; and (which is strange) some die with joy!
So that when our last Grain, is running out,
no Grain so small but turns our flesh to dust;
Be we as Giants, strong; as Lions, stout;
all is less then nothing, then to naught we must.
The Grave (too like a Ierfe) does naught but fill
his greedy Panch, and straight out-straines the same:
Then fill again, then strains; then fill it still,
till it all Flesh consumes that Nature frames.
One rots therein to give another place;
a second to a third, and so, forth on:
Till Earth yield up her dead; and she embrace,
her funeral flame to lea^e Corruption.
Then, since that Life and Flesh so soon decay,
why should our flesh with life be long in love?
This world is but an Inn; this Life, a Way;
(a wrackfull way) that Wisdom lothes to prove.
Which has, of yore, made Kings to quit their Crowne^
the lighter, so, the Way of life to run:
Directed, by the Cross (over Dales and Downs)
in private Paths, the public Toils to shun.
We (like to Fools or Babes) for Bables long,
wherewith we hurt oursel^es and others often;
Yet straight we whyne if they from us be wroong,
our Natures, toward Folly, are so soft.
But our all-wise-celestiall-louing Sire
takes, or keeps from his Children which he loves,
All that may harm them, though they it desire,
but gives, though it displease them, what behoues.
Some long for State, and what is that but strife,
more full of trouble, then it is of State;
(With dangers mixed) a simple Hell of life;
which none do love, but those that rest do hate?
Some love to bear the most imbrued Swords
before the Majesty of Victory;
And what are they but Butchers made of Lords,
that (like fiends) Lord it over Calamity?
Some hidden Arts do openly desire
and seek for knowledge only to be known;
But knowledge such, is light but of Hellfire,
to see (with Eve) such Prides confusion.
Some fame affect, and for it venture far,
seeking by Sea and Land the same find;
"But Fame most follows those that flee from her;
and, often who meets her, she o'erthrowes with wind.
In summe^ both all and some (o strangest Case!)
have hurtful humors; which (if not restrained
By him that is the Lord of power, and Grace)
all would to naught, where Grace should never (...) gained.
Then, if our Flesh and Sinne-corrupted Bloods
could rightly feel, they well might see that Hand
That made us, will not mar us with his goods;
unless our selves his powerful Grace with-stand.
Our dearest Sense is Sight; yet if the same
offend that Grace, we must pull out our Eyes:
Then must we Limbs, of less account, vnframe,
much more Things less, if they against It rise.
"The greatest Cross is never to be crossed;
"the Way to Heaven is by the Ports of Hell;
"The Waters most corrupt, that least are tossed;
"and their account exceedes, who most excel!
He Is rich enough for Virtues choicest friend,
that neither needs to flatter, nor to borrow:
To lade our Backs with Baggage till they bend
(wandering in stumbling-wayes) augments our so^row.
" Abundance is a Burden to the Soul,
and strongest Souls can hardly it abide:
For, Men that, being mean, could Pride, control,
be'ing mighty made, are most controlled by Pride.
Nature's suffiz'd with Nothing, in respect
of that our Wolfe-like Appetites require;
And they as Naturals great-men reject,
whose Souls have not the power of great Desire.
"But greatest Men have not still greatest Grace;
(ah would they had, then should thou soon be free
From thy restraint) and all desires are base
of Greatness, that with Goodness disagree.
I wade too far (perhaps) in Dangers Deepes,
that may o'erwhelme the rash, though never so tall;
But Truth's my Guide; and, Care my Footing keeps
on double Duties Ground, and firm in all!
Yet wot how ill it stands with Policy,
to fancy those whom Times disfavor most;
Since Fancies such, acquire but Jealousy
(if not much worse) of those that rule the Roste.
For, Wisemen shift their Sails as Wind does shift,
and, but whom Fortune favors, favor none:
For, if Kings have with Fortune been at shrift,
they leave them to their Penance post alone.
But I conceive it a prodigious Sin,
(like that of Judas ( Peter's I would say)
Who left his Lord when trouble he was in,
which (in effect) is merely to betray.
I fear not Justice, since she does command,
that we should love our friends in spite of Fate;
And, to the Alter, with them go or stand,
though we might (therefore) be o'erthrowne with hate.
Then Justice warrants me in what I do;
and I will do but what selfe-Iustice would:
That Is love my Liege, obey and serve him too;
yet love that Lord that likes me as I should.
Let him have never friend that leaves his friend,
in show of sound affection, in distress:
And let highest Wit to lowest Hell descend,
that weighs ought more then some friends heaviness.
Let those that wait on Fortune weigh the Times
in Scoles of greatest Sculs, I, little i,
Do little weigh the ways how other climbes,
since I would live as longing well to dye.
Beyond my Birth, has Fortune been my foe,
she never yet so much as smiled on me;
No force, since I my self the better know;
and see the World while me it does not see.
Fear they her frowns, that care but for her fawnes;
I fear, nor care for neither: (being white
With Cares and Fears) for my Grave open yawnes
to swallow me to save me, from her spite.
Enough (great Lord) my Proheme is a Feast,
whereat my Muse does surfeit with sowre-sweetes;
Hard to receive, and harder to digest,
where love and rashness, Rhyme and Reason meets;
But if they meet with Grief that meets with thee,
I grieve with joy: for, thou art fast and free.
A Dumpe, or Swans-song.
ALl in a gloomy shade of Sicamour,
that did his leaves extend (like Shields) to bear,
The Beams of Phoebus, darted in his power,
at those that underneath them shrouded were)
I me reposed, while my Thoughts did range
here, there, and every where, where thoghts might roame;
So, by their change at last, my latest change
became their Subject, with my latest Home.
And when, with Travel, they themselves had tired,
I likewise tired with life (that stirred them) too,
Thus flasht I out, (with sacred fury fired)
and my thoughts Bottom thus did I undo.
Why long I longer here to live in death?
for life, if mortal, dies all the while:
Be'ing but a puff, but of the weakest Breath;
yet, blows me ( Weakness) into strong Exile.
As soon as borne, was I condemned to dye;
since when, Time has but executed me;
Yet life prolongs in dying misery;
so, yet I am as those that dying be.
To him that gave me life, a death I owe;
which, since I can, I must, and shall repay:
His Powr's as great to take as to bestow;
then will I pay him, though I quite decay.
I, dead in Sin, his only Son he slew,
to please his Justice, and to make me live:
Since me he bought, I Will give him then his due;
which had, I have much more then that I give.
Death soon will rid me from this life's annoyes,
( Annoyes that naught can rid, save death, from life)
And put me in possession of those Joys,
that are as far from end, as free from strife!
And were not madness to repine, that I
had not had life when Eve did Adam wiue?
Then, it is but all alike to live, and dye;
as it is, Not to have lived, and not to live.
Then, life IS not, that not immortal is;
for, mortal life is but Deaths other name:
Nor is that Bliss, that is not fearelesse Bliss;
nor glory, that is subject still to shame.
The Days of Heaven are datelesse; since the Sun
that makes them such, does neither set nor rise;
But stands (as it shall, does, and still has done)
fixed in the Noone-stead of ETERNITIES.
Here one's the ruin of another Day,
while (like a ne'er-suffized Grave) the Night,
Does bury both in silence; yet, does prey
upon them both, till both play least in sight.
" Death is the door of life: so, would I live?
then, through this door to life, I needs must go:
For, through this door Death, LIFE it self did drive:
then, since LIFE did for life, I must do so.
Two only had the privilege to wend
another way to life that mortals were,
But it was in fiery- Charets, to this end,
that Fire should flesh refine, yer it came there*
There, where all joys, united, are of force
(for, force united, stronger makes the same)
The spirit and flesh (both ravished) to divorce,
and melt their powers in loves eternal flame.
What Lets shall let me then, from Paradise?
Mountains of Gold, and Rocks of rarest stone,
Crossing my Way, I (trampling) will despise,
if thither Hope but go with me alone.
This WORLD's a Vale that ceaseles tears do spoil;
and make it so a Bog, or loathsome Lake:
Then who but Swine (that pleasure take in Soil)
will here (if they can choose) abiding make?
Heaven is my Home; the HIGHEST, my Father is;
his SON, my Brother; Angels, are my Friends:
Then while from Them I am, I am amiss;
and, lightly, miss the Means to so good Ends.
My Body's but the Prison of my Soul;
which straits her more, the more that Prison's free:
Time's but the Rock that up my Life does roll;
and Earth the Place where Heaven spinnes it and me.
Here must I fight till Death for endless Life;
"The Chariot of my Triumph then, is Death:
Then (as I would be free from endless strife)
to mount this Chariot I must spend my Breath.
The ground whereon I tread's the ground of Grie^e;
so that each step does grieve me: for it is
A Sanguine-field, that bears Hurts, in chief,
crossed with sinister-bends; and All amiss.
Then here to be, amiss is to be borne
in Dolors Field, to every foul Disgrace:
O Death then help my Souls house to adorn;
and let thine Arms be mine; for, life's are base.
Am I not dirt and dust? then, marvel is it
if I, but with a thought, be that or this?
A shadow by some substance, does subsist:
but, all my substance, but a shadow is.
The Sun does rise and set; the Moon does hold
a constant course in most unconstant state:
The Earth now quick with heat, then dead with cold,
does show their plight that It preambulate.
Then o ye Saints (whose Bellies being rife
with Waters both of life and grace) be ye
Pure Aquaducts, by, life, to bring me life
from the Wellhead, that fill may you and me.
The Grave (though wide it gape) dismayes me not,
since it is the Gate of glory, rest, and peace:
And though therein my mortal Part must rot,
yet thence it springs with much more fair increase.
If the last breath we call our Bodies death,
then may we call the other Breathings deaths;
Since Life and death do come and go with Breath,
we have as many deaths, as we have breaths.
Yet, twixt this life, and that we death do call;
this ods there is; while life does last, we dye:
But when Death comes, we die no more; but shall
by dying well, live well immortally.
O then, look how the Labourer for Night;
the Pilot, for the Port; and for the Inn
The Poast does long: so does my tired spright
(by death) still long for Life, and rest therein.
Death is my Hope: than fear not I his knife;
Fear is his Sting; but, Hope has pulled it out;
The mortall'st Wounds, immortal make my life:
then, better dye in Hope, then live in Doubt.
If Death be painful; then, is pain sustained
before, or, at the Article of Death:
But not before: for then, but thought is pained;
and at the instant it is but rest of breath.
So that in Death, is rest without disease:
then Death be kind, and rest my life in thee:
While others, (that do cast such sums as these)
these Ciphers sum, decyph'ring thee and me.
And, Ciphers cast life's Ciphers to, and fro,
that I their number (seen) may multiply:
Take naught from Naught, and naught remains; and so,
the sum of All is less then vanity.
Ciphers (not Numbers) call I them, because
they run (sans number) roundly to the Grave:
At which my Muse, being now arrived, shall pau^e;
referring these to those that Science have
To cast up life's account; and to forecast
the stricktnesse of Life's great account at last.
ESSAIES.
The Fool has said in his heart, there is no God. Psalm. 14.1.
THat GOD IS, no Man ever made a doubt;
if doubt some did, they did it not as Men:
For, faithless men, by mere sense, GOD find out:
what are these senseless God-deniers then?
They are not Fiends; for, they have humane Souls;
and Fiends confess, with fear, there is a GOD:
Much less, not Angels, Beasts, nor Fish, nor Fowls,
for, these praise God! What then? Even their own Rod.
Who do themselves, tormentingly, confound;
hardening their Hearts; and, so, plague Sin by Sin:
Yet joy in that which does their Conscience wound:
is it possible such Creatures ere have bin?
It Is possible, for, such there be, God wot,
That know not God, because God knows them not.
No pleasure to the pleasure of the Spirit.
TWo Joys there are, whereof, the one is not;
of Flesh the one, that other of the Spirit:
The Spirits joy is real, active, hot;
but, that of flesh, is vain, cold, dull and light.
How then can they be two, if but one Be?
one is; but is, but merely in Conceit:
Which in Conceit, is forgde by Fantazie;
and whatsoever is forgde, is but deceit.
Yet in this mere deceit, most men conceive
most pleasure to consist; and, it to buy,
They most essential perfect pleasure; give:
so, make their Judgment give their Sense the lie:
For, Sense could never tell, by her Receipt,
That such Joy Is, that is but in conceit.
Vanity of Vanities, all is but Vanity. Eccles. 1.2.
A Mortal Eye can see but mortal Things;
and whatsoever is mortal, is but vain:
Then all we see is vain, though Crowns, or Kings;
yet Men will lose themselves, the same to gain.
And yet, thy ween, they win by so great loss;
o corrupt Judgment! Men made to be lost:
Who will all Vices (hatched in Hell) engrosse,
them to retaile, to get but Care, with Cost.
It Is said, Light gain does make an heavy Purse;
but, this light gain does make an heavy Heart:
To gain all blessings, with Gods heavy Curse,
is too light gain for such an heavy Thwart:
For, who does purchase All at such a Price,
Does buy but extreme Vanity with Vice.
Fly vain Pleasures, as Pains intolerable.
IF Vanity be All, and All be vain,
how scapes he from this All, that is All in All?
It is, because He ever does remain,
the Cause of Causes metaphisicall.
Since fiends immortal are, not vain they are:
for Vanity is but the Instrument
Wherewith, in sport, they do this All ensnare,
to bring the same to Be as they are bent.
And, so, unbend their being, and, distort
the even Compass that became their Form:
So Vanity them backward bends, in sport;
and, Satan still, in sport, does them deforme:
O then let All that would be bent aright,
Beware these sports, that do distort them quite.
To the good, the Worst falls out for the Best.
THe Cross and Crown, on Earth, our value try;
as Crowns alone, in Heaven, our virtue crown:
In Earth, if crowned, we swell in Heart too hie,
and, under Crosses we lie basely down.
But yet, if Grace do Nature ouer-sway,
and that a Cross, or Crown, alike we bear,
A pride of Grace, our Nature, will bewray;
so, in our Nature, Sin, though dead, does steer.
And yet this Pride does humble us the more;
for when we mind it, grief does us pursue:
So, is our Sore still cured by our Sore;
for, still we heal as we our grief renew:
This, is a Work of Nature; that* of Grace;
And this and that, runs with us all our Race.
To the Lady Anne Glemmam, upon the death of her noble Father.
TO lie down under Crosses, is to lie
in our Confusion: for, that is Cowardice;
And has no taste of true Humility:
then, such prostration is an abject Vice.
Nor is it the Way from Crosses to be free
to sink beneath the Cross, which weighes the more
The more we, under it, so, humbled be;
but HE that bore your Sins It stoutly bore.
Yet is the Cross imposed to humble us;
nor, is it removed, till we be humble made;
How much more low, so much more glorious;
(so as the Cross does us not ouer-lade)
Then if we meek be made, we win by loss;
And cut a Crown of Glory from the Cross.
That to sin finally maliciously, is irremissible.
THe oftener Sin, the more grief, shows a Saint;
the oftener Sin, the less grief, notes a Fiend:
But to sin often, with grief the Soul does taint;
and, often to sin with Joy, the Soul does rend.
To sin, on Hope, is Sin most full of fear;
to sin of malice, is the Devils Sin:
One is, that Christ may greater Burden bear;
the other, that his Death might still begin.
To sin, of frailty is a sin; but, weak:
to sin, in strength, the stronger makes the blame:
The first, the Reed, Christ bare, has power to break;
the last, his Thorny Crown, can scarce vnframe:
But, finally, to sin maliciously,
Reed, Crown, nor Cross has power to crucify!
That mortal Life is a mortal Plague.
THis Life, of ours, is called Life most amiss;
which may be termed, more truly, life's disease;
Whose perfect'st Pleasures are opposed to Bliss,
and, greatest pains grow from her greatest ease.
One, has the Plague, we say, and he will dye,
that yet may live; then much more may we say,
That One has Life, and Death he cannot fly:
for, Life's a Sickness mortal every way.
Does mortal life, then, bring the mortall'st death?
then, no Disease so mortal as it is:
A Plague of Plagues then, is our mortal breath;
yet mortal Men would still be plagued with this:
Though Life be Plague of Plagues, yet this desire,
Is the highest Plague, whereto no Plagues aspire.
Too much Honey breaks the Belly.
SWeet honied Life, thinks one, that Honey draines
from bloomes of Helebo^e (this vain Worlds-wealth)
Which, though It breaks his Belly, yet his pains
seem, to his Appetite, true Signs of Health.
O bewitched judgment! Senses r^ft of Sense!
deem ye that sweet, that yields Eff^cts so sour?
That spoils the Will and soiles the Intelligence?
and Soul and Body, quite, in dung, devour?
Yet, those whose Spirits are turned to grossest flesh,
nay, those whose flesh seems turned to purest sp'rit
Are thus bewitched; which Sweetes their Sense refresh;
who sting like Waspes, if them they lose by might:
If thus they fare by whom the World is led,
What meruell though in sweet Sin It be dead?
The Fool makes a mock of Sin. Pro. 14.9.
WHo laughes at Sin; for Sin can hardly weep:
who ie^ts thereat, is mad, or misbeleeues:
Then, since the World still laughes at Debt so deep,
it shows it madly sins; and never grieves.
Sin is a Stinger; and who feels it not
is mortifide, not to, but in foul Sins:
Then, does the World, in Sin, but stincke and rot;
for, it feels not when Sin ends, or beginne^.
If it do stincke, what Nose can it abide?
if it do rot, what Eye, or Taste, or Touch
Can be content by them it should be tried?
Then only Hearing hears it without grutch:
And that is because the Dead, in silence, cry
Cave to those, that, living, are to dye:
Then they that love it, in such loathsome plight,
Have neither Sense, nor Reason, Flesh, nor Spright.
The World is in a desperate plight, for which Christ refused to pray.
But if the World be dead, God owes it not;
for of the living, He is God alone:
And, if not Gods, it is the Devils Lot;
which bounded is with the chief Cornerstone.
From that Stone upwards, all to God belongs;
and from it, downwards, all the Devils is:
For, God, being just, the Devil never wrongs;
but; lets him have his due; as He has His.
Then, to be Gods, is still to rest thereon:
but who can rest there, that God does not stay?
Then, since the World refused this Corner Stone,
God, for the World, refused but to pray:
O woeful World, how can thou merry be,
That so forsook'st him, that so leaves thee?
That all Heresies are grounded on the infallible Scriptures erroniously
interpreted.
EAch Bible-bearing Sectarie will say
he is in the Truth; and proves it by her Word:
Thus, is the Word of Truth wrencht every way;
and made a Text that Falsehood does afford.
Yet, Truth's but one, though Falshood's manifold;
and when Truths Saints, with her Word, do conspire
To find her out; that Truth embrace we should,
though we should mount to her in Coach of sire.
No Exposition of the Truth is true,
but what Truth makes her friends, alone, to make:
Who know Her best, and what to Her is due;
but, foo^es, wise in their own Eyes, both mistake:
For many Eagles Eyes have better sight
Then one blind Bats, that hardly see the light.
That the Eye is Sinnnes Burning-glasse, working upon the Heart and Soul.
AS Sinne's most conversant with outward Sense;
so is she most familiar with the Eye:
For, she sits in the eyes Concupiscence
as in her Throne of greatest Majesty.
From eyes, to eyes, Sin does, in triumph, Tilt:
(a fiery Serpent, clad in silver Rays:)
The end of whose Carr^ere is, where her guilt
makes black the Soul with Dolor and Dispraise.
Heuah first sinned: but, ere her Heart, her Eye
did Sin commit; and all the lustful Crew
Melt in that Sun, like Ye, until they dye:
yet, like dead Flies, those Rays, their lives renew:
Then, since this Sun exhales such Humors ill,
We must with Sorrows Clouds, eclipse It still.
To take is to give; for a Gift, Liberty.
Our Mouths run over with false Superlatiues,
in praising him, though bad, that did us good;
Which are naught else, but true demonstratiues
of the Corruption of our basest blood.
For, Pride can give as much as Charity:
and Tyranny as much as Mercy can:
But, who appl^uds or Pride or Tyranny,
do Monsters praise, the Mind does make the Man.
Then shall we take no good gifts of the ^ad?
I say not so: and yet, I say, who will
Take Kingdoms of the Diu'll, are worse than mad;
for He does good to no man, but for ill:
Then since, for Gifts, M^n give their Liberty,
Such Gifts bind Takers often to villainy.
Again, of the same.
ANd yet blind Justice sees her Sword to sheath,
if any offer her a Sheath of Gold;
Nay, high and hardy Hands often sincke beneath
the abject Gift and Giver, to uphold.
There Is naught more free than gift: yet naught more ties
the Hand, that takes them, to the Gi^^rs will:
And yet (^h woe therefore) some, god^y-wise,
take Gifts, as good: and give, as gifts were ill.
Were I a Devil, yet were I liberal,
(in this damned Age) I would be served with Saints:
For, if I sent bright Angels to them all,
they would adore me, maugre all restraints:
But, were I GOD, if Gold were not my Friend,
Pure Saints, in show, would loathe me like a Fiend.
To him that has, shall be given; and from him that has not, shall be taken
away, that which it se^mes he has. Mat. 25.2^.
HIs Word is Truth, that said, to him that has,
shall still be given; and, from him that lackes
Shall be withdrawn that which he holds, with scath;
so, this World makes men, made; and marred men, wracks.
Who least does lack, has most bestowed on him;
for GOD and M^n give richest gifts to Kings:
So, he that does in all abundance swim,
each Hand to him much more Abundance brings.
What means this Mystery so mystical!
what! World, begin'st thou now, with Age, to dote,
That Thou do give some All; some, naught at all:
and, sinck'st some, sincking, to make swimmers flote?
I know now what this means; but, this I know,
It Is too much to be loathed, to be too low.
Of the Neglect of Art and Virtue. To mine ingenious, dear, and
well-accomplish'd Friend, Mr. John Sandford, of Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford.
Go, forlorn Virtue, into Eden go;
and, with Leaves, hide thine outward nakedness:
Though it is their shame, not thine, that made thee so;
there make Work for the Press, far from the Press.
Tell Times to come, how much these Times neglect Thee,
in Lines as far from death, as free from dread:
And, make their Ofsprings blush that do reject Thee;
yea, live in shame when their Shames Cause is dead.
With open Hand to All, thy Largess throw;
though All are too straite-handed, unto Thee:
Make them, them selves, and thee, aright, to know;
that in thy shining Lines they, both, may see:
But, if they will be blind, and both still wrong,
Eden still keep, and sing a Sion Song.
Ye have made a mock of the counsel of the Poor. Psalm. 14.10.
THe Wisdom of the Poor, is still mispriz'd,
since by their Wealth, Men's Wits are valued:
Speak he like Solomon, he is ill advised,
say some, that understood not what he said.
But if he be an Isis-bearing Ass,
and speak what he himself, nor none conceiues,
His Praise shall, as his Folly does, surpass;
and speaks, as he no place for answer leaves.
Yet had some Kings, some Beggars in a place,
where he might not be seen, to use their Wit,
(If it were Sovereign, though his state were base)
this Sovereign would, of him, perhaps, beg It:
Which when He vents, the Peoples voice is than,
This is the voice of God, and not of Man!
Against Fortune Tellers, commonly called, Wisemen.
Since all our Knowledge from our Senses comes,
which often mistake, then must our Wisdom needs
Mistake, as often as Error ouer-comes
our Knowledge, that from ^rring Sense proceeds.
Then all our Wisdom must be most unsure,
as are the grounds from whence the same does grow;
Yet some great Wi^^ m^n har^ly can endure
that GOD should know that, which they do not know.
And, since they know, they know not as they ought;
more then they ought they seem to know, at least;
These are the^ Wi^e-men that by Fools are sought,
to s^ew ^u^nts to come to give them rest:
On whom they do^ bestow a Wise-mans ^ee,
Which th^se wise Seers, only, do foresee.
Sinful Curiosity had rather be acquainted with the Devil, then with God, or
his Saints.
Have any made a Cou'nant with black Hell,
and are Familiar with infernal Sprights?
They shall be sought to, wheresoe'er they dwell;
for, many Souls desire to see those sights.
But lives Elias (most familiar
with GOD and Heaven) where great ones most frequent,
He lives as in his fiery C^ach he were;
for, none comes near so mere an Innocent.
Thus does the Devil Lord it over the Air,
and those that most do prize It; while his slaves
Are more sought to then Saints or Angels fair,
though such Fiends bideing be among the graves:
Then, what so senseless, as the World, to take
Delight in Diu'ls, and in Hell, for their sake?
Again, of the same.
WEre Bacon, and that Vandermast alive, ( Air)
(if live they did where Men might draw but
They, with a mischie^e, would much more than thrive;
for, they would smothred be with Men's repair.
Some Bladuds would inuest them with their Robes,
nay, Crown them too, to learn them but to fly:
That so they might but glide about the Globes,
to be admired for Iack-dawes quality.
So much Men, singularity affect,
that to be singular, (though but in Toys)
They Will fre^ly give what they do most respect;
so much their inward Man, loves outward Joys:
Nay, Men to Hell will creep from out the Croude,
Ere they will be drowned in the Multitude.
That Persecutors of Truth, are their own Tormentors.
IF Virtues Sons be plagued with Vices Brood,
(since they, by Nature, still do disagree)
It Is for the vicious plague, and virtuous good;
which both shall here, or elsewhere, shortly see.
If our good life, our Enemies increase,
that bad increase, in that great good, is drowned;
Who fight against themselves, but for our Peace;
and, through our Weeds, their Hearts and Souls do wound!
Our Savior, through his Death, did Death subdue,
to make us conquer by enduring strife:
Then, what though They, to Death, do us pursue,
when, through our Death, they dye to give us li^e?
But with such proofs, none but such Saints are proved
That of his Judge, in death, was feared and loved.
The righteous, in Joy or Grief, Life, or Death, GOD keeps as his Treasure.
FEll Malice most of her own Poison drinks;
for them she plagues, do sippe but of the top;
But she of that, which to the Bottom sinckes,
to work in Her Perdition, without Hope.
Impiety and Plagues are of an age;
being burnt, not in the Hand, but in the Heart:
For, who against the good do battle wage,
shall perish through his power that takes their part.
And, if, for virtue, Men are made away,
GOD takes for sacrifice, their sufferings:
But when, by course of Nature, they decay,
he then receives them as Peace Offerings:
So that in life and death, the righteous rest,
As the Apple of his Eye, as safe, as blessed.
That men's Devotions toward God and Goodness, are most mutable.
Naught in our Life endures so many Turns,
as our Devotion; off, on, in, and out;
Now, cold as Ice, and by and by It burns,
scarce in one mood, while we can turn about.
If good we hear, perhaps we think thereon;
but be it ill, ill (past perhaps) we mind:
Thus, roll we ever, like a thriftlesse stone,
till Death us stay by force, or Course of kind.
From Sin to Sin, as Flies from sore to sore,
we still do shift; the best Men, Men are still;
The worst are worse than Beasts, to kill, or store;
for, they are leave in good, but fat in ill:
Then blessed are they, that neither fat nor leave,
Have rolled to Rest, but with the Golden-meane.
To my most honored and approved best Friend, and Alye, Sr. Fran: Louell,
Kn^ght. God takes the Will for the Deed.
ALthough we do not all the good we love,
but still, in love, desire to do ^he same;
Nor leave the Sins we hate; but ^^^ing, move
our Soul and Bodies Powers their forc^ to tame;
The good we do, GOD takes as done aright;
that we desire to do, He takes as done:
The Sin we shun, He will with Grace requi^e;
and not impute the Sin we seek to shun!
But good Desires produce no worser Deeds;
for, GOD does both together (lightly) give:
Because He knows a righteous Man must needs
by Faith that works by Love, for ever live:
then, to do naught, but only in desire,
Is Love that burns, but burns like painted fire.
The Virtuous, live well for Virtues sake; the Vicious, for fear of Punishment.
THree things, in Judgment, have observed bin,
to wo^k with wicked ones, shame, grief, and fear:
And yet without shame, grief, or fear, they sin,
till Judgment (strict) begins to appear.
If Judgment then, have force t'extort these three;
they have no Judgment, that will not prevent
This sore Extortion, with an easy fee;
that is, live well; if not, then, well repent.
But are these two performed with such ease?
Gods Y^ake is easy, and his burden light:
And such as cannot well away with these,
can neither live well, nor repent aright:
But if they cannot, much less can they bear,
What Judgment will extort, shame, grief, and fear.
That there is no peace to the Wicked.
THe Wickeds rest is like the raging Deep,
whose smoothest Peace is rough intestine War:
With whose Alar'ms they often start in sleep;
whose Heart Strings, with such fretting Stops, do jar
Yet as the Sea seems calm, as other Brooks,
till Winds arise, wherewith they rage as mad;
So, often the Wicked-man as smoothly looks
in prosperous state, as he whom GOD does glad.
And in this plight, he Saint it can as well
(at least in show) as can the holiest Saint:
Yea, can (for glory) in Good-workes excel;
and, Piety in Word and Deed depaint:
But when Afflictions flawes begin to blow,
He plays the Devil both in Deed and Show.
That a vexed Conscience is the only Hell on Earth.
THe Bodies rest does most disease the Soul,
that is diseased with Sins sorest Sting:
For then the Thoughts about that Prick do roll,
and to the Soul an Hell of Horror bring!
The Mind then looking into Fancies Mirror,
sees nothing there but Sin that sits a-Broode
On grimme Chimaeraes, and sights full of horror,
so to confound the Mind, or mad her mood.
For, when Sin only fronts the Fantasy;
that Glass reflects these horrid Forms, by kind,
Then, when the body most alone does lie,
these Monsters muster most about the Mind.
O! Plague of plagues, when Sense nor Reas'n can spy
A Real Object from a Fantasy!
Fantasy a great Comforter, or Tormenter.
Give me Jobs Botches, Naamans Leprosy,
nay, give me All that plagues the outward sense,
Rather then Terrors of the Fantasy,
crawling from out an Hell of Conscience.
And give me all the Hels the Damned endure,
(this Hell alone excepted) I will be
Able to make them Heavens, in Conscience pure,
through Operations of the Fantasy.
Asleep, awake, in Company, alone,
past-vnderstanding Peace, and Joys past Joy,
In our Minds Kingdom, then, themselves enthrone,
to ouer-sway the Pains that Flesh annoy:
Then, is this Peace and War, true Heaven and Hell,
Where Pain and Pleasure do themselves excel.
A wounded Conscience, who can bear?
SAlues, Sores do cure; and Medicines, Maladies:
Friendship, Oppression; W^sed me, poor Estate:
Favor, Restraint; and Tim^, Captiuiti^s;
Good life, Reproach; and loving Manners, Hate:
But, these, nor ought else that are ^^st, or best,
(except the Highest grace) h^u^ p^w'r to cure
A wounded spirit (with Sadness st^^l oppressed)
but It does Death out-liue, and Hell o^^ dure.
Were our Meat, Manna, our We^des, Salomons;
Monarchs- our Friends; and Eden, our Freehold;
Our Guardes, G^^ia^s; our Seates^ highst Thrones;
our Houses Silver, hung with Pearl and Gold:
All these, and all what else can Sense delight
Do rather kill, than cure a wounded Spirit.
Death makes Things appear as they are.
Envy and Anger have some Wise-me^ killed;
(though in those Passions we hold no man wise)
As favor and base flattery Fools have spild;
for, with them both, we Fools do Nestorize.
But when these moodes are, with the Parties, dead,
then, were they Fools, who were so wise while-ere:
And, They most wise that Fools were reckoned;
thus, Death does make Things, as they are, appear.
Flattery adornes Men's Fortunes, not the Men;
and Envy, not their Persons, but their Fames
Does seek to wound: so, it appears then,
that Wise nor Fools have here their proper Names:
But in the Font of Death they do receive
Their naked Names which their true Natures give.
God and Conscience tells truly what we are; and are not as we seem.
WHat thou art, ask thine Heart, and it will show;
or, ask a Foe, that Conscience makes to lie;
But ask thou no^ Self-love which cannot know:
no^, ask a Friend, which can no ^ault epsy.
If we could see our selves, then should we see
that we are nothing less then what we seem;
Yet, some seem far worse than in Deed they be;
and therefore All, this Some do not esteem.
For, we know nothing wholly, but in part,
and, understand but, what we know, by Sense:
We see the Face, but cannot see the Heart:
then shows betray our best Intelligence:
This makes all wise men, that such Secrets know,
To win the World; a Shadow, with a Show.
That Truth, being One and still the same, is made by wicked m^n to countenance
Falsehood, which is manifold, and still unlike.
WHen Peace and Truth do jar, Peace is not peace:
then, Peace, in Truth, is that we should ensue:
Now, for this Truth, what Wars and Iarres increase,
these Times do ^eele, and Aftertimes may rue.
Yet, no Man's so unjust, that will auerre,
he fights for Falsehood; but, for Truth and Right:
So, just, some say, is every unjust War:
thus, Truth is made to countenance each Fight.
Who ever yet for Heresy has did,
but says, for Truth he dies, and so believes?
Or, what Sect says not, Truth is on their side?
so, Truth is made a Devil, that deceiues:
But Truth is God, unmade, who, in the end,
Will damn them all, that make him such a Fiend,
That we are naturally bent to Ill, but supernaturally to Goodness.
TWixt Sin and Grace, I tossed am to, and fro,
as mine Affections please to bandy me:
From Grace, to Sin I fly; but, back, I go;
and yet I go as one that feign would flee.
Nature does move the Wings of my Desire
to Sinne-wards nimbly; but, not so to Grace:
For, then she limes them with my fleshes mire,
that I am forced to pass an heavy pace.
Yet still I stir those Wings, and seek to break
fail fleshes Bands; too strong, for me (too frail)
Who though, sometimes, I fail of what I seek,
yet seek I what I find, and never fail:
For, none seeks Grace that has not Grace in hold:
Then, Seekers find, though often less then they would.
Abuse is familiar with humane Flesh and Blood.
MInding this World, I muse at what I mind,
though It unworthy be of Mind or Muse:
I muse that Men are to It so inclinde,
since It minds naught, but how Men to abuse.
From high to low Abuse does proudly reign;
from which the Priest, that leads all, is not free:
The Holy hold the Holy in disdain,
if with their state, their states do not agree.
Virtue, or Vice are held or good or ill,
as, in this World, they thrive or ill, or well:
For, Vice is honored more then Virtue still,
if Vices Manors, Virtues do excel:
If Manors good, do what good Manners ought,
(That Is make men great) great men are made of naught.
That it is far better not Be, then to be Ill.
THe World (the Womb where all misdeeds are bred)
breeds in my little- World such great offense,
That my Soul, great with Sinne's delivered
of Grief, that gauls my bleeding Conscience:
The Midwife Flesh, that did the same produce,
gives it the Nurse, cursed Nature, it to feed:
And fattens It with full-Breasts of Abuse;
so, Grief grows great, with Natures gross misdeeds.
O Nature, Nurse of my Souls foul Disgrace!
o World, the Nurse of that Nurse (grounds of grief)
Why do you give me being, time, and place
since you do worse then kill me with relief?
For, that reli^se that does but nourish Sin,
Makes our Case worse, then if we never had bin.
Sin and Grace cannot dwell in one place.
IF Faith believed that Creed that Essence gives her,
then would she give the Soul what that does give:
Faith's made to know, and do that which relieues her;
for, by her active knowledge she does live!
But often the Soul (though Faith be still her Ghest)
makes Sin her Steward to provide her Food:
How then can Faith such banefull Bits digest,
which but contaminate her vital Blood?
Can Faith and Sin (if they be full in force)
dwell (as if friends they were) in one weak Heart?
No: one will other from the same divorce;
for, Sou'raignes part with life, ere Lordship part:
Then, want of Faith, with gross Sin is supplide;
For, Nature vacuum could never abide.
In rainy-gloomy Weather.
THis Weather's like my troubled Mind and Eyes:
the one, being sad; the other, full of Tears;
And, as Wind often the often Showrings dryes:
so, Sighs my Tears dry up, and kindle Cares.
Sighs please, and pain the displeased painful Heart;
they please in giving vent to Griefs vp-pent;
And yet the Heart, they ease, they cause to smart:
so, Griefs increase as Sighs do give them vent.
But were my Mind thus sad but for my Crimes,
and mine Eyes turned to Tears for cause so dear;
Or, did my Heart for that since often- times,
my Sighs, my Tears, my Sadness blessed were:
But it is, since Hope, my Ship, through Fates crosse-waue,
Now grates upon the Gravel of my Grave.
Our Wits are unable to please our Wills.
THis Life is but a Laborynth of Ils,
whose many Turnings so amaze our Minds:
that out of Them our Wit no issue finds,
But what our Sense commands, our Wit fulfils.
Yet Sense (being tired with deceitful Joys
that fleet as soon as felt) prouokes the Wit
to cast about those Turns to pleasure it,
Which finds new Pleasures lined with old Annoyes.
So, that when Sense and Wit are at a Stand
in quest of Pleasures vain variety,
they are so cloid with their sacietie,
That Will is wearyed with her own Command*
Thus, in this Life, or Laborynth of Ils,
We toil our Wits in vain, to please our Wills.
To my most dear, and no less worthily-beloued Friend and Pupil, Henry
Mainwarring Esquier, with the truely-noble and venterous Knight Sr. Henry
Thynne, accompanying, into Persia, the meritoriously-farre-renowmed Knight, Sr.
Robert Sherley, Englishman; yet, Lord Ambassador sent from the great Persian
Potentate, to all Christian Princes, for the good of Christendom.
HEroicke Pupil, and most honored Friend,
to thee, as to my Moitie, I bequeath
Half the other half; beginning, at mine end,
to make (I hope) me triumph over Death.
My Son (sole Son; and, all I ever had)
unto thy Care and Service I commend;
So, make me Sonnelesse, till you make me glad
with your Return from this Worlds further end.
The Absence of so dear a Son as thou,
must needs affect thine honored Sire with Grief;
But, for thy good, he does his Grief subdue:
so, do I mine, by his, since his is chief:
Then, with my Son, take thou my Heart and these
Celestial Charms, in Storms, to calm the Seas.
Rob not the Poor, because he is poor; neither wrong him in Judgment. Pro.
22.22.
THough Words with Wisdom richly be attirde,
yet, if their Speaker be not rich withal,
They will be rather scorned, then admired;
or thought, through Enuyes spite most criminal.
But Words pronounced by Authority,
(though no Authority does them approve)
Are held for Oracles of Deity;
and, quoted, as rich Scriptures, Truth to prove!
Thus Wisdom rare, without a Fortune rich,
is a rich Gift that gets but poor regard:
For, Wisdoms lowest voice, or highest Pitch,
if her Pipe be but mean, can never be heard:
For, the Worlds Ears, though wide, no voice can hear
That comes not from a Pipe, as dear as clear.
To my worthy* witty, long-approued, and beloved Friend, Mris. Joyce Ieffreies.
Let us hear the end: Fear God, and keep his Commandments: for this is the
whole duty of man. Eccles. 12.13.
MAny a weary Winter have I past
since first our eyes strange- looks did interchange:
But now (dear Friend, that is; as kind, as fast)
Time, in Life's Reere, or vital- Powers does range.
My Lays of Love, are now turned all to Psalms
and Hymns addressed to Heaven; which my young days
Did most offend: Then, now, I crave this Alms,
that thou, for me, on These, our God wilt praise.
When Time, and Thwarts have taught the humbled- sp'rit
that all, save love and fear of God, is vain;
By Grace and Nature we take most delight
in pains, which may prevent eternal pain:
Then, if thy Will do match thy Wit (dear Friend)
On these Feet may thou travel to that END.
The CONCLUSION.
LO here an end of these our Muses Flights,
which aimed at Man's End, or chiefest GOOD;
But if too wild she were, in heavenly Heights,
let her be made to know it, by the W^ood.
If her Disire too high has made her rise,
(though less than GOD contents not that Desire)
Of Christ, and of his Church she mercy cries;
and, humbly, stoupes to what they do require.
Yea, prostrate, she does fall; nay, vailes her Neck
under his Spouse (the Church) her sacred Feet;
Submitting all her Soarings to her Check;
and ready to reform what she thinks meet:
If she has rightly fled, GOD made that Flight:
If not, she prays the Church to make it right.
But, knew I ought offensive to her Ear,
My Tears should blot It, yer It mended were.
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by T. S. for George Norton, and are to be sold at his Shop,
under the Blacke-bell within Temple-barre. 1612.


