TRVE RELATION OF THE TRAVAILES and most miserable Captivity of William
Dauies, Barber-Surgion of London, under the Duke of FLORENCH.

Wherein is truly set down the manner of his taking, the long time of his
slavery, and means of his delivery, after eight years, and ten months
Captivity in the Galleys.

Discovering many main Lands, Islands, Rivers, Cities, and towns, of the
Christians and Infidels, the condition of the people, and the manner of their
Country: with many more strange things, as in the Book is briefly and
plainly expressed.

By William Dauies, Barber-Surgion of London, and borne in the City of
Hereford.

LONDON: Printed for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at the South-entrance
of the Royal Exchange* 1614.

A Table of all those places that he has been at, and in, since his
departure, Alphabetically composed. viz.
A
ALexandria, A City in Turkey. Argier, A City in Barbary. Alegant, A City in
Spayn^. A^^a^^^ A River in the West Indies. Ar^no^h^, A River in the West
Indies.
B
BRaats, In the Main, a main land of the Turks. Bizert, A town in Barbary.
Bona, A town in Barbary. Baye, A town in Brazile. Budgie, A town in Barbary.
C
CIci^^ia, A famous Island of the Spaniards. Can^se, A famous Island of the
Venetians* Cipris, A famous Island of the Turks. Cirrigo, An Island of the
Venetians. Christiana, An Island of the Greeks. Corrune, A town of the Turks.
Corphou, A City of the Venetians. Corsigo, An Island of the Genowes. Callary, A
City upon Sardina. Carthageine, A town in Spain. Cales, A City of the
Spaniards. Corues, An Island of the Spaniards.
D
DEnei, A town in Castillia.
F
FLorence, A famous City of the great Dukes. Famagosta, A City upon Cyprus.
Fernandobuck, A town in Brazyle. Fi^lk, An Island of the Spaniards. Flowers, An
Island of the Spaniards.
G
GOodz^, An Island inhabited by Greeks. Genowey, A famous City in Italy. Grand
Maligo. A City in Spain. G^^ne, A River in the West Indies. Gratiose, An
Island of the Spaniards.
I
IO^a, An Island of the Turks. Iuersey, An Island of the Spaniards. Iublatore, A
town of the Spaniards.
L
LIlbo, An Island governed by Spaniards and Italians. Lisbor^e, A famous City
in Portugal. Luca, A City in Tuskanie. Ligorne, A famous City of the Duke of
Florence.
M
MAlta, A famous Island. M^ntua, A famous City in Italy. M^aona, A town in
Turkey. Maluedra, A town in Castile. Mayorke, An Island of the Spaniards.
M^^^ork, An Island of the Spaniards* Massegant, A Town in Barbary. Muggadore,
An Island in Barbary. Muria, An Island in the West Indies.
N
NAples, A famous City in Calabria. Naueyrne, A town of the Turks.
P
PAlerma, A famous City in Sicillia. Petras, A City in Turkey. Portercula, A
strong town of the Spaniards. Pume-bien, A town of the Spaniards. Peza, A
City in Tuskany. Porta Richo, An Island in the West Indies. Portaferare, A
strange town of the Duke of Florence. Porta long, A town of the Spaniards.
R
ROme, The chief City of the Pope. Regi, A town in Calabria.
S
STrumbula, A burning Island. Sapientia, An Island of the Turks. Salerna, A
town in Calabria. Syppa de Vecchia, An ancient City. Sardina, A famous Island
of the Spaniards. St. Mary's, An Island of the Spaniards. St. Lucas, A City of
the Spaniards. Sapphi^, A town in Barbary. Sancta Cruce, A town in Barbary.
Santa Lucia, An Island of the Spaniards. Santa Martyne, An Island of the
Spaniards. St. Michaels, An Island of the Spaniards. Scanderune, In the bottom
of the straits, governed by Turks. St. Georgis, An Island of the Spaniards.
Scena, A City in Tuskany.
T
THe Rhodes, held by the Turks. The Strauales, And Island inhabited by Greeks.
Tarrant, A Town in Calabria. The Geta A town of the Popes. Tunis, A great
City in Barbary. Tit^an, A town in Barbary. Tangere, A Town in Barbary. The
River of Amazons in the West Indies. Trnidado, An Island of the West Indies.
Teneriefe, An Island of the Spaniards. The Grand Canaries, inhabited by
Spaniards.
V
VAlentia, A famous City in Castile. Uize Maligo, A town in Spain. Ualdeny,
A town in Brachademayne.
W
VVIapocho, A River in the West Indies.
Z
ZAnt, An Island of the Venetians. Zumbula, An Island of the Turks.
Here in this Table have I not spoken of France, nor of any part of the
Low Countries, neither of Ireland, in all which places I have been, nor yet of
England, the Garden of the world, because I count it a folly to tell the Master
of the house the condition of the Servants, for every man by natural reason
can discover his own home.

Now have I thought it fit out of the former Table to select twelve principal
places, in discovery whereof I shall not omit as occasion is offered to speak
of the rest, and how I came to every place, with the names of Ships and
Galleys, with the owners, and Masters, and how many leagues each of these
twelve places are from England.

FOr proof of what I have herein written, concerning my slavery and thraldom,
I have procured, though not without some cost and more travel, six of the
chiefest masters of ships of London, who see me, and relieved me often during
my thraldom, to subscribe their hands hereunto, as also the hands of diverse
Masters and Surgions of other places in England, whose names follow, viz.

Robert Thorneton. Master of the good ship called the Royal Merchant of
London. Thomas Gardener. Master of the good ship called the Triumph of London.
Robert Bradshaw. Master of the good ship called the William and Thomas of
London. Thomas Rickman. Master of the good ship called the Mary Anne of London.
James Dauies. Master of the good ship called the Isaak of London. George
Millard. Master of the good ship called the May-flowre of London. Denis Dauies.
Barber Surgion of London. Thomas Rousley. Barber Surgion of London. Charles
Hearne. Barber Surgion of Bristow. Richard W^ight. Barber Surgion of Plymouth.
Walter Matthew. Owner of the good ship called the Mathewes farm of Plymouth.
Richard Row. Owner of the good ship called the Portion of Milbrook, in the
county of Cornwell.
Many others more as well Noble men, Knights, Gentlemen, as owners, Masters, and
Surgions did see, and can witness my slavery, whose hands lik^wise I might
easily have procured, but that con^^^ering the business to be of no great
importance, I held it needless to trouble either them or my self any further,
and these present witnesses are sufficient.

The twelve principal places are thus distinguished. VIZ.
Three Cities, and three Islands of the Christians, and three Cities, and three
Islands of the Infidels.

The Christians be, the Pope, the Spaniards, and the Italian,
The infidels be, the Turk, the Moore, and the Indian.
The Names of the twelve places*
1 CIuita de Vecchia, A City of the Popes. 2 Argeir, A City of the Turks. 3
Tunys, A great City of the Moors. 4 Ligorne, A City of the Italians. 5
Naples, A famous City of the Spaniards. 6 The River of the Amazons in the West
Indies. 7 Malta, an Island of the Popes, very famous. 8 Cyprus, A famous Island
of the Turks. 9 S^^^l^ia, A famous Island of the Spaniards. 10 Muggadore, An
Island of the Moors. 11 Candy, A famous Island of the Italians. 12 Morria, An
Island of the Indians.
The Travails and miserable Captivity of William Dauies, Barber-Surgion of
LONDON.
I Departed out of England the 28. of January 1597. in the good ship named the
Francis of Saltash, in the county of of Cornwell, Master Tyball Gear, Owner,
and William Lewellyn, Master of her, being laden with Fish, and Herings, and
such like commodities, then bound for the Strayts and to arrive at Ciuita de
Vecchia to the will and pleasure of God: where we arrived the sixth day of March
ensuing, whose description follows by me William Dauies Barber-Surgion of
London, and borne in the City of Heriford.

I. The Description of Ciuita de Vecchia.
CIuita de Vecchia is an ancient City of the Popes, lying Distant from England
leagues 700.
in low ground, a days journey from Rome by land, this City lies close upon
the Sea, very strongly fortified, and planted with Ordinance, to the East side
a strong Castle, or Fort: And also the like upon the West side, in this place
the Popes Galleys lie, and shipping. For there is a harbor, and fair mould
for their safety. For the Pope has no other place for Ships or Galleys but
Rome, and there none will come up but small Barks, and Boats, and such like,
by reason of the shallowness of the River. In this Ciuita de Vecchia are
altogether Romans, wholly professing the Romish Religion, saying directly that
the Pope is God an earth, and that he can forgive any sin whatsoever being
committed, which makes the most part of them, or all, run desperately into
most deadly sins.

For very Murder they hold it no great sin, being committed, receiving of
the Popes pardon, or else getting into some Monastery where they may be
confessed, and absolved, whereby no Law can take hold of them at their coming
forth, being apt and ready within a week, or fortnight after to commit the
like Murder, then receiving the like pardon, or absolution, as before they had
done: and thus many bloody minded men continue their lifetime, for it is an
easy matter for a man to have his adversary killed, or poisoned for money,
although his executioner never see him till such time as he commits this
bloody deed, being hired by another.

Also in this Country their women are very lewd and wicked, for even in that
ancient City of Rome, there are many thousands of lewd living women that pay
monthly unto the Pope for the sinful use of their wicked bodies: some pay
six Crowns a month, and so from six Crowns to one, for they are rated
according to their outward show, and for the no^-payment of this monthly pay,
they shall have their goods strained and carried out of their houses, or
chambers, by the Popes officers, and kept from them till such time as
satisfaction is made to the Pope. So it is lawful for any man to use any of
these women as his own wife, neither shall he be molested or troubled, or
otherwise endangered, so he escape secret occasions of danger, for this woman
will be as dutiful unto him as his servant, always attending his pleasure for
his diet or any thing else belonging unto him: he giving her content with his
purse; but she not receiving content may as lawfully arrest him, and cast him
into prison till such time as she does receive satisfaction, being recovered by
Law: for they hold their livings by the Pope.

Now as I have spoken of two deadly sins wherein they exceed, so will I
speak of one thing wherein some of them are to be commended, that is this. If
there be any Christian, of what Nation soever, poor and in distress, making
his case known, and asking for Christ's sake, he shall be relieved, with all
those necessaries whereof he is destitute, as apparel, meat, and drink, and
some money, though it be but little: if he be sick, then shall he be put into
an Hospital, where he shall be cho^sely attended upon, having good lodging,
dai^tie diet, and comfortable Physic for the r^storing of his health, whether
he be Papist or Protestant: but if he be a Papist, he shall be the better used,
and if he be a Protestant they will use all means they can to convert him, but
force him to nothing at all. In these Countries it is dangerous for an
Englishman being a Protestant to speak any thing against the Pope, or his
Religion, especially unto another Englishman that is a Papist, yet this English
Papist will seek all the means possible to intrappe the Protestant, and will
speak ill words of himself, to draw him to the like, but when he has made
him utter the secrets of his heart, then will he make it known, and more then
the Protestant spoke, to some chief man of a Church, by whom he shall be
forced to alter his Religion, or to be burned, or put in some secret prison
where he shall be starued to death, and this is the manner and fashion in all
Countries of Christendom within the Popes Jurisdiction, not only of the
treachery of the English Papists, but also of the other deadly sins which I
touched before, as their murder and adultry: and in like manner of their
general compassion, to a distressed Christian. What I have here written, I
speak not of hearsay, nor by imaignation, but directly have seen, and of
mine own knowledge you may speak it, being too long a time amongst them,
against my will.

II. The Description and discovery of Argeir.
ARgeir, is a marvelous strong City, and governed by the Distant from England
leagues 480.
Turk, lying upon the side of an upright hill, close upon the Sea, this City
is very strongly fortified with Castles, Forts, and platformes, with great
store of Ordinance planted about it, also there are many Galleys belonging to
this place, which do much offend the Christians, in taking of their ships,
Tartanes and Satties, and other small vessels, making all the Christians that
they take slaves, and selling of them in their markets like horses: for
according to age and strength they are prised. This City is governed by a
King, being vassal to the great Turk. Also there are great store of
Janissaries in it, to the number of 20. or 30000. at one time: these Ianizaries
are chief Soldiers, and governed by a Dane, which is a general under the
great Turk. These Turks are goodly people of parson, and of a very fair
complexion, but very villains in mind, for they are altogether Sodomites, and
do all things contrary to a Christian. For they do never lie in a bed, nor
feed upon a Table; yet their feeding and diet is very plentiful, their
bedding and apparel is very neat and costly, the manner of their lodging is
thus: There is a very fair table in a room, about three yards in breadth, and
as many in length standing in height one yard from the ground, and thereon they
use to spread a double quilt very costly with many curious Cushions, in stead
of Pillowes, whereon he lies down in his shirt, and linen britches only,
without any other covering, by reason of the heat of the country. Also in the
same room he has another Table laid after the same fashion very richly,
whereon his wives do lie, but she that likes him best, he will take to
accompany him for the night. A Turk may have as many wives as he pleases, so
he be able to buy them, and by the number of his wives, most commonly his
substance is known, for the richer he is, the more wives he has, the poorer
the fewer: yet never married to none of them, but only the first, but
maintaining of them all. It is very dangerous for a Christian to be found in
the company of any Turks woman, for being found together, he shall be forced
to turn Turk, or else be put to death, and the said woman also shall be put
into a sack, which being made fast, she shall be flung into the Sea, whether
they commit the sin or not. These Turks are very zealous in their religion,
acknowledging God; and Mahomet a soliciter for their sins. A Turk will keep
his word if he swears by his head, putting his hand upon his forehead. In this
country there is great store of gold and rich Merchants; the manner of their
Churches and coming to Prayer is thus. The Church is very fair within, with
many hundreds of Lamps burning therein, all matted under foot, without any
kind of picture, or seats, also most of them do pray upon Beads. In the
morning on the top of the Church they hang out a white flag, and in the after
noone a blew one for a sign of their coming to Church, then goes eight or
ten of them on the very top of the Church, and cry with a loud voice. Volla,
volla hamdrulla and shalla, that is to say God, God, help us at thy pleasure,
and this is their ordinary warning to come to Church, as we use Bells in
Christendom, for they abhor the ringing of Bells, being contrary to their
Prophets command.

A Turk chooses his first wife after this manner. He never sees his wife till
she come to the Church to be married, for the match is made by their friends,
neither is a Turkish woman's face to be seen, because their faces are
continually covered going through the streets, both young and old: neither
shall a manchilde after he is ten years old ever see his mother. A Turk is
Circumcised after this manner. The better Gentleman he is, the longer he stays
before he be Circumcised, but the time being come, then is he put upon a very
fair white horse, being very costly attired, and before him goes two, or
three hundredth by two and two in purple coats, bearing wax candles in their
hands, and after them follows a great many playing on diffused Instruments
making of a great noise, then follows a Bull covered with very fair Arras,
and his horns gilded, and next rides he that shall be Circumcised, with all
his friends following, and thus he rides to the place of Circumcision, where
they cut off the foresa^ne of his yard, naming of him Morat, Shebane, or Hosan,
or some such like name: then will they take the Bull, and turn his head to to
the Eastward, then cut his throat, saying, this day we have done a good deed,
then they cut the Bull in yeeces, and distribute it among his friends, and
kindred, and so they return home where they do feast with great joy.

The manner of a Christian turning Turk, is thus. He is put upon a horse with
his face toward the tail, and a Bow and an Arrow in his hand, then the
picture of Christ is carried before him with his feet upwards, at the which he
draws his Bow with the Arrow therein, and thus he rides to the place of
Circumcision, cursing his father that begat him, and and his mother that bore
him, his Country, and all his kindred: then coming to the place of
Circumcision, he is Circumcised, receiving a name, and denying his Christian
name, so that ever after he is called a Runagado, that is, a Christian denying
Christ and turned Turk: of which sort there are more in Turkey and Barbary
then of natural Turks. The manner of their judgment for offending of the Law
touching death, either for theft or murder, is thus: within four hours after
he is taken, he is condemned by certain chief Soldiers, and presently put to
death after this manner, viz. ganshed, s^aked or beat to death. Their ganshing
is after this manner: He sits upon a wall, being five fadomes high, within
two fadomes of the top of the wall, right under the place where he sits, is a
strong Iron hook fastened, being very sharp, then is he thrust off the wall
upon this hook with some part of his body, and there he hangs sometimes two
or three days before he dies. Staking to death is thus: Around piece of wood
three yards long, and as big as a man's leg, being sharp at one end, is taken
and driven in at the fundament of the offender, and out at his shoulder, and so
they let him lie till he be dead, which sometimes will not be in a day or two.
The manner of beating to death is thus: They take the offender, and lay him
down upon his back, being naked, and with two double ropes, two several men,
one on the one side, and the other on the other side of him, beat on his belly
till he is dead. But these deaths are very seldom used, because they are so
fearful to the offenders, yet I have seen them all executed.

III. The Description and discovery of Tunys.
TVnys is a great City in Barbary, inhabited by Moors, Distant from En^land
leagues* 600.
and some Turks and Jews. This City is spacious, and lies in low ground,
eight miles from the Sea: there belongs to this City a very fair Castle,
named the Galletta: This Castle is very strong of Ord^ance, and governed by
Turks: betwixt the City and this Castle lies the ancient City of Carthage,
sunk, by the report of all the Inhabitants thereabouts: but this did I see my
self going up to Tunys in a Boat, the foundation of many houses for the space
of four or five miles, the water being very clear, and in depth a fadome and
a half.

The Moors of this Country are altogether in Religion like to the Turks, and
also in habit: they are very light of foot, and gallant horsemen: they
cannot endure Hogs flesh, nor the drinking of Wine, for they drink water
altogether, except it be sometimes Aqua-vitae. The manner of their living in
the Country is thus: They will go five or six hundred together, Men, Women,
and Children, with their Cammels, Asses, and Sheep, together with all their
Poultrie, under the side of a Mountain, where every man pitcheth his Tent,
living every man to himself, having his Wife and Children about him, with his
Servants and Cattle, thus many Tents are pitched together, to the bigness of
a little Town, continuing there till such time as their Cattle have eaten up
the grass, and then being able to stay there no longer, they remove to
another place, where they live as before they had done: and thus they do spend
their lives. By reason the Country is continually hot, their feeding is
plentiful, but their apparel poor and bare, neither have they any, but what
they buy with the increase of their Cattle, carrying them often to the Towns,
Cities, and Market places near, where they have sale for them. These Moors
are very ingenious people, cunning and treacherous.

Now leave we Tunys in the same Ship that I came out of England in, named the
Francis of Sal^ash, being bound to Syo within the Arches of Archipelago, and
fraighted with Turkish goods by Turks, and some Turks aboard with us, for we
traded as well with the Turk as the Christian: but we had not sailed above
four leagues out of our Port in the night season, but that we were most
fiercely set upon by six of the Duke of Florence his Galleys, (who being in
continual war with the Turk, took us as a Turkish prize) which spit fire
like diue^s, to our great discomfort, but at length couraging of our selves in
Gods mercies, we continued fight with them, to the loss of many a man's life of
each fide, but all in vain for us, for they were forty for one of us, and our
Sip torn down to the water with their Ordinance, our main Mast, and missen
Mast, shot by the board, the ^^e end of the Mast with all the sails lying in
the Sea, the other end aboard: thus were we taken, and stripped every man stark
naked, and then were we distributed, some into one Gallie, and some into
another* where we had as many Irons knocked upon us, and more, than then we
were able to bear. Our Ship presently sent to Ligorne, being mended as well as
they could, but we in the Galleys, continued a month before we came thither,
to the loss of many of our lives: but at length coming thither* as many of us
as were left alive were thus entertained. We were all shaven both head and
beard, and every man had given him a red coat, and a red cap, telling of us
that the Duke had made us all Slaves, to our great woe and grief: where I
continued eight years and ten months in this slavery, as in the next
discovery shall be truly spoken of.

IIII. The Description and discovery of Ligorne.
LIgorne is a City of the Duke of Florence, and lies in low Distant from
England leagues 630.
ground, having many towers without it, standing in the Sea, also to this Town
does belong a wild road, and two very fair moulds for the safety of the
Dukes Galleys. In the entrance of these moulds is a very strong Castle with
great store of Ordnance planted: also the Town is very strongly fortified, for
it is the chief garrison of the great Dukes, where is continually great store
of Soldiers in pay. Which Soldiers are always employed in his shipping or
Galleys, wherewith he does more offend the Turk then all Christendom, for
they do take Galleys and Carmizals and Briganteens, and Towns of the Turks
and Moors: possessing of Men, Women, and Children, and selling them in
Markets, like to Horses, Cowes, or Sheep, reserving the strongest for his own
flauery: In this place I lived eight years, and ten months: three years of
this time I lived in this manner, from Sun rising to Sun set, chained in a
Cart like a horse, receiving more blows then any Cart-horse in England, our
diet being Bread and Water, and not so much Bread in three days as we might
have eaten at once, thus we were used to go forty or fifty Carts together,
being all slaves: our lading would be Sand, or Lyme, or Brick, or some such
like, and to draw it whither the Officers appointed us, for their buildings.
These Italians are very deceitful people, for when they laugh in a man's face,
they will seek to kill him, yet they are very cowards being natural Italians:
their women are altogether wicked and lewd. Three years being spent in this
manner: all we English*men were called as many as were left alive, making
choice of the ablest of us to go into the Galleys, of which I was one chosen,
then did my misery increase many-fold, for then I was made a Gally*slaue to
row at an Oar, where our former diet lessened* but blows increased, to the
loss of many of our lives. We were shaven Head and Beard every eight or tenth
day, being always naked, but only a pair of linen breeches and chains
continually. In this time I was at the taking of many a Town and Gally of the
Turks, though sore against my will, seeing of many Cities, Islands, and main
Lands in the time of my slavery, where I continued six years a Gally-slaue,
finding in all this time much comfort and relief from English Merchants that
were Protestants, and also from many English Masters and owners of Ships. But
from English men being Papists none at all. The misery of the Galleys does
surpass any man's judgment or imagination, neither would any man think that
such torture, or torment were used in the world, but only they that feel it,
the extreamitie of misery causes many a slave to kill themselves, or else
seek to kill their Officers; but we were not suffered to have so much as a
knife about us, yea if we had gotten one by any extraordinary means, and
offered any violence to any Officer, we should presently have lost our nose and
ears, and received a hundred blows en our bare back, and a hundred on our
belly with a double rope, or a Bulls pis^e, continuing a slave still: But I
entreated the Almighty God to grant me grace that I might endure it patiently,
that feeling that extreamitie in body in this world, how far would the
torments of hell have surpassed and exceeded it, if I had in this my earthly
torture been accessory to mine own death, as many were. But at length God of
his great goodness and mercy, delivered me (according to my hope) in this
manner. The great Duke fitted a ship* a Tartane and a Frigot, being very well
appointed and victualled, dispesing of them into the West Indies, and chiefly
for the Kiuer of the Amazons, appointing Captain Robert Thornton, an
Englishman to be chief Commander of the Ship, the Tartane and the Frigot: so
likewise was every other Officer appointed by the Duke himself; insomuch as
speaking of the placing of a Physician, a Surgion, and a Surgions mate,
Captain Thornton standing by, said, your Highness may do well to deliver a
poor Englishman that has continued a great while in your Galleys: he is well
experimanted in P^^sicka, and Surgery, by reason of his long practice both by
Sea an Land: he is hardened to the Sea, and able to discharge the place better
then the three before mentioned: for in the Galleys he does your Highness but
the labor of one slave: whereupon the Duke demanded my name. Captain
Thornton answered, and said, William Dauies: whereto the Duke replied, I have
often been spoken to for that fellow, whose liberty now I give upon thy good
report, Thornton, but yet I doubt his usage has been so hard in my Country,
that as soon as he is out of chains, he will give me the slip and not go
the voyage into the In^ies with thee. But if he can give five hundred Crowns
security to go the voyage, he shall be released presently out of chains:
neither shall he want any thing that is needful for the voyage, ^or the good
of all the Company, or for his own body, and this let him understand as soon
as may be: which news came within two days unto me, to my great rejoicing and
comfort, but as soon as I heard it, I suddenly sat down, being at my ol^
profession, carrying of dirt, and stone, and such like in a basket, and would
work no longer, neither suffer the slave to work that was chayned unto me,
but as soon as I was espied, one of the Masters of the work came to me, and
said thou Lutheran Dog: Why workest thou not? and with that struck me with a
Cudgel, whereto the slave that was chayned with me, replied. The Duke has
given him his liberty: then said he that had stricken me, Master, I beseech
you forgive me, and excuse my rashness, doubting that I should have remembered
his former courtesies being at liberty. And within a short time after Captain
Thorneton came from Florence to Ligorne, where I was, who then told me the
Dukes disposition to the full, and upon what security I should be delivered:
which security I did suddenly procure by an English Merchant, whose name was
Master William Mellyn, of Bristow, who passed his Band for five hundred
Crowns to the Duke, for the performance of the voyage by me: Whereupon I was
suddenly released out of chains, to my great rejoicing, giving God thanks
for his blessings. Then was I presently well apparrelled by Captain Thorneton,
and this Merchant, wanting nothing whereof I was destitute: But within two or
three days after I was sent for, by the great Duke, to come unto him to
Archemeyne, where then he continued, whither sodaynely I repaired, and coming
to the Dukes presence, doing my duty, he said unto me, be of good comfort I
have given thee grace, with thy liberty, neither shall thou want any thing for
the fitting of thy voyage, or needful for thy own body, therefore speak
boldly, and demand any thing that shall be necessary, and I will have thee
well fitted: for the great Duke of Florence wants no money. Then he demanded
of me further what I was in mine own Country, whither I was a Gentleman or
no. I answered his highness I was: then he asked me how? I told him my father
was a Gentleman, and for my part I had served my Queen by Lano and by Sea,
against the adversaries of my Queen and Country, and had lost mine own
blood, and spilt my enemies blood: and next that I was a Gentleman by Art. Then
the Duke answered and said: Thou art a worthy fellow, for thou have endured
much misery in this world. But tell me, quoth he, with what substance of
wealth came thou out of thy Country: I answered with two purses full: Full
said he, of what? I said of Silver and Gold, which I lost when I was taken by
his Highness Galleys, and the other full of Patience, which does continue full
still: Then said the Duke to one that stood by, give him a hundred Crowns to
spend to strengthen himself, and bring himself to courage; thus did the Duke
take delight in discoursing with me, in respect I spoke the Italian tongue very
perfectly, for I bought it dear, with many a drop of my blood, in the time
of my slavery. Then receiving this hundred Crowns, which the Duke had given
me, I left his Court, coming presently to Ligorne, where the Ship lay,
indeauoring of my self, by my labor, and industry, for the fitting of all
things necessary for the good of the Uoyage, upon the Dukes charge, besides
this hundred Crowns: for they were given me to spend at my own pleasure,
which I did, to the comfort of many Englishmen that lay in chains, that were
taken with me: they wanted neither meat nor drink as long as my money
lasted, as many of them as were left alive, for of seven and thirty of us that
were taken at the first, there remained then but thirteen, whereof ten
continued in chains, and two were delivered with me. By this time all things
were prepared and made ready for the performance of our pretended Uoyage, now
being bound to serve in the good Ship called the Santa Lucia, with a Frigot,
and a Tartane, well victualled, and well manned, and chiefly bound to the
River of Amazones, with other several Rivers, the which the Duke would have
inhabited, hoping for great store of gain of Gold, but the Countries did
afford no such thing, as hereafter shall be spoken of. Upon this Uoyage we
were fourteen months, making little gain, or benefit for the Duke, for
there was nothing to be gained. Now are we homewards bound, and recovering the
straits again, and being within three or four days sail of our own Port,
Ligorne: in the night season we met with an English Pirate, who would have
taken us, but was not able, yet held us fight all the whole night, and killed us
a man, and hurt other two: whereof one was an Englishman, who died within two
days after we recovered Ligorne, and being dead I went to the Captain and
demanded of him where he should be buried, but he ^ad him go ask of one
father Sherwood an Englishman, so he told me that if he were a Roman
Catholic they would bury him in the Church, but if he were not, I should bury
him out in the fields: But yet for my better assurance I went and asked of the
Friars of the Misericordia, who also gave their advise, and counsel that he
should be buried in the fields, because he was no Roman Catholic, whereupon I
buried him in this manner.

I entreated the company of many Englishmen that were Protestants to help me
to shroud him, and also to accompany me to the burying of him, which they did
in this manner. We put him upon a Bear, being shrouded with a covering over
him, and carried by four men, many Englishmen that were Protestants followed
him, bearing every man a branch of Rosemary in his hand to the place where we
buried him, reading Prayers over him after the English manner. His name that
was buried was Erasmus Lucas, and borne in Southwarke near unto London. Two
days being spent after his burial, and was sought for by an Italian Friar,
who finding of me, demanded of me my name, which presently I told him, then he
replied, thou art he that I look for, for thou have buried a good Christian,
and a Roman Catholic out in the fields, like to a Dog and a Lutheran as thou
art thy self: therefore I charge thee in the Dukes name to go along with me,
which command I durst not deny, but went with him, where he brought me before
three or four aged Friars of the Inquisition, and they asked of me whether I
were that Lutheran that buried a good Christian in the fields, for he was a
Roman Catholic, and confessed, and received the Sacrament like to a good
Christian, and therefore thou shall be burned, for thou have done contrary to
the Law of Rome. I answered that I had buried a good Christian, but not a
Roman Catholic, neither was he confessed, nor received the Sacrament: they
replied, if this be not true which thou have said thou shall surely die for it.
Therefore take him, and put him into the secret, whither unto I was brought,
which is a prison in this manner: Many double doors being opened, I passed
through two or three outward prisons then coming to the door of the secret,
whereinto I was thrust, it was so dark that I could see no part of my body,
then feeling round about me with my hands, I found it to be very short in
length, and less in breadth, but of height I know not how high, because I
could neither see nor feel the top. In this place I was almost over shoes in
the filth of other men that had died there before, who never lived above eight
or ten days there at the most: Then wrapping one arm within another, and
leaning against the wall, calling to mind Jobs miseries and Daniels
afflictions amidst the Lions, and encouraging my self in Gods mercy, sung a
Psalm very cheerfully to the praise and glory of God, wherein I was greatly
comforted. Then did I draw off my shoes and stockings, and with my bare feet
swept all the trash and filth into one corner. In this manner I lived forty
hours before any sleep possessed me, and then being desirous of sleep, I sat
down and leaned my head against the wall, and slept very soundly, being
altogether comforted with a lively hope in the Almighty God, that he would
deliver me (according to my trust) as he had done before. And when most
extremes would oppress me, then would I be most joyful, finding always an
inward motion, saying, be of good comfort, the Lord will deliver thee: In this
manner I lived sixteen days, my food being bread and water, and my lodging
upon the cold stones, and being yet alive, they held it a miracle that I should
live there so long, saying, this Lutherane has a Lions heart, for we never
knew any to live above ten days, wherefore let us have him forth to be
examined. Then was I brought before the high Inquisitioner, who demanded of me,
whether he that I buried had received the Sacrament and confessed, according to
the Roman order or no, I answered no; he was a good Christian, but received
not the Sacrament, nor was not confessed, after the order of Rome: then he said
that he was, by a Friar of the Mesericordia, and therefore thou shall be
burned. Then I entreated that I might but speak, and he said speak on: then I
asked them this, whether the Friar that confessed him could speak any English or
no, he answered that he could speak none: then tell me quoth I, how an Italian
Friar (can confess an Englishman speaking no English, nor the Englishman
speaking no Italian, nor other language but his mother tongue? for you know well
there must be no interpreter in confession, and if the Sacrament were ministered
unto him, the house where he died can justify it. Then the Inquisitioner
hearing this, scratched his head, saying, this fellow has spoken the truth,
wherefore take him and put him out into a large prison, whether I was brought,
where I lived ten weeks being well, and often relieved by English Protestants,
who rejoiced much to see me alive. These malicious Friars, there reason
wherefore they sought my life was, because they would have the dead man's pay to
themsel^es, which if he had been a Roman Catholic had bin their due, and in
respect he was not, they mist of the pay, and of their wicked pretense against
me, (God I give him thanks) by reason I could speak the Italian tongue, for if
I had had an interpreter in this, though my cause was just, yet I had surely
died. Ten weeks being spent in this prison, it was the fortune of one M.
Richard Row of Milbrooke, in the county of Cornwel, to ariue at Ligorne, in
the good ship called the Portion he being owner and Merchant of the said ship,
and one day coming to the Prison grate demanded of me what Countryman I
was, I told him I was borne in the City of Hereford. He asked my name: I
answered William Dauies. Said he, know you one Master Dauies in Plymmouth. I
said I was an unfortunate brother of his. With that he was very sorely grieved,
in respect he knew my brother very well, and loved him directly, and told me if
all the means that he could use could deliver me, he would: therefore said
he, think with your self, how I may deliver you, and I will be back again
with you within these two or three hours: whereupon he delivered me six
Crowns, and bid me spare for no money, for he knew my brother would repay it
again: then leaving me, I sat down and leaned my head upon my hand, setting
my elbow upon my knee, entreating my Almighty God, to show me some direct
course whereby I should be delivered. Then presently came into my head, to send
for a Frenchman, in whose house I had always layne before, who presently came
unto me, unto whom I imparted my mind, telling of him that if he would feign a
matter of debt against me, I would give him ten Crowns for his labor, though
I ought him nothing: but he answered and said it was dangerous, for it was a
Gally-matter, but I vewed it should never be made known by me: Whereupon he
gave consent, and went to the Governor and told him, that in the Prison where
debtors are, there is an Englishman who owes me money, and we were agreed,
then said the Commissarie if thou art content, let him pay the charge of the
house, and be gone: which charge I paid presently, and was freed, departing
away with the Frenchman, and brought him to Master Hunts house, the English
Counsel, where I gave him his ten Crowns. So leaving one another, I went
presently aboard of Master Rows Ship, being then bound for Naples, unto which
place we came, whose description follows.

V. The Description and discovery of Naples.
NAples is a famous and most worthy City very spacious, Distant from England
700. leagues.
standing close upon the Sea, marvelous strongly fortified and planted with
Ordnance, in many several Castles, Bulwarks, Forts, and such like: Also to
this City does belong many Galleys, and very good shipping, and continually
great store of shipping rides before it, this City lies in the Land of
Calabria, and is governed by a Viceroy, under the King of Spain: also there
are many Soldiers in Garrison, being all Spaniards. The King of Spain
maintaynes many P^nti^ners there. In this City they speak several Christian
languages, because there are of all Nations in Christendom but principally
Italians, and Spaniards. The Neopolitans are very proud, and of a leftie
spirit, being for the most part very rich, and costly attired, and most
commonly well furnished inwardly with their Country disease. They are
altogether Papists, and their women very audacious, especially in the sinful
use of their bodies, by reason they have as well their pardon as privilege
from Rome. In this City it is very dangerous to walk by night, for a man may
suddenly be killed for the clothes on his back, whither he be poor or rich.
In this place are always great store of Merchants and Lidgers of several
Countries, as specially English, Dutch, Greeks, Italians, Uenetians, French,
Spaniard, Jew, with many other Christian Nations. The chief commodity that
these Merchants deal in, is ^aw* Silk, or Silk wrought, either into Sattens,
Taffities, Grograms, and diverse other silk stuffes, Silk stockings, Laces of
all sorts, and Garters of several sorts. In this place I have been diverse
times, and never found any thing note-worthy, but only one, which was this. A
mine underneath a great Mountain about a mile or thereabouts in length. This
vault was dug by the industry of men for a passage from the City to an
Island called N^^^ta, where all shipping does stop before they come to the
City; The reason wherefore this passage was invented, is because the mountain
over it is so sleep that there was no passage over it, except they would go
twenty miles about, but now Coaches, Wagons Carts, horse or foot may pass as
smoothly through as in a plain way, continually hanging within it great store
of Lamps: this vault is in height about five fadame, and four in breadth, it
is named the Grout, and by common report one Virgil a learned man was the
Author of it, whose Tomb is aloft in each end of it, having a Lamp hanging
continually before it: Through this place I have often and many times passed: and
therefore upon my own knowledge I can assure what I have written.

V. The Description and discovery of the River of Amazons.
THe River of the Amazons lies in the highest part of the Distant from England
1600 (...)
West Indies, beyond the Equinoctial line; to fall with this River forty
leagues from Land you shall have eight, six, and seven fadome water, and you
shall see the Sea change to a ruddie color, the water shall grow fresh, by
these signs you may run in boldly your course, and coming near the Rivers
mouth, the depth of your water shall increase, then you shall make discovery of
the trees before the land, by reason the land is very low, and not higher in
one place then another three ^oote, being at a spring tide almost all over
flowne, God knows how many hundred leagues. It flows much water there with a
very forcible tide. In this River I continued ten weeks, seeing the fashion of
the people and country there: This Country is a together full of woods, with
all sorts of wild beasts, as Lions, Bears, Wolves, Leopards, Baboones, ^range
Bores, Apes, Monkies, Martyns, Sanguins, Marmosets with diverse other strange
beasts: also these woods are ^ull of wilde-fowle of all sorts, and Parats more
plentiful then Pigeons in England, and as good meat, for I have often eaten of
them. Also this Country is very full of Rivers, having a King over every
River. In this place is continual tempests as lightning, thunder, and rain,
and so extreme, that it continues most commonly sixteen or eighteen hours
i^ four and twenty. There are many standing ^^ters in this Country, which be
full of Aligators, G^^^es, with many other several water Serpents, and great
store of fresh fish, of strange fashions. This Country is full of Muskitas,
which is a small Fl^e, which much offends a stranger coming newly into the
Country. The manner, fashion, and nature of the people is this: They are
altogether naked, both men and women, having not so much as one three^ about
them to cover any part of their nakedness, the man takes a round Cane as big
as a penny candle, and two inches in length, through the which he pulls the
foreskin of his yard, tying the skin with a piece of the rind of a tree about
the bigness of a small packethreed, then making of it fast about his middle,
he continues thus till he have occasion to use him. In each ear he wears a
Reed or Cane, which he bores through it, about the bigness of a Swans quill,
and in length half an inch, and the like through the midst of the lower lip:
also at the bridge of the nose he hangs in a Reed a small glass Bead or
Button, which hanging directly before his mouth, flies too and fro still as he
speaks, wherein he takes great pride and pleasure. He wears his hair long,
being rounded below to the nether part of his ear, and cut short, or rather as
I judged plucked bald on the crown like a Friar. But their women use no fashion
at all to set forth themselves, but stark naked as they were borne, with hair
long of their heads, also their breasts hang very low, by reason they are never
laced or braced vy: they do use to annoint their bodies, both men and women,
with a kind of red earth, because the Muskitas or Flies shall not offend them.
These people are very ingenious, crafty* and treacherous, very light of foot,
and good Bowemen, whose like I have never seen, for they do ordinarily kill
their own food, as Beasts, Foul, and Fish, the manner of their Bow and
Arrows is this. The Bow is about two yards in length, the Arrow seven foot.
His Bow is made of Brazill wood very curious, his string of the rind of a
Tree, lying close to the Bow, without any bent, his Arrow made of a Reed, and
the head of it is a fish bone, he kills a beast in this manner: standing
behind a Tree, he takes his mark at the beast, and wounding him, he follows
him like a Bloud-hound till he fall, oftentimes seconding his shoot: then for
any foul be he never so little, he never misses him: as for the first, he
walks by the water side, and when he has spied a fish in the water, he
presently strikes him with his Arrow, and suddenly throwing down his Bow, he
leaps into the water, swimming to his Arrow which he draws a-land with the
fish fastened to it, then having each killed his own sood, as well flesh, and
foul, as fish, they meet together, to the number of fifty or si^tie in a
company, then make a fire after this fashion: They take two sticks of wood,
rubbing one hard against another, till such time as they be fired, then making
of a great fire every man is his own Cook to broyle that which he has
gotten, and thus they feed without Bread or Salt, or any kind of drink but
Water and Tobacco, neither do they know what it means: In these Countries we
could find neither Gold nor Silver Dare, but great store of Hens. For I have
bought a couple for a Jews Harp, when they would refuse ten shillings in
mo^ey. This Country is full of delicious fruit, as ^ynes, Plantins, Euaues,
and Potato roots, of which fruits and roots I would have bought a man's
burden for a glass Button or Bead. The manner of their lodging is this: they
have a kind of net made of the rind of a Tree which they ^^ll Haem^c, being
three fadome in length, and two in breadth* and gathered at both ends at
length, then fastening either end to a Tree, to the full length about a yard and
half from the ground, when he has desire to sleep, he creepes unto it The
King of every River is known by this manner. He wear^s upon his head a Crown
of Parats feathers, of seue^al^ ^^o^^s, having either about his middle, or
about his neck ^ chain of Lions teeth or claws, or of some other strange
^^a^^, having a woo^^en sword in his hand, and hereby is he known to be the
King: Oftentimes one King wars against another in their Canowes, which are
Boats cut out of a whole Tree, and sometimes taking one another the Conquerers
eats the Captines. By this time ten weeks were spent, and being homewards
bound, but not the same way that we came, for we sailed unto the River before
the wind, because it blows there continually one way, which forces all ships
that come thither to returns by a contrary way.

VII. The Description and discovery of Malta.
MAlta is a small Island, very famous, having two Cities Distant from England
^^^ ^eagu^^.
upon it called Terra-noua, and Terra-vecha being s^ituate very near one
another. This Island is governed by a great Master, who acknowledges no
Superior upon earth, but the Pope to be Supreme head of the Church. The great
Master lives in Terra-noua, which is a great City, lying close upon the Sea,
marvelous strongly fortified and planted with Ordnance the like is not in
Christendom, for the Turk has oftentimes sought to take it, with two or three
hundred sail of Galleys at a time, but yet was never able to take any part of
it. To this Island does there belong Galleys, though they be but few, to the
number of six or eight sail, and also shipping, wherewith they do much
offend the Turk, taking of them very often, and making them slaves: In this
Island they hold the Romish Religion, both men and women, their women are
altogether lascivious and lewdly given, but there men are valiant, Gentlemen,
and worthy men at arms: they are of all Nations of Christendom, speaking
generally all languages, also they have an ancient order of Knighthood, sworn
by the Cross of Saint John, which is a forked white Cross which they wear
upon their breasts to be known to be C^u^liers and Knights of Malta. The
manner of their* Oath of Knighthood is this: that they shall never marry, by
reason they shall never have Children legitimate: for there are many Lords and
Noble men sent thither by their Uncles to be Knighted, because they shall never
marry, whereby after his death his lands shall come to his Uncles issue, yet
they are suffered to have as many whores as they will. Another part of their
oath is this. A Knight of Malta is sworn not to stand in place where two,
three, or four are upon one in fight, but to take the weaker part, and to
fight to the last. They are all of bold courage, being to the number of five
thousand or there abouts, in Malta and other Christian places: another part of
their oaths is this, by Land or Sea, whether it be in ship or Gally, they are
sworn to encounter their adversaries, though they be three to one, and never
to yield or slip away, for they are sworn to fight it to the last man's death:
The which oath they perform very courageously, for they are Gentlemen of very
great respect, neither will they ever fall out amongst themselves, being
forbidden by another part of their oath. As for their maintenance, the poorer
sort have a pention from the great master, which maintains him very gallant,
and the richer sort live upon their own charge. One thing there is strange in
that Island, those that are borne without the cities speak altogether the
Morisco tongue, being altogether like Moors. This Island is very plentiful and
fruitful of all things, especially, Wine, Corn, Fish, Flesh, and Fruits. These
Knights are very merciful, having their adversaries prostrate, greatly
regarding their Oath.

VIII. The Description and discovery of Cyprus.
CYprus is a famous Island of the Turks, having two Cities Distant from England
1000. leagues.
and many Towns upon it; The chiefest City upon it is Famagosta: this City
lies close upon the Sea, in low ground, being very strongly fortified and
walled about, and governed by Turks, holding their own Religion, believing
and confessing God the Father, and their Prophet Mahomet, doing all things
contrary to a Christian, yet though they do not acknowledge Christ to be the
Son of God, and a God, yet they say he is the breath of God, and by the Jews
put to death, but they do not believe that he is risen again. They hate a Jew
above any nation even as they do the devil, neither do they care to kill him,
no more then they do a dog, oftentimes killing them in the very streets upon
the least occasion, if it be but for touching his garment as he passes by him:
yet their lives many Jews in all parts of the Turks dominions, but in this
manner. They will suffer neither man, woman, nor child to pluck up their
shoes on their heel, if they be Jews, but go always slipsh^d and barelegd,
wearing a black cap upon his head, and carrying of a buckram sack upon his
shoulders empty, to show that he is a Jew, and a slave to the world. In this
Island of Cyprus, without the Cities and Towns, the Country is inhabited by
Greeks, living vassals to the Turks, paying to the Turk the tenth of all that
they possess, even to the tenth of their children, if they amount to that
number, and that tenth child is Circumciled and made a Turk, receiving an
Osper a day from the great Turk for the first years, and for the second two,
and for the third three, per diem, and so his pay increases an Osper yearly
as he grows in years, for he is chosen from his infancy to be a Soldier of
the great Turks, and so shall all his male children receive the like pay, and
be Soldiers to the Turk: their garments being welt^d about the neck with a
welt of purple silk, whereby they are known from others. This Osper is the
eleueuth of a shilling English. So that at twenty years of age he serves in
the field, his pay being worth ninteen pence a day, and so increasing with his
years. This Island of Cyprus is very fruitful, having great store of silk
wo^mes, which yields them abundance of Silk. Also this Island yields great
store of fruits of all sorts, and store of Cattle of all sorts: Three sorts of
Beasts this Island yeeldes, which differ far from ours in England, that is to
say, a Bu^fella differs from an Ore, their Cammels from our Horses, and their
Sheep from ours. The Bu^fella is a Beast after the manner of an Ore, but that
he is bigger, and not so high, nor so long as the tallest of our Oxen, yet one
of them is as strong as three of our Oxen, for two of them do the labor of
six Oxen: their horns are flat, and at midday when they use to rest them,
they take them, and turn them into a water, where they will stand for the
space of two hours covered quite over the backs in water, then will they yoke
them and work them as fresh till night, as they did in the Morning, without
any bayting at all. Their Cammels is a marvelous tall beast, having a neck
twice as long as a Horse, and a great bunch growing about the middle of his
back, as big as a pecke, he is cloven footed, and his tail little, and for
his strength he will carry as much on his back as four horses, and continue
with his carriage on his back threescore hours without meat or rest. I have
seen four thousand of them laden at one time with Merchandise going a very
slow pace, and nothing so fast as a Carriers horse, yet will they continue that
pace two days and two nights together, without any eating or drinking: and
when they do rest and feed, it is but slender and very little, in this
manner: when they come to their resting place they lie down with their lading
upon their backs. Then the Moors or Turks, put a Ball made of Date stones
beaten, into every one of their mouths, the powder of the stones being
compounded with Linseede Oil, and the white of Eggs, which makes the Balls as
hard as Stones, and thus they will live and continue their travail sixteen
days and nights together, receiving the said rest and relief at every two
days end. Their Sheep are twice as big as ours in England, but in all
fashions like our Sheep, except the tail, for their tails are marvelous
great, broad, and thick, being very fat, for I have weighed many of their
tails flayed from the Butchers, and they have waighed ten, eleven, and twelve
pound weight, and throughout all Barbary and Turkey, they have plenty of these
beasts, and also all kind of beasts that we have in England. There live many
Greeks in all parts throughout the Turks Dominions, but in great bondage and
poverty: they are good Christians, abhorring the Idolatry of Rome, and
observing the same computation for Christmasse and other festiuals, that we do
in England.

Also there are Jews in all parts of Turkey and Barbary, and all parts of
Christendom, England excepted: yet though they be thus dispersed throughout
most parts of the world, living in extreme slavery, yet shall you not see one
Jew beg his bread. One thing I have greatly marvelled at, that a Jew is
respected more in Christendom, then with the Turks: for the Turks (as you have
heard) detests him above any Nation, tying him to a notable and known mark,
or manner of apparel, and yielding him no Law or right, either against Turk
or Christian: whereas, contrariwise, in Christendom, he is tied to no manner
of wear, but may go in what shape he lists: and for Law, by reason of his
wealth, he shall sooner have right done to him then a Christian: wherefore in
my mind, the Turk greatly in this condemns the Popish Christian: for it is
an ordinary saying with them, tha^ if a Jew had put Mahomet to death, nay, but
touched the hem of his garment violently, they would not have left one of the
race of them alive, nor yet any thing, or building vnraced, that might procure
their memory. But in Christendom they are suffered to build Sinagogues, and to
use their Religion publicly. But I beseech the Almighty God that this our
Land of England may never be defiled, either by Pope, Turk, or Jew.

IX. The Description and discovery of Sicillia.
SIcillia is a famous Island of the Spaniards, having many Distant ^ro^ England
(...) ^eague^.
worthy Cities upon it. This Island is in bigness seven hundred miles about,
very fruitful, and plentiful of all things, as Silk, Flesh, and Fish, Corn,
Wine, and Oil, with great store of Fruit. This Island is governed by a Vizeroy,
under the king of Spain: his chiefs abiding is at Palerm^, or Mercina, two
famous Cittes, but his chiefest residence is at Palerma. This City lies in low
ground, having a Mountain near it, called Monta Pellagrune. This City is
very populous, being rich of Merchandise and wealthy Merchants. At this City I
have been very often in the time of my sla^^^te in the Dukes Galleys. Also,
near this City there is a Town called Trappany, in which Town there is a
Monastarie, wherein they affirm that the Pillar of Salt that Lots Wise was
turned unto, coming out of Sodom is. They profess the Romish Religion
through out this Island both men and Women, speaking the Italian tongue
generally, as many as be borne in the Island, and are called Sicillianes.
Mercina being another famous City, lies close upon the Sea, and is situated
upon high ground, under the foot of a great Mountain. This City is strongly
fortified and planted with O^^^^nce: also there is great store of Galleys and
Shipping belonging to this place, which does much offend the Turk, ^^t
chiefly they are employed in Marchandiye. This high Mountain that hangs over
the City is called Mungebella, and stands in the East-part of this Island,
the top of it burning continually both night and day, and by reason of the
fierceness of the fire, has consumed many Uillages. The reason of this fire
is a Brimstone, or a Sulphur Mine, which being high, is (as all men imagine)
set a fire by the heat of the Sun, as the Island Strambula is, which
continually burns: and many other high places more that I have seen, as
Mount Aetna, the pike of Teneriffe a Southward Island, and many others, etc.

Unto this City Mercina belongs a straight entrance by Sea, commonly called
the ^ale of Mercina it lies betwixt the Land of Sicillia and Calabria, very
dangerous to pass through for any Ship, except they are very well
experimented. For my part I know this place well, being often there in the ^^me
of my slavery.

X. The Description and discovery of ^^ggadore.
MVggadore is an Island of the Moors, and lies near the ^ (...) (...) England
(...) (...)
Lan^ o^ ^arbary, without the Straights, not far from the Lands of the Kings
of Fesse and Morrocco. Th^s Il^nd is not inhabited, but very barren, being all
Rocks by the (...) side, and very smoothe on the to^, and full of bushes, (...)
Pidgions do b^eede in great store: we held it nothing (...) (...) six or
eight in company together into the Island, and (...) (...) the space of three
hours, twenty dozens of Pidgions (...) with us. Betwixt the Maine and this
Island there is very good riding for a Ship. Also, the Moors will bring out
^^ the Maine Land such Uictuals as they have to re^^^^e o^r wants, as Mutton,
Beef, ^c. The Moors of this Countr^^ are very deceitful and treacherous:
their clothing is but very naked and thin, for they wear but one slat of
thin^^ F^an^^^ wherewith they cover their breasts, backs and p^^u^e parts and as
for their arms, legs, and thighs, they ^^e na^ed of them: the said Garment,
or piece of Flane^l, they call ^ Barnoose. In this Country of Barbary there is
great store of Sugarcanes, and Sugar made, as they in Braz^e. Sometimes in
this Country there is Amber-grease found, but the cunning of the Moors makes
a great deal counterfaite. I came to this Island in a Carnell of Plymouth,
Master Edward Decon of the said Town being Master of her: Moors coming
oftentimes aboard of us, where they were kindly entertained; but they returned
our kindness in this manner* Setting of the chiefest, with many more of them
ashorem our Boat, wherein six English men rowed them ashore* they being all a
Land, our Boat was aground, then one of our men stepped out of the Boat, up to
the knees in water, and by strength would have set the Boat off from the Land,
which as ^oone as they espied him out of the Boat, they took h^^d of him* and
drew him a Land, where they cut all his clothes off his back, and divided
them in pieces amongst them, carrying the man stark naked up into the
Country, saying tha^^e should never have him again except they had twenty
French Crowns for his ransom, which news the Boace brought presently aboard,
(which being in vain to st^^^e with them ^ee gave them, and received the man
naked, having no further dealing with them.

XI. The Description and discovery of Candy.
CAndy is a famous Island of the Venetians, very fruitful, Distant from England
^^^ leagues
yielding great store of Wine and Oil, and all other things plentiful. This
Island is very high and long, poynting East and West: the North-side of it very
pleasant, with great store of Gardens and Uineyards, and such like: but very
barren to the Southward-side, with great Rocks, Cliffs, and Mountains, which
part is inhabited by poor Greeks: and also there are many small Islands under
these Cliffs, inhabited likewise by Greeks, as Christiana and Godza, with
others more. These Greeks live all together in bondage to the Uenetians. The
North-side of this Island is inhabited by Italians, and some Jews. There are
two very fair Cities: (viz.) Candia, and Acony, these Cities are inhabited
most with Uenetians, strongly fortified and planted with Ordnance. These Cities
lie right against the entering of the Arches of Appellican, which goes to
Constantinople, where the Great Turk continues, receiving tribute of the Duke
of Venice for this Island, and other parts, for the Uenetian is tributary to the
Great Turk. Also the Great Turk keeps him in subjection by Land and Sea,
neither dare the Uenetian join their forces with any Christian, at any time
whenever a Fleet of Galleys and Ships is set forth against the Turk, yet
the Duke of Uenice has twice as many Galleys as any Christian Prince
whatsoever, which he does employ, some of them in Merchandise, having
continual trading both with Christian and Turk, and some of his Galleys
continually lies about the entering of the Gulf of Venice, about the Island of
Zant and Saphlany, and the small Island of the Strauales, and near about
Madona: these parts do they defend from any Christian men of war, or
Christian Galleys, or either Galleys or Brigganteens of the Turks that shall
approach near unto these parts, in the manner and fashion of men of War: and
oftentimes the said Galleys do take both Christian and Turk, making Slaves of
the men, or else chopping off of their heads; for it is lawful for him so to
do, by the conclusion betwixt Him, the Christian, and Turk, taking them
within twenty leagues compass of the entrance of his Gulf, but not in any
other part of the Sea, without the said compass.

XII. The Description of Morria.
MOrria is a small low Island, lying in the River of Amazones, (...)
the highest part of the West Indies. This Island is altogether inhabited by
Women, having no Mankind amongst them: they go altogether naked, using Bow
and Arrows for the killing of their own food: the hair of their heads is
long, and their Breasts hang low: and whereas many here in England do imagine
that they have the right Breast seared, or cut off, it is no such matter as now*
what has been in times past I know not: for this of mine own knowledge, I
have seen forty, fifty, or threescore of them together, each of them bearing
Bow and Arrows in their hands, going along by the Seaside; and when they
espied a Fish, they shoot at it, and strike it, and so throwing down their
Bows, they leap into the water after their Arrows, and bring the Fish aland,
fastened to the Arrow: and ^o in all other things as well the dressing of their
meat, as their lodging and customs, they resemble and imitate the Indians of
the River of Amazons, as you heard before in that discourse. But some ^^ these
Women do use to bear their Children upon their backs, in this manner: They
take a year of the unde of ^ Tree, and with the one end thereof they fasten
the Childs hunmes, and about the arme-pits and shoulders with the other, and
so hang him on their backs like a Tinkers Budger, and cast up the breast to him
over the shoulder. The reason wherefore this Island is inhabited by Women only,
^s this One Month in the year, the Men from each side of the Maine Land comes
in their Canowes, over to the Island, every Man matching himself with a Woman,
living there a Month: and what men Children they find there, they carry away
with them; and the Woman Children they leave behind with the Mothers. And this
is their use once a year, whereby this Island is altogether inhabited by Women.
There is one thing more to be wondered at, that I have also seen, that is to
say, very good Oysters and Muskles growing upon trees, for I have eaten my part
of many an hundred of them. And for your better understanding how they grow,
you shall know that the Trees stand near the Sea side, and at every full tide
the bows hang into the Sea a fadome, or a fadome and a half, so that when the
tide goes out, they are found hanging in great clusters upon the branches,
like Barnacles to the side of a ship, and at the coming in of the tide, they
receive their moisture.

FINIS.
The Conclusion of the Book: to the Reader.

THus far (gentle Reader) I thought good, out of my slender capacity, to
acquaint thee with a brief and plain discourse of my Travel, which though it
be rude, as coming from a barren brain, which professes nothing less then
learning: yet assure thy self it contains undoubted truth, being no more then
I have seen, known, and to my grief and peril felt. And if any, as well or
better acquainted with these Parts, or any of them, whereof I make mention,
disliking the rudeness of my style, will undertake to refine it, he gives me
no discontent, so he derogate not from the truth thereof. And whereas I made
promise in the beginning of this Treatise, in these twelve discourses, to touch
or speak something of the rest of the places, specified in the Table, I have
partly performed it: but to have written of them at large, would have been but
frivolous and superfluous, partly because they are places of no extraordinary
note, but specially because they do in most, or all things, agree with the
Countries to which they are annexed, and tributaries, or vassalls: as the
Islands tributary to the Spaniards, follow their manner of government, customs,
and orders. The Turkish tributaries imitate them in most things: and so you may
judge of the rest, according as they are severally distinguished. And so much
may suffice to clear that doubt. Now the reasons that urged me to publish this
Book are manifold, but chiefly three: The first was, to keep in record, and
make known my own misery, lest with the forgetful Butler in Pharaos Prison,
who being delivered forgot his promise made to Joseph. that foretold his
delivery: so I (such is infirmity and frailty of humane nature) might
(cheaked with worldly prosperity forget my merciful and mighty Deliverer.
The second was, that others (warned by my misery) might shun the like. The last
and chiefest reason was, to glorify God, especially here in England, which
above all earthly Countries and Nations is most bound to extend and set forth
his glory. For what Christian, reading but the extreme thraldom and
punishment he has inflicted upon the Jews, even to this hour, being a Nation
he had once selected to himself from amongst all the Nations of the earth. Or
the present misery of the Greeks, who once were Monarchs of the Earth, and
one of the chiefest Churches of Christendom, being the first fruits of the
Gentiles, whose extreme bondage is now lamentable, yet not with the
Israelites, sacrificing their children to Idols, but forced to give as well the
tenth of their children, as of their substance to that monstrous Mahumetan
Idol the Turk. Or who, duly pondering the blindness and obstinacy of the
Spaniards, Pope, and Italians, with the horrible and absurd sins that God
has given them over to: Or who, seeing the Infidelity of the simple Indian
(well may I call him simple, because his error grows more of want of true
knowledge then obstinacy) who worships the creature, being ignorant of the
Almighty Creator? What English heart (I say) duly pondering these things in
general, or any one of these things in particular, can otherwise choose but
falling down on his bended knees, yield God immortal and innumerable thanks
and prayse-giuing, not only for electing him above all other Nations of the
Earth, to the true and perfect knowledge of his blessed Gospel, but also for
preserving him so long from so many miseries and wretched thraldomes, whereunto
most Nations of the Earth are subject?

FINIS.

