CHRISTIAN Prayers and Meditations in English French, Italian, Spanish, Greek,
and Latin.

IMPRINTED at London, by John Day. An. 1569.

tree of Jesse IESSE.
DAVID SALOMO^ ABIA (...) (...) (...)
IORAM OSIAS IOATAM AHAS ESECHIA Manss^





royal blazon or coat of arms E R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Elizabeth Regina.
portrait of Elizabeth I

2. PARALIPOM. 6. Domine Deus Israel, non est similis tui Deus in coelo and in
terra qui pacta custodis and misericordiam cum seruis tuis, qui ambulant coram
te in toto cord suo.

Prayers to be said in the morning: and first when you awake out of your
sleep, pray thus.
Most merciful God and father of our Savior Jesus Christ, I most humbly
thank thee for the sweet sleep and comfortable rest which thou have given me
this night past: besechyng thee, that like as thou have now awaked my body from
sleep, so thou would awake my soul from the sleep of sin and darkness of
this world: and that which thou have now awaked out of sleep, thou would
after death (whereof this sleep is but an image) restore and raise again to
life everlasting. Oh gracious God, make my body (I heartily pray thee) such a
companion, or rather a minister of godliness to my soul, this day and all the
time of this present life, that in the life to come it may be pertaker with ye
same of everlasting happiness, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord.

* Awake thou that sleep and arise from the dead, and Christ shall show
light unto thee. Ephesians. 5
Occasions to meditate.
HEre call to mind the great mirth and blessedness of ye everlasting
resurrection. Also remember to muse upon that most clear light, that bright
morning and new clearenes of our bodies after the long darkness which they have
been in. All then shall be full of unspeakable joys and felicity.

When you behold the day light, pray.
O Lord God, thou most glorious and true light, from whence this light of the
day and sun does spring, and shine unto us: O light which lightnest every man
that comes into this world: O light which know no night nor evening, but
art always a midday most clear and fair: without whom all is most horrible
darkness, and by who^ all things are most splendent: O thou wisdom of the
eternal father of mercies, lighten my mind that I may see those things only
which please thee, and may be blinded to all other things. Grant me so to
walk in thy ways by the light of thy holy word, that nothing else may be
light and pleasant unto me.

* Lighten mine eyes (O Lord) that I sleep not in death, least mine enemies
say, I have prevailed against him. Psalm. 30.
Occasions to meditate.
Muse a while, how much the light and eye of the mind and soul is better then
of the body. Also how much more we ought to care for the soul that it may see
well, then for the body. Moreover, that beasts have bodily eyes as well as men,
but men only have eyes of the mind, and that such as are godly wise.

When you arise, pray.
Our first parents cast down themselves from a most excellent, high, and
honorable estate, in to shame and misery, and in to the deep sea of all
wickedness and mischief: but (oh Christ) thou puttyng forth thy hand, did
raise them up again. Even so we, except we be raised up by thee, shall lie
still for ever. O good Christ, our most gracious redemer, as thou do
mercifully raise up now this my body, even so I beseech thee raise up my mind
and heart to the true knowledge and love of thee, that my conversation may be
in heaven where thou art.

* If you be risen with Christ, think upon those things that be above.
Colloss. 3.
Occasions to meditate.
Think how foul the fall of Adam was by reason of sin: and so of every one
of us from the height of gods grace. Again, think upon the inestimable
benefit of Christ, by whose help we daily arise again from our fallynges.

When you are made ready, to begin the day withal, pray.
O Almighty God and most merciful father, thou know and have taught us also
somethyng to know, that the weakness of man and woman is great, and that
without thy grace they can neither do nor think any good thing. Have mercy
upon me, I humbly beseech thee, thy most weak, frail and unworthy child.
Lighten my mind that I may with pleasure look upon good things only.
Inflame my heart with the love thereof, that I may carefully couete them, and at
the last by thy gracious co^ducting, may happily attain them, thorough Jesus
Christ our Lord. I distrustyng altogether mine own weakness, commend and
offer my self both soul and body into thy hands.

* Thy loving spirit lead me forth into the land of righteousness. Psalm. 143.
Cogitations meet to begin the day withal.
Think first that man consists of soul and body, and that the soul is from
heaven heavenly, firm and immortal: but the body is from the earth earthly,
frail and mortal.

Again, think that though by reason of sin wherein you are conceived and
borne, the parts of the soul which do understand and desire, be so corrupt
that without special grace to both parts you can neither know nor love any
good thing in gods sight, much less then, do that is good: yet this
notwithstanding, think that you are regenerate by Christ's resurrection (which
your baptism requires you to believe) and therefore to do also some good in
the sight of God through Christ: for whose sake our poor doings are accepted
for good, the evil and infirmity cleaving thereunto, not being imputed through
faith.

Think that by faith, which is gods seed (for they which believe are of God
and made Gods children) given to those that be ordained to eternal life:
think (I say) that by faith you receive more and more the spirit of
sanctification, through the use of Gods word and sacraments, and earnest
prayer, to illuminate your mind, understanding, judgment, and reason, and to
bow, form, frame and inflame your affections with love and power to do that
that good is, and therefore use you the means aforesaid accordingly.

Think, that by this spirit you are thorough faith coupled to Christ as a
lively member, and so to God, and as it were, made one with him: and by love,
which springs out of this faith you are made one also with all that be of
God, and so you have fellowship with God and all good men that ever were or
shall be, in all the good that God and all his saints have or shall have.
Think, that as by faith and love through the spirit of God you are now entered
into this communion (the blessedness whereof no tongue can express) so after
this life you shall first in soul, and in the last day in body also, enjoy for
ever the same society most perfectly which now is but begone in you.

Think, in consideration of your heavenly estate, how your body is the temple
of the holy ghost, your members of Christ, the whole world and all things
therein are your own. Therefore say unto your soul: O my soul, arise, follow
God, contemn this world, purpose well and pursue it, long for the Lords
coming, be ready and watch that he come not upon thee unawares. And for so much
as you must live to Gods pleasure, see the vocation and state of your life
whereunto God has called you, and pray to god for grace, knowledge, and
ability to take the most profitable things in hand, well to begin, better to
go on, and best of all to end the same to Gods glory and the profit of
others, and think that time lost wherein you speak not or do not, or at tho
least think not something to Gods glory and the commodity of his children.

At the sun going down, pray.
HOw unhappy are they (O Lord) on who^ thy Sun goes down and gives no
light, I mean thy grace which is always clear as the midday. Dark night unto
the^ is the midday which depart from thee. In thee is never night, but always
day light most clear. This corporal Sun has his courses, now up, now down:
but thou dear Lord, if we love thee, art always one. O that this block and
veil of sin were taken away from me, that there might be always clear day
in my mind.

Occasion to meditate.
Think, that as we are not sorry when the sun goes down, because we know it
will rise again: even so we should not sorrow for death, wherewith the soul
and body do part asunder: for they shall eftsoon return and come together
again in most glorious wise.

When the candels be light, pray.
MOst thick and dark clouds do cover our minds, except thy light (O Lord)
do drive them away. Thy Sun (O most wise worker) is as it were a firebrand to
this world. Thy wisdom whereby light comes to both soul and body, is a
firebrand to the spiritual world. After day when the night comes, thou have
given for the remedy of darkness a candell. After sin, for the remedy of
ignorance, thou have given thy doctrine which thy dear son has brought
unto us. O thou that art the author and master of al truth, and art the true
light, make us so to see, that the dimnes of our minds may be driven clean
away.

* Thy word is a lantern to my feet and a light unto my paths. Psalm. 4. *
Lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us and send joy and gladness
into our hearts.
Occasions to meditate.
Think that the knowledge which God gives unto us by the candel light (whereby
we see those things in this night of our bodies which are expedient for us)
should make us to wish much more for this spiritual light of our souls, this
doctrine of our salvation, and when we get it, the more to esteem it, and
diligently to embrace it: Again, that as all would be horror without candell
light, so there is nothing but mere confusion where Gods word takes not
place.

When you make your self unready, pray.
This our life and weak knit body by reason of sin, by little and little
shall be dissolved, and so shall be restored to the earth from whence it was
taken: then will be an end of this vanity which by our folly we have wrought
to our selves. O most meke father, so do thou untie and loose me (for you art he
that have knit these my weak members together) that I may perceive my self to
be loosed and dissolved, and so may remember both of whom I was made, and also
whether I must go, least I be had unprovided unto thy tribunal seat.

* Put of the old man with his lusts and concupiscences. Col. 3 Ephe. 4.
Occasion to meditate.
Think that as we do willingly put of our garments because we shall receive
them again when the night is past: so we should not unwillingly forsake our
bodies when God by death shall call us, because we shall receive them again in
the resurrection of the just.

When you enter into your bed, pray.
THe day now ended, men give themselves to rest in the night, and so this life
finished, we shall rest in death. Nothing is more like this life the^ every
day: nothing more like death the^ sleep, nothing more like to our grave then
our bed. O Lord our keeper and defender, grant that I now laying me down to
rest, being unable to keep my self, may be preserved from the crafts and
assaults of the wicked enemy. And grant further, that when I have run the
race of this life, thou would of thy mercy call me unto thee, that I may
live and watch with thee for evermore. And now gracious God, give me to take
my rest in thee: and bring to pass that thy goodness may be even in sleep
before mine eyes, that slepyng I be not absent from thee, but may have my
dreams to draw me unto thee, and so both soul and body may be kept pure and
holy for ever.

* I will lay me down in peace and take my rest. Psalm. 4.
An other prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, my watchman and keeper, take me to thy care: grant that
my body slepyng, my mind may watch in thee, and be made merry by some sight of
that celestial and heavenly life, wherein thou art the king and prince,
together with the father and the holy ghost, where the Angels and holy spirits
be most happy citizens. Oh purify my soul, keep clean my body, that in both
I may please thee sleping and waking, for ever, Amen.

Occasion to meditate.
Think, that as this troublesome day is now past and night come, and so rest,
quietness, and pleasant sleep, which makes most excellent princes, and poor
wretches alike: even so after the tumultes, troubles, temptations and tempests
of this life, they that believe in Christ, have prepared for them an haven and
rest most pleasant and joyful. As you are not afraid to enter into your bed,
and to dispose your self to sleep, so be not afraid to die, but rather
cherefully prepare your self thereunto.

Think that now you are nearer your end by one days journey, then you were
in the morning.

A prayer to God the Father, for the true knowledge of the mystery of our
redemption in Christ.
O Almighty God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by him also our
father, the father of all mercy and God of all consolation, have mercy upon us
and hear our prayers.

We most humbly beseech thee, for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake, for his
merits and cruel death which he suffered, to deliver us from eternal death
and the power of darkness: send into our hearts thy spirit of truth, to work
in us a true, lively, and steadfast faith, that the clear light and brightness
of thy gospel, the glory of Christ, may shine unto us, and lighten our minds,
that we may learn and understand the wonderful and unspeakable riches of ye
mystery of our redemption in Christ, and by Christ. O father of glory, give
unto us the spirit of wisdom, and bring us into the true knowledge of this thy
beloved son Jesus Christ, and the knowledge of thy self. Open and lighten
the eyes of our minds and understanding that we may know what the hope is
whereunto thou have called us, and how rich the glory of thine enheritance is
upon thy saints, and the excedyng greatness of thy power toward us: yt by true
faith, by understanding and knowledge of thine eternal wisdom (which is Jesus
Christ) we may be in deed as we are called, true christians and unfeigned
professoures of thy holy name, to worship thee in spirit and truth, and to set
forth the glory of thy grace given unto us in Christ Jesus our Lord, Amen.

O dear Father, write in our hearts love of thy law, hate to all sin,
thankfulness of heart, and continual heat of thy holy spirit, for thy son
Jesus christ's sake. To whom with thee and thy holy spirit, be all honor,
majesty, glory, thanks, rule, empire, and dominion, for evermore.

A form of thanks-geuing for our redemption, and prayer for strength and
increase of faith.
ETernal praise and thanks be given unto thee dear God and father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which have blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
things by Christ, in that thou have chosen us in him before the foundation of
the world was laid, that we should be without blame before thee through him:
by whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgeuenes of our
sins: In whom, after we heard the word of truth, the Gospel of our
salvation, wherein we believed, we were sealed with the holy spirit of promise,
which is the earnest of our inheritance: which spirit has and does bear
witness unto our spirits, that we are thy children, and therefore cries in our
hearts, Abba, Father. And thus most gracious father, when thou have once given
the earnest penny of our salvation into our hearts, thou do not repent of thy
gift and calling, neither will thou at any time, break thy covenant of grace
and mercy in Christ thy sons merits, confirmed in us by that seal and love
token. For what though we be weak in our belief? shall our unbelief make thy
promise of no effect? No, thou will always be found true, but all men be
liers. And yet Lord, thou do most graciously behold and accept, be it never
so little a spark of faith. We say therefore and cry unto thee with one that
wept and said: I believe Lord, help my unbelief. Yea that little, be it never
so little, is thy mere gift also. The which as thou have begone: so (most
merciful Lord) increase the same more and more, to the peace and comfort of our
conscience, and the glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
A meditation for the exercise of true mortification.
HE that will be ready in weighty matters to deny his own will, and to be
obedient to the will of God, the same had need to accustom himself to deny
his desires in matters of less weight, and to exercise ye mortificatio^ of his
own will in trifles. For if that our affections by this daily custom be not
(as it were) half slain, surely, surely, when the plunge shall come, we shall
find the more to do. If we cannot watch with Christ one hour, as he says to
Peter, we undoubtedly can much less go to death with him. Wherefore, that in
great temptations we may be ready to say with Christ: Not my will but thine be
done, (in that this commonly comes not to pass, but where the roots of our
lusts, by thy grace dear father, are almost rotten and rooted out by a daily
denial of that they desire) I humbly beseech thee for Christ's sake to help
meherein. First pardon me my cherishing and (as it were) watering of mine
affections, obeying them in their devises and superfluous desires:
wherethrough, in that they have taken deep root, and are to lively in me, I
secondly do beseech thee to pull them up by the roots out of my heart, and so
henceforthe to order me, that I may continually accustom my self to weaken the
principal root, that they by roots and branches may loose all their power.
Grant me (I beseech thee) that thy grace may daily mortify my concupiscence of
pleasure in things, yt is, of wealth, riches, glory, liberty, favor of me^,
meats, drinks, apparel, ease, yea and life it self, that the horror and
impaciency of more grievous things, may be weakened, and I made more pacient in
adversity. Whereunto I further desire and pray thy goodness (dear father) that
thou will add this: namely, that I may for ever, become obedient and ready to
do thy good will in all things, heartily and willingly to serve thee, and do
whatsoever may please thee. For doubtless, although we accustom our selves in
the pleasant things of this life, to a mortification and denial of our
selves, yet we shall find enough to do when more bitter and weighty crosses
come. For if thy son our Savior (ever wont to obey thy good will) prayed so
heartily and often: Not my will but thy will be done, whereby he declares him
self to be very man, how can it be but we, whose nature is corrupt, not only
in nativity, but in the rest of our whole life also, shall find both our hands
full in great and grievous temtations wholly to resign our selves unto thee.
Grant therefore (dear father) for thy christ's sake, I most heartily beseech
thee, thy grace and holy spirit, to be effectual in me, that daily I may
accustom my self to deny my will in more easy and pleasant things of this
life, that when need shall be, I may come unto thee with a resigned will,
always steadfastly expecting thy mercy, and in the mean season, continually
obeying thee with readiness and willingness, doing whatsoever may most please
thee, through Christ our lord, which lives with thee etc

A meditation of the coming of Christ to judgment, and of the reward both of
the faithful and unfaithful.
OH Lord Jesus Christ, the son of the everliving God, by who^ all things
were made, are ruled and governed, as of thy love, for our redemption thou
did not disdain to be our mediator, and to take upon thee our nature in
the womb of a virgin, purely and without sin, by the operation of the holy
spirit, that both you might in thine own person wonderfully beautify and
exalte our nature, and work ye same in us also, first abolishing the giltines
of sin by remission, then sin it self by death, and last of all, death by
raising up again these our bodies, that they may be like unto thine own
glorious and immortal body, according to the power wherewith thou art able to
subject all things unto thee: as (I say) of thy love for our redemption thou
becamest man and that most poor and afflicted upon earth by the space of
xxxiii. years at ye least, in most humility, and payedst ye price of our
ransom by thy most bitter death and passion (for the which I most heartily
give thanks to thee) so of the same thy love toward us, in thy good time
thou will come again in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory, with
flaming fire, with thousands of saints, with angels of thy power, with a
mighty cry, shoute of an Archangell, and blast of a trumpe, suddenly as a
lightning which shines from the East, etc. when men think least, even as a
thief in the night when me^ be a sleep, thou will so come (I say) thus
suddenly in the twincklyng of an eye, all men that ever have been, be and shall
be, with women and children, appearyng before thy tribunal judgment seat, to
render an account of all things which they have thought, spoken, and done
against thy law, openly and before all Angels, saints, and Devils, and so to
receive ye just reward of thy vengeance, if that they have not repented and
obeyed the gospel, and so depart from thee to the Devil and his angels and
all the wicked which ever have been, be, or shall be, into hell fire, which is
unquenchable, and of pains intolerable, easeles, endeles, hopeles, even from
the fear of thy glorious and mighty power.

But if they have repented and believed thy gospel: if they be found watching
with their lamps and oil in their hands: if they be found ready appareled
with the wedding garment of innocence: if they have not hardened their hearts,
and hourded up the treasure of thy vengeance in the day of wrath to be
revealed, but have used the time of grace, the acceptable time, the time of
salvation, that is, the time of this life, in the which thou stretchest out thy
hand, and spreadest thine arms, calling and crying unto us, to come unto thee
which art meek in heart and lowly, for thou will ease all that labor and are
heavy laden: if they have visited the sick and prisoners, comforted the
comfortless, fed the hungry, clothed the naked, lodged the harbourles, if
they have not laden their hearts with glotony, and surfeting, and carefulnes of
this life: if they have not dug and hid their talent in the ground, doing no
good therewith, but have been faithful to occupy thy gifts to thy glory, and
here washed their garments in thy blood by hearty repentance: then shall thy
angels gather them together, not as the wicked which shall be collected as
fagots, and cast into the fire, but as ye good wheat that is gathered into thy
barn: then shall they be caught up to meet thee in the clouds: then shall
their corruptible body put on incorruption: then shall they be endued with
immortality and glory: then shall they be with thee, and go whether thou
go: then shall they hear, Come blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning, etc. then shall they be set on seats of
majesty judging the whole world: then shall they reign with thee for ever:
then shall God be all in all with them and to them: the^ shall they enter and
enherite ye heavenly Jerusalem and the glorious restfull land of Canaan, where
is always day and never night, where is no manner of weping, tears,
infirmity, hunger, cold, sickness, envy, malice, nor sin: but always joy
without sorrow, mirth without measure, pleasure without pain, heavenly harmony,
most pleasant melody, saying, and singing: holy, holy, Lord God of hosts.
etc. Finally the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man, that they shall then enherite and most surely
enjoy, although here they be tormented, prisoned, burned, solicited of Satan,
tempted of the flesh, and entangled with the world, wherethrough they are
enforced to cry, Thy kingdom come: Come Lord Jesus, etc. How amiable are thy
tabernacles? Like as the heart desires the water brooks, etc. Now let thy
servant depart in peace: I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ: We
mourn in our selves, waiting for the deliverance of our bodies, etc. Oh
gracious Lord, when shall I find such mercy with thee, that I may repent,
believe, hope and look for these things, with the full fruition of those
heavenly joys which thou have prepared for all the^ that fear thee, and so
rest with thee for evermore.

A meditation concerning the life everlasting, the place where it is, and the
incomparable joys thereof.

THat there is an enerlasting life, none will deny but such as will deny God. For
if he be true and just (which he must needs be, or else he is not God) then can
there not be but an eternal life. That he has both spoken it and promised it,
in Math. 25. 1. Cor. 16. Hebr. 4. 11. 13. 1. Petr. 1. it plainly appears, and
else where in very many places. So that to deny an everlasting life, is to deny
God, to deny Christ and all that ever he did, also to deny all piety and
religion, to condemn of foolishnes all good men, martyrs, confessors,
Evangelists, Prophets, Patriarckes. Finally the denial of eternal life is no
thing else, but a denial of the immortality of the soul, and so a plain
making of man no thing better then beasts. If it be so, let us then eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall die. Lord preserve us from this Saduceal and
Epicureall impiety, and grant us for thy mercies sake (dear God) that we may
be assuredly persuaded, that there is in deed an eternal life and bliss with
thee, for them that put their trust in thee, amongst whom account me for thy
mercies sake.

Again, this eternal life, and the place appointed for them that be thy
servants, all men do grant to be with thee: Albeit they do not think that
because thou art every where, therefore eternal life is every where: For they
by thy word do know, that in as much as no man can see thee and live, this
eternal life and thy blessed presence is most pleasant and had in fruition,
after in an other world, where unto by corporal death they do depart and are
translated to a place above them, where thou dwell in a light whereunto no
man can approach. Abraham's bosom (they read) was above, as the place for the
wicked, was a low and beneath. Helias was caught up into heaven, and thy son
our dear savior prayed, that where he is, those also might be, which thou
had given him and might se his glory. Now, he (dear father) we learn by thy
spirit, was ascended and taken up in his very body into heaven, whether Steven
looked up and saw thy Christ standing on thy right hand: to whom he prayed: Oh
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Grant I beseech thee, gracious god and father,
yt I may have a clean heart, more and more to see thee, and so in spirit to
see and look often upon this place: whether bring me at the length in body
also, I humbly pray thee.

Now, what a thing this everlasting life is, no man is able to conceive, much
less able to utter: For the peace of god which is eternal life, passes all
understanding. The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither can
man's heart conceive those things, which thou (dear God) have prepared for
them that love thee. Whatsoever therefore can be spoken or imagined of thy
kingdom, of the clearenes, joy and felicity of the same, is nothing in
comparison: as we may see by ye Prophets, which (because they could not
otherwise) under corporal things, have shadowed the same: So that the
confidence of eternal life, what a thing it is, can in no wise be told.
Howbeit some what we may be brought into some sight of it, by earthly things,
to think on this sort. If God has given here so many things in a strange
place, how many are the great good things that be at home? If in a prison are
so many mercies, how many are they in the palace? If the wicked have so many
benefits, what is the store prepared for thy servants, O Lord? If thy children
find such comfortes in the day of tears and mournyng, what shall they find
in the day of ye marriage? If with beasts men being, have the use of so
innumerable blessings, oh how many are the blessings which they shall enjoy
with thy Angels, and with thee thy self (O dear God) when they shall see thee,
and have the fruition of thee, in whom is fulness without lothing of all good
and fair things: so that nothing can be more desired, and that for evermore?

This thy children do not so see as they now believe it: I say that even in
their bodies they shall see it for ever, as Job said. They heleue that they
shall see thee, and their own eyes behold thee, when these our corporal
eyes, our bodies being raised, shall do their duties. Such a knowledge of thee
they believe to have, as shall not be only intellectual and by faith, as now
it is: but even a full sight and fruition, yea a comunction and fellowship with
thee. Now they see but in a glass, even in a dark speaking: but the^ they
shall see face to face. For faith, though it be the substance of things hoped
for, and a certain dark sight of thee: yet it may not be compared to the
reward of faith, and glorious sight which we shall see in the life to come,
when faith and hope shall cease.

Now, thy children know yt they be thy children, though it yet appear not what
they shall be. We know (say they) that when our Christ God and man shall
appear, then shall we be like unto him: for we shall see him even as he is. Oh
great prerogative, to see Christ as he is. Which is not to be considered so
much for the ma^hoode, as for the Godhead it self: as Paul does also write,
that when all things are subject unto the son, then shall he be subject unto
thee (dear Father) also that God may be all in all. And therefore Christ our
savior prayed for us, that we might know thee the only true God. Not yt our
Christ thy son is not with thee, the true, coequal, and substanciall god, but
that we might know how that after the judgment such a mystery of his
mediatourship shall not be in heaven, as is now in earth. Then thou blessed
trinity, God the Father, God the son, and God the holy ghost shall be all in
all: thou shall be the end of our desires, thou shall be looked upon without
end, thou shall be loved without lothyng, thou shall be praised without
weariness. Although lothsomues be wont to follow fulness, yet our fulness in the
contemplatio^ of thy pleasures shall bring with it no kind at all of
lothsomnes. Sacietie of joys shall be in the beholding of thee. Pleasures are
on thy right hand for ever. We shall be satiffied when we arise after thine
image: I mean in the resurrection. Oh dear father, show thy self unto us, and
we ask no more. Oh grant us with thy Saints in everlasting life, to praise
with perpetual praises, thy holy name. Happy then and happy again were we, if
that day were come that we might sing with thy angels, elders, and innumerable
thousands, a new song and say, thou Christ Jesu which wast slain, art worthy
to receive power, and riches: and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory,
and blessyng. In this blessed life all kind of maladies, griefs, sorrows and
evils be far away, and all full of all kind of mirth, joy and pleasure. Oh
that we might see now a little with S. John that holy City, new Jerusale^,
descending from heaven, prepared of god as a bride trimmed for her husband. Oh
that we might now somethyng hear the great voice speaking out of the throne,
behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they
shall be his people, and he shall be unto them their god: he will wipe away all
tears from their eyes, and death shall be no more, nor weeping, nor crying, nor
sorrow: for the former things are gone.

An other meditation of the blessed state and felicity of the life to come.
THis body is but a prison wherein the soul is kept, and that verily, not
beautiful nor bright: but most foul and dark, disquiet, frail, and filled
up with much vermin and venomous vipers (I mean it concerning our affections)
standing in an air most unwholesome, and prospect most loathsome, if a man
consider the excrementes of it, by the eyes, nose, mouth, ears, hands, feet,
and all the other parts. So that no Bocardo, no Little ease, no Dungeon, no
Bishops prison, no gatehouse, no sincke, no pit, may be compared in any point,
to be so evil a prison for the body, as the body is for and of the soul:
wherethrough the children of God have been occasioned to cry and lament their
long being in it. Oh says David, how long shall I lie in this prison? Oh
wretch that I am (says Paul) who shall deliver me out of this body of sin?
which is an heavy burden unto the soul, as the wise man says. And therefore
the godly cry, now let thy servant depart in peace. Oh that I were dissolved
and had put of this earthly and frail tabernacle.

Take me unto thee, and bring my soul out of this prison, that it may give
thanks unto thee O Lord. For so long as we be in this body, we can not see the
Lord: yea it is as an heavy habitation, and depresseth down sore the spirit
fro the familiarity which it else should have with God. This world and life is
an exile, a vale of misery, a wilderness, of it self being void of all virtues
and necessaryes for eternal life, full of ennemies, sorrows, sighings,
sobbings, gronings, miseries, etc: In danger to hunger, cold, heat, thirst,
sores, sickness, tentations, trouble, death, and innumerable calamities, being
momentanye, short, unstable, and nothing but vain, and therefore is compared to
a warfare, a womans travail, a shadow, a smoke, a vapor, a word, a storm, a
tempest, in the which Gods people feel great molestations, greefes, and
troubles, now of Satan him self, now of the world, now of their own flesh,
and that so wonderfully, diversely, daungerously, and contrarily, that they are
enforced to cry: Oh Lord, when shall we come and appear before thee? when
shall this misery end? when shall we be delivered out of this vale of miserye?
out of this wilderness? out of this continual affliction and most perilousseas?
But where thou art (Lord and dear father of mercy) there is not only no
prison, no dolours, no sorrow, no sighinges, no tears, no sickness, no hunger,
no heat, no cold, no pain, no temtations, no displeasure, no malice, no
pride, no uncleanness, no contention, no torments, no horror, no sin, no
filth, no stinch, no dearth, no death, no weeping, no tears, no misery, nor
mischief: there is (I say) not only no such thing, or any eeuill, noisome, or
displeasaunt thing: but all liberty, all light, all pleasauntnes, all joy,
rejoicing, mirth, pleasure, pastime, health, wealth, riches, glory, power,
treasure, honor, triumph, comfort, solace, love, unity, peace, concord,
wisdom, virtue, melody, meekenes, felicity, beatitude, and all that ever can
be wished or desired, in most security, eternity, and perpetuity yt may be
thought, not only of man, but of Angels and Archangels, yea above all
thoughts. The eye has not seen the like, ye ear has not heard it, nor no
heart is able to conceive in any point, any part of the blisfull beatitude which
is with thee most dear God and Father, most dear Lord and Savior, most
gracious good God and comforter. Where thou art, O blessed God, the
Archaungels, Angels, Thrones, powers, dominations, Cherubins, Ceraphins,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Virgins, Confessors, and righteous
spirits, cease not to sing, night and day: Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of
hosts: honor, majesty, glory, power, empire and dominion be unto thee, oh God
the creator, oh Lord Jesu the redemer, oh holy spirit the comforter. In
recordation of this, Oh how thy children rejoice? how contemn they ye
pleasures of this world? how little esteem they any corporal grief or shame?
how desire they to be with thee? How amiable are thy tabernacles, Oh Lord God
of hosts, say they: my soul has a desire to enter into ye courts of the
Lord: my heart and my soul rejoices in the living God. Blessed are they yt
dwell in thy house, they that may always be praising thee. For one day in thy
courts is better then a thousand else where. I had rather be a door keeper in
the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of ungodliness: for the Lord
God is a light and defense. And again: like as the Heart desires the water
brooks: so longs my soul after thee, Oh God: my soul is a thyrst for God,
yea even for the living God. When shall I come to appear before the presence
of God? My soul thirsts for thee: my flesh also longs after thee in a
barren and dry land, where no water is. They (thy children I mean O Lord)
desire the day of that their redemption: still they cry: let thy kingdom come:
they cry: Come Lord Jesu: they lift up their heads lookyng for thy appearing,
Oh Lord, which will make their vile body like to thine own glorious and
immortal body: for when thou shall appear, they shall be like unto thee. Thy
Angels will gather them together, and they shall meet thee in ye clouds, and
be always with thee. They shall hear this joyful voice: Come ye blessed of
my father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning. Then
shall they be like to thy Aungells. Then shall they be like unto the Sun in
thy kingdom. Then shall they have crowns of glory, and be endued with white
garments of innoce^cie and righteousness, and Palms of victory in their
hands. Oh happy is he that may but see that immortal and incorruptible
inheritance, which they shall enjoy for evermore, Amen.

A Meditation of the presence of God.
THere is nothing that makes more to true godliness of life, then the
persuasion of thy presence (dear father) and that nothing is hyd from thee,
but all to thee is open and naked, eue^ the very thoughts, which one day thou will reveal and open, either to our praise or punishment in this life: as thou
did David's faults which he did secretly. 2. Reg. 12. or in the life to
come. Math. 25. for nothing is so hid that shall not be revealed. Therefore does
the Prophet say: Woe to the^ that keep secret their thoughts to hide their
counsel from the Lord, and do their works in darkness, saying who sees us?
Grant to me therefore (dear God) mercy for all my sins, especially, my hid
and close sins. Enter not into judgment with me, I humbly beseech thee. Give
me to believe truly in thy Christ, that I never come into judgment for the^:
that with David I might so reveal them and confess them unto thee, yt thou
would cover the^. And grant further, yt hence forth I always think myself
continually co^uer saunt before thee, so that if I do well, I pass not of the
publishing of it, as hypocrites do: If I do or think any evil, I may
forthwith know that the same shall not always be hid from men. Grant me, that
I may always have in mind that day wherein hyd works of darkness shall be
illumined, and also that sentence of thy son, that nothing is so secret which
shall not be revealed. So in trouble and wrong I shall find comfort, and
otherwise be kept through thy grace from evil: which do thou work I humbly
beseech thee, for Christ's sake,

Amen.
A Meditation of death, and the commodities it brings.
WHat other thing do we daily in this present life, then heap sin upon
sin, and hourde up trespass upon trespass? so that this day is worse
always then yesterday, by increasing as days, so sins, and therefore thy
indignation, good Lord, against us: but when we shall be let go out of the
prison of this body, and so taken into thy blessed company, then shall we be in
most safety of immortality and salvation, the^ shall come unto us no sickness,
no need, no pain, no kind of evil to soul or body: but what soever good we
ca^ wish, that shall we have, and what soever we loath, shall be far from us.
O dear father, that we had faith, to behold these things accordingly. Oh
that our hearts were persuaded thereof, and our affections enflamed with ye
desire of them. Then should we live in longing for that which now we most loath.
O help us, and grant that we being ignorant of things to come, and of the
time of our death, which to thee is certain, may so live and finishe our
journey here, that we may be ready and then depart, when our departing may make
most to thy glory and our comfort through Christ.

What is this life but a smoke, a vapor, a shadow, a warfare, a bubble of
water, a word, grass, a flower? That we shall die it is most certain: but
the time, no man can tell when. The longer in this life we do remain, the more
we sin, which will turn to our further pain. By cogitation of death, our
minds be often, in a manner, oppressed with darkness, because we do but
remember the night of the body, forgetting the light of the mind, and of the
resurrection. Hereto remember the good things that after this life shall
ensue, in certainty of faith, without wavering, and so shall the passage of
death be more desired. It is like a sailing over the sea to your home and
country: it is like a medicine or purgation to ye health of soul and body: it
is the best Physician: it is like a womans travail. For as the child being
delivered, comes into a more large place then the womb wherein it did lie
before, so the soul being delivered out of the body, comes into a much more
larger and fayrer place, even into heaven.

A meditation concerning the sober usage of the body, and pleasures in this
life.
THe beginning of all evil in our kind of living springs out of the
deprauation and corruptnes of our judgment, because our will always follows
that which reason judges to be followed. Now, that which every man takes to be
friendly and agreyng to his nature, the same does he judge necessarily to be
good for him, and to be desired. This is meat, drink, apparel, riches,
favor, dignity, rule, knowledge, and such like, because they are thought good
and agreeyng either to the body, or to ye mind, or to both, for they help
either to the conservation or to the pleasure of man, accounted of every one
amongst good things.

Howbeit such is the weakness of our wit on the one part, and the blindness
and too much rage of our lusts on the other part, that we being left to our
selves, can not but in the desire of things which we judge good and agreeyng
to our nature by the judgment of our senses and reason, we cannot (I say) but
ouerpasse the bounds whereby they might be profitable unto us, and so we make
them hurtful to us, which of themselves are ordained for our health. What is
more necessary then meat and drink, or more agreeyng to nature? but yet how
few be there which do not hurt themselves by the^? In like manner it goes with
riches, estimation, friends, learning, etc. Yea although we be in these most
temperate, yet when there wants the spirit our regeneratour, we are so
drowned in them that we utterly neglect to lift up our minds to the good
pleasure of God, to the end we might imitate and follow God our maker by
yelding our selves over, duly to use his gifts to the common and private
vtility of our neighbors.

But now, God only is life and eternity, and cannot but demand of us his
handiworke, that we should render our selves and all we have to the end
wherefore we were made, that is, to resemble for our portion, his goodness, as
those which be nothing else but witnesses and instruments of his mercy. So that
when we wholly do naturally strive against that kind of life whereto he has
create us, by seking always our selves, what other thing ought to ensue, but
that he should again destroy us and take away his notable gifts, wherewith he
therefore endued us that by all kind of well doing we should resemble his image:
yea what other thing may ensue but that he should leave us and that eternally,
that we might feel and by experience prove how bitter a thing it is to leave
the lord in whom is all goodness? Oh that I might therefore find such favor in
thy sight dear father, that thou would work in me by thy holy spirit, a
true knowledge of all good things, and hearty love to the same, through Christ
Jesus our lord and only Savior.

Amen.
A meditation upon the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ.
OH Lord Jesus Christ, the son of ye almighand euerliuyng God, by whom all
things were made, and be ruled and governed: thou the lively image of the
substance of the Father, the eternal wisdom of God, the brightness of his
glory, god of God, light of light, coequal, coeternall, and consubstancial with
the father: thou which of the love thou had to mankind when he was fallen
from the fellowship of God into the society of Satan and all evil, did
vouchsafe for our redemption to become a Mediator between God and man, taking
to the Godhead our nature, as concerning the substance of it, and so becamest
man: also the heir of all, and most merciful Messiah: which by ye power of thy
Godhead and merits of thy manhood, have made purgatio^ of our sins, eue^ by
thine own self, whilst thou wast here on earth, being now set on the right
hand of thy father for us, even concerning our nature, in majesty, glory, and
power infinite: I pray and humbly beseech thy mercy, to grant me at this
present, to rehearse some of thy passions and suffringes for me the last night
that thou wast here before thy death, that thy good spirit might thereby be
effectual to work in me faith, as well of the pardon of my sins by them, as
mortification of mine affections, comfort in my crosses, and patience in
afflictions, Amen.

In the midst of thy last supper with thy dear Apostles, these things could
not but be before thee, namely that they all would leave thee, the most earnest
would forswear thee, and one of the xij. should most traitrously betray thee:
which were no small crosses unto thee. Judas was admonished of thee to beware,
but when he took no heed, but wilfully went out to finish his work,
contemnyng thy admonition and counsel, he could not but vex thy most loving
heart.

After supper, there was contention amongs thy disciples, who should be
greatest after ter thee, yet dreamyng carnally of thee and thy kingdom, and
having this affection of pride and ambition busy among them, notwithstanding
thy diligence in reprouyng and teaching them.

After thy admonition to the^ of the cross that would come, thereby to make
them more vigilant: so gross were they that they thought they could with their
two swords put away all perils: which was no little grief unto thee.

After thy coming to Gethsemane, heaviness oppressed thee, and therefore thou
would thy disciples to pray. Thou did tell to Peter and his fellows, that
thy heart was heavy to death. Thou did will them to pray, being careful for
them also, lest they should fall into temptation. After this thou wentest a
stones cast from the^ and did pray thy self, falling flat and groueling
upon the earth: but (alas) you feltest no comfort, and therefore thou came to
thy disciples (which of all others were most sweet and dear unto thee) but lo
to thy further discomfort, they pass neither of thy perils, nor of their own,
and therefore sleep apace. After thou had awaked the^, thou wentest again to
pray, but thou foundest no comfort at all, and therefore did return again
for some comfort at thy dearest friends hands. But yet again (alas) they are
fast a sleep. Whereupon thou art enforced to go again to thy heavenly father
for some sparckle of comfort in these thy wonderful crosses and agonies. Now
here thou wast so discouraged and so comfortles, that eue^ streams of blood
came runnyng from thine eyes and ears, and other parts of thy body. But who
is able to express the infinitenes of thy crosses, even at thy being in the
garden? All which thou sufferedst for my sake, as well to satisfy thy fathers
wrath for my sins, as also to sanctify all my sufferinges, the more gladly to
be sustained of me.

After thy bloody prayer thou came, and yet again foundest thy disciples a
sleep, and before thou can well awake them, lo, Judas comes with a great
band of men, to apprehend thee as a thief, and so does, leadyng thee away
bound, to yt hie Bishops house Annas, and so from him to Cayphas. Here now to
augment this thy misery, behold thy disciples fly from thee: false witnesses
be brought against thee: thou art accused and condemned of blasphemy: Peter,
even in thy sight forsweareth thee: thou art unjustly stricken for answering
lawfully: thou art blindefield, stricken and buffeted all the whole night in the
bishop Cayphas house, of their cruel servants.

In the morning betymes you art condemned again of the priests, of blasphemy,
and therefore they bring thee before the secular power, to Pilate, by whom thou
art openly arrayned as other thieves and malefactors were: and when he saw that
thou wast accused of malice, yet he did not dismiss thee, but did send thee
to Herod where thou wast derided shamefully, in coming and going to him and
from him all the way, especially after Herod had appareled thee as a fool.

Before Pilate again therefore thou wast brought, and accused falsely: no man did
take thy part, or speak a good word for thee.

Pilate caused thee to be whipped and scourged, and to be handled most
pitifully, to se if any pity might apeare with the Prelates, but no man at all
pitied thee.

Barrabas was preferred before thee: all the people, head and tail, was
against thee and cried, hang thee up: unjustly to death wast thou judged: thou
wast crowned with thorns that pierced thy brains: thou wast made a mocking
stock: thou wast reviled, beaten, and most miserably handled.

Thou wentst through Jerusalem, to the place of execution, even to the mount
Caluery: a great cross to hang thee on, was laid upon thy back to bear
and draw, as long as thou wast able.

Thy body was racked, to be nailed to the tree: thy hands were bored through,
and thy feet also: nails were put through them to fasten thee thereon: thou
wast hanged between heaven and earth, as one spewed out of heaven, and vomited
out of the earth, unworthy of any place: the high priest laughed thee to
scorn: the elders blasphemed thee, and said, God has no care for thee: the
common people laughed and cried out upon thee: thrist oppressed thee, but
vinegar only and gall was given thee to drink: heaven shined not on thee: the
Sun gave thee no light: the earth was afraid to bear thee: Satan tempted
thee, and thine own senses caused thee to cry out: My God my GOD why have thou
forsaken me? Oh wonderful passions which thou suffredst. In them thou teach
me, in them thou comfortest me: for by the^ God is my father, my sins are
forgeuen. By the^ I should learn to fear God, to love God, to hope in God, to
hate sin, to be patient, to call upon God, and never to leave him for any
temptations, but with thee to cry: Father into thy hands, I commend my
spirit.

A meditation of Gods power, beauty, goodness, etc.
BEcause thou lord woul dest have us to love thee, not only do thou will,
entice, allure and provoke us, but also do command us so to do, promisyng
thy self unto such as love thee, and threatening us with damnation if we do
otherwise: whereby we may see both our great corruption and noughtines, and also
thine excedyng great mercy toward us.

First, concerning our corruption and noughtines, what a thing is it, that
power, riches, authority, beauty, goodness, liberality, truth, justice,
(which all thou art good lord) cannot move us to love thee? Whatsoever things
we see, fair, good, wise, mighty, are but even sparkles of that power,
beauty, goodness, wisdom, which you art. For to ye end thou might declare thy
riches, beuty, power, wisdom, you have not only made, but still do conserve
all creatures to be (as David says of the heavens) declarers and setters forth
of thy glory, and as a book to teach us to know thee.

How fair thou art, ye beauty of the Sun, Moon, Stars, light, flowers,
rivers, fields, hills, birds, beasts, men and all creatures, yea the goodly
shape and form of the whole world does declare.

How mighty thou art, we are taught by the creation of this world even of
naught, by governing the same, by punishing the wicked mighty Giants thereof, by
overthrowing their devises, by repressing ye rages of the sea wtin her bounds,
by storms, by tempests, by fires: these and such like declare unto us thine
invisible, almighty, and terrible power, whereby thou subduest all things unto
thee.

How rich thou art, this world, thy great and infinite treasurehouse does
well declare. What plenty is there, not only of things, but also of every
kind of things? Yea how do thou yearly and daily multiply these kinds?
How many seeds do thou make of one seed? yea what great increse do thou
bring it unto? These cannot but put us in remembrance of the exceedyng riches
that thou have. For if to thine enemies which love thee not (as the most part
in this world be) if to the^ thou geuest so plentifully thy riches here, what
shall we think that with thy self thou have laid up for thy friends?

How good thou art, all creatures generally and perticularly do teach. What
creature is there in the world which thou have not made for our commodity? I
will not say how that thou might have made us creatures without sense or
reason if thou had would. But amongst al things, none does teach us so thy
great love toward us, as does ye death of thy most dearly beloved son, who
suffered the pains and terrors thereof, yea and hell it self, for our sakes.
If this thy love had been but a small love, it would never have lasted so long,
nor Christ should never have died.

A prayer to Christ crucified.

AS thou O Lord, wast crucified for me, so I beseech thee crucify me with
thee, that I may rise again with thee to everlasting life. Thy flesh was
crucified for me: crucify with thee (O Christ) the kingdom of the flesh which
has dominion in me, that I may put of the old Adam, and by newnes of life,
may be transformed into thee that second Adam, sin, infidelity, and the
whole tyranny of Satan being vanquished and overcome. Bring to pass, O Lord,
that by thy cross and painful sufferyng, thy yoke may be to me made light,
and thy burden easy, that willingly and gladly following thee, I may come
whether thou art gone: that is, to thy father most blessed and immortal, from
whom nothing shall afterward be able to separate us.

* God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing but in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.
A prayer to Christ ascended and reigning in glory.
OH good Christ, our first begotten brother and tender hearted Joseph: oh
natural son of that Father, to whom we are made children of adoption
through thee: oh our head reigning on high in glory: forget not us thy poor
members here on earth, wherinto abasyng thy self, thou came down and
sufferedst for us most cruel death. Out of this thy throne of majesty and
glory, thou put test us in assured hope and confidence, that we also shall
attain to that blessed place whether thou art gone before to take possession
for us. Oh our strong tower of defense and succor, what can hurt us now
trusting in thee? Most unhappy are they which are ignorant of thee. Most happy
are they which always behold thee. Blessed are they which have known thee
here in the days of their mortality: but more blessed are they which see thee
in the heavens, and shall see thee reigning with thy father in joys
incomparable.

Oh Lord, the only joy and comfort of our souls, show us thy loving
countenance: embrace us with the arms of thy mercy: receive us O good Joseph
thy younger brethern, with ye kiss of comfort: pour into our hearts thy holy
spirit: pluck us up from the earth and earthly things: open our eyes and lift
them up unto thee: open thy mouth and call us unto thee: open our ears that we
may hear thee, so that whatsoever we do speak or think, it may be directed
unto thee alone, our redemer, mediator and advocate.

If ye be risen again with Christ, seek the things which are above where
Christ sits at the right haud of God: set your affection on things that are
above, and not on things which are on the earth.

A prayer for the avoiding of Gods deserved wrath and vengeance for our sin.
WHen we look back and behold our sinful life past, what a dungeon of
errors, vice, and wickedness opens it self unto us? so that there is no man
but he must needs be ashamed of himself when he calls to mind what he has
been, and tremble when he considers the wickedness and sinful course of his
life to come. For who shall undertake that the rest of our life shall be any
better then that is past? How can we then sufficiently magnify and praise thy
great mercy, which have differred thy punishment so long? Beholding therefore
this our dangerous and miserable state, we come unto thee (O thou great and
mighty judge) in trembling and fear, humbly beseching thee not to heap upon
us thy deserved vengeance, but let thy tender kindenes and love thou bear to
Jesus Christ thy dear son our gracious Lord and redemer, cover our
iniquities: for whose sake, though we deserve all extremity, thou do pardon
us.

If thou Lord shall straightly mark our iniquities (O Lord) who shall be able to
abide it?

A prayer to God for his help and protection against the obstinate enemies of
the truth.
MOst righteous judge, God of all mercy and comfort, which by thy secret
judgment and wisdom do suffer the wicked to triumph and increase for a
time, for trial of the faith of thy well-beloved little flock, and the
mortifying of their lusts, but at length to the utter confulio^ of the
enemies, and joyful deliverance of thy people: look down, we beseech thee, on
thy dispersed sheep out of thy holy habitation in heaven, and strengthen our
weakness against their furious rages: abate their pride: assuage their malice:
confound their devises, wherewith they lift up themselves against Christ Jesus
thy son our Lord and Savior, to deface his glory and set up Antichrist. We
be not able of our selves to think a good thought, much less to stand against
their assaults, except thy undeserved grace and mighty arm defend and deliver
us. Perform thy promises made to Jacob, and stop the mouths of the cursed
Edomites. Call them to repentance whom thou have appointo salvation, bring home
them that run astray, lighten the blind, and teach the ignorant: forgive
all those that wilfully and obstinately rebel not against thy holy will, let
thy fearful threatenings pierce our stony hearts, and make us tremble at thy
judgments.

Make the examples of them whom thou have overthrown in their own devises, as
Cain, Cham, Nemrod, Esau, Pharao, Saul, Achitophell, Judas, and such other to
be a warning for us, that we set not up our selves against thy holy will.
Grant free passage to thy holy word, that it may work effectually in us the
work of life and blessed hope of our salvation, to the eternal praise of thy
majesty, through our mediator Christ Jesus: to whom with thee and the holy
ghost, three persons and one God, be praise and thanksgeuyng in all
congregations world without end. So be it.

A Prayer for the afflicted and persecuted under the tyranny of Antichrist.
O Merciful father, who never do forsake such as put their trust in thee:
stretch forth thy mighty arm to the defense of our brethren, by the rage of
enemies persecuted and grievously tormented in sundry places for the true
profes1ion of thy holy Gospel, who in their extreme necessity cry for comfort
unto thee. Let not thy long suffering O Lord, be an occasion either to
increase the tyranny of thy enemies, or to discourage thy children, but with
speed O Lord, consider their great miseries and afflictions. Prevent the
cruel devise of Aman: stay the rage of Holophernes: break of the counsel of
Achitophell. Let not ye wicked say: Where is now their God? Let thy afflicted
flock feel present aid and relief from thee O Lord: look down upon them
with thy pitiful eye from thy holy habitation: send terror and trembling
among their enemies: make an end of their outrageous tyranny: beat back their
boldness in suppressing thy truth, in destroying thy true servants, in defacing
thy glory, and in setting up Antichrist. Let them not thus proudly advance
them selves against thee and thy Christ, but let them understand and feel that
against thee they fight. Preserve and defend the vine which thy right hand has
planted, and let all nations see the glory of thine anointed,

Amen.
A Prayer to be said before the receiving of the Communion.
O Father of mercy and God of all consolation, seeing all creatures do knowledge
and confess thee to be their governor and Lord, it becomes us the
workmanship of thine own hands, at all times to reverence and magnify thy
godly majesty: First, for that thou have created us to thine own Image and
similitude, but chiefly because thou have delivered us from that everlasting
death and damnation, into the which Satan drew mankind by the means of sin:
from the bondage whereof neither man, nor Angel was able to make us free, but
thou (O Lord) rich in mercy, and infinite in goodness, have provided our
redemption to stand in thine only and well-beloved son: whom of very love, you
did give to be made man like unto us in all things, sin excepted, that in
his body he might receive the punishment of our transgression, by his death to
make satisfaction to thy justice, and by his resurrection to destroy him that
was author of death, and so to bring again life to the world, from which the
whole offspring of Adam was most justly exiled.

O Lord, we acknowledge that no creature was able to comprehend the length and
breadth, the deepenes and height of that thy most excellent love which moved
thee to show mercy where none was deserved, to promise and give life where
death had gotten victory, to receive us into thy grace when we could do
nothing but rebel against thy majesty. O Lord, ye blind dulnes of our corrupt
nature will not suffer us sufficiently to weigh these thy most ample benefits:
yet nevertheless at the commandment of Jesus Christ our Lord, we present our
selves to this his table (which he has left to be used in remembrance of his
death until his coming again) to declare and witness before the world, that
by him alone we have received liberty and life: that by him alone thou do
acknowledge us to be thy children and heirs: that by him alone we have
entrance to ye throne of thy grace: that by him alone we are possessed in our
spiritual kingdom, to eat and drink at his table, with whom we have our
conversation presently in heaven, and by whom our bodies shall be raised up
again from the duste, and shall be placed with him in that endless joy, which
thou (O father of mercy) have prepared for thine elect before the foundation of
the world was laid, And these most inestimable benefits we acknowledge and
confess to have received of thy free mercy and grace, by thine only beloved
son Jesus Christ. For the which therefore we thy congregation, moved by thy
holy spirit, render to thee all thanks, praise, and glory, for ever and ever.

A thankesgeuing after the receauiug of the holy Communion.
Tossed merciful father, we render unto thee all praise, thanks, honor, and
glory, for that it has pleased thee of thy great mercies, to grant us
miserable sinners, so excellent a gift and treasure, as to receive us into the
fellowship and company of thy dear son Jesus Christ our Lord, whom thou have
delivered to death for us, and have given him unto us as a necessary food and
nourishment unto everlasting life. And now we beseech thee also (O heavenly
father) to grant us this request, that thou never suffer us to become so
unkind, as to forget so worthy benefits, but rather imprint and fasten them
sure in our hearts, that we may grow and increase daily more and more in true
faith, which continually is exercised in all manner of good works: and so much
ye rather (O Lord) confirm us in these perilous days and rages of Satan,
that we may constantly stand and continue in the confession of the same, to the
aduaunceme^t of thy glory, which art God over al things, blessed for ever, So
be it.

A Prayer for wisdom to govern the Realm.
Almighty God and King of all Kings, Lord of heaven and earth, by whose
ordinance Princes have governance of mortal me^, whereas the wisest King
Solomon plainly confesses him self unable to govern his kingdom without thy
help and assistance: how much less shall I thy handmaide, being by kind a
weak woman, have sufficient ability to rule these thy kingdoms of England
and Ireland, an innumerable and warlike nation, or how shall I possibly be able
to bear the infinite weight of so great a burden, unless thou (O most
merciful father) as thou have of thine own liberality, without my deserving
and against the expectation of many, given me a kingdom and made me to reign,
do also in my reigning endue and help me with thy heavenly grace, without
which, none, even the wisest among the children of men, can once think a right
thought. Thou therefore (O endless fountain of all wisdom) send down from
thy holy heaven, and from the sovereign throne of thy majesty, thy wisdom,
to be ever with me, and always to assist me, to watch and labor with me in
governing the common weal: and that it may so teach and instruct me thy
ha^dmaide, that I may discern between good and evil, and between right and
wrong, that I may ever have willingness, boldness, and power, to give deserved
punishment to ye guilty, lovingly to defend the innocent, liberally to cherish
the painful and profitable members of the common weal: finally without
regard of persons, without account of worldly respects take in hand, execute,
and perform that which I shall know to please thee alone: that when thou ye
rightful judge that shall require many and great things at their hands to
whom many and great things are committed, shall call us all to a strait
reckening, I be not condemned as guilty of evil governance: but if I thy
handmaide, by natural frailty, weakness, and want of consideration, shall in
any thing have swarued from the right way, it may please thee of thy great
mercy (most sovereign king and most loving father) for

Jesus Christ thy sons sake, to pardon me, and grant that after this earthly
kingdom expired, I may with thee enjoy the heavenly and everlasting kingdom,
through the same Jesus Christ thy son, our Lord and Mediator, to whom with
thee and with the holy ghost, the only king of all worlds, immortal,
invisible, and only wise God, be all honor and glory for ever.

Domine ne in furore.
PSALM. VI. When David by his sins had provoked Gods wrath, and now felt
not only his hand against him, but also conceived the horrors of death
everlasting, he desires forgeuenes, bewailing that if God took him away in
his indignation, he should lack occasion to praise him as he was wont to do
whiles he was among me^. Then suddenly feeling Gods mercy, he sharply rebukes
his enemies which rejoiced in his affliction.
O Lord rebuke me not in thine indignation: neither chasten me in thy
displeasure.

My soul is also sore troubled: but Lord how long will thou punish me?

Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul, Oh save me for thy mercies sake.

For in death no man reme^breth thee, and who will give thee thanks in the pit?

I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my bed and water my couch with
tears.

My beauty is gone for very trouble, and worn away because of all mine
enemies.

Away from me all that work vanity, for the Lord has heard the voice of my
weping.

The Lord has heard my petition, the Lord will hear my prayer.

All mine enemies shall be confounded and sore vexed: they shall be turned
back and put to shame suddenly.

A prayer taken out of the VI. Psalm.
WE deserve without dout (O almighty God) for our wicked offenses and infinite
sins, to be severely chastised of thee: but trustyng to thy great mercy, we
most humbly beseech thee that thou will not punish us in thy wrath, nor in
thy heavy displeasure. We tremble, O our good father, and be in manner
astonished with fear, when we call to mind our own sins and thy
righteousness. Do not therefore, we beseech thee, as we have with our evil deeds
deserved, throw us down to hell, for there we shall not be able to sing to thy
glory, nor to set forth thy praise. Our enemies do gredily desire to have it
so: but thou, O God, look back upon the tears of them that trust in thee,
and make the workers of wickedness to depart from us. Finally so hear us, that
they all may be ashamed and confounded that are enemies to our safety and to
thy glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Beati quorum.
PSALM XXXII. David punished with grievous sickness for his sins, counts
them blessed to whom God does not impute their transgressions. And after that
he had confessed his sins and obtained pardon, he exhorts the wicked men to
live godly, and the good to rejoice.
BLessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgeuen, and whose sin is covered.

Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes no sin, and in whose
spirit there is no guile.

For while I held my tongue, my bones consumed away, thorough my daily
complaining.

For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night, and my moisture is like the
droughte in summer.

I will knowledge my sin unto thee, and mine unrighteousness have I not hid.

I said, I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and so thou forgauest the
wickedness of my sin.

For this shall every one that is godly, make his prayer unto thee, in a time
when thou may be found: but in ye great water floudes, they shall not come
nigh him.

Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shall preserve me from trouble, thou
shalt compass me about with songs of deliverance.

I will inform thee and teach thee in the way wherein thou shaltgo, and I will
guide thee with mine eye.

Be ye not like to horse and mule, which have no understanding, whose mouths
must be holden with bit and bridle, lest they fall upon thee.

Great plages remain for the ungodly, but who so puts his trust in the
Lord, mercy embraces him on every side.

Be glad O ye righteous and rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful all ye that are
true of heart.

A prayer taken out of the XXXII. Psalm.
WE are taught by thee, O our most good and mighty God, that here in stands
the true felicity of those that be thine, that their sins be forgeuen,
covered, and not laid to their charge in thy judgment. Of the obtaining
whereof, if ever there were need, now it appears that we have greatest need
of it, when the calamities of this present time do set our sins before our
eyes. For we feel that thy hand waxes heavy upon thy church, wherefore we
have thought it best for us not to cloak our sins, but to confess them
openly before thee, and we distrust not, that thou of thy great goodness wilt
forth with pardon and forgive us our offenses.

Wherefore being thine own, we beseech thee at this time, when we doubt not
that thou will be found, that thou will not suffer thy people to be
overwhelmed of the ungodly which now abound like unto ouerflowing waters. Be
thou to us a place of succor and refuge in these afflictions. Do thou instruct
and teach us the ways of salvation, and whatsoever portion of brutish and
untamed lust remains in us, do thou with the bitte and bridle of thy spirit
so subdue and restrain, that we be not for it thrown hedlong into everlasting
destruction. And at length O Lord let the sorrows and miseries be poured out
upon the enemies of thy glory: but let those that trust in thee be fenced and
defended with thy singular bountifulnes, that they which be zealous lovers of
thy name and upright in heart, may rejoice in thee and triumph with perfect
gladness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

An other out of the same Psalm.
THey are undoubtedly blessed (O almighty GOD) to whom of thy mercy thou have
vouchsaued to pardon their sins, and not to impute to them but to cover and
forgive all the wickedness and misdoing what so ever it be, that has heretofore
defiled them. We do most certainly know, that it is impossible for us to
obtain so great a benefit, unless we do first only see our own evils and
bewray them to thee, and pour forth into thy bosom what so ever we have
sinnefully, wickedly, and shamefully committed against thy law. Wherefore we
confess to thee, O our heavenly father, that our unrighteousness is most
heinous, and that our consciences are most miserably ouerburdened with the
weight of our wickedness. Thou therefore with thy mercy do now relieve us, and
whatsoever misdoyng and iniquity remains in us, we beseech thee that thou will lovingly and mercifully wipe it away from us. Deliver us from the miseries
hangyng over us, instruct us with true understanding, and with thy prudent care
so govern us, that we do not with evil affections run out of kind, and
become as most folishe brute beasts: but that being garnished with thy
goodness, we may be cheared with true gladness and perfect joy before thee,
thorough Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Domine in.
PSALM XXXVIII. David lying sick of some grievous disease, acknowledges
himself to be chastised of the Lord for his sins, and therefore prays God
to turn away his wrath. He utters the greatness of his grief by many words
and circumstances, as wounded with the arrows of Gods ire, forsaken of his
friends, evil entreated of his enemies. But in the end with firm confidence
he commends his cause to God, and hops for spedy help at his hand.
PUt me not to rebuke (O Lord) in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure.

For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore.

There is no health in my flesh because of thy displeasure, neither is there
any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin.

For my wickedness are gone over my head, and are like a sore burden to heavy
for me to bear.

My wounds stincke and are corrupt through my folishnes.

I am brought into so great trouble and misery, that I go mourning all the day
long.

For my loins are filled with a sore disease, and there is no whole part in my
body.

I am feeble and sore smitten I have rored for the very disquietnes of my heart.

Lord thou know all my desire, and my groaning is not hid from thee.

My heart pants, my strength has failed me, and the light of mine eyes is
gone from me.

My lovers and my neighbors did stand looking upon my trouble, and my kinsmen
stood a far of.

They also that sought after my life laid snares for me, and they that went
about to do me evil, talked of wickedness, and imagined deceit all the day
long.

As for me, I was like a deaf man and heard not, and as one that is dombe,
which does not open his mouth.

I became even as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproves.

For in thee O Lord, have I put my trust: thou shall answer for me O Lord my
God.

I have required that they (even mine enemies) should not triumph over me, for
when my foot slipte, they rejoiced greatly against me.

And I truly am set in the plague, and my heaviness is ever in my sight.

For I will consider my wickedness, and be sorry for my sin.

But mine enemies live and are mighty, and they that hate me wrongfully are
many in number.

They also that reward evil for good are against me, because I know the thing
that is good.

Forsake me not (O Lord my God:) be not thou far fro me. Have thee to help me
O lord (God) my salvation.

A prayer taken out of the XXXVIII. Psalm.
REbuke and chastise us (O Lord) as children, but withdraw thy wrath and heavy
hand from our present distresses. For we feel thy hand and the dangers
wherein we be: we perceive them to be past the cure of man's remedy, which
happens unto us not unworthily for our deserving. For sins and wickednesses
have every way overwhelmed us, wherewith we are ouerburdened and pressed down
far more then we be able to bear. Hereof comes our sorrow and that we be in
manner fainted with griefefulnes of heart. We see our neighbors and friends
estranged from us, our enemies to lay snares for us, and to attempt all the
ways to our destruction. Thou therefore (O God) for thy great mercy, first
reconcile us to thy self, in pardonyng all those things that we have most
wickedly committed against thee, and the^ make have to help us. We look for no
other refuge but thee, whose wont it is to be at hand to succor them that call
upon thee, and to satisfy their petitions. Thou art not ignorant how, while
we are thus shaken with adversities, antichrists do triumph against us, and
they daily increase in strength and number that do wrongfully hate us.
Wherefore we beseech thee, good father, forsake us not in so great afflictions,
since thou art our only safety, make have (we pray thee) to help thy church,
and to succor her now being in extremest peril, for Jesus Christ's his sake.

Amen.
Miserere mei deus.
PSALM. LI. When David was rebuked by the prophet Nathan for his great
offenses, he did not only acknowledge the same to God with protestation of
his natural corruption and iniquity, but also left a memorial thereof to
his posterity. Therefore first he desired God to forgive his sins, and to
renew in him his holy spirit, with promise that he will not be unmindful of
those great graees. Finally fearyng least God would punish the whole church
for his faut, he requires that he would rather increase his graces toward
the same.
Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness according unto ye
multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

For I knowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that thou
might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art indged.

Behold, I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts, and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

Thou shall purge me with Jsope, and I shall be clean, thou shalt wash me,
and I shall be whiter then snow.

Thou shall make me hear joy and gladness, that ye bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.

Turn thy face from my sins, and blotte out all my misdeedes.

Make me a clean heart (O God,) and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.

O give me the comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with thy free
spirit.

Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall he converted
unto thee.

Deliver me from bloudgiltines O god, thou that art the God of my health, and
my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

Thou shall open my lips O Lord, and my mouth shall show thy praise.

For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee, but thou delightst
not in burnt offringes.

The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit, a broken and contrite heart O god
shall thou not despise.

O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of rightousnes, with the burnt
offringes and oblations, then shall they offer young bullockes upon thine
altar.

A prayer taken out of the LI. Psalm.
WE do with one whole consent and with hearty prayers crave of thy mercy (O
almightye God) that we may be cleansed, washed, and wyped from our
wickednesses, sins and offenses. We acknowledge and confess how we have
heretofore done evil in thy sight, but our sins shall never be able to make
thee unjust or unfaithful. We do well understand that we deserve not, that
thou should perform to us the noble and most honorable promises that thou
have made us, but herein we have need to be relieved, and our case to be
supplied with thy truth and constancy. Thou see how we are borne into the
world, corrupt and defiled even from our birth, which were also before our
birth conceived in wickedness. Cleanse therefore our souls, and vouchsaue to
beautify them with that cleannes that is pleasant in thy sight. Give us a
pure heart, and a spirit upright, holy, and courageously well disposed, that we
may not be cast away from thee as ungodly persons, but may receive true joys
and perfect gladness. If thou shall have delivered us from sins which do
accuse us as guilty of eternal death, then shall our lips be opened to
praise thee with cherefulnes. Grant we beseech thee that we may come to thee
with the sacrifice wherewith thou art principally debated, that is, of a broken
spirit, an abaced and humbled courage. There both our present sorrows shall be
eased, and thou shall be pleased with the praises wherewith we shall magnify thy
name. Show forth thy good will to Zion, that is, to thy church. Thou see in
how great danger she is tossed, she is oppressed both within and without. We
beseech thee deliver her not only from outward enemies, but also inwardly so
reform and renew her, that she may be accounted worthy of thee her spouse,
through Jesus Christ our lord Ame^

A prayer taken out of the same Psalm.
WE acknowledge (O Almighty God) with how dangerous spotte of sins we have
defiled our souls, which being most grievous and sorrowful unto us, and we not
able with our own power nor by any kind of good works to wash away the same
spots, this only refuge is left us, to fly unto thee the fountain of mercy
that it may please thee to have pity upon us, to wash away our iniquities to
blot out our sins and cleanse the corruptions whereunto we are from our birth
and conception subject. For when thou shall have freely and liberally pardoned
the offenses and misdoinges where with we are laden, then shall thou appear
most true, faithful and constant in thy promises. Vouchsaue to sprinckle us
with the blood of of thine only son, by which alone our body and soul may
be restored to perfect and healthful gladness. We crave to have a new heart
created in our bodies, and to have a principal spirit given us, whereby, not
as by constraint, but earnestly, heartily, and willingly we may offer to thee
the sacrifice of an afflicted and abased courage, which thou art wont never to
despise. Finally that so being made clean and purified, by thy favor and
mercy, we may always offer to thee sacrifices of praise, through Jesus Christ
our Lord,

Amen.
Domine exaudi.
PSALM. CII. I It seems that this prayer was appointed to the faithful to
pray in the captivity of Babylon. A consolation for the buildyng of the
church, whereof follows the praise of God to be published unto all
posterities. The conversion of the Gentiles, and the stabilitie of the church.
Hear my prayer (O Lord) and let my cry come in unto thee. Hide not thy face
from me in the time of trouble, incline thine ears unto me when I call, O
hear me and that right soon.

For my days are consumed away like smoke, and my bones are brent up as with a
firebrand.

My heart is smitten down and withered like grass: so that I forget to eat my
bread.

For the voice of my groaning my bones will scant cleave to my flesh.

I am become like a Pellicane in the wilderness, and like an Owl that is in the
desert.

I have watched and am even as a sparrow that sits alone upon the house top.

Mine enemies revile me all the day long, and they that are mad upon me, are
sworn together against me.

For I have eaten ashes as it were bread, and mingled my tears with weping.

And that because of thine indignation and wrath, for thou have taken me up and
cast me down.

My days are gone like a shadow, and I am withered like grass.

But thou (O Lord) shall endure for ever, and thy remembrance throughout all
generations.

Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion, for it is time that thou have
mercy upon her, yea, the time is come.

And why: thy servants think upon her stones, and it pitieth them to see
her in the dust.

The heathen shall fear thy name (O Lord,) and all the kings of the earth
thy majesty.

When the Lord shall build up Sion, and when his glory shall appear.

When he turns him unto the prayer of the poor destitute, and despises not
their desire.

This shall be written for those that come after, and the people which shall
be borne, shall praise the Lord.

For he has looked down from his sanctuary, out of the heaven did the Lord
behold the earth.

That he might hear the mourninges of such as be in captivity, and deliver
the children appointed unto death.

That they may declare the name of the lord in Sion: and his worship at
Jerusalem.

When the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms also to serve the
Lord.

He brought down my strength to my journey, and shortened my days.

But I said, O my God take me not away in the midst of mine age, as for thy
years they endure throughout all generations.

Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundations of the earth, and the
heavens are the works of thy hands.

They shall perish, but thou shall endure: they shall all wax old, as does a
garment.

And as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: but thou
art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

The children of thy servants shall continue: and their seed shall stand fast
in thy sight.

A prayer taken out of the CII. Psalm.
OF our selves (O almighty God) we are unworthy that our prayers should have
access unto thee, forasmuch as we have daily broken thy law and commaundeme^ts
and have lived not according to thy gospel and our vocation. But thou of thy
mercifulnes, hide not away thy face from our prayers and supplications. For we
are grievously vexed and assaulted with great perils. Wherefore bow down thine
ear unto us, and spedily grant favor to us that call upon thee. First we
crave to be releued of our sins and offenses, that our feeble heart may be
strengthened in thy way, and that thou do moisten the consumed strength of our
soul with thy holy spirit, that we may live to thee, and being restored and
renewed, we may make thy name and thy gospel to be well reported. Then we pray
thee to turn thy force and power against those that slander and blaspheme the
name of thy son and his holy doctrine. Have mercy now we beseech thee, on
Zion, that is, thy church, for now it seems to be time that thou show her thy
favor. Look down we pray thee, from thy hie habitation, and behold our
calamities. Hear the groaning of those that be bound, beaten, and in marvelous
wise tormented for thy names sake. Save thy sheep out of so great dangers,
which are not only put to death, but also cursedly threatened with extreme
damnation by Antichrist that yet at length thy children may live with rest and
quietness in thy presence, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
An other out of the same Psalm.
OAlmighty father, the company of the faithful craves thy help, which is
cruelly oppressed with the tyranny of sin, so as the oily moisture of
godliness is almost dried up in them, their mouth is stopped that it cannot sing
thy praises, and there is in a manner in the whole body no one member, that does
his duty to relieve an other. Wherefore thou that art always one, rise up to
succor us, for now we think it time for thee to help thy afflicted church.
This if we shall obtain, we doubt not that the fear of thy name and true
godliness shall be largely spread abroad. For if thou shall rescue the people
from so grievous miseries, thou shall make men know that thy truth endures
always constant and unremoved, which ever remaneth one toward thine elect, how
so ever heaven and earth be tossed with chaunges, and shaken til they perish.
By this thy truth, not of our own strengthes and deseruinges, but by thy
loving and merciful working, we pray to be saved and restored, thorough Jesus
Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Deprofundis cla.
PSALM. CXXX. The people of God from their bottomless miseries do cry unto God
and are heard. They confess their sins and flee unto Gods mercy.
OUt of the deep have I called unto thee (O Lord:) Lord hear my voice.

O let thine ears consider well: the voice of my complaint.

If thou Lord wilt be extreme and mark what is done amiss: oh Lord who may
abide it?

For there is mercy with thee therefore shall thou be feared.

I look for the Lord, my soul does wait for him: in his word is my trust.

My soul flies unto the Lord: before the morning watch (I say) before the
morning watch.

O Israel trust in the Lord for with the lord there is mercy: and with him is
plenteous redemption.

And he shall redeem Israel from all his sins.

A prayer taken out of the same Psalm.
THou art often wont (O almighty God) grievously to afflict thy faithful people,
that thereby they may return to thee with fervent and perfect repentance,
whereof now in thy church we have experience, in these most troublesome
times. For we that heretofore have infinite ways been unthankful to thee, and
have daily broken thy law, are oftentimes so vexed with the fiercenes of the
devil and his servants that we are constrained to cry to thee out of the most
deep pit of our miseries, and to pray thee that thou will not so severely
punish our sins. If thou (O God) be determined to mark and punish our
iniquities according to their deseruinges, which of us shall be so clean and
holy, that he shall be able to stand before thy righteousness. But since we know
that thou art full of exceeding mercy, we do both morning and evening look up
for thy help. Although therefore our offenses be many, yet it may please thee
of thy most plentiful goodness and mercy to succor us, that being delivered
from these instant perils, and from the miseries that oppress us, we may both
believe and report that with thee alone is true redemption, through Jesus Christ
our Lord,

Amen.
An other prayer taken out of the same psalm.
FOrasmuch as (O almighty God) we are continually tossed in the deep sea of
temptations* and are not able of our selves to withstand them, we do for our
great necessity beseech thee mercifully to relieve us. For if thou being judge
and examiner of all our doings, shall narrowly mark all our offenses against
thee, and rigorously punish them, who shall be able to stand before thy throne?
Wherefore sith there is with thee great and infinite clemency, as our only
trust is therein, so we beseech thee that our iniquities may thereby be redeemed.
With this only confidence we are daily and hourly nourished, and do trust
that thou will never forget the true Israel, that is, thy church. Grant
therefore we pray thee that we may obtain of thee pardon of our sins as the
true and perfect fruit of this affiaunce, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Domine exaudi.
PSALM. CXLIII. An earnest prayer for remission of sins, acknowledging that
the enemies did thus cruelly persecute him by Gods just judgment. He desires
to be restored to grace, to be governed by his holy spirit, that he may
spend the remnaunt of his life in the true fear and service of God.
Hear my prayer O lord and consider my desire hearken unto me, for thy truth
and righteousness sake.

And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

For the enemy has persecuted my soul, he has smiten my life down to the
ground: he has laid me in the darkness, as the men that have been long dead.

Therefore is my spirit vexed within me, and my heart with in me is desolate.

Yet do I remember the time past, I muse upon all thy works, yea, I exercise
my self in the works of thy hands.

I stretch forth my hands unto thee, my soul gaspeth unto thee as a thirsty
land.

Hear me (O Lord) and that soon, for my spirit waxes faint, hide not thy
face from me least I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

O let me hear thy loving kindness betymes in the morning, for in thee is my
trust, show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto
thee.

Deliver me (O Lord) from mine enemies, for I fly unto thee to hide me.

Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my god, let thy
loving spirit lead me forth into the land of righteousness.

Quicken me O Lord, for thy names sake, and for thy righteousness sake bring
my soul unto thee.

And of thy goodness slay mine enemies, and destroy all them that vex my soul,
for I am thy servant.

A prayer taken out of the 143. Psalm.
WE do earnestly desire (O lord God) that thou will incline to our common
petitions, and for thy truth and mercies sake hear the prayers that we pour
out before thee. And we deny not that the sins wherewith we have grievously
offended thee, do not so deserve. But if thou would deal with us by
extremity of thy law and judgment, and drive us to severe trial, forasmuch as
no mortal man, yea no creature, be the same never so pure and holy, were able
to abide it, we also without doubt must needs be condemned and not able to
stand before thy judgment seat in thy presence. It may therefore please thee
with thine accustomed clemency and pity to behold how vehemently our ennemy
pursues our souls, whereby we are so vexed and overcome, that our case seems
little to differ from the estate of the dead, so sore is our spirit accombred
within us, and our heart astonished. Yet do we well remember of thy former and
ancient mercy whereby thou art wont wondrously to succor thine elect when
their cases are most dispaired. Wherefore now we do not only lift up our
hands, but also with all our hearts we cry to thee that thou will deliver thy
church from thine enemies, and so govern us with thy good spirit, that
hereafter we may according to thy will and good pleasure faithfully do those
things that are upright and holy, being brought out of this distress, and
revived by thy strength and help through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
An other out of the same Psalm.
SO great O Lord, is our want of righteousness, that all such as are well in
structed with thy spirit, do well know how unable we are to stand before thy
judgment. Therefore when we wey our deseruinges, our spirit fails, and our
heart is amassed. But by and by we turn to thy mercy, and do confess that our
unrighteousness comes not of our self, but is thy work. Vpholden and
encouraged with thee, we fly to thy favor in our perils of this life. For
unless thou do help us, we plainly see our salvation past recovery. Show us
the way wherein we may safely go, and teach us the manner how to perform thy
will, and with thy holy spirit that proceeds from thee, govern all our doings
and thoughts, through Jesus Christ our lord, Amen. **

Here begins the Letany and Suffrages.
O God the father of heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the father of hea. etc.

O God the son redemer of the world, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son redemer of. etc.

O God the holy Ghost proceeding from the father and the son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost proceeding. etc.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious. etc.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins. Spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou
have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of
the devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all blindness of heart, from pride, vain glory and hipocrisy, from envy,
hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceites of the
world, the flesh and the Devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightninges and tempests, from plague, pestilence and famine, from
battle and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy,
from all hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy Nativity and
circumcision, by thy Baptism fasting and temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony and bloody sweat, by thy cross and passion, by thy precious
death and burial, by thy glorious resurrection and ascension, and by the
coming of ye holy Ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

Me sinners do beseech thee to hear us O Lord God, and that it may please
thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant Elizabeth our most
gracious Queen and governor.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to rule her heart in thy faith, fear and love, and
that she may evermore have affiaunce in thee, and ever seek thy honor and
glory.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to be her defender and keeper, giving her the victory
over all her enemies.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to illuminate all Bishops, Pastoures and ministers
of the Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word: and that both
by their preaching and living they may set it forth and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to indue the Lords of the Counsel, and all the
nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee, to bless and keep the Maiestrates, giving them
grace to execute justice and to maintain truth.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to give to al nations unity peace and concord.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to give all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth
the fruits of the spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred
and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to strenghthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat
down Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort all that be in danger,
necessity, and tribulation.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring with child, al sick persons and young children, and to show
thy pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for ye fatherles children and
widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors and slaunderers,
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use, the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us al our
sins, neglige^ces and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy word.

We beseech thee to hear us. etc.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God we beseech thee to hear us.

O lamb of God that take away the sins of the world.

Grant us thy peace.

O lamb of God that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art. etc.

And lead us not into te^ptatio^: But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The virsicle.
O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

Answer. Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O God, merciful father, that dispisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercfully assist our prayers that we
make before thee in all our troubles and adversities whenever they oppress
us: and graciously hear us, yt those evils which the craft and subtlety of ye
Devil or man works against us may be brought to naught, and by the providence
of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants being hurt by no
persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, thorough
Jesu Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise help us and deliver us for thy names sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears and our Fathers have declared unto us the
noble works yt thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy honor.

Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to ye holy Ghost: as it was in
the beginning, is now. etc. Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afllictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O Son of David, have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us O Christ.

Graciously hear us O Christ, graciously hear us O Lord Christ.

O Lord let thy mercy be sheshed upon us.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.
WE humbly beseech thee, O father mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and
for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us all those evils that we most
righteously have deserved: and grant that in all our troubles we may put our
whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness and
pureness of living to thy honor and glory, through our only mediator and
advocate Jesus Christ our lord, Amen.

A prayer for the Queens Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly father, high and mighty, king of kings, Lord of Lords, the
only ruler of Princes which do from thy throne behold all the dwellers upon
the earth: most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold our most
gracious sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, and so replenish her with the grace
of thy holy spirit, that she may always incline to thy will, and walk in thy
way. Indue her plentifully with heavenly gifts. Grant her in health and
wealth long to live. Stre^gthen her yt she may vanquishe and overcome all her
enemies, and finally after this life, she may attain everlasting joy and
felicity, through Christ our Lord,

Amen.
In the time of any common plague or sickness.
O Almighty God, which in thy wrath in ye time of king David did slay with
the plague of pestilence, three score and ten thousand, and yet remembering thy
mercy, did save the rest: have pity upon us miserable sinners, that now
are visited with great sickness and mortality, that like as thou did then
command thine Angel to cease from punishing: So it may please thee to
withdraw from us this plague and grievous sickness through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A prayer of Chrysostom.
ALmighty God which have given us grace at this time with one accord to make
our common supplications unto thee, and do promise, that when two or three
be gathered together in thy name thou will grant their requests: fulfill now
(O Lord) the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient
for them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world
to come, life everlasting,

Amen.
In time of sickness.
MOst merciful redemer, thou art alwais merciful, who art always the Savior,
whether you do send health or sickness, wealth or adversity, joy or sorrow.
For it is of great mercy when by outward afflictions (as it were by bitter, but
yet wholesome medicines) thou do heal ye inward diseases of the soul: and
by temporary troubles, which do last but for a short time, do prepare us to
eternal joys which endure for ever. And thy self, O gracious Savior, passing
into thy glory through the greatest afflictions of this world have trode^ out
unto us by thy steps, that way to true and perfect felicity, in the which no
humble and true servant ought either to disdain or to shrincke, to follow
after his Lord and Master so going before him. But for so much as without thee
we can do nothing that good is, I beseech thee to endue me with thy heavenly
grace, that I may take up willingly and obediently this cross which thou have
appointed unto me, and follow after thee: and that I may drink of, as it were
this medicinable cup, though bitter unto ye flesh, which thou the heavenly
physician do thus offer unto me, patiently without grndging or murmuring
against thee: and that I may with thy faithful servant Job and with unfeigned
lips and heart, say: the Lord has given, the Lord has taken away: as it has
pleased the Lord, so is it come to pass: blessed be the name of ye Lord. For
if I have received gladly, youth, health, riches, honor, and joy, at thy
hands O lord, why should I refuse patiently to take age, sickness, adversity,
and sorrow at thy hands also? These things be in deed very grievous unto
frail nature and flesh: but thou my Lord, though most perfectly innocent,
infinitely have suffered more grievous things for me, and I have deserved
infinitely more grievous things, who have so often deserved hell. But yet thou
know the frailty of our humane condition and nature. Wherefore I beseech
thee, as thou pourest sharp wine into our wou^des to bite away the corruption
of our sins, so after the example of the merciful Samaritane set forth in
thy holy Gospel, to resemble thy self, add unto the sharp wine of thy
correction, the suppling oil of thy merciful comfort, whereby I may be able to
suffer things, which otherwise are intolerable unto me. And if it be thy
pleasure to increase sorrow upon me, increase also thy grace and gift of
patience in me, and turn these worldly and bodily afflictions to the profit
of my soul, by mine acknowledging of thy justice in punishing me worthily, and
thy mercy in correcting me graciously, even like as a father has pity upon
his children when he beats them, and by my submitting of my own will unto
thy holy will, and patiently taking of this thy proving and trying of me,
whether I love thee or no, may offer that sacrifice of obedience which is
acceptable unto thee. And when thy fatherly piety shall be contented with thy
meek chastising of me, then I beseech thee send calm after this tempest,
quietness after this trouble, and joy after this sorrow: that I may render
thanks unto thee for double causes, both that thou have first corrected and
amended me an unprofitable servant, and afterward have taken away the
bitterness of affliction with the softnes of thy comfort, in the one having
regard of necessity, in ye other not forgetting my infirmity, and in both as
in all things always remembering thy mercy: unto the which I do commend and
betake my self both body and soul, now and for ever. Unto thee with the father
and the holy ghost, one God of most excellent majesty, be all praise, honor,
and thankesgeuing, for ever and ever, Ame^.

An other in sickness.
Almighty God and most merciful father, who do correct all those who^ thou
do receive, bringing even unto the very gates of death, and yet reducing
back again: I beseech thee that as thou have with thy sharp visitation and
grievous sickness already corrected me thy disobedient servant, so thou will
also after this thy fatherly correction, mercifully relieve and restore me if
it may so stand with thy gracious goodness, even as thy beloved son our
Savior Jesus Christ upon earnest suit and prayer (as in his holy Gospel is
mentioned) relieved, and restored unto health the rulers son, being in
extreme sickness and at the very point of death: which my most humble suit I
likewise entirely make unto thee most merciful father, in the name of ye same
thy dearlybeloued son our Savior Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with
thee and the holy Ghost world without end,

Amen.
In time of sickness.
O Most mighty and most merciful Savior Jesu Christ, ye only son of the
living God, who being here upon the earth amongst mortal men, by the healing
of all diseases, and pardoning of the sins of such as put their trust in
thee, did declare unto the world that thou art that only heavenly and
perfect Physician, as well of our souls as of our bodies: and when such as
trusted in their own righteousness did lay it to thy charge as a fault, that
thou did keep company with sinners, thou did expressly testify, that
not such as were in health, but such as were sick had need of ye Physician.
Behold O heavenly Physician, here in me a matter most worthy of thy divine
cure, most meet to show both thy power and mercy upon. Behold a person sore
oppressed both with the sickness of my soul and body. Behold me thy
handmaiden upon whom from my tender years unto this day, thou have heaped so
great and so many, and almost infinite benefits of thy gracious goodness, whom
being borne of a king and Queen, thou have not only endued with gifts of
grace, meet for a kingdom, but also have delivered me from many and great
dangers, out of the hands of my enemies, and from ye snares of death which
they had set for my life, have exalted me unto the dignity of a Queen, and
placed me in the high estate of honor amongst mortal persons, and that not
through any my deseruyng, but only of thy free goodness and mere liberality.
But now O Lord, either lest too much worldly prosperity should carry my mind
astray and cause me to forget my self and my bounden duty toward thee, or
else for that I being by thee made a Queen over thy people, have never as I
ought to do from my heart acknowledged and confessed my self to be the subject
and handmaiden of thy Majesty, neither behaved my self toward thee
accordingly, as became thy bond maiden, neither being thankful toward thee,
as my most gracious Savior, nor obedient unto thee, as my most dreadful Lord,
or else for other causes unto thy divine wisdom best known: now I say, either
wholesomly to admonish, or most justly to punish thy disobedient servant, and
so graciously to correct and amend me, thou have stricken me with a grievous
sickness of my body, and very dangerous unto my life, and also troubled and
abashed my mind with terrors and anguishes of my soul: and withal thou have
by my danger sore flighted and amassed thy people of England, whose safety and
quietness next after thee, seems to stay upon me above all other worldly
creatures, and upon my life and continuance amongst them. Wherefore as well I
as thy people committed* unto me, bowing the knees of our hearts before thy
majesty, do humbly beseech thee most gracious Savior, in thy judgment to
remember thy mercy, and according to thy accustomed goodness, to deliver me thy
handmaiden from this present peril of dangerous sickness. And first O heavenly
Physician, I beseech thee heal my soul, pardoning my unkindness toward thee,
forgeuing my forgetfulness of thee and of my self, and utterly blotting out and
putting clean away all other my sins committed against thy Majesty. Heal
my mind, reforming and instructing me with thy heavenly grace, that I may take
this sickness, which thou have most justly punished me withal, contentedly and
patiently, as a bitter, but wholesome medicine of all ye diseases of my mind
offered unto me by thee, as it were by ye hands of the best Physician. And
withal heal my body also making it sound and pure from all infirmities, and
remnantes of sickness, yt I may be thoroughly cured by the having of a whole
mind in a whole body: and that I having obtained perfect health of both by thy
only benefit, not only my self, but also all thy people of England with me
may both be taught by the peril past, hereafter to give due reverence and
obedience unto thy majesty, and for the delivery from so great a danger, and
benefit of perfect health, may magnify thy goodness and mercy with perpetual
praises and continual thankesgeuing: who with thy heavenly father, and the
holy Ghost are one immortal and most glorious God, to whom belongs all
Empire, power, and majesty world without end.

Amen.
A Prayer to be said after sickness or any other kind of cross or affliction.
Almighty and most merciful father, I thy poor creature and work of thine
hands acknowledge and confess unto thee my manifold sins and offenses,
which I from my youth up unto this day have committed against thee in thought,
word, and deed, and am taught and moved by thy word and grace to be heartily
sorry for the same, beseching thee for Jesus Christ thy dear sons sake, to
have mercy upon me, and to forgive me all these mine offenses, according to thy
great mercy and promise, which have said: At what time so ever a sinner does
repent him of his sin from the bottom of his heart, I will put all his
wickedness out of my remembrance. Ezech. xviij.

O Lord, I confess that I was borne in sin, and conceived in wickedness, and
am by nature a child of wrath: for in my flesh dwells no good thing, and of
my self I am not able to think a good thought, much less to do that thou in
thy law requirest of me, which have said: Cursed is he that continues not in
all things that are written in the law, to do them. Again, thy law is
spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin. Therefore O Lord, I come unto
thee for grace, (which have said: Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall
find, knock and it shall be opened unto you) to prevent and draw my will
unto all goodness: for none can come unto thee except he be drawn: and except
we be borne from above we can not see the kingdom of God.

Therefore O Lord renew in me a right spirit, that I may receive strength and
ablenes to do thy righteous will. Assist me with thy grace, that I may be
strengthened with power in the inward man, and be armed with thy holy armor,
which is the brestplate of righteousness, the shield of faith, the hope of
salvation for an helmet, and the sword of the spirit, which is thy holy word,
that I may stand perfect in all that is thy will, and be found worthy through
Christ, to receive the crown of life which thou have promised to all them that
love thee.

Grant that I may ever desire and will that which is most pleasing and
acceptable to thy will.

Thy will be my will, and my will be always to follow thy will.

Let there be ever in me one will and one desire with thee, and let me never
desire to will or not to will, but as you wilt.

Grant me that above all things I may rest in thee, and fully quiet and
pacify my heart in thee: for thou Lord art the true peace of the heart, and
perfect rest of the soul.

Thou know Lord what is most profitable and expedient for me: wherefore do
with me in all things as it shall seem best unto thee: for it may not be but
well that thou do, which do most justly and blessedly dispose all things
after thy most godly wisdom.

Grant unto me O Lord, that I may esteem all things in this world as they
be, transitory and soon vanishing away, and my self also with them, drawing
toward my end: for nothing under the Sun may long abide, but all is vanity
and affliction of spirit.

O Lord God which art sweetenes unspeakable, turn in to bitterness to me all
transitory and earthly delights which may draw me from the love of eternal
things.

Blessed are they that for the love of thee set not by the pleasures of this
world, but crucify the flesh and the lusts thereof, so that in a clean and
pure conscience they may offer their prayers unto thee and be accepted to have
company with thee and thy blessed Angels.

O everlasting light, send down ye beams of thy brightness, and lighten the
inward parts of my heart.

Open my heart that I may behold thy laws, and teach me to walk in thy
commandments.

Behold my weakness (O Lord) and consider my frailnes best known unto thee.

I covet to cleave fast to heavenly things, but worldly affections and
tentatio^s pluck me back: they daily rebel and suffer not my soul to live
in rest.

Which although they draw me not always to consent, yet nevertheless their
assaults be very grievous unto me.

Oh what a life may this be called, where no trouble nor misery lacks? where
every place is full of snares of mortal enemies?

For one trouble or temptation over passed, an other comes by and by, and the
first conflict yet during, a new battle sodeinly arises.

Tedious it is to me to live in such battle: but I perceive such conflictes
are not unprofitable for me, whilst I know my self and mine infirmities the
better, and am thereby compelled to seek help at thy hand.

It is good for me O Lord, that thou have thus exercised and humbled me, that I
may learn to dread thy secret and terrible judgments, which scourgest every
child that thou receauest, which wou^dest and healest, which bring down to
the gates of hell, and bring back again.

I yield thee thanks therefore that thou have not spared my sins, but have
punished me with scourges of love, and have sent affliction and anguishe within
and without.

Of grace and favor it is, O Lord, that thou suffer thy servants to be
troubled and afflicted in this world, because they should not be condemned with
the world.

Thou would that they should here be broken with affliction, that they may
after rise in a new light and be clarified and made glorious in thy kingdom.

Oh holy father thou have ordained it so to be, and it is done as thou have
appointed.

Wherefore O Lord, give me the grace to rest in thee above all things, and to
quiet my heart in thee above all creatures, above all glory and honor, above
all dignity and power, above all health and beauty, above all riches and
treasure, above all joy and pleasure, above all fame and praise, above all
mirth and consolation that man's heart may take or feel besides thee. For you
Lord art most good, most wise, most righteous, most holy, most just, most
blessed, most high, most mighty, most comfortable, most beautiful, most
loving, most glorious, in who^ all treasures of goodness most perfectly rest.

And therefore what soever I have besides thee, it is nothing unto me: for my
heart may not rest nor fully be pacified but only in thee.

Oh Lord Jesu, who shall give me wings of perfect love, that I may fly up
from these worldly miseries, and rest with thee?

Of Christ the king of everlasting glory, my soul cries unto thee with
continual groninges, and says: how long taryeth my Lord God to come to me?

Oh when shall the end come of all these miseries?

When shall I be clean delivered from the bondage of sin?

When shall I Lord, have my mind only fixed on thee, and be merry in thee
with perfect joy and gladness?

When shall that blessed hour come that thou shall visit me and make me glad
with thy blessed presence, when thou shall be to me all in all?

When shall I come unto thee and feel and enjoy those sweet consolations,
which with thy blessed Saints are always present?

When shall I have peace without trouble, peace without and peace within, and
on every side steadfast and sure?

Oh Lord Jesu, when shall I stand and behold thee, and have full sight and
contemplation of thy glory?

When shall I be with thee in thy kingdom that you have ordained for thine
elect people before the beginning?

Oh blessed mansion of that heavenly City: Oh most clear day of eternity,
whom ye night may never darken.

This is the day always clear and mirry, always sure and never changing.

This day shines clearly to thy Saints in heaven (oh gracious God) with
everlasting brightness: but to us here on earth (so great is the darkness of
sin in us) it shines obscurely, and as it were a far of: we see but a
glimmering thereof.

Would to God this day might shortly appear and shine unto us, and that these
worldly vanities were at an end.

Thy heavenly Citizens know and feel how joyful this day is: but we the
children of Eve, strangers and exiles here on earth, do lament and bewail
the bitter tediousnes of this present life, short and evil, full of sorrow
and anguishe:

Where man is oftentimes defiled with sin, encumbred with affliction,
unquieted with troubles, lapped in cares, busied with vanities, blinded with
errors, ouercharged with labors, vexed with tentations, overcome with vain
delights and pleasures of the world, and miserably wrapped in many kinds of
calamities.

Wherefore O Lord arise and help me: comfort mine exile: assuage my sorrow:
destroy the power of mine enemies, the kingdom of sin, Satan, the world,
and my wicked flesh, which always make battle against me, and bring these
conflicting days to an end: so shall I sing praises unto thee, O God of my
salvation, and magnify thy holy name world without end, Amen.

Certain sentences taken out of the scripture.
Of the kingdom of God, and how all kings ought to seek his glory.
Psalm. 10. b. 16.
GOd is king for ever and ever, but the heathen shall perish out of the land.

Psalm. 11. b. 5. 6. 7.
God will try the righteous but his soul abhors the ungodly, and him that
delights in wickedness. Upon the ungodly he will rain snares, fire and
brimstone, and tempests, storms shall be their portion and drink. For God most
righteous, loves righteousness, his countenance will behold the just.

Micheas. 4. b. 7.
The Lord himself shall be their king upon the mount Sion from this time for
evermore.

Esaias. 33. d. 22.
The Lord is our judge, the Lord is our law geuer, the Lord is our king, and
he himself shall be our Savior.

Psalm. 47. a. 1.
Clappe your hands all ye people, make a noise unto the Lord with a joyful
voice. For God is high and terrible, he is the great king upon all the earth.
He will subdue the people under us: and the nations under our feet. He has
chosen for us our inheritance, the glory of Jacob, whom he loved. The Lord
ascends in a triumph (and) God with the sound of a trumpet. Sing Psalms to
the Lord, sing Psalms, sing psalms, to our king, sing Psalms. For the Lord
is king of all the earth, sing Psalms (all you that have) skill. God reigns
over the heathen: God sits upon his holy throne. The Princes of the people
are assembled together (for to be) the people of the God of Abraham: for the
fields of the earth be Gods, who is highly exalted.

Psalm. 146. 6. 10.
God thy Lord shall reign O Sion, to the worlds end, throughout all
generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Psalm. 68. a. 4. 5. b. 8. 12. c. 17. 18. 19. 20. 32.
Sing unto the Lord, sing Psalms unto his name: magnify him that rides upon
the heavens as it were upon an horse in his name everlasting and rejoice before
his face. He is a father of the fatherles, and the judge of widows (he is) the
Lord in his holy habitation. The earth shook, and the heavens dropped at the
presence of the Lord, even Sinay it self shook at the presence of the Lord,
Lord of Israel. Kings with their armies did fly, they did flee, and the
ornament of an house divided the spoil. The charettes of the Lord are twenty
thousand, even thousands of Angels, and the Lord is among them in holy Sinay.
Thou wenst up on hie, you have led captivity captive, you have received gifts
for men: yea even (for) those that be disobedient, that God the Lord might
dwell (among them). Blessed be the Lord, who day by day powers his (benefits)
upon us: and is God of our salvation. The Lord is our Lord for to save us: and
all manner of ways for death pertayneth to God the Lord. Sing unto the Lord, O
ye kingdoms of the earth. O sing Psalms unto the Lord, who rides upon the
most highest eternal heavens: lo he sends out a mighty voice in his voice.
Acknowledge the Lord to be mighty: his majesty is over Israel, and might in
the clouds. O Lord thou art terrible out of thy holy places: the God of
Israel gives might, and strength unto his people. Blessed be the Lord.

Psalm. 44 a. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
Thou art my king O God, command that Jacob be saved. Through thee we will
overthrow our enemies: and in thy name we will tread them under that rise
against us. For I will not trust in my bow, and it is not my sword that can
save me. But it is thou that sauest us from our enemies: and thou put the^
to confusion that hate us. We make our boast of God all the day long, and we
will confess thy name for ever.

Psalm 45. a. 6. b. 7. 10. 11. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17.
Thy throne O Lord endures for ever and ever, the scepter of righteousness is
the scepter of thy kingdom. Thou have loved justice, and hated ungodliness:
wherefore ye Lord even thy Lord has anointed thee with the oil of gladness more
then thy fellows. Harken O daughter and consider, incline thine ear: forget
also thine own people and thy fathers house: so shall the king have pleasure
in thy beutie: for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him. The kings daughter is
all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought gold. She shall be brought unto
the king in rayme^t of nedle work: the virgins that follow her, and her company
shall be brought unto thee. With joy and gladness shall they be brought (and) shall
enter into the kings palace. In steed of thy fathers thou shall have
children: whom thou may make princes in all lands. I will remember thy name
from one generation unto an other: therefore shall the people praise thee,
world without end.

Psalm 48. b. 9.
O Lord according to thy name, so is thy praise unto the worlds end, thy
right hand is full of justice.

Psalm. 99.
God reigns, the people be in a rage: he sits (between) the Cherubins, the
earth quaketh. God is great in Sion, and high above all people. They shall
praise thy name, great and dreadful (for) it is holy, and a kings power (that)
loves judgment. Thou have ordained all things according to equity: thou have
caused judgment and justice to be in Jacob. Magnify God our Lord: and kneel
down before his foot stool, for it is holy. Moses and Aaron among his
Priests, and Samuel among such as call upon his name: these called upon
god, and he heard them. He spoke unto them out of the cloudy pillar: for they
kept his testimonies, and the law that he gave them. O God our Lord thou
heardest them, O Lord thou did forbear the^: and thou tookest auengement
for their own inventions. Magnify God our Lord, and kneel down before his
holy hill, for God our Lord is holy.

Psalm 100. a.
Be ye joyful in God all that be in ye earth: serve God with gladness, and come
before his face with a joyful noise. Be ye sure that God is the Lord, it is he
that has made us, and not we our selves: we are his people, and the sheep of
his pasture. Go your way into his gates with thanksgeuing, and into his
courts with praise, be thankful unto him and bless his name. For God is
gracious, his mercy is everlasting, and his truth from generation to generation.

Psalm. 101. a.
I will sing of mercy and judgment, I will sing unto thee O God Psalms. I
will endeavor my self to be fully instructed in the way of perfectues: when
thou wylt come unto me, I will go up and down in the midst of my house in the
perfectnes of my heart. I will never set before mine eyes any deuilish thing: I
will detest to do the work of transgressors, it shall take no hold of me. A
froward heart shall depart from me. I will not once know any evil. I will
destroy him who privily slaundreth his neighbor: I will not suffer him who
has a proud look, and a great stomach. My eyes shall be upon such in the
land as have a true meaning, that they may sit with me: he that leads a
perfect life shall minister unto me. There shall no deceitful person have any
seat in my house: He that tells lies shall not tarry long in my sight. I will
every morning destroy all the ungodly in the land: that I may root out from
the City of God all workers of wickedness.

Psalm. 145.
I will magnify thee O God my king, and I will bless thy name for ever and
ever. I will bless thee every day, and I will praise thy name for ever and
ever. Great is God and most worthy to be praised: and his greatness can not be
searched out. One generation shall praise thy works unto an other: and they
shall declare thy mighty power. I will set forth in words, ye glorious majesty
of thy excellentnes, and thy wondrous works. I will also declare thy greatness
so that men shall speak of the force of thy terrible acts. They shall utter
out of their mouth a memorial of thine abundant kindness: and they shall sing
of thy righteousness. God is gracious and merciful, loath to be angry, and great
in loving kindness. God is good unto every man, and his mercy is above al his
works, All thy works shall confess it unto thee O God, and thy saints shall
bless thee. They shall show ye glory of thy kingdom: and talk of thy power.
That they may make known to the children of men his manifold power, and the
glorious majesty of his kingdom. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and
thy dominion endures throughout all ages. God vpholdeth all such as fall, and
lifts up all those that be bowyng downward. The eyes of all wait upon thee,
and thou geuest the^ their meat in due season. Thou openest thy hand, and
satisfiest the desire of every thing. God is righteous in all his ways: and
holy in all his works. God is nigh unto al them that call upon him, unto all
such as call upon him in truth. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear
him: he will also hear their cry, and he will save them. God preserves all
those that love him, but he will bring to nothing such as be ungodly. My mouth
shall speak the praise of God: and all flesh shall bless his holy name for
ever and ever.

Luke. 1. d.
Christ shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there
shall be none end.

Promises, admonitions and counsels to good kings, with examples of their good
success.
Deuteronomy. 7. d. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.
THen thou shalt make him king over thee, whom the lord thy God shall chose.
Even one from among thy brethren shalt thou make king over thee, and thou
may not set a stranger over thee, which is not of thy brethren. But he shall
not multiply horses to himself, nor bring the people again to Egypt to
increase the number of horses: forasmuch as the Lord has said unto you, ye
shall henceforth go no more again that way. Also he ought not to multiply
wives to himself, least his heart turn away, neither shall he gather himself
silver, and gold to much. And when he is set upon the seat ofhys kingdom, he
shall write him out a copye of this law in a book before the Priests ye
Levites: And it shall be with him, and he ought to read therein all the days of
his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all ye
words of this law, and these ordinances for to do them: And that his heart
arise not above his brethren, and that he turn not from ye commandment to
the right hand or to the left: but that he may prolong his days in his
kingdom, he and his children in the midst of Israel.

The words of Joshua to the people.
Joshua. 24. c. 14. d. 20.
THe Lord has given unto you a land flowing with milk and honey.

Now therefore fear the Lord and serve him in perfectnes and truth, and put
away the Gods which your fathers served on the otherside of the flood, and in
Egypt, and serve ye the Lord. If ye forsake the Lord, and serve strange
Gods, he will turn and do you evil, and consume you, after that he has
done you good. And the people said unto Josua: Nay, but we will serve the Lord.
And Josua said unto the people: ye are witnesses against your selves, that ye
have chosen you the Lord to serve him. And they said we are witnesses. Then put
away (said he) ye strange Gods which are among you, and bow your hearts unto
the Lord God of Israel. The people said unto Josua: The Lord our God will we
serve, and his voice will we obey. And Israel served the Lord all the days
of Josua, and all the days of the elders that ouerliued Josua, and which had
known all the works of the Lord, that he had done for Israel.

Admonitions out of the word of God.
The words of the Lord to his servant Joshua captain of his people Israel,
and by him to all the godly Princes, Kings and Queens. etc. Joshua. 1. a. 5.
b. 6. 7. 8. 9.
THere shall not a man be able to withstand thee in all the days of thy. life.
For as I was with Moses so will I be with thee, and will not sail thee, nor
forsake thee. Be strong therefore and bold, for unto this people shall thou
divide the land for inheritance, which I swore unto their fathers to give
the^. Only be thou strong, and of a stout courage, that thou may observe
and do according to all ye law which Moses my servant commanded thee. Turn
from the same, neither to right hand, nor to the left, that thou may do
wisely in all that thou take in hand. Let not the book of this law depart
out of thy mouth, but occupy thy mind therein day and night, that thou may
observe and do according to all that is written therein: For the^ shall thou
make thy way prosperous, and the^ thou shall do wisely. Have not I commanded
thee that thou should be strong and hardy, and not fear, nor be faint
hearted? For I the Lord thy God am with thee whether soever thou go.

Exodus. 15. a. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. and. b. 11. and. 15. c. 18. and. d. 21.
I will sing unto the Lord for he has triumphed gloriously, the horse and him
that rode upon him has he overthrown in the sea. The Lord is my strength and
praise, and he is become my salvation: he is my God, and I will glorify him, my
fathers God, and I will exalt him. The Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his
name. Pharaos charetes, and his host has he cast into the sea, his chosen
captains also are drowned in the red sea. The deep waters have covered
the^, they sunk to the bottom as a stone. Thy right hand Lord is become
glorious in power, thy right hand Lord has al to dashed the enemies. And in
thy great glory thou have overthrown them that rose up against thee: thou
sendest forth thy wrath which consumed them even as stubble. Who is like unto
thee O Lord amongst Gods? Who is like to thee, so glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises, showing wonders. The Lord shall reign for ever and
ever. Sing ye unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously: the horse and
his ryder has he ouerthrown in the sea.

For sickness.
Exodus. 15. d. 26.
IF thou will harken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, and wylt do that which
is right in his sight, and wilt gene ear unto his commandments, and keep
all his ordinances, then will I put none of these diseases upon thee, which I
have brought upon the Egiptians for I am the Lord that heals thee.

2. Chronicles. 2. a. 5. 6. b. 11. and. 9. b. 8.
Great is our God above all Gods. But who is able to build him an house?
when that heaven, and heaven above all heavens is not hable to receive him,
what am I then that should build him an house? nay, but even to burn
sacrifice before him shall this building be. The Lord sets a wise king over
the people whom he loves, that they may long endure and prosper. Blessed be
the Lord thy God which have lust to thee, to set thee (king) on his seat, that
thou might be king for the Lord thy God, because thy God loves Israel (and
has delight) to make them continue ever, therefore made he thee king over them,
to do right and equity.

Exodus 18. c. 18. d. 21. d. 23.
Thou can not alone sustain the burden of ruling a whole kingdom, but
hear my words and counsel, and the Lord shall be with thee.

Moreover thou shall seek out among all the people men of actiuitie, and such
as fear God, true men, hating coueteousnes, and place (of these) over ye
(people) rulers of thousands, rulers of hundrethes, rulers offifties, and
rulers of tennes. And let them judge the people at all seasons: and every great
matter that comes, let the^ bring unto thee, but let them judge all small
causes themselves, and so shall it be easier for thy self, and they shall
bear a burden with thee. If thou shall do this thing and God charge thee
withal, thou shall be able to endure, and yet the people shall come to
theyrplace in peace.

1. Reg. 12. b. 13. 14. 15. and. c. 20. and. d. 24. 25.
Samuel said unto the people. Behold the king whom ye have chosen and whom ye
have desired, lo ye Lord has set a king over you. If ye will fear the Lord
and serve him and hear his voice, and not disobey the word of the Lord, both
ye and the king that raig neth over you shall follow the Lord your God. If ye
will not harken unto the voice of the Lord but disobey ye Lords mouth, then
shall the hand of the Lord be upon you and on your fathers. Yet depart not
from following of the Lord, but serve the Lord with all your hearts. Therefore
fear ye the Lord, and serve him in the truth, and with all your hearts: and
consider how great things he has done for you. But if ye do wickedly, then
shall ye perish both ye and yourking.

The words of Samuel to be truly spoken by all good rulers.

1. Reg. 12. a. 3. 4. 5.

Behold here I am, bear record of me before the Lord, and before his
anointed: whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? who have I done
wrong to? whom have I hurt? or of whose hand have I received any bribe, to
blind mine cyes therewith? and I will restore it you. They said. Thou have done
us no wrong, nor hurt us, neither have thou taken ought of any man's hand. He
said unto the^ again: The Lord is witness against you, and his annomted, is
witness this day, that ye have found naught in my hands. And they answered:
he is witness.

1. Reg. 13. b. 13. 14.

Samuel said to Saul: Thou art become a fool, thou have not kept the
commandment of the Lord thy God, which he commanded thee: For at this time
would the Lord have stablished thy king dome upon Israel for ever. But now
thy kingddme shall not continue: The Lord has sought him a man after his own
heart, and the Lord has commanded to be captain over his people, because thou
have not kept that which the Lord commanded thee.

2. Reg. 14. b. 9. 11. c. 17. and. d. 20.

The king and his throne should be giltlesse, and ought to remember the Lord
his God, and not to suffer much bloodshed.

The king is as an Angel of God in hearing of the good and bad, therefore the
Lord God is with him.

The king is wise according to the wisdom of an Angel of God, to understand
all things thac are in earth.

2. Paral. 9. b. 7. 8.
Happy are the me^ and people unto whom God gives a wise king.

God makes one a king that he should do according to right and equity.

Esaias. 32. a. 12.
A good and godly king shall govern after the rule of righteousness, and the
princes shall rule according to the balance of equity. And that man shall be
unto men as a defense for the wind, and as a refuge for the tempest, like as a
river of water in a thirsty place, and the shadow of a great rock in a dry
land.

Jeremy. 22. a. 1. etc. b. 9.
Thus says the Lord: Go down into the house of the king of Juda, and speak
there these words, and say: Hear the word of ye Lord thou king of Juda that
sit in ye kingly seat of David, thou and thy servant, and thy people that
goes in and out at these gates. Thus the Lord commands? keep equity and
righteousness, deliver the oppressed from the power of the violent, do not
grieve, nor oppress the stranger, the fatherles, nor the widow and shed no
innocent blood in this place. And if ye keep these things faithfully, then
shall there come in at ye door of this house kings to sit upon Dauides seat:
they shall be carried in charetes, and ride upon horses, both they and their
servant, and their people. But if ye will be obedient unto these
commandments. I swear by my own self says the Lord, this house shall be
wast. For thus has the Lord spoken upon ye kings of Juda: thou Giliad art
unto me ye head of Libanus: shall I not make thee so wast as ye Cities yt no
men dwell in? I will prepare a destroyer with his wepo^s for thee, to hew down thy
especial Cedar trees, and to cast them in the fire. And all the people that go
by this City shall speak one to an other: wherefore has the Lord done thus
unto this noble City? Then shall it be answered: because they have broken the
covenant of the Lord their God, and have worshipped and served strange Gods.

Psalm 18. 48.
God has wonderful often delivered his king, and he has done mercifully unto
David his anointed, and to his seed for evermore.

Psalm. 24. a. 1. 2. and. b. 7.
The earth is Gods, and all that therein is: the world and they that dwell
therein. For he has laid the foundations of it upon the seas, and he has
set it sure upon the floudes. Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be ye lift
up ye everlasting doors, and the king of glory shall enter in. Who is the king
of glory? It is God both strong and mighty, it is God mighty in battle. Lift
up your heads (O ye gates) and be ye lift up you everlasting doors, and the
king of glory shall enter in. Who is the king of glory, even the God of hosts,
he is the king of glory.

Psalm. 21. a. 1. etc.
The king ought to rejoice in thy strength, O God, and he ought to be exceeding
glad of thy salvation. Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not
denied him the request of his lips. For thou have prevented him with good
blessings, and have a crown of pure gold upon his head, He asked life of
thee, and thou gave him long days, even for ever and ever. His honor is
great through thy salvation: thou have laid glory and great worship upon him.
For thou have placed him to be blessings for ever, and have made him glad with
the joy of thy countenance. Because the king trusts in God, and in ye mercy
of the most highest: he shall not miscary. Thine hand will find out all thine
enemies: thy right hand will find out them that hate thee. Thou will make like
a burning furnace in time of thy fury: God will destroy the^ in his wrath, and
fire shall consume them. Thou will root their fruit out of ye earth, and
their seed from among the children of men. For they intended mischife against
thee, and imagined a crafty device: (but) they could not (bring it to pass)
Therefore thou will put them to flight (and) direct thine arrows against their
faces. Be thou exalted O God according to thine own might: so we will sing:
and with Psalms we will praise thy power.

Psalm. 72.
O God give unto the king thy judgments: and thy righteousness unto ye kings
son. Then he will judge thy people according unto justice, and thy afflicted
according to equity. The mountains also and hills shall bring peace to the
people by the means of righteousness. He will judge the afflicted amongst the
people, he will save the children of the poor, and subdue ye oppressor. They
will fear thee as long as the sun and moon shines from one generation to
an other. He will come down like the rain into a fleece of wolle, even as the
dropes that water the earth. In his days the righteous shall flourishe*, and
there shall be abundance of peace so long as the moon endures. His dominion
also shall be from the one sea to the other, and from the flood unto the end of
the earth. They that dwell in the wilderness, shall kneel before him, his
enemies shall lick the dust. The king of Tharsis and of the Isles shall offer
presents: the king of Sheba and Seba shall bring gifts. All kings will
worship him, all nations will do him service. For he will deliver the poor when
he cries, and the afflicted, and him that has no helper. He will have
compassion upon ye poor and nedy: and he will preserve the souls of the poor.
He will deliver their souls from deceit and oppression, and their blood shall
be in his sight. He will live, and he will give to the poor of the gold of
Sheba: and he will pray always for him, and daily he will bless him. A
handful of corn shall (be sowed) in the earth, upon the top of hills, and
ye fruit thereof shall make a noise like Libanus, and shall flourishe in the
City like grass upon the earth. His name shall endure for ever, his name
shall be spread abroad to the world, so long as the sun shall shine, all
nations shall be blessed in him, and shall call him blessed. Blessed be God the
Lord: the Lord of Israel which only does wondrous things. And blessed be
the name of his majesty for ever: and all the earth shall be filled with his
majesty,

Amen, Amen.
Psalm. 80. a. 1.
Hear O thou shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep: and
thou that sit upon the Cherubins, show thy gracious presence.

Romans. 5. d.
They shall raigue through Jesus Christ, receiving abundance of grace, and
gift of righteousness. *

Sentences of threatening to evil kings, and examples of their evil success.
1. Reg. 15. 10. d. 16. 17.
THe word of the Lord came unto Samuel saying. It repents me that I have
made Saul king. For he is turned from me, and has not performed my
commandments. And Samuel was evil apaid, and cried unto the Lord all
night. And Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning, and when he came
unto him he said. Let me tell thee what the Lord has said to me this night.
And he said unto him say on. Samuel said when thou wast little in thine own
sight, wast thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the Lord
anointed thee king over Israel?

Jeremy. 13. c. 18. 19.
Tell the king and the Queen humble your selves, sit you down low, for your
dignity shall be thrown down, and the crown of your glory shall fall from
your head. The Cities toward the south shall be shut up, and no man shall open
them, all Juda shall be carried away captive so that none shall remain.

Jeremy. 21. d. 11.
Unto the house of the king of Juda say thus: Hear the word of the Lord. O
thou house of David, thus says the Lord: Minister righteousness and that soon,
deliver the oppressed from violent power, or ever my terrible wrath break out
like a fire, and burn so yt no man may quench it because of the wickedness of
your imaginations. Behold says the Lord I will come upon thee that dwell
in the valleys rocks and fields, and say, tush who will make us afraid? or
who will come into our houses. For I will visit you (says the Lord) because
of the wickedness of your inue^tions, and will kindle such a fire in your wood,
as shall consume all that is about you.

Proverbs. 28. a. 2. c. 15. 16. 21.
For the wickedues of the land the Prince is often changed: but through a man of
understanding and wisdom a realm endures long. As a roaring Lion and an
hungry bear, so is an ungodly Prince over the poor people. Where the Prince
is without understanding, there is great oppression and wrong: but if he hates
coueteousnes, he shall long reign. To have respect of persons (in judgment)
is not good, for that man will do wrong, yea even for a piece of bread.

Psalm. 2. a. 2. 4. 5. 10. 11. 12.
The kings of the earth stand up and the rulers take counsel together against
God and against his anointed. He that dwells in heaven will laugh them to
scorn, the Lord will have them in derision. Then will he speak unto them in
his wrath: and he will astonish them with fear in his sore displeasure. Thou
shall brast them with a rod of iron, and break the^ in pieces like a potters
vessel. Wherefore be you now well advised, O ye kings: be ye learned ye that
are judges of the earth. Serve ye God in fear, and rejoice ye with trembling.
Kiss ye the Son least that he be angry, and so ye perish from the way. If
his wrath be never so little kindled, blessed are all they that put their trust
in him.

Jeremy. 13. b. 11. 2. Parallepo. 3. ^.
Saul, Roboam, Achab, with all their posterity, Sellam, Jehoakim. 4. Reg. 13.
c. 24. a. Ieremiae. 22. c. 18. came unto an evil end.

David, Solomon, Jehosephat, Ezechias, Josias, etc. Godly kings reign
prosperously, have victory over their enemies.

Lamentation of Jeremy. 2. b. 9
The goodly City and temple of Jerusalem are destroyed utterly: the king and
Princes are carried away to the Gentiles, they have neither law nor prophets,
nor yet any vision from the Lord. The Senators of the daughter Sion sit upon
the ground in silence: they have strawed ashes upon their heads, and girded
themselves with sackecloth: the maidens of Jerusalem hang down their heads to
the ground.

Iudicium. 9. c.
King Abimelech being wickedly chose^ and wicked, works his own destruction,
and destruction of those that did choose him.

Luke. 19. c.
Those Citizens that will not have Christ to reign over them are destroyed.

Luke. 19. c.
The king asks an account of his servants. *

A prayer taken out of the book of Wisdom. Cap. 9
O God of my fathees, and Lord of mercies (thou that have made all things
with thy word, and did ordain man through thy wisdom, that he should
have dominion over thy creatures which thou have made, and that he should
order the world according to holiness and righteousness, and that he shouid
execute judgment with a true heart) give me wisdom which is ever about thy
seat, and put me not out from among thy children: for I thy servant and
handmaiden am a feable person, of a short time, and to weak for the
understanding of thy judgments and laws. And though a man be never so
perfect among the children of men, yet if thy wisdom be not with him, he shall
be of no value. O send her out therefore from thy holy heavens, and from the
throne of thy Majesty, that she may be with me, and labor with me, that I may
know what is acceptable in thy sight: for she knows and understands all
things, and she shall lead me soberly in my works, and preserve me in her
power. So shall my works be acceptable by Christ our Lord, to whom with thee
and to the holyghost, be all honor and glory, world without end. Amen.

Un bref formulaire d'Oraison.
La Preface.
O Seigneur bon Dieu and Pere, que ton nom soit benit a iamais. Dispose mon
coeur, ouure mes leures, and me conduis par ton saint Esprit, a vne vraye
recognoissance de toutes mes fautes, a fin que mo^ Oraison soit exaucee de toy
au Nom de ton filz Jesus Christ. Ainsi soit-il.

La Confession des pechez.
SEigneur mon Dieu, Pere eternel and toutpuissant, ie recognoy and confess
deuant ta saint and haute Majesty, que ie n'ay cesse depuis ma naissance, and
ne cesse tous lesiours, estant conceue and nee en iniquite and corruption, de
transgresser tes commandemens. Quoy faisant, ie ne puis selon ton just
judgment, euiter ruin and perdition: Toutesfois aya^t desplaisir de t'auoir
offense, conde^nant and moy, and mon peche: puis qu'il t'a pleu de nous aymer,
lors mesme que nous estions tes ennemis, en tesmoignage dequoy tu nous as done
ton filz unique, and bien aim, pour mediateur and aduocat enter toy and nous,
nostre Seigneur Jesus Christ, auec promise d'obtenir en son Nom, tout ce que
nous te demanderons.

Vueille donc Dieu tresbenin and pere misericordieux en son Nom and en sa
faueur me fair pardon and mercy. Et en repurgeant mon coeur de toute vanite
and souillure, m'addresser and co^duire par to^ saint Esprit, en toutes mes
voyes, a fin que ie chemine selon tes saints and diuins commaundeme^s tous les
iours de ma vie, a la gloire de ton No^, Par iceluy ton filz bien-ayme. Ainsi
soit-il.

L'oraison pour le Matin.
MOn DIEV mon Pere and mon Sauueur, comme maintenant tu enuoye ton Soleil sur
la terre, pour donner la lumiere corporelle a tes creatures, vueille aussi
illuminer mon coeur and mon enten deme^t, par la lumiere celeste de to^ saint
Esprit: a fin que ie ne pense, ne dise, and ne face rien sinon pour te seruir
and complaire. Que durant tout ce iour mon but principal soit de cheminer en ta
crainte, te seruir and honorer, attendant tout heur and prosperity de ta seule
benediction. Que selon mon corpse and mon ame tu sois mon protecteur, me
fortifiant contre toutes les tentatio^s du diable, and de la chair, me
preseruant des entreprinses and conspiratio^s de tous mes ennemis, leurs
accomplices and adhere^s.

Et d'autant bon Dieu que ce n'est rien de bien commencers^ on ne persevere,
qu'il te plaise, no^ seuleme^t pour ce iour me receuoir sous ta conduite and
protection, mais pour tout le course de mavie: continua^t and augme^tant de iour
en iour les do^s and graces de ton saint Esprit en moy iusques a ce qu'estant
vnie and coniointe auec ton filz unique, mon Sauueur, ie puisse iouir de ceste
vie bien-heureuse laquelle tu as promise a tous tes eleuz. Pariceluy ton filz,
nostre Seigneur Jesus Christ. Ainsi soit-il.

Action de Graces.
DIeu tout bon and tout sage, Pere celeste, plein de misericorde and cleme^ce,
reduisant en memoire les oeuures de tes mains, ie ne puis sinon admirer ta
grande sapience and bonte infinie, laquelle tu as declaree enuers toutes tes
creatures, and singulierement au regard de moy, comme de m'auoir done estre,
mouuement, and vie: mais aussi outre les benefices infinis, que tu distribue
co^munement a tous hommes de la terre, tu m'as fait tant de graces speciales,
qu'il m'est impossible de les reciter, ne mesme les pouuoir compre^dre. Il t'a
pleu par la lumiere de ton Eua^gile me deliurer des tenebres d'erreur and
d'ignorance, voire me retirer des abismes de de mort, and de la confusion
horrible, ou i'estoye destinee selon la corruption de ma nature: and ainsi m'as
tu transportee au royaume de ton filz bien-ayme, lequel selon ton plaisir and
decret eternel, s'est done soy mesme pour mes pechez.

Il ya aussi Seigneur, que m'ayant receue en to^ Eglise au nombre de tes
enfans, tu m'as eleue and choisie par ta providence admirable pour me decorer
sous la Majesty de ta grandeur d'vn estat d'honneur and d'excellence, assauoir
de la dignite Royale pour le gouuerneme^t and conservation de ton peuple.

Or maintena^t selon la parole de David, quelle chose re^drayie au Seigneur
pour tous ses bie^faitz enuers moy? Ie say que tou te ma vie deuroit estre
consacree a vne perpetuelle action de graces; pour annoncer auec la gent saint
and le peuple acquis, les vertus de celuy qui nous a appellez des tenebres a sa
merueilleuse lumiere. Le calice de deliura^ce ne deuroit bouger de mes mains,
n'y les Cantiques nouueaux de ma bouche. Mais Seigneur, fay moy la grace, comme
iadis tu as faite a David, homme selon ton coeur. Lequel traitant de ce mesme
Argument, and recitantles tesmoignages de ta bonte, disoit, Ainsi est-il
Seigneur, Ie suis ton seruiteur, Ie suis ton seruiteur filz de ta chambriere,
tu as rompu mes liens, Ie te sacrificeray sacrifice d'actio^ de graces
reclameray le nom du Seigneur. Ainsi di-ie Seigneur de moymesme, and ce par ta
grace, Iesuis ta seruante, Ie suis ta seruante. Tu as rompu mes liens, and m'as
preseruee au milieu des dangers de mort, tu m'as mis au large and en sauuete.
Au Roy des siecles, immortel and invisible, a Dieu seul bon and seul sage, soit
honneur and gloire es siecles des siecles par Jesus Christ son filz nostre
Seigneur. Ainsi soit-il.

Oraison pour tout le Royaume and corpse de l'Eglise selon leurs Estas and
members.
DIeu tout puissant, Pere celeste, tu as done commandment a tes fideles de
prier les vns pour les autres, auec promise de les exaucer au Nom du mediateur
ton filz bien-ayme.

Moy donc ton humble seruante en confiance de tes promesses, and en
consideration des necessitez si grandes and si vrgentes, qui se presentent de
toutes pars, Satan faisant tous ses effors pour mettre la terre en confusion,
and sur tout pour empescher le course de ton Euangile. Seigneur bon Dieu auquel
est mon refuge and mon esperance, ie te supply and requiers comme tu es le
Pere des lumieres, qu'il te plaise d'illuminer les coeurs and les entendemens
de tous hommes, d'autant que tu veux toutes gens estre sauuees, and venir a la
cognoissance de verite. Et come specialeme^t tu as ordo^ne qu'on pry pour les
Rois and tous ceux qui sont constituez en dignite, a fin que la societe human
viue en paix and tranquillite auec toute piete and honnestete.

Moy donc sachant combien les couro^nes and les sceptres sont pesans, and
l'administratio^ d'iceux difficile, pour s'en bien acquitter, soit au regard de
toy, mon Dieu, ou de mes subiectz, Ie te requiers de tout mon coeur, tant pour
moy, que pour tous autres que tu as constituez en ce mesme degree de
preeminence, de nous donner, ce que iadis t'a demand un Solomon, duquel tu as
approuue l'Oraison, comme l'ayant mise en son coeur, and en sa bouche par ton
saint Esprit, lequel nous apprend de bien prier aydant noz infirmitez.

O Seigneur bon Dieu tu m'as fait regner au milieu de ton peuple, tu donneras a
ta seruante and a tes seruiteurs un coeur entendu pour iuger to^ peuple, and
pour discerner le bien d'entre le mal, a fin que nous ne soyons point inutiles,
ou mesme pernicieux en vne vocation si saint.

Done nous aussi des Conseillers prudens sages and vertueux, chassant loing de
nous, tous ambitieux, malins, cauteleux, and hypocrites.

Done des Iuges, hommes veritables haissans avarice, and fuyans l'acception
des persons, a fin que mon peuple soit gouuerne en toute equite and droiture,
les bons soustenus en leur Justice and innocence, les iniques punis and
chastiez selo^ leurs demerites.

Fay aussi Seigneur que tous ceux, desquelz tu m'as commis la charge en main,
me rendent le deuoir d'vne just obeissance, a fin qu'il y ait vne bonne and
saint union enter le chef and les members, and que par ce moyen tous
cognoissent que de toy seul depend l'Estat des Royaumes and le gouuerneme^t des
republiques. Et que par ainsi ie puisse a iamais chanter a ta louenge le
Ca^tique de David, ou il proteste de fair le deuoir de bon Prince.

PSEAVME. c 1.
VOuloir m'est pris de mettre en escriture,
Pseaume parlant de bonte and droiture,
Et si le veux a toy mon Dieu chanter, Et presenter.
Tenir ie veux la voye non nuisible,
Quand viendras-tu me render Roy paisible?
D'vn coeur tout pur conduiray ma maison. Auec raison.
Rien de mauuais y voir n'auray envy.
Car ie hay trop les meschans and leur vie:
Un seul d'entr'eux autour de moy adioint. Ne sera point.
Tout coeur ayant pensee desloyale,
Deslogera horse de macour Royale:
Et le nuisant n'y sera bien venu. Non pas cognu.
Qui par mesdire a part son prochain greu^
Qui a coeur gros and les sourcils esleue:
L'vn mettray bas, l'autre souffrir pour vray. Ie ne pourray.
Mes yeux seront fort diligens a querre.
Les habitans fideles de la terre:
Pour estre a moy. Qui droite voyeira. Me seruira.
Qui s'estudie a vser de fallace,
En ma maison point netrouuera place:
De moy n'aura mensonger ne baueur. Bien ne faueur.
Ains du pays chasseray de bonne heur^,
Tous les meschans, tant qu'vn seul n'y demeure,
Pour du Seigneur nettoyer la Cite, D'iniquite.
Ie te pry aussi Pere veritable and Sauueur pour tous ceux que tu as ordonnez
vrays Pasteurs a tes fideles and ausquelz, tu as commis la charge des ames, and
la dispensation de ton sacre Euangile que tu les conduise par ton saint Esprit,
a fin qu'ilz soyent trouuez fideles and dilige^s en leur saint vocation.

D'autrepart que tu chasse les faux Pasteurs, hommes corrompus d'entendement,
loups pesans, ambitieux, and auaricieux, qui ne seruent qu'a destruire and
perdre tes Eglises.

Et d'autant que tu requiers en tous tes enfans le zele de ta maison, fay moy
la grace de repurger en mo^ peuple toutes sects, heresies, and superstitions,
a fin que tes Eglises soubz ma charge profitent and accroissent de iour en iour
en la verite de ton Euangile a toute justice and saintete.

Que generalement il te plaise de fair vne deliverance and restoration de tes
Eglises par toute la terre, enuoyer ouuriers a ta moisson, hommes idoines and
suffisans pour recueillir les poures brebis esgarees soubz la houlette de ce
grand pasteur des ames ton filz Jesus Christ.

Quant aux auditeurs ceux qui desia font profession de ton Nom que tu leur
done vne vraye perseverance en foy, en charity, and en toutes bonnes oeuures
pour la gloire de ton Nom, and a leur salut.

Quant aux autres qui cheminent encore en la vanite de leur sens que tu touch
leurs coeurs and leur done des yeux illuminez, a fin que tous se rengent pour
te seruir and complaire.

Finalement o Dieu de toute consolation, ie te pry d'auoir pity des calamitez
and afflictions de toutes tes creatures en general. Des peuples que tu visit
par pestes, guerres ou famines. Des persons que tu afflige par pourete,
prison, malady, bannisseme^t, ou autres tes verges, soit en leurs corpse ou en
leurs esprits.

Et singulierement que tu aye pity de tes eleuz qui souffrent and endurent
pour le tesmoignage de ton saint Euangile.

Et come il t'a pleu me fair ce bien, and cest honneur, de donner repos en ma
terre, estans les autres Royaumes en horribles co^fusions, and que tu m'as
enuoye les entrailles de ton filz Jesus Christ, pour leur donner refuge en
leurs oppressions: fay moy la grace d'estre vraye nourrissiere and tutrice des
tiens selon la parolle de to^ Prophet Isaye, pour auoir vne vraye compassion
tant de ceux qui sont icy, que de tous autres, a fin qu'en l'accomplissement de
tes promesses, lors que la parolle sera dite, Venez les benits de mon Pere,
possedez le Royaume qui vous a este prepare des la fondation du monde, que lors
tu me recoiue. Pere celeste, au nombre de tes enfans, pour l'amour de ton filz,
mon Sauueur Jesus Christ. Auquel auec toy and le saint Esprit soit honneur and
gloire eternelleme^t.

Amen.
L'oraison pour le Soir.
SEigneur mon Dieu, mo^ Pere, and mon Sauueur me prosternant en toute humilite
deuant ta saint Majesty, ie te requiers bie^ affectueusement, comme tu m'as
fait la grace d'estre paruenue a la fin de ce iour, d'autant que tu as cree la
nuit pour le repos des hommes que tu me face ce bien auectes autres benefices
infinis de telleme^t reposer ceste nuit pour le soulagement de mon infirmite,
que mon coeur estant tousiours esleue a toy, mon ame ait aussi bien son repos
spirituel, come le corpse prend le sien.

Que mo^ dormir ne soit point excessif, pour complaire outre mesure a l'aise de
ma chair, mais seulement pour la necessite de ma nature, a fin que demain ie
soye mieux disposee a to^ service.

Preserve moy aussi de toute souilleure de corpse and d'esprit, and me guard des
tentations de l'ennemy, and contre tous dangers qui me pourroyent auenir.

Et pource que ce iour n'est point pass que ie ne t'aye offense en plusieurs
sorts and manieres, comme tu enuoye maintena^tles tenebres en l'absence du
Soleil pour cacher toutes chooses, ainsi vueille effacer toutes mes offenses par
ta misericorde infinie, a fin que iamais else ne viennent en compte deuant ton
judgment.

Toutes lesquelles chooses ie te requiers and demand au Nom and en faueur de
ton filz unique mon Seigneur and Sauueur Jesus Christ, comme luy-mesme nous a
done la reigle de te prier.

NOstre Pere qui es es cieux.

Ton Nom soit sanctify. Ton regne aduienne. Ta volonte soit faicte, en la
Terre comme au Ciel. Done nous auiourd' huy, nostre Pain quotidien. Et nous
pardo^ne noz offenses, ainsi que nous pardonnons a ceux qui nous ont offense.
Et ne nous induy point en te^tation: mais deliure-nous du mal. Car a toy est le
regne, la puissance, and la gloire, es siecles des siecles. Ainsi soit il.

Oraison pour fair deuant la consultation des affairs du Royaume.
O Seigneur nostre bo^ Dieu qui contemple d'enhaut tout ce qui est au Ciel and
en la Terre, duquel le throne est admirable and la gloire incomprehe^sible,
deuant lequel la congregation des Anges se tient en crainte.

Nous ton humble seruante and tes seruiteurs estansicy assemblez en ta
presence, pour traiter and aduiser aux affairs qui co^cernent la vocation
saint a laquelle tu nous as appellez par ta grace, cognoissans que tu
soustiens and conserve sous la conduite de ta providence l'estat and
government de tous les Royaumes de la terre, and que c'est a toy de presider
au milieu des Princes en leur conseil.

D'autre part recognoissans que nous sommes enuironnez de tenebres, remplis
d'erreurs and d'ignora^ces, and mesme indignes de ton assistence si tu regardes
a nos iniquitez.

Pour ces causes bon Dieu, nous te prions au nom de ton filz unique nostre
Seigneur Jesus Christ de nous pardonner toutes nos offenses, and pour l'amour
d'iceluy nous communiquer les dons and graces de ton saint Esprit, a fin
qu'estans poulsez du vray zele de ta gloire, and d'vn amor paternel enuers le
peuple que tu nous as done en charge. Nous puissio^s auec prudence and sagesse
traiter les chooses qui maintenant seront proposees.

Dispose donc Seigneur nos bouches, nos coeurs, and nos entendeme^s, nous
faisant cognoistre les chooses que tu approuue pour les embrasser, and discerner
les mauuaises pour les decliner and chasser.

D'auantage que tu tienne tellement la main a toutes nos deliberations, que tu
nous en face veoir vne heureuse issue, a la gloire de ton Nom, au bien and
profit de nostre peuple, and a la descharge de nos consciences.

Ce que te demandons humblement en la faueur de ton filz bien-ayme, comme par
luy sommes enseignez de te prier.

Nostre Pere qui es. etc.

Priere.
O Gouuerneur, de la machine ronde,
Toy qui as mis, les fondemens du monde,
Et le depars, ainsi que bien tu vois,
A tous humains sans recueillir leur voix
Tu hausses l'vn, and l'aultre tu rabaisses,
Cil qui languit, en peine tu redresses,
Et le fais Roy, si tell tu le veulx estre.
Ainsi m'as fait: o mon Dieu and mon maistre,
En me tirant, horse de prison cruelle,
Prison du Corpse, and de peine eternelle,
L'vne ou i'estoye, pour mes pechez co^mis
Des ma ieunesse, and me les as remis:
Et l'aultre estoit, pour auoir verite,
En amor prise, and mensonge quitte,
Pour suyure Christ, ainsi tu m'as tiree,
Par ta main forte, and a toy retiree,
En me donnant, ceste grand' Royaulte,
Range moy donc, a ce qu'as decrete,
Force, Conseil, auec saine doctrine,
Pour bien guider, le peuple que domine,
Ottroye moy: aussi par ta bonte,
Ne prens point guard, a mon iniquite.
Fin des Prieres en Francoys.
I0 T'HO FATTO NOto il mio peccato, e non ho coperto la mia iniquita: ho detto,
^o confessero le mie trasgressioni al Signore, etu hai leuata l'iniquita del
mio peccato. SALMO. 32.
Confession de'peccati, al Signore.
IDdio et Signor mio. Humilmente, and con animo pieno d'infinito dispiacere
d'hauerti offeso, and d'offenderti tutto di, io humil serua tua, et pecca
trice, mi presento dinanzi la tua diuina maesta per confessare ingenuamente,
and liberamente i miei peccati, et chiedertene perdono. Sono, come sai,
concetta, and nata in peccato, dall'istessa massa di corruttione uenuta, onde e
tolto tutto l'human lignaggio: trouomi sempre piena di cattiui affetti, and non
fo may cosa che buona sia, oue il tuo santo spirito mi guidi, ma ogni hora
piego alla terra, and al male, oue mi tira il peso grave di questa carne. Le
occasioni d'offenderti per l'altezza del luogo oue m'hai posto, per le
ricchezze, per gli agi, et per gli honori, sono molte, and molte, Infiinite le
tentationi, continue, and vrgentissime: la mia carne e fragile si, che non fo
altro che errori, and graui peccati dinanzi a te Dio mio, onde sento sopra di
me l'ira tua giusta insino allultima condennatione. Dall'altra part hauendomi
mi tu piantato, per infinita tua misericordia vna viua feed nel cuore, che
Cristo e la mia vera e certa salute, and che per lui e riceuuta ogni anima
lauata nel suo sangue, dalla tua pieta: ecco che vengo con sicurta, et certa
feed a trouar perdono appresso il tribunal della misericordia tua per esso
Giesu Cristo. Riceui dun que ti prego padre benigno questa tua figliuola, che
viene all' vbidienza paterna: raccogli pastore amoreuole questa pecorella
errante, che torna al' tuoouile, and guarisci medico celeste, tutte le piaghe
dell'anima mia con la medicina della tua gratia: assicurandomi prima nella
conscientia mia, che tutti i peccati essen domi rimessi, io sia pacificata con
esso te, and appresso con lo spirito tuo rinouandomi, and sanctificandomi ogni
di, meni questa vita, che mi resta in santita, and giustitia nel tuo cospet to,
e della tua chiesa, fin che mi chiami alla gloria di vita eterna, la quale
aspetto, and attendo sicuramente per Giesu Cristo Signor mio, cui sia honor
and gloria perpetuamente. Amen. **

CHIUNQUE ADOra Iddio con diletto, sara riceuuto, and la sua preghiera
s'anuicinera in sino all nuuole. L'oratione di chi si humilia penetrera le
nuuole. ECCLESIASTICO. 32.
Oratione prima come creatura di Dio.
RIconoscendo Signore, com'io sono tua creatura, creata ad imagine and
Somiglianza tua, opera eccellente delle tue mani sopra tutte l'altre creature,
io te ne rendo gratie infinite, e ti prego humilmen te, che ti piaccia far
ch'io habbia con tinuamente cura and riguardo di no^ isuilire, ne imbratare
questa tua santissima imagine, ristoratami per Giesu Cristo: anzi conseruandola
pura and sincera d'ogni affetto carnale, riluca innanzi gli occhi di tutti lo
splendore del tuo volto, c'hai spar so sopra di me, alla gloria tua, per Giesu
Christo.

Amen.
Oratione seconda, come Cristiana, e Regina.
IDdio padre, et pro tettor mio, Grandemente mi sento debitrice alla tua
clementia, hauendomi a buon'hora chiamata per la predicatione dell Euangelio di
Giesu Cristo alla vera pieta, and sincerita della tua religione, affine che con
l'autorita, che m'hai dato, and co'l zelo, di che ti sono debitrice, fossi
istrumento tuo di ripiantare, e stabilire in questa part del mo^do, oue t'e
piaciuto ch'io a nome tuo regni, la tua pieta et santissima religione. Pregoti
Dio mio, and buon padre, che si come in part con la gratia tua ho seruito in
questo alla tua santa volonta, cosi ti piaccia di torre ogni impedimento, e
resistenza d'infidelta dal mio papolo, et a me di been in meglio inspirar buona
volonta, and ardente zelo, dan domi mezzi efficaci, istrumenti atti and
sufficienti, accio possa, si come desidero, spiantando ogni maluagio seem
d'empieta, spargere, seminare, and radicare il tuo santo Euangelio in tutti i
cuori, aggrandendo per tutto questo regno tuo terreno, quel celeste di Giesu
Cristo, al quale sia sempre honor and gloria. Cosi sia.

Oratione terza per l'amministratione della Giustitia.
VLtimamente Iddio supremo Re, and Signor mio: Io confesso, che molto grande
fra le grandezze terrene, e l'honore, and la dignita in che tu m'hai posta, et
posta, and ma^tenutamici miracolosamente, co^seruandomi, et liberandomi da
molti mali, and pericoli d'huomini cattiui. Riconosco che se fin qui con alcuna
prudenza, vigilanza, giustitia equita, misericordia and in pace ho amministrato
l'ufficio, che tu mi hai imposto, tutto e stato dono della tua paterna bonta
con esso me. Or'io ti prego caramente, che tipiaccia perseuerare, tenendomi le
mani di sopra, humiliandomi sotto il tuo imperio, a cui io sono serua, and
dammi che questa corona, che mi hai posto in capo, io la tenga sempe sotto i
tuoi piedi: e lo scettro regale postomi nelle mani serua alla gloria tua, alla
giustitia and equita del tuo popolo, alla pace, et concordia del Regno. Sia
l'intelletto della tua serua chiaro and giusto, la volonta sincera, i giudici
equi, and pij. Dammi Signore aiuti, consegli, and ministri abbastanti, retti,
and sufficienti, pieni di pieta, and del tuo santissimo timore, sieno i popoli
fideli, e disciplinabili. Perch io, e tutto il mio gregge viuendo in
tra^quillita, and pace, habbiamo agio, and tempo quieto di seruire alla tua
maesta: pregandoti, and supplicandoti di tutto cio per Giesu Cristo Signor mio,
e tuo vnigenito figliuolo, al quale con esso te, and con lo spirito santo sia
honor and gloria eternamente. Cosi sia.

Primera oracion.
* MVCHAS SON LAS tribulaciones de los justos, pero el Sen^or los libra de
todas ellas. PSALM. 34.
DIos mio y Padre mio dulcissimo, cuya bondad es infinita, cuya misericordia
nunca se puede agotar, y cuya boca siempre dize verdad: porque tu eres la mesma
verdad que has prometido a los que en ti creen, a los que en ti confian y ponen
su esperanca libraros, ampararlos y ser les Padre en todas sus necessidades
assi temporales como espirituales: y esto lo has cumplido con la obra ni mas ni
menos que tu lo has prometido de palabra: como lo testifican muy muchos
testimonios de tu sagrada Escriptura. Assi libraste a Noe del diluuio, a
Abrahan de los Chaldeos, a Lot de Sodoma, a Jacob de las sangrientas manos de
su proprio hermano Esau, a Daniel del lago de los Leones y d Sufanna del falso
testimonio de aquellos dos malditos viejos y iniquos iuezes. Yo tu humilde
sierua me prostro, O Dios mio, O Padre mio delante del throno de tu diuina
Magestad, y te doy gracias infinitas, gracias quan grandes yo puedo, porque me
has hecho vna del numero de aquellos que tu libraste de grandes afliciones: que
me libraste de las crueles manos de mis enemigos, los quales como lobos
hambrientos me pretendian chupar la sangre y tragar me biua. Tenia^ me un tal
odio, porque yo ponia en ti solo toda mi esperanca, porque yo no me auergoncaua
del Euangelio de tu amantissimo Hijo: mas antes me honraua del, como aquella
que tenia por cierto el Euangelio ser potentia tuya para dar salud a todos los
que creen. Plegate O Dios mio, dar me gracia que yo no me oluide de un tan
insigne beneficio y merced: no permitas que la buena yerua de gratitud y
agradescimiento que tu Magestad ha plantado en el jardin de mi anima, la
ahoguen las espinas: las quales son la solicitud y cuydado de las cosas
temporales, y el engan^o de las riquezas. Haz Sen^or, que de tal manera yo las
possea, que yo sea sen^ora dellas, y no ellas de mi, que yo siempre este
aparejada para las emplear en tu seruicio. Todo esto te demando en el nombre de
tu Hijo Jesus Christo: el qual es mi Dios, mi Sen^or y mi Redemptor. Amen.

Segunda oracion.
* DA ATV SIERVA un coracon entendido para iuzgar a tu Pueblo, y para discernir
lo bueno de lo malo: Porque quien podra iuzgar este tu pueblo el qual es tan
grande en multitud? 1. REG. 3.
SEn^or Dios todo poderoso y Padre mio amantissimo, que por tu admirable bondad
y immensa misericordia has querido hazer a mi pobre pecadora hija de Adan,
instrumento de tu gloria, instrumento con que tu seas glorificado constituyendo
me por cabeca y gouernadora deste tu opulentissimo Reyno en estos tan
infelicissimos tiempos, en que tu yglesia vnica espo sa tuya es en tan gran
manera oprimida de la tyrania de Satanas y de sus ministros, ten por bien
assistir me con tu sancto Espiritu, el qual es Espiritu de sabiduria y de
inteligencia, Espiritu de co^sejo y de fortaleza, Espiritu de sciencia y de
temor tuyo, para que yo tu sierua te^ga coracon entendido que pueda discernir
enter lo bueno y lo malo: y desta manera sea en este tu Reyno administrada
iusticia, sea lo bueno aprouado y remunerado: y por el contrario lo malo
condenado y castigado. Pues que para esto tu has constituido el Magistrado y le
has puesto el cuchillo en la mano. Esto te pido O Sen^or y Dios mio en nombre
de tu vnigenito Hijo Jesus Christo mi Redemptor y intercessor. Amen.

Tercera oracion.
* LOS INIVSTOS PEreceran sin quedar ninguno, y el paradero de los malos es
perdicion. PSALM. 37.
O Sen^or Dios mio y Padre mio, immortales gracias hago a tu diuina Magestad
con mi boca, con mi coracon y con quanto yo soy, por las infinitas
misericordias de que has vsado con migo: que no solamente me has hecho criatura
tuya, hechura de tus manos formada a la imagen y semejancatuya, me has por la
muerte y passion de tu vnico Hijo Jesus Christo reconciliado contigo, adoptado
me y hecho hija tuya, hermana de Jesus Christo tu primogenito y de todos
aquellos que en ti creen, en ti esperan y confian: mas aun porque me has hecho
esta tan sen^alada y tan rara merced, que siendo yo vna muger de mi naturaleza
flaca, timida y delicada, como lo son todas las demas, me has querido hazer
robusta, animosa y fuerte para resistir a tanta multitud de Idumeos,
Ismaelitas, Moabitas, Agarenos y otra infinidad de gentes y naciones que se
auian juntado, conjurado, conspirado y hecho liga, contra ti, contra tu hijo y
contra todos aquellos que confiessan tu nombre y tienen por vnica regla de
salud a tu sancta palabra. O Dios mio, O Padre mio, cuya bondad es infinita y
cuya pote^cia es immensa, que sueles escoger las cosas flacas deste mundo para
co^fu^dir y destruir las fuertes, perseuera, perseuera por la gloria de tu
no^bre, por la honra de tu Hijo, por el desca^so y quie tud de tu yglesia
afligida en dar me fuercas para que yo como otra Debora, como otra Judith, como
otra Esther libre a tu pueblo de Israel de las manos de tus enemigos, leuantate
Sen^or iuz ga tu causa. Derrama tu ira sobre las gentes que note conoscen y
sobre los Reynos que no inuocan tu Nombre. Sea conoscida enter las naciones
delante de nuestros ojos la venganca de la sangre de tus sieruos que es
derramada. Enter de lante tu acatamiento el gemido de los presos, y segun tu
gran potencia reserua los que estan ya deputados para morir. Sean Sen^or los
que persiguen a tu yglesia auergoncados y conturbados perpetuamente, y sean
confundidos y perezcan. Conoscan que tu, cuyo nombre es IEHOVA, eres solo el
Altissimo sobre toda la tierra. O Sen^or concede esto a tu yglesia por aquel
vnico intercessor y abogado nuestro que siempre esta delante de tu Magestad
intercediendo por ella, que es Jesus Christo tu eterno Hijo: el qual con tigo y
con el Espiritu sancto es un solo Dios y Sen^or nuestro. Amen.

Precatio Reginae.
ADmirabilis est, deus opt. Max. iudiciorum tuorum abyssus. Tu rex regum,
Dominator dominantium. Tu imperia quibus visum est aufers and transfers,
euellis and plantas, destruis and aedificas. Tu, quae tua est singularis
benignitas, ancillam tuam mortis pene filiam liberasti: me, me captiuam in
patrio and regali solio collocasti. Tibi igitur gratias ago, tibi lauds and
hymnos cano, tuu^ nomen dies and noctes celebrabo. Per te patriae libertas,
doctrinae veritas, ecclesiae tranquillitas restituta sunt. Beneficiu^ tuum,
tuum solius fuit, ministerium meum. Onus certe humero muliebri grave, te
leuante leave. Adiuua obsecro clementissime pater, necscelera mea, aut merita
parentum, aut populi mei respice, quia mala and infinita su^t: sed
misericordiae tuae memineris, quia antiqua and aeterna et om nibus miseris
exposita est. Serua regnu^, tuere religione^, defend causam tuam, regina^
tua^, populu^ tuum and meum. Dissipentur hosts tui qui bella volu^t: qui
adorant sculptilia pudefiant and conuertantur. Ne simus praeda gentibus quae te
non norunt, and nomen tuum non inuocant. Confirma o Deus opus quod caepisti,
affla spiritum principale^ seruulae tuae, and pusillo gregi tuo, vt religionis
castitatem cum moru^ puritate coniungamus, vt vuas non labruscas, and fructus
dignos resipiscentia, dignos Euangelio proferamus, quo immortali hoc thesauro
immortaliter fruamur, quo hic tibi viuentes and morientes regni tui caelestis
haereditate^ aliquando cernamus, per Christum Iesum Dominum nostru^. Si quidem
tuum est regnum, potentia, and gloria in omnem perpetuitatem. Amen.

Precatio ad deum pro foelici regni administratione and populi incolumitate.
SVmme rerum opifex and seruator deus, quu^ hic ad maiestatis tuae pedes
humilis iaceo, mecu^que ^erio reputo quam indigna sim cui aure^ benignus
praebeas, vndique suffusa pudore vix audeo ad te oculos attollere. Cum enim iam
olim in ipso matris vtero peccati labes me infecisset, ob idque (vt reliqui
Adami nepotes) abortu dignissima essem, me tamen hinc tua paterna manus eduxit
atque in lucem edi permisit, editam cum Christo mori, and mortuam vt aeterna
vita fruerer, renasci. Et tamen (miseram me) iuuentus mea, immo mea incunabula
nihil nisi prioris illius vitae fecem spirarunt. Vnde iterum iam me iudicem
iratum exspectare te debui. At tu pro infinita tua bonitate me indignissimam ab
aulicis voluptatibus ad regni tui delitias, per Sanctorum co^munionem and vocem
euangelij tui etiam tum vocasti. Cumque verbis tuis non satis attente and
diligenter auscultare^, etsi me vna cum alijs huius regni ingratis virga tua
percussisti, tamen vicit tua hic quoque bonitas genuinam malitiam. Ecce enim
dum me loco filiae, qualem me in Christo adoptaras, detrudere debeat tua
iustitia: infinitae clementiae cedens, and nouo me beneficio cumulans, e
carcere and custodia, atque adeo e faucibus leonu^ solutam ad regnum euexisti,
aureo diademate immeritum caput cingens, and regali sceptro dextram ornans.
Addo and illud (quod ex omnibus non minimum esse censeo) quod christu^ ex regno
Angliae exulante^, quasi postliminio redeu^tem ministerio meo restituendu^
co^cesseris. Haec sunt benignissime pater, praecipua tuorum in me beneficiorum
capita: quae quanto excellentiora sunt, tanto indignius erga te me gessi, dum
vitam meam nouis subinde vitijs corrumpo. Vnde fit vt horum consideratione de
mea salute plane desperem. Sed rursum cum luculenta tua in Christi sanguine
sancta promissa memoria repeto, tota reficior and recreor, and recuperata
pristina spe tuum thronum securior accedo, non quidem oblatura aliquid quod
meis peccatis expiationi esse possit: sed ta^tum vt Christi tui oblationem, qua
semel perfectos effecit qui sanctifica^tur, mihi sanctificatione^ and
expiatione^ esse patiare, supplicatura, meque in tuam clientela^ ita suscipias,
vt quando ouium adipi obsequium, pecudum carni and sanguini virtutes labiorum
anteponis, tuis laudibus efferendis and mandatis tuis exequendis reliquu^ vitae
cursum transigam. Nominatim vero cum me faeminu^ and imbecillem, and solam ad
huius regni gubernacula sedere dignatus sis, and huius administrationis (quae
omniu^ difficillima existit) me coram Christi tui tri bunali ratione^ reddere
oporteat, porrige pater, porrige inqua^ e sublimi solio filiae tuae, quae illi
ad tam arduu^ munus obeundu^ necessaria esse iudicas. Dedisti co^siliarios, da
dextre eorum vti consilijs: illis autem and piam and aequam and sanam mente^,
industriam vero sedulam, vt quae mihi subditoque populo vsui sint, and
prouidere sub tuo praesidio, and consulere velint ac queant. Dedisti insuper vt
renatus verbo tuo idem populus eodem mecum foueri and ali se patiatur. Da ergo
qui eos pascant etfideles pastores, and pios sanosque doctores. Caeterum
mercenarios and omne genus luporum ab hoc nostro quantuluscu^que est, tibi
Christoque dicato grege arce. Quin and gregem ipsum nouis tuis beneficijs ita
orna, vt tibi tuum supremum honorem, nobis tua in hac part vice fungentibus
obsequentiam, sibi inter se mutuam charitatem nusquam deneget. Conserua porro
tua bonitate mihi partam pacem, and ab omni belli impetu assere patriam and
regnum, potissimum ab intestinis and domesticis tumultibus, quibus bona iam
orbis Christiani pars quatitur, immunes nos prolege. Et quonia^ pauperrimi
cuiusque atque abiectissimae conditionis hominis afflictio ad nos qui tui
sumus, attinet: etiam afflictorum omnium qui tua opera promptiori egere
videntur, vt te misereat supplex oro and obtestor: Idque meritis and nomine
filij tui domini nostri Jesus Christi, qui tecu^ viuit and regnat in omnem
aeternitatem. Fiat.

Alia precatio.
SVmme Deus, qui me iam ab ineunte aetate, and antequam in lucem essem aedita,
admirabili potentia, incredibilique prouidentia a capitali humani generis
inimico, eiusque sceleratis administris hactenus tutam incolumemque
co^seruasti: concede itidem vt tua singulari benignitate freta, cum ab omnibus
clandestinis insidiis, tum etiam a domesticis exterisque hostibus eripiar, and
ea liberate mentisque quieto tranquilloque statu consistam, vt populum
regnumque meae fidei ac tutelae commendatum, sartum tectum ab omnibus periculis
tuearis: and cum ex hac vita migrauero, tecum immortali fruar beatitudine, in
omnes aeui aeternitates. Amen.

(...)
THE (...)

(...)

(...)
Krie de (...)

(...)

(...)

(...)
YPrtate pter (...)

royal blazon or coat of arms E R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

narrative triptych: birth of Mary The birth of blessed Mary the virgin the
mother of Christ, etc.



typological diptych There shall come a rod forth of the stock of Jesse, and a
graffe, etc. Esaias. 11. There shall come a star of Jacob, and a scepter shall
rise of Israel, etc. Number. 24.

narrative triptych: Mary and Joseph Mary the mother of Jesu betrothed to
Joseph her husband, before they came together, was found with child by the
holy ghost. The^ Joseph her husband being a just man, etc Math. 1.

typological diptych But thou shall go unto my fathers house, and to my kindred,
and take a wife, etc. Genesis 24. I will speak for her that she may be given thee
to wife. For to thee does the right of her, etc. Tob. 6

narrative triptych: annunciation And in the vi month the angel Gabriell was
sent from God to a city in Galile, named Nazareth, to a virgin affianced to a
man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, etc. Luke. 1.

typological diptych The seed of the woman shall tread upon the head of the
serpent Genesis 3. The angel said to him, the Lord is with thee thou valiant man.
Judges. 6.

narrative triptych: John the Baptist And Mary arose and went with have into
the hilly country to a city of Juda, and entered into the house of Zacharias
and saluted Elizabeth. And it came to pass, etc. Luke. 1.

typological diptych And Moses returned to Jethro his father in law and said
to him, I pray, etc. Exo. 4. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my sprite does
rejoice in God my savior. Luke. 1.

narrative triptych: nativity When the days were accomplished, Mary brought
forth her first begotten son and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid
him in the manger because there was no room, etc. Lu. 2.

typological diptych Put thy shoes of thy feet for the place whereon thou
stand, is holy ground. Exodus 3. Aarons rod being put in the tabernacle did
blossom and I will make cease etc. Number. 17.

narrative triptych: circumcision And when the viii. days were accomplished,
that they should circumcise the child, his name was then called Jesus, which
was so named of the Angel, before he was conceived, etc. Luke. 2.

typological diptych Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight
days old, as God had commanded him, etc. Genesis 21 Let every manchild among you
be circumcised. That is ye shall circumcise the foreskin of your flesh, etc.
Genesis 17

narrative triptych: Magi and Herod Where is the king of the Jews that is
borne, for we have seen his star in the East, and are come to worship him.
When Herod the king heard this, he was troubled. and all Jerusalem, etc. Math.
2.

typological diptych Abner said to David, make covenant with me, and behold,
mine hand shall be with thee, etc. 2. Sam. 3. The Queen of Saba bring gifts to
Jerusalem to Solomon, with a very great train, etc. 3. Reg. 10.

narrative triptych: purification of Mary Then the days of Purification after
the law of Moses, were accomplished, they brought Jesus to Jerusalem to present
him to the lord, as it is written in the law of the lord, Luke. 2.

typological diptych God said to Moses, sanctify unto me all the first borne,
that open all manner matrices among the children, etc. Exo. 13. Anna bare a
son and brought him into the house of the Lord in Siloh, and the child was
young, etc. 1. Sam. 1.

narrative triptych: flight into Egypt Arise and take the babe and his mother
and fly into Egypt, and be there till I bring thee word, for Herod will seek
the babe to destroy him. So he arose and took the babe and his mother, etc.
Math. 2

typological diptych Behold, thy brother Esau is comforted against thee,
meaning to kill thee. Genesis 27. Michaell spoke unto David: If thou save not thy
self this night to morrow, etc. 1. Sa. 19

narrative triptych He shall break down their altars, he shall destroy their
images. For now they shall say. we have no king because we feared not the Lord,
and what should a king do to us? Ose. 10.

typological diptych Moses cast the tables out of his hands and brake them in
pieces because of their idolatry, etc. Exo. 32. The Philistines find Dagon
fallen down before the ark of the Lord etc. 1. Sam. 5.

narrative triptych: slaying of the innocents Herod caused all male children
to be slain that were in Bethlehem and in all the costs thereof from two year
old and under, according to the time which he had diligently searched, etc.
Mat. 2.

typological diptych Saul said to Doeg, turn thou and fall upon the priests.
And Doeg the Edomite turned, etc. 1. Sa. 22 Athalia seeing her son to be dead,
destroyed all the kings seed. But Jehosheba, etc. 4. Reg. 11.

narrative triptych: baptism of Christ And Jesus when he was baptized, came
straight out of the water. And lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and John
saw the spirit of God descending like a dove, etc. Math. 3.

typological diptych Lift up thy rod and stretch out thine hand upon the
sea, etc. Exodus. 14 They cut down a branche with one cluster of grapes, and
bear it upon, etc. Number. 13.

narrative triptych: return from Egypt The Angel said to Joseph: Arise and take
the babe and his mother, and go into the land of Israel, for they are dead
which sought the babes life. Then he arose and took the babe etc. Mat. ^

typological diptych God spoke to Jacob, Get thee out of this country. Jacob
took all his goods and cattle. etc. Genesis 31. David asked counsel of the
Lord, saying: Shall I go up into any cities of Judah, etc. 2. Sam. 2.

narrative triptych: temptation of Christ The tempter came to Christ saying: If
thou be the son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he
aunswering, said, it is written, Man shall not live by bread only, etc. Math. 4.

typological diptych Esau sells his birth right for a mess of pottage, etc.
Genesis 25. The woman seeing the tree to be pleasant, took of the fruit, etc. Genesis
3.

narrative triptych: raising of Lazarus Christ cried with a loud voice, Lazarus
come forth. Then he that was dead came forth. bound hand and foot with bands
and his face was bound with a napkin. Jesus said unto them, etc. John. 11.

typological diptych Helias stretched himself upon the child, and the Lord
heard the voice of Helias, etc. 3. Reg. 17. Heliseus coming into the house,
and behold, the child was dead, and he stretched, etc. 4. Reg. 4.

narrative triptych: transfiguration He was transfigured before them, and his
face did shine as the sun, and his clothes were as white as the light. And
behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias, etc. Math. 17.

typological diptych Abraham said, Lord if I have now found favor in thy
sight. etc. Genesis 18. Nabuchadneser answered: Lo I see four men loose walking
in the midst of the fire. Dan. 3.

narrative triptych: Mary Magdalene Jesus said, Many sins are forgeuen her,
for she loved much. To whom a little is forgeuen* he does love a little. And he
said unto her, Thy sins are forgeuen thee, etc. Luke. 7.

typological diptych David said to Nathan: I have sinned against the Lord, etc.
2. Sam. 12 Aaron looked upon Miriam, and behold, she was leprous. Number. 12

narrative triptych: lamentation over Jerusalem When Christ came nere Jerusalem
he beheld the city and wept for it, saying: O if thou had even known at the
lest in this thy day those things which belong unto thy peace etc. Luke. 19.

typological diptych Who shall have pity then upon thee, O Jerusalem or who,
etc. Jere. 15. Their feasts are turned into lamentation, their altars, etc, 1.
Macha. 1.

narrative triptych: the triumphal entry Christ riding to Jerusalem, many spread
their garments in the way, other cut down branches of the trees and strawed
them in the way. And they that went before, and they that followed, etc Mark. 11

typological diptych The women sang by course in their play, and said: etc. 1.
Sam. 28 The children of the prophets came to meet Helisha, etc. 4. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: cleansing of the temple Jesus went into the temple and
began to cast out them that sold and bought, saying unto them it is written,
Mine house is the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. Luke.
19

typological diptych Is this house become a den of thieves, whereupon, etc.
Jere. 7. Mine house shall be called a house of prayer for all people, etc.
Esaias. 56.

narrative triptych: plots against Jesus The chief priests and the Scribes
and the Elders of the people, consulted how they might take Jesus by suttletie
and kill him. But they said, not on the feast day, least any uproar, etc. Math.
26

typological diptych When Josephes brethren saw him a far of, etc. Genesis 37.
Absolon rose up early and stood hard by the, etc. 2. Sam. 15.

narrative triptych: thirty pieces of silver They appointed unto him thirty
pieces of silver, and from that time Judas sought opportunity to betray Christ
his master. Now on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, etc. Math.
26

typological diptych Judas said: Come let us sell him to the Ismalites, etc.
Genesis 37 So Joseph was brought down into Egypt, and Potiphar, etc. Genesis 39.

narrative triptych: betrayal of Christ Jesus knowing all things that should
come, went forth and said unto them whom seek ye? They answered him Jesus of
Nazareth. Jesus answered I am he. Judas also etc. John. 18.

typological diptych The foolish virgins came also saying, Lord Lord, etc.
Math. 25. The great Dragon that old serpent was cast out, etc. Ruee. 12.

narrative triptych: the Judas kiss Judas had given them a token saying:
whomsoever I kiss, he it is, take him and lead him away. And as soon as he
was come, he goes to him and says: Master, master, etc. Mark. 14.

typological diptych Joad took Abner aside peaceably, and smote him under the
ribbe that he died. etc. 2. Sam. 3. Simon to redeem Jonathan, sends money and
the children to Triphon etc. 1. Macha. 13.

narrative triptych: the scourging of Jesus The Jews spate Christ in his face,
and buffeted him saying: Prophecy unto us O Christ who is he that smote thee?
Peter sat without in the hall, and a maid, etc Math. 26.

typological diptych When Cham the father of Chanaan saw the nakedness of his
father, he told his two brethren, etc. Genesis 10. Heliseus is mocked of little
children crying unto him: Come up thou baldhead, etc. 4. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: the release of Barabbas Pilate let Barrabas lose unto the^
and scourged Jesus, and delivered him to be crucified Then the soldiers of
the governor took Jesus in to the common hall, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych The plowers plowed upon my back, and furrows long did
cast, etc. Psalm. 131. Satan smote Job with sore boyles from the soul of his
foot etc. Joh. 2.

narrative triptych: mocking of Jesus And the soldiers platted a crown of
thorn upon his head, and a reed in his right hand, and bowed their knees
before him and mocked him, saying: God save, etc. Math. 27

typological diptych When thou have done all thy duty, sit down that thou
may receue a crown etc. Eccle. 32 Abner said unto David. who art thou that
criest to the king. etc. 1. Sam. 26

narrative triptych: Pilate washes his hands Pilate took water and washed his
hands before the multitude, saying: I am innocent of the death of this just
man, look you to it. Then answered all the people, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych Jezabell sent a messenger unto Helias saying The Gods do
so to me etc. 3. Reg. 19. Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel and
cast, etc. Dan. 6.

narrative triptych: the crucifixion and Jesus bare his cross and came into a
place named Golgotha, where they crucified him and two other with him in either
side one, and Jesus in the midst of them, etc. John. 19.

typological diptych Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it
upon Isaac his son, etc. Gene. 22. Behold the widow was there gathering
sticks, and Eliah called her, and said, etc. 3. Reg. 17.

narrative triptych: the crucifixion And when they were come to the place which
is called Caluarie, there they crucified him and the evil doers, one on the
right hand, and the other on the left, etc. Luke. 23.

typological diptych Tubultaim wrought cunningly every craft of brass and
iron, etc. Genesis 4. Esaias the prophet was cut in the midst with a saw, and fasted
on a tree, etc.

narrative triptych: the spear One of the soldiers with a spear pierced his
side. and forthwith ran there out blood and water. And he that saw it bare
record and his record is true. And he that etc. John. 19.

typological diptych With the ribbe which the Lord God had taken from the man,
etc Genesis 2. The Lord said to Moses Thou shall smite the rocks and water, etc
Exo. 17

narrative triptych: the burial of Jesus Joseph took the body and wrapped it in
a clean linen cloth, and laid it in his new tomb which he had hewn out even
in the rock and rolled a great stone to the door, St. Math. 27.

typological diptych As Soon as the sun was down, Josue commands that
they, etc. Josu. 8 Then they arose and went all night, and took the body, etc.
1. Sam. 31

narrative triptych: the Mary's watch There was Mary Magdalene and the other
Mary sitting over against the sepulcher. The next day that followed the day of
preparing, the hie priests and Pharisees, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych She wepeth continually in the night, and her tears. etc.
Lamen. 1. Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara for the lord has given, etc.
Ruth. 1.

narrative triptych: burial of Jesus He laid it in a tomb hewn out of a rock
wherein was never man yet laid. And that day was the preparing of the Saboth,
and the Saboth drue on. The women that followed after etc. Luke. 23.

typological diptych When Joseph was come to his brethren, they stripped him,
etc. Genesis 37. So they took up Jonas and cast him into the sea and the sea* etc.
Jonas. 1

narrative triptych: resurrection For fear of him the kepers were astonished and
became as dead men. But the Angel said to the women: Fear not, for I know you
seek Jesus which was crucified, etc. Math. 28.

typological diptych Samson arose at midnight and took the doors, etc. Judicum.
16. And the Lord spoke unto the fish and it cast out Jonas, etc. Jonas. 2.

narrative triptych: post-resurrection appearance Jesus appeared first to Mary
Magdalene out of whom he had cast vij. devils. And she went and told them that
had been with him which mourned, etc. Mar. 16

typological diptych The king said unto Daniell: O Daniel the servant, etc.
Daniel. 6. When I had past a little from them, then I found him, etc. Cant. 3.

narrative triptych: doubting Thomas Jesus said to Thomas put thy finger here
and see my hands and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not
faythlesse, etc. John. 20.

typological diptych And Jacob called the name of the place Peniell, etc. Genesis
32. Gedeon answered: the Lord be with us why then, etc. Jud. 6.

narrative triptych: ascension So after the Lord had spoken unto them he was
received into heaven and sat at the right hand of God. And they went forth and
preached, etc. Mar. 16

typological diptych And Enoch walked with God, and he was no more seen, for
God took him away, etc. Genesis 5. There appeared a charet of fire, and horses of
fire, so Elias went up by a whirlewinde, etc. 2. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: birth of Mary The birth of blessed Mary the virgin the
mother of Christ, etc.



typological diptych There shall come a rod forth of the stock of Jesse, and a
graffe, etc. Esaias. 11. There shall come a star of Jacob, and a scepter shall
rise of Israel, etc Number. 24.

narrative triptych: Mary and Joseph Mary the mother of Jesu betrothed to
Joseph her husband, before they came together, was found with child by the
holy ghost. The^ Joseph her husband being a just man, etc Math. 1.

typological diptych But thou shall go unto my fathers house, and to my kindred,
and take a wife, etc. Genesis 24. I will speak for her that she may be given thee
to wife. For to thee does the right of her, etc. Tob. 6

narrative triptych: annunciation And in the vi month the Angel Gabriell was
sent from God to a city in Galile, named Nazareth, to a virgin affianced to a
man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, etc. Luke. 1.

typological diptych The seed of the woman shall tread upon the head of the
serpent Genesis 3. The angel said to him, the Lord is with thee thou valiant man.
Judges. 6.

narrative triptych: John the Baptist And Mary arose and went with have into
the hilly country to a city of Juda, and entered into the house of Zacharias
and saluted Elizabeth. And it came to pass, etc. Luke. i.

typological diptych And Moses returned to Jethro his father in law and said
to him, I pray, etc. Exo. 4. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my sprite does
rejoice in God my savior. Luke. 1.

narrative triptych: nativity When the days were accomplished, Mary brought
forth her first begotten son and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid
him in the manger because there was no room, etc. Lu. 2.

typological diptych Put thy shoes of thy feet for the place whereon thou
stand, is holy ground. Exodus 3. Aarons rod being put in the tabernacle did
blossom and I will make cease etc. Number. 17.

narrative triptych: circumcision And when the viii. days were accomplished,
that they should circumcise the child, his name was then called Jesus, which
was so named of the Angel, before he was conceived, etc. Luke. 2.

typological diptych Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight
days old, as God had commanded him, etc. Genesis 21 Abner said to David, make
covenant with me, and behold, mine hand shall be with thee, etc. 2. Sam. 3.

narrative triptych: Magi and Herod Where is the king of the Jews that is
borne, for we have seen his star in the East, and are come to worship him.
When Herod the king heard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem, etc. Math.
2.

typological diptych Abuer said to David, make coueuant with me and behold,
mine hand shall be with thee, etc. 2. Sam. 3 The Queen of Saba bring gifts to
Jerusalem to Solomon, with a very great rain, etc. 3. Reg. 10.

narrative triptych: purification of Mary When the days of Purification after
the law of Moses, were accomplished, they brought Jesus to Jerusalem to present
him to the lord, as it is written in the law of the lord, Luke. 2.

typological diptych God said to Moses, sanctify unto me all the first borne,
that open all manner matrices among the children, etc. Exo. 13. Anna bare a
son and brought him into the house of the Lord in Siloh, and the child was
young etc. 1. Sam. 1.

narrative triptych: flight into Egypt Arise and take the babe and his mother
and fly into Egypt, and be there till I bring thee word, for Herod will seeks
the babe to destroy him. So he arose and took the babe and his mother, etc.
Math. 2

typological diptych Behold, thy brother Esau is comforted against thee,
meaning to kill thee. Genesis 27. Michaell spoke unto David: If thou save not thy
self this night to morrow, etc. 1. Sa. 19

narrative triptych He shall break down their altars, he shall destroy their
images. For now they shall say. we have no king because we feared not the Lord,
and what should a king do to us? Ose. 10.

typological diptych Moses cast the tables out of his hands and brake them in
pieces because of their idolatry. etc. Exo. 32 The Philistines find Dagon
fallen down before the ark of the Lord etc. 1. Sam. 1.

narrative triptych: slaying of the innocents Herod caused all male children
to be slain that were in Bethlehem and in all the costs thereof from two year
old and under, according to the time which he had diligently searched, etc.
Mat. 2.

typological diptych Saul said to Doeg, turn thou and fall upon the priests.
And Doeg the Edomite turned, etc. 1. Sa. 22 Athalia seeing her son to be dead,
destroyed all the kings seed. But Jehosheba, etc. 4. Reg. 11.

narrative triptych: baptism of Christ And Jesus when he was baptized, came
straight out of the water. And lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and John
saw the spirit of God descending like a dove, etc. Math. 3.

typological diptych Let up thy rod and stretch out thine hand upon the
sea, etc. Exodus. 14 They cut down a branche with one cluster of grapes, and
bear it upon. etc. Number. 13.

narrative triptych: return from Egypt The Angel said to Joseph: Arise and take
the babe and his mother, and go into the land of Israel, for they are dead
which sought the babes life, Then he arose and took the babe etc. Mat. 2

typological diptych God spoke to Jacob, Get thee out of this country. Jacob
took all his goods and cattle, etc. Genesis 31. David asked counsel of the
Lord, saying: Shall I go up into any cities of Judah, etc. 2. Sam. 2.

narrative triptych: temptation of Christ The tempter came to Christ saying: If
thou be the son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he
aunswering, said, it is written, Man shall not live by bread only, etc. Math. 4.

typological diptych Esau sells his birth right for a mess of pottage, etc.
Genesis 25 The woman seeing the tree to be pleasant, took of the fruit, etc. Genesis
3.

narrative triptych: raising of Lazarus Christ tried with a loud voice, Lazarus
come forth. Then he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with bands
and his face was bound with a napkin. Jesus said unto them, etc. John. 11.

typological diptych Helias stretched himself upon the child, and the Lord
heard the voice of Helias, etc. 3. Reg. 17. Heliseus coming into the house,
and behold, the child was dead, and he tretched, etc. 4. Reg. 4.

narrative triptych: transfiguration He was transfigured before them, and his
face did shine as the sun, and his clothes were as white as the light. And
behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias, etc. Math. 17.

typological diptych Abraham said, Lord if I have now found favor in thy
sight. etc. Genesis 18. Nabuchadneser answered: Lo I see four men loose walking
in the midst of the fire. Dan. 3.

narrative triptych: Mary Magdalene Jesus said, Many sins are forgeuen her,
for she loved much. To whom a little is forgeuen, he does love a little. And he
said unto her, Thy sins are forgeuen thee, etc. Luke. 7.

typological diptych David said to Nathan: I have sinned against the Lord, etc.
2. Sam. 12 Aaron looked upon Miriam, and behold, she was leprous. Number. 12

narrative triptych: lamentation over Jerusalem When Christ came nere Jerusalem
he beheld the city and wept for it, saying: O if thou had even known at the
lest in this thy day those things which belong unto thy peace etc. Luke. 19.

typological diptych Who shall have pity then upon thee, O Jerusalem or who,
etc. Jere. 15. Their feasts are turned into lamentation, their altars, etc, 1.
Macha. 1.

narrative triptych: the triumphal entry Christ riding to Jerusalem. many spread
their garments in the way, other cut down branches of the trees and strawed
them in the way. And they that went before, and they that followed, etc Mark. 11

typological diptych The women sang by course in their play, and said: etc. 1.
Sam. 28 The children of the prophets came to meet Helisha, etc. 4. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: cleansing of the temple Jesus went into the temple and
began to cast out them that sold and bought, saying unto them it is written,
Mine house is the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. Luke.
19

typological diptych Is this house become a den of thieves, whereupon, etc.
Jere. 7. Mine house shall be called a house of prayer for all people, etc.
Esaias. 56.

narrative triptych: plots against Jesus The chief priests and the Scribes
and the Elders of the people, consulted how they might take Jesus by suttletie
and kill him. But they said, not on the feast day, least any uproar, etc. Math.
26

typological diptych When Josephes brethren saw him a far of, etc. Genesis 37.
Absolon rose up early and stood hard by the, etc. 2. Sam. 15.

narrative triptych: thirty pieces of silver They appointed unto him thirty
pieces of silver, and from that time Judas sought opportunity to betray Christ
his master. Now on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, etc. Math.
26

typological diptych Judas said: Come let us sell him to the Ismalites, etc.
Genesis 37 Do Joseph was brought down into Egypt, and Potiphar, etc. Genesis 39.

narrative triptych: betrayal of Christ Jesus knowing all things that should
come, went forth and said unto them Whom seek ye? They answered him Jesus of
Nazareth, Jesus answered I am he. Judas also etc. John. 18.

typological diptych The foolish virgins came also saying, Lord Lord, etc.
Math. 25. The great Dragon that old serpent was cast out, etc. Ruee. 12.

narrative triptych: the Judas kiss Judas had given them a token saying:
Whomsoever I kiss, he it is, take him and lead him away. And as soon as he
was come, he goes to him and says: Master, master, etc. Mark. 14.

typological diptych Joad took Abner aside peaceably, and smote him under the
ribbe that he died. etc. 2. Sam. 3. Simon to redeem Jonathan, sends money and
the children to Triphon etc. 1. Macha. 13.

narrative triptych: the scourging of Jesus The Jews spate Christ in his face,
and buffeted him saying: Prophecy unto us O Christ who is he that smote thee?
Peter sat without in the hall, and a maid, etc Math. 26.

typological diptych When Cham the father of Chanaan saw the naked n^^ of his
father, he told his two brethren, etc. Genesis 10. Heliseus is mocked of little
children crying unto him: Come up thou baldhead, etc. 1. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: the release of Barabbas Pilate let Barrabas lose unto the^
and scourged Jesus, and delivered him to be crucified Then the soldiers of
the governor took Jesus in to the common hall, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych The plowers plowed upon my back, and furrows long did
cast, etc. Psalm. 131. Satan smote Job with sore boyles from the soul of his
foot etc. Job. 2.

narrative triptych: mocking of Jesus And the soldiers platted a crown of
thorn upon his head, and a reed in his right hand, and bowed their knees
before him and mocked him, saying: God save, etc. Math. 27

typological diptych When thou have done all thy duery, sit down that thou
may receue a crown etc. Eccle. 32. Abner said unto David, who art thou that
criest to the king, etc. 1. Sam. 26.

narrative triptych: Pilate washes his hands Pilate took water and washed his
hands before the multitude, saying: I am innocent of the death of this just
man, look you to it. Then answered all the people, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych Jezabell sent a messenger unto Helias saying The Gods do
so to me etc. 3. Reg. 19. Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel and
cast, etc. Dan. 6.

narrative triptych: the crucifixion And Jesus bare his cross and came into a
place named Golgotha, where they crucified him and two other with him on either
side one, and Jesus in the midst of them, etc. John. 19.

typological diptych Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it
upon Isaac his son, etc. Gene. 22. Behold the widow was there gathering
sticks, and Eliah called her, and said, etc. 3. Reg. 17.

narrative triptych: the crucifixion And when they were come to the place which
is called Caluarie, there they crucified him and the evil doers, one on the
right hand, and the other on the left, etc. Luke. 23.

typological diptych Tubultaim wrought cunningly every craft of brass and
iron, etc. Genesis 4. Esaias the prophet was cut in the midst with a saw, and fasted
on a tree, etc.

narrative triptych: the spear One of the soldiers with a spear pierced his
side, and forthwith ran there out blood and water. And he that saw it bare
record and his record is true. And he that etc. John. 19.

typological diptych With the ribbe which the Lord God had taken from the man,
etc Genesis 2. The Lord said to Moses Thou shall smite the rocks and water. etc
Exo. 17

narrative triptych: the burial of Jesus Joseph took the body and wrapped it it
in a clean linen cloth, and laid it in his new tomb which he had hewn out
even in the rock and rolled a great stone to the door, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych As Soon as the sun was down, Josne commands that
they, etc. Josu. 8 Then they arose and went all night, and took the body, etc.
1. Sam. 31

narrative triptych: the Mary's watch There was Mary Magdalene and the other
Mary sitting over against the sepulcher. The next day that followed the day of
preparing, the hie priests and Pharisees, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych She wepeth continually in the night, and her tears. etc.
Lamen. 1. Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara for the lord has given, etc.
Ruth. 1.

narrative triptych: burial of Jesus He laid it in a tomb hewn out of a rock
wherein was never man yet laid. And that day was the preparing of the Saboth,
and the Saboth drue on. The women that followed after etc. Luke. 23.

typological diptych When Joseph was come to his brethren, they script him,
etc. Genesis 37. So they took up Jonas and cast him into the sea and the sea, etc.
Jonas. 1

narrative triptych: resurrection For fear of him the kepers were astonished and
became as dead men. But the Angel said to the women: Fear not, for I know you
seek Jesus which was crucified, etc. Math. 28.

typological diptych Samson arose at midnight and took the doors, etc. Judicum.
16. And the Lord spoke unto the fish and it cast out Jonas, etc. Jonas. 2.

narrative triptych: post-resurrection appearance Jesus appeared first to Mary
Magdalene out of whom he had cast vij. devils. And she went and told them that
had been with him which mourned, etc. Mar. 16

typological diptych The king said unto Daniell: O Daniel the servant, etc.
Daniel. 6. When I had past a little from them, then I found him, etc. Cant. 3.

narrative triptych: doubting Thomas Jesus said to Thomas put thy finger here
and see my hands and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not
faythlesse, etc. John. 20.

typological diptych And Jacob called the name of the place Peniell, etc. Genesis
32. Gedeon answered: the Lord be with us why then, etc. Jud. 6.

narrative triptych: ascension So after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was
received into heaven and sat at the right hand of God. And they went forth and
preached, etc. Mar. 16

typological diptych And Enoch walked with God, and he was no more seen, for
God took him away, etc. Genesis 5. There appeared a charet of fire, and horses of
fire, so Elias went up by a whirlwinde, etc. 2. Reg. 2

narrative triptych: birth of Mary The birth of blessed Mary the virgin the
mother of Christ, etc.



typological diptych There shall come a rod forth of the stock of Jesse, and a
graffe, etc. Esaias. 11. There shall come a star of Jacob, and a scepter shall
rise of Israel: etc Number. 24.

narrative triptych: Mary and Joseph Mary the mother of Jesu betrothed to
Joseph her husband, before they came together, was found with child by the
holy ghost. The^ Joseph her husband being a just man, etc Math. 1.

typological diptych But thou shall go unto my fathers house, and to my kindred,
and take a wife, etc. Genesis 24. I will speak for her that she may be given thee
to wife. For to thee does the right of her, etc. Tob. 6

narrative triptych: annunciation And in the vi month the Angel Gabriell was
sent from God to a city in Galile, named Nazareth, to a virgin affianced to a
man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, etc. Luke. 1.

typological diptych The seed of the woman shall tread upon the head of the
serpent Genesis 2. The angel said to him, the Lord is with thee thou valiant man.
Judges. 6.

narrative triptych: John the Baptist And Mary arose and went with have into
the hilly country to a city of Juda, and entered into the house of Zacharias
and saluted Elizabeth. And it came to pass, etc. Luke. i.

typological diptych And Moses returned to Jethro his father in law and said
to him, I pray, etc. Exo. 4. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my sprite does
rejoice in God my savior. Luke. 1.

narrative triptych: nativity When the days were accomplished, Mary brought
forth her first begotten son and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid
him in the manger because there was no room, etc. Lu. 2.

typological diptych Put thy shoes of thy feet for the place whereon thou
stand, is holy ground. Exodus 3. Aarons rod being put in the tabernacle did
blossom and I will make cease etc. Number. 17.

narrative triptych: circumcision And when the viii. days were accomplished,
that they should circumcise the child, his name was then called Jesus, which
was so named of the Angel, before he was concerned, etc. Luke. 2.

typological diptych Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight
days old, as God had commanded him, etc. Genesis 21 Abner said to David, make
covenant with me, and behold, mine hand shall be with thee, etc. 2. Sam. 3.

narrative triptych: Magi and Herod Where is the king of the Jews that is
borne, for we have seen his star in the East, and are come to worship him.
When Herod the king heard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem, etc. Math.
2.

typological diptych Abuer said to David, make coueuant with me, and behold,
mine hand shall be with thee, etc. 2. Sam. 3 The Queen of Saba bring gifts to
Jerusalem to Solomon, with a very great train, etc. ^. Reg. 10.

narrative triptych: purification of Mary When the days of Purification after
the law of Moses, were accomplished, they brought Jesus to Jerusalem to present
him to the lord, as it is written in the law of the lord, Luke. 2.

typological diptych God said to Moses, sanctify unto me all the first borne,
that open all manner matrices among the children, etc. Exo. 13. Anna, bare a
son and brought him into the house of the Lord in Siloh, and the child was
young, etc. 1. Sam. 1.

narrative triptych: flight into Egypt Arise and take the babe and his mother
and fly into Egypt, and be there till I bring thee word, for Herod will seek
the babe to destroy him. So he arose and took the babe and his mother, etc.
Math. 2

typological diptych Behold, thy brother Esau is comforted against thee,
meaning to kill thee. Genesis 27. Michaell spoke unto David: If thou save not thy
self this night to morrow, etc. 1. Sa. 19

narrative triptych He shall break down their altars, he shall destroy their
images. For now they shall say, we have no king because we feared not the Lord,
and what should a king do to us? Ose. 10.

typological diptych Moses cast the tables out of his hands and brake them in
pieces because of their idolatry, etc. Exo. 32 The Philistines find Dagon
fallen down before the ark of the Lord etc. 1. Sam. 5.

narrative triptych: slaying of the innocents Herod caused all male children
to be slain that were in Bethlehem and in all the costs thereof from two year
old and under, according to the time which he had diligently searched, etc
Mat. 2.

typological diptych Saul said to Doeg, turn thou and fall upon the priests.
And Doeg the Edomite turned, etc. 1. Sa. 22 Athalia seeing her son to be dead,
destroyed all the kings seed. But Jehosheba, etc. 4. Reg. 11.

narrative triptych: baptism of Christ And Jesus when he was baptized, came
straight out of the water. And lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and John
saw the spirit of God descending like a dove, etc. Math. 3.

typological diptych Lift up thy rod and stretch out thine hand upon the
sea, etc. Exodus. 14. They cut down a branche with out cluster of grapes,
and bear it upon, etc. Number. 13.

narrative triptych: return from Egypt The Angel said to Joseph: Arise and take
the babe and his mother and go into the land of Israel, for they are dead which
sought the babes life, Then he arose and took the babe etc. Mat. 2

typological diptych God spoke to Jacob, Get thee out of this country. Jacob
took all his goods and cattle. etc. Genesis 31. David asked counsel of the
Lord, saying: Shall I go up into any cities of Judah, etc. 2. Sam. 2.

narrative triptych: temptation of Christ The tempter came to Christ saying: If
thou be the son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he
aunswering. said, it is written, Man shall not live by bread only, etc. Math. 4.

typological diptych Esau sells his birth right for a mess of pottage, etc.
Gen 25. The woman seeing the tree to be pleasant, took of the fruit, etc. Genesis
3.

narrative triptych: raising of Lazarus Christ cried with a loud voice, Lazarus
come forth. Then he that was dead came forth. bound hand and foot with bands
and his face was bound with a napkin. Jesus said unto them, etc. John. 11.

typological diptych Helias stretched himself upon the child, and the Lord
heard the voice of Helias, etc. 3. Reg. 17. Heliseus coming into the house,
and behold, the child was dead, and he stretched, etc. 4. Reg. 4.

narrative triptych: transfiguration He was transfigured before them, and his
face did shine as the sun, and his clothes were as white as the light. And
behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias, etc. Math. 17.

typological diptych Abraham said, Lord if I have now found favor in thy
sight. etc. Genesis 18. Nabuchadneser answered: Lo I see four men loose walking
in the midst of the fire. Dan. 3.

narrative triptych: Mary Magdalene Jesus said, Many sins are forgeuen her,
for she loved much. To whom a little is forgeuen* he does love a little. And he
said unto her, Thy sins are forgeuen thee, etc. Luke. 7

typological diptych David said to Nathan: I have sinned against the Lord, etc.
2. Sam. 12 Aaron looked upon Miriam, and behold, she was leprous. Number. 12

narrative triptych: lamentation over Jerusalem When Christ came nere Jerusalem
he beheld the city and wept for it, saying: O if thou had even known at the
lest in this thy day those things which belong unto thy peace etc. Luke. 19.

typological diptych Who shall have pity then upon thee, O Jerusalem or who,
etc. Jere. 15. Their feasts are turued into lamentation, their altats, etc, 1.
Macha. 1.

narrative triptych: the triumphal entry Christ riding to Jerusalem, many spread
their garments in the way, other cut down branches of the trees and strawed
them in the way. And they that went before, and they that followed, etc Mark. 11

typological diptych The women sang by course in their play, and said: etc. 1.
Sam. 22 The children of the prophets came to meet Helisha, etc. 4. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: cleansing of the temple Jesus went into the temple and
began to cast out them that sold and bought, saying unto them it is written,
Mine house is the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. Luke.
19

typological diptych Is this house become a den of thieves, whereupon, etc.
Jere. 7. Mine house shall be called a house of prayer for all people, etc.
Esaias. 56.

narrative triptych: plots against Jesus The chief priests and the Scribes
and the Elders of the people, consulted how they might take Jesus by suttletie
and kill him. But they said, not on the feast day, least any oprore, etc. Math.
26

typological diptych When Josephes brethren saw him a far of, etc. Genesis 37.
Absolon rose up early and stood hard by the, etc. 2. Sam. 15.

narrative triptych: thirty pieces of silver They appointed unto him thirty
pieces of silver, and from that time Judas sought opportunity to betray Christ
his master. Now on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, etc. Math.
26

typological diptych Judas said: Come let us sell him to the Ismalites, etc.
Genesis 37 So Joseph was brought down into Egypt, and Potiphar, etc. Genesis 39.

narrative triptych: last supper Jesus at his last supper as they did eat,
took bread, and when he had given thanks brake it, and gave it to his
disciples, saying: Take, eat, this is my body, etc. Math. 26.

typological diptych Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine, and he, etc.
Genesis 37. Moses said to the people of Israel: This is that bread, etc. Exo. 16

narrative triptych: Gethsemane Jesus said: all ye shall be offended by me this
night, etc. He said moreover unto them, sit ye here while I go and pray
yonder. And he took Peter and the two sons etc. Math. 26.

typological diptych I saw all Israel scartred sheep that had no shepeheard,
etc. 3. Reg. 22. Helisha said: behold thou shall see it with thine eyes but
thou, etc. 4. Reg. 7.

narrative triptych: betrayal of Christ Jesus knowing all things that should
come, went forth and said unto them whom seek ye? They answered him Jesus of
Nazareth* Jesus answered I am he. Judas also etc. John. 18.

typological diptych The foolish virgins came also saying, Lord Lord, etc.
Math. 25. The great Dragon that old serpent was cast out, etc. Ruee. 12.

narrative triptych: the Judas kiss Judas had given them a token saying:
Whomsoever I kiss, he it is, take him and lead him away. And as soon as he
was come, he goes to him and says: Master, master, etc. Mark. 14.

typological diptych Joad took Abner aside peaceably, and smote him under the
ribbe that he died. etc. 2. Sam. 3. Simon to redeem Jonathan, sends money and
the children to Triphon etc. 1. Macha. 13.

narrative triptych: the scourging of Jesus The Jews spate Christ in his face,
and buffeted him saying: Prophecy unto us O Christ who is he that smote thee?
Peter sat without in the hall, and a maid, etc Math. 26.

typological diptych When Cham the father, of Chanaan saw the nakedness of his
father, he told his two brethren, etc Genesis 10 Heliseus is mocked of little
children crying unto him: Come up thou baldhead, etc. 4. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: the release of Barabbas Pilate let Barrabas lose unto the^
and scourged Jesus, and delivered him to be crucified Then the soldiers of
the governor took Jesus in to the common hall, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych The plowers plowed upon my back, and furrows long did
cast, etc. Psalm. 131. Satan smoke Job with sore boyles fed the soul of his
foot etc. Job. 2.

narrative triptych: mocking of Jesus And the soldiers platted a crown of
thorn upon his hend, and a reed in his right hand, and bowed their knees
before him and mocked him, saying: God save, etc. Math. 27

typological diptych When thou have done all thy duty, sit down that thou
may receue a crown etc. Eccle. 32. Abner said unto David, who art thou that
criest to the king, etc. 1. Sam. 26.

narrative triptych: Pilate washes his hands Pilate took water and washed his
hands before the multitude, saying: I am innocent of the death of this just
man, look you to it. Then answered all the people, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych Jezabell sent a messenger unto Helias saying The Gods do
so to me etc. 3. Reg. 19. Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel and
cast, etc. Dan. 6.

narrative triptych: the crucifixion And Jesus bare his cross and came into a
place named Golgotha, where they crucified him and two other with him on either
side one, and Jesus in the midst of them, etc. John. 19.

typological diptych Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it
upon Isaac his son, etc. Gene. 22. Behold the widow was there gathering
sticks, and Eliah called her, and said, etc. 3. Reg. 17.

narrative triptych: the crucifixion And when they were come to the place which
is called Caluarie, there they crucified him and the evil doers, one on the
right hand, and the other on the left, etc. Luke. 23.

typological diptych Tubultaim wrought cunningly every craft of brass and
iron, etc. Genesis 4. Esaias the prophet was cut in the midst with a saw, and fasted
on a tree, etc.

narrative triptych: the spear One of the soldiers with a spear pierced his
side. and forth with ran there out blood and water. And he that saw it bare
record and his record is true. And he that etc. John. 19.

typological diptych With the ribbe which the Lord God had taken from the man,
etc Genesis 2. The Lord said to Moses Thou shall smite the rock and water, etc
Exo. 17

narrative triptych: the burial of Jesus Joseph took the body and wrapped it it
in a clean linen cloth, and laid it in his new tomb which he had hewn out
even in the rock and rolled a great stone to the door, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych As Soon as the sun was down, Josne commands that
they, etc. Josu. 8 Then they arose and went all night, and took the body, etc.
1. Sam. 31

narrative triptych: the Mary's watch There was Mary Magdalene and the other
Mary sitting over against the sepulcher. The next day that followed the day of
preparing, the hie priests and Pharisees, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych She wepeth continually in the night, and her tears. etc.
Lamen. 1. Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara for the lord has given. etc.
Ruth. 1.

narrative triptych: burial of Jesus He laid it in a tomb hewn out of a rock
wherein was never man yet laid. And that day was the preparing of the Saboth,
and the Saboth drue on. The women that followed after etc. Luke. 23.

typological diptych When Joseph was come to his brethren, they stripped him,
etc. Genesis 37. So they took up Jonas and cast him into the sea and the sea, etc.
Jonas.

narrative triptych: resurrection For fear of him the kepers were astonished and
became as dead men. But the Angel said to The women: Fear not, for I know you
seek Jesus which was crucified, etc. Math. 28.

typological diptych Samson arose at midnight and took the doors, etc. Judicum.
16. And the Lord spoke unto the fish and it cast out Jonas, etc. Jonas. 2.

narrative triptych: post-resurrection appearance Jesus appeared first to Mary
Magdalene out of whom he had cast vii. devils. And she went and told them that
had been with him which mourned, etc. Mar. 16

typological diptych The king said unto Daniell: O Daniel the servant, etc.
Daniel. 6. When I had past a little from them, then I found him, etc. Cant. 3.

narrative triptych: doubting Thomas Jesus said to Thomas put thy finger here
and see my hands and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not
faythlesse, etc. John. 20.

typological diptych And Jacob called the name of the place Peniell, etc. Genesis
32. Gedeon answered: the Lord be with us why then, etc. Jud. 6.

narrative triptych: ascension So after the Lord had spoken unto them he was
received into heaven and sat at the right hand of God. And they went forth and
preached, etc. Mar. 16

typological diptych And Enoch walked with God, and he was no more seen, for
God took him away, etc. Genesis 5. There appeared a charet of fire, and horses of
fire, so Elias went up by a whirlwinde, etc. 2. Reg. 2

narrative triptych: the Canaanite woman Behold a woman a Cananite, came out of
the sea coasts, and cried, saying unto him: Have mercy on me O Lord, etc.
Math. 15.

typological diptych A certain man was diseased 38. years, when Jesus saw him
lie and knew, etc. John. 5. And in the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went
unto them, walkyng on the sea, etc. Math. 14.

narrative triptych: the angels at the tomb Mary stood at the sepulcher
weeping, and as she wept, she bowed her self into the sepulcher and saw two
angels in white sitting, the one etc. John. 20.

typological diptych Ruben returned to the pit, and behold Joseph was not in
the pit, etc. Genesis 37. I will seek him that my soul loves: I sought him but
I found him not, etc. Cant. 3.

narrative triptych: birth of Mary The birth of blessed Mary the virgin the
mother of Christ, etc.



typological diptych There shall come a rod forth of the stock of Jesse, and a
graffe, etc. Esaias. 11. There shall come a star of Jacob, and a scepter shall
rise of Israel, etc. Number. 24.

narrative triptych: Mary and Joseph Mary the mother of Jesu botrothed to
Joseph her husband, before they came together, was found with child by the
holy ghost. The^ Joseph her husband being a just man, etc Math. 1.

typological diptych But thou shall go unto my fathers house, and to my kindred,
and take a wife, etc. Genesis 24. I will speak for her that she may be given thee
to wife. For to thee does the right of her, etc. Cob. 6.

narrative triptych: annunciation And in the vi month the Angel Gabriell was
sent from God to a city in Galile, named Nazareth, to a virgin affianced to a
man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, etc. Luke. 1.

typological diptych The seed of the woman shall tread upon the held of the
serpent Genesis 3. The angel said to him, the Lord is with thee thou valiant man.
Judges. 6.

narrative triptych: John the Baptist And Mary arose and went with have into
the hilly country to a city of Juda, and entered into the house of Zacharias
and saluted Elizabeth. And it came to pass, etc. Luke. i.

typological diptych And Moses returned to Jethro his father in law and said
to him. I pray, etc. Exo. 4. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my sprite does
rejoice in God my savior. Luke. 1.

narrative triptych: nativity When the days were accomplished, Mary brought
forth her first begotten son and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid
him in the manger because there was no room, etc. Lu. 2.

typological diptych Put thy shoes of thy feet for the place whereon thou
stand, is holy ground. Exodus 3. Aarons rod being put in the tabernacle did
blossom and I will make cease etc. Number. 17.

narrative triptych: circumcision And when the viii. days were accomplished,
that they should circumcise the child, his name Was then called Jesus, which
was so named of the Angel, before he was concerned, etc. Luke. 2.

typological diptych Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight
days old, as God had commanded him, etc. Genesis 21 Let every manchild among you
be circumcised. That is, ve shall circumcise the foreskin of your flesh, etc.
Genesis 17

narrative triptych: Magi and Herod Where is the king of the Jews that is
borne, for we have seen his star in the East, and are come to worship him.
When Herod the king heard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem, etc. Math.
2.

typological diptych Abner said to David, make covenant with me, and behold,
mine hand shall be with thee, etc. 2. Sam. 3. The Queen of Saba bring gifts to
Jerusalem to Solomon, with a very great train, etc. 3. Reg. 10.

narrative triptych: purification of Mary When the days of Purification after
the law of Moses, were accomplished, they brought Jesus to Jerusalem to present
him to the lord, as it is written in the law of the lord, Luke. 2.

typological diptych God said to Moses, sanctify unto me all the first borne,
that open all manner matrices among the children, etc. Exo. 13. Anna bare a
son and brought him into the house of the Lord in Siloh, and the child was
young, etc. 1. Sam. 1.

narrative triptych: flight into Egypt Arise and take the babe and his mother
and fly into Egypt, and be there till I bring thee word, for Herod will seek
the babe to destroy him. So he arose and took the babe and his mother, etc.
Math. 2

typological diptych Behold, thy brother Esau is comforted against thee,
meaning to kill thee. Genesis 27. Michaell spoke unto David: If thou save not thy
self this night to morrow, etc. 1. Sa. 19

narrative triptych He shall break down their altars, he shall destroy their
images. For now they shall say, we have no king because we feared not the Lord,
and what should a king do to us? Ose. 10.

typological diptych Moses cast the tables out of his hands and brake them in
pieces because of their idolatry, etc. Exo. 32. The Philistines find Dagon
fallen down before the ark of the Lord etc. 1. Sam. 5.

narrative triptych: slaying of the innocents Herod caused all male children
to be slain that were in Bethlehem and in all the costs thereof From two year
old and under, according to the time which he had diligently searched, etc.
Mat. 2.

typological diptych Saul said to Doeg, turn thou and fall upon the priests.
And Doeg the Edomite turned, etc. 1. Sa. 22 Athalia seeing her son to be dead,
destroyed all the kings seed. But Jehosheba, etc. 4. Reg. 11.

narrative triptych: return from Egypt The Angel said to Joseph: Arise and take
the babe and his mother, and go into the land of Israel, for they are dead
which sought the babes life, Then he arose and took the babe etc. Mat. 2

typological diptych God spoke to Jacob, Get thee out of this country. Jacob
took all his goods and cartell. etc. Genesis 31. David asked counsel of the
Lord, saying: Shall I go up into any cities of Judah, etc. 1. Sam. 2.

narrative triptych: baptism of Jesus And Jesus when he was baptized, came
straight out of the water. And lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and John
saw the spirit of God descending like a dove, etc. Math. 3.

typological diptych Lift up thy rod and stretch out thine hand upon the
sea, etc. Exodus. 14. They cut down a branche with one cluster of grapes,
and bear it upon, etc. Number. 13.

narrative triptych: temptation of Christ The tempter came to Christ saying: If
thou be the son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he
aunswering, said, it is written, Man shall not live by bread only, etc. Math. 4.

typological diptych Esau sells his brith right for a mess of portage, etc.
Genesis 25. The woman seeing the tree to be pleasant, took of the fruit, etc. Genesis
3.

narrative triptych: raising of Lazarus Christ cried with a loud voice, Legarus
come forth. Then he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with bands
and his face was bound with a napkin. Jesus said unto them, etc. John. 11.

typological diptych Helias stretched himself upon the child, and the Lord
heard the voice of Helias, etc. 3. Reg. 17. Heliseus coming into the house,
and behold, the child was dead, and he stretched, etc. 4. Reg. 4.

narrative triptych: transfiguration He was transfigured before them, and his
face did shine as the sun, and his clothes were as white as the light. And
behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias, etc. Math. 17.

typological diptych Abraham said, Lord if I have now found favor in thy
sight, etc. Genesis 18. Nabuchadneser answered: Lo I see four men loose walkyng
in the midst of the fire. Dan. 3.

narrative triptych: Mary Magdalene Jesus said, Many sins are forgeuen her,
for she loved much. To whom a little is forgeuen* he does love a little. And he
said unto her, Thy sins are forgeuen thee, etc. Luke. 7

typological diptych David said to Nathan: I have sinned against the Lord, etc.
2. Sam. 12. Aaron looked upon Miriam, and behold, she was leprous. Number. 12

narrative triptych: lamentation over Jerusalem When Christ came nere Jerusalem
he beheld the city and wept for it, saying: O if thou had even known at the
lest in this thy day those things which belong onto thy peace etc. Luke. 19.

typological diptych Who shall have picie then upon thee, O Jerusalem or who,
etc. Jere. 15. Their feasts are turued into lamentation, there altats, etc. 1.
Macha. 1.

narrative triptych: the triumphal entry Christ riding to Jerusalem, many spread
their garments in the way, other cut down branches of the trecs and strawed
them in the way. And they that went before, and they that followed, etc Mark. 11

typological diptych The women sang by course in their play, and said: etc. 1.
Sam. 28 The children of the prophets came to meet Helisha, etc. 4. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: cleansing of the temple Jesus went into the temple and
began to cast out them that sold and bought, saying unto them it is written,
Mine house is the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. Luke.
19

typological diptych Is this house become a den of thieves, whereupon, etc.
Jere. 7. Mine house shall be called a house of prayer for all people, etc.
Esaias. 56.

narrative triptych: plots against Jesus The chief priests and the Scribes
and the Elders of the people, consulted how they might take Jesus by suttletie
and kill him. But they said, not on the feast day, least any uproar, etc. Math.
26

typological diptych When Josephes brethren saw him a far of, etc. Genesis 37.
Absolon rose up early and stood hard by the, etc. 2. Sam. 15.

narrative triptych: thirty pieces of silver They appointed unto him thirty
pieces of silver, and from that time Judas sought opportunity to betray Christ
his master. Now on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, etc. Math.
26

typological diptych Judas said: Come let us sell him to the Ismalites, etc.
Genesis 37. So Jeseph was brought down into Egypt, and Potiphar, etc. Genesis 39.

narrative triptych: last supper Jesus at his last supper as they did eat,
took bread, and when he had given thanks brake it. and gave it to his
disciples, saying: Take, eat, this is my body, etc. Math. 26.

typological diptych Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine, and he, etc.
Genesis 37. Moses said to the people of Israel: This is that bread, etc. Exo. 16.

narrative triptych: Gethsemane Jesus said: all ye shall be offended by me this
night, etc. He said moreover unto them, sit ye here while I go and pray
yonder. And he took Peter and the two sons etc. Math. 26.

typological diptych I saw all Israel scattred as sheep that had no
shepeheard, etc. 3. Reg. 22. Helisha said: behold thou shall see it with thine
eyes, but thou, etc. 4. Reg. 7.

narrative triptych: betrayal of Christ Jesus knowing all things that should
come, went forth and said unto them Whom seek ye? They answered him Jesus of
Nazareth, Jesus answered I am he. Judas also etc. John. 18.

typological diptych The foolish virgineg came also saying Lord Lord, etc.
Math. 25. The great Dragon that old serpent was cast out, etc. Reave. 12.

narrative triptych: the Judas kiss Judas had given them a token saying:
Whomsoever I kiss, he it is, take him and lead him away. And as soon as he
was come, he goes to him and faith: Master, master, etc. Mark. 14.

typological diptych Joab took Abner aside peaceably, and smote him under the
ribbe that he died. etc. 2. Sam. 3. Simon to redeem Jonathan, sends money and
the children to Triphon etc. 1. Macha. 13.

narrative triptych: the scourging of Jesus The Jews spate Christ in his face,
and buffeted him saying: Prophecy unto us O Christ who is he that smote thee?
Peter sat without in the hall, and a maid, etc Math. 26.

typological diptych When Cham the father of Chanaan saw the nakedness of his
father, he told his two brethren, etc. Genesis 10. Heliseus is mocked of little
children crying unto him: Come up thou baldhead, etc. 4. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: the release of Barabbas Pilate let Barrabas lose unto the^
and scourged Jesus, and delivered him to be crucified Then the soldiers of
the governor took Jesus in to the common hall, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych The plowers plowed upon my back, and furrows long did
cast, etc. Psalm. iji. Satan smote Job with sore boyles from the soul of his
foot etc. Job. 2.

narrative triptych: mocking of Jesus And the soldiers platted a crown of
thorn upon his head, and a reed in his right hand, and bowed their knees
before him and mocked him, saying: God save, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych When thou have done all thy duty, sit down that thou
may receive a crown etc. Eccle. 32. Abner said unto David. who art thou that
criest to the king. etc. 1. Sam. 26.

narrative triptych: Pilate washes his hands Pilate took water and washed his
hands before the multitude, saying: I am innocent of the death of this just
man, look you to it. Then answered all the people, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych Jezabell sent a messenger unto Helias saying The Gods do
so to me etc. 3. Reg. 19. Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel and
cast, etc. Dan. 6.

narrative triptych: the crucifixion And Jesus bear his cross and came into a
place named Gol gotha, where they crucified him and two other with him on
either side one, and Jesus in the midst of them, etc. John. 19.

typological diptych Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it
upon Isaac his son, etc. Gene. 22. Behold the widow was there gathering
sticks, and Eliah called her, and said, etc. 3. Reg. 17.

narrative triptych: the crucifixion And when they were come to the place which
is called Caluarie, there they crucified him and the evil doers, one on the
right hand, and the other on the left, etc. Luke. 23.

typological diptych Tubultaim wrought cunningly every craft of brass and
iron, etc. Genesis 4. Esaias the prophet was cut in the midst with a saw, and fasted
on a tree, etc.

narrative triptych: the spear One of the souldiwith a spear pierced his side,
and forth with ran there out blood and water. And he that saw it bare record
and his record is true. And he that etc. John. 19.

typological diptych With the ribbe which the Lord God had taken from the man,
etc. Genesis 2. The Lord said to Moses. Thou shall smite the rock and water, etc.
Exodus 17.

narrative triptych: the burial of Jesus Joseph took the body and wrapped it it
in a clean linen cloth, and laid it in his new tomb which he had hewn out
even in the rock and rolled a great stone to the door, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych As Soon as the sun was down, Josue commands that
they, etc. Josu. 8 Then they arose and went all night, and took the body, etc.
1. Sam. 31

narrative triptych: the Mary's watch There was Mary Magdalene and the other
Mary sitting over against the sepulcher. The nert day that followed the day of
preparing, the hie priests and Pharisees, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych She wepeth continually in the night, and her tears. etc.
Lamen. 1. Call me not Naomi but call me Mara, for the lord has given, etc.
Ruth. 1.

narrative triptych: burial of Jesus He laid it in a tomb hewn out of a rock
wherein was never man yet laid. And that day was the preparing of the Saboth,
and the Saboth drue on. The women that followed after etc. Luke. 23.

typological diptych When Joseph was come to his brethren, they stripped him,
etc. Genesis 37. So they took up Jonas and cast him into the sea and the sea, etc.
Jonas. 1.

narrative triptych: resurrection For fear of him the kepers were astonished and
became as dead men. But the Angel said to the women: Fear not, for I know you
seek Jesus which was crucified, etc. Math. 28.

typological diptych Samson arose at midnight and took the doors, etc. Judicum.
16. And the Lord spoke unto the fish and it cast out Jonas, etc. Jouas. 2.

narrative triptych: post-resurrection appearance Jesus appeared first to Mary
Magdalene out of whom he had cast vij. devils. And she went and told them that
had been with him which mourned, etc. Mar. 16

typological diptych The king said unto Daniell: O Daniel the servant, etc.
Daniel. 6. When I had past a little from them, then I found him, etc. Cant. 3.

narrative triptych: doubting Thomas Jesus said to Thomas put thy finger here
and see my hands and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not
faythlesse, etc. John. 20.

typological diptych And Jacob called the name of the place Peniell, etc. Genesis
32. Gedeon aunsuered: If the Lord be with us, why then, etc. Jud. 6.

narrative triptych: ascension So after the Lord had spoken unto them he was
received into heaven and sat at the right hand of God. And they went forth and
preached, etc. Mar. 16

typological diptych And Enoch walked with God and he was no more seen, for God
took him away, etc. Genesis 5. There appeared a charet of fire, and horses of
fire, so Elias went up by a whirle wind, etc. 2. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: birth of Mary The birth of blessed Mary the virgin the
mother of Christ, etc.



typological diptych There shall come a rod forth of the stock of Jesse, and a
graffe, etc. Esaias. 11. There shall come a sta^ of Jacob, and a scepter shall
rise of Israel, etc. Number. 24.

narrative triptych: Mary and Joseph Mary the mother of Jesus betrothed to
Joseph her husband, before they came together, was found with child by the
holy ghost. The^ Joseph her husband being a just man, etc Math. 1.

typological diptych But thou shall go unto my fathers house, and to my kindred,
and take a wife, etc. Genesis 24. I will speak for her that she may be given thee
to wife. For to thee does the right of her, etc. Tob. 6.

narrative triptych: annunciation And in the vi month the Angel Gabriell was
sent from God to a city in Galile, named Nazareth, to a virgin affianced to a
man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, etc. Luke. 1.

typological diptych The seed of the woman shall tread upon the head of the
serpent Genesis 3. The angel said to him, the Lord is with thee thou valiant man.
Judges. 6.

narrative triptych: John the Baptist And Mary arose and went with have into
the hilly country to a city of Juda, and entered into the house of Zacharias
and saluted Elizabeth. And it came to pass, etc. Luke. 1.

typological diptych And Moses returned to Jethro his father in law and said
to him, I pray, etc. Exo. 4. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my sprite does
rejoice in God my savior. Luke. 1.

narrative triptych: nativity When the days were accomplished, Mary brought
forth her first begotten son and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid
him in the manger because there was no room, etc. Lu. 2.

typological diptych Put thy shoes of thy feet for the place whereon thou
stand, is holy ground. Exodus 3. Aarons rod being put in the tabernacle did
blossom and I will make cease etc. Number. 17.

narrative triptych: circumcision And when the viii. days were accomplished,
that they should circumcise the child, his name was then called Jesus, which
was so named of the Angel, before he was conceived, etc. Luke. 2.

typological diptych Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight
days old, as God had commanded him, etc. Genesis 21 Let every manchild among you
be circumcised. That is, ye shall circumcise the foreskin of your flesh, etc.
Genesis 17

narrative triptych: Magi and Herod Where is the king* of the Jews that is
borne, for we have seen his star in the East, and are come to worship him.
When Herod the king heard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem etc. Mark.
2.

typological diptych Abner said to David, make covenant with me, and behold,
mine hand shall be with thee, etc. 2. Sam. 3. The Queen of Saba bring gifts to
Jerusalem to Solomon, with a very great train, etc. 3. Reg. 10.

narrative triptych: purification of Mary When the days or Purification after
the law of Moses, were accomplished, they brought Jesus to Jerusalem to present
him to the lord, as it is written in the law of the lord, Luke. 2.

typological diptych God said to Moses, sanctify unto me all the first borne,
that open all manner matrices among the children, etc. Exo. 13. Anna bare a
son and brought him into the house of the Lord in Siloh, and the child was
young, etc. 1. Sam. 1.

narrative triptych: flight into Egypt Arise and take the babe and his mother
and fly into Egypt, and be there till I bring thee word, for Herod will seek
the babe to destroy him. So he arose and took the babe and his mother, etc.
Math. 2

typological diptych Behold, thy brother Esau is comforted against thee,
meaning to kill thee. Genesis 27. Michaell spoke unto David: If thou save not thy
self this night to morrow, etc. 1. Sa. 19

narrative triptych He shall break down their altars, he shall destroy their
images. For now they shall say, we have no king because we feared not the Lord,
and what should a king do to us? Ose. 10.

typological diptych Moses cast the tables out of his hands and brake them in
pieces because of their idolatry, etc. Exo. 32 The Philistines find Dagon
fallen down before the ark of the Lord etc. 1. Sam. 5.

narrative triptych: slaying of the innocents Herod caused all male children
to be slain that were in Bethlehem and in all the costs thereof from two year
old and under, according to the time which he had diligently searched, etc
Mat. 2.

typological diptych Saul said to Doeg, turn thou and fall upon the priests.
And Doeg the Edomite turned, etc. 1. Sa. 22 Athalia seeing her son to be dead,
destroyed all the kings seed. But Jehosheba, etc. 4. Reg. 11.

narrative triptych: baptism of Jesus And Jesus when he was baptized, came
straight out of the water. And lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and John
saw the spirit of God descending like a dove, etc. Math. 3.

typological diptych Litt up thy rod and stretch out thine hand upon the
sea, etc. Exodus. 14. They cut down a branche with one cluster of grapes,
and bear it upon. etc. Number. 13.

narrative triptych: return from Egypt The Angel said to Joseph: Arise and take
the babe and his mother and go into the land of Israel, for they are dead which
sought the babes life. Then he arose and took the babe etc. Mat. 2

typological diptych God spoke to Jacob, Get thee out of this country. Jacob
took all his goods and cattle etc. Genesis 31. David asked counsel of the Lord,
saying: Shall I go up into any cities of Judah, etc. 2. Sam. 2.

narrative triptych: temptation of Christ The tempter came to Christ saying: If
thou be the son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he
aunswering, said, it is written, Man shall not live by bread only, etc. Math. 4.

typological diptych Esau sells his birth right for a mess of pottage, etc.
Genesis 25. The woman seeing the tree to be pleasant, took of the fruit, etc. Genesis
3.

narrative triptych: raising of Lazarus Christ cried with a loud voice, Lazarus
come forth. Then he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with bands
and his face was bound with a napkin. Jesus said unto them, etc. John. 11.

typological diptych Helias stretched himself upon the child, and the Lord
heard the voice of Helias, etc. 3. Reg. 17. Heliseus coming into the house,
and behold, the child was dead, and he stretched, etc. 4. Reg. 4.

narrative triptych: transfiguration He was transfigured before them, and his
face did shine as the sun, and his clothes were as white as the light. And
behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias, etc. Math. 17.

typological diptych Abraham said, Lord if I have now found favor in thy
sight. etc. Genesis 18. Nabuchadnesee answered: Lo I see four men loose walking
in the midst of the fire. Dan. 3.

narrative triptych: Mary Magdalene Jesus said, Many sins are forgeuen her,
for she loved much. To whom a little is forgeuen, he does love a little. And he
said unto her, Thy sins are forgeuen thee, etc. Luke. 7

typological diptych David said to Nathan: I have sinned against the Lord, etc.
2. Sam. 12 Baron looked upon Miriam, and behold, she was leprous. Number. 12

narrative triptych: lamentation over Jerusalem When Christ came nere Jerusalem
he beheld the city and wept for it, saying: O if thou had even known at the
lest in this thy day those things which belong unto thy peace etc. Luke. 19.

typological diptych Who shall have pity then upon thee, O Jerusalem or who,
etc. Jere. 15. Their feasts are turned into lamentation, their altars, etc, 1.
Macha. 1.

narrative triptych: the triumphal entry Christ riding to Jerusalem, many spread
their garments in the way, other cut down branches of the trees and strawed
them in the way. And they that went before, and they that followed, etc Mark. 11

typological diptych The women sang by course in their play, and said: etc. 1.
Sam. 28 The children of the propheres came to meet Helisha, etc. 4. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: cleansing of the temple Jesus went into the temple and
began to cast out them that sold and bought, saying unto them it is written,
Mine house is the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. Luke.
19

typological diptych Is this house become a denue of thieves, whereupon, etc.
Jere. 7. Mine house shall be called a house of prayer for all people, etc.
Esaias. 56.

narrative triptych: plots against Jesus The chief priests and the Scribes
and the Elders of the people, consulted how they might take Jesus by suttletie
and kill him. But they said, not on the feast day, least any uproar, etc. Math.
26

typological diptych When Josephes brethren saw him a far of, etc. Genesis 37
Absolon rose up early and stood hard by the, etc. 2. Sam. 15.

narrative triptych: thirty pieces of silver They appointed unto him thirty
pieces of silver, and from that time Judas sought opportunity to betray Christ
his master. Now on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, etc. Math.
26

typological diptych Judas said: Come let us sell him to the Ismalites, etc.
Genesis 37 So Joseph was brought down into Egypt, and Potiphar, etc. Genesis 39.

narrative triptych: last supper Jesus at his last supper as they did eat,
took bread, and when he had given thanks brake it, and gave it to his
disciples, saying: Take, eat, this is my body, etc. Math. 26.

typological diptych Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine, and he, etc.
Genesis 37. Moses said to the people of Israel: This is that bread, etc. Exo. 16

narrative triptych: Gethsemane Jesus said: all ye shall be offended by me this
night etc. He said moreover unto them, sit ye here while I go and pray
yonder. And he took Peter and the two sons etc. Math. 26.

typological diptych I saw all Israel scad^red sheep that had no shepeheard,
etc. 3. Reg. 22. Helisha said: behold thou shall see it with thine eyes but
thou, etc. 4. Reg. 7

narrative triptych: betrayal of Christ Jesus knowing all things that should
come, went forth and said unto them whom seek ye? They answered him Jesus of
Nazareth, Jesus answered I am he. Judas also etc. John. 18.

typological diptych The foolish virgins came also saying, Lord Lord, etc.
Math. 25. The great Dragon that old serpent was cast out, etc. Ruee. 12.

narrative triptych: the Judas kiss Judas had given them a token saying:
Whomsoever I kiss, he it is, take him and lead him away. And as soon as he
was come, he goes to him and says: Master, master, etc. Mark. 14.

typological diptych Joab took Abner aside peaceably, and smote him under the
ribbe that he died. etc. 2. Sam. 3. Simon to redeem Jonathan, sends money and
the children to Triphon etc. 1. Macha. 13.

narrative triptych: the scourging of Jesus The Jews spate Christ in his face,
and buffeted him saying: Prophecy unto us O Christ who is he that smote thee?
Peter sat without in the hall, and a maid, etc Math. 26.

typological diptych When Cham the father of Chanaan saw the nakedness of his
father, he told his two brethren, etc Genesis 10 Heliseus is mocked of little
children crying unto him: Come up thou baldhead, etc. 4. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: the release of Barabbas Pilate let Barrabas lose unto the^
and scourged Jesus, and delivered him to be crucified Then the soldiers of
the governor took Jesus in to the common hall, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych The plowers plowed upon my back, and furrows long did
cast, etc. Psalm. 131. Satan smote Job with sore boyles from the soul of his
foot etc. Job. 2.

narrative triptych: mocking of Jesus And the soldiers platted a crown of
thorn upon his head, and a reed in his right hand, and bowed their knee
before him and mocked him, saying: God save, etc. Math. 27

typological diptych When thou have done all thy duty, sit down that thou
may receue a crown etc. Eccle. 32 Abner said unto David, who art thou that
criest to the king, etc. 1. Sam. 26.

narrative triptych: Pilate washes his hands Pilate took water and washed his
hands before the multitude, saying: I am innocent of the death of this just
man, look you to it. Then answered all the people, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych Jezabell sent a messenger unto Helias saying The Gods do
so to me etc. 3. Reg. 19. Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel and
cast, etc. Dan. 6.

narrative triptych: the crucifixion And Jesus bare his cross and came into a
place named Golgotha, where they crucified him and two other with him on either
side one, and Jesus in the midst of them, etc. John. 19.

typological diptych Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it
upon Isaac his son, etc. Gene. 22. Behold the widow was there gathering
sticks, and Eliah called her, and said, etc. 3. Reg. 17.

narrative triptych: the crucifixion And when they were come to the place which
is called Caluarie, there they crucified him and the evil doers, one on the
right hand, and the other on the left, etc. Luke. 23.

typological diptych Tubultaim wrought cunningly every craft of brass and
iron, etc. Genesis 4. Esaias the prophet was cut in the midst with a saw, and fasted
on a tree, etc.

narrative triptych: the spear One of the soldiers with a spear pierced his
side, and forthwith ran there our blood and water. And he that saw it bare
record and his record is true. And he that etc. John. 19.

typological diptych With the ribbe which the Lord God had taken from the man,
etc Genesis 2. The Lord said to Moses Thou shall smite the rock and water, etc
Exo. 17

narrative triptych: the burial of Jesus Joseph took the body and wrapped it in
a clean linen cloth, and laid it in his new tomb which he had hewn out even
in the rock and rolled a great stone to the door, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych As Soon as the sun was down, Josne commands that
they, etc. Josu. 8 Then they arose and went all night, and took the body, etc.
1. Sam. 31

narrative triptych: the Mary's watch There was Mary Magdalene and the other
Mary sitting over against the sepulcher. The next day that followed the day of
preparing, the hie priests and Pharisees, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych She wepeth continually in the night, and her tears. etc.
Lamen. 1. Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara, for the lord has given, etc.
Ruth. 1.

narrative triptych: burial of Jesus He laid it in a tomb hewn out of a rock
wherein was never man yet laid. And that day was the preparing of the Saboth,
and the Saboth drue on. The women that followed after etc. Luke. 23.

typological diptych When Joseph was come to his brethren, they stripped him,
etc. Genesis 37. So they took up Jonas and cast him into the sea and the sca, etc.
Jonas.

narrative triptych: resurrection For fear of him the kepers were astonished and
became as dead men. But the Angel said to the women: Fear not, for I know you
seek Jesus which was crucified, etc. Math. 28.

typological diptych Samson arose at midnight and took the doors, etc. Judicum.
16. And the Lord spoke unto the fish and it cast out Jonas, etc. Jonas. 2.

narrative triptych: post-resurrection appearance Jesus appeared first to Mary
Magdalene out of whom he had cast vij. devils. And she went and told them that
had been with him which mourned, etc. Mar. 16

typological diptych The king said unto Daniell: O Daniel the servant, etc.
Daniel. 6. When I had past a little from them, then I found him, etc. Cant. 3.

narrative triptych: doubting Thomas Jesus said to Thomas put thy finger here
and see my hands and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not
faythlesse, etc. John. 20.

typological diptych And Jacob called the name of the place Peniell, etc. Genesis
32. Gedeon answered: he Lord be with us why then, etc. Jud. 6.

narrative triptych: ascension So after the Lord had spoken unto them he was
received into heaven and sat at the right hand of God. And they went forth and
preached, etc. Mar. 16

typological diptych Ano Enoch walked with God, and he was no more seen, for
God took him away, etc. Genesis 5. There appeared a charet of fire, and horses of
fire, so Elias went up by a whirlwind. etc 2. Reg. 2

narrative triptych: the Canaanite woman Behold a woman a Cananite, came out of
the sea coasts, and cried, saying unto him: Have mercy on me O Lord, etc.
Math. 15.

typological diptych A certain man was diseased 38. years, when Jesus saw him
lie and knew, etc. John. 5. And in the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went
unto them, walkyng on the sea, etc Math. 14

narrative triptych: the angels at the tomb Mary stood at the sepulcher
weeping, and as she wept, she bowed her self into the sepulcher and saw two
angels in white sitting, the one etc. John. 20.

typological diptych Ruben returned to the pit, and behold Joseph was not in
the pit, etc. Genesis 37. I will seek him that my soul loves: I sought him but
I found him not, etc. Cant. 3.

narrative triptych: miracle of loaves and fishes And he took the v. loaves
and two fishes and looked up to heaven and blessed, and brake, and gave the
loaves to his disciples and the disciples, etc. Math. 14.

typological diptych He that is without fault let him cast the first stone,
etc. John. 8. Jesus seeing their faith, said to the sick of the palsy, son,
etc. Math. 9.

narrative triptych: birth of Mary The birth of blessed Mary the virgin the
mother of Christ, etc.



typological diptych There shall come a rod forth of the stock of Jesse, and a
graffe, etc. Esaias. 11. There shall come a star of Jacob, and a scepter shall
rise of Israel: etc Number. 24.

narrative triptych: Mary and Joseph Mary the mother of Jesu betrothed to
Joseph her husband, before they came together, was found with child by the
holy ghost. The^ Joseph her husband being a just man, etc Math. 1.

typological diptych But thou shall go unto my fathers house, and to my kindred,
and take a wife, etc. Genesis 24. I will speak for her that she may be given there
to wife. For to thee does the light of ber, etc. Tob. 6

narrative triptych: annunciation And in the vi month the Angel Gabriell was
sent from God to a city in Galile, named Nazareth, to a virgin affianced to a
man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, etc. Luke. 1.

typological diptych The seed of the woman shall tread upon the head of the
serpent Genesis 3. The angel said to him, the Lord is with thee thou valiant man.
Judges. 6

narrative triptych: John the Baptist And Mary arose and went with have into
the hilly country to a city of Juda, and entered into the house of Zacharias
and saluted Elizabeth. And it came to pass, etc. Luke. 1.

typological diptych And Moses returned to Jethro his father in law and said
to him, I pray, etc. Ero. 4. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my sprite does
rejoice in God my savior. Luke. 1.

narrative triptych: nativity When the days were accomplished, Mary brought
forth her first begotten son and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid
him in the manger because there was no room, etc. Lu. 2.

typological diptych Put thy shoes of thy feet for the place whereon thou
stand, is holy ground. Exodus 3. Aarons rod being put in the tabernacle did
blossom and I will make cease etc. Number. 17.

narrative triptych: circumcision And when the viii. days were accomplished,
that they should circumcise the child, his name was then called Jesus, which
was so named of the Angel, before he was conceived, etc. Luke. 2.

typological diptych Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight
days old, as God had commanded him, etc. Genesis 21 Let every manchild among you
be circumcised: That is, ye shall circumcise the foreskin of your flesh, etc.
Genesis 17

narrative triptych: Magi and Herod Where is the king of the Jews that is
borne, for we have sent his star in the East, and are come to worship him.
When Herod the king heard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem, etc. Math.
2.

typological diptych Abner said to David, make covenant with me, and behold,
mine hand shall be with thee, etc. 2. Sam. 3. The Queen of Saba bring gifts to
Jerusalem to Solomon, with a very great train, etc. 3. Reg. 10.

narrative triptych: purification of Mary When the days of Purification after
the law of Moses, were accomplished, they brought Jesus to Jerusalem to present
him to the lord, as it is written in the law of the lord, Luke. 2.

typological diptych God said to Moses, sanctify unto me all the first borne,
that open all manner matrices among the children, etc. Exo. 13. Anna bare a
son and brought him into the house of the Lord in Siloh, and the child was
young, etc. 1. Sam. 1.

narrative triptych: flight into Egypt Arise and take the babe and his mother
and fly into Egypt, and be there till I bring thee word, for Herod will seek
the babe to destroy him. So he arose and took the babe and his mother, etc
Math. 2

typological diptych Behold, thy brother Esau is comforted against thee,
meaning to kill thee. Genesis 27. Michaell spoke unto David: If thou save not thy
self this night to morrow, etc. 1. Sa. 19

narrative triptych He shall break down their altars, he shall destroy their
images. For now they shall say, we have no king because we feared not the Lord,
and what should a king do to us? Ose. 10.

typological diptych Moses cast the tables out of his hands and brake them in
pieces because of their idolatry, etc. Exo. 32 The Philistines find Dagon
fallen down before the ark of the Lord etc. 1. Sam. 5.

narrative triptych: slaying of the innocents Herod caused all male children
to be slain that were in Bethlehem and in all the costs thereof from two year
old and under, according to the time which he had diligently searched, etc.
Mat. 2.

typological diptych Saul said to Doeg, turn thou and fall upon the priests.
And Doeg the Edomite turned, etc. 1. Sa. 22 Athalia seeing her son to be dead,
destroyed all the kings seed. But Jehosheba, etc. 4. Reg. 11.

narrative triptych: baptism of Jesus And Jesus when he was baptized, came
straight out of the water. And lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and John
saw the spirit of God descending like a dove, etc. Math. 1.

typological diptych Lift up thy rod and stretch out thine hands upon the
sea, etc. Exodus. 14. They cut down a branche with one cluster of grapes,
and bear it upon, etc. Number. 13.

narrative triptych: return from Egypt The Angel said to Joseph: Arise and take
the babe and his mother and go into the land of Israel, for they are dead which
sought the babes life. Then he arose and took the babe etc. Mat. 2

typological diptych God spoke to Jacob, Get thee out of this country. Jacob
took all his goods and cattle. etc. Genesis 31. David asked counsel of the
Lord, saying: Shall I go up into any cities of Judah, etc. 2. Sam. 2.

narrative triptych: temptation of Christ The tempter came to Christ saying: If
thou be the son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he
aunswering, said, it is written, Man shall not live by bread only, etc. Math. 4.

typological diptych Esau sells his birth right for a mess of pottage, etc.
Genesis 25. The woman seeing the tree to be pleasant, took of the fruit, etc. Genesis
3.

narrative triptych: the raising of Lazarus Christ cried with a loud voice,
Lazarus come forth. Then he that was dead came forth. bound hand and foot with
bands and his face was bound with a napkin. Jesus said unto them, etc. John.
11.

typological diptych Helias stretched himself upon the child, and the Lord
heard the voice of Helias, etc. 3. Reg. 17. Heliseus coming into the house,
and behold, the child was dead, and he stretched, etc. 4. Reg. 4.

narrative triptych: transfiguration He was transfigured before them, and his
face did shine as the sun, and his clothes were as white as the light. And
behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias, etc. Math. 17.

typological diptych Abraham said, Lord if I have now found favor in thy
sight. etc. Genesis 18. Nabuchadneser answered: Lo I see four men loose walking
in the midst of the fire. Dan. 3.

narrative triptych: flight into Egypt Arise and take the babe and his mother
and fly into Egypt, and be there till I bring thee word, for Herod will seek
the babe to destroy him. So he arose and took the babe and his mother, etc.
Math. 2

typological diptych Behold, thy brother Esau is comforted against thee,
meaning to kill thee. Genesis 27. Michaell spoke unto David: If thou save not thy,
self this night to morrow, etc. 1. Sa. 19

narrative triptych He shall break down their altars, he shall destroy their
images. For now they shall say, we have no king because we feared not the Lord*
and what should a king do to us Ose. 10.

typological diptych Moses cast the tables out of his hands and brake them in
pieces because of their idolatry, etc. Exo. 32. The Philistines find Dagon
fallen down before the ark of the Lord etc. 1. Sam. 5.

narrative triptych: slaying of the innocents Herod caused all male children
to be slain that were in Bethlehem and in all the costs thereof from two year
old and under, according to the time which he had diligently searched, etc
Mat. 2.

typological diptych Saul said to Doeg, turn thou and fall upon the priests.
And Doeg the Ecomite turned, etc. 1. Sa. 22 Athalis sayng her son to be dead,
destroyed all the kings seed. But Jehosheba, etc. 4. Reg. 11.

narrative triptych: return from Egypt The angel said to Joseph: Arise and take
the babe and his mother and go into the land of Israel, for they are dead which
soughth the babes life, Then he arose and took the babe etc. Mat. 2

typological diptych God spoke to Jacob, Get thee out of this country. Jacob
took all his goods and cattle, etc. Genesis 31. David asked counsel of the
Lord, saying: Shall I go up into any cities of Judah, etc. 2. Sam. 2.

narrative triptych: baptism of Jesus And Jesus when he was baptized, came
straight out of the water. And lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and John
saw the spirit of God descending like a dove, etc. Math. 3.

typological diptych Lift up thy rod and stretch out thine hand upon the
sea, etc. Exodus. 14. They cut down a branche with one cluster of grapes,
and bear it upon, etc. Number. 13.

narrative triptych: temptation of Christ The tempter came to Christ saying: If
thou be the son of God, command that these stoues be made bread. But he
aunswering, said, it is written, Man shall not live by bread only, etc. Math. 4.

typological diptych Esau sells his birth right for a mess of pottage, etc.
Genesis 25. The woman seeing the tree to be pleasant, took of the fruit, etc. Genesis
3.

narrative triptych: raising of Lazarus Christ cried with a loud voice, Lazarus
come forth. Then he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with bands
and his face was bound with a napkin. Jesus said unto them, etc. John. 11.

typological diptych Helias stretched himself upon the child, and the Lord
heard the voice of Helias, etc. 3. Reg. 17. Heliseus coming into the house,
and behold, the child was dead, and he stretched, etc. 4. Reg. 4.

narrative triptych: transfiguration He was transfigured before them, and his
face did shine as the sun, and his clothes were as white as the light. And
behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias, etc. Math. 17.

typological diptych Abraham said, Lord if I have now found favor in thy
sight. etc. Genesis 18. Nabuchadneset answered: Lo I see four men loose walking
in the midst of the fire. Dan. 3

narrative triptych: Mary Magdalene Jesus said, Many sins are forgeuen her,
for she loved much. To whom a little is forgeuen. he does love a little. And he
said unto her, Thy sins are forgeuen thee, etc. Luke. 7

typological diptych David said to Nathan: I have sinned against the Lord, etc.
2. Sam. 12. Aaron looked upon Miriam and behold, she was leprous. Number. 12

narrative triptych: lamentation over Jerusalem When Christ came nere Jerusalem
he beheld the city and wept for it, saying: O if thou had even known at the
lest in this thy day those things which belong unto thy peace etc. Luke. 19.

typological diptych Who shall have pity then upon thee, O Jerusalem or who,
etc. Jere. 15. Their feasts are turned into lamentation, there altars, etc, 1.
Macha. 1.

narrative triptych: the triumphal entry Christ riding to Jerusalem, many spread
their garments in the way, other cut down branches of the trees and strawed
them in the way. And they that went before, and they that followed, etc Mark. 11

typological diptych The women sang by course in their play, and said: etc. 1.
Sam. 28 The children of the prophets came to meet Helisha, etc. 4. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: cleansing of the temple Jesus went into the temple and
began to cast out them that sold and bought, saying unto them it is written,
Mine house is the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. Luke.
10

typological diptych Is this house become a den of thieves whereupon, etc.
Jere. 7. Mine house shall be called, a house of prayer for all people, etc.
Esaias. 56.

narrative triptych: plots against Jesus The chief priests and the Scribes
and the Elders of the people, consulted how they might take Jesus by suttletie
and kill him. But they said, not on the feast day, least any uproar, etc. Math.
26

typological diptych When Josephes brethren saw him a far of, etc. Genesis 37.
Absolon rose up early and stood hard by the, etc. 2. Sam. 15.

narrative triptych: thirty pieces of silver They appointed unto him thirty
pieces of silver, and from that time Judas sought opportunity to betray Christ
his master. Now on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, etc. Math.
26

typological diptych Judas said: Come let us sell him to the Ismalites, etc.
Genesis 37. So Joseph was brought down into Egypt, and Potiphar, etc. Genesis 39.

narrative triptych: last supper Jesus at his last supper as they did eat,
took bread, and when he had given thanks brake it, and gave it to his
disciples, saying: Take, eat, this is my body, etc. Math. 26.

typological diptych Melchifedeth brought forth bread and wine, and he, etc.
Genesis 37. Moses said to the people of Israel? This is that bread, etc. Exo. 16

narrative triptych: Gethsemane Jesus said: all ye shall be offended by me this
night, etc. He said moreover unto them, sit ye here while I go and pray
yonder. And he took Peter and the two sons etc. Math. 26.

typological diptych I saw all Israel scattred as sheep that had no
shepeheard, etc. 3. Reg. 22. Helisha said: behold thou shall see it with thine
eyes, but thou, etc. 4. Reg. 7.

narrative triptych: betrayal of Christ Jesus knowing all things that should
come, went forth and said unto them Whom seek ye? They answered him Jesus of
Nazareth, Jesus answered I am he. Judas also etc. John. 18.

typological diptych The foolish virgins came also saying, Lord Lord, etc.
Math. 25. The great Dragon that old serpent was cast out, etc. Reave. 12.

narrative triptych: the Judas kiss Judas had given them a token saying:
whomsoever I kiss, he it is, take him and lead him away, and as soon as he
was come, he goes to him and says: Master, master, etc. Mark. 14.

typological diptych Joad took Abner aside peaceably, and smote him under the
ribbe that he died. etc. 2. Sam. 3. Simon to redeem Jonathan, sends money and
the children to Triphon etc. 1. Macha. 13.

narrative triptych: the scourging of Jesus The Jews spate Christ in his face,
and buffeted him saying: Prophecy unto us O Christ who is he that smote thee?
Peter sat without in the hall, and a maid, etc Math. 26.

typological diptych When Cham the rather of Chanaan saw the nakedness of his
father, he told his two brethren, etc. Genesis 10. Heliseus is mocked of little
children crying unto him: Come up thou baldhead, etc. 4. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: release of Barabbas Pilate let Barrabas lose unto the^ and
scourged Jesus, and delivered him to be crucified Then the soldiers of the
governor took Jesus in to the common hall, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych The plowers plowed upon my back, and furrows long did
cast, etc. Psalm. 131. Satan smote Job with sore boyles from the soul of his
foot etc. Job. 2.

narrative triptych: mocking of Jesus And the soldiers platted a crown of
chorne upon his head, and a reed in his right hand, and bowed their knees
before him and mocked him, saying: God save, etc. Math. 27

typological diptych When thou have done all thy duty, sit down that thou
may receue a crown etc. Eccle. 32. Abner said unto David, who art thou that
criest to the king, etc. 1. Sam. 26

narrative triptych: Pilate washes his hands Pilate took water and washed his
hands before the multitude, saying: I am innocent of the death of this just
man, look you to it. Then answered all the people. etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych Jezabeli sent a messenger unto Helias saying The Gods do
so to me etc. 3. Reg. 19. Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel and
cast, etc. Dan. 6.

narrative triptych: the crucifixion And Jesus bare his cross and came into a
place named Golgotha, where they crucified him and two other with him. in
either side one, and Jesus in the midst of them, etc. John. 19.

typological diptych Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering. and laid it
upon Isaac his son, etc. Gene. 22. Behold the widow was there gathering
sticks, and Eliah called her, and said, etc. 3. Reg. 17.

narrative triptych: the crucifixion And when they were come to the place which
is called Caluarie, there they crucified him and the evil doers, one on the
right hand, and the other on the left, etc. Luke. 23.

typological diptych Tubultaim wrought cunningly every craft of brass and
iron, etc. Genesis 4. Esaias the prophet was cut in the midst with a saw, and fasted
on a tree. etc.

narrative triptych: the spear One of the soldiers with a spear pierced his
side, and forthwith ran there out blood and water. And he that saw it bare
record and his record is true. And he that etc. John. 19.

typological diptych With the ribbe which the Lord God had taken from the man,
etc Genesis 2. The Lord said to Moses Thou shall smite the rock and water, etc
Exo. 17

narrative triptych: the burial of Jesus Joseph took the body and wrapped it it
in a clean linen cloth, and lard it in his new tomb which he had hewn out
even in the rock and rolled a great stone to the door, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych As Soon as the sun was down. Josue commands that
they, etc. Josu. 8 Then they arose and went all night, and took the body, etc.
1. Sam. 31

narrative triptych: the Mary's watch There was Mary Magdalene and the other
Mary sitting over against the sepulcher. The next day that followed the day of
preparing, the hie priests and Pharisees, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych She wepeth continually in the night, and her tears. etc.
Lamen. 1. Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara, for the lord has given, etc.
Ruth. 1.

narrative triptych: burial of Jesus He laid it in a tomb hewn out of a rock
wherein was never man yet laid. And that day was the preparing of the Saboth,
and the Saboth drue on. The women that followed after etc. Luke. 23.

typological diptych When Joseph was come to his brethren, they stripped him,
etc. Genesis 37. So they took up Jonas and cast him into the sea and the sea, etc.
Jonas. 1.

narrative triptych: resurrection For fear of him the kepers were astonished and
became as dead men. But the Angel said to the women: Fear not, for I know you
seek Jesus which was crucified, etc. Math. 28.

typological diptych Samson arose at midnight and took the doors, etc. Judicum.
16. And the Lord spoke unto the fish and it cast out Jonas, etc. Jonas. 2.

narrative triptych: post-resurrection appearance Jesus appeared first to Mary
Magdalene out of whom he had cast vij. devils. And she went and told them that
had been with him which mourned, etc. Mar. 16

typological diptych The king said unto Daniell: O Daniel the servant, etc.
Daniel. 6. When I had past a little from them, then I found him, etc. Cant. 3.

narrative triptych: doubting Thomas Jesus said to Thomas put thy finger here
and see my hands and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not
faythlesse, etc. John. 20.

typological diptych And Jacob called the name of the place Peniell, etc. Genesis
32. Gedeon answered: If the Lord be with us, why then, etc. Jud. 6.

narrative triptych: ascension So after the Lord had spoken unto them he was
received into heaven and sat at the right hand of God. And they went forth and
preached, etc. Mar. 16

typological diptych And Enoch walke^ ^ith God, and he was no more seen, for
God took him away, etc. Genesis ^ There appeared a charet o^ fire, and horses of
fire, so Elias went up by a whirleminde. 2. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: birth of Mary The birth of blessed Mary the virgin the
mother of Christ, etc.



typological diptych There shall come a rod forth of the stock of Jesse, and a
graffe, etc. Esaias. 11. There shall come a star of Jacob, and a scepter shall
rise of Israel, etc. Number. 24.

narrative triptych: Mary and Joseph Mary the mother of Jesu betrothed to
Joseph her husband, before they came together, was found with child by the
holy ghost. The^ Joseph her husband being a just man, etc. Math. 1.

typological diptych But thou shall go unto my fathers house, and to my kindred,
and take a wife, etc. Genesis 24. I will speak for her thac she may be given thee
to wife. For to thee does the right of her, etc. Tob. 6

narrative triptych: annunciation And in the vi month the Angel Gabriell was
sent from God to a city in Galile, named Nazareth, to a virgin affianced to a
man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, etc. Luke. 1.

typological diptych The seed of the woman shall tread upon the head of the
serpent Genesis 3. The angel said to him, the Lord is with thee thou valiant man.
Judges. 6.

narrative triptych: John the Baptist And Mary arose and went with have into
the hilly country to a city of Juda, and entered into the house of Zacharias
and saluted Elizabeth. And it came to pass, etc. Luke. i.

typological diptych And Moses returned to Jethro his father in law and said
to him, I pray, etc. Exo. 4. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my sprite does
rejoice in God my savior. Luke. 1.

narrative triptych: nativity When the days were accomplished, Mary brought
forth her first begotten son and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid
him in the manger because there was no room, etc. Lu. 2.

typological diptych Put thy shoes of thy feet for the place whereon thou
stand, is holy ground. Exodus 3. Aarons rod being put in the tabernacle did
blossom and I will make cease etc. Number. 17.

narrative triptych: circumcision And when the viii. days were accomplished,
that they should circumcise the child, his name was then called Jesus, which
was so named of the Angel, before he was conceived, etc. Luke. 2.

typological diptych Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight
days old, as God had commanded him, etc. Genesis 21 Let every manchild among
you^^ circumcised. That is ye shall circumcise the foreskin of your flesh, etc.
Genesis 17

narrative triptych: Magi and Herod Where is the king of the Jews that is
borne, for we have seen his star in the East, and are come to worship him.
When Herod the king heard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem etc. Math.
2.

typological diptych Abner said to David, make couenaut with me, and behold,
mine hand shall be with thee. etc. 2. Sam. 3. The Queen of Saba bring gifts to
Jerusalem to Solomon, with a very great train, etc. 3. Reg. 10.

narrative triptych: purification of Mary When the days of Purification after
the law of Moses, were accomplished, they brought Jesus to Jerusalem to present
him to the lord, as it is written in the law of the lord, Luke. 2.

typological diptych God said to Moses, sanctify unto me all the first borne,
that open all manner matrices among the children, etc. Exo. 13. Anna bare a
son and brought him into the house of the Lord in Siloh, and the child was
youg, etc. 1. Sam. 1.

narrative triptych: flight into Egypt Arise and take the babe and his mother
and fly into Egypt, and be there till I bring thee word, for Herod will seek
the babe to destroy him. So he arose and took the babe and his mother, etc.
Math. 2.

typological diptych Behold, thy brother Esau is comforted against thee,
meaning to kill thee. Genesis 27. Michaell spoke unto David: If thou save not thy
self this night to morrow, etc. 1. Sa. 19

narrative triptych He shall break down their altars, he shall destroy their
images. For now they shall say, we have no king because we feared not the Lord,
and what should a king do to us? Ose. 10.

typological diptych Moses cast the tables out of his hands and brake them in
pieces because of their idolatry, etc. Exo. 32. The Philistines find Dagon
fallen down before the ark of the Lord etc. 1. Sam. 5.

narrative triptych: slaying of the innocents Herod caused all male children
to be slain that were in Bethlehem and in all the costs thereof from two year
old and under, according to the time which he had diligently searched, etc.
Mat. 2.

typological diptych Saul said to Doeg, turn thou and fall upon the priests.
And Doeg the Edomite turned, etc. 1. Sa. 22 Athalia seeing her son to be dead,
destroyed all the kings seed. But Jehosheba, etc. 4. Reg. 11.

narrative triptych: return from Egypt The angel said to Joseph: Arise and take
the babe and his mother* and go into the land of Israel, for they are dead
which sought the babes life, Then he arose and took the babe etc. Mat. 2

typological diptych God spoke to Jacob, Get thee out of this country. Jacob
took all his goods and cattle* etc. Genesis 31. David asked counsel of the
Lord, saying: Shall I go up into any cities of Judah, etc. 2. Sam. 2.

narrative triptych: baptism of Jesus And Jesus when he was baptized, came
straight out of the water. And lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and John
saw the spirit of God descending like a dove, etc. Math. 3.

typological diptych Lift up thy rod and stretch out thine hand upon the
sea, etc. Exodus. 14. They cut down a branche with one cluster of grapes,
and bear it upon. etc. Number. 13.

narrative triptych: temptation of Christ The tempter came to Christ saying: If
thou be the son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he
aunswering, said, it is written, Man shall not live by bread only, etc. Math. 4.

typological diptych Esauselleth his birth right for a mess of pottage, etc.
Genesis 25. The woman seeing the tree to be pleasant, took of the fruit, etc. Genesis
3.

narrative triptych: raising of Lazarus Christ cried with a loud voice, Lazarus
come forth. Then he that was dead came forth* bound hand and foot with bands
and his face was bound with a napkin. Jesus said unto them, etc. John. 11.

typological diptych Helias stretched himself upon the child, and the Lord
heard the voice of Helias, etc. 3. Reg. 17. Heliseus coming into the house,
and behold, the child was dead, and he stretched, etc. 4. Reg. 4.

narrative triptych: transfiguration He was transfigured before them, and his
face did shine as the sun, and his clothes were as white as the light. And
behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias, etc. Math. 17.

typological diptych Abraham said, Lord if I have now found favor in thy
sight. etc. Genesis 13. Nabuchadneser answered: Lo I see four men loose walking
in the midst of the fire. Dan. 3.

narrative triptych: Mary Magdalene Jesus said, Many sins are forgeuen her,
for she loved much. To whom a little is forgeuen, he does love a little. And he
said unto her, Thy sins are forgeuen thee, etc. Luke. 7.

typological diptych David said to Nathan: I have sinned against the Lord, etc.
2. Sam. 12 Aaron looked upon Miriam, and behold, she was leprous. Number. 12

narrative triptych: lamentation over Jerusalem When Christ came nere Jerusalem
he beheld the city and wept for it, saying: O if thou had even known at the
lest in this thy day those things which belong unto thy peace etc. Luke. 19.

typological diptych Who shall have pity then upon thee, O Jerusalem or who,
etc. Jere. 15. Their feasts are turned into lamentation, their altars, etc. 1.
Macha. 1.

narrative triptych: the triumphal entry Christ riding to Jerusalem, many spread
their garments in the way, other cut down branches of the trees and strawed
them in the way. And they that went before, and they that followed, etc Mark. 11

typological diptych The women sang by course in their play, and said: etc. 1.
Sam. 28 The children of the prophets came to meet Helisha, etc. 4. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: cleansing of the temple Jesus went into the temple and
began to cast out them that sold and bought, saying unto them it is written,
Mine house is the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. Luke.
19

typological diptych Is this house become a den of thieves, whereupon, etc.
Jere. 7. Mine house shall be called a house of prayer for all people, etc.
Esaias. 56.

narrative triptych: plots against Jesus The chief priests and the Scribes
and the Elders of the people, consulted how they might take Jesus by suttletie
and kill him. But they said, not on the feast day, least any uproar, etc. Math.
26

typological diptych When Josephes brethren saw him a far of, etc. Genesis 37
Absolon rose up early and stood hard by the, etc. 2. Sam. 15.

narrative triptych: thirty pieces of silver They appointed unto him thirty
pieces of silver, and from that time Judas sought opportunity to betray Christ
his master. Now on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, etc. Math.
26

typological diptych Judas said: Come let us sell him to the Isinalites, etc.
Genesis 37 So Joseph was brought down into Egypt, and Potiphar, etc. Genesis 39.

narrative triptych: last supper Jesus at his last supper as they did eat,
took bread, and when he had given thanks brake it, and gave it to his
disciples, saying: Take, eat, this is my body, etc. Math. 26.

typological diptych Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine, and he, etc.
Genesis 37. Moses said to the people of Israel: This is that bread, etc. Exo. 16

narrative triptych: Gethsemane Jesus said: all ye shall be offended by me this
night* etc. He said moreover unto them, sit ye here while I go and pray
yonder. And he took Peter and the two sons etc. Math. 26.

typological diptych I saw all Israel ^^^^^^ed a^ sheep that had no
shepeheard, etc. 3. Reg. 22. (...) said: behold thou shall see it with thine
eyes but thou, etc. 4. Reg. 7

narrative triptych: betrayal of Christ Jesus knowing all things that should
come, went forth and said unto them Whom seek ye? They answered him Jesus of
Nazareth, Jesus answered I am he. Judas also etc. John. 18.

typological diptych The foolish virgins came also saying, Lord Lord, etc.
Math. 25. The great Dragon that old serpent was cast out, etc. Ruee. 12.

narrative triptych: the Judas kiss Judas had given them a token saying:
whomsoever I kiss, he it is, take him and lead him away. And as soon as he
was come, he goes to him and says: Master, master, etc. Mark. 14.

typological diptych Joab took Abner aside peaceably, and smote him under the
ribbe that he died. etc. 2. Sam. 3. Simon to redeem Jonathan, sends money and
the children to Triphon etc. 1. Macha. 13.

narrative triptych: the scourging of Jesus The Jews spate Christ in his face,
and buffeted him saying: Prophecy unto us O Christ who is he that smore thee?
Peter sat without in the hall, and a maid, etc Math. 26.

typological diptych When Cham the father of Chanaan saw the nakedues of his
father, he told his two brethren, etc Genesis 10 Heliseus is mocked of little
children crying unto him: Come by thou baldhead, etc. 4. Reg. 2.

narrative triptych: release of Barabbas Pilate let Barrabas lose unto the^ and
scourged Jesus, and delivered him to be crucified Then the soldiers of the
governor took Jesus in to the common hall, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych The plowers plowed upon my back, and furrows long did
cast, etc. Psalm. 131. Satan smote Job with sore boyles from the soul of his
foot etc. Job. 2.

narrative triptych: mockery of Jesus And the soldiers platted a crown of
thorn upon his head, and a reed in his right hand, and bowed their knees
before him and mocked him, saying: God save, etc. Math. 27

typological diptych When thou have done all thy duty, sit down that thou
may receue a crown etc. Eccle. 32 Abner said unto David, who art thou that
cried to the king, etc. 1. Sam. 26.

narrative triptych: Pilate washes his hands Pilate took water and washed his
hands before the multitude, saying: I am innocent of the death of this just
man, look you to it. Then answered all the people, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych Jezabell sent a messenger unto Helias; saying The Gods do
so to me etc. 3. Reg. 19. Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel and
cast, etc. Dan. 6.

narrative triptych: the crucifixion And Jesus bare his cross and came into a
place named Golgotha, where they crucified him and two other with him on either
side one, and Jesus in the midst of them, etc. John. 19.

typological diptych Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it
upon Isaac his son, etc. Gene. 22. Behold the widow was there gathering
sticks, and Eliah called her, and said, etc. 3. Reg. 17.

narrative triptych: the crucifixion And when they were come to the place which
is called Caluarie, there they crucified him and the evil doers, one on the
right hand, and the other on the left, etc. Luke. 23.

typological diptych Tubultaim wrought cunningly every craft of brass and
iron, etc. Genesis 4. Esaias the prophet was cut in the midst with a saw, and fasted
on a tree, etc.

narrative triptych: the spear One of the soldiers with a spear pierced his
side, and forth with ran there out blood and water. And he that saw it bare
record and his record is true. And he that etc. John. 19.

typological diptych With the ribbe which the Lord God had taken from the man,
etc Genesis 2. The Lord said to Moses Thou shall smite the rock and water, etc
Exo. 17

narrative triptych: the burial of Jesus Joseph took the body and wrapped it in
a clean linten cloth, and laid it in his new tomb which he had hewn out even
in the rock and rolled a great stone to the door, andt. Math. 27.

typological diptych As Soon as the sun was down, Josue commands that
they, etc. Josu. 8 Then they arose and went all night, and took the body, etc.
1. Sam. 31

narrative triptych: the Mary's watch There was Mary Magdalene and the other
Mary sitting over against the sepulcher. The next day that followed the day of
preparing, the hie priests and Pharisees, etc. Math. 27.

typological diptych She wepeth continually in the night, and her tears. etc.
Lamen. 1. Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara for the lord has given, etc.
Ruth. 1.

narrative triptych: burial of Jesus He laid it in a tomb hewn out of a rock
wherein was never man yet laid. And that day was the preparing of the Saboth,
and the Saboth drue on. The women that followed after etc. Luke. 23.

typological diptych When Joseph was come to his brethren, they stripped him,
etc. Genesis 37. So they took up Jonas and cast him into the sea and the sea, etc.
Jonas.

narrative triptych: resurrection For fear of him the kepers were astonished and
became as dead men. But the Angel said to the women: Fear not, for I know you
seek Jesus which was crucified, etc. Math. 28.

typological diptych Samson arose at midnight and took the doors, etc. Judicum.
16. And the Lord spoke unto the fish and it cast out Jonas, etc. Jonas. 2.

narrative triptych: post-resurrection appearance Jesus appeared first to Mary
Magdalene out of whom he had cast vij. devils. And she went and told them that
had been with him which mourned, etc. Mar. 16

typological diptych The king said unto Daniell: O Daniel the servant, etc.
Daniel. 6. When I had past a litl^ from them, then I found him, etc. Cant. 3.

narrative triptych: doubting Thomas Jesus said to Thomas put thy finger here
and see my hands and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not
faythlesse, etc. John. 20.

typological diptych And Jacob called the name of the place Peniell, etc. Genesis
32. Gedeon answered: the Lord be with us why then, etc. Jud. 6.

narrative triptych: ascension So after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was
received into heaven and sat at the right hand of God. And they went forth and
preached, etc. Mar. 16

typological diptych And Enoch walked with God, and he was no more seen, for
God took him away, etc. Genesis 5. There appeared a charet of fire, and horses of
fire, so Elias went up by a whirlwind. etc 2. Reg. 2

scene from danse macabre The Emperor
Emperor or king:
I must thee bring.
scene from danse macabre The King.
With rulers and kings:
I end all things.
memento mori As Emperors and kings, we did reign:
But now the earth, does us detayne.


scene from danse macabre The Duke.
Duke and Prince
I do convince.
scene from danse macabre The Marquis.
Marquis or state:
I am thy mate.
memento mori Lords and rulers, have been:
But what we are, is to be seen.


scene from danse macabre The Baron.
Baron and lord:
To me must accord.
scene from danse macabre The Vicount.
High and low:
with me must go.
memento mori Time to live, and time to dye:
God grant us life, eternally.


scene from danse macabre The Lord.
Galaunt or gay:
Then must away.
scene from danse macabre The Knight.
Stout and brave:
I must thee have.
memento mori Behold me here, as in a glass:
For as thou art, so I was.


scene from danse macabre The Esquire.
For all thy lust
Thou shall to dust.
scene from danse macabre The Gentleman
Grave or sad:
Thou must be had.
memento mori As the hours of the day:
So our lives pass away.


scene from danse macabre The Captain.
In peace and war:
I make and mar.
scene from danse macabre The Soldier.
Of foe and friend:
I make an end.
memento mori As we were, so are ye:
And as we are, so shall ye be.


scene from danse macabre The Dromme.
Cease thy dromme:
For all is done.
scene from danse macabre The Fife.
Cease thy play:
And come away.
memento mori Times do pass, and time it is,
To use well time, least time do miss.


scene from danse macabre The Judge.
Come on judge:
With me to trudge.
scene from danse macabre The Justice.
Justice I say:
Come on thy way.
memento mori From earth to earth, so must it be,
From life to death, as thou do see


scene from danse macabre Sergeant at law.
Leave the laws:
and hear my cause.
scene from danse macabre The Attorney.
Plead as thou lust:
With me thou must.
memento mori Christ, for thy bitter passion:
Grant us a joyful resurrection.


scene from danse macabre The Mayor.
Though Mayor thou be:
Come go with me.
scene from danse macabre The Shirife.
Sir Shirife stand:
and give me thy hand.
memento mori From earth to earth, so must it be,
From life to death, as thou do see


scene from danse macabre The Bailife.
Thou Baily also:
With me shall go.
scene from danse macabre The Constable.
Constable be pressed:
For I thee arest.
memento mori Behold me here, as in a glass:
For as thou art, so I was.


scene from danse macabre The Phisician.
Let Phisike alone:
And go with me home
scene from danse macabre The Astronomer.
Look not so hie:
I am thee by.
memento mori Time to live, and time to dye:
God grant us life, eternally.


scene from danse macabre The Merchant.
Neither craft nor trade:
Can me persuade.
scene from danse macabre The Citizen.
Of town nor city:
I have no pity.
memento mori Behold me here, as in a glass:
For as thou art, so I was.


scene from danse macabre The Rich man.
Silver nor gold:
cannot thee hold.
scene from danse macabre The aged man.
Youth and age
Must be my page.
memento mori As the hours of the day:
So our lives pass away.


scene from danse macabre The Atrificer.
Leave thine art:
And take my part.
scene from danse macabre The Husbandman.
Labor no more:
For I have store.
memento mori As we were, so are ye:
And as we are, so shall ye be.


scene from danse macabre The Beggar.
Begging is done:
For I am come.
scene from danse macabre The Roge.
Think I am best:
For I bring rest.
memento mori From earth to earth, so must it be,
From life to death, as thou do see


scene from danse macabre The Shepeheard.
Leave thy sheep
And with me crepe.
scene from danse macabre The Fool.
Of foolish and fond:
I break the bond.
memento mori Christ, for thy bitter passion:
Grant us a joyful resurrection.


scene from danse macabre Of Youth.
Young and old:
Come to my fold.
scene from danse macabre Of Infancy.
Fear not me:
though I grisly be.
memento mori Time to live, and time to dye:
God grant us life, eternally.


scene from danse macabre The Emperor.
Emperor or king:
I must thee bring.
scene from danse macabre The King.
With rulers and kings:
I end all things.
memento mori As Emperors and kings, we did reign:
But now the earth, does us detayne.


scene from danse macabre The Duke.
Duke and Prince
I do convince.
scene from danse macabre The Marquis.
Marquis or state:
I am thy mate.
memento mori Lords and rulers, we haue^ been:
But what we are, is to be seen.


scene from danse macabre The baron.
Baron and lord:
To me must accord.
scene from danse macabre The Vicount.
High and low:
with me must go.
memento mori Times do pass, and time it is.
To use well time, least time do miss.


scene from danse macabre The Lord.
Galaunt or gay:
Thou must away.
scene from danse macabre The Knight.
Stout and brave:
I must thee have.
memento mori As the hours of the day:
So our lives pass away.


scene from danse macabre The Esquire.
For all thy lust
Thou shall to dust.
scene from danse macabre The Gentleman
Grave or sad:
Thou must be had.
memento mori Behold me here, as in a glass:
For as thou art, so I was.


scene from danse macabre The Captain.
In peace and war:
I make and mar.
scene from danse macabre The Souldior.
Of foe and friend:
I make an end.
memento mori From earth to earth, so must it be,
From life to death, as thou do see


scene from danse macabre The Dromme.
Cease thy dromme:
For all is done.
scene from danse macabre The Fife.
Cease thy play:
And come away.
memento mori As we were, so are ye:
And as we are, so shall ye be.


scene from danse macabre The Judge.
Come on judge:
With me to trudge.
scene from danse macabre The Justice.
Justice I say:
Come on thy way.
memento mori As the hours of the day:
So our lives pass away.


scene from danse macabre Sergeant at law
Leave the laws:
and hear my cause.
scene from danse macabre The Attorney.
Plead as thou lust:
With me thou must.
memento mori Behold me here, as in a glass:
For as thou art, so I was.


scene from danse macabre The Mayor.
Though Mayor thou be:
Come with me.
scene from danse macabre The Shirife.
Sir Shirife stand:
and give me thy hand.
memento mori Time to live, and time to dye:
God grant us life, eternally.


scene from danse macabre The Bailife.
Thou Baily also:
With me shall go.
scene from danse macabre The Constable.
Constable be pressed:
For I thee arest.
memento mori From earth to earth, so must it be,
From life to death, as thou do see


scene from danse macabre The Phisician.
Let Phisike alone:
And go with me home.
scene from danse macabre The Astronomer.
Look not so hie:
I am thee by.
memento mori Times do pass, and time it is,
To use well time, least time do miss.


scene from danse macabre The Merchant.
Neither craft nor trade:
Can me persuade.
scene from danse macabre The Citizen.
Of town nor city:
I have no pity.
memento mori Christ, for thy bitter passion:
Grant us a joyful resurrection.


scene from danse macabre The Rich man.
Silver nor gold:
Cannot thee hold.
scene from danse macabre The aged man.
Youth and age
Must be my page.
memento mori Christ, for thy bitter passion:
Grant us a joyful resurrection.


scene from danse macabre The Atrificer.
Leave thine art:
And take my part.
scene from danse macabre The Husbandman.
Labor no more:
For I have store.
memento mori As we were, so are ye:
And as we are, so shall ye be.


scene from danse macabre The Beggar.
Begging is done:
For I am come.
scene from danse macabre The Roge.
Think I am best:
For I bring rest.
memento mori Times do pass, and time it is,
To use well time, least time do miss.


scene from danse macabre The Shepeheard.
Leave thy sheep
And with me ^^epe.
scene from danse macabre The Fool.
Of foolish and fond:
I break the bond.
memento mori From earth to earth, so must it be,
From life to death, as thou do see


scene from danse macabre Of Youth.
Young and old:
Come to my fold.
scene from danse macabre Of Infancy.
Fear not me:
though I grisly be.
memento mori Time to live, and time to dye:
God grant us life, eternally.


scene from danse macabre The Empress.
Empress though thou be
Thou must away with me.
scene from danse macabre The Queen.
Queen also thou do see:
As I am, so shall thou be.
memento mori We that were of highest degree:
Lie dead here now, as ye do see.


scene from danse macabre The Princes.
Princes of hie estate:
co^te^t you I am your mate
scene from danse macabre The Duchess,
Duches and princes:
Death daily conuinces.
memento mori We that sat in the highest seat:
Are laid here now for worms meat,


scene from danse macabre The Countess.
Countess, or what thou art:
I strike thee with my dart.
scene from danse macabre The Vicountesse.
Vicountes I do not spare:
For of them I have no care.
memento mori Beauty, honor, and riches avail no whit:
For death when he comes, spoyleth it.


scene from danse macabre The Baronnesse.
Baronnesse brave and hie:
Prepare thy self to dye.
scene from danse macabre The Lady.
Ladies gay and fair:
To you I do repair.
memento mori No state, no might, neither young nor old:
To resist death, dare be bold.


scene from danse macabre The Judges wife.
Madame or justice wife:
I am come to end thy life.
scene from danse macabre The Lawyers wife.
Beware thy husbands gain
Reward thee not with pain
memento mori Death by his might does convince:
Express, Queen, Duches, and Prince.


scene from danse macabre The Gentlewoma^
Gentles brave and fine:
Dance after my line.
scene from danse macabre Aldermans wife.
Thou art clothed in skarlet:
And yet art but my varlet.
memento mori Behold us here, that sometime were gay
How now we lie here, all lapped in clay.


scene from danse macabre Merchantes wife.
Brave and never so nice:
Dance after my device
scene from danse macabre Citizens wife.
Trick and trim, put of your hood
I am come to do you good.
memento mori Riches nor treasure, avail nothing:
For death to earth, all does bring.


scene from danse macabre Rich man's wi^^.
Though thou have sil^^^ and gold:
Yet art thou within my hold.
scene from danse macabre Young woman.
Fine and pretty in the wast:
Come with me in have
memento mori From earth we came, and to earth we shall:
For sin by death, has made us thrall.


scene from danse macabre The Maid.
Fresh, galant, and gay:
All must with me away.
scene from danse macabre The Damsel.
Fine, proper and neat:
And all is but worms meat.
memento mori O death, how bitter is thy sting:
That poor and rich to earth does bring.


scene from danse macabre Farmers wife.
Cease thy labor and pain:
For I am thy riches and gain
scene from danse macabre Husbandma^s wife.
Toil no more I say:
For hence I must away.
memento mori The wise, the simple, and every degree:
Are by force compelled to obey unto thee


scene from danse macabre Countreywoman.
Away with butter and chese.
For thy life thou must now leese.
scene from danse macabre The Nurse.
Give suck no more:
For I am at the door.
memento mori Learn by us that here do lie:
For to live well and learn to die.


scene from danse macabre Shepeheardes wife.
Be thou young or old:
Thou must enter into my fold
scene from danse macabre Aged woman.
Be the day never so long:
At last comes Euensong.
memento mori As death to the just, brings advantage:
So he to the wicked, does great damage


scene from danse macabre The Creeple,
Be thou poor or disesed:
Thou must with me be pleased.
scene from danse macabre The poor woman.
Be thou never so poor:
Thou must enter at my door.
memento mori As death in this world has the victory:
So by death we hope to enter Gods glory.


depiction of the resurrection of the blessed at the last trump

Come ye blessed of my father inherit the kingdom prepared for you.

Math. 25.
depiction of the damned consigned to hell at the last judgment

Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for etc.

Math. 21.

