ORCHESTRA OR A Poem of Dancing.

Iudicially proouing the true observation of time and measure, in the
Authentical and laudable use of Dancing.

Ovid. Art. Aman. lib. t. Si vox est, canta: si mollia brachia, salta: Et
quacunque potes dote placere, place.

At London, Printed by I. Robarts for N. Ling. 1596.

To his very Friend, Ma. Rich: Martin.
TO whom shall I this dancing Poem send,
This sudden, rash, halfe-capreol of my wit?
To you, first mouer and sole cause of it
Mine-owne-selues better half, my dearest friend.
O would you yet my Muse some Honny lend
From your mellifluous tongue, whereon does sit
Suada in majesty, that I may fit
These harsh beginnings with a sweeter end.
You know, the modest Sun full fifteen times
Blushing did rise, and blushing did descend,
While I in making of these ill made rimes,
My golden hours unthriftily did spend.
Yet if in friendship you these numbers praise,
I will mispend another fifteen days.
ORCHESTRA. OR A Poem of Dancing.
1
WHere lives the man that never yet did hear
Of chaste Penelope, Ulysses Queen?
Who kept her faith unspotted twenty year
Till he returned that far away had been,
And many men, and many towns had seen:
Ten year at siedge of Troy he lingering lay,
And ten year in the Midland-sea did stray.
2
Homer, to whom the Muses did carouse
A great deep cup with heavenly Nectar filld,
The greatest, deepest cup in Jove's great house,
(For Jove himself had so expressly willd)
He drank of all, ne let one drop be spilld;
Since when, his brain that had before been dry,
Became the welspring of all Poetry.
3
Homer does tell in his abundant verse,
The long laborious travails of the man,
And of his Lady too he does rehearse,
How she illudes with all the Art she can,
Th'vngratefull love which other Lords began;
For of her Lord false Fame long since had sworn,
That Neptunes Monsters had his carcass torn.
4
All this he tells, but one thing he forgot,
One thing most worthy his eternal song,
But he was old, and blind, and saw it not,
Or else he thought he should Ulysses wrong,
To mingle it, his Tragic acts among.
Yet was there not in all the world of things,
A sweeter burden for his Muses wings.
5
The Courtly love Antinous did make,
Antinous that fresh and jolly Knight,
Which of the gallants that did undertake
To win the Widow, had most wealth and might,
Wit to persuade, and beauty to delight.
The Courtly love he made unto the Queen,
Homer forgot as if it had not been,
6
Sing then Terpsichore, my light Muse sing
His gentle Art and cunning courtesy:
You Lady can remember every thing
For you are daughter of Queen Memory,
But sing a plain and easy Melody:
For the soft mean that warbleth but the ground,
To my rude care does yield the sweetest sound.
7
One only nights discourse I can report,
When the great Torch-bearer of heaven was gone
Down in a mask unto the Oceans Court,
To revel it with Tethis all alone;
Antinous disguised and unknown
Like to the spring in gaudie Ornament
Unto the Castle of the Princess went.
8
The sovereign Castle of the rocky I Will
Wherein Penelope the Princess lay,
Shone with a thousand Lamps, which did exile
The dim dark shades, and turned the night to day,
Not Jove's blew Tent what time the Sunny ray
Behind the bulwark of the earth retires
Is seen to sparkle with more twinkling fires.
9
That night the Queen came forth from far within,
And in the presence of her Court was seen,
For the sweet singer Phemius did begin
To praise the Worthies that at Troy had been;
Somewhat of her Ulysses she did ween
In his grave Hymn the heavenly man would sing,
Or of his wars, or of his wandering.
10
Pallas that hour with her sweet breath divine
Inspired immortal beauty in her eyes,
That with celestial glory she did shine,
Brighter then Venus when she does arise
Out of the waters to adorn the skies;
The wooers all amazed do admire,
And check their own presumptuous desire.
11
Only Antinous when at first he viewed
Her st^^ bright eyes that with new honor shind,
Was not dismayed, but there-with-all renewed
The noblesse and the splendor of his mind;
And as he did sit circumstances sind,
Unto the Throne he boldly began advance,
And with fair manners, wooed yt Queen to dance.
12
Goddess of women, since your heau'nlinesse
Has now vouchsaft it self to represent
To our dim eyes, which though they see the less
Yet are they blessed in their astonishment,
Imitate heaven, whose beauties excellent
Are in continual motion day and night,
And move thereby more wonder and delight.
13
Let me the mouer be, to turn about
Those glorious ornaments that Youth and Love
Have fixed in you, every part throughout,
Which if you will in timely measure move,
Not all those precious Iemms in heaven above
Shall yield a sight more pleasing to behold,
With all their turns and tracings manifold.
14
WIth this, the modest Princess blushed and smiled,
Like to a clear and rosy euentide;
And softly did return this answer mild,
Fair Sir; you needs must fairly be denide
Where your demand cannot be satisfied.
My feet, which only nature taught to go,
Did never yet the Art of footing know.
15
But why persuade you me to this new rage?
(For all disorder and misrule is new,)
For such misgouernment in former age
Our old divine Forefathers never knew,
Who if they lived and did the follies view
Which their sond Nephews make their chief assaires,
Would hate themselves that had begot such heirs.
16
Sole heir of Virtue, and of Beauty both,
Whence comes it ( Antinous replies)
That your imperious virtue is so loath.
To grant your beauty her chief exercise?
Or from what spring does your opinion rise
That Dancing is a frenzy and a rage,
First known and ys'd in this newfangled age?
17
Dancing (bright Lady) then began to be,
When the first seeds whereof the world did spring
The Fire, Air, Earth, and water did agree,
By Loves persuasion, Natures mighty King,
To leave their first disordred combating;
And in a dance such measure to observe,
As all the world their motion should preserve.
18
Since when they still are carried in a round,
And changing come one in another place,
Yet do they neither mingle nor confound,
But every one does keep the bounded space
Wherein the dance does bid it turn or tracc:
This wondrous miracle did Love devise
For Dancing is Loves proper excrcise.
19
Like this, he framed the Gods eternal bower,
And of a shapelesse and confused mass
By his through-piercing and digesting power
The turning vault of heaven framed was:
Whose starrie wheels he has so made to pass,
As that their mouings do a music frame
And they themselves, still dance unto the same.
20
Or if this (All) which round about we see
(As idle Morpheus some sick brains has taught)
Of undivided motes compacted be,
How was this goodly Architecture wrought?
Or by what means were they together brought?
They err that say they did concur by chance,
Love made them meet in a well-ordered dance.
21
As when Amphion with his charming Lire
Begot so sweet a Siren of the air,
That with her Rethorike made the stones conspire
The mines of a City to repair,
(A work of wit and reasons wise affayre)
So Loves smooth tongue, the motes such measure taught
That they joined hands, and so yt world was wrought.
22
How justly then is Dancing termed new
Which with the world in point of time begun?
Yea Time it self (whose birth Jove never knew
And which is far more ancient then the Sun)
Had not one moment of his age outrunne
When out leapt Dancing from the heap of things,
And lightly rode upon his nimble wings.
23
Reason has both their pictures in her Treasure,
Where Time the measure of all moving is;
And Dancing is a moving all in measure,
Now if you do resemble that to this
And think both one, I think you think amiss:
But if you judge them Twins, together got,
And Time first borne, your judgment erreth not.
24
Thus does it equal age with age enjoy,
And yet in lusty youth for ever flowers,
Like Love his Sire, whom Paynters make a Boy,
Yet is he eldest of the heavenly powers;
Or like his brother Time, whose winged hours
Going and coming will not let him dye,
But still preserve him in his infancy.
25
This said; the Queen with her sweet lips divine
Gently began to move the subtle air,
Which gladly yielding, did it self incline
To take a shape between those rubies fair
And being formed, softly did repair
With twenty doublings in the empty way,
Unto Autinous ears, and thus did say.
26
WHat eye does see the heaven but does admire
When it the mouings of the heavens does see?
My self, if I to heaven may once aspire,
If that be dancing, will a Dauncer be:
But as for this your frantic iollitie
How it began, or whence you did it learn,
I never could with reasons eye discern.
27
Antinous answered: Jewel of the Earth
Worthy you are that heavenly Dance to leadc:
But for you think our dancing base of birth
And newly borne but of a brainsick head
I will forthwith his antique Gentry read,
And for I love him, will his Herault be
And blaze his arms, and draw his Petigree.
28
When Love had shapt this world, this great fair wight
That all wights else in his wide womb contains
And had instructed it to dance aright,
A thousand measures with a thousand strains,
Which it should practice with delightful pains
Until that fatal instant should reuolue,
When all to nothing should again resolve:
29
The comely order and proportion fair
On every side did please his wandering eye,
Till glauncing through the thin transparent fire
A rude disordered rout he did epsy
Of men and women, that most spightfullie
Did one another throng, and crowd so sore,
That his kind eye in pity wept therefore.
30
And swister then the Lightning down he came,
Another shapelesse Chaos to digest,
He will begin another world to frame,
(For Love till all be well will never rest)
Then with such words as cannot be expressed
He cutts the troops, that all a sunder fling,
And ere they wist, he casts them in a ring.
31
Then did he rarifie the Element
And in the center of the ring appear,
The beams that from his forehead shining went,
Begot an horror and religious fear
In all the souls that round about him wear,
Which in their ears attentiveness procures
While he with such like sounds their minds allures.
32
How does Confusions Mother, headlong Chance
Put reasons noble squadron to the rout?
Or how should you that have the governance
Of Natures children, heaven and earth throughout
Prescribe them rules, and live your selves without?
Why should your fellowship a trouble be,
Since man's chief pleasure is society?
33
If sense has not yet taught you, learn of me
A comely moderation and discreet,
That your assemblies may well ordered be
When my uniting power shall make you meet,
With heavenly tunes it shall be tempered sweet:
And be the model of the worlds great frame,
And you Earths children, Dancing shall it name.
34
Behold the world how it is whirled round,
And for it is so whirled, is named so;
In whose large volume many rules are found
Of this new Art, which it does fairly show:
For your quick eyes in wandering too and fro
From East to West, on no one thing can glaunce,
But if you mark it well, it seems to dance.
35
First you see fixed in this huge mirror blew
Of trembling lights a number numberless,
Fixed they are named, but with a name untrue,
For they are moved, and in a Dance express
That great long year that does contain no less
Then threescore hundreths of those years in all
Which the Sun makes with his course natural.
36
What if to you these sparks disordered seem
As if by chance they had been seattered there?
The Gods a solemnemeasure do it deem
And see a just proportion every where,
And know yt points whence first their mouings were,
To which first points when all return again,
The Axeltree of Heaven shall break in twain.
37
Under that spangled sky, five wandering flames,
Besidos the King of Day, and Queen of Night,
Are wheeled around, all in their sundry frames,
And all in sundry measures do delight:
Yet altogether keep no measure right.
For by it self, each does it self advance,
And by it self, each does a Galliard dance.
38
Venus the Mother of that bastard Love
Which does usurp the worlds great Marshals name,
Just with the Sun her dainty seete does move
And unto him does all her iestures frame:
Now after, now asore, the flattering Dame
With diverse cunning passages does err,
Still him respecting that respects not her.
39
For that brave Sun the Father of the Day,
Does love this Earth the Mother of the Night,
And like a reuellour in rich array
Does dance his Galliard in his Lemmans sight,
Both back, and forth, and side-wayes passing light,
His gallant grace does so the Gods amaze,
That all stand still and at his beauty gaze.
40
But see the Earth, when she approaches neete,
How she for joy does spring and sweetly smile;
But see again her sad and heavy cheer
When changing places he retires a while:
But those black clouds he shortly will exile,
And make them all before his presence fly
As mists consumed before his cheerful eye.
41
Who does not see the measures of the Moon
Which thirteen times she daunceth every year?
And ends her pauine thirteen times as soon
As does her brother, of whose golden heir
She borrows part and proudly does it wear.
Then does she coylieturne her faoe aside,
That half her cheek is scarce sometimes discride.
42
Next her, the purt, subtle, and cleansing fire,
Is swistly carried in a circle even:
Though Vukan be pronounst by many a liar
The only halting God that dwells in heaven.
But that foul name may be more fitly given
To your false fire that far from heaven is fall
And does consume, wast, spoil, disorder all.
43
And now behold your tender Nurse the air
And common neighbor that ay runns around,
How many pictures and impressions fair
Within her empty regions are there found,
Which to your senses Dancing do propound?
For what are breath, speech, Ecchos, music, winds,
But Dauncings of the air in sundry kinds?
44
For when you breath, the air in order moves,
Now in, now out, in time and measure true;
And when you speak, so well the dancing loves,
That doubling often, and often redoubling new,
With thousand forms she does her self endew:
For all the words that from your lips repair,
Are naught but tricks and turnings of the air.
45
Hence is her prattling daughter Echo borne,
That daunces to all voices she can hear;
There is no sound so harsh that she does scorn,
Nor any time wherein she will forbear
The aerie pauement with her feet to wear.
And yet her hearing sense is nothing quick
For after time she ends every trick.
46
And thou sweet Music, Dauncings only life.
The ears sole happiness, the airs best speech,
Loadstone of followship, charming rod of strife,
The soft minds Paradise, the sick minds Leach,
With thine own tongue you trees and stones can teach
That when the Air does dance her finest measure,
Then art you borne the Gods and men's sweet pleasure.
47
Lastly, where keep the winds their reuchy
Their violent turnings and wild whirling hayes?
But in the Airs tralucent gallery?
Where she her self is turned a hundredth ways,
While with those Maskers wantonly she plays;
Yet in this misrule, they such rule embrace
As two at once encomber not the place.
48
If then fire, air, wandering and fixed lights
In every province of imperial sky,
Yeald perfect forms of dancing to your sights,
In vain I teach the ear, that which the eye
With certain view already does descne.
But for your eyes perceive not all they see
In this I will your senses master be.
49
For lo the Sea that fleets about the Land,
And like a girdle clips her solid wast,
Music and measure both does understand:
For his great Crystal eye is always cast
Up to the Moon, and on her fixed fast.
And as she daunceth in her pallid spheere,
So daunceth he about the Center here.
50
Sometimes his proud green waves in order set,
One after other flow unto the shore,
Which when they have with many kisses wet,
They ebb away in order as before;
And to make known his Courtly Love the more,
He often does lay aside his three-forkt Mace,
And with his arms the timorous Earth embrace.
51
Only the Earth does stand for ever still,
Her rocks remove not, nor her mountains meet,
(Although some wits enricht with Learnings skill
Say heaven stands firm, and that the Earth does sleete
And swiftly turns underneath their feet)
Yet though the Earth is ever steadfast seen,
On her broad breast has Dancing ever been.
52
For those blew veins that through her body spread,
Those sapphire streams which from great hills do spring,
(The Earths great duggs: for every wight is fed
With sweet fresh moisture from them issuing)
Observe a dance in their wild wandering:
And still their dance begets a murmur sweet,
And still the murmur with the dance does meet.
53
Of all their ways I love Meanders path,
Which to the tunes of dying Swans does dance,
Such winding sleights, such turns and tricks he has,
Such Creekes, such wrenches, and such daliaunce,
That whether it be hap or heedlesse chance,
In his indented course and wringling play
He seems to dance a perfect cunning Hay.
54
But wherefore do these streams for ever run?
To keep themselves for ever sweet and clear:
For let their everlasting course be done
They straight corrupt and foul with mud appear.
O ye sweet Nimphs that beauties loss do fear,
Contemn the Drugs that Physic does devise,
And learn of Love this dainty exercise.
55
See how those flowers that have sweet Beauty too
(The only Jewels that the Earth does wear
When the young Sun in bravery her does woo)
As often as they the whistling wind do hear,
Do wave their tender bodies here and there;
And though their dance no perfect measure is,
Yet oftentimes their music makes them kis,
56
What makes the Vine about the Elm to dance
With turnings, windings, and imbracements round?
What makes the Lodestone to the North advance
His subtle point, as if from thence he found
His chief attractiue Virtue to redound?
Kind Nature first does cause all things to love,
Love makes them dance and in just order move.
57
Hark how the Birds do sing, and mark then how
Iumpe with the modulation of their lays,
They lightly leap, and skip from bow to bow;
Yet do the Cranes deserve a greater praise
Which keep such measure in their ayrie ways,
As when they all in order ranked are,
They make a perfect form triangular.
58
In the chief angle flies the watchful guide,
And all the followers their heads do lay
On their forgoers backs, on either side,
But for the Captain has no rest to stay
His head forwearied with the windy way,
He back retires, and then the next behind,
As his Lieuetenaunt leads them through the wind.
59
But why relate I every singular?
Since all the worlds great fortunes and affairs
Forward and backward rapt and whitled are,
According to the music of the spheres:
And Chance her self, her nimble feet vpbeares
On a round slipperie wheel that rowleth ay,
And turns all states with her impetuous sway.
60
Learn then to dance you that are Princes borne
And lawful Lords of earthly creatures all;
Imitate them, and thereof take no scorn,
For this new Art to them is natural
And imitate the stars caelestiall.
For when pale Death you vital twist shall sever,
Your better parts must dance with the for ever.
61
Thus Love persuades, and all the crown of men
That stands around does make a murmuring;
As when the wind loosd from his hollow den,
Among the trees a gentle base does sing,
Or as a Brook through peebles wandering:
But in their looks they uttered this plain speech,
That they would learn to dance if love would teach.
62
Then first of all, he does demonstrate plain
The motions seven that are in nature found,
Upward, and downward, forth, and back again,
To this side, and to that, and turning round:
Whereof, a thousand brawles he does compound,
Which he does teach unto the multitude,
And ever with a turn they must conclude.
63
As when a Nymph arysing from the Land
Leads a dance with her long watery train
Down to the Sea, she wries to every hand
And every way does cross the fertile plains
But when at last she falls into the maine
Then all her trauerses concluded are,
And with the Sea her course is circulate,
64
Thus when at first Love had them marshalled
As erst he did the shapelesse mass of things,
He taught them rounds and winding Heyes to tread,
And about trees to cast themselves in rings.
As the two Bears whom the first mouer flings
With a short turn about heavens Axeltree,
In a round dance forever wheeling be.
65
But after these, as men more civil grew
He did more grave and solemn measures frame,
With such fair order and proportion true
And correspondence every way the same,
That no fault finding eye did ever blame:
For every eye was moved at the sight
With sober wondering, and with sweet delight.
66
Not those old Students of the heavenly book,
Atlas the great, Promethus the wise,
Which on the Stars did all their lyfe-time look
Could ever find such measures in the skies,
So full of change and rare varieties;
Yet all the feet whereon these measures go,
Are only Spondeis, solemn, grave, and sloe.
70
But for more diverse and more pleasing show,
A swift and wandering dance she did invent,
With passages uncertain to and fro,
Yet with a certain answer and consent
To the quick music of the Instrument.
Five was the number of the Musicks feet,
Which still the dance did with five paces meets
71
A gallant dance, that lively does bewray
A spirit and a virtue Masculine,
Impatient that her house on earth should stay
Since she her self is fiery and divine:
Often does she make her body upward flyne,
With lostie turns and capriols in the avre,
Which with the lusty tunes accords fair.
69
What shall I name those current trauases
That on a triple Dactyle foot do run
Close by the ground with slyding passages,
Wherein that Dauncer greatest praise has won
Which with best order can all orders shun:
For every where he wantonly must range,
And turn, and wind, with unexpected change.
70
Yet is there one the most delightful kind,
A lofty iumping, or a leaping round,
Where arm in arm, two Dauncers are entwind,
And whirle themselves with strickt embracements bound,
And still their feet an Anapest do sound:
An Anapest is all their musicks song,
Whose first two feet are short, and third is long.
71
As the victorious twinns of Laeda and Jove
That taught the Spartans dancing on the sands,
Of swift Eurotas dance in Heaven above,
Knit and united with eternal hands;
Among the Stars their double Image stands,
Where both are carried with an equal pace
Together iumping in their turning race.
72
This is the Net wherein the Sunns bright eye
Venus and Mars entangled did behold,
For in this Dance, their arms they so imply
As each, does seem the other to enfold;
What if lewd wits another tale have told
Of jealous Vulcan, and of iron chains,
Yet this true sense that forged lie contains.
73
These various forms of dancing, Love did frame,
And beside these, a hundred millions mot,
And as he did invent, he taught the same
With goodly iesture, and with comely show,
Now keeping state, now humbly honoring low.
And ever for the persons and the place
He taught most fit, and best according grace.
74
For Love, within his fertile working brain
Did then conceive those gracious Virgins three,
Whose civil moderation did maintain
All decent order and conueniencie,
And fair respect, and seemlie modesty:
And then he thought it fit they should be borne,
That their sweet presence dancing might adorn.
75
Hence is it that these Graces painted are
With hand in hand dancing an endless round:
And with regarding eyes, that still beware
That there be no disgrace amongst them found;
With equal foot they beat the flowery ground,
Laughing, or singing, as their passions will,
Yet nothing that they do becomes them ill.
76
Thus Love taught men, and men thus learnd of Love
Sweet Musicks sound with feet to counterfaite,
Which was long time before high thundering Jove
Was lifted up to heavens imperial seat.
For though by birth he were the Prince of Creete,
Nor Creete, nor Heaven, should yt young Prince have seen
If Dancers with their Timbrels had not been.
77
Since when all ceremonious mysteries,
All sacred Orgies and religious rights,
All pomps, and tryumphs, and solemnities,
All Funerals, Nuptials, and like public sights,
All Parliaments of peace, and warlike fights,
All learned Arts, and every great affair
A lively shape of Dancing seems to bear.
78
For what did he who with his ten-tong'd Lute
Gave Beasts and blocks an understanding ear?
Or rather into bestiall minds and brute
Shed and infused the beams of reason clear?
Doubtless formen that rude and savage were
A civil form of dancing he devised,
Wherewith unto their Gods they sacrifiz'd.
79
So did Musaem, so Amphion did,
And Linus with his sweet enchanting song,
And he whose hand the earth of monsters rid
And had men's cares fast chayned to his tongue:
And Theseus to his wood-borne slaves among
Used dancing as the finest policy
To plant religion and society.
80
And therefore now the Thracian Orpheus Lire
And Hercules him self are stellified;
And in high heaven amidst the starry Quire
Dancing their parts continually do slide:
So on the Zodiake Ganimede does ride,
And so is Hebe with the Muses nine
For pleasing Jove with dancing, made dinine.
81
Wherefore was Proteus said himself to change
Into a stream, a Lion, and a tree,
And many other forms fantastique strange
As in his fickle thought he wished to be?
But that he daunc'd with such facility.
As like a Lion he could pace with pride,
Ply like a Plant, and like a Riner slide.
82
And how was Caeneus made at first a man,
And then a woman, then a man again
But in a Dance? which when he first began
He the man's part in measure did sustain.
But when he changed into a second strain
He daunc'd the woman's part another space,
And then returned into his former place.
83
Hence sprang the fable of Tirefias
That he the pleasure of both saxes tryde:
For in a dance he man and woman was
By often change of place from side to side.
But for the woman easily did slide
And smoothly swim with cunning hidden Art,
He took more pleasure in a woman's part.
84
So to a fish Venus herself did change,
And swimming through the soft and yielding wave,
With gentle motions did so smoothly range
As none might see where she the water drove:
But this plain truth that salsed fable gave
That she did dance with slyding easines,
Plyant and quick in wandering passages,
85
And merry Bacchus practiced dancing to,
And to the Lydian numbers rounds did make:
The like he did in th'Easterne India do,
And taught them all when Phoebus did awake,
And when at night he did his Coach sorsake:
To honor heaven, and heavens great roling eye
With turning daunces, and with melody.
86
Thus they who first did found a commonweal,
And they who first Religion did ordain,
By dancing first the peoples hearts did steal,
Of whom we now a thousand tales do feign.
Yet do we now their perfect rules retain,
And use them still in such devises new
As in the world long since their withering grew.
87
For after Towns and Kingdoms founded were
Between great States arose well-ordered war,
Wherein most perfect measure does appear
Whether their well-set ranks respected are
In Quadrant form or Semicircular:
Or else the March, when all the troops advance
Unto the Drum, in gallant order dance.
88
And after wars, when white-wing'd victory
Is with a glorious triumph beautified,
And every one does Io Io cry,
VVhiles all in gold the Conqueror does ride,
The solemn pomp that fills the City wide
Observes such rank and measure every where,
As if they altogether dancing were.
89
The like just order Mourners do observe,
(But with unlike affection and attire)
When some great man that nobly did deserve
And whom his friends impatiently desire
Is brought with honor to his latest fire:
The dead corpse too in that sad dance is moved,
As if both dead and living, dancing loved.
90
A diverse cause, but like solemnity
Unto the Temple leads the bashful bride,
Which blusheth like the Indian Iuorie
Which is with dip of Tyrian purple died:
A golden troop does pass on every side
Of flourishing young men and Virgins gay,
Which keep fair measure all the flowery way.
91
And not alone the general multitude,
But those choice Nestors which in counsel grave
Of Cities, and of Kingdoms do conclude,
Most comely order in their Sessions have:
Wherefore the wise Thessalians ever gave
The name of Leader of their Countries dance
To him that had their Countries governance.
92
And those great Masters of the liberal Arts
In all their several Schools do Dancing teach:
For humble Grammar first does set the parts
Of congruent and well-according speech:
Which Rhetoric whose state yt clouds does reach,
And heavenly Poetry do forward lead,
And diverse Measures, diversely do tread.
93
For Rhetoric clothing speech in rich array
In looser numbers teaches her to range,
With twenty tropes, and turnings every way,
And various figures, and licentious change:
But Poetry with rule and order strange
So curiously does move each single pace,
As all is mard if she one foot misplace.
94
These Arts of speech the guides and Marshals are,
But Logic leads Reason in a dance,
(Reason the Cynosure and bright Load-star
In this worlds Sea t'auoid the rock of Chance)
For with close following and continuance
One reason does another so ensue,
As in conlusion still the dance is true.
95
So Music to her own sweet tunes does trip
With tricks of, 3, 5, 8, 15, and more:
So does the Art of Numbering seem to skip
From even to odd in her proportioned score:
So do those skils whose quick eyes do explore
The just dimension both of earth and heaven
In all their rules observe a measure even.
96
Lo this is Dauncings true nobility.
Dancing the child of Music and of Love,
Dancing it self both love and harmony,
Where all agree, and all in order move;
Dancing the Art that all Arts do approve:
The fair Caracter of the worlds consent,
The heavens true figure, and the earths ornament.
97
THE Queen, whose dainty ears had borne too long
The tedious praise of yt she did despise,
Adding once more the music of the tongue
To the sweet speech of her alluting eyes,
Began to answer in such winning wise
As that forthwith Antinous tongue was tide,
His eyes fast fixed, his ears were open wide.
98
Forsooth (quoth she) great glory you have won
To your trim Minion Dancing all this while,
By blazing him Loves first begotten son;
Of every ill the hateful Father vile
That does the world with sorceries beguile:
Cunningly mad, religiously profane,
Wits monster, Reasons canker, Senses bane.
99
Love taught the mother that unkind desire
To wash her hands in her own Infants blood;
Love taught the daughter to betray her Sire
Into most base unworthy servitude;
Love taught the brother to prepare such food
To feast his brothers, that the all-seeing Sun
Wrapped in a clowd, that wicked sight did shun.
100
And even this self same Love has dancing taught,
An Art that shows the Idea of his mind
With vainesse, frenzy, and misorder fraught;
Sometimes with blood and cruelties unkind:
For in a dance, Tereus mad wife did find
Fit time and place by murdering her son,
T'auenge the wrong his traiterous Sire had done.
101
What mean the Mermayds when they dance and sing
But certain death unto the Mariner?
What tidings do the dancing Dilphins bring
But that some dangerous storm approaches nere?
Then since both Love and Dancing liveries bear
Of such ill hap, unhappy may they prove,
That sitting free, will either dance or love.
102
YEt once again Antinous did reply,
Great Queen, condemn not Love the innocent,
For this mischievous Lust, which traitorously
Vsurps his Name, and steals his ornament:
For that true Love which dancing did invent,
Is he that tuned the worlds whole harmony,
And linkt all men in sweet society.
103
He first extracted from th'earth-mingled mind
That heavenly fire, or quintessence divine,
Which does such simpathy in beauty find
As is between the Elm and fruitful Vine,
And so to beauty ever does incline.
Lives life it is, and cordial to the heart,
And of our better part, the better part.
104
This is true Love, by that true Cupid got
Which daunceth Galliards in your amorous eyes,
But to your frozen heart approaches not,
Only your heart he dares not enterprise.
And yet through every other part he flies,
And every where he nimbly daunceth now,
That in your self, your self perceive not how.
105
For your sweet beauty daintily transfused
With due proportion throughout every part,
What is it but a dance where Love has used
His finer cunning, and more curious Art?
Where all the Elements themselves impart,
And turn, and wind, and mingle with such measure,
That the eye that sees it, surfeits with the pleasure.
106
Love in the twinkling of your eylids daunceth,
Love daunceth in your pulses and your veins,
Love when you sow your needles point aduaunceth,
And makes it dance a thousand curious strains
Of winding rounds, whereof the form remains,
To show, that your fair hands can dance yt Hey,
Which your fine seet would learn as well as they.
107
And when your Iuory fingers touch the strings
Of any siluer-sounding instrument,
Love makes the dance to those sweet murmurings,
With busy skill, and cunning excellent:
O that your feet those tunes would represent
With artificial motions to and fro,
That Love this Art in every part might shoe.
108
Yet your fair soul which came from heaven above,
To rule this house, another heaven below,
With diverse powers in harmony does move,
And all the virtues that from her do flow,
In a round measure hand in hand do go.
Could I now see as I conceive this Dance,
VVonder and Love would cast me in a trance.
109
The richest Jewel in all the heavenly Treasure
That ever yet unto the Earth was shown,
Is perfect Concord, the only perfect pleasure
That wretched Earth-borne men have ever known,
For many hearts it does compound in one:
That what so one does will, or speak, or do,
With one consent they all agree thereto.
110
Concords true picture shines in this Art,
Where diverse men and women ranked be,
And every one does dance a several part,
Yet all as one, in measure do agree,
Observing perfect uniformity:
All turn together, all together trace,
And all together honor and embrace.
111
If they whom sacred Love has linked in one,
Do, as they dance, in all their course of life
Never shall burning grief not bitter moan,
Nor factious difference, nor unkind strise,
Arise betwixt the husband and the wife.
For whether forth or back, or round he go,
As the man does, so must the woman do.
112
What if by often enterchange of place
Sometime the woman get the upper hand?
That is but done for more delightful grace,
For on that part she does not ever stand:
But as the Measures law does her command
She wheels about, and ere the dance does end,
Into her former place she does transcend.
113
But not alone this corespondence meet
And uniform consent does dancing praise,
For-Comlines the child of order sweet
Enamels it with her eye-pleasing rays:
Fair Comlines, ten hundred thousand ways
Through dancing shedds it self, and makes it shine
With glorious beauty, and with grace divine.
114
For Comlines is a disposing fair
Of things and actions in fit time and place,
Which does in dancing show it self most clear,
When troops confused which here and there do trace
Without distingushment or bounded space,
By dancing rule, into such ranks are brought,
As glads the eye, and rauisheth the thought.
115
Then why should reason judge that reasonles
Which is wits offspring, and the work of Art,
Image of concord, and of comlines.
Who sees a clock moving in every part,
A sailing Pinneste, or a wheeling Cart,
But thinks that reason ere it came to pass
The first impulsive cause and mouer was?
116
Who sees an Army all in rank advance
But deemes a wise Commander is in place
Which leads on that brave victorious dance?
Much more in dauncings Art, in dauncings grace
Blindness it self may reasons footstep trace:
For of Loves Maze it is the curious plot,
And of man's fellowship the true-loue knot.
117
But if these eyes of yours, (Load stars of love
Showing the worlds great dance to your minds eye)
Cannot with all their demonstrations move
Kind apprehension in your fantasy
Of Dauncings virtue, and nobility:
How can my barbarous tongue win you thereto
which heaven and earths fair speech could never do?
118
O Love my King: if all my wit and power
Have done you all the service that they can,
O be you present in this present hour,
And help your servant and your true Leige-man
End that persuasion which I erst began:
For who in praise of dancing can persuade
With such sweet force as Love, wc dancing made.
119
Love heard his prayer, and swifter then the wind
Like to a Page, in habit, face, and speech,
He came, and stood Antinous behind,
And many secrets to his thoughts did teach.
At last, a crystal Mirror he did reach
Unto his hands, that he with one rash view,
All forms therein by Loves revealing knew.
120
And humbly honoring, gave it to the Queen
With this fair speech: See fairest Queen (quoth he)
The fairest sight that ever shall be seen,
And the only wonder of posterity,
The richest work in Natures treasury;
Which she disdaines to show on this worlds stage,
And thinks it far too good for our rude age.
121
But in another world divided far,
In the great, fortunate, triangled I Will,
Thrice twelve degrees removed from the North stat
She will this glorious workmanship compile
Which she has been conceiving all this while
Since the worlds birth, and will bring forth at last,
When six and twenty hundredth years are past.
122
PEnelope the Queen when she had viewed
The strange-eye-dazeling-admirable sight,
Feign would have praisd the state and pulchritude,
But she was stricken dumb with wonder quite,
Yet her sweet mind retayn'd her thinking might:
Her ravished mind in heavenly thoughts did dwell,
But what she thought, no mortal tongue can tell.
123
You Lady Muse, whom Jove the Counselor
Begot of Memory, wisdoms Treasuresse,
To your divining tongue is given a power
Of uttering secrets large and limitlesse:
You can Penelopes strange thoughts express
Which she conceived, and the^ would feign have told,
When she the wondrous Crystal did behold.
124
Her winged thoughts bore up her mind so hie
As that she weend she saw the glorious throne
Where the bright Moon does sit in majesty,
A thousand sparkling stars about her shone,
But she herself did sparkle more alone
Then all those thousand beauties would have done
If they had been confounded all in one.
125
And yet she thought those stars moved in such measure
To doetheir Sovereign honor and delight,
As soothed her mind with sweet enchanting pleasure
Although the various change amazed her sight,
And her weak judgment did entangle quite:
Beside, their moving made the^ shine more clear,
As Diamonds moved, more sparkling do appear.
126
This was the Picture of her wondrous thought,
But who can wonder that her thought was so,
Since Vulcan King of fire, that Mirror wrought
(Which things to come, present, and past does know)
And there did represent in lively show;
Our glorious English Courts divine Image
As it should be in this our golden age.
127
Away Terpsichore, light Muse away,
And come Vrame, Prophetess divine;
Come Muse of heaven, my burning thirst allay,
Even now, for want of sacred drink I tine.
In heavenly moisture dip this Pen of mine,
And let my mouth with Nectar ouerflow,
For I must more then mortal glory show.
128
O that I had Homers abundant vain,
I would hereof another Ilias make,
Or else the man of Mantuus charmed brain
In whose large throat great Jove the thunder spoke.
O that I could old Gefferies Muse awake,
Or borrow Colins sayre heroike style,
Or smooth my times with Delias servants file.
129
O could I sweet Companion, sing like you,
Which of a shadow, under a shadow sing;
Or like fair Salues sad lover true,
Or like the Bay, the Marigolds darling,
Whose sudden verse Love couers with his wing:
O that your brains were mingled all with mine,
T'inlarge my wit for this great work divine.
130
Yet Astrophell might one for all suffize,
Whose supple Muse Camelion-like does change
Into all forms of excellent devise:
So might the Swallow, whose swift Muse does range
Through rare Idaeas, and inventions strange,
And ever does enjoy her joyful spring,
And sweeter then the Nightingale does sing.
131
O that I might that singing Swallow hear
To whom I owe my service and my love,
His sugared tunes would so enchant mine ear,
And in my mind such sacred fury move,
As I should knock at heavens great gate above
With my proud rimes, while of this heavenly state
I do aspire the shadow to relate.
FINIS.

