A TREATISE, INTITVLED; Nobody is my name, which bears Eueri-bodies blame.

WHEREIN IS LARGELY laid forth the lawful bounds of all buying and selling,
according to the infallible line of the laws of the Lord.

Compiled Dialogue wise by JOHN DEACON. Minister.

PROVE. 20. 14. It is naught, it is naught says the buyer: but when he is gone
apart he boasts.

1. THESE. 4. 6. Let no man oppress or defraud his brother in bargaining, or in
any matter: for the Lord is the auenger of all such things.

AT LONDON Printed by Robert Walde-graue, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard.

To the worshipful his very good friends, M. Richard WALTER Merchant; and M.
William Cleibrooke Mercer, Citizens of London; and to all the whole company of
Merchants there: JOHN DEACON wishes increase of grace, with abundance of
blessings both for this present life, and for the life to come, through Christ
our Savior. Amen.
MOses (right worshipful and dearly beloved) among many other matters of
weighty importance, Genes. 37.
remembers one imminent mischief intended against the innocent and harmless
Joseph, by the preposterous malice of Iaacobs sons. Who (disdaining that
future dignity of Joseph, which the Lord in a dream discovered unto him)
waited only a fit opportunity for the speedy perfourmance of that dreadful
destruction, which they had already determined against him. And surely, they
had put that devise of theirs in practice; had not Ruben their elder brother
persuaded the contrary. Notwithstanding, this their choler conceived against
him, could at no hand be alaied, before the same had achieved some strange
and unnatural effect: and therefore (by the advice of Judah) they sold him (in
most slavish manner) to the Ismeelitish Merchants. Who also respecting rather
their private auailes, then any the rare and hidden virtues of Joseph) did
presently sell him again to Potiphar the chief Steward of Pharaohs court.
But now the Lord (purposing, to give some glimmering show of his former
promises) does so prosper pore Joseph in all his affairs: that Potiphar
forthwith affoords him the highest pre-eminence over all his house, and
referres the determination of his domestical matters to the only direction
and order of Joseph. Who likewise showed himself very careful that way, and
carried withal so even an hand in this his appointed charge: that the Lord
both prospered Potiphar within and without, and bestowed many blessings upon
his house for Joseph's sake. Howbeit, this the happy estate of Joseph it held
not long. For such were the insatiable desires of his mistress (besotted with
the only sight of his beauty) that every day she devised, how to estraunge
his heart from his former sincerity, and even earnestly egged him also an end
to addulterate his masters bed. To which villainy of hers, when Joseph could
not by no means be brought: she sticked not then to lay such unjust
accusations against him, as caused Potiphar forthwith to clap him in prison:
where the pore soul continued comfortles, until the Lord (procuring by
Pharaohs good means his glorious deliverance) committed with all, the whole
care of Egypt to his proper and only directions. Wherein also he did not
negligently behave him self, but so indifferently disposed the blessings and
treasures of Egypt, as not only the great famine fore-shewed, was (by his
means) very timely prevented: but an habitation also for his parents and
kinsefolkes (by Pharaohs consent) very fitly provided.

Surely (dear brethren) so often as I remember this story, I am driven with
all to consider my proper estate in this newly attempted enterprise; For this
poor Joseph of mine (but newly crept from the swaddling clothes) was (at the
first coming forth) so unnaturally hated of his elder breethren (those
chapmen I mean before whom he uttered his vision) that (by the importunate
entreatie of some) he was feign to be delivered over unto the Ishmeelitish
merchants (to the Printers I mean) or ever he had attained to any full
perfection of knowledge; which men also (respecting chiefly their private
profits) have sold him over again unto Potiphar king Pharaohs Steward, I
mean to you Merchaunts, and other her Majesty's subjects. If therefore your
good worships, or any else whosoever (having him now at home in your houses)
shall find that the Lord (by his means) does prosper your labors: refuse not
the^ (I beseech you) forthwith to refer those other your domestical dealings
to his approved and faithful directions. And although that Potiphars wife (I
mean your worldly wisdoms) haled an end with the swaie of her unbridled
affections, shall happlie attempt (by the sundry suggestions of Satan) to
adulterate the yonglings former sincerity, and not prevailing therein) shall
presently thunder out her forged accusations unjustly against him: yet, let the
godly Potiphars in any wise beware that they show not them selves to
credulous in admitting those cankred clamours, neither yet over hasty in
clapping him close with in the gaile of forgetfulness, least with all they
deprive them selves of those manifold blessings which before by his means
they embraced. For notwithstanding this their unspeakable cruelty (concerning
only this poor offspring of mine) should work the aforesaid effect: yet, I
doubt not at all, but that the Lord (who tendreth the truth of his former
integrity) will cause him by Pharaoh (I mean, by our gracious Princes
procurement) to have a fuller enlargment, and to come abroad with more credit
then at any time heertofore. Yea, and (waying withal his faithful
simplicity) will very solemnly decree and most straightly command, that
your interchangable trafique what-soeuer shall be generally disposed by his
godly directions. The which so coming to pass, I dare boldly assure you, that
not only the threatened famine shall be for-stalled in time: but old Iaacob
likewise with the rest of his family (I mean the pore members of Christ)
shall much better be provided for, then heretofore they have been. Labor you
therefore (my brethren) with Pharaohs chief Butler when occasion shall serve,
and do your daily endeavors, (every one as his calling requires) to make my
poor Joseph his cause acquainted in Pharaohs court. I mean, do move (as you
may) her most excellent majesty with her honorable councellers, to see some
more faithful execution of the established laws against the horrible abuses
in buyeng and selling: for the better avoiding of all those fearful effects
which are handled hereafter at large in this treatise. And whereas, that
miserable enhansing of grain and of victuales, and that chargeable preperation
of household provision which now a-daies falls out, may draw your minds from
a due consideration of your duties herein and hinder this work: I promise
you therefore soon as the Lord shall ennable me to it) to confer in like
manner with those kind of people (who are to fraught the Markets for the
aforesaid provision) as I have done hear with your selves, for the speedier
effecting of those the premises.

Now next, concerning the treatise ensuing, I mean to be silent my self.
Only, I have spoken therein: let the other prophets therefore determine as
the Lord shall direct them. And, whereas it has been a usual practice
(drawn from the scriptures them selves and the primitive church) to dedicate
every treatise to some one man or other, and that for diverse respects: I
thought it also a thing very convenient for me, to recommend these slender
traueiles of mine, to some such sincere patrons as (I was sure) would
willingly undertake the protection thereof.

If now therefore you demand what should move me (among many others) to make
special choice of your selves: think not (I pray you) but that I have reason
sufficient to lead me unto it. For first, I assuredly know you are able to
judge of the matter. Both because you profess the faculty of bying and selling
your selves: and for that you are also those good Merchants in deed, who (for
the precious Perle of the Gospel) can be content to forgo whatsoever you
have, whereupon it follows that you are the better able to balance all the
afternamed abuses, by the estimation thereof. Secondly, for that, (by reason of
our ancient acquaintance) I have bin more specially beholding, to you both,
then to any other besides: and therefore (although I am detter to all in
Christ) more specially abound to you both, then to many other besides.

Being therefore so strongly confirmed herein, it makes me the bolder
specially to present you both, and generally in you the whole company there,
with this my poor Joseph. Most humbly beseeching you to accept thereof, as a
special means to renew that our old and ancient love. Which love of ours,
being both begun and continued in Christ, and for Christ: may be one
principal argument of our eternal election in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whose
grace I commend you all, Amen.

Yours in the Lord, and the Lord his unworthy: John Deacon.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader: grace in Christ.
THE apostle S. Paul (good christian reader) preaching on a time at Act. 19.
18. 19
Ephesus against their gross idolatry, and therein also very mightily
prevailing: it fell forth that one Act. 19. 18. 19
Demetrius a siluer-smith, and other the craftsmen confederat with him,
perceiving (as they thought) their profits would very shrevvdlie abate, if
(by the preaching of Paul) their great goddess Diana should grow in
contempt, they therefore Act. 19. 27.
(pretending the only defense of their state and religion) procured
foorthvvith Act. 19. 29. 34
a vvoonderfull tumult throughout the city, whereby the dealings of Paul and
his company were causleslie called in question. For the sequel shows it
self, that the preaching of Paul, tended neither to the dispraise of their
art, neither yet to the overthrow of religion: notvvithstanding Demetrius and
his company Act. 19. 27.
pretended both: No, he only reproved that superstitious abuse of their
faculty: and labored to bring them vvithall unto the sincere religion in deed.

So surely, my self (on a sabbath day) preaching not long since at a
certain fair against those sundry abuses which the common sort of chapmen
do usually practice in their buieng and selling: very many of them were
meruellouslie offended therevvith, as though I had (with the anabaptisticall
heretics) even utterly condemned the very faculty it self, or had been
some professed enemy unto the religion of Christ. VVheras the sequel shows
(you may see) how that both I endeavored to revive the ancient integrity of
buiing and selling (the same being now a days, very dangerously ouerspred
with the contagious infection of beastly abuses) and that I labored vvithall
to maintain the sincere religion of Christ, which (by means of those
beastly abuses) began now (in a manner) to be generally despised, as a
religion tending only to a very licencious and carnal liberty. But as
Demetrius and the rest of that covetous crew (howsoever they pretended the
public state and religion) would never have so vvinched at the preaching of
Paul, if so be their unlawful commodities themselves had not (by circumstance
thereof) bin called in question: so surely it is to be thought, that those
fellows which frovvned so furiously against that sermon of mine
(whatsoever they outvvardlie pretended) would never have kicked thereat as
they did, had not some other secret and inordinat affections of theirs (by such
a manner of preaching) been very shreudlie spurgalled. Howbeit, I (for mine
own part) do not yet certeinelie know the chief cause in deed of this
their sudden conceived choler against me: and therefore dare not certeinelie
set down the same. For, whether it was because (in their own consciences)
they felt themselves very roundly rubd on the gall, or whether it was for
that they doubted their great goddess Diana (I mean that dissimulation of
theirs, Act. 19. 24
which brought before such gain to their arts) being thus plainly
displaied, would now be easily espied even of the simpler sort, Act. 19. 27.
and so, by consequence, the reproouing thereof become the more dangerous to
that their estate: very sure I am they had no just cause at all to be grieved
therevvith. Well, whether it was the spirit or spite, or whatsoever
accident else that disquieted their splentike passion: the issue (you may see)
does turn to the glory of God. Ierem. 23.
For hereby appears the power of his word, which as a hammer, is able to
break unto powder, such hardened hearts as hearten themselves against the
orderly course thereof. And now being often persuaded by some, that the
publishing thereof in Print would greatly grow to thy good: I could not
with any reason at all dissent from that their earnest desire. For although
it should work none amendment at all in the minds of miserable catifs, who
(being too too far muzled with the contagious practice of such cankred abuses)
cannot, by any possible means, recover themselves from the custom thereof:
yet may it fully suffice, both to display their devises, and to make thee the
more thoroughly acquainted with some knowledge of those their deceits
vvherevvith I was deeply deceived my self. Neither could I at any hand
find out their footings, until by daily experience, the schoole-mistresse of
fools, I espied their pranks, and paid for my knowledge.

The principal cause which drove me to dispose the matter dialog wise, was
thereby to let thee understand, both what they were able to say for
themselves: and to show thee vvithall, how to answer the same. So that thou
nedest not now no more be deceived by any their subtle devises: unless thou
purposelie suffer thine eyes to be blindfolded by such prattling dissemblers as
purpose to play with thy pursse.

The speakers produced in this present treatise are principally four,
presenting unto thee four several estates of people. The Ingroser he
comprehends our principal merchants. The Peddler does signify the inferior
sort of buiers and sellers. No-bodie stands for the state of our painfullest
preachers. And Euerie-bodie puts upon him the person of the comminaltie. Now
because the best preachers of all are (in these days) not only of no account
with the wicked, but often times also unjustly accused of all men: I have
therefore thus entitled this treatise: NO-BODIE is my name, bearing
EVERIE-BODIES blame: which thing the very sequel it self does fully
confirm.

Moreover, because those particular reprehensions which the godly preachers
(upon just occasion) do practice, can hardly have passage among the most of
our English professors: I do therefore purposlie debate that one special
point, or ever I proceed to the principal, argument. Lastly, at the knitting
up of this treatise, I have promised to deal (in like sort) against the hard
dealings of such as are to fraught the Markets with grain and victuals: the
which (by Gods grace) I mean to perform, the rather if I perceive these
nevvlie attempted traueiles may obtain any good liking at the hands of the
godly, for vvose sake I adventured the publishing thereof. In the mean time
(good christian reader) commend all those in thy prayers to God: who have even
vowed themselves to undertake any pains for the profit of his church. Soheit.

Thine in the Lord, and the Lord his unworthy JOHN DEACON.

The Lawful bounds of buying and selling, limited forth by the line of Gods
word.
The speakers are
Ingroser. Peddler. Eueri-body. Nobodie.
Ingroser. Having thus speedily packed my wares, trussed my Hampiers, made
safe my money, and sent all iogging before by Jack my boy: I would now that I
had some one friend or other to accompany me hom-ward: but, wish (they say) and
have: For see where (in a very good time) mine old acquaintance the Peddler of
Potton, goes plodding before me. I assure you I am glad thereof. Oh he is a
iollie companion, a pleasant fellow, and a mate for the nonce. Besides that,
(if he have had any good market at all) I shall be sure to take some silver of
him for wares which he received (by retaile) at my hands this morning. Well, be
what be will: of this I am certain, that (if happily we should be besee with
false harlots as we walk home-wardes together) I may be bold of him to help
at a pinch, for the man is made of a tried metal, he fears not his flesh: I
will after him therefore with all the haste that I can. Well ouer-taken friend
Peddler: What is the cause (man) you make so much speed? I immagine you have had
a warm market to day, you march so merrily home-wardes: or else (it should
seem) you are afraid of your pursse.


Peddler. For my market (good sir) I confess I have had many a worse in my
days. But as for robbing (assure your self) that is the least of my care.
Whosoever dare challenge a further right to my coin then I have in it my
self, and ther-vpon will attempt his said enterprise: (being but one to one)
let him win it and were it.


Ingroser. Is it true? and are you (in deed) so lusty a champion? well, then I
hope (if need should require) I might he hold to trust to your help.


Peddler. Be bold thereof, and that so long as these leges of mine shall be able
to bear my body.


Ingroser. What man? and would you take you to your legs? surely sir, you
are a friend to trust to at need.


Peddler. Nay sir, you do much mistake my words. My meaning is, that I would
fight in your cause so long as I wear able to stand. And this, not only in
regard of many your former frendshipps, but especially in some recompense of
your kindenes toward me at this fair, by delivering your wares into my hands
of trust: whereby I have got an honest gain: yea I have had a good Market to
day, I thank you hartelie for it.


Ingroser. In good soothe I am glad thereof. Neither has the pleasuring of
thee that ways been any hinderaunce at all to my self: for albeit many men
hold an opinion that I (by keeping my wares in mine own hands) might happily
in the end have sold them for more: yet (because those happs are in hazard,
and for that the longer I hold them, the greater is my charge, and the
seldomer I return them, the less my commodity) I had rather to take a little
in time, then right naught at leisure: for light gains and often will make the
purse heavy.


Peddler. Truth (sir) as you say, howbeit many men had rather hold their wares
in their hands, although it turn to the hurt of them selves, then that they
would retaile them forth to the furderaunce of others: and so often times they
are forced to return their gains by weeping cross. But what is he that yonder
goes ietting before us.


Ingroser. I am greatly deceived if it be not our old friend Eueri-bodie: sure
it is so. Come, let us leg it a little to ouer-take the man and we shall be
sure to hear some one news or other: for he is a tolie talke-atiue fellow.
Well overtaken friend Eueri-bodie.


Eueri-bodie. What? master Ingroser and you goodman Peddler, mine old
acquintance, in good sooth you are welcome both: yea, even the welcomest friends
of a thousand.


Ingroser. Gramercie for that, but what news abroad I pray thee friend
Eueri-bodie?


Eueri-bodie? Small news (sir) even now. And yet this news I can tell you
(beshrew your lips for your labor) Eueri-bodie do marvel that wares should
be so dear to day. You chapmen have had a good hit at this fair: men say you
have made your markets as you list your selves.


Peddler. In deed (for mine own part) I confess I have sped pretelie well. And
yet, if we chapmen had been but so wise amongst our selves as to have met
together in the morning before the fair, and then (rating our wares all at one
reckoning) had so held men at hardmeate a while till toward the end of the
fair: we might happily have got one hundred pownds amongst us more then we
did: howbeit, (such is the greedines of some) they will sell (forsoothe)
although it tend to the hurt of them selves and the rest of their trade. They
love to be turning the penie so often, The purpose of this treatise, is to show
that ministers may deal both generally and perticulerly with offenders.
that (I fear me) at length they will turn them selves clean out of credit.


Eueri-bodie? Oh, I perceive by your speech (goodman Peddler) that you hard not
the Sermon today.


Peddler. The Devil a Sermon I hard: why? think you I could not more
profitablie employ my self then stand staring upon a prattling Priest to hear
I wot not what, and so have my Bouthstakes to pytch when other are selling
their wares? nay, I like not of that.


Ingroser. I hold thee the wiser. For howsoever men seek after Sermons, they
must be careful to live. But I pray thee friend Eueri-dodie, what news have
thou brought from the Sermon?


Eueri-bodie. Surely, 10. general reprehe^sions so generally granted, they
need no proof.
such news as made Eueri-bodie amazed. He kept a coil as though he had got a
commission to condemn the whole company to death, he was so outrageous against
al estates (especially pore chapmen frequenting the fayres) that I maruayled
greatly some one or other did not presently pluck him out of the Pulpit.


Ingrosor. Were it not for fear of the laws, an hundred (I warant thee) would
have been ready to that. And surely (except the varlets be tamed in time)
they will bring at length every man's head under their girdle. But I pray thee
what could he prate against us that be chapmen?


Eueri-body. What? sure I had thought the tenth part of that which he spoke
could not possibly have com forth of his belly. He so coursed them for their
cou^terfayt wares, so loaded them for their lying and swering, so ratled them
up for their regrating, so shook the Slaves for there selling derer for days:
with a thousand things more that I am not able to to call to mind: the least
whereof had been able to have moved the most patient man on the earth.


Ingroser. What was he I pray thee? where is his dwelling? and how is he
called?


Eueri-bodie. Surely, concerning his substance he was (for any thing I could
perceive) even then in the mydest thereof. For by the goodly gaberdine he wore,
any man might easily gather, that either he was a miserable catiff, very loath
to lay any cost on his carkes: or other-wais so pore a snake he could not
provide him a better. As for his dwelling, I think that, either he had no
where at al to hide his head: or that he passed but little for the love of his
countrie-men, in raging so roundly against them on a row without any cause at
all for ought I could see. Now next, as touching his name, (for ought I heard)
he was called Nobodie: which name, whether it was proper unto him, or
otherways given him in skorne, I cannot certainly say. But (unless I be
foulie deceived) yonder goes the man, or one very like him.


Ingroser. I would it were true: upon condition thereof, I would give thee a
gallon of wine.


Peddler. Oh that it were so. Thou should then see us thoroughly prove the
gentle-mans patience: or otherwais laugh him out of his coat.


Eueri-bodie. Of a truth it is even the very same. Let me alone (I pray you)
with broaching the matter. Wherein you shall see me so cunningly deal, that
at the very first entrance of all, he will make no daubt to lay open the
inward secrets of his heart.


Ingroser. We willingly consent to the same.


Peddler. Now (alas seely soul) see how leanelie he looks. A man would
judge by his cheeks he had not eaten a good meals meat this month. But mum:
go to Eueri-bodie, lets see you salute him.


Eueri-bodie. Well over taken master Parson? whither (I pray you sir) are you
traueling this way alone?


No-bodie. Even whither it pleases the Lord him self: Act. 17. 28.
for in him alone I live, move, and have my being.


Ingroser. It Is marvel (master parson) to see a man of your profession
without three or four good geldings of your own, a couple of men and a lackie.


No-bodie. That worldly pomp in a preacher (good brother) beseems such as
seek their kingdom on earth. As for me Heb. 11. 10.
I look for a city having a sure foundation, whose builder and maker is God.
And therefore Heb. 11. 25.
I had rather to suffer adversity with the children of God, then so to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season.


Peddler. Surely (sir) the man is so marueilouslie well disposed, that (me
think) it were great pity, he should live any longer.


Ingroser. A man may perceive (master Parson) by your apparel, you are an
old Penni-father: one that cannot spare an halpeny to your back for powching
the same in your budgit.


No-bodie* As there can not be a more miserable Eccle, 10. 9.
thing then the love of money, and the hording up of the same, for James. 5. 3.
the very rust thereof will be a witness of such an outrageous wickedness
in the last day, and burn men's flesh as fire: so am I 1. Tim. 6. 8.
taught by the Apostle saint Paul, when I have meat, drink, and apparel
whatsoever to be contented therewith. And touching the bravery of apparel,
as Genesis 3. 7. 21.
the same first entered with sin and shame: so it ends (for the most part) in
misery and confusion. Neither do I see, why mortal men, should be so puffed
up with the bravery of apparel, (unless it be to show them selves proud of
their borrowed plumes) seeing the Silke-woorme her self has greater occasion
to glory in her silks, and the poor seely sheep, more reason to brag of
the bravery of her wool then miserable men: who in no wise can long continue
their bravery without borowing these blessings at the hands of them both.


Eueri-bodie. Well sir: how plain soever you seem in apparel, you were
meetlie rough (me thought) this day in your preaching: especially against
these buyers and sellers. In good sooth master Ingroser, and you good man
Peddler whereas you think him plain at this present, if you had heard him
preach to day, you would have thought him a plain fellow in deed.


Ingroser To be plain in expounding the word of god, that I account a plainnes
with profit. But for any man to be plain in displaying the manners of men: to
tell you plain, I take that for a plainnes plainly besides the purpose.


No-bodie. If you think it meet for a man to be plain in expounding the
scriptures, why should you judge it unmeet to be also as plain in dividing the
same? unless you do deem the Lord God to be meetlie wise in providing a
medicine, but merely unwise in applying the plaster.


Ingroser. Whatsoever I think thereof, it makes no matter. But (sir) because you
and the rest of your fellows do every where show your selves so malapert in
deciphering the several dealinges of all men: Particular reprehensions
warrantable both by precept and practice.
or ever we come to examine the causes that compelled you to carpe at us
chapmen, lets see how (either by precept or practice of any one servant of
God) you are able to warrant such particular reprehensions from the sacred
scriptures?


No-bodie. With all my heart. By precept and how:
First therefore (to begin with precepts) an evident warrant concerning the
same, is laid down by the Lord him self in Leuitticus, saying: Leuit. 19.
17,
thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke
thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin.


Peddler. Tut, tut (sir) you are clean besides your case: for that is to be
understood of private reprehensions.


No-bodie. But if you look to the verse next going before, you shall find it
far otherways, For there the Lord (to suppress all outrageous malice in
men) forbids them in place of judgment, to seek (by any sinister
affection) the death of the innocent, saying: Leuit. 19. 16.
thou shall not stand against the blood of thy brother: I am the Lord. Now,
least any should seem to cauil against the equity of this law, saying: why?
then we may not speak the truth against our brother before a judge,
especially, when it may tend to his destruction, he adds forthwith: thou
shall not hate thy brother in thine heart but thou shall plainly rebuke thy
neighbor, and suffer him not to sin. Giving us thereby to understand, that
it is no less demonstration of a malicious mind for men to wink at the
wickedness of their brother before a judge, then with hatred to pursue his
innocence unto the death. For whereas by the one, they wound but his body: by
the other they slaie both body and soul.


Ingroser. But this is spoken (as appears in the beginning of the chapter) to
all the congregation of Israel without exception, showing therein how one
neighbor should friendly and privately admonish another: and not that you
Priests should (in open Pulpit) thus peartlie prate against all men at your
pleasures.


No-bodie. You could not (in all the Bible) have brought an argument more
directly against your self. For if the safety and good estate of our
brethren, must be so carefully couched in all christian breasts, that every
private and particular man is bound (by the rule of charity) to be most
careful thereof: How much more belongs it then to the ministers to be
preciselie circumspect therein, who, not only by the self-same league of love,
but also in a more special regard of their function and calling, are charged
very vigilantlie to watch Heb. 13. 17.
over the souls of Gods people, as those that are sure to give an account for
the same.


Ingroser. Tush a straw: for that is meant to reprove them in general
terms, but where can you warrant your particular reprehensions by the word
of God?


No-bodie. Besides this lately alleged law of the LORD, the proofs which
do tend to that purpose are both pregnant and plentiful. For first, our
Savior Christ (intending to make a plain description of a ministers office)
compares Math. 24. 45.
him to a wise and faithful steward, Luke. 12. 42.
whom his Lord has made ruler over his house, to give them their portion of
meat in due time. If therefore it belongs to the duty of a temporal steward,
to give every servant his portion of meat, namely: four peckes of meal for
every month, Donatus in Phormio.
(as Donatus declares) or otherways, (for his unfaithfulness) to be hewn in
pieces: Is it likely (think you) the spiritual steward (being with no less
diligence bound to distribute justly to every one his portion of spiritual
meat) if he be found negligent therein, that Ezec. 33. 8.
he should be brought to any better estate of dignity, Math. 24. 51.
remaining (as you see) in a far more miserable condition of sin. Luke. 12.
46.



Eueri-bodie. Surely (sir) you have said something now to the purpose, if
comparisons proved any thing at all. But seeing such shot is of
insufficient force to batter the enemies hold: we will be the sooner
persuaded in this point, if you can avouch your assertion by some evident
precepts and rules of the holy ghost.


No-bodie. That may easily be performed. For the Apostle saint Paul (to the
end his scholar Timothy might more carefully continu the integrity and
credit of his calling) he gives him herein a special exhortation saying: 2.
Tim. 2. 15.
Study to show thy self approved to God, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, dividing the word of truth aright.


Peddler. What means the Apostle (I pray you) by dividing the word of truth
aright?


No-bodie. Even that selfsame skill and care which our savior Christ required
before in the faithful Steward: namely, Exodus 29. 32.
that both he know how, Leuit. 9. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.
and also be diligent in giving every one his portion of meat in due time.
Wherein also, either he alludeth unto the Priests of the old law, who (in
their sacrifices) accustomablie gave unto God the portion of right, belonging
unto him, took their own part, and delivered also to him which brought the
sacrifice his appointed share? Or else it is a Metaphorical and borrowed
speech, transferred either from the usual manner of cutting of bread, as we
see a father (when he feeds his children) deuideth the whole loaf in
pieces, and gives to every child his portion: Or otherways drawn from the
lopping away of superfluous things, as the Physicians do practice: who use to
sear, to cut, and to purge away the putrified and rotten parts for infecting
the rest of the body.


Ingroser. And what would you infer upon this?


No-bodie. Even the self same doctrine I delivered before. For like as a
father, being careful to feed his children, distributeth to every one that
portion of meat, which is properly fit, and belongs unto him. And as a
Physician, (seeking soundly the sauegard of his patient) spares not to purge
away and to cut of those superfluous and putrified parts, which otherways
would annoie the whole body it self: even so it befalls especially for
spiritual fathers, to be careful in feeding their flock, and for spiritual
Physicians to be provident in cutting away (with the sword of the spirit) all
such inordinate affections as 2. Cor. 10. 5^
do raise them selves against the knowledge of God, and to bring into
captivity every thought unto the obedience of Christ: having ready the
vengeance against all disobedience, when the obedience of the sons of GOD is
fulfilled.


Ingroser. Is this then (that you say) the meaning of Paul.


No-bodie. Yea no doubt. And this more plainly appears by that platform of
reproouing, which (else where) he prescribes to Timothy for all degrees of
people, saying: 1. Tim. 5. 1. 2.
Rebuke not an elder rigorously, but exhort him as a father, the younger men as
breethren, the elder women as Mothers, the younger as Sisters, with all pureness:
showing therein how he should distribute to every one their portion of rebukes,
according as their age and calling required.


Ingroser. Well: be it that this was the meaning of the Apostle: But where (for
all that) can you name in the scriptures, any one servant of God, which either
practiced the same, or showed themselves so saucy in snapping at al estates of
men, as your self and such other have done.


No-bodie. Why? think you then that the holy ghost (who was so careful in
penning these precepts) would have men careless in practicing the same? or
dare you call that holy service of God, a sawcines of men? Oh beware of the
woe Isay. 5. 20.
that is threatened against such an outrageous blasphemy. But where and when (I
pray you) have you seen me so saucy? for it seems by your speech even now
that you were from the sermon to day.


Ingroser. I confess I was from the Sermon indeed: and yet notwithstanding I
hard of your dealings therein.


No-bodie. It may be so, howbeit, you should here have remembered withal, that
heare-saye, is commonly the next neighbor to a lie. But (I pray you) of whom
have you hard the same?


Peddler. Of whom? why of Eueri-bodie in the fair.


No-bodie. If you hard this news of Eueri-body, it follows then, either that
you also did here the same of your selves or otherwais that you your selves are
to be accounted as Nobody: god grant you may be found more in the reckoning
of the lord. Notwithstanding (lest my self alone might be thought to be
mizzeled with the performance of that holy service of God which your self so
vnholilie account but a sawcines of men: I will show some examples thereof in
the sacred scriptures.


Eueri-bodie. I pray you do so, and (for mine own part) I will heartily thank
you for it.


No-bodie. Eliiah (being by Ahab unjustly accused for a disturber of the
kingdom and state of Israel) most boldly replied, by practice and how:
say 1. King. 18. 17. 18.
I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house: in that you have
forsaken the commandemente of the Lord. Declaring (by this his example) that
the faithful Ministers must not only not suffer the truth to be unjustly
standered: but also, very boldly reprove the wicked slaunderers thereof to
their faces, and that also without any respect of persons at all.


Ingroser. What is this to the purpose? Eliiah had to deal with a wicked and
an ungodly wretch: such a one, whose salvation is rather to be doubted then
other-waies. But (sir) you have not such a large, commission as Elijah had:
neither are you able so stricktly to determine of men as he did of Ahab.


No-bodie. Well, be it so. Yet thus much withal you grant (by the way) yt
against such as are notoriously known to be wicked, a man may deal both
particulerlie and plainly. But what say you to David? a man 1. Sam: 13. 4.
made after the mind of God, one of whose salvation none may lawfully doubt.
And yet notwithstanding, did not Nathan the prophet 2. Sam: 12. 7.
reprove him openly to the face, saying that he was even the man which had
slain Vriah with the sword, and taken his wife to be his wife?


Ingroser. You say som-thing indeed, if this had been done in the time of the
Gospel, wherein the Lord deals now a great deal more favorably with his
people, then heretofore with those that were under the rigor and rule of the
law.


No-bodie. As though that Mat. 3. 6.
God who is ever like unto him self, Iam: 1. 17.
can (at any time) become a chaungeling. Or as though that Lord (who so
sharply reproved the transgressors under the law) could now be content not
only to wink at, but also to become a baude unto the sins of such as live in
the days of the Gospel. No no, he remains one and the selfsame God for
ever: and Ezech: 18. 4. 10.
is every day ready to take a like vengeance on all such as commit the like
sins. Rom: 1. 31.
Yea, and to punish the wickedness of the fathers upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation. But (seeing the examples under the Gospel do
stick so sore in your stomach) what say you to John Baptist? did not he Matt
3. 7.
both openly and bitterly reprove the hypocrisy of the Pharisees and Saduces
which came to his baptism: calling them by name, the generation of vipers.


Peddler. Yea, that was in private talk, and not in his public preaching.


No-bodie. But (if you mark well the beginning Matt. 3. 1.
of the third chapter of Mathewes Gospel) Mark. 1. 14.
you shall find it far otherways. Luke. 3. 4.
For there it is said that Matt. 3. 2.
John Baptist Came and preached in the wilderness of Judea. Mark. 1. 15.
Lo, there it is said he came and preached. Luke. 3. 4.
The abridgment also of his Matt. 3. 7. 8.
said Sermon, is there set down in these words, Repent for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand. Having therefore to deal with the matter of repentance, he
also, according to the tenure thereof, applied his particular reprehensions
unto the Pharisees and Saduces, saying, (e) O generation of vipers, who has
forewarned you to flee from the vengeance to come? bring forth therefore
things worthy amendment of life. Thus then you see not in private conference
but in public preaching, the practice of that doctrine which we handled before.


Ingroser. Yea, but it may notwithstanding be probably coniectuted that this
was done only before the Pharisees and Saduces themselves, and not in the
presence of the other people: which if it be true, then, although the same were
tolerable in him, yet have you nothing herein for the proof of your purpose.


No-bodie* How little gain soever I have gotten by this: every child may
epsy your want of waightier matter, when only upon a bare supposition, you
are driven to conclude your purpose. Whereby also you have, at unawares in the
foresaid example, directly granted against your self, that this kind of
preachinge is tolerable among such as he wicked, so the same be practiced
only in the presence of those that be acquainted with the selfsame
wickedness. But if you look well to the matter, you may find this thing to be
done, not only before the Pharisees and Saduces, themselves, with the rest of
that viperous brood: but also even in the presence of the other people. For in
the fifth verse it is said that Matthew. 3. 5, 6.
then went out unto him, Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round
about Jordan, and they were baptized of him in Jordan confessing their sins.


Ingroser All this may be granted, and yet you are never the nearer your
purpose. For in the verse next following it is said, that Matthew. 3. 7.
many of the Pharisees also and Saduces came unto him. But when came they unto
him? even after he had preached repentance and baptized the people. So then,
it is very likely, that (after he had dispatched the people and sent them
packing away) then came also the Pharisees and Saduces unto him to learn their
lesson.


No-bodie. This your loose opinion (which leans only upon likelihoods) is
more likely to fall to the ground, then to find any firm foundation in the
example of John. For it is said there, they came not only unto him, but that
they came also unto his Baptism, where upon it follows, that they also were
made partakers of that his Sermon, which he preached unto the people or ever he
baptized them. For otherwise it had bin an apish imitation in them, to have
counterfeited the people in coming to his baptism, having heard before no
reason at all to lead them unto it.


Eueri-bodie. Why then does the Evangelists so preciselie express the coming
of them to the baptism of John, immediately after the baptizing of the people,
if so be they were present before?


No-bodie. This was purposely done to express the great admiration of John
Baptist in beholding the same. And thus much also the discretiue (autem, or
but) imports, saying Matthew. 3. 7. 8.
But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Saduces come to his baptism, he
said unto them: Oh generation of vipers, who has forewarned you to flee from
the wrath to come? As if (with a wonderful admiration) he had said to
himself: and is it possible that these men (among the rest of the people)
should so suddenly repent from the bottom of their hearts? Upon consideration
also whereof he cries out unto them saying: Who has forewarned you to flee
from the wrath to come? whence springs this so sudden an alteration of your
mind? with what an affection have you heard my preching? yea, with what manner
of spirit come you to this my Baptisiue: if it be only in hypocrisy of heart,
I tell you in truth, it will nothing avail you, but if it be with unfeigned
repentance, then look in any wise, that you witness the same to the world,
by such fruits as are worthy the amendment of life. Thus then you see the
cause why the evangelist so precisely expresses the coming of the Pharisees
and Saduces to the baptism of John, and that also immediately after the
baptizing of the rest of the people.


Ingroser. If he dealt, as you say, thus roundly with the Pharisees and
Saduces, and that also in the presence of all the people: with what affection,
I pray you, was he moved so bitterly to inueigh against those men alone, and
to spare the rest of the people. Surely the one of these two (me think) must
necessarily follow thereof, namely, that either the rest of the people were
departed before, or otherwise in speaking so plainly to the Pharisees and
Saduces alone the people still present, that they only, and not any of the
other people were guilty of sin.


No-bodie. Neither of both. For first, that the people also were sinners as well
as the other, it is very apparent by their coming to baptism: otherwise the
same had been needles unto them. For baptism was a Sacrament of the washing
away of their sins. And secondly, that the people also were present at this
the reprehension of the Pharisees and Saduces, it has been proved before.
Now with what affection John Baptist was moved to speak especially to them
in the presence of all the rest: it is to be considered, that this his public
proceeding against the Pharisees and Saduces, was principaly done in regard of
the whole church of God. Who hearing, on the one side, the wickedness of those
whom they took for their guides so openly revealed: and perceiving again on
the other side, that even they also which Math. 23. 27.
outwardly pretended a glittering show of godliness were inwardly but
rotten bones, they might themselves be stricken with a greater terror of the
judgments of God: and thereupon (being thus driven to a deeper consideration
of their cursed estate) they would the more easily be won to an unfeigned
repentance of their former wickedness. Which general commodity, the apostle
also himself does will us to wait, for from such public reprehensions,
saying, 1. Tim. 5. 20.
Those that offend rebuke openly, that others also may fear.


Ingroser. If the rest of the people (as your self have affirmed) were sinners
as well as those Pharisees and Saduces of whom we have spoken: what moved him
then so bitterly to bend his force only against these, and let the other
escape? This sauoreth very much me think of a partial mind.


No-bodie. God forbid you should so much as imagine the holie-ghost to be
partial. Neither do I say, the other escaped scot-free, although I affirm
that he dealt more roundly with these Pharisees and Saduces than with the rest
of the people. And yet if you list to read the third chapter of Luke, you shall
find Luc. 3. 7. 10, 11 12 13 14
there, the selfsame reprehensions applied to every particular estate of men,
which Matthew here only reports of the Pharisees and Saduces.


Ingroser. I perceive (master parson) you came of a woman: you must have your
mind in this matter whosoever says nay. But can you allege any other
examples beside to confirm this point? For one swallow (we commonly say)
makes no summer.


No-bodie. Although I cannot deny but that I have imperfections remaining
within me: yet would I not have you to think Romans 6. 12
they reign over me, or that I am not ready (from time to time) to yield to
a more dexterity. Notwithstanding, being fully assured of the truth on my
side, I am Eccles*
taught to strive for the same unto death. And whereas you do further imagine
that John Baptist alone has taken this course of reprehending particularly,
you are greatly deceived. For not only he (with the rest of the Prophets
before him) has 2. Sam. 12. 7. 1. Kin. 18. 17. 18 Ierem. 20. 3. 4.
broken the ye to this enterprise: Matthew. 23. 13 Mark. 6. 18. Acts 7. 51.
Acts 13. 10. Acts 23. 3.
but our Savior Christ also himself, saint Stephan, saint Paul, and all the
other Apostles have followed this trace, as in sundry places of Scripture most
plainly appears.


Peddler. You conclude then, that a preacher in his public preaching may use
particular reprehensions, so often as time and occasion require.


No-bodie. What else? that so his agreement may be with the prophets, apostles,
and with our savior himself. Always yet provided, that the same 2. Tim. 2. 15.
be performed in truth, with all sincerity of heart, and according to that
inviolable rule which is contained at large in the eighteenth of Matthew.


Eueri-bodie. I pray you sir tell us, what rule that is?


No-bodie. With all my heart: our Savior Christ (purposing there to prescribe a
perpetual platform of true discipline concerning the censuring of sinners)
says on this sort, Leuit. 19. 17. Eccles. 19. 13. Matthew. 18. 15. Luke. 17.
3. James 5. 18.
When thy brother does trespass against thee alone, go and tell him his fault
between him and thee alone: if he hear thee, thou have won thy bother. But if
he hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two: that Deuteronomy. 19. 15. John 8.
17. 1. Cor. 13. 1. 1. Tim. 5. 19. Hebr. 10. 28.
by the mouth of one or two witnesses every word may be confirmed. If he will
not vouchsafe to hear them, then tell it unto the church also, let him be
unto thee as an heathen man and a publican.


Ingroser. Then I perceive you would have men first to be privately
admonished, or ever such bitter and public reprehensions be permitted to
proceed forth against them. But why have not your self observed the same?


No-bodie. Where, and at what time I pray you have I swarued from it?


Ingroser. Even in your Sermon to day: for it was in Eueri-bodies mouth, that
you dealt especially against us that be chapmen.


No-bodie. Although I spoke then against those ougly abuses which be generally
practiced in buying and selling: yet will no man I am sure affirm, that I
applied my said speeches especially against any one particular person. No, my
whole care was to rip up the sins in general: leaving the particular
application thereof to every man's conscience, The question proved, it follows
consequently, that therefore the ministers may reprove all abuses in buieng
and selling.
so far forth as he felt himself to be touched therewith.


Ingroser. Well sir, having hitherto proved that the preachers, keeping a
general course against sin, may now and then also put in practice some such
particular reprehensions, as occasion, time, place, and person requires: you
are now (by promise) to discover those general faults which you find in
buying and selling, and for the which you showed your self so sharp (this
day in your sermon) against us that be chapme^.


No-bodie. Very true as you say. And because that contraries do more timely
appear by their contraries: I think it expedient (for the better performance
hereof) first to lay down the lawfulnes of buying and selling, and then next
the unlawfulness thereof. That so, as well the excess as the wants, being
plainly perceived: the abuses in both may more lively bewray themselves.


Peddler. Well, then show first I pray you the lawfulnes thereof.


No-bodie. I am willing (with all my heart) to perform the same. The end of our
creation an infallible touchstone, to try the lawfulnes or unlawfulness of
merchandrie.
And therefore because the lawfulnes of every action is to be tried and
approved by some infallible rule, it shall not be amiss or ever we proceed in
this point: first to set down that principal end of our creation, which is, as
it were, the very square or shoot-anker whereunto in all our actions we ought
to have a principal regard: and then next, to make thoroughly known unto you,
the faculty it self of buying and selling, with the causes, the kinds, the
difference, the effects and ends thereof: that so, by conferring faithfully the
one with the other, you may the better perceive how far men are swarued
from that perfection, whereunto (in a christian care) they are to direct the
continual practice of their several professions. Otherwise, if I should
presently enter upon the discovery of all those crimes which be commonly
incident to buying and selling, the very buiers and sellers themselves, being
before unacquainted either with the said end of their creation, or with any
one part of the true faculty it self, many things (be you sure) would be
esteemed for trifles, which yet by this means will be found most heinous
offenses.


Ingroser. I like this your order excellently well* proceed therefore, I pray
you, first of all in penning down the principal end of man's creation: and then
next to the description of ye trade it self.


No-bodie. The principal end of man's creation is the Pro. 16. ^.
glory of God: the practice whereof consists, especially in a christian
conversation. Wherein we are bound to show our selves not only careful of our
own salvation: but also very diligent, in procuring the good and profit one of
another. Now, because the affections of our Psalm. 7. 9. Psalm. 139. 1. 2.
heart, are only known unto the Lord him self, and our outward actions are
also a testimony thereof unto the world, it is therefore very apparent, that,
then the care of Gods glory is rightly couched in the closet of our breasts,
when both we keep our selves, Collos. 1. 22. Iam. 1. 27.
the unspotted of the world, and withal, do so witness our love unto our
brethren by: that equity and upright dealing, which we keep with them in out
common affairs: as even Psalm. 15. 3.
in our lips appears no guile. For otherways, how can we be said, 1. John.
4. 20.
to love God whom we have not seen: if we love not our brethren whom we se
daily before our face. In whom assured lie the Lord presents him self unto
us, as it were in a lively glass representing the image of his glory, which
glory of God so shining in them, we should seek also, by all possible means,
to garnish with that our christian love aparantly tendered unto them. Now,
because the discharge of this our christian love where with we are Romans 13. 8.
thus deeply indebted toward our christian brethren, may in no wise be
measured by our private affections, ye Lord therefore him self has given a
general law, requiring us Math. 7 12. Luke. 6 3. Tobi. 4. 13.
to do to other men, as we would be done unto our selves. Unto the equitye
of which so general a rule, it behooves us all to have a special regard even
in those our faculties and trades which we practice on earth: not so much in
respect of our selves, as for the good estate of the rest of our breethren. And
this is that principal end of man's creation; whereunto, also even you that
be Chap-men ought to have a special care: and must witness the same by the
continual practice of that your vpryght dealings, with other in the selfsame
facultye and trade which your selves do profess.


Ingroser. If this be the allotted end of man's creation, and our actions (as
you say) either are or ought to be an aparant testimony thereof unto the
world, and that those our actions also may in no wise exceed their limits and
bounds allowed them in the laws of the Lord: I fear me, the most part of our
men must come short in their reckoning. But proceed now (I pray you) first in
describing the lawfulnes of Merchandry, and then next the unlawfulness thereof,
from the abuses incident unto it.


No-bodie. With all my heart. 10. The lawfulnes of merchandrie apparent from a
consideration of the matter it self.
And therefore (to the end we may rightly describe the lawfulnes of Merchandry
indeed, we will (according to the true order of teaching) begin first with
the description of the matter it self: and then next to the causes, the
kinds, the difference, the ends and effects thereof. Because, that being
made thorowlye known, both the rest of the building may more fitly be framed*
and the abuses also them selves will more easily break forth to the view of
all.


Peddler. Indeed as you say sir. But what is that (I pray you) which we call
Merchandrie: Is it not a buying and a selling of one thing for another?


No-bodie. I confess indeed, it is a buying and selling of one thing for
another, but that is no full description thereof. For merchandrie, 1. Touching
that matter we have to consider what Merchandrie is.
even by natural necessity is a saleable exchange of saleable things,
tending to public profit, and preservation of life, without al sinister
affection of filthy gain. Lo this is a perfect description thereof.


Peddler. A perfect description in deed. Call you this a good point of
merchandrie, for a man to lay forth his money without any gain? So should the
seely poor chap-man be sure to buie and sell and live by the loss. Nay sir,
if you make no better descriptio^s, I pray you describe for your self, and let
pas our trade without any description at all.


Eueri-bodie. What? Soft goodman Peddler, you are something too hasty: you are
not unlike to those restie iades which winch before they are prickte, what
man? He is now in describing simply the thing it self, without due
consideration of the circumstaunces annexed unto it. But go to sir, 2. The
sundry causes of merchandrie.
having already defined the thing, proceed, I pray you, in discovering next,
the causes, the kinds, the difference, the ends, and effects, of all buying
and selling.


No-bodie. With goodwil: and first concerning the causes themselves. In that I
call Merchandrie, 1. The efficient cause of merchandry.
even by natural necessity, a saleable exchange of saleable things, etc. We
have therein to consider, that a natural necessity, is that which we
properly call the efficient, the accomplishing, or the procuring cause of all
buying and selling. Which necessity also it self, requires a two-folde
consideration. For either the same consists in an honest preservation of this
present life: or otherwise, in the careful continuance of christian concord,
between country and country.


Ingroser. And are these two causes of so weighty importance, that the trade
of Merchaundrie, must of necessity be continued from time to time, as
ordinarye good means to maintain the same?


No-bodie. Yea verelie: For even as this natural life of ours, can not
continue one hour without the natural supply of natural things: So has
the Lord also in wisdom ordained this lawful trade of buying and selling,
as a most necessary means to maintain the same. And as he has again in
Guil. pariss. in lib. de vitiis par. 4.
his own council determined, that no one country in all the world should
have sufficient for it self in all the necessary matters of this present
life: So has he likewise blessed some other countries again, with a more
plentiful increase of that which they want, and further, has with all
engraffed such an indissoluble league of natural love between country and
country, that (by means of this lawful trade of buying and selling) the one
may have a mutual access to the other, for the easier attainement of such
interchaungeable traffike as tend most to their mintenance. And all this (I
say) especially, for a further increase of love, and the greater continuance
of concord between country and country.


Ingroser. This natural necessity then (tending so fitly to the preservation
of life, and continuance of concord between Country and Country) is that
which you call the efficiente, the accomplysheing, or the procuring cause of
all buying and selling: We perceive it well. But go to (I pray you) proceed
in the rest.


Nobody. Secondly, in yt I call merchandrie a saleable exchange of saleable
things: 2. The material cause of merchandrie.
there we have (in like manner) the material cause of al buying and selling, I
mean, the temporal blessings, commodities, and profits of this present,
those are the matter and stuff whereupon must be builded all that buying and
selling which men do accustomablie practice on earth.


Eueri-bodie. If the temporal commodities and profits of this present life,
be (as you say) the only matter whereunto must be employed all buying and
selling: it follows then very necessarily, that these our occupiers may (at no
hand) exchange their temporal blessings for trumperie or trash. Oh this
pintcheth (I dare say) my friend Peddler to the heart. But proceed (I pray
you) in the course you have taken.


No-bodie. Thirdlye, 3. The formal cause of merchandrie.
in that I call merchandrie a saleable exchange of things, here we have also
the formal cause of all buying and selling, I mean a saleable exchange of
saleable things. That alone, and only that must be the cause which
forms, which fashioneth, and frames forth the whole matter.


Ingroser. If only a saleable exchange of things (as you say) must make up
the market: that deceit then, that guile, and that fraudulent dealing which
most men accustomably use, may at no hand be admitted in making the match. But
what more remains?


No-bodie. Lastly, 4. The final cause of merchandrie.
in saying that merchaundrie must tend only to public commodity and
preservation of life: there have we (in like manner) the final cause of all
buying and selling: namely, an honest care of public commodity and the
preservation of life, those are the only and peculiar ends allotted unto the
public practice of every such trade. Now for that the aforesaid ends may in
no wise be attained unto, without a continual use of such saleable exchange
of temporal things, we therefore conclude, that Merchaundrie is a thing most
necessary for manne, and the lawful practice also thereof very laudable and
godly. Because the same (so aptly serving for natural necessity) may be
generally applied, not only to the public profit of foreign nations, but
also to the private commodity of our natural country, and the preservation
of this present life. And thus much for the trade of Merchandrie in general.


Peddler. In general? Why? what (sir I pray you) may further be spoken,
concerning this matter? Me think you have said so much as may be: and
perhaps a great deal more then you shall have thanks for.


No-bodie. As a Christian manne in the discharge of his christian duty,
should gape for no thanks: So surely (for mine own part) if Gal. 1. 10.
I would go about to please men, I were not the servant of Christ.
Notwithstanding, that which we have spoken before, tends no farther at all,
than the general description of the faculty it self: where also next to
consider the sundry and more especial kinds of buying and selling, 3. The
sundry kinds of Merchandry.
which are principally three.


Ingroser. Which be they sir, I pray you?


No-bodie. The first kind of Merchandrie is called Nauigatio, 1. The first
kind of Merchandrie.
which is a chargeable conuayaunce of wares, from Country to Country by
ship, into all the nauigable parts and coasts of the world. And this is
done, either by bringing into a Country such kinds of Merchaundrize, as the
Country most needs, which manner of dealing is fitly termed Importatio: or
else, by carrying forth the commodities aboundinge in any one Country, into
such other coasts and quarters of the world, as want the same, and this also
is aptly called Exportatio. All which the aforesaid traffiquers by the
Latins also are named Mercatores: and we (in our Country language) do
fitly term them Merchaunts. Of these Merchaunts generally there are two
sorts. First, Merchaunts of the Staple, who now transport our woolles and
felles into the low Countries, as also in times past they did our Tallows,
Hydes, Worsteddes, Butter, Cheeze and such like: and for them do bring in
again, either money, or such other Wares as the paynefull Fleamminges
affoorde them. Secondly, the Merchaunte Adventurers, which very casuallie
conuaying over our Clothes, Saffron, and such other commodities into all the
parts of the world, do bring in money again for the same, and such other
traffike besides as the countries commonly yield them. Now, both of these
(whether employed by sea or by laud) are rightly called Merchaunts, and very
aptly comprehended under that first kind of merchandry named Nauigatio,
Philosophus.
the which surely, (...). Politicorum.
as it is of all other most dangerous, and yet (in truth) the necessariest of
all, for the continuance of concord between country and country: so it
deserves the greatest commendation of all, and (for those the aforesaid ends)
to be had in the highest account.


Ingroser. Let this suffize for that first kind of merchandrie called
Nauigatio, together with the allotted ends, and principal dealers therein.
And now tell us (I pray you) which is the second kind of merchandrie, and to
whom especially the same appertains.


No-bodie. The second kind of Merchaundrie is called Deuertio, 2. The second
kind of merchandrie.
which is a trusty transporting of wares (from those ports and havens which
were fraughted before by the aforesaid navigations) into all the other parts
and quarters of the realm, for the speedier supply of so many besides as
want the same. And under this second kind of Merchandrie also are comprehended
two sorts of traffikes: For, either they are those chapmen (whether travelers
abroad in the country, or ingrosers, and retalers dwelling in Cities) which
from time to time do unlade and disburden the lately arrived navy of their wares
whatsoever: and laying them up in their vauts and storehouses) do so sell the
same, and utter them forth unto others, as they see they have need: or else
they are those artificers wheresoever, which do bring their commodities (newly
gained) to the Merchants hands: as do the Glouers to the Staplers, the
Clothiers to the Adventurers, and such like. Thus seeking by their daily
endeavor, and painful travels, to fraught the lately vnladed navy afresh,
and to further the same in her future voyages, for the speedier accomplishement
of both the above named ends. Now the oversight and care for the execution
hereof (reaching it self generally to all) more properly belong, not only to
Politikes, Philosophus.
I mean the Magistrates of every city and shire, 1. Ethicorum.
who are to see a general provision made for the whole body and state of
their country, but also in more special manner to householders, whose whole
endeavor must principally be employed about the necessary provision of their
housholdes and families. For otherwise they 1. Tim. 5. 8.
should show them selves to be worse than Infidels, and to have denied the
faith of Christ. All which persons thus profitablie employed either by sea or
by land, are woorthtlie also accounted Merchaunts. Such were Genes. 37. 28
those men (of whom we read) who (carrying upon their cammelles spicerie,
rozen, and mirrhe) bought Joseph and bare him into Egypt. As are also the
Merchants of our time, who passing from France to Spain, over the mountains
called Pyrenaei, do sometimes go through the midst of those mountains,
having an hole dug through before in the dark: and from France to Italy
over the Alps: and at this day from Germany into the low countries
adioining: and not long since, from high Dutch-land, both Merchaunts and their
wares were customablie carried into the low countries with wagons.


Ingroser. You have spoken already of two kinds of merchandrie: the first
named Nauigatio, appertaining (you say) unto Merchants of the Staple, and
Merchant adventurers. The second called Deuectio, whose practice concerns
especially the Ingrosers, Travelers, and country Artificers, although the
care for the execution thereof more properly beseems the Magistrates of
cities and Masters of families. But I pray you (sir) to what kind of
Merchaundrie will you ascribe that faculty or trade which the Haberdashers,
Mercers, Pedlers, and such other do practice?


No-bodie. Verily even unto that third kind of Merchandrie, The third kind of
merchandrie.
as yet remaining untouched, viz. Negotiatio, that is to say, a saleable
exchange of temporal things, practiced only by such as do make a
profession thereof for filthy gain: which may fitly be called a chopping
or changing. And of this third kind of Merchandrie also are sundry sorts of
chopmen. For either they are those Haberdashers Mercers, Pedlers, and such
like, which, buying of one do sell to an other: or else they are those
occupiers, grasiers, traunters and others, who carieng from any part of the
realm such cattle, corn, and other commodities as grows there, into some
other part and place of the relme, or, who buying lean Oxen, Sheep, and other
cattle abroad in the country, do fat the^ in pasturs, and so sell the^ forth
for their best advantage. Now these two sorts of traffikers (containing diverse
sorts of chapmen) are all comprehended under that third kind of merchandrie
called Negotiatio, and may very fitly be termed chappers and chaungers. And
whereas the trade of these men, should especially be employed toward the
preservation of those poor people which are otherways unable to make their
provision themselves, we see the same to be of al other the most beastly
abused. And therefore this was that kind of merchandrie, against the abuses
whereof I specially did bend my purpose this day.


Peddler, What fault sir, I pray you, is to be found therewith, seeing you
confess the same to be a kind of merchandrie: and merchandrie, you said but
even now, is so necessary a matter, as without the same, neither kingdom nor
country, no, nor this life it self can long time continue.


No-bodie. Although I allow Merchaundrie (being simply considered) as a most
necessary means for the maintenance of all the aforesaid matters, does it
therefore follow, that all those abuses whatsoever which be commonly incident
unto it, must pass uncontrolled, even by a special privilege of that the
aforesaid warrant? I think nay. For, who would account this a good kind of
reasoning? Such a one gives a general alowance of wines as they are of
themselves: therefore he disalloweth no one kind of abuse belonging to wine
whatsoever.


Ingroser. That were a childish collection indeed: for wine, although of it
self, it be a good creature of God: yet often times we see the same to be but
beastly abused.


No-bodie. Even so is this kind of buying and selling, which although it be
most necessary for man: yet notwithstanding, (through the abuses thereof) we
see him eft-soones more endangered thereby, than by any thing else whatsoever.


Peddler. What abuses, I pray you, are to be taxed therein? the same being one
of those kinds of merchandrie, which (you say) is so necessary and commodious
for man.


No-bodie. Although the same be a kind of merchandrie, 4. The difference of
merchandrie, the same being either natural or unnatural.
and therefore (in respect of it self) very necessary and commodious for man:
yet for all that (such difference there is of buying and selling) that the the
trade it self requires a two-folde consideration. For, either the same is
natural, and then very necessary and commendable: or else it is unnatural,
and then not so much necessary, as hurtful and horrible.


Ingroser. And when is the same (I pray you) to be accounted natural?


No-bodie. Verily, 1. Natural, and how?
when as it tends truly to the aforesaid ends, I mean to a public
commodity and preservation of life: and that also without all sinister
affection of filthy gain, which was the difference I put in the definition
it self. Being thus used, the same is most natural, and commes in the right
kind.


Peddler. And when again is it to be accounted unnatural?


No-bodie. Even at every such time as the same is not practiced upon
special regard of the causes and ends aforesaid, 2. Unnatural, and that both
from the use, and the end.
but only upon an insatiable desire of gain, and for the love of money.


Eueri-bodie. Call you this an unnatural kind of chopping and changing?


No-bodie. What else? 1. Unnatural in use and how?
Whether we respect the use, or the end. For first (concerning the use) who
sees not the same to be very unlawful, seeing it swarueth so shamefully,
not only from the natural and proper use by serving the insatiable desires
of men, which never cry hoe: but for that also it tends to an infinite
toil, and leads men headlong into an endless labyrinth: For, a covetous
man Eccles. 5. 9.
May never be satisfied with money.


Ingroser. And how is the same unnatural concerning the end?


No-bodie. Thus: 2. Unnatural in the end, and how?
namely, when (besides the former unlawful use) it contains in it self
(albeit improperlie) a certain filthiness: in as much as it imports an
dishonest end. Chrysostom. opere impers. hom. 31.
For, that manne (whosoever) which makes filthy Iucre, the final cause of
his buying and selling, (a thing too apparauntlie appearing in the practice of
so many as do buie their wares, with a predeterminate purpose to sell them
dearer again, the property of their said wares remaining unchanged, and
their charges considered) undoubtedly, that man's buying and selling is
meerelie wicked, because it proceeds from a covetous intent, and desire of
riches, which is evermore a sin, not only directly against the last
Commandment, Exodus 20. 17.
which says, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors goods: but also flat
opposite and contrary to the law of nature, Math. 7. 12.
which wills us to do to every man, as we would be done unto our selves, for
this (says Christ) is the law and the prophets.


Ingroser. Will you then condemn this trade of buying and selling because of
some abuses incident unto it. This (me think) is absurd, Anabaptisticall and
wicked,


No-bodie. I defy the Anabaptists and all their heretical opinions, with no
less detestation then I abhor all abuses in buying and selling: touching the
simple allowance whereof, I have answered partly before. Neither was it the
mind of the Apostle 1. These. 4. 6.
(as I taught from my text) simply to condemn the faculty it self. For
whereas he only forbids the oppression, the guile, and those fraudulent
fetches which commonly are incident to buying and selling: who sees not how
(by the Antithesis) he covertly includes a special commandment concerning
true dealing therein. And yet notwithstanding this his simple lowance thereof)
no wise man (I am sure) will deny, but that many questions may grow
concerning this matter.


Ingroser. But before we come to these questions, I pray you tell me in
truth, whether you think this trade in it self to be simply lawful, or
flatly forbidden.


No-bodie. Albeit you buyers and sellers (even) by the very quality of that
gain which you get for your wares) may not only in some sort be justly
approved, but also in some sort again most justly reproved, because gain
is commonly of two sorts (I mean either honest or filthy) yet
notwithstanding the trade of it self, I grant to be meerelie lawefull. And
again, whereas many of our Buyers and Sellers (bewitched with a blind and
inordinate desire of riches) do both blaspheme the Lord for their losses,
grow unthankful to him for their gains, yea and often times also with (lying,
swearing, and forswearing themselves) do sell forth unto others their wares
at an unreasonable reckoning: yet this I account rather a fault of the man,
then of the matter it self, and therefore do not think the trade (for these
causes) should be simplye condemned.


Peddler. Then you do not simply deny the thing it self as unlawful: but
only in respect of the abuses belonging unto it.


No-bodie. It is very true. For as some things are flatly forbidden, not by
way of cyrcumstaunce only, but because they be also evil in their own
nature, namely, addulterie, murder, theft, and such like, which in no wise
may be practiced of any, without a manifest breach of the law of GOD: So
there are some things again, which be forbidden, only (as it were) by
occasion, not because they are evil of them selves, but for that (by reason of
their manifold abuses) great evils often times do ensue the practice of them,
as wine, meat, fire, water and such like. Which things (albeit in their proper
nature) they are most necessary and commodious for man: yet oftentimes we see
(even in a miserable experience) that (by their abuse) they are turned to his
destruction. In the self same condition consists this your faculty of
buyinge and sellinge. Which although (in the own nature) the same be not
evil: Yet notwithstanding it may be unlawful by reason of the abuses
incident unto it.


Ingroser. This then I suppose to be the whole skope of your speech, namelye,
that the faculty of it self, is in no wise to be simplye forbidden:
notwithstanding the abuses befallyng unto it.


No-bodie. It is even the same. For as wine, meat, fire, water and such like,
are (notwithstanding their abuses) in no wise to be utterly taken from man,
but only the abuses themselves to be reformed: So surely, this your
faculty of buying and selling (albeit many abuses are incident unto it) may
(at no hand) be barred from the common society of men, but only the abuses
thereof (by the Magistrate) must severely be punished.


Peddler. You prattle very much of the abuses in buying and selling, I pray you
sir, what one abuse are you able to name therein?


No-bodie. I prattle not (good brother) I speak the truth. And whereas our
nature is given commonly to voate on the thing it desires: Yet would I not
have you so stubbornly addicted to the swaie of unbridled affections, as
nothing may move you to acknowledge those evident abuses which by apparaunt
demonstrations may plainelye be proved.


Ingroser. Well sir, you have hitherto handled the lawfulnes of buying and
selling: describing fully therein the faculty it self, the causes, the
kinds and difference also thereof. I pray you in like manner (seeing you
harp so sore upon the abuses) declare now at large the unlawfulness of
merchandrie.


No-bodie. With all my heart: wherein you have to remember that the
unlawfulness of Merchaundrie must be considered, 2. The unlawfulness of
merchandry considered either in the abuses: or in the effects which follow the
same.
partly in respect of the abuses incident unto it: and partly also in respect
of those fearful effects which follow the foresaid abuses.


Ingroser. Very well. But show forth (I pray you) first the abuses
themselves.


No-bodie. The abuses in buying and selling, 1. The abuses are, either in the
matter sold: or in the manner of selling.
(notwithstanding they be many) may very fitly be referred either to the
matter it self which is to be sold: or else to the manner of selling the same.


Ingroser. Leaving the manner of selling a while to place more convenient, I
pray you speak first of the matter it self which is to be sold.


No-bodie. I am willing unto it. 1. Abuses in the matter sold, either generally
or particularly.
Wherein first we have to entreat of the abuses incident unto the matter
general: And then next, of particular abuses more specially concerning the
same.


Ingroser. Well, then show first (I pray you the abuses incident unto the
matter generally.


No-bodie. With good will. 1. The abuses in the matter general and how?
First therefore this one principal abuse (for all) may generally be
considered in the matter it self. I mean, when men make a sale of such
things as tend neither to the public profitte, nor the honest preservation
of life: But rather of such tryfling toys as train the people to a peeuishe
vanitye, cause them contynuallie to consume their substance, and provoke them
eft-soones to presumtuous sins.


Eueri-bodie. I pray you sir what tryfles are those?


No-bodie. Surely, even such as are too horrible to be named, much more to
be practiced of Chrystians. As for example, those vain and unnecessary
tryfles, which serve fitly for nothing but to prick men in pride. Also
Cards, Dice, and other such detestable chaffer, the bewytched baytes of the
Devil to bleare men's eyes, and to allure them with all unto the myspending of
that their portion of time in ungodliness and vanity, Ephe. 5. 15. 16
which the apostle wills them to redeem with virtue and godliness.


Peddler. What are those trifles to us sir, seeing we make them not (as you
know your self) but only do buy them for money, and so sell them again?


No-bodie. Although you make not these things (as you say) but only do sell
them: Yet notwithstanding you must remember with all an infallible rule of the
law, which says, that he that gives but only an occasion of an other
man's loss: the same man shall be adjudged in law to have given the loss him
self. Which saying (no doubt) is both according to reason, and agreeable also
with the proportion of faith. Because not only they Romans 1. 31.
that do such things, are guilty of death: but even they also which favor
or consent unto them that do them. And therefore, although it Math. 18. 1. 1.
Cor. 11. 19.
be necessary that offenses should come: yet woe to that man by whom the
offense comes.


Ingroser. But wherefore I beseech you, should the sale of such things be so
heinous an offense?


No-bodie. Not only because they provoke men to pride, and to mispend their
time, (as has been before declared) but especially for that they tend in no
wise to publyke profit, one principal end whereunto all buiing and selling must
principally be employed. For what a commodity call you this, that our English
Chap-men should conuaie over to foreign nations, whole thousands of our
country coin with other temporal commodities: and that only for a needles
exchange of their trumpery, their trashe and most trifling vanities? What man
would ever be so mad as to account him for a profitable Steward, who (being
put in full trust to employ his masters treasure to the most commodity that
may be) does very wastfullie lavish forth the same not only to no gain at
al, but also even upon such trifles as do nothing else but train the whole
household to provide to unthriftiness, and all other vnspeake able vanity*


Ingroser. Your comparison holds not. For the steward, besides that he is a
servant (and therefore not his own man) he is also put in trust with another
man's treasure, whereof, he may in no wise dispose at his pleasure without his
masters appointment. But we (you know) are every ways our own men, subject
to the controllment of none, and such besides as are the entire owners of that
which we possess: and therefore our money and whatsoever besides is wholly
our own, and in our own power to employ the same as seems us good for our
greatest commodity.


No-bodie. Well, be it so. And yet this notwithstanding you grant by the way,
that if I be able to prove you a steward, then (for so much as you are now but
a servant) you are not otherwise to deal with your treasure, than according to
the only direction of him, whose authority you are subject unto. But are not
all men (I pray you) 2. Maca 9. 12 James. 4. 7.
subject unto the authority of the Lord? Psalm. 119. 16.
Is not every living soul a servant to the Lord? Are not all those blessings
which we generally enjoy on earth Job 1. 22. Eccles. 5. 14. 1. Tim. 6. 7.
Lent us a time of the Lord? Have we not every one (in our several callings)
Luc. 16. 1. 2
Received a stewardship of the Lord? And must not every one of us also, be
Matthew. 25. 19 Luke. 16. 2.
Sure to yield an account to the Lord of our sever all stewardships? If
therefore we be found in our reckoning, either to Math. 25. 26
Have hid our talents, or otherwise very wastefullie to have Luke 16. 1.
consumed our masters treasure: we shall be sure to be cast Math. 25. 30.
into utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.


Peddler. But (sir) how can it be said that we waste our goods, when as we
receive our own with advantage? Very sure I am (for mine own part) that I
gain more cleerlie by dice, cards, counters, points, and such like, in one
quarter of the year, than I do by all the rest of my wares, in the other
three quarters following.


No-bodie. It may be so, howbeit, christians ought not to be so much careful
of gains, as with what christian conscience they do get their gains: because
all your actions (as you have hard before) must tend wholly to the glory of God.
And whereas you say further, that the gains that you get by such misgotten
Merchandrize, is more in one quarter of the year, then that which you win (by
the rest of your wares) in all the whole year besides: very sure I am and dare
boldly affirm it, that the Lord (by the only means of those Merchandrize)
is more beastly dishonored in that one quarter then in all the whole year
besides.


Eueri-bodie. Which way sir, I pray you?


No-bodie. Even by dicing, carding, and such other ungodly games wherewith all
our careless ding-thrifts are set daily a gogge: and whereof also ensues
covetousness, theft, lying, swearing, forswearing, quarrelling, killing, with
other like fruits of the flesh.


Eueri-bodie. Why? would you not have men to be merry and drive away the
time in good fellowshippe? I peceiue you are one of those Puritanes, who allow
neither of pastime nor pleasure. Surely, you are the straungest people that
ever I hard of.


No-bodie. It seems strange unto you, 1. Pet. 4. 4.
that we run not together with you unto the same excess of ryotte, and
therefore you speak evil of us. Howbeit it is sufficient for you, (if you had
the grace to consider it) that you have Ephesians. 4. 22 1. Pet. 4. 3.
spent the time of your life after the lusts of the Gentiles: walking
inwantonnesse, lust, drunkenness, gluttony, in drinkings, and all abominable
Idolatry 1. Pet. 4. 2.
and therefore (from hence forth) should learn to live as much time as
remains in the flesh) not after the lusts of the flesh, but according to
the will of God.


Eueri-bodie. Why man? think you dicing and carding to be a sin? now sure
you speak you wot not what.


No-bodie. I do not only think it (dear brother) even with my very heart:
but I could also confirm the same with invincible reasons, were it not beside
the purpose which we have in hand. Notwithstanding take this for the present,
as a general answer to that your demand, namelye, that if Dice, Cards,
with other their appurtenaunces are such infectious snares of Satan, as none
may safely either buy or sell the same, unless he will desparatelie incur
the displeasure of GOD: how dare any manne then so boldly bequeath his
eyes, ears, hands, and tongue, yea, even his whole body and soul, as a
sacrifice sold over, to that vile service of Satan, whereunto so many (by
those his bewitched baits) are most beastly allured?


Ingroser. Nay now sir, the poverty of your cause too plainly appears,
seeing you are driven a begging for proofs to underprop the same. For, what
if it be answered again, that the sale of such things is not so sinful a
matter as you would seem for to make it: are you not now as far from your
proof, as you were before from the point of your purpose?


No-bodie. Well, yet thus much your speech does seem to insinuate, that if
the sale of such things be proved unlawful: then for any to abuse themselves
with the vile practice of them, is much more unlawful.


Ingroser. Yea surely, I must needs confess the same: But why do you deem
the sale of such things so horrible a sin?


No-bodie. Not only, because they make so much to the dishonor of God, and
allure men so lewdlie to such a vain misspending of their time (as has been
told you before) but for that also they tend not to a public profit, one
principal end of all buying and selling.


Peddler. Why, but I told you also before, what profit we gain by the sale of
such things.


No-bodie. You did so indeed: howbeit, we speak not now of any private, but
of a public profit: to the participation whereof all men are ordained. Now
then, what public profit (I pray you) is that, where, for the gain of two,
ten thousand do loose.


Eueri-bodie. Which way sir I pray you?


No-bodie. First, in bestowing their Lords treasures upon such needless toies:
next by mispending their portion of time in such trifling vanities: Did. 47.
decretor. Can. Omnes.
lastly, by hazarding that wealth in one hour, which their forefathers had
been hoording up for them many hundred years: and all these, by the occasion
and means of those sugared baits of the devil. If therefore you would gladly
employ your several trades to the glory of God, and the good of his Church,
it behooves you especially to consider before for what purposes each sort of
wares are, or ought to be provided, namely, whether for the necessary provision
of this present life, or for the seemly garnishing and bedecking of nature, or
else for an honest recreation and pleasure. Necessary rules for buyers and
sellers.
And then next you must (with an honest and christian care) drive the
provision of all your wares, as near unto the aforesaid purposes as possibly
you may: wherein also these few rules following, must (in all your buying and
selling) of necessity be duly observed: 1. The first rule.
first, that all those wares, which you provide for preservation of life, do
(in any wise) tend (so near as possibly they may) to the public profit and
comfort of al men: secondly, 2. The second rule.
that al such merchandise as chapmen prepare for the adorning and bedecking of
nature, be such as are seemly, and may serve very fitly for every calling:
and thirdly, 3. The third rule.
that those things which are any ways procured for pleasure, be such as may
in every sort be made appliable to honest recreation. But these foolish proud
toys for prickma-deintie dames, these dice and cards, for these careless
ding-thrifts, these hobbi-horses, rottles, and painted boxes for boys, with
1000. trifling toies besides, do in no wise tend to any the aforesaid ends as
experience too plainelye approves: and therefore the sale of such things is
merely unlawful. And thus much briefly, for the abuses generally considered in
the matter it self which is to be sold.


Ingroser. Very well: now have you next to declare with all, what particular
abuses are more specially to be considered in the matter also it self.


Nobody. The particular abuses ar those which more properly concern the
matter: 2. The abuses perticulerlie considered, are either in the quality, or
quantity of the matter
and are (as I told you before) to be considered in regard, either of the
quality, or else of the quantity of wares which are to be sold.


Ingroser. Why? what abuses are to be considered (I pray you) in ye quality of
wares?


No-bodie. First, 1. In the quality of the matter, either by an utter want of
goodness: or by a show of more then it has.
there may be an abuse in the quality when wares which are to be sold, do
either utterly want that quality of goodness which naturally they ought for to
have: or when, having the same in some sort, they are made by a glittering show
of more goodness, to seem much better then properly they are of themselves.


Ingroser. Show first (I pray you) when wares do want that quality of
goodness, which naturally they ought for to have.


No-bodie. They do utterly want the same when either they are naught of
themselves: 1. By an utter want, being either naught of themselves or but
naughtely used.
or when (being otherways good in some sort) they are but naughtely used.


Ingroser. And when are the wares utterly naught of themselves?


No-bodie. When having no one tote of that quality of goodness, 1. Naught of
themselves, and how?
of comeliness, and of honesty which naturally they ought for to have in a
special regard of those the aforesaid ends: they are notwithstanding made
saleable Merchandrize. As for example, when chapmen (having no conscience at
all in their dealings) do sell out corrupt things for pure things, unwholesome
things for wholesome things, hurtful things for profitable things, and such
like. All which are so far off, either from preservation of life, or
continuance of concord between country and country, that they rather destroy
the state of the one, and utterly do dashe the very diadem of the other in
pieces.


Ingroser. And when also are wares (being otherwise good in some sort) but
naughtilie used?


No-bodie. Verily, 2. But naughtilie used, and how?
when as the said wares (being not simply evil of themselves) are
deceitfully delivered forth with a fair pretense of some other quality of
goodness, comeliness, or honesty than that which naturally they have of
themselves: I mean when one kind of ware is sold for another, by reason of some
likeness yt it has with the other kind of wares, for the which it is so
deceitfully sold. As for example, when chapmen are not ashamed at all to sell
copper for gold, fustian-anapes for velvet, Flaunders tikes for right Brasil
tikes, with a thousand such slights, whereby the simple and ignorant sort are
most shamefully abused.


Peddler. Is not their own eye their chapman, to look well on our wares or
ever they buy them?


No-bodie. And should not your own conscience also be a faithful surueyor, to
size your said wares or ever you sell the^? but tell me, I pray you, in good
earnest, could you be content for these your cou^terfeit wares to be paid
again with counterfeit cayne?


Peddler. Beshrewe me then: for how should I be able to live, if I were so
unconscionably served?


No-bodie. And how should the other I pray you be able to live, whom your self
so vnconscionablie deceives, without any conscience at all? Notwithstanding,
howsoever your self shall swerve from the law of nature, in an unconscionable
sale of your wares, and howsoever with Atheists and worldlinges it is deemed no
deceit at all to deceive a dissembling wretch: yet would I have Christians in
no wise to recompense evil for evil, but (leaving vengeance to the Lord, to
whom alone it belongs) to keep an vppright dealing with men, how unjustly
soever they are dealt withal (by other) themselves. Neither was it my purpose
(in propounding the question) to tolerate deceit for deceit, but only (by a
supposed deceipte from others) to let you see your shameless deceyuing of men,
that so (seeing the same by some means) you might the sooner be ashamed
thereof.


Ingroser. Having hitherto heard the first particular abuse, concerning the
quality of wares: you are now next to declare how wares (having also a quality
of goodness in some sort) are made by a glittering show of more goodness, 2. A
show of more than it has, either by prete^ding that good which it has not:
or by hiding the evils which it has.
to seem much better than properly they are of themselves.


No-bodie. That may easily be done. For notwithstanding, the wares be neither
naught of themselves, nor naughtely used, by decetfully selling some one for
another, yet the abuses this way considered, may also be wrought in a double
respect: namely, either by pretending that quality of goodness to be in the
wares which properly they have not: or otherways by covering and hiding those
evils which they have.


Ingroser. How first by pretending that good which they have not?


No-bodie. When as chapmen not contencing them selves with that quality of
goodness, 1. By prete(...)ding a goodness, and ho(...)
which wares have simply in their proper nature, do seek to better the same
only in an outward show: the inward substance and essential quality being
still the same, or rather worse th^n before. And this either by pouldring and
startching their wares to give them a glass, to dazel men's eyes: or otherways
by matching a course and a better together, Job. 20. 12. 13. 14. etc. Isay. 29.
15. 16. 17.
that so (the baseness of the bad more bravely setting forth the beauty of the
better) simple men may be made more desirous thereof. Which dealing of theirs
(how delightful so ever) differs undoubtedly, nothing at all from the
practice of an insatiable Strumpet or whore: who prancketh her neck, and
painteth her face, to make fantastical fools more eger upon her.


Ingr. And how also by hiding those evils which they have?


Nobody. Verily, when unconscionable, chapmen do either provide them dark
shops, and close houses of set purpose, to blind the blemishes of their wares,
and to darken those their deformities, which otherwise would be apparent to al
men: or when (the defects and faults of their wares being not outwardly
apparent to others, but inwardly known to themselves) they do very
wickedlie conceal them, and will in no wise be brought to discover the same.


Ingroser. Think you then, that a man (in conscience) is bound to discover
the imperfections and wants of his wares?


Nobody. Yea no doubt. And the reason is, for that every man ought to be no
less careful of another man's commodity than of his own. Whereunto also,
even the very institution of nature, and light of reason do lead us. For
nature (we see) does show her self every way as careful in conseruing
the meanest member, as the might of all. And reason also requires, that
nothing be done guilefully, deceitfully, nor fraudulently among men, according
to that which the Apostle commands, saying: Let no man oppress nor
defraude his brother in bargaining (or in any manner of thing) for the Lord is
the auenger of all such evil. So then, those false men (you see) do not only
degenerate from nature her self, but do further declare themselves to be very
unreasonable beasts, who seek thus to shroud the blemishes, and to darken the
deformities of those their wares, which they deliver for good to their brethren
in bargaining.


Peddler. A proper devise forsooth: but follow it who lust. For how shall we
be sure to sell? Or who will be hasty in buieng our wares when the faults
thereof are apparently known?


Nobody. As though the discovery of their faults would be any hinderance at
all to a conscionable sale of your wares: or as though those faulty wares
(being unfit for one purpose) may not fitly be made to serve for another. If
therefore you chapmen would first enquire of the buier, for what purpose he
buieth, should you not easily perceive (by the answer he gives) whether
those your said wares will sufficiently serve him, or not? Now if by his
answer you find them unfit, then look in gods name, that you lay them aside,
and either provide him of better, or otherwise do tell him you have not to serve
his turn. But if you perceive that his wares (notwithstanding their
imperfections) may as fitlye serve for his purpose, as if they were better:
then, having first acquainted the buier with their faults whatsoever, do assure
him in all simplicity, that the same, notwithstanding their wants will both
fitly serve his turn, and that you also your self may affoorde it unto him of
an easier reckoning. Surely this conscionable dealing, how hardly soever it
seems now, being but practiced a while, would in the end procure you such
credit, that whereas the other (who deal but deceitfully) do purchase a
penny, you your self shall be sure to purchase a pound. Besides that, as
the buier, by this means, shall not be disappointed of that his principal
purpose, nor at no hand be deceived with those faulty wares. So neither
shall the seller himself incur the displeasure of GOD, by increasing his
wealth with deceitful gain.


Peddler. Why sir, is not the market open for every man to make the best of his
own?


No-bodie. I confess no less: But yet so, as the same be not sought with the
hurt of another. Otherways, the gain that he gettes to himself, would but
tend to the grief of the rest. Even as if the hand should hoord up to it self
that food which belongs indifferently to all the other members of the body:
and yet, who sees not, that this unnatural greediness would 1. Cor. 12. 21
turn (in the end) not only to the destruction of the whole body, but also
even unto the extreme annoyaunce of the hand it self.


Ingroser. Well: having hitherto heard those particular abuses which concern
the quality of the matter: you are now next to declare the other particular
abuses also more specially concerning the quantity of the matter which is to
be sold. 2. In the quantity also of the matter which is to be sold, either by
abusing of weights and measures: or by using sophistical practices.



No-bodie. With all my heart: wherein you have first to consider, that another
particular abuse in buying and selling, may be drawn from the quantity of the
matter which is to be sold, namely, when as wares do fail either in their
weight or measure, or both: a thing directlye contrary to that distributive
justice, which gives generally to every one his own.


Peddler. How is it possible (I pray you) that any should this way be deceived,
when he sees the wares both measured and weied before his face?


No-bodie. Though this which you say were true, yet notwithstanding the simple
may soon be deceived, and that either by abusing of weights and mesures, or
otherwise, by using sophistical practices and iugling sleights.


Ingroser. How first by abusing of weights and measures?


No-bodie. Verelie, 1. By abusing of weights and measures, which is either in
having unlawful weights, or in abusing of lawful weights.
when as the weightes and measures are not rightlye practiced, according to
that special end whereto they were in justice appointed: but very
vnconscionablie abused, to the speedy enriching of the owner himself, and the
utter impouerishing of all other besides. Which may also be done, either by
having unlawful weights and measures, or else, by using of lawful weights and
measures vnlawflly.


Ingroser. How first in having unlawful weights and measures?


No-bodie. When as chapmen possessing two manner of weights and measures (I
mean a greater and a less) do use to buy with the greater and sell with the
less: 1. In having unlawful weights, and how?
a thing flatly forbidden by the law of the Lord, who says, Deuteronomy. 25. 13,
14. Prou. 16. 11. Prou. 20. 10.
Thou shall not have in thy bag two manner of weights, a great and a small,
neither shall thou have in thy house diverse measures, a great and a small. But
thou shall have a right and a just weight, a perfect and a just measure shall
thou have, that thy days may be prolonged in the land which the Lord thy God
gives thee: For all that do such things are abominable to the Lord.


Ingroser. This I must needs confess to be a fault: But how also (I pray you)
in using lawful weights and measures unlawfully?


No-bodie. When as the seller having only but just weights and measures in
his bag, 2. By abusing of lawful weights either in the weying of wares, or
mesuring of wates.
does yet notwithstanding very unjustly abuse men, both in the weying of
wares, and in the measuring of wares.


Ingroser. How first in the weying of wares?


No-bodie. When (notwithstanding both weights and ballaunce be just) the
quantity of wares is deceitfully impaired. 1. In the weying of wares, and how?
And this, either by turning the cock on the beam, with a trick of the
finger, or else by dashing the skales deceitfully upon the board, that so (the
ballaunce rebounding backward) their proper and natural course may be turned
with a trice.


Ingroser. And how also in the measuring of wares?


No-bodie. Verelie, 2. In the measuring of wares, and how?
when as (measures being both just and straight) the seller notwithstanding
does very deceitfully diminish the just quantity of that which is to be
sold. And this also, either by casting the measure a cross: or otherwise, by
slipping very slightly the yard-wand behind the thumb, to curtoll their
proper and natural length, with forty such fraudulent fetches. All which
whatsoever, are flatly forbidden by the mouth of the Lord, who says Leuit.
19. 35, 36
You shall not deal unjustly in judgment, in line, in weight, or in measure.
You shall have just balances, true weights, a true Ephah, and a true Hin: I am
the Lord thy God, which have brought you out of the land of Egypt, therefore
shall you observe all mine ordinances, and all my judgments, and do them, I
am the Lord.


Peddler. Call you these, the particular abuses more specially concerning the
quantity of wares: Surely, I had thought the scriptures had never meddled with
any such trifling matters.


No-bodie. Undoubtedly, the Psalm. 19. 7, 8.
Law of the Lord is not only most pure and holy, but every way also most
absolute, equal, and perfect, teaching throwly both what is to be done, and
what to be avoided in every calling. Neither are these such trifling matters
(how triflingly soever you trifle therewith for a time) 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.
having no trifling, but a terrible vengeance allotted unto them.


Ingroser. Well, is this all you have to say concerning the quantity?


No-bodie. Not so: For (besides such abusing of weights and of measures) there
may be a marvelous deceit in buying and selling, 2. By using sophistical
practices: and this either by putting more matter unto it: or else by marring
the matter it self.
when both weights and measures, and the wares also themselves being good, the
seller notwithstanding does seek by sophistical practices and iugling
sleights, to impair the proper and natural quantity of that which is to be
sold: and this, either by putting more matter unto it, or otherwise by
misusing and mangling the matter it self.


Ingroser. How first by putting more matter unto it?


No-bodie. Verelie, 1. By putting more matter unto it, and how?
when some other kind of mixture is unconscionably added unto those good and
saleable wares, and that also with a wicked intent, either to augment their
measure (as the Vintners do, who usually mingle their wines with water) or
else to increase their weight ^s the sheepmaisters and haberdashers, now
adays deal, the one very cunningly watering their wool, the other very
craftily washing their fruits, to make them the heavier.


Ingroser. And how also by misusing and mangling the matter it self?


No-bodie. When as chapmen (not contenting themselves with the natural
property of those saleable wares) do very fleightlie transform and alter
their matter: 2. By marring the matter it self, and how?
to make them (by this means) seem more in quantity than otherwise they
should be. And this, either by placing and hammering the same, as Pewterers do
to drive them in breadth: or otherwise by tentering and stretching it forth,
as the clothiers accustomably deal with their clothes to enlarge their length.
All which their treacherous dealings (with sundry other such fleights of
satan) are very severely censured by the Lord himself, under this one
general reprehension saying: Isa. 1. 22.
Thy silver is turned to dross, and thy wine is mixed with water. Giving
Jerusalem thereby to understand, that notwithstanding her outward pretended
profession, whatsoever was pure and perfect in her before, the same was now
become wholly corrupt, to the utter impouerishing and hurt of the poor. And
therefore he told her flatly Isa. 1. 15.
that her hands were filled with blood.


Ingroser. Do you then account it an unlawful thing, for any man to take his
full price for these deceiuable wares?


No-bodie. Yea merely unlawful. For whereas all men (even by the institution
of nature and light of reason) are precisely commanded (in an exchange of their
temporal blessings) to drive the commodities given and received so near to
equality as possibly they may: what an equality call you this, for a man to
take a commodity for that thing, which (even by lying unoccupied in the others
possession) will vanish to nothing? Is it not all one in effect, as if some
crafty iugler had closed (as we thought) some piece of coin in our fist: but
when we open our hand, there is no such thing at all to be found? these men
therefore, so much as lies in them, do very peeuishly pervert the
unchangeable order of God himself. Who, by his own unsearchable wisdom,
has Leuit. 19. 35, 36
commanded measures and weights, to the end that those things (which otherwise
would remain unequal and unjust) might yet, by means of the aforesaid
measures and weights, be reduced to equity and justice. And not only
commanded it thus, but also, even with his own example, he has fully
confirmed the same Wisd. 11. 17.
by ordaining all things in measure, in number, and weight. From which so
necessary a rule and example, when miserable men do willingly swerve, yea
although but a little: what do they else but even desperately despise both the
ordinance, and also the example of their Lord and creator?


Peddler. But what if some men are desirous to have our said wares,
notwythstanding they be thus washed, mixed, or stretched: is it unlawful then
also to take the full price for them?


No-bodie. Yea undoubtedly. For the peevish desire of the people is no
privilege for you to do any thing that is unlawful of it self to be done:
neither may any man's appetite warrant your wrongful dealings in deceiuable
wares.


Ingroser. Well sir, having sufficiently showed the unlawfulness of merchandry,
in regard of the sundry abuses incident unto the matter, either generally, or
particularly according unto the quality and quantity of the wares themselves
which are to be sold, you are now next to declare the unlawfulness also
thereof, in respect of the manner of selling the same.


No-bodie. Very true, Abuses also in the manner of selling, and how?
as you say, wherein also you may mark another most notable abuse, to show yet
further the unlawfulness thereof. I mean, when that due manner, order, and form
which 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.
the Lord himself most straightly commands, is not precisely observed in
buying and selling: but rather, the match is most commonly concluded with
cogging, cousonage, lying, swearing and forswearing, with sundry such other
most pestilent practices.


Eueri-bodie. It is good lying (some say) for advantage.


Nobody. And I also would say the same, if the advantage were likewise good.
But what advantage, I pray you, is this, for a man (by lying a little) to be
damned for ever? Psalm. 120. 3. Wisd. 1. 11. Apoc. 22. 15.
For the mouth that lies, slaieth the soul.


Eueri-bodie. What the Devil care they so they get the gain?


No-bodie. And, what cares the devil though they gain the whole world, so yt
he in the end may gain their souls. No, he will not stick to promise them
all Matthew 4. 8, 9
the kingdoms of the earth: if that they so often as they buy and sell, will (by
lying and swearing) but fall down and worship him.


Peddler. Call you buying and selling a worship of the devil?


No-bodie. Nothing less. For although I account, that dissimulation and lying,
that deceit, and that guile which most men commonly practice therein, no better
in effect, yea, and the very John. 8. 44. 1. John. 3. 8. Jude. 1. 6.
practisers also themselves the darlings of the devil, who was himself a liar
from the beginning: yet I think far otherwise of the faculty it self as I
have told you before. Moreover, concerning that their worldly gain thus
wickedly gotten, and whereof (you say) they so highly account: the same (in
very deed) is nothing so certain as they assure themselves Pro. 13. 11. Pro.
21. 6. Ecclus. 20. 23. 24.
For the gathering of riches by a deceitful tung, is vanity tossed too and
fro, of them that seek death. Lo this is the gain allotted to lying: whereof
whosoever is found, let him follow the trace of his Father the Devil, and he
will be sure to bring him unto it.


Ingroser. Surely (for mine own part) I like no such gain. But is this all
you can say concerning the manner of selling?


No-bodie. Not so. a further abuse in the manner of selling, taken, either from
the cause of selling: or from the pitching of price.
For (besides that this the aforesaid manner of selling is very evil of it
self, and such also as (by consequence) brings a foul stain to the
Faculty or trade, the unlawfulness thereof may be further enlarged from a
necessary consideration of some other circumstances annexed unto it,
especially from the cause of selling, and the pitching of price.


Ingrocer. Now first from the cause of selling?


No-bodie. When, 10. The cause of sellinge unlawful, whether we consider the
person that selles: or the affection in selling.
neither that natural necessity which tendes to a public commodity and the
preservation of life, neither yet any careful continuance of concord
between Cuntry and Cuntry do make up the match: but some other inordinate
cause or prepostorous care does carry men headlong unto it. And this also
more plainly appears, whether we consider the Person that selles, or the
affection in selling.


Ingroser. How first in consideration of the Person that selles?


Nobodie. When such men be wholye employed about the Faculty of buying and
selling as are utterly unfit for the same: 1. The person that selles, unfit
either for his calling: or for his condition.
either in respect of their public calling, or of their peculier condition.


Ingroser. How first unfit for their public calling?


No-bodie. Verily, 1. Unfit for his calling: and how?
when the faithful performance of their aforesaid calling is of so weighty
importance, as neither they can possibly become Merchants though willingly
they would: as also, if (at some time) their leisure were such that they
might, yet should they rather procure a contempt, then pluck any credit upon
those their honorable callinges by the preposterous practice thereof. As for
example: If Princes, Potentates, Noblemen and such other, for whom the same is
unseemly, should give them selves unto buying and selling, as did Dionycius
the Tirant, whose insatiable affections made a sale of piss, to his perpetual
reproach among all posterities for ever, or if the Preachers and Ministers of
Gods holy word should become Market-men, and make a public profession 2. Tim.
4. 10.
thereof like Demas the Apostata, who (forsaking the fellowship of faithful
Apostles) followed with a filthy desire the affairs of this present world,
contrary to the unchangeable decree of the eternal God: who willing Timothy
to stand out like a courageous Captain of Jesus Christ, tells 2. Tim. 2, 4,
him further, that no man which warreth, entangleth him self fit with the
affairs of this life, because he would please him who has chosen him to be a
Soldiour.


Ingroser. And how also unfit for their peculier condition?


No-bodie. When (their proper estate and condition being certainly such, 1.
Unfit for his condition: and how?
as either they are almost unable to buy and sell any more by reason of age,
or other ways they need not at all, having neither wife, nor child, nor any
near kinsman besides on whom to bestow their goods, they are yet
notwithstanding so wretched and miserable that they cannot forbear it: but so
toil and turmoyle them selves continually for the mucke of this world, as
uneath they are able to live, according to that which Solomon says, Eccle. 4. 8.
There is one alone, and there is not a second, which has neither Son nor
Brother, and yet is there no end of all his travel, neither can his eye be
satisfied with riches: nether does he think with him self, for whom do I
defraude my soul of pleasure? this is also a vanity, and this is an evil
travel.


Ingrocer. Having hitherto proved the cause of selling unlawful from the
person that selles, you are now next to declare some further unlawfulness
thereof, from the affection also in selling.


No-bodie. Very true as you say. Where in you have to observe a further abuse of
buying and selling, The affection also in selling unlawful, and how?
namely: when men run headlong unto it without any one jot of that religious
and loving affection which the Lord (in conscience) requires of al, for the
preservation of life and continuance of concord: but only their covetousness,
their inordinate desire of gain, yea or self love it self does strike ye
stroke. Which ca^ckred abuse (notwithstanding it be secret) a man may very
shrewdly surmize to be shrouded with such, as (having no need at al for any ye
aforenamed ends) do buy up their wares at every of those dead times in the
year, when they are commonly cheap: with a predeterminate purpose, at no hand
to sell them again until they be grown very dear.


Peddler. Is it not (I pray you) a good point of husbandrye to buy when it is
cheap?


No-bodie. Yes surely. So the same be not done with a purposed mind to hoord
up much in your hands, and then not to forgo them again before the price be
grown excessive great: no, although it should lie either upon the loss of
many men's lives, or otherways procure a present perrill of concord between
country and country. Which diuelishe devise of many, not only drives all fear
of God from their minds: but further, does make the^ become very gross
Idolators. For (in as much as they have neither respect to ye Lord, nor any
regard of Christian love) yt their service (we see) which is due unto God, and
that their Christian love which of right belonges to their brethren, they do
wholly employ to the practice of their pelf: which is plain Idolatry and
barreth those beasts from the kingdom of heaven as says the Apostle Ephe. 5.
5. Collos. 3. 5.
No covetous person which is an Idolatour has any inheritance in the kingdom
of Christ and of God.


Ingroser. Why? then you conclude that good Joseph has no inheritance in ye
kingdom of heaven? For both he bought you know when grain was good cheap and
sold not again before it grew dear.


No-bodie. You greatly mistake the matter. This example of Joseph does yield
no couerte at all to any our Cutthroate dealers. Gene. 41. 46.
For the dealings of Joseph were wholye directed by the certain providence of
God: whereas these men are driven to deal as they do by a secret provocation
of the devil. He dealt no further in those affairs then the allowance of the
Lord and the protection of Pharaoh: these deal as they do without any warrant
at all from the Lord, and contrary also to the established laws of the Prince.
His dealinges were to provide for the whole common wealth against a famine to
come: theirs are only to purloyne from the whole common wealth, if any famine
should come. He bought in the time of abundance to continue a further abundance
amongste all men: these buy most of all in the time of scarsity, to pluck more
scarsity upon men. He for the profit of others, without any regard of gain to
him self: they with a miserable polling of others, to the only gain of
themselves. And therefore Joseph (notwithstanding all this) a glorious
inheritour of the kingdom of Christ and of God: when these greedy cormorantes
shall be greeuouslye dispossessed thereof, through their insatiable affections
which never cry ho.


Eueri-bodie. Well sir, when they have gotten enough, then they will leave.


No-bodie. Think you then, that the increase of their wealth will be any
means at all to decrease their desire? That were all one (in effect) as if a
man would imagine that the plentiful pouring of drink into a Barrel and none
at all into the stomach, were the readiest way to assuage a drunken man's
thirste: or as if the continual packing on of more wood, were ye best policy
of all to quench an outrageous fire: or as though it were possible with one
grain of Musterd seed to fill up a bottomless Barn: or with great store of
riches to satisfy the insatiable desire of an insatiable wretch whose
insatiable affections will never be satisfied with monye. For even as those men
which sodainlye become mad or frantic, do in no wise behold the very
matter it self, whereabout their brains are so busied, but have only (in
their own imagination) such a certain impression of those their fantasied
passions as drives them an end with an unbridled rage: so surely, the mind of
a covetous catife (being once fettered with the desire of riches) ever (it
thinks) its gazing on gold, ever its musing of money, ever its reckoning her
rentes, and takes a far greater pleasure in the fickle contemplation of
glittering coin, then in the glorious sight of the shining Sun: yea all her
supplicatio^s and prayers to God are only for Gold.


Eueri-bodie. They will have enough (I warrante you) when their mouths are
filled with mouldes.


No-bodie. Very true. But while their mouths are in fillinge with mouldes,
they make many men's mouths to starve for meat, such (no doubt) is the
unbridled swaye of their insatiable affections.


Pedlar. Its very hard (sir) thus peremptorily to conclude from the inward
affections of any. For, who made you a searcher of men's secret thoughts? No,
that you must leave to the Lord alone who knows the heart.


No-bodie. As though (because the Lord alone is Genes. 6. 5. Psalm. 139. 1, 2.
an immediate searcher of the heart and the raines, he having only a full
knowledge of men's thoughts long before) it were therefore utterly unlawful for
me to conjecture thereof by these ordinarys means which him self has
prescribed: surely, so to imagine were very absurd. For Math. 12. 34. Luke.
6. 45.
if from the abundance of the heart the mouth does utter her voice* Eccle. 19.
28.
if the garments, the gate, and the laughter of a man declare what he is:
breefly, if the tree may be known Math. 7. 16. 17
by his fruits: why may not I also give a guess at the heart, by ye hand: or
aim at the mind, by the manners: yea, and sound the inward affections, by
the outward actions: seeing all the members of the body (for the most part) are
severally disposed, A further unlawfulness of the affection in selling, either
from the time when they sell: or from the place where they sell.
as the heart it self is inwardly inclined. And therefore, not only this former
forestalling of Markets does argue an heart very filthely affected, but the
same also may yet further be proved, both from the time when they sell: and
the place where they sell.


Ingrocer. How first, (I pray you) from the time of selling?


No-bodie. When as the sellers (not contenting them selves with the ordinary
times and seasons appointed for such worldly affairs) do very greedilye
encroche upon the several of the eternal God, 1. From the time when they
sell: and how?
by making a sale of their wares upon the Lords day, which thing
(undoubtedly) does argue a most slauishe subjection to their own inordinate
and beastly affections.


Peddler. You speak now (I perceive) you wot not what: For is it not then (I
pray you) the best time of all to sell our wares when the Cuntry may be at most
leisure to buy the same? But this they cannot do half so well on ye week
days as on the hollidayes, for following their worldly affairs.


No-bodie, You imagine (belike) you have spoken very much to the purpose, but
how fitlye (forsooth) your self by and by shall be judge. For suppose ye
Prince should straightlye command you upon such a day in the week (all
affairs set apart) to make your personal apperance at Hampton Court, and
their diligently attend and tarry her further pleasure, upon perrill that will
follow the contrary. Tell me now I pray you? whether you think your self
bound to obaye this charge, or whether your disobeying the same: may be fully
excused by telling her Majesty you could not conveniently come at the
appointed time, for following your worldly affairs?


Peddler. A very frivolous question. For who knows not that the Prince must be
served, howsoever we serve our selves?


No-bodie. Verry well. Now tell me again, whether you ought to have the laws
of God or the Prince in higher account?


Pedlar. Why, the laws of the Lord.


No-bodie. Thus then at unawares you have flatly concluded against your self,
that seeing your proper affairs must be laid apart for the pleasure and
service of Princes, much more at the commandment of the eternal God. But
this God as he has in his laws allotted to Men the other six days in the
week for the better dispatche of their worldly affairs Exodus 20. 9. 10
so has he in like manner reserved the seventh to him self, to be wholye
spent in his spiritual service, without giving regard to your worldly
affairs.


Eueri-bodie. And is not the same so spent (I pray you?) when (on that day)
both Man and Beasts do cease from their labors?


No-bodie. If the matter were so indeed, then should not your self have been
here to day. But although I should grant your affirmacion in some sort to
be true, yet were this service you speak off, no full observation of ye
Sabbath: because that men are therein commanded, not only to rest from their
own labors but with all to be very careful in performing the works of the
Lord. For Exodus 20. 8.
Remember (says he) you keep holy the Sabbath. If therefore ye ceassing from
worldly affairs without any fulfilling at all of the Sabbath day, works
were a right celebratio^ of the Sabbath: surely I see no reason at all, why
your horse may not be said to hold as holy a Saboth to the Lord as your
self, seeing that he also on that day is free from his usual labors.
Notwithstanding, as man (besides those manifold graces in Christ) is further
endued with that gift of reason whereof brute beasts are deprived: so surely
he is by perticipation thereof: much more bound then they, both to discern
aright between the service of him self and of his creator, and Isa. 58. 13.
to be forward (a thousand fold) in fulfilling the one then the other, yea
even at such time and in such manner as the Lord himself has appointed. But
the Lord has appointed the seventh day to be wholye spent in his spiritual
service: and therefore it follows, that the only ceassing that day from
bodily labor, is no full performance of the service due to ye same: unless
(perhaps) you imagine that the sanctification of the Sabbath consists alone
in an idle and loytring life, without any doing at all of the Sabbath day
works.


Ingroser. Which then (I pray you) are Sabbath day works.


No-bodie. Verily, these and such like. Namelye that men in abstaining from
bodily labors, do learn withal to cease from sin: Neh. 8. 1. 2. etc. Luke.
4. 16. 17. Act. 13. 14. 15. Act. 17. 2. Act. 20. 7. Romans 12. 13. 1. Cor. 11.
20. 1. Cor. 16. 2. Revel. 1. 10.
do wholly apply themselves to an attentive hearing of Gods holy word, to the
participation of the Sacraments, to the use of Catechizing and singing of
Psalms, with other such heavenly exercises. Besides that, to this so necessary
a Law, the Lord him self has annexed both promises and threatninges: to the
end that men might the better be brought to some dutiful performance thereof.


Ingroser. Rehearse them both verry breeflye, I pray you.


No-bodie. I will. And first for the promises he says. If Isa. 58. 12. 14.
Ier. 17. 21. Ezech. 20. 21.
thou turn away thy foot on thy Sabbath from doing thy will on my holy
day, and call the Sabbath a delight to consecrate the same as glorious to the
Lord, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor seeking thine own
will, nor speaking a vain word, then shall thou delight in the Lord, and I
will cause thee to mount upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with
the heritage of Iaacob thy Father, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Now next, for the threatninges also he says. Ier. 17. 27.
But if thou will not hear me to sanctify the Sabbath day, and not to bear
a burden, nor to go through the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, then
will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall not be quenched.

Lo these (as I said before) are the promises and threatninges, concerning
this so necessary a Law of the Lord.


Eueri-bodie. Tushe a straw: these are but scar-crowes of your own devising.
For think you (if the matter were indeed so heinous as you seem to make it)
that some very good laws would not (long ago) have been provided for so
needful a purpose?


No-bodie. Good Laws be provided? why? would you wish a Law of more
antiquity, of greater equity, or of waightier importance then this which I have
showed before, being both so solempnlye decreeed, and so severely confirmed
from the mouth of the Lord. But perhaps your meaning is only of ye positive
laws of Princes: And (so by all likelyhoode) you imagine the ordinary good
laws of our Land have hitherto had no regard at all for the Sabbath, wherein
you are fully deceived. For, if the penaultie appointed for the breach heerof
were dulye inflicted upon the offenders, I believe they would say they had
law enough for their money. Now, for proof hereof, besides other good laws,
peruse the statute at large of Henry the sixth, and ye same will tell you that if
any Faires or markets be kept upon good Friday, Corpus Christi day the
Ascension day, All Saints day, Whitson day, Trinity Sundaye, or any other
Sunday, (the four Sondayes in Harueste excepted) and any goods or Merchandies
in them be showed: the owners thereof shall forfeite all their said goods so
showed, to the Lord of the Liberty. etc.


Pedlar. If this be certainlye true, and these Statutes in force: it will make
some of us wiser hereafter.


No-bodie. As you may search the Records themselves for their truth: so
when you feel what force they bare, you shall find a further certaintye of
both. But (by the way) you discover an vnconcionable heart, which more fears
the force of a Statute then the fire of Hell.


Peddler. And yet for all this (if there were such a Statute, and the same still
in force) me think the Magistrates would never continue so careless as they
commonly do, in executing the same.


No-bodie. How careless soever the Magistrates are, it makes no matter: they
shall one day be sure (without a speedy repentance) for this their carelessness,
to find (in a miserable experience) that the Lord him self will be careful
enough of his glory, and most sharply plague the prophanors thereof: who
(having both the line of his Laws to lead them, and example also of good
Nehemiah to direct their dooinges that ways) are yet notwithstanding still so
careless therein.


Eueri-body. I pray you sir, what was Nehemiah his act?


No-bodie. Even that which witnesses a wonderful zeal of the glory of God,
according as him self has testified saying: Neh. 13. 15. etc.
In these days saw I in Judah, them that trod Wine presses on the Sabbath,
and that brought in sheaues, and which laded Asses with Wine, Grapes and
Figs, and all burdens: and brought them into Jerusalem on the Sabbath day.
And I protested unto them in the day that they sold victuals (saying that God
could not suffer such transgressors of his Law unpunished.) There dwelt men of
Tyrus also therein, which brought fish and all wares, and sold on the Sabbath
unto the Children of Judah in Jerusalem. Then reproved I the rulers of Judah
and said unto them: What evil thing is this that you do and break the
Sabbath day? Did not your Fathers this? and our God brought all this plague
upon us, and upon this City? Yet you encreace the wrath upon Israel in
breaking the Sabbath. And when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before
the Sabbath, I commanded to shut the gates, and charged that they should not
be opened til after the Sabbath. And some of my servants set I at the gates,
that their should no burden be brought in on the Sabbath day. So the Chapmen
and Merchantes of all Merchandise remained once or twice all night without
Jerusalem. And I protested among them and said unto them, why tarry you all
night about the wall? If you do it again I will lay hands upon you. From that
time came they no more on the Sabbath. Lo this is the testimonye of Nehemiah
his zeal toward the laws of the Lord.


Ingroser. A very rare and notable example: the Lord encreace ye number of such
zealous Magistrates. But sir? having hitherto proved a wicked affection in
selling of wares, from the time when they sell: you are now next to prove the
same further, from the place where they sell.


No-bodie. Very true as you say, wherein also it appears a more evident
argument of a wicked affection, 2. From the place also where they sell, and how?
I mean, when wares are accustomablye sold in places consecrate to a sacred
use: as in Churches Chapels, Oratories and such other peculier places,
appointed only for the religion and service of God.


Peddler. There is no man so mad as to practice this thing during the time of
public prayer, Goodman Peddler an Iniunction protestant.
having especially an Iniunction against the same. But (the prayers
dispatched) do you then think it unlawful to buy and sell in those places?
This would but breed a popish opinion in peoples hearts concerning the
holiness of one place more then another.


No-bodie. Although I confess that the places are (simply of them selves) the
one no more holy then the other, yet in respect of the uses and ends whereunto
they are especially allotted: who seeeth not some difference? Otherways had not
Iaacob greatly offended in intituling the place of his heavenly visions by
Genesis 28. 19.
the name of Bethell, that is to say the house of the Lord: and had not King
David also been deeply deceived him self in naming the Temple the Sanctuario
of the Lord, if (in respect of the use thereof) no holiness at all were to be
ascribed unto it? Thus then you may see, that whereas this doctrine of mine is
far from breeding any popish superstition in the peoples breasts: that
preposterous practice of yours, in forbearing no place: does not only prove
you the public transgressors of Princes Laws, but further does make you
very like to those Math. 21. 12. Mar. 11. 15. Luc. 19. 45. John. 2. 10.
buyers and sellers, whom Christ so reprochfully whipped out of the Temple,
saying: Isa. 56. 7.
My house shall be called the house of prayer, Ier. 7. 11.
but you have made it a Den of thieves. Math. 20. 13.



Ingroser. Well, notwithstanding it is thought that Christ dealte not only
against those Merchants, (who under a pretense of Religion,) sought to
maintain their covetous affections. Bearing the people very fair in hand,
that their daily selling of Oxen, of Sheep and of Doves, and their exchanging
also of monye in the Temple, was only to further the service of God. For
whereas the people, being for sundry causes commanded Leuit. 1. 1. 10. 14
Leuit. 2. 1. 4. Leuit. 4. 1. 2. 3. 13. 22. 27. etc.
to offer several gifts, were often times unprovided therein: their meaning was
(as they said) by the sale of such things to have those diverse offringes ever
in a readiness, at every such time as the people had any occasion to offer the
same. But we (sir you know) have no such pretense: and therefore the reason
you make has no force against us at all.


No-bodie. Howsoever you differ in pretense, your practice and theirs (for any
thing I can perceive) does tend to one, and the selfsame purpose: I mean,
to maintain your covetous affections. For as those Merchants then
(notwithstanding their glorious pretense) preferred their own private wealth,
before the public woorship of God: so surely who seeeth not that our Merchants
likewise (for all their plausible pretenses) are rather addicted to their own
inordinate desires, then unto the glory of God. When as they for the love of
their greedye gain, will in no wise forbear the place appointed to his
spiritual service. Forgetting withal 2. Cor. 8. 14. 15
that as God and Mammon could never agree: Math. 6. 24. Luc. 6. 13.
no more may the service of both, be possibly placed together.


Ingroser. Having hitherto proved the manner of selling unlawful, first from
the cause it self, whether the same be considered in the person that selles,
or the affection in selling: you are now next (by promise) to declare a further
unlawfulness in the manner of selling, from the pitching of price.


No-bodie. It is certainly so, wherein you must mark that by this means also
the manner of selling may be made more unlawful. Namely, when covetousness,
self love, or your inordinate affections, do in making the market, pitch a
price of your wares: The manner also of selling unlawful.
and not the worthiness of the thing it self which is to be sold neither
yet the benefit that should in conscience redound to the buyer thereof does
strike the stroke. From the pitching of price wherein first from the price it
self, and next from the handmaides attending upon it.
And this also more plainly appears, either from the price it self: or from
the other handemaides attending upon it.


Ingroser. How first from the price it self?


No-bodie. Verily, when as the chapman having no regard at all unto these the
aforenamed considerations, 2. From the price it self, and how?
do make the same to surmount all measure, and very much to exceed the
bounds of equity.


Peddler. Why sir? is not every man master of his wares, to sell forth ye
same at such a reconing as seems good to him self?


No-bodie. Although I should grant you his goods are his own, yet for that a
man is not only borne for him self, but also for his Christian breethre^ about
him it behooves the seller (in pitching the price of his wares,) The price it
self reduced to an equality and the direction of conscience.
First to drive the same to an equality so near as possible he may: and then
next to be directed therein by the testimony of a Christian conscience.


Ingroser. How first, by driving the price to an equality?


No-bodie. When that the Seller in pitching a price of his wares has no less
special care of the buyers commoditye then of his own: (...). To an equality
and how?
that so between the wares which are sold, and the price repaied for the
same, there may be a proportionable equality observed in valor and goodness.
According also to which fidelity and faithfulness in all buying and selling,
the Lord gave a law to the people of Israel saying: Leuir. 25. 14. 15. 16. 17.
When thou sellest any thing unto thy neighbor, or buyest at thy neighbors
hands, you shall not deceive one another: but according to the number of the
years after the Jubilee, thou shall buy of thy neighbor, also, according to
the number of the years of the reuennues he shall sell unto thee. According to
the multitude of years thou shall encreace the price thereof, and according to
the fewnes of years thou shalt abate the price thereof: for the number of
fruits does he sell unto thee. Oppress not you therefore any man his Brother,
but thou shall fear thy God, for I am the Lood thy God.


Peddler. What mean you (sir) in aleadging this Law unto us, which (being
given to the people of the Jews) is now abrogate by the coming of Christ?


No-bodie. Although the Ceremonye (I grant be ceased in Christ) yet
notwithstanding the equity thereof remains for ever: being the equity of
that righteous God, who can at no time Mal. 3. 6. Iam. 1. 17.
be contrary to him self.


Ingroser. And what are we taught from the equity of this Law?


No-bodie A very profitable Doctrine: Namelye, that the seller (in selling out
his wares) must have a special regard of that commodity which the buyer is
likelye to enjoy by the same. Whereof also it behoues him to make a simple
conjecture, according to the usual and ordinary rate of those wares as they
go at that time when he selles the same: and thereupon, must either encreace or
abate the price of his said wares, whatsoever accordingly.


Peddler. And why so I pray you?


No-bodie. Because they are commanded to buy and sell according as the year of
Jubilee shall be either sooner or later: increasing the price thereof if it be
longer to that year, seeing the buyers commoditye should be the more, and
abating the price thereof if the said time be shorter, for that the buyers
commodity must be so much the less.


Eueri-bodie. What use of this Law with us that be Christians?


No-bodie. A most notable and necessary use. For, from the equity thereof may
be drawn the two former most perfect rules, whereby we are taught both to
discern aright of true buying and selling: and which ways also we may buy and
sell in the fear of God, with the warrant of upright conscience.


Ingroser. What rules (I pray you) are those?


No-bodie. First, that our covetous affections set not the price of our wares:
for here (you see) we should have a special eye unto that time wherein the
others commodity must cease. Secondlye, that (in all our buying and selling)
we do drive the comoditie given and received, as near to equality as we
possible may Leuit. 25. 16.
For (says the Lord) the number of fruits thou sellest unto him, and the
number of fruits he can now no longer enjoy. As if he should say, since the
nearenes of time will not suffer him to make any more commodity of that which
he bought at thy hands: therefore, the price thereof must be abated accordingly,
that so there may be a mutual benefit, and that neither part be found
oppressing another. Exodus 20. 17.
(b) For no man is licensed (by the Lord) to take so much from his Christian
brother as one peney, for nothing.


Peddler. Then belike (sir) you would not have men to sell forth their wares
any dearer at all then they boughte the same?


No-bodie. Although, for some considerations (as was told you before, I mean
nothing less: yet if here you would have me simplye to answer the matter,
setting other causes and consideratons apart) I might boldly affirm that they
may not.


Peddler. And why so I beseech you?


No-bodie. Because Math. 7. 12.
the Law of the Lord requires evermore an equality of Justice to be
proportionably observed of all men in their buying and selling. Now for that
Ezech. 18. 4. 10 Romans 6. 23.
the Justice of God dispenceth with no sin be it never so little, and seeing
the manner also and form of those his judgments against sin are every way
made appliable to that equity and upright deling which we our selves do seem
to observe with others: who seeeth not how that we (in keeping this equality of
Justice) must ever do unto others, as we would be done unto our selves. But
no man him self would willingly be oppressed with the ouerprizing of wares:
And therefore, it behooves him also to measure the price unto others, in a
fellow like feeling of both their estates. Thus then (you see) that if we be
rightly careful (in deed) to shun the said Judgments of God we may in no
wise, take twelve pence for six pence. For why should not the others twelve
pence in monye be fully as good as thy twelve penywoorthe of wares? Justice
therefore requires, that if (in the exchange of these temporal commodities)
the one party be found to have more then the other: he which has the more
should willingly return (for a recompense) as much of his own to the other,
and so there shall be an equality observed according to Arithmaticall proportion.


Eueri-bodie. What proportion (I pray you) is that?


No-bodie. Even the same which has evermore an especial regard unto the
excess. As for example, Five is the mean (you know) between four and six:
the which even by adding unto it but one) both exceeds, and is also exceeded
it self. If therefore (either of the parties having only five at the first,) the
one of the^ does take but even one from ye other: this man that so takes,
should have six to himself and leave the other but four which were a
marvelous excess. The Justice therefore of God (according to Arithmaticall
proportion) requires for the better redress heerof) that either of the^ both
he brought again to the mean, which is five. And this may easily be done, by
taking one from him that has six, to give it the other who has but four, and
so either of them both shall have five you see, which is the mean between
four and six, as was told you before.


Ingroser. And what if this equity were observed in buying and selling?


No-bodie. Then undoubtedly would cease all those vile and unsavory speeches
which men spewe abroad to their own reproach. Namely, I must needs sell thus
dear because of my losses: or I will sell for so much, to provide me a pennye
against the rain.


Peddler. And why should not we both say it and do it?


No-bodie. As though you had commission from the Lord, to encroche upon other
men's coin for the supplye of your Shipwreck? or as though it were lawful to
recompense your loss with other men's Labors? or, as though you had a special
privilege, very unjustly to lay those strokes upon the shoulders of such as
deal with your wares, which your selves by your former losses: had iustlye
received before from the Lord? or as though you might boldly provide you a
shilter for showers it skilleth not how.


Peddler. Tushe, this is a great deal more nycenesse then needs: for poor
chapmen you know must live.


No-bodie. As I dare not deny but that they must live* so dare I also affirm
that they must seek to live none otherways at all, then they may with the
warrante and alowance of the Lord. For, if this were enough for men to say (we
must live) why? then by the selfsame warrant every felon also might say, I
must maintain my charge with other men's costs.


Ingroser. Nay, that were too absurd. But do you think it then to be meerelye
unlawful for a man to take more for his wares then he paid for the same?


No-bodie. I say not so. For as I affirmed before, a man in some
considerations, may lawfullye take a reasonable gain in the sale of his wares.


Eueri-bodye. What considerations are those?


No-bodie. Verilye, even such as partly concern the seller himself, and
partly also the wares which are sold. For first, concerning the seller him
self, a reasonable gain is allowed unto him: when first his travel in buying
and selling does truly tend to a public commodity, and not to a private
advantage. Secondly, when as by his own endeavor, those wares which he bought
before are any thing bettered, either by adding unto the^ that thing which
they wanted: or otherways by a chargeable preserving of them in their proper
goodness. And thirdly, when as he has been at charges by transporting his
said wares from place to place. Now next, concerning the wares which are to be
sold. Seeing one certain, one just and unchangeable price thereof has not
hitherto been determined, neither possible can be: because those wares must
sometimes be esteemed in their natural property, and so Musk (for that it
quickneth the sprites and makes them lively is more precious then Gold.
Sometimes also they are to be valewed according to their rarity and scarsenesse:
and so gold surmounteth in valor any grain whatsoever. And sometime again
according to those seasons wherein they are sold: being otherwhiles cheaper:
otherwhiles dearer. Now, because in every of these and such other accide^ts
the very interest it self doothe stand upon hazard: who would not allow
those Merchants some reasonable gain in ye sale of their wares, especially,
when they stick not to adventure their private commodities for the public
profit of all men. Moreover, for that (if after the first buying of wares,
their prices abate, the Merchant which so buys them is sure him self to abide
by the loss: me thinnk (on the other side) its very reasonable, that if after
the buying of them their prices increase, he also him self should likewise
receive the benefit. And therefore I conclude, that for these and such other
like necessary consideracions, every chapman in the sale of his wares, may
lawfully take a reasonable gain. For as 1. Cor. 9. 7.
no man goes ever a warfare at his proper charges: so surely Math. 10. 10. 1.
Tim. 5. 18.
the woorkman is always worthy of his reward whatsoever.


Eueri-bodie. And who (I pray you) must be the judge to determine this their
reasonable allowance? For, seeing neither their expenses nor yet the price of
their wares, can (as you say) be possibly known to any save only themselves,
and a few besides of their trade: me think it were hard for any to seek a
certaintye thereof at themselves alone, as also to enquire out the same at the
hands of those other, that were but to ask my fellow if I be a thief.


No-bodie. True it is. And therefore may self love, at no hand determine the
matter: but men must be directed therein by the testimonye of a Christian
conscience as I told you before.


Ingroser. And how (I pray you) by the testimonye of conscience?


No-bodie. When conscience (having first driven the commodities given and
received as near to equality as possible may be) does then set down such an
indifferente price thereof as the seller him self, (...). To the direction of
conscience and how?
could (in the like consideration) be contented to give to another: and this
is the only and the best direction I know. For seeing both their travels and
expenses be unknown (as you say) and the just prices also of their wares are
not certainly set down, but must from time to time be determined according to
the estimation of good men: I see not how an equality can possibly be kept in
such intricate cases, where a good conscience before does not strike the
stroke. As for example, Let three several men of ye selfsame trade (taking
all a like view of one and the selfsame piece of cloth) be appointed to set
down their several determinations concerning the certain price thereof: and
you shall see how much they will differ therein, which argues how difficult a
thing it is for any to deal in a doubtful discharge of these matters,
according to equity: without the direction of a Christian conscience.


Ingroser. Very true. And therefore God grant us all to be more careful
heerin. But sir? Having hitherto handled the price it self: I pray you
likewise proceed to the Handmaides attednding upon it.


No-bodie. With all my heart. From ye hand maids attending upon it* and this,
either by a partial prizing of wares: or by racking the same for some respit
given in the payment.
Wherein you have also to make that there may be a further abuse in the pitching
the price, when as Chapmen are vnconscionablye carried from the aforenamed
equalitye and direction of conscience unto the contrary vices And this, either
by a partial prizing of wares: or otherways, by an unreasonable racking
thereof, for some respet given in the payment.


Ingroser. How first, by a partial prizing of wares? 1. By a partialler
prizing of wares and how?



No-bodie. When as chapmen (setting a charitable conscience apart) do prize
their wares with respect of persons I mean, when they sell the same deerer to
strangers then they do unto Citizens, or to any other besides, of the
selfsame trade.


Peddler. Why should they not so do?


No-bodie. Both, because they are commanded Exodus 23. 9.
to be loving to strangers as those that know well enough the heart of a
stranger, being sometimes strangers themselves: and also for that this so
uncharitable oppressing of them above others: would but drive Isa. 52. 5. Romans
2. 24.
them to dislike that Religion of God, whereunto Exodus 20. 9. 10. Judge. 19. 18.
Neh. 13. 20 21. Romans 1. 14. 15.
they should labor by all lawful means to allure them.


Ingroser. This reason (how pregnant so ever it appears in your eyes) may
soon be refelled with that infallible law of the Lord, which permits Deuteronomy.
12. 20.
his own people to take Vsurye of strangers. For if strangers may (by the
permission of God) be oppressed with Usury, a thing otherways of it self very
unlawful in any: it follows necessarilye, that they may much more be
pinched in buying and selling, the same it self being a faculty favored of
God.


No-bodie. You greatly mistake the mind of the Lord in this matter. For that
Law was only allotted for those people and times, and that in a double
respect. First, in respect of the Jews, to whom the Lord (for their
hardness of heart) permitted that Usury a time, least they otherways should in
lending beco^e cruel to their own Nation and People. And secondly also, in
regard Deuteronomy. 23. 20.
of those strangers themselves, who being ye remnant of those cursed Canani^s,
who^ ye Lord had already determined Deuteronomy 7. 22.
by little and little to root out from the Iewishe Nation: therefore he
privileged his own people by Deuteronomy. 28. 12.
this and other means to oppress them, to the end that this their oppression
might from time to time be accounted (as it were) the forerunner of their
future and final destruction.


Ingroser. And was it not likewise lawful for the Jews to oppress those
other strangers also which dwelt among them as Proselytes, and were united to
them in the self same Religion?


No-bodie. No, in no wise: as Deuteronomy 10. 18. Deuteronomy. 19. 19.
by another place more plainelye appears, where the Lord shows him self so
careful for such kind of strangers, that (in a further testimony of his
unspeakable love) he permits to them the participation of Tithes. And
therefore, now the oppressing of Strangers by such a partial prizing of wares
Exodus 23. 19. Leuit. 19. 33. Deuteronomy. 10. 19. Heb. 13. 2.
not only ouerturneth the ordinarye good laws of the Lord and this land: but
also directly contrary Deuteronomy. 10. 18. Genesis 18. 1. etc. Judge. 19. 17. 2. Tim. 5.
10.
to the example of God him self, and of all good men besides.


Ingroser. And how also I pray you by an unreasonable rackinge of wares for
some respite given in the payment?


No-bodie. Verily, 2. By racking the wares for some respite in payment and how?
when as the seller (in a consideration only of giving some respite or time for
the payment) does strike up his wares at an excessive reckoninge, without any
regard either of duetye to God, Wherein a consideration must be had of the
seller and buyer.
or of love to his neighbor.


Ingroser. Why sir? is it unlawful for a man to take so much the more for
those wares which he selles, when he gives a longer time for the payment
thereof?


No-bodie. For answer heereto, 1. Considerations for the seller in giving a
respite
some considerations must necessarilye be had as well of the seller, as of the
buyer.


Peddler. What considerations are first to be had of the seller?


No-bodie. For the seller, 1. That he is to make present sale of his wares.
it behooves him especially to remember, that as he is presentlye to sell
forth his wares: so he may not at any hand make a sale of time which is not
his but the Lords. Consider (I beseech you) that time is no saleable
Merchandise. For who dare be so bold, as to say he has brought time into the
Market to be sold? or where is he that ever obtained leave of the Lord, to
make any sale of months or days?


Peddler. Oh yes sir, Ephe. 5. 16.
the Apostle in one place as I remember, does will us to redeem the time,
which he would never have done unless ye same might be bought and sold.


No-bodie. See how greatly you err, not Math. 22. 29.
knowing the scriptures, neither the Apostles purpose in that place. Who
pursuing still this general proposition, vidz. that the elect in Christ,
must not only seek to garnish their Christian profession with every kind of
virtue: but also abstaining from all enormities what soever disgracing the
same, he shows next, what those virtues are Ephe. 4. 32.
vidz. first the forgiveness one of an other, after the example of Christ.
Secondlye Ephe. 5. 12.
a mutual love not only in word, but also in deed: which is the fufilling of
the law. This being done, he then contriueth a catologue of all such
enormities as they are especially to eschew, namelye: Ephe. 5. 3.
Fornication, uncleanness, covetousness, filthiness, foolish talking, and vain
jesting which are unseemly for their profession. After all this, to the end
they should not be suddenly allured unto the participation of any the
aforesaid enormities by the wicked example of such as licentiouslye practice
the same: he foretefieth the^ a fresh with sundry other invincible arguments.
As first, Ephe. 5. 8.
from their former condition saying: before your commission to the faith of
Christ, you lived in those enormities, and therefore, having now taken upon you
another profession, another practice of life is also required. Secondly, from
Ephe. 5. 9.
the sundry effects of the holy ghoast which must of necessity appear in
the regenerate as his proper and peculiar virtues. Thirdlye, from Ephe. 5. 10.
the diligent endeavor of all the Children of God, who seek by all possible
means, to approve themselves to their heavenly Father. Fourthly from the
nature of sin, which is Ephe. 5. 11.
to make unfruitful whomesoeuer it possesses. Fifthly from the filthy Ephe. 5.
12.
conversation of the wicked, who procure to themselves a shame, yea even of
their secret sins. Sixtlye from the Ephe. 5. 13.
euente thereof, which is to be discovered at length And lastly, from Ephe. 5.
14.
the continual cry of God, who calls us every where to amendment of life.
Now, from all the aforesaid reasons Ephe. 5. 15.
he drives an exhortation to the study of Godliness and confirms the same
with an argument gathered Ephe. 5. 16.
from a consideration of the time. Which time also and every occasion thereof,
he wills them to redeem with newness of life: least by their careless
ouerslipping thereof) they be like to those negligent husbandmen, who omitting
the occasion of seed time, when others do reap, are themselves most iustlye
deprived of fruit. Lo, this is the very purpose of Paul in that place. And
this also is that buying and selling of time whereof he entreats: being so
far from warranting the unreasonable oppression of those which sell forth
their wares the deerer for days, that rather it serves every way to overthrow
the same, as one of the most principal means to maintain that their
insatiable covetousness which he before had so flatly forbidden.


Eueri-bodie. I perceive (Goodman Peddler) you triumphed a little before the
conquest: and that (in alleging this scripture) you are not unlike to those
foolish Fencers, who often times in a lustye ioylitie, do prepare Cudgelles
for their own shoulders. But what other considerations (I pray you) are to be
had in the seller?


No-bodie. For the seller also, 2. That there be an equality of gain between
him self and the other.
he must further consider, whether there be an equality of commodities
between himself and the other, or no. Because in every such buying and
selling, men are commanded as it was told you before: to drive the commodity
given and received, so near to equality as possible they may: which can in no
wise be looked for in that excessive racking of wares, sold over for time.
True it is, if a Coat cloth sold forth for days, would be so much the longer
in wearing, then that which is given for present monye, or if a quarter of
Corn, delivered out for days, would longer relieve the poor man and his
family, then that which he provides for present paimente: then, there were
good reason the seller should more encreace the price of the one then of the
other, because buyers commodity were liker to be greater by the one then the
other. But seeiug the one is no less subject to wearing and wasting then is
the other: how should it otherways be, but that this unreasonable enhaunsing
of the one in respect of the other, must needs carry in it, a smacke of most
blooddy and cruel oppression.


Peddler. Tushe a straw, this is no reason at all: seeing not only the seller,
but also the buyer him self does likewise make a commodity of such sale of
wares for days. Seeing that he having still his stock wholly in his hands,
may imploye the same to his best advantage by the often return thereof, yea
even unto the very time it self wherein he is to discharge the debt: and an
often return, we commonly say, returns some profit.


No-bodie Though this your replye were granted you every whit, yet does it
answer the matter nothing at all, unless it be first proved that you may
lawfullye take money for that thing, which (although peradventure some one do
not loose thereby through his as unjust dealing as your own) yet you are sure
another cannot but smart for the same: because it comes so much the more
dearer unto the hands of him that must use it. Who reapeth no commodity by any
such sale of time, but rather a loss and hindera^ce, notwithstanding it has
so highlye enriched your self and your debtor that bought it for days,


Eueri-body. Very true as you say: for surely my self have felt too much
the smart of this matter. And this also (I suppose) is not the least occasion
of so pinching a dearth, in such a kingdom of plenty and peace: but proceed
with the rest.


No-bodie. Lastly, 3. That an excessive selling for time, is hurtful to other
poor occupiers being either to sell: or to buy.
such an excessive selling out of wares for days, cannot be but prejudicial
to other poor occupiers of the selfsame trade, whether they be to buy or to
sell.


Peddler. How is it first hurtful to them being to buy?


No-bodie. Surely many ways. For if he be to buy his said wares for days, 1.
Hurfull to others being to buy: and how;
he cannot have them (you see) without an excessive reckoning, whereby he is
driven, either to give over his said trade, partly through this so
unconscionable dealing of others, and partly for want of better ability: or
otherways continuing his said trade, he is constrained to adventure very
hardlye upon those their wares for days. Which if after their buying they
abate in price, are rather become ginnes to fetter him faster in the Gaile of
miserye: then kayes, to vnbolte those bars of bondage, whereunto he is brought
by the cruelty of other.


Peddler. And how also is it hurtful to them, being to sell forth their wares?


No-bodie. Undoubtedly, 2. Hurtful to others being to sell: and how?
such excessive enhaunsing of things for days, is this ways hurtful also to
other poor occupiers. For if he be to sell forth his wares, and that his
present need does drive him to crave present paimente: then (on this side we
see again, his sale is so hindered by means of those cormorants, who let out
the like wares unto other for days: that, either he shall have no one Chapman
at all to buy his said wares, or otherways be forced by reason of his need
to sell them out at a far lower reckoning then he first bought them himself.
This thing therefore being both ways so hurtful as you have heard: with what
good conscience can any Christian practice the same. And thus much first, for
the considerations to be had in the seller.


Ingroser. Verily, these considerations are such as (being rightlye
considered) will make a Christian conscience consider twice, or ever he sell out
his wares any deerer for days. But what considerations also (I pray you are
to be had of the buyer?


No-bodie For ye buyer likewise it must be duelye considered whether when he
comes to buy his wares, 2. Considerations to be had of the buyer in taking a
respite for payment.
he be well able or not, to make present paimente for them without any
hinderance at all: for therein consists the matter which marreth or makes the
match.


peddler. What if the buyer be able to pitch and pay?


No-bodie. If he be able to make a present dispatch, 1. Whether he be well able
to make present payment.
and yet would be dodging for days, then, the enhaunsing of wares to such a
one is much more tolerable. Because it is to be intended, that as he has no
need at all of any such delay in the payment: so surely, that none other
thing else does drive him unto it, but a covetous affection which can in no wise
be qualified with a moderate wealth. And therefore seeks (he cares not how) to
gather up much in his hands, to the end he alo^e may be a Chapman on earth,
either to sell out his wares as he list him self: or otherways by hoording
the same: to procure a dearth throughout the land.


Ingroser. You never spoke more truly in all your life. There are too too many
of this mischeeuous mind, the Lord God amend the^. But what if the buyer be
not able to pay presently for those his wares?


No-bodie. If the buyer be not able to make present payment, 2. That he is not
able to make present payment.
and yet notwithstanding at very great need (for that must be also considered)
does drive him to buy the said wares: the seller then (remembering evermore
that we are born one for another) must not now lie in waighte to make a pray
of another necessity. For this were not only simple theft, but carries in
it also some smacke of crueltye and murder: because it is most commonly offered
to them, whose necessite (if we had in us any bowels of pity and compassion)
were rather of all men to be forthwith relieved then thus unnaturally of any
to be increased Leuit. 25. 17. 35 Am. 1. 9. 1^
by adding affliction unto their affliction. As if their affliction were not
cruel enoughe to be cast groueling under our feet unless we also trampled
upon them, and did our en-deuour, that they might never be able to arise any
more.


Peddler. Such cutthroates (no doubt) do swarm in every cost: who weight for
nothing so much as for the spoil of their brethren being driven to distress.


No-bodie. The more to be lamented. Howbeit, this would they not do if they
had the grace to remember that, as the Lord forbids them to show any lack of
love toward their brethren: so (for a further trial of their obedience
heerin) that he follows their footings to ye gate of their neighbors goods,
as well as to the door of his person: to epsy whether they will return from
thence, either merciful and helpefull, or cruel and hurtful. And thus he
traceth the^ out and tries their hearts toward their brethren: letting them
see the very secrets thereof, by the outgoings it has to those temporal
things which are especially commodious and necessary for them. And thus much
breeflye for the abuses incide^t to buying and selling, whereby also the
unlawfulness thereof more plainly appears.


Ingroser. Surely, these abuses they are so many, and the occasions thereunto
likewise so great: that I see not how any man may safelye deal in buying and
selling withont the direction of a Christian conscience governed by the inward
grace of God. But (sir) having hitherto hauled the unlawfulness of Marchandrie
in respect of the manifold abuses incident either unto the matter it self
which is to be sold, or unto the manner of selling the same. You are now by
promise to prove a further unlawfulness also thereof, from those sundry
effects which follow the aforesaid abuses.


No-bodie. Very true. 2. A further unlawfulness of Merchandrie from the
effects which follow the former abuses.
For, albeit the unlawfulness of buying and selling, has been sufficiently
showed by the former abuses: yet notwithstanding those fearful effects which
do ordinarily follow in the neeke of the same, Wherein first of the effects
themselves: and then next, the sundry arguments against the same.
will not only prove the practice thereof to be much more unlawful, but be
some further check to bridle the outrageous affections of men, in pursuing
such a practice. Wherein also you have first to consider the effects them
selves: and then consequentlye, the sundry arguments against the same.


Ingroser. Very well. And what I pray you are the effects them selves?


No-bodie. They are those monstrous, The effects (...)hemselues being partly
general and partly particular.
those strange and unnatural issues or fruits which do ordinarily ensue,
either upon all or any the former disordered abuses to the great grief and
offense of the godly and to the daily dishonor of God. All which most
fearful effects (being both many and intricate) do crave a twofold
consideration: namely, being either general or particular.


Ingroser. What (I pray you first) are the general effects?


No-bodie. They are those ugly events which (flowing from the filthy puddle
of the foresaid abuses, 1. The general effects are those which have a
relation either to all other occupiers else: or to the whole common wealth.
and having a general relation to many or all) do make the very trade of
Merchaundrie to seem much more filthy and odious then it is of it self. And
this also more plainly appears, whether the same be severally considered in
all other occupiers else whatsoever: or whether it be generally wayed in the
whole common wealth.


Ingroser. How first, being considered in all other occupiers else?


No-bodie. Verily, 1. To all other occupiers, either by alluring minds to the
like: or by bringing some infamy upon them.
when as those the former abuses (howsoever practiced of any) do generally
tend to the hurt, the discredit and loss of all other Chapmen besides, whether
abroad or at home. And this also, either by alluring their minds to practice
the like: or otherwise, by bringing some general infamy upon themselves, and
their several callings.


Peddler. How first, by alluring their minds to practice the like?


No-bodie. When as (by beholding the rare and wonderful increase of that other
man's wealth which so deceitfully deals in buying and selling, 1. By aluring
their minds to the like, and how?
and forgetting withal the common condition of their corrupted nature, being
of it self very prone to prosecute that which is naught) they are shrewdly
allured, and even egged an end (as it were) to tread in their trace, and to
put the like lewdenes in practice, to the hazard of themselves and of theirs.
For, may you not perceive by common experience, how easily the world is haled
an end by examples? how roundly it follows the trundle of those their teachers
before them? yea, and how mightily Satan prevails with flesh and blood, by
tickling her often in the ear, and by saying slilie unto her, that seeing such
and such sales-men continue this course in buying and selling, and very richly
do prosper therein, why may not you your self put in practice the like?


Eueri-bodye. I know this to be certenlie so by experience. For I must needs
confess, that my Landlords example has hitherto more mightily prevailed with
me in every matter, then the Preachers persuasions whatsoever. But how (I pray
you) does such fraudulent dealing of some, bring also a general infamy upon
all other sellers besides, and their several callings?


No-bodie. Verily, 2. By bringing some infamy upon them: and how?
when as the sinister dealings of those cutthrote chapmen, which only delight
in deceaueable devises, do make the simpler sort of people (being before very
cruelly cousined of some) to begin forthwith to grow in some grievous
suspicion against them all, and to measure the rest of that company by the
false footings of those whom before they found in a trip. Whereupon also they
commonly cry out and say, nay trust them who will, for there is naught in the
very best of them all but cogging, but craft and deceit: there is not one of a
thousand to trust. No, the more men be customed with them, the more they will
consume them. Yea, and when they pretend the frendliest of all in show, then
are they the farthest of all from meaning true friendship in deed, with ten
hundred such clamorous cries and grievous complaints. By which means, not
only the honest and well meaning Merchaunts are undeservedly drawn in
discredit: but the very faculty also it self (being as you heard at the
first, so necessary for preservation of life, and continuance of concord
between country and country) is grown in disgrace amongst many, to the
exceeding great grief of the Godly, who tremble to see it unjustly subject to
so many most strange and prosperous effects.


Eueri-bodie. They are very preposterous in deed. For who (having due care of
his credit or calling) would by any their sinister dealings procure such
unnatural stains, either to themselves, or the rest of their trade?


No-bodie. Verily, none but such as (having already made Shipwreck of shame)
do give their further endeavor to Ship true honesty also over the Seas.


Ingroser. Well Sir, having hitherto handled only those fearful events,
which (following the former abuses) do ordinarily fall upon all other Chapmen
else whatsoever: you are now next, to discover those other effects which more
generally attend upon the whole common wealth.


No-bodie. With all my heart. Wherein also you may easily observe some further
blemish in buying and selling: namely, for that the same (being now become
very monstrous by reason of the manifold abuses incident unto it) not only is
hurtful to all other occupiers beside (as was showed you before) but also
because it procures many most strange and fearful effects to take hold of
that common wealth or country, 2, To the whole common wealth, either by
hurting the same in it self: or by procuring the Lord for to plague us.
wherein they usually make their abode. And this also, either by hurting the
same in it self, or otherways by procuring the Lord for to plague it.


Peddler. How first, by hurting the same in it self?


No-bodie. When as the buyers and sellers (by abusing their trades as before)
do not only endanger their whole 1. By hurting the same in it self, and how?
company (as you have heard) but do very covertly also procure a more general
hurt to that common wealth whereof they are members, and this also by diverse
and sundry means. As first, by impouerishing the greater part thereof,
through some peeuishe purpose to enrich themselves and their offspring.
Secondly, in procuring a dearth by little and little to steal on the land,
through that their excessive hoording up and hiding of the good blessings
therein. Thirdly, by the utter undoing of many poor men, through their false
and fraudulent dealings. Fourthly, by compelling great numbers of people to
beg or to steal, and so consequently, either to starve in the streets, or
otherways, to be cut off by untimely deaths. All which (with sundry other
most fearful effects) can not choose but kindle some further mischiefs, and
that also to some further general confusion, except the same be more speedely
prevented. For, first it can not but foster a secret grudge in the minds of the
rich men one with another: which is (in very deed) the mother of all mutinies,
and civil dissentions. Secondly, it hardneth the hearts of the poor against
the wealthy, and makes them (in a manner) so desperate, they care not a dodkin
which end goes forward. Thirdly, it weakeneth very shrewdly the whole land
it self by little and little: and so consequently encourages some one
foreign enemy or other to give the onset upon it.


Ingroser. And how also by procuring the Lord for to plague it?


No-bodie. Verily, when as these their outrageous dealings (together with the
continual cries of the poor whom they daily oppress) shall awaken the Lord
out of sleep, 2. By procuring the Lord for to plague it; and how? Psalm. 78.
65. 66.
like a Giant refreshed with wine, to strike his enemies in the hinder parts,
and to put them withal to a perpetual shame, shall kindle his wrath, and
provoke him to plague the whole land with sundry sicknesses and diverse
diseases: namely, with Famine, with Pestilence, with Sword, and with Fire: yea,
and shall further enforce him to whistle for the flies of Spain (or some other
elsewhere, having more deadly stings in their tails) to subdue and destroy, to
devour and Isa. 33. 1.
to spoil up, even all those greedy spoilers themselves, which so greedely
had spoiled many thousands before. And for further proof of this point, I will
at this present content my self with one Prophecy of Amos against the rich
Cormorants and Cutthroates of that his age: who forbore neither time nor place,
but (with false measures and waights) bought and sold the poor people for
shoes, saying: Amos. 8. 5. etc.
When will the new month be gone, that we may sell corn? and the Sabbath,
that we may set forth wheat, and make the Ephah small and the Shekell great,
and falsify the waights by deceit? that we may buy the poor for silver, and
the needy for shoes: yea, and sell the refuse of wheat? The Lord has sworn
by the excellency of Iaacob, surely, I will never forget any of their works.
Shall not the Land tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwells
therein? And it shall rise up wholly as a flood, and it shall be cast out and
drowned, as by the flood of Egypt. And in that day (says the Lord) I will even
cause the Sun to go down at noone: and I will darken the earth in the
clear day. And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs
into lamentation: and I will bring sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness upon
every head: and I will make it as the mourning of an only son, and the end
thereof as a bitter day. Behold, the day is come (says the Lord) that I will
send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but
of hearing the word of the Lord: and they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and
from the North even unto the East shall they run too and fro, to seek the
Word of the Lord, and shall not find it. And in that day, shall the fair
virgins and young men perish for thirst. Lo, here you may see their sin of
cruelty, and fraudulent dealing decyphered fully, together with the fearful
effects which follow the same, namely, a common calamity of the whole country
or land concerning both bodee and soul. And thus much briefly for those
general effects which either concern all other occupiers besides, or the
whole Common wealth.


Eueri-body. Oh fearful effects? and oh vnnatuall wretches, whom the very
hearing thereof does not greatly amaze?


No-bodie. It is surely so. The Lord make them hereafter more mindful
thereof.


Ingroser. Well Sir, having hitherto handled the general events whatsoever, you
are now to declare in like sort those other particular effects which do
ordinarily follow the former abuses.


No-bodie. With all my heart. 1. The particular effects are those, which either
pertai(...) to the party him self, or t(...) his posterity.
Wherein you have further to mark, that (besides those former most fearful
issues concerning all other occupiers else, or the whole common wealth) there
are sundry other more particular effects, which (having a special relacion to
some one, or a few) do make the very trade of Merchandrie to seem much more
filthy and odious then it is of it self. And this also more plainly
appears, whether the same be severally considered in the seller himself, or
in that his posterity and offspring which he leaves behind him.


Ingroser. What are those effects (first) which have special relation unto the
seller himself?


No-bodie. They are those, 1. The effect pertaining to him self, are either
such as concern the body alone, o(...) both body and Soul.
which more properly attend upon the very person of him that makes a practice
of the aforenamed faculty, without having further relation unto any his
posterity or offspring whatsoever. And these also are of two sorts, for either
they are such as concern the body alone, or such as concern both body and
soul.


Peddler. What are the effects concerning the body?


No-bodie. They are properly such as (having some participation with all the
several members and parts thereof) do (by a continual custom and practice
of that which is evil) either most filthelie defile the body, The effects
concerning the body alo^e, are either such as defile the same, or draw it in
danger.
or else, very desperately draw it in danger.


Ingroser. How do they first defile the body?


No-bodie. When as the Chapmen (abusing themselves in buying and selling) do
give over their bodies as weapons of unrighteousness to sin: 1. They defile
the body, either by bringing a loath some bondage upon it, or by making it
loathsome to others.
whereby also, they, either do bring a loathsome bondage upon it, or
otherways, make it very loathsome to others.


Ingroser. How first, by bringing a loathsome bondage upon it?


No-bodie. When the same is slauishly subject unto an inordinate desire of
gain, 1. By bringing a loathsome bondage upon it, and how?
that it willingly suffers it self and every member thereof, to be most
beastly abused in serving the insatiable affections. As for example. When the
head is abused by mischeuous and crafty devises: the eyes, by inordinate and
suspicious watchings: the ears, by covetous and worldly enchauntments: the
tongue, by untrusty and cosining treacheries: the hands, by deceitful and
disordered dealings: the feet, by cruel and unconscionable wanderings abroad:
and all this, to enrich himself with other men's wealth.


Eueri-bodie. And how also, by making it loathsome to others? 2 By making it
loathsome to others, and how?



No-bodie. Verily, when as (by an ungodly continuance of those the former
abuses) the sellers disordered dealings are not only discerned of all men,
but, even his whole body also it self, and every member thereof is very
fitly derided, and most justly detested as a most filthy and loathsome carryon.
Namely, when his head is accounted with all men, the very Cage of deceites:
when his eyes are no better esteemed, then the very Scoutwatches of wickedness:
when his ears are abhorred, as the Ewes-droppers of destruction: when his
tongue is no less distrusted then the poison of Aspis: when his hands and
every finger thereof are hated like the limetwigs of a lurching Cormorant: when
his feet are eschued as the crafty supporters of a pilfering Purloyner.
Briefly, when him self (with the whole pack appertaining unto him) are even
pointed at (as they walk up and down in the streets) for those, who seek to
beguile and to deceive no more then have any dealinges with them at all. And in
this respect, those sellers them selves may fitly be compared to a Snayle,
which never keeps (in creeping about) any ordinary course, but with windings
and turnings conuayeth her self into her Cottage: so surely, such sellers as
seek only for gain, they care not at all for keeping a christian course in
those their common affairs, but seek by windings and turnings to convey
themselves into the credit of their daily customers, not passing who lose, so
themselves may be sure for to win. No, they make not any reckoning at all to
deride Job. 12. 4.
the simplicity of the upright and just. Yea, they think that the wisdom of
this world consists altogether in hiding their heart by subtle devises, in
concealing the mind by coosining speeches, in making falsehoode seem truth,
and truth to seem falsehood. And this wisdom also of theirs is found out of
young men by practice, and of children likewise by paying some price for the
same. Lo, these are the effects (for the most part) which (following the former
abuses) do both bring the whole body in bondage, and make it also very ugly
and loathsome to others.


Ingroser. These (no doubt) are most horrible effects. But what (I pray you)
are those other which draw the body into danger?


No-bodie. Surely, 2. They draw the body in danger, either by their own
disordered dealings, or by some outrage of others.
they are even such as (ensuing a careless and preposterous practice either of
all or of any the former abuses) do procure some present danger unto the body
it self. And this also, either by their own disordered dealings, or else by
some outrage of other.


Peddler. How first, by their own disordered dealings?


No-bodie. When as those our fantastical and foolehardie Chapmen, 1 By their
own disordered dealinges, and how?
floating amain beyond the vttermoste bounds of India, and trudging about by
Sea and by land, by fire and water, to foreshunne the prison of poverty, have
neither care of their health, nor give any regard at all to the ability and
strength of their nature, whereby their own bodies do either become subject
to sundry perilous diseases, or otherways are brought at unawares to many
strange and untimely deaths.


Ingroser. And how also, by some outrage of other?


No-bodie. Verily, when as the seller (by his unconscionable hoording of coin,
2. By some outrage of others: and how?
and his uncharitable withholding of help from the needy) do earnestly provoke
the common Swash-blades and Make-shifts, either to drive them (for their
purses) into a very extreme and deadly fear, or otherwise to bereave them of
breath and of goods together. And in this respect, the sellers also themselves
may (again) be fitly compared unto the creeping Snayle, which (being evermore
dry on the outside, but yet very fat, full of moisture, and all greasy
within) is now and then compelled to pluck in her horns, has her house (by
such as stand in need of her grease) broken over her head, and her self
(without pity) deprived both of grease, and of life. So surely, those
salesmen, who hoord to themselves without helping of others, who (when their
compassion is craved of any) are as dry on the outside as keckes (though very
greasy within, and fat for themselves and their own) Job. 20. 10. 11.
they are oftentimes driven in a deadly fear for their goods, have their
houses broken over their heads, their coin very cunningly conuayed from their
Chestes, and lastly, themselves delivered to death. And thus much briefly for
those particular effects, which either do defile the body, or bring it in
danger.


Eueri-bodie. Undoubtedly, most fearful effects, and such as are able alone to
make men amazed. But these (you say) concern only the body, what therefore
are those other concerning the soul?


No-bodie. They are such and so fearful, that I tremble to tell them: for as
those former effects which concern only the body, are of themselves every way
so vile and infectious, that the Chapmen whatsoever (having any participation
therewith) cannot choose but bear about with them in every place, the most
ugly blots and stains of perpetual reproach: so surely, those other
concerning ye soul, are very horrible to hear, too too monstrous to behold,
and most intolerable of all to endure, being such as tend either to the hurt
of the soul it self, or else to the dishonor of God.


Ingroser. How first to the hurt of the soul it self?


No-bodie. When as the seller (by those sinister dealings) does very carelessly
suffer that lively image of God in himself to be (in a manner) so foully
defaced, 1. To the hurt of the soul it self, being either most filthely
distained with sin, or brought in to a careless condition.
deformed and obscured, as no apparent token thereof may appear to the world,
the same, being either most filthely distained with sin or otherways brought
into a secure and careless condition.


Ingroser. How (first) most filthely distained with sin?


No-bodie. When as the soul her self (by means of those former abuses) is
brought to the participation of all outrageous enormities. 1. Being filthely
distained with sin, and how?
As first, to an unconscionable desire of other men's goods. Secondly, to most
strange and wicked imaginations, which ways that desire may be compassed.
Thirdly, to most deuillish devises, how and by what means those imaginations
of theirs might be brought to some pass. And lastly, to most pestilent
practices, for the speedier accomplishment of those former most filthy devises,
namely, to cogging, to cosinage, to flattery, to lying, to swearing and
foreswearing it self, with four hundred such other unspeakable villainies.


Ingroser. And how also by bringing the same into a secure and careless
condition? Being brought into a careless condition, and how?



No-bodie. Verily, when as the soul (being every ways ouerburdened with those
beastly abuses) is also very dangerously drawn into such a continual custom
of sinning, as not only it is utterly unmindful of God and his word, but is
further, so greedy of pelf, that Amos. 8. 5.
it had rather all the day long be harping after one halfepenny gain, then to
tarry one hour in hearing a Sermon: that it remembers not how Deuteronomy. 25. 15.
Pro. 11. 1.
abominable it is become before the Majesty of God, that it forgets Iam.
4. 14.
the uncertainty of this short and transitory life: that it considers not,
how justly it deserves to Ioh. 2. 15.
be whipped out of the congregation and assembly of Christians: and lastly, to
be Psalm. 15. 4. Apoc. 22. 15.
barred for ever, from the glorious Tabernacle, and holy hill of the Lord.


Peddler. Surely, how cunningly soever some other can cloak their dealings, I
for mine own part do know by experience, all this to be true. But Sir, these
being only noisome to the soul it self, what are those other I pray you,
which tend withal to the dishonor of God?


No-bodie. They are undoubtedly those which have in themselves such a
contagious infection, 2. To the dishonor of God either by profaning his name
and religion: or by promoting the religion of antechriste.
as not only destroieth the very soul it self, but by consequence also does
utterly ouerturne, so much as lies in them, the glory of the eternal God.
And this, either by procuring a dishonor to his holy name and Religion, or
otherways by promoting to their uttermost power, the accursed religion and
service of Antichrist.


Ingroser. How first, by dishonoring Gods holy name and Religion?


No-bodie. When as the seller, 1. By profaning his name and religion, and how?
who professes Religion, himself being too apparently infected with the
contagion of those canckered enormities, not only causes thereby Isa. 52. 5.
Romans 2. 24. Ezech. 36. 10.
the name of God to be evil spoken of among the unbelievers, but his holy
Religion also in a manner to be abhorred of all men, as a Religion which
tends only to carnal liberty, and all other licentious lewdness.


Ingroser. And how also, by promoting the Religion and service of Antichrist?


No-bodie. Verily, 2. By promoting the religion of Antechrist, and how?
when as the Chapmens minds are so beastly bewitched with the inordinate
desire of worldly wealth, that, not only they are not ashamed at all even in
open Markets and Faires, to buy and to sell such Romish Relics, as help to
uphold the kingdom of Antichrist in the hearts of the ignorant, namely, their
Agnus Deies, their Bulls, their Beads, their Crucifixes, their Pardons, with
other such paltrey popish trash: but also, most highly commend that former
golden world, wherein so great gains arose to themselves by the continual sale
of Vestments, Copes, wax Tapers, with ten hundred such trifling toys. And
lastly, do in most shameless manner very bitterly bewail the present
overthrow and want of that Popish Religion, yea, even Genes. 19. 27. Apoc. 18.
11.
with a sorrowful sighing, and shedding of tears.


Ingroser. Having hitherto handled those particular events, which touch the
party himself that sells, whether the same be considered in body alone, or
in body and soul together: you are now next to discover the other particular
issues also concerning his posterity or offspring.


Nobody. Very true as you say. 2. The effects concerning the posterity are
loathsome unto him either by making restitution of those wrong gotten goods, or
by retaining the^ in his proper possession.
Wherein you have further to mark, that the effects which this ways do
usually follow the former abuses, (being also by means of such wrong gotten
goods more strongly confirmed) are not only of them selves very dangerous,
but also most loathsome in nature, whether the posterity or offspring (to whom
they be given) shall be moved in conscience to make restitution thereof to the
owners themselves: or otherways, very vnconscionablie retain them still in
his proper possession.


Ingroser. How first dangerous to the offspring by making restitution thereof to
the owners them selves?


Nobodie. When as the posterity or offspring (whether by yielding some
recompense, or otherwise by restoring that home which his Father before him
had wrongfully gotten) 1 By making restitution of them and how?
shall become the public instrument Job. 20. 10. 11.
of his Fathers perpetual reproach, in making his treacheries further known to
the world, through that so conscionable restitution of his. The which
(notwithstanding it be very miraculously wrought by the spirit of God) cannot
be but grievous to the offspring himself. Because the public shame which
thereby redoundeth to the departed Father, is every ways so lothesome in
nature, as naturally, every natural child cannot choose but abhor, both, in
respect of that worldly reproach it self, and also, in regard of those
terrible torments which his Father before him (by those his vile and
unrighteous dealings) did justly deserve.


Peddler. And how also, by retaining those goods in his proper possession?


No-bodie. Verily, 2 By retaining them (...) possess^ and how^
when as those same wrong gotten goods shall be some special means to allure
the posterity or offspring himself to follow and practice his Fathers former
proceedings, and so make them in the end the one as wicked as the other, to the
perpetual destruction of both: or when otherways, those goods of theirs
having some Ezech. 18. 12. 13 Isa. 33. 1.
secret curse fastened upon them, shall be an occasion to move the righteous
God to deal with them, for this their possession procured by blood, as 1.
King. 21. 21
he dealt with Ahab and his for the like. I mean utterly to root out the
whole progeny of them and of theirs from the face of the earth: for the
bloudthirstie and deceitful men shall hardly Psalm. 55. 23.
continue the one half of their days. And therefore, those Fathers, which so
hoord up for their children and offspring, do deal in this respect a thousand
fold more cruelly with them, then does the venomous Spider with her natural
brood: for she only spinneth her Spiders nets to entangle such Flies as
fall in the same: but these unnatural Fathers, by their wrong gotten goods,
do weaue the webs of destruction for themselves and their Children. And thus
much briefly, for those effects whatsoever, which either generally or
perticulerly ensue the former abuses of buying and selling, and whereby the
very trade of Merchaundrie becomes unlawful.


Ingroser. No doubt, very strange and fearful effects: yea, such as are able
to shatter an heart of flint. And Sir, howsoever the wicked will skorne thereat,
I assure you, my self begins now to have such sight in the matter, as makes me
both sorry and ashamed of many my former dealings. And so I dare say for the
rest.


Peddler. Yea surely. For mine own part I find now the abuses of buying and
selling so many, and the effects which follow the same so fearful withal,
that I wish a general reformation thereof, though I never bought nor sold any
more.


No-bodie. Seeing my travels herein have taken so good an effect, the Lord
make me in some measure to be thankful to him for the same. And his holy
name be blessed for ever, who has 1. Cor. 3. 6.
yielded to this poor watering of mine, so plentiful increase.


Ingroser. We desire the same with all our hearts. But Sir, having hitherto
handled the unlawfulness of Merchaundrie, as well from the abuses incident unto
it, as also from those sundry effects which follow the former abuses. You are
now lastly by promise to bring what arguments you are able against them both.


No-bodie. With all my heart. 2. The sundry arguments against those former
abuses and fearful effects.
And although many arguments might be brought for this matter, yet will I
content my self for this present, with those few which were handled to day in
the Sermon, wherein, sundry reasons were drawn from the words of the Apostle
himself, and those also of such weighty importance, as none but they Isa. 28.
15.
that have made a covenant with Hell, and are at a point with death himself,
will despise the same.


Ingroser. I beseech you then, rehearse them in order. 1. Arguments drawn from
our Christian profession.



No-bodie. Content. First therefore, the Apostle purposing to dissuade men from
all fraudulent devises in buying and selling, does draw one argument from our
christian profession, saying, Let no man oppress 1. These. 4. 6.
his brother, etc. As if he should say, you are you know all Brethren in
Christ, such as profess Mal. 2. 10. Ephesians. 4. 5. 6.
one God, one Religion, one Faith, one Baptism, one Savior: and therefore,
you should be linked so sure in a christian league, as no desire of fraudulent
dealings should ever be able to dissolve the indissoluble bond thereof. For if
such guilefull oppression be horrible among the very Heathen, it can not be
but damnable in the consciences of christians. Who being Romans 8. 21.
redeemed from the corruptions of this corruptible life, and called into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, should show forth their faith, both by
their obedience to God, and love to their Brethren. Otherways, they are (in
truth) no better then dissembling Hypocrites, having Genesis 27. 22.
Iaacobs voice, but Esaus hands: proffering with Math. 26. 49.
and Apostles face, but a Judas kiss: and confessing Tit. 1. 16.
that they know God in words, but deem him with their works: being
abominable and disobedient, and reprobate to every good work.


Peddler. A very mighty and most forcible argument. Who would not be even
ravished therewith? surely, none but such as having already made Shipwreck of
conscience, do deny the brotherhood, and calling in Christ. But proceed in
the rest.


No-bodie. Another argument to dissuade men from all fraudulent dealings in
buying and selling, ^. Arguments drawn from our dutiful obedience.
may be fitly drawn from that dutiful obedience which Christians are to
declare therein to the Lord. And this the Apostle does principally handle in
these words, namely, in bargaining. As if he should say, you that practice the
trade of buying and selling, you especially it behooves to remember, that when
you come to bargaining, you are not to respect your private commodities, but
rather, to way withal, that in this your bargaining you come as it were to
witness your dutiful obedience to the laws of the Lord. That is, to testify
first of all what faith you have in his fatherly providence. Which your faith
does show it self effectually, so often as you seek not by any sinister
dealings, to satisfy your inordinate affections in enriching your selves, but
using true simplicity and plainenes in all your practices, as those that fear
not the storms of future want, do pitch the Pauilion of this your Pilgrimage
upon his provident pleasure. Secondly, in showing forth your christian love
toward those your christian brethren with whom you have to deal. Now, this
your said love toward them can not any ways more effectually be found, then
in that plain and upright dealing, which the law of the Lord in a dutiful
obedience, does exact at your hands. But (alas for pity) who so does
diligently look unto most men's dealings in these our days, shall find Lady
Equity her self to be driven into such an extreme and deadly distress, that
very hardly she is entertained of any in buying and selling. For, who sees
not now, (if they see any thing at all) that most men do come unto bargaining,
as it were to the razing and spoiling of an enemies hold. And he is thought to
have sped the best therein, which carries most away with him when he returns,
how unjustly soever he has gained the same. His booty is accounted the
warmest of all, who by his fraudulent fetches, has made the most men to go
naked or cold. Yea, he is said (for the most part) to come the meariest home,
who (by his falsehood and wrong) has made the most weeping eyes. All which
most horrible enormities do flow even from the forgetfulness of that dutiful
obedience wherein men are indebted to God and their brethren in buying and
selling.


Ingroser. Very true it is. Whereas the dutiful remembrance thereof would be
a sufficient means to drive men unto a more upright behavior therein. But
proceed in your purpose. 3. Arguments drawn from the Justice of God.



No-bodie. Another argument to fear men from all fraudulent dealings in
bargaining, may be drawn from the justice of God, in these words: For the Lord
is the auenger of all such things: as if he should say: Though, neither your
christian profession, nor your dutiful obedience to the laws of your God, nor
your says in his fatherly providence, neither yet, that interchangeable love,
which as members of one mystical body, you owe one to another, can touch your
consciences with a trusty dealing in these your affairs: yet for so much as
your God is a righteous God, think not that he will in any wise be bound to
bear with, or otherways will become a Bawd unto any your secret sins
whatsoever. But as he has them all before him in a memorial Book written, so
will he one day most surely and most sharply scourge the same, whether it be
open oppression, or deceitful dealing, or fraudulent fetches under the form
of faithful bargaining, or whatsoever it be: for the Lord himself is the
auenger of all such things. Although you can draw a Curtain very cunningly
before the face of mortal men, yet are you not able to bleare the eyes of his
Majesty. Though you know well enough which ways to procure a privilege that
these your practices may pass uncontrolled in the assembly of sinners: yet
think you not, but that the same will be sharply censured in the audit of the
almighty, who is a righteous revenger of all such things.


Eueri-bodie. Oh most terrible sentence? Surely, whosoever will not tremble at
the very hearing thereof, they show themselves to be such, as having 1. Tim. 4.
2.
their consciences seared up with hot irons, are wholly sold over 1. King.
21. 25.
to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, Ephesians. 4. 19.
and being past feeling, have given themselves to wantonness, to work all
manner of uncleanness, yea, even with greediness. But, continue the course
you have taken.


No-bodie. Another argument to dissuade men from all deceit in buying and
selling, 4. Arguments drawn from the title or name that is given them.
may be fitly drawn from that title or name which the holy Ghost ascribes
covertly unto it, in these words, Of all such 1. These. 4. 6.
things. The which words of his (having a very Emphaticall, or forcible
relacion to that wicked oppression and guile, forbidden before in the former
part of the verse) do signify as much in effect, as those evils themselves
whereunto they have such special relacion, and therefore may fitly bear the
selfsame denomination, or name of evils. As if he should say (by using such
fraudulent fetches in buying and selling) you show your selves to be
wonderfully besotted with the deceitfulness of sin, who colors her
bewitched baits, with a most beawtifull bravery: who, under the pretense of
some pleasant potion, does proffer unto you a most pestilent poison, who makes
you believe, that this your guilefull dealing is nothing else but a provident
thriftinesse, when it is (in very deed) a most horrible evil and
wickedness. So then, how excellent soever the same seems unto you, it is
(you see) an evil, a most pestilent evil: yea, and the Lord himself is the
auenger of all such evil: with whom also you show a daily dissimulation, in
that you do every day offer up your prayers against it, saying: Math. 6. 3.
Luc. 11. 4.
Deliver us (O Lord) from evil, and yet notwithstanding do still make the
same your daily and continual practice.


Peddler. Without doubt you say true. For this I know in my self, that the
selfsame day wherein I heartily besought the Lord to send me a good Market, I
have used (I confess) the most fraudulent dealings.


No-bodie And even thereby also you made that most holy action of Prayer
accursed unto you: For he that Pro. 28. 9.
turns his ear from hearing the Law, his Prayer shall be abominable.


Ingroser. Very true it is: the Lord be merciful to all them that know not
the evil they do. But proceed in your purpose.


No-bodie. Another argument also, to drive men from all fraudulent dealings in
buying and selling, 5. Arguments drawn from the uncertainty of their
punishments.
may be drawn from the uncertainty of that punishment, which the Lord in
justice alotteth to those that deal loosely therein. For whereas the Apostle
says plainly, The Lord is the auenger of all such things, yet has he here
assigned no one certain kind of punishment unto it. Teaching men thereby,
that as the Lord is at liberty to plague, when, where, and in what manner he
please: so you Chapmen should tremble and quake at every punishment, as at a
just recompense of such your sinister dealings, according to that which the
Lord himself does testify, saying. Mich. 6. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.
Are yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the scant
measure that is abominable? Shall I justify the wicked Balances, and the
Bag of deceitful waightes? For, the rich men of Jerusalem are full of
cruelty, and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue is
deceitful in their mouths. Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting
thee, and in making thee desolate, because of thy sins. Thou shall eat, and
not be satisfied, and thy casting down shall be in the midst of thee, and
thou shall take hold, but shall not deliver: and that which thou deliuerest,
will I give up to the sword. Thou shall sow, but not reap, thou shall tread
the Olives, but not annoint thee with Oil, and make sweet Wine, but shall not
drink Wine. In these words, the Lord (you see) both reproves the enormities
and sins of such fraudulent dealers, and also denounces against them, not
one, but sundry kinds of punishments due for the fame. Namely, an utter
consumption and wasting by famine, by inward greefes and sorrows, by making
frustrate their hope of help, by spoiling their goods within and without.
Seeing therefore the Lord has not assigned any one special plague unto such
their subtle and sinister dealings, but makes the same subject to so many
sorts of punishments: this (me think) should be a sufficient reason to remove
far off from Chapmen, all fraudulent fetches in buying and selling. For that,
as the Lord will surely be avenged of all such things, so has he made this
sin subject (you see) to every punishment. Wherein men are to remember, that
not only every sin has some punishment attending upon it, howsoever the
execution thereof be delayed at time: but that, like sin is commonly
recompensed with the like punishment according as it is written, Because of
Wisd. 11. 13.
the foolish devises of their wickedness wherewith they were deceived, and
worshipped Serpents Wisd. 12. 24. Romans 1. 23.
that had not the use of reason, and vile beasts, thou did send a multitude
of unreasonable beasts upon them for a vengeance, to the end they might know,
that wherewith a man sins, by the same also he shall be punished.


Eueri-body. What is your meaning herein?


No-bodie. My meaning herein, is to let you understand, that, as these
fraudulent dealers have often times oppressed their brethren in bargaining, so
they themselves are oftentimes (by the just judgments of God) most justly
oppressed of others again, through theeuerie and stealing. As they (often times
by their guilefull dealings) have made their poor brethren to walk with a
threadbare Coat: so they themselves (according to their due deserts) have
been (by others again) stripped naked and bare. And as they (by their
falsehood) have made men poor souls, to go heavily homewardes with trickling
tears, so they themselves are sometimes most justly sent homewards that
selfsame day by weeping Cross, and this also according to the righteous
judgments of God, who is a righteous revenger of all such things.


Peddler. Undoubtedly (Sir) I suppose the same to be true. A profitable
application of the former arguments.
For (on a time) I remember how that I (deceiving a sielie soul a little
before with the sale of some wares) was in the way homewardes robbed my self.


Eueri-bodie. I pray you (Goodman Peddler) if a man might be so bold as to ask
you the question, what came your gains clearly unto that Fair?


Peddler. To tell you the truth, they came fully to less then nothing. For sure
I am, that for every penny which I got that day by unjust deceit, I lost a
pound by due desert.


Ingroser. And for my part also I must needs confess, that I lost more in one
night by casualtie of fire, then I had gotten before (by my fraudulent
dealings) in twenty winters. And yet very certain I am (the Lord be
merciful to me) that (even by such deceitful practices) I have wronged from
men not so little as forty pounds by the year.


No-bodie. That good God, who has opened your eyes to see your sins, give
you also his grace, that you may freely forsake the same.


Ingroser. Oh grant it good Lord, for the glory of thy name. But Sir? such
is the unreasonable enhaunsing of grain and of victualles in every place,
that very necessity enforces many a man to do that, which (in his own
conscience) he utterly dislikes.


No-bodie. Accursed be that necessity whatsoever, which constrains a man to
make shipwreck of conscience. For, Math. 16. 26. Mar. 8 25. Luc. 9. 25.
what shall it profit any man to win the whole World, and loose his own
Soul?


Ingroser. Very true it is. If therefore you could (by any your godly
persuasions) so bring it to pass, that the rich Farmers and Husbandmen (who
are to fraught the Markets with corn and victualles) would sell the same at a
reasonable reckoning, for my part I promise you, that, as thereby I should have
less occasion to use any deceit in my dealings, so would I utterly renounce
the same for ever. And I believe, my friend Peddler would do the like.


Peddler. Yea (be you sure) with all my heart.


No-bodie. I have none authority (you know) to reform things amiss: neither
will I challenge so much to my self. My duty is only to reprove, and to
denounce the judgments of God against all outrageous enormities, wherein (by
Gods grace) I will not cease to do my best endeavor, leaving the reformation
of matters wholly unto them, whose callings the same more properly concerns.
But, what if those men (you spoke of before) will never be brought to any
better dealings? shall the waywardness of those wicked ones withdraw your
selves from doing your duties? Oh beware (I beseech you) for this is the
subtle persuasion of Satan, to make you believe, that you may as well offend
therein, as another. But, remember the word of the Lord, Exodus 23. 2.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil: neither shall thou agree in a
controversy to decline after many, and overthrow the truth. Having therefore
the example of good Joshua before your eyes, say one to another in the
sincerity of your souls: Josh. 24. 15.
Let the wicked this day choose what Gods they will serve, as for us and our
households, we will serve the Lord.


Ingroser. Nay (by Gods grace) howsoever the wicked do still welter and
wallowe in their impieties, for my part, I rest fully resolved for ever
hereafter to abhor all fraudulent dealings in my self and in others. And I
beseech the Lord God to make me continually thankful for these his good
graces, which (by your means) I have received this day.


Peddler. And surely (for my part) I do with an unfeigned heart protest the same.
But Sir? if it might please you to take the pains to confer also with those
men, as you have done already with us, I doubt not, but that good God, who
has begun this good work by you, will bring the same to some excellent
end.


Eueri-bodie. Undoubtedly I believe no less. For he that had heard these men
in the morning, would hardly have thought that they would ever have been
brought unto this.


No-bodie. Such (you see) is the great goodness of God, and such also is the
efficacy and power of his heavenly word, when it pleases his Majesty to
work with the same. Then is it (in deed) a lively Heb. 4. 12.
word, and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged Sword, and
enters through even to the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, and
of the joints and the marrowe: and is a discerner of the thoughts, and the
intentes of the heart.


Ingroser. Oh blessed be God therefore. And the Lord grant the same word a
like effect in the rest.


Peddler. So be it good Lord, if it be thy will.


No-bodie. Well, since you seek this thing thus earnestly at my hands, I
promise you both (so soon as any occasion is offered) to put the matter in
practice, leaving the success thereof to the Lord.


Ingroser. Gods name be blessed for it. But we beseech you (Sir) linger not
the time over long: for as the zeal of Psalm. 69. 9.
Gods house has even eaten us up: so (we pray you) remember withal, that the
Pro. 13. 12.
hope which is deferred, is the fainting of the heart, but when the desire
comes, it is a tree of life.


No-bodie. Well, assure your selves, there shall be no want of good will in me,
so soon as the Lord shall offer occasion unto it.


Euerie-bodie. And for my part, be you bold, I will so further the matter,
that I doubt not to bring your self and them very presently together. I know
where are (at this hour) a couple of as greedy Cormorants as live in the
land. Walk you on your way all three together, and let me alone for this once.
They promised to tarry my coming at yonder Town: go you fair and softly
before, till we overtake you.


Ingroser. With all our hearts. Come Sir? we will gladly accompany you still
in your journey, although we are already wandered five or six miles out of our
way.


No-bodie. Are you so in deed? now truly I am sorry therefore.


Peddler. But so are not we. Nay, rather we have both great cause to rejoice:
for by loosing the way (a little) to our earthly homes, we have lighted (at
length) on that way which leads directly to our heavenly habitation.


Ingroser. Very true it is: Gods name be blessed for it. And blessed be his
Majesty also for you, who were the good means thereunto.


No-bodie. All the honor Psalm. 115. 1.
hereof be given to his name. But sure, as I am heartily sorry you have
wandered already so far from your way, so will I not have you to go one
step farther with me, partly, for that when the other and I shall be alone by
our selves, they will the more franckly afoorde me their minds: and partly
also, because I would not have the night overtake you or ever you get to your
homes. And therefore (for this present) I commend you both to the mercies of
God.


Ingroser. Seeing (for any thing) you will have it so, we leave you likewise to
the Lord himself: most humbly beseeching him (of his infinite mercies) to
bless the labors which you have in hand.


Peddler. So be it (good Lord) if it be thy gracious will.


So be it Lord Jesus. Amen.

FINIS.

