A LETTER WRITTEN FROM PARIS, BY THE Lord Cardinal of Peron, TO MONSr.
CASAVBON in England.

Translated out of the French corrected Copy, into English.

Anno M.DC.XII.

GENTLE Reader,
This Epistle was composed by the Lord Cardinal of Peron, without any purpose
to have it seen in public, but rather with deliberation not to impart it so
much as to his very familiar friends. But a Copy thereof being by chance
gotten, it was presently printed in Paris, with many faults, yea and with some
heresies. And although the foresaid Cardinal used all diligence to have it
suppressed, causing the Copies to be seyzed on by the Officers of Justice, and
the Printer to be punished for publishing them without his knowledge: yet was
there soon after another impressio^ made thereof in Roan, conformable to that
faulty Copy of Paris, and the like may also be done elsewhere. For remedy
therefore of the disadvantage which may arise hereof, both to the doctrine of
Catholics, and the reputation of the Author, it has seemed necessary to
permit, that it be printed entire and perfect, according to the Copy which was
written and sent. And this we do at this present, disclayming from all the
former copies, and whatsoever else not comfortable to this.

SIR.
THE Letter which you delivered to Monsieur de la Boderie, to be given me, I
received when I was upon my departure, taking my journey into Normandy. Since
my return, I have been allwaies sick; which has been the cause, that my
Answer comes no sooner to your hands. But now, that my infirmity allows me
some little ease, I will pay the arrierages of my former slacknesse. And first
I yield you many thanks, for the pleasure you did me, in showing my Letter to
his Majesty of Great-Britaine, and procuring me some part in his gracious
favor; which I will endeavor so to increase by most humble services, and
particulerly by setting forth his Royal Praises (the only fruit, which good
and virtuous Kings, such as his Majesty is, do receive of the thorny cares
annexed to Royal Government) as he shall have no cause to be sorry, that
Posterity know the honor, which his Majesty did me with his Royal favor, and
the Reverence and Admiration I had of his Princely virtues.

As for the Translation of Virgils verse, whereof you say his Majesty desired a
Copy, that being lost, which before I sent you, I must differ for some days
the performance of this duty, for that I have caused it to be printed again
with an Addition of one part of the fourth; which for his Majesty's sake I have
of purpose added, to make thereof unto him a more ample and worthy present; and
as soon as some few Copies shall be finished, I will not fail to send you one,
that you may present it to his Majesty in my name.

There rests now the third point of your Letter; which is, that his Majesty
much meruailed at these words of mine, where I said, that excepting the only
Title of Catholic, there was nothing wanting in his Royal Person, to express
the lively pattern of a Prince, completely endued with all Princely virtues:
and that he pretended the Title of Catholic, could not be denied him, since he
believed all those things, which the ancient Fathers with uniform consent
esteemed necessary to salvation.

To this I answer, that as on the one side I cannot but greatly praise the
Christian humility of his Majesty, in that he refuses not to submit his
Judgment, adorned with so rare light of Nature, and increased by Industry, to
those bright shining Lamps of Antiquity; imitating herein the prudence of the
Great Emperor Theodosius, who thought no other means more ready for the
composing of those dissentions, wherewith the Church was molested in his time,
then to demand of both parties, if they believed, that the ancient Fathers,
who flourished before their contentions began, had the true faith; which they
confessing, he required them to submit themselves to that, which they should
find to have been believed by the ancient Fathers: so on the other side, there
are diverse things to be observed upon the Premises before we come to the
Conclusion; which for that I have not means to present to his Majesty, I
shall be content to inform you of the^ for your particular satisfaction.

The first is, that the Name of Catholic, is not a Name of only Belief, but
of Communion; otherwise the ancient Fathers would never have refused to give
this Name to them, that were separated from them, not in belief, but in the
communion and unity of the Church. Neither would they ever have affirmed, that
out of the Catholic Church they might have Faith and Sacraments, but not
Salvation. Out of the Catholic Church (says S. Augustine in his Treatise of
the Conference had with Emeritus) a man may have all things, excepting
salvation: he may have Orders, he may have Sacraments, he may sing Alleluia, he
may answer Amen, he may have the Gospel, he may have, and preach the faith
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; but he can
by no means obtain salvation, but in the Catholic Church.

And in his book de vtilitate credendi. Cap. 7.
There is one Church, as all do confess: and if you look on the whole
compass of the world, it exceeds all others in number: and as they affirm
that know, it is more sincere in the doctrine of the Truth. But this is another
question. That which suffices for our present purpose, is, that there is one
Catholic Church, to which diverse heresies have given different Names, when as
every of them have their proper Names, which they dare not deny: by which it
may easily appear, to whom the Name of Catholic, of which all are desirous,
ought to be attributed.

Cap. 4.
And in his book contra Epist. Fundam. And that I may omit this wisdom, which
you deny to be in the Catholic Church, there are diverse other things, which
do most justly retain, and hold me in her bounds and unity. There does hold
me the consent of people and nations, the authority which had her beginning by
miracles, nourished by hope, augmented by charity, confirmed by antiquity.
There does hold me the Succession of Bishops until this present day, from the
very Seat of Peter, to whom our Lord committed the feeding of his sheep after
his Resurrection, to the Episcopal dignity of the present Bishop. And lastly
this very name Catholic does hold me in the unity of this Church; which name
this Church has always, not without cause, amongst so many different sects of
heresies, in such sort obtained, that although all heretics desire to be called
Catholics; yet if a Stranger should demand where is the Assembly of the
Catholic Church, there is no Heretic that dares to assign him his Temple,
or his house.

Cap. 10.
And in his Treatise de fide and symbolo. We do believe the holy Church, that
is Catholic; for the Heretics and the Schismatikes do call their Congregations
Churches: but the Heretics believing those things of God, which are false, do
violate the faith; and the Schismatiks by unlawful divisions, do separate
themselves from brotherly charity, although they believe in all things the same
with us. And for this cause neither does the Heretic appertain to the
Catholic Church, for that she loves God; nor the Schismatike, for that she
loves her neighbor.

Cap. 4.
And in his Book de vnitate Ecclesiae. All those that believe, as has been
said, that our Lord Jesus Christ is come in flesh, and risen from death in the
same flesh, in which he was borne, and has suffered; and that he is the Son
of God, with God, and one with the Father, and the only immutable Word of the
Father, by whom all things were made, but does yet in such sort dissent from
his body, which is the Church, that their communion is not with all them with
whom the Catholic Church does participate, but are in some divided part; it
is manifest, that they are not in the Catholic Church.

And Prosper his Disciple says: That he who does communicate with this
Universal Church, is a Christian, and a Catholic, and he that does not
communicate, is an Heretic and Antichrist. By which we see, that the ancient
Fathers denied the Title of Catholic to the Donatists, because they separated
themselves from the Communion of the Church, and granted it to them, from
whom the Donatists took their doctrine, because they remained in the Unity of
one communion. The people under S. Cyprian his charge (says Saint Pacianus)
have never been called otherwise then Catholic. And S. Vincentius Lyrinensis:
O admirable change of things! The Authors of one and the same opinion are
esteemed Catholics, and their followers are judged Heretics. And S.
Augustine. Your dissension, says he, and your division makes you Heretics,
and their peace and unity made them Catholics.

And when as in the fourth Council of Carthage this Article was put in the
examen of those that were to be made Bishops, the same was repeated in the
Epistle of the Council, by Saint Augustine, who was the Secretary, in these
words: epist. 152. ad Donat^st.
Whosoever is divided from the Catholic Church, how laudably soever he seem
to live, for this only crime that he is separated from the Unity of the Church,
he shall be excluded from life, and the wrath of God shall remain upon him.
And the same was repeated again by Fulgentius, who says: lib. de fid. ad Pet.
Diac. cap. 29.
Hold for most certain, and doubt not in any manner, that no Heretic or
Schismatike, baptized in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, if he be not united to the Catholic Church, although he give never so
great alms, and shed his very blood for the name of Christ, yet can he in no
wise be saved. Thus said these Fathers, wholly or principally against the
Donatists; who notwithstanding agreed with the Catholics in all articles of
the Creed, and in holy Scripture.

You accord with us (says S. Augustine) in Baptism, and in the Creed, and in
all other Sacraments of our Lord: but in the spirit of Unity, in the place of
peace, and lastly in the Catholic Church, you are not with us. And yet they
differed only in one point of Tradition, not expressly contained in Scripture.
And S. Augustine himself, the chief Conqueror of this Heresy, does confess,
that it could not be proved by Scripture. This (says he lib. Cap. 19.
de vnitate Ecclesiae) neither you, nor I, do read in express words. And in
his first book contra Cresconium: Cap. 33^
Although no example of this matter be found in holy Scriptures, yet do we
follow in this, the Truth of the Scriptures, when we do that which is agreeable
to the Universal Church, commended unto us by the authority of the same
Scriptures. And l. Cap. 4.
11. de Bapt. cont. Donat. And we our selves (says he) should not dare to
affirm any thing of this matter, if we were not warra^ted by the most uniform
Authority of the Church. Cap. 24.
And l. 5. The Apostles have commanded nothing concerning this matter: but the
custom which was alleged against S. Cypr. is to be thought to have descended
from their tradition, as diverse other things have done, which the Universal
Church does observe, and are therefore with great reason believed, to have been
commanded by the Apostles, although they be not written.

Whence it follows, that it suffices not, for the obtaining of the Name
Catholic, to hold, or rather to think we do hold the self same belief of
the ancient Fathers, if we do not participate with them in the Unity and
Communion of the same Catholic Church, with which the same ancient Fathers did
communicate, and which by succession of persons, and, as we further pretend, by
the succession also of doctrine is descended unto us. And if she has lost any
part of her greatness in our Hemisphere, she has gotten as much, or more, in
the other Hemisphere, that is under us: that so those ancient Prophesies may be
fulfilled; Genesis 26.
In thy seed all the nations of the earth shallbe blessed And: In the last
days, Isa. 2.
the mountain of the house of our Lord, shall be in the top of mountains, and
shall be lifted up above the hills, and all nations shall come unto it. The
Gospel of the Kingdom must be preached through the universal world, Matthew.
23.
and then shall follow the end and consummation: with other the like sentences
of holy Scripture. By which (as Saint Augustine notes) the Church has
obtained the Title and Mark of Catholic.

The second observation is, concerning the restriction to things, necessary to
salvation. For besides those that are necessary to salvation, there are two
other degrees of things: the one, of such as are profitable to salvation: as,
according to the judgment of your Ministers, is the selling of all that a man
has, and giving it to the poor. Likewise to fast in time of affliction, to
appease the indignation of God; to pray for the brethren that are of the same
faith with us; to pray to Almighty God for our own necessities. The other
degree is of things lawful, and not repugnant to salvation; as to fly in time
of persecution, and for such as serve the Altar, to be maintained by the Altar;
to put away the wife that is Adultresse, and the like. For I allege these, as
examples, and not for instances. Now for entire conformity with the belief of
the ancient Fathers, it is necessary, that we believe all those things which
they believed, every one according to the degree in which they were held by
them; that is, to believe those things to be necessary to salvation, which they
reputed necessary; and those things profitable to salvation, which they
esteemed so: and likewise to believe those things to be lawful, and not
repugnant to salvation, which they did hold for lawful and not repugnant: and
that under color, that these two last degrees are not of things necessary to
salvation, but only profitable or lawful, we should not condemn them, nor
separate our selves for any respect of them from the Church, which did, and
does practice them.

The third observation is, concerning the ambiguity of the words ( necessary
to salvation) which for that there are diverse kinds of necessities in matters
of Religion, may be diversely taken. For there is one necessity, which is called
Absolute, and another Conditional. There is a necessity of the means to do a
thing, and there is a necessity induced by the precept, by which we are
commanded to do it. There is also a necessity of special and particular
belief, and a necessity of belief in general: a necessity of act, and
lastly a necessity of approbation. I call absolute necessity (not that it is
simply so, but for that God has so ordained it) that which admits no excuse
of impossibility, nor any exception of place, time, or person. Of this kind is
the knowledge and belief of Christ, the Mediator between God and man, which
is of absolute necessity to be known of all that be of age. For it is not
excused with the circumstance of not being in place, where one may be
instructed, nor with the condition of being ignorant and unlearned, rude, and
of little capacity, a sheep, and not a shepherd: for none of these
exceptions can defend them from eternal death, that do not actually believe.
Forasmuch as whosoever belieueth not in the only begotten Son of God, is
allreadie judged. Ioan^ 3.
And of the same necessity to little infants, is the receiving of the
Sacrament of Baptism, by which alone, according to the doctrine of Catholics,
the faith in Christ is in them supplied: following herein the sentence of S
Augustine, lib. 3. de an. and eius orig. c. 9.
who says: Do not believe, do not say, do not teach, that the Infants
prevented by death, before they be baptized, can obtain remission of Original
sin, if thou will be a Catholic. And of this kind of necessity, there are
but few examples.

I call that necessity Conditional, which obliges not, but when there is
possibility, and admits exception of place, time, and persons: and this
again is subdeuided into many branches. For first of all (to speak of matters
which concern Faith) there are many points, which necessarily are to be
believed by him, that is in place, where he may be instructed, or has time to
inform himself, which are not necessary to another, that lives in a desert,
or is so suddenly prevented by death, that he has no leisure to be
instructed: as, that Christ was borne of a Virgin, that he was crucified under
Pontius Pilate, that he rose again the third day. And many things are
necessary to be believed and held for points of Faith, either by the whole body
of the Church in general, or by the order of Ministers or Pastors, who are
the eyes of the Church, which be not necessary to be known and believed as
articles of Faith by every one in particular: As, that the persons of the
blessed Trinity are one in Essence, and distinct in Subsistence: that the
Father has begotten his Son of necessity, and not of free accord; that they
are the divine Persons which do produce, and are produced, and not the Essence
which does neither produce, nor is produced; that the external operations of
the blessed Trinity are undivided: that the only Person of the Son has taken
flesh, and not any of the others: that in Christ there are two Substances, and
one Subsistence: that the Divinity was not in place of the soul, but that
besides the body and Divinity, there was in Christ also a sensible and
reasonable soul: that what Christ did once personally unite unto him, he does
never abandone: that the Devil was created good, and by the liberty of his own
free will, he became evil; and other the like.

And as for the necessity of action, there are many things necessary, when
there is possibility and opportunity of times, of places, and of persons; which
are not necessary absolutely, and when these commodities and means to perform
them, are wanting: As to assist at Ecclesiastical solemnities; to receive
actually the Eucharist. And many things are necessary to some, as Mission and
Imposition of hands to the Pastors of the Church; and Marriage to such as
desire lawful offspring, which are not necessary to others. And briefly, other
things are needful for the obtaining of salvation, and others for the
obtaining of it with more facility: others for the obtaining of it for ones
self, and others for the procuring and getting of it for another: others for
the constitution of the Church, and others for the edification and more large
propagation of the Church: others for the mere being of Christian Religion,
and others for the better being, that is, for the dece^cy, dignity, and
splendor thereof. I call necessity of means that which is in the things
themselves we use, as that of the Sacraments, to which God has given power,
for the imparting of Grace, and the real cooperation to the health of a man's
soul, That also of the Commandments of the moral law, the necessity whereof
is imposed by the order of nature. In like manner the necessity of repenting
for our sins, which is a necessary mean for obtaining of pardon.

I call that necessity of Precept, which proceeds only from the force of
commaundment, as is the keeping holy of the first day in the week, in memory
of that day in which our Savior rose from death, and which for this cause is
called Dies Dominicus, that is, the day of our Lord, and other the like
observations; the omission of which, would nothing endanger salvation, if it
were not for disobedience and the breaking of the precept, by which they are
commanded. I call necessity of particular and special belief, the necessity
of those articles, which all faithful souls not prevented by death are bound
to know and believe with an express, distinct, and determinate faith, which in
Schools is called Fides ex licita: and of this kind, are the twelve Articles
of our Creed.

Necessity of general belief comprehends those things, which every one in
particular is not bound to believe in distinct and express manner; as the
doctrine of Original sin; the article of two wills in Christ; the proceeding
of the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son; the force of Baptism given in
due form out of the Catholic Church; and that the baptized by heretics are
not to be rebaptized, when they return to the unity of the Church, and other
the like, which every simple and rude Christian is not bound expressly and
distinctly to believe, but it suffices, that they believe them in general, in
the faith of the Church, that is, that they adhere, and be united to the
Church, which belieueth them; in the faith whereof they live as long, as they
remain in her communion and unity; in like manner as the infant lives by the
food received by the mother, as long as it is within her womb.

Necessity of Act I call that, which is of those things, which every one in
particular is bound actually to do: As to profess the name of Christ, to
pardon received injuries, to restore the goods of others unjustly detayned.
Necessity of approbation is of those things, which every one in particular is
not bound actually to execute; but he is bound not to contradict, or condemn
those that do them, nor the Church which does approve them, nor for any dislike
of them to separate themselves from the Church, under pain of being excluded
from everlasting salvation. Of this sort is the choice of living a chaste and
single life, and other the like. Of all which kinds of Necessity the ancient
Fathers held many things, each one in his degree, differently necessary to
salvation: as we will show in those particulers, which shall be presented to be
examined. Now if we hold the points of doctrine or of action, which the Fathers
esteemed necessary for salvation, according to some of these necessities, and
do reject the rest, we cannot for this be said to agree in belief with the
ancient Fathers: but it is further needful to hold and esteem all those
things necessary to salvation, which the ancient Fathers did esteem to be
necessary, every one in the degree, and according to the kind of necessity, as
they were esteemed by them.

The fourth Observation is about the word (Ancient) which some, when they
should come to perform their promise of submitting their judgment to
Antiquity, do restrain to the first or second Age immediately after the
Apostles, not for that they hope to find within that space any ancient Father,
that does favor them, but for that the Church being then oppressed with
persecutions, left us but few writings of that Date; and those for the most
part against such persons, and about such matters, as do so little appertain
to the questions now in co^trouersy, as the face of the ancient doctrine, and
the practice of the Church in those days, cannot be fully represented unto us
and known. But reason and equity requires, that if we will confer the estate
of the Sects of this age, which would challenge to themselves the Title of the
Catholic Church, with the estate of the ancient Church; we should take a time,
wherein not only our Competitours do agree with us, that the Church of that age
was the true Church, and the true Spouse of Jesus Christ, and that she had
lawful authority to judge and determine the Controversies in matters of
Religion; but also it behooves us to take such a time, of which we have
sufficient Monuments and Records, to show clearly unto us the doctrine and
obobseruatio^s of that Church, which cannot in any sort be better found then in
the times of the four first Councels, that is, from the time of Constantine
the Great, who was the first Emperor that publikly professed Christian
Religion, to the time of the Emperor Martian.

And it seems his Majesty does liberally accord, not only to this, but to
much more in some of his writings, having extended the continuance of the true
Church, to the whole space of the five first ages. For besides that the
freedom from the yoke of servitude of the Pagans, gave place to the Church
then to speak with more liberty, and to have more free communication with all
the parts belonging unto it, dispersed in diverse Countries and Kingdoms, and
to flourish in a greater multitude of learned and excellent Writers, which has
been the cause, that we have at this present without comparison, many more
testimonies of those ages, to discover the entire and perfect form of the
ancient Christian Religion, then we have of the other ages which went before.
Besides this, I say, our Adversaries cannot deny, but that Church, which was
nourished with the breasts of the first Christian Emperors, and which destroyed
the Temples, abolished the service and honor done to false Gods, and exercised
the sovereign Tribunal of spiritual authority on earth, by the sentence of
condemnation, which she pronounced against the four most famous Heresies, in
the four first general Counsels, which were the four first general
Assemblyes, and Parlaments of Estate of the Kingdom of Christ, was that Church
of whom it was fortould, that she should suck the breasts of Kings; Isa. 62.54.
and that Nations should walk in her light, and Kings in the brightness of
her orient; that all attempts against her should be destroyed; that she should
judge every tongue that resisted in judgment; that God had put watchmen upon
her walls, who should not be silent day or night for all eternity; Matthew.
16.18.
that the gates of Hell should not prevail against her; and whosoever refused
to hear her, should be esteemed as a Publicane and Heathen: 1 Timothy 3.
and briefly that she was the pillar and firmament of truth. Shall we doubt, de
vtilitate cred. c. 17.
says Saint Augustine, to put our selves in the bosom of that Church, which
by succession of Bishops from the Seat of the Apostles, to the universal
confession of mankind, the Heretics barking on all sides, and condemned partly
by the judgment of the very people, and partly by the Majesty of miracles,
has obtained the highest degree of authority, which not to obey and
acknowledge, is an act of extreme impiety or precipitous arrogancy. And
again. De symb. ad Catech. lib. 1. c. 5.
The Catholic Church resisting all Heretics may be impugned, but never
overcome: al heresies have come out of her, as unprofitable branches cut off
from the vine, but she remains still in her root, in her vine, in her
charity.

That doctrine therefore shall truly be said to be ancient, and marked with the
character of the primitive Church, which shall be found to have been believed and
practiced universally by the Fathers, who lived in the time of the four first
General Counsels; and principally when it shall appear, that the things
affirmed by the authors of those ages, were not held by them as doctrines and
observations of their own, but as doctrines and observations perpetually
practiced by the Church in all ages, from the time of the Apostles: although
perhaps there cannot be found so many express testimonies of every one of
those things within the compass of the precedent ages, as may within the time
of the four first Counsels, by reason of the small store of writings, which
the Persecution of those times suffered to come to our hands. For it suffices
to assure us of the perpetual practice of those matters, that the Fathers who
lived in the time of the four first Counsels, and knew better then we what
passed in the ages that went before them, do testify that they were believed
and practiced, not as things instituted in their age, but as things, which had
been practiced in all times in the Church, and were come by continual and
successiue observation from the Apostles unto them; and that in the Authors of
the precedent ages, no repugnant testimony can be found, but wholly to the
contrary: when any occasion of speaking of those things is offered, they
always affoard comfortable and favorable testimonies; which is in few words
to say: That thing ought to be held in all reason for ancient, which those,
whom we do account ancient, did themselves esteem to be ancient.

The fifth observation is, about the Unanimity and uniform consent of the
Fathers; which some contentious spirits would have to be understood only, when
one and the self same thing is actually found in the writings of all the
Fathers; which is a most unjust and impertinent pretension. For, that any
doctrine or observation be truly held by the Fathers to be Universal and
Catholic, it is not needful that it be found in the writings of all the
Fathers, when as many of them perhapps never treated of those matters, and of
whose writings some have perished, and never come to our hands: but there are
two other lawful ways to assure and satisfy us in this matter. The one, when
the Fathers or greatest eminency in every Country, do agree in the
affirmation of one and the self same doctrine or practice, and none of the
others have noted it, as dissenting from the Church, nor have written against
it. In this sort, Contra (...).
when Saint Augustine had cited against the Pelagians the testimony of an
eleven Fathers, emine^t in learning, and agreeing in the same points of
doctrine, he thought he had sufficiently produced against them the belief of
the Catholic Church: and when the Council of Ephesus had produced ten Fathers
of former ages, they thought, they had sufficiently expressed the consent of
the Church in the precede^t times, against the doctrine of Nestorius: Cap 42*
for that, as Vincentius Lyrinensis notes, they doubted not, but those ten
Fathers held and believed the self same, which all the rest of their brethren
did.

The other way is, when the Fathers do speak not as Doctors, but as
witnesses, of the use and practice of the Church in their ages, and do not say;
In my opinion, this ought thus to be believed, or thus to be understood, or
thus to be observed: but the Church from one end of the world to the other,
belieueth thus, or observes this. For then we do not hold that, which they
say, as a thing said by them, but as said by the universal Church: and
principally in matters whereof they could not be ignorant, by reason either of
the condition of things, as in matters of fact, or in respect of the
sufficiency of the persons. And in this case we do not draw from their words,
only a probable argument, as we do, when they speak as particular Doctors;
but the argument we draw from hence, is an absolute demonstration.

This therefore is to be held undoubtedly for Universal and Catholic, which
the most eminent of the Fathers, that lived in the time of the four first
Counsels, have taught in diverse Countries, and different parts of the world,
and which none of the rest have impugned or noted, as disagreing from the
doctrine of the Church; or which the Fathers of these Counsels have witnessed,
to have been believed and practiced by the whole Church in their ages: and that
shall undoubtedly remain as ancient and Apostolic, which the Fathers of those
ages have testified to have been observed by the whole Church, not as a thing
newly begun in their time, but descended to them by continual and immemorable
succession from former ages, or from the express Tradition of the Apostles.
For those things having been universally observed in the time of the four
first Councels, they could not be instituted, but by an universal authority.
For in the Catholic Church was then exactly observed the rule mentioned by
Vincentius Lyrinensis, to oppose Universality against Particularitie. And
therefore one doctrine or observation of one particular Prince, could never
come to be the belief or custom uniform and universal throughout all parts
of the world: especially in such sort, as no one of the Fathers living near
the time of those universal innouations, should have perceived or noted; but
whatsoever was then universally observed in the whole Church, must necessarily
be instituted by some universal Prince.

For according to the opinion of your Ministers, there were in those ages but
two principal and universal authorities; the one of the Apostles, and the
other of general Counsels. For they will not admit, that the Sea Apostolic
had at those times any universal authority: and therefore, whatsoever shall be
found to have been universally and uniformly observed in the Church, in all
Countries and Provinces of the earth, in the time of the four first General
Counsels, and not to have been begun in that time, but to have been formerly
practiced, that is, before there was any General Council in the Church, must
necessarily be a tradition of the Apostles, following those rules of S.
Augustine Epist. 18. Those things, says he* which we keep, not by writing, but
by Tradition, which are observed through the whole world, are understood to be
received from the ordination and institution either of the Apostles themselves,
or of General Counsels, whose authority is most profitable to the Church. And
in another place. De Bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 4. c. 6.
That custom also, which men looking upwards, could not find, that it was
instituted by posterity, was justly believed to have been instituted by the
Apostles. And there are many other things, which would be long to repeat. And
again. If any one in this do seek divine authority, although that which the
universal Church observes, and has not been instituted by Counsels, but
always retained; is justly believed not to have been delivered by Tradition,
but by Apostolical authority etc. Which rules of S. Augustine if they have
place in those things, which the Fathers, who lived in the time of the four
first Counsels, do testify, to have been observed in the Church before those
Counsels; with how much more reason ought they to have place in those matters,
which the same Fathers affirm, not in doubtful, but in express terms, to
have been instituted, and ordained by the Apostles.

These five Observations then thus made upon the Premises, to pass now to the
Conclusion; I say, that so far of it is, that your Ministers to whom his
Majesty does exteriourly adhere, do hold the same things, which the ancient
Fathers have believed and practiced, as necessary to salvation, that in the
solemn Service or Liturgy of the Church, which is the seal of
Ecclesiastical Communion, the four principal points, for which they have
separated themselves from us, which are, the Real Presence of the body of
Christ in the Sacrament; the Offering of the Sacrifice of the Eucharist; Prayer
and Oblation for the dead; and Prayer to Saints, the ancient Fathers have
universally and uniformly believed, held, and practiced them all, as things
necessary to salvation; although in different degrees of necessity. So as if
your Ministers had lived in the time of the ancient Fathers, they must, as they
have now forsaken and renounced our solemnities and communion for these causes:
so also have then renounced the sole^nities and communion of the ancient
Fathers, and consequently the title and society of the Catholic Church.

I said the Real Presence of the body of Christ in the Sacrament, not because
I think not to pass further, to affirm the substantial conversion of the
Sacrament into the body of Christ, but it suffices for my purpose to say, the
Real Presence. For it is not precisely and particulerly the Transubstantiation
of the Sacrament, but the Real Presence of the body of Christ in the
Sacrament, on which is grounded the importance of this article, and the
necessity of it to salvation, to wit, the Communion and substantial Union to
the body of Christ; which Saint Cyrill calls the knot of our Union with God.
Neither is it particulerly and precisely the Transubstantiation, but the Real
Presence, from whence those two inconveniences do proceed, for which your
Ministers in this article have separated themselves from our Communion; which
are, the one, the adoration of the body of Christ in the Sacrament, whom they
would have to be sought and adored only in heaven; and the other is, the
pretended destruction of the Union of the body of Christ, by being at one time
in many places in the Sacrament.

I have said nothing of the prerogative of the Roman Church, which all the
ancient Fathers have held to be the Center and root of Episcopal Unity, and
Ecclesiastical communion. For that I persuade my self, that You are
sufficiently conversant in antiquity, to know, that the most ancient Fathers,
Counsels, and Christian Emperors have perpetually given unto her the Primacie
and supereminent Authority in all Ecclesiastical matters, and such as concern
Religion: which is as much as the Church requires, to be confessed as a point
of faith, by them that do return to the Unity thereof, that so this company of
the Faithful may be discerned from the Grecians, and others of their Sect, who
some ages since have separated themselves from the visible, and ministerious
head of the Church.

These four points therefore are the principal fountains of our dissension:
and if about these we were of accord, it would be easy to agree about the rest.
I say, that the Fathers, who lived in the time of the four first Counsels,
have all of the^ held and practiced, as necessary to salvation, albeit in
different degrees of necessity, to wit, the Real Presence of the body of
Christ, and the oblatio^ of the Sacrifice, as a means absolutely necessary to
the whole body of the Church, and conditionally necessary to every one in
particular: Prayer and Oblation for the dead, as necessary necessitate medij
to them for whom they are offered, to help the^ by the prayers and Sacrifices
of the Church, to deliver from temporal pains after this life, those who
having sinned after baptism, have not done sufficient penance, nor fully
satisfied the justice of Allmighty God: and they are necessary necessitate
praecepti, for the exercising of Christian charity and piety, both to the
Church, who makes them, and to the Ministers and Pastors, by whom she makes
them.

And Prayer to Saints has been practiced, as necessary to the body of the
Church, and to the Ministers, by whom she makes them: necessary, I say,
necessitate praecepti, for the communion and commerce between the Triumphant
and Militant Church. And as for particular men, than have no office in the
Church, but use their private devotions, it is not necessary necessitate actus,
but it is only profitable for the more easy obtaining pardon for their sins,
by making their recourse in prayer to them, that are already in perfect and
assured possession of the grace and favor of God: but to these and to all
other it is necessary necessitate approbationis, that is, they are bound not to
contradict it, nor to condemn the use and doctrine of the Church in this
point, nor to separate themselves from the Church for this cause, under pain
of Excommunication, and to be held and esteemed for Heretics.

Of all which things I do not for the present undertake the proof, least in
place of a Letter I should se^d you a book, but I oblige my self to perform
it, whensouer you shall require it: and to show unto you, both by the uniform
consent of the Fathers, who flourished in the time of the four first
Counsels, and by the forms which they have left us in their writings, of the
ancient service of the Catholic Church in their ages, universally and
uniformly were held, believed, and practiced through all the Provinces and
Countries of the earth, these four points, in the same sense, and in the same
form, as they are used in our Liturgies and common Service, and not as
Observations, which then had their beginning, but as things which the same
Fathers affirm to have been believed and practiced by all Antiquity; and to
have come to them, by a neuer-interrupted succession of the tradition or
approbation of the Apostles. So as, no man can renounce the Communion of our
Church under the pretext and color of any of these things, but they must also
renounce the Communion of the ancient Catholic Church, and consequently the
inheritance of salvation.

And this I will do by authors and testimonies of good rank and mark, as you
know I am curious not to use others, and with plain and clear answers to all
objections, taken out of the Fathers of those or former ages; which thing will
be unto me so much the more easy, for so much as the proofs, which we bring out
of the Fathers, do contain in express terms the affirmative of what we say;
whereas on the contrary, our Adversaries shall never be able to find one
passage, which does in express terms contain the negative: but only by such
inferences, as in an equal and just Tribunal deserves not so much as once
the hearing. For who knows not, how contrary to reason it is, to allege the
consequences of passages, and those also ill interpreted and understood, and in
whose inferences does always lie hidden some Paralogisme and fallacy, against
the express words, and the lively and actual practice of the same Fathers,
out of whom they are taken: and that this is a ready way to accuse the Fathers
of want of understanding and memory, not to take them for judges, and to submit
ones self to the observation of that, which they have believed and practiced.

To this I will further add when you shall desire it, the present conformity
of all other Patriarchall Churches, in these four points, with the Church of
Rome, and of all those which do yet remain to this day under their
jurisdiction, that is, of those that do remain under the Patriarchall
Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople, as the Grecians, Russians,
Muscouites, and Asians of the lesser Asia, separated from us some eight hundred
years since: of those also which are under the Patriarch of Antioch, as the
Syrians, Mesopotamians, and others that are further East: For those that
acknowledge the Patriarch of Syria, as the Maronites, do still persevere in the
Communion of the Church of Rome. Of those also, which rely and depend of the
Patriarch of Alexandria, as the natural Egyptians, whom they call Copthes,
and the Ethiopians, divided from us and the Grecians, more then eleven hundred
years ago, even from the last of the four first Counsels, that is, from the
Council of Chalcedon; these do hold these four articles, and with greater
jealousy, if it were possible, then the Latins do; and particulerly that of
the Sacrament, in which they do not only believe the Transubstantiation which
the Grecians at this day do call (...), but do also adore it with external
actions, full of much more humility, then ours are; which is a manifest sign,
that these four points were uniformly held and observed by the ancient
Catholic Church; seeing that all the parts, into which the Catholic Church
is divided, retain them to this present day with great uniformity,
notwithstanding the distance, separation, and division of them, through all
Nations of the earth.

Behold here in general, the causes, which moved me in my Letter, to use
that exception objected unto me in yours, which if his Majesty of
Great-Brittaine had as well the leisure to consider in particular, as he has
capacity to comprehend them; I assure my self, he would not think it
strange, that I should wish him the Title of Catholic: but would also wish and
desire it himself, and put himself in state to obtain it both to himself,
and his: I mean, he would to his other Crowns add also this, that he would
become a Mediator for the reconciliatio^ of the Church which would be unto him
a more triumphant Glory, then that of all Alexanders, and Cesars: and it would
obtain no less honor to his Island, to have been the place of his birth, then
to have brought forth the Great Constantine, the first deliverer and pacifier
of the Church of Christ.

I beseech the infinite goodness of God, that he would vouchsafe one day to
increase with this, the other graces, which he has given him, and to grant in
this behalf, the prayers of the happy deceased Queen his Mother, whose not
only tears, as did those of S. Augustines Mother; but also her blood does make
intercession, and cry unto heaven for him: and always preserve You in health
and safety.

FINIS.

