A SCOVRGE for Paper-Persecutors, OR

Papers Complaint, compiled in ruthful Rimes,
Against the Paper-spoylers of these Times.
By

WITH

A continued just Inquisition
Of the same subject, fit for this season.
Against PAPER-PERSECVTORS.

By

Wit nay up with him if he were my brother
if he will needs be a paper-spoyler

Time

O could Thou whip these Bedlams till they bleed
Thou whipp'st in vain: we will whip anon indeed.



Printed at London for H. H. and G. G. and are to be sold at the Golden Flower
Deluce in Pope's Head Alley. 1625.

A SCOVRGE for Paper-Persecutors, OR

Papers Complaint, compiled in ruthful Rimes,
Against the Paper-spoylers of these Times.
by I. D. WITH A CONTINVED INQVISITION against Paper-Persecutors, By A. H.

Printed at London for H. H. and G. G. and are to be sold at the Flower Deluce
in Pope's Head Alley. 1624.

A Scourge for Paper-Persecutors, OR Papers Complaint compiled in ruthful Rimes
Against the Paper-spoylers of these Times.

WHat heart so hard, that splits not when it hears,
What ruthlesse Martyrdom my Body bears
By rude Barbarians of these latter Times,
Blotting my spotless Breast with Prose and Rimes,
That Impudence, it self, would blush to bear;
It is such shameless Stuff and irksome Gear?
Though I (immaculate) be white as Snow,
(Which Virgin Hue mine innocence does show)
Yet these remorcelesse Monsters on me piles
A massy heap of blockish senseless Styles;
That I ne wot (God wot) which of the twain
Do most torment me, heavy Shame, or Pain.
No less than my whole Reames will some suffize,
With mad-braine stuff over them to tyrannize.
Yea Ballet-mongers make my sheets to shake,
To bear Rimes-doggrell making Dogs perbrake;
Whereto (ayeme) gross Burdens still they add,
And to that put again, light Notes and sad:
O Man in desperation, what a dewce
Meanst thou such filth in my white face to sluice?
One rays me with course rimes, and Chips them call,
Offals of wit; a fire burn them all.
And then to make the mischeife more complete,
He blotts my Brow with verse as black as Ieat,
Wherein he shows where Ludlow has her Site,
And how her Horse-high Market House is pight,
Yet not so satisfied, but on he goes,
And where one Berries mean house stands, he shows.
An other comes with Wit, too costiue then,
Making a Glister-pipe of his rare pen:
And through the same he all my breast becackes,
And turns me so, to nothing but Ajax.
Yet Ajax (I confess) was too supreme
For Subject of my-his wit royalld Reame,
Exposed to the rancor of the rude,
And wasted by the witless Multitude.
He so adorned me, that I shall never
More right, for kind, than in his Robes appear.
Whose Lines shall circumscribe vncompast Times:
And, past the wheeling of the Spheres, his Rimes
Shall run (as right) to immortality,
And praisd (as proper) of posterity.
Yet since his wit was then with Will annoyd,
And I enforct to bear what wit did void,
I cannot choose but say as I have said,
His wit (made loose) defiled me his maid.
Another (ah Lord help) me vilifies
With Art of Love, and how to subtilize,
Making lewd Venus, with eternal Lines,
To tie Adonis to her loves designs:
Fine wit is shown therein: but finer 'twere
If not attired in such bawdy Gear.
But be it as it will: the coyest Dames,
In private read it for their Closset-games:
For, sooth to say, the Lines so draw them on,
To the venerian speculation,
That will they, nill they (if of flesh they be)
They will think of it, since loose Thought is free.
And thou (O Poet) that do pen my Plaint,
Thou art not scot-free from my just complaint,
For, thou have played thy part, with thy rude Pen,
To make us both ridiculous to men.
But O! my Soul is vexed to think how evil
I was abused to bear suits to the Devil.
Pierse-Pennilesse (a Pies eat such a patch)
Made me (aye me) that business once dispatch.
And having made me undergo the shame,
Abusde me further in the Devils name:
And made Dildo (dampened Dildo) bear,
Till good-mens hate did me in pieces tear.
O they were merciful therein (God knows)
It Is ruth to rid condemned ones from woes.
How many Quires (can any Stacioner tell)
Were bandied then, twixt him and Gabriel?
Who brutishly my beauty so did blot
With Gaulie girds by pens pumpt from th'inke pot,
That I more ugly than a Satyr seemd:
Nay, for an hellish Monster was esteemd.
Five grotes (good Lord!) why what a rate was that,
For one mere railing Pamphlet to be at?
Well, God forgive them both, they did me wrong,
To make me bear their choler spude, so long.
Yet if, in Judgment, I should spend my breath,
The Doctor foild him with his Dagger-sheath.
The Conny-catcher now plays least in sight,
That wonted was on me to show that slight.
And made more hauock of my Reames and Quires,
Than all the necks are worth of such scald Squires.
No Term could escape him, but he scraped me
With Pens that spirtled me with villainy:
And made me open a gap, unto each Gap,
That leads to shame, to sorrow, and mishap.
But let him go, he long since dead has been,
In body dead, but yet his name is Green.
What should I speak of infant- Rimers now,
That ply their Pens as Plow-men do their Plow:
And pester Posts with Titles of new books?
For, none but blocks such wooden Titles brooks.
Ay me, how ill-bested am I the while,
To see, how at my carriage, Carters smile:
And yet such Rascall-writers find a Press,
(A mischief ont) to make me to confess
I was in fault, for that I did not find
A way to fly from such Gulls with the wind.
Then to recount the volumes hugely written,
Where I lie soild as I were all be-()
Ajax, I le stand toot, did beseem me better,
For all is unsweet Sense, Sentence, Line and Letter.
The Sons of Aymon, Beuis, Gawen, Guy,
Arthur, the worthy, writ unworthily;
Mirror of Knighthood, with a number such,
I might spend time (past time) them all to touch.
And though I grieve, yet cannot choose but smile
To see some modern Poets seed my soil
With mighty words that yield a monstrous Crop,
Which they do spur-gald in a false-gallop.
Embellish, These words are good: but ill used: in overmuch use sauouring of
witless affectation.
Blandishment and Equipage
Such Furies fly from their Muse holy rage.
And if (perchance) one hit on Surquedry,
O he writes rarely in sweet Poesy!
But, he that ( point-blanck) hits Enueloped,
He (Lord receive his Soul) strikes Poetry dead.
O Poetry! that now (as stands thy case)
Art the head game; and yet art out an Ace:
An Ace? nay two: (for on thee Fortune frowns)
That Is out of Credit quite, and out of Crowns.
Thou art a work of darkness, that do damn
Thy Soul (all Satire) in an Epigram.
Thou art, in this worlds reckoning, such a Botch
As kills the English quite, how er'e the Scotch
Escape the mortal mischief: but, indeed,
Their Stars are better; so, they better speed.
Yet Poetry be blithe, hold up thy head,
And live by Air till Earthly Lumpes be dead.
But, if Air fat not, as through thee it passes,
Live upon Sentences against golden Asses.
Some burden me, since I oppress the Stage,
With all the gross Abuses of this Age,
And press me after, that the world may see
(As in a soiled Glass) her self in me:
Where each man in, and out of's humor pries
Upon himself; and laughs until he cries.
Vntrussing humerous Poets, and such Stuff
(As might put plainest Patience in a Ruff)
I show men: so, they see in me and Elues
Themselves scornd, and their Scorners scorn themselves.
O wondrous Age! when Phoebus Ympes do turn
Their Arms of Wit against themselves in scorn
For lack of better use: alack, alack,
That Lack should make them so their credits crack!
Is want of Wealth, or Wit the cause thereof,
That they thus make themselves a public scoff?
I wot not I, but yet I greatly fear,
It is not with them as I would it were:
I would it were; then Time should never report
That in these Times, Wit spoild himself in sport.
O poor Apollos Priests (rich in reproach)
Is It not enough the base your blame should broch?
But you your selves (unhappy as ye are)
Must do it, as if your divine fury were
Turned into Hellish; to excruciate none
(To glad your Scorners) but your selves alone.
And make me bear, to my eternal shame,
The Immortal Records of your Rancors Blame.
Can you teach men how they themselves should use,
When you your selves your selves do so abuse?
Or set this Chaos of confusion
(The World) in order by abusion?
Alas ye cannot: For, Men will despise
The precepts of great Clerks, if so unwise.
Then Time redeem, and in time that amiss,
And I past-time will bear the blame of this.
For, pale-faced paper cannot blush a whit,
Though still it bear the greatest blame of Wit.
Yet, Poets love I, since they make me wear
(What wears out Time) my rich and gaudiest Gear.
Yea, those I love that in too earnest Game
(Or little spleen) did me no little shame.
Since I can witness to succeeding Times,
They often have me araid with royal Rimes,
That ravish Readers (though they) envious be,
Such sacred Raptures they have put on me.
Here give me leave (kind Reader) to digress;
To speak of their unhappy happiness,
Who can put words into the mouths of kings,
That make them more than seem Celestial things.
And can their deeds so fashion with their Pen,
That, doing so, they should be Gods with men!
Each Mood that moves the Mind, they so can move,
As does the Wit, the Will, or Beauty, Love.
Yet, as they were accursed by the Fates,
They can move none to better their estates:
Who do not only hurt themselves alone,
But Fortune (that still hurts them) do enthrone
Among the Senate of those Deities
That hiss (like Geese) at their kind Gulleries.
What boots the Brains to have a wit divine,
To make what ere it touch, in Glory shine?
If ( Midas like) it famisht be with store
Of golden Morsels set the same before:
And for an hunger-staruen Fee (alas)
To make an Idol of a Golden Ass.
It Is the worst way that wit can use his trade,
For Fee so light, with rich praise Blocks to lade.
Yet will I not so wrong my self and you,
To bid you quite your thriftlesse Trade eschew.
For, then, in time, I might want change (perchance)
Of Robes, that do my glory most advance.
No: write (kind Patrons) but let Patrons such
Be praised as they deserve, a littl's much:
Because that little good in such is found,
That give but little to be much renownd.
Yet write (dear Gracers, that do make me fair)
And live the while ( Chamelion like) by air.
Your lines (like shadows) set my Beauty forth,
Shadowing the life of Art, Wits dearest worth.
When you are gone (for, long you cannot stay,
Whose Brains your Pens pick out, to throw away)
I will remember you, and make you live
A life (without worlds charge) which Fame does give:
For, should that life cost this Age more than breath,
It soon would gnaw your dearest Fames to death.
Man's life is but a dream; Nay, less then so;
A shadow of a Dream; that is scarce a show:
Then, in this Shadow, shadow out that Shade,
That may the world substantially persuade
You are half Gods, and more: so, cannot die
By reason of your Wits Divinity!
How am I plagued with pettifogging Scribes,
That load me with foul lies for Fees and Bribes?
And though wide Lines upon my sheets they put,
Close knau'ry yet in those wide Lines they shut:
Which there in mystery obscurely lies
That those which see it need have Eagles eyes,
So I a Labyrinth am made thereby
Where men often lose themselves until they die:
Or else a Traitrous trap, and subtle Snare,
To crush rash fools which run in unaware.
But that which most my soul excruciates,
Some Chroniclers that write of Kingdoms States,
Do so absurdly sableize my White
With Maskes and Enterludes by day and night:
Balld Maygames, Beare-baytings, and poor Orations
Made to some Prince by some poor Corporations:
And if a Brick-bat from a Chimney falls
When puffing Boreas nere so little bralls:
Or else a Knave be hanged by justice doom
For cutting of a Purse in selfsame room:
Or wanton Rig, or letcher dissolute
Do stand at Pauls-Crosse in a Sheeten Suit;
All these, and thousand such like toys as these
They clap in Chronicles like Butterflees,
Of which there is no use; but spotteth me
With Medley of their Motly Livery.
And so confound grave Matters of estate
With plays of Poppets, and I wot not what:
Which make the Volume of her Greatness bost
To put the Buyer to a needless Cost.
Ah good Sir Thomas Moore, (Fame be with thee)
Thy Hand did bless the English History,
Or else (God knows) it had been as a Pray
To brutish Barbarism until this Day.
Yet makes the Readers which the same peruse
At her unruly Matters much to muse:
For (ah!) that ever any should record
And Chronicle the Sedges of a Lord:
Seiges of Towns, or Castles? No, (alas!)
That were too well, but sedges that do pass
Into the Draught, which none can well suruay
Without he turn his face another way.
Yet where that is, I may not well disclose:
But you may find it, follow but your Nose.
As also when the Weathercock of Poules
Amended was, this Chronicler enroles.
And O (alas!) that er'e I was created
Of Rags, to be thus rudely lacerated:
With such most ragged wild, and childish Stuff
As might put plainest Patience in a Ruff:
For, this says one: There was, on such a day,
A disputation (that is a Grammar fray)
Between Paul's Scholars, and Saint Anthonies,
Saint Bartholmewes among; and, the best Prize
A Pen was of five shillings price; Alas!
That ere this Doteherd made me such an Ass
To bear such Trash; and that in such a Thing
Which we call Chronicle: so, on me bring
A world of shame: a shame upon them all
That make mine injuries Historical
To wear out Time, that, ever (without end)
My shame may last, without some one it mend.
And then, like an Historian for the nonce,
He tells how two Knights here were feasted once,
At Mounsier Doysels lodging (mong the rest)
With a whole powdered Palfray (at the least)
That roasted was: so he (without remorse)
Tells us a Tale but of a roasted Horse.
Good God! who can endure, but silly I,
To bear the burden of such Trumpery,
As, could I blush, my face no ink would bear:
For blushing Flames would burn it coming there?
But, Fame reports, there is one (forth coming yet)
That Is coming forth with Notes of better Set:
And of this Nature; Who both can, and will
With descant, more in tune, me fairly fill.
And if a senseless creature (as I am;
And, so am made, by those whom thus I blame)
May judgment give, from those that know it well,
His Notes for Art and judgment do excel.
Well fare thee man of Art, and World of wit,
That by supreamest Mercy live yet:
Yet, do but live; yet, live thou to the end:
But so thou paist for Time, which thou do spend,
That the dear Treasure of thy precious Skills
The World with pleasure, and with profit fills.
Thy long-wingd, active, and ingenious Spright
Is ever Towering to the highest height
Of Wit, and Art; to beautify my face:
So, dearly gracest life, for life's dear Grace.
Another in the Chronicle as great
As some old Church-book (that would make one sweat
To turn it twice) at large (good man) does show
How his good Wife, good Beer, and Ale does brew.
With which (lest Readers foulely might mistake)
He many Leaves, in Folio, up does take,
To make them brew good Beer, and Ale as well
As his good wife; and all the Art does tell.
So, for a book of Cookery one would take
That Chronicle that shows to brew and bake.
Here is strong Stuff, a Chronicle to line;
Wort varnish will; then does the Story shine:
Wherein Historians still may see the face
Of Wit, and Art, their Histories to grace.
I must endure all this: but God forgive them;
I can no more commend them then believe them.
I scarce would venture Malt, a Pennies price;
To try the virtue of this Stories vice:
For, as it marred the Chronicle before,
So might it mar the malt, what ever more.
With rank Redundance being thus oppressed,
I (as for speaking naught) to death am pressed.
But now (ah now) ensues a pinching pang,
A villain vile, that sure in hell does hang
Hight Mach-euill, that evil none can match,
Daubed me with deu'llish Precepts souls to catch,
And made me so (poor silly Innocent)
Of good souls wrack^, the cursed instrument.
Now not a Groom (whose wits erst soard no higher
Than how to pile the Logs on his Lords fire)
But plays the Machiavillian (with a pox)
And, in a Sheepe-skin clad, the Wolf or Fox.
I could here speak what hauock still is made
Of my fair Reames which quarrels ouer-lade
In right Religions cause, as all pretend,
Though nere so wrongly some her right defend.
What never ending Strife they make me stir:
For, I am made the Trumpet of their war.
I pell-mell put together by the ears
All Nations that the Earth turmoiled bears;
While wounded Consciences in such conflicts,
Damnations terror evermore afflicts
In desperate doubts; with Winds of Doctrine tossed,
Still likely in Faiths Shipwreck to be lost:
While learned Pilots strive which Course is best,
Gods tempest-beaten Arc can take no rest,
But up and down on Discords Billows borne
In dismal plight, and fares as quite forlorn.
But thou sweet Concords cause, who with thy hand
Do tune the Deepes, and highest winds command,
Look down from thine eternal Seat (secure)
Upon thy Church Storme-tossed every hour;
And factious men inspire with better grace
Than with defense of Sects to stain my face.
But wretched I (unhappy that I am)
None, no not one, a'Pistle now can frame,
T'addresse their Works to any Personage,
But they (ay me) must crave their Patronage,
To be protected from the bitter blow
Of Momus, Zoilus, and I wot not who.
O Momus, Momus, Zoilus, Zoilus, ye
In these Epistles too much pester me:
For, under Lords wings Metaphorical
All Authors creep, a shame upon them all.
And men you have alas so much bewitched
That with your Names (like Needles) must be stitcht:
All dedicating ' Pistles in my sheets:
For, first of all with you the Reader meets.
And now that fashion is so stale become,
That he in hate, crosse-wounds me with his Thumb,
And ready is to tear my tender sides
To make me Scauenger for their Back-sides.
Good gentle Writers for the Lord sake, for the Lord sake,
Like Ludgate Prisner, lo, I (begging) make
My moan to you; O listen to my moan,
Let Zoile and Momus (for Gods love) alone;
Meddle not with them, Mome's a biting beast;
And men for his name sake your Books detest,
And makes me shake for fear lest in a rage
They should enforce me wear their Buttocks badge.
Leave off, leave off your Tokens of good will;
The Poesies of old Rings new ' Pistles spill.
Away with Patronage, a plague upon it,
That hideous word is worse than Termagant.
Call for no aid where none is to be found;
Protect my Book: such Books O fates confound.
To show my grateful mind: That Is stinking stale;
Yet in new 'Pistles such geare's set to sale.
The poor man's present to the Emperor;
O that in ' Pistles keeps a stinking stir.
And not the Gift, but giuers poor good will:
This, this, (O this) my vexed Soul does kill!
This is a Pill (in deed) to give more stools
Than Mouths will fill of forty such fine-fooles.
This heavy Sentence which I often sustain,
Makes me to groan, it puts me to such pain.
Therefore I pray such Writers, write no more;
Or if you do, write better than before.
Does Nature new Heads bring forth every day?
And can those new heads no new Wit bewray?
Unhappy Nature or unhappy Heads,
Its time for one or both to take your Beads.
The World and most men's Writs are at an end,
Pray for increase of faith, then Wit will mend*
For sure the cause why men too foolish are,
They faint in search of Wisdom through despair.
Has Aristotle left his wit behind;
To help those Wits that seek, yet cannot find?
Has Socrates and Plato broke the ice
To many a Skill and most divine Device?
And cannot After-commers to it ariue?
And with those Helps not equal Skill atchieue?
Did they (poor Men) out of mere Industry
Attain to so great singularity,
Having no Ground, or if Ground had but little
Whereon their lofty buildings sure to settle:
And can no Worke-man of this hapless Time,
Add no Stone to it, nor no Dabbe of Lyme?
I wrong them now, that Word I countermand;
They add much Lyme, but neither stone, nor sand.
And that is the cause (as some good Authors say)
Their Works, with Wind and Rain do dance the Hay;
For, they fall downright; but the Rain and Wind
Makes them run in and out as they are inclinde:
And could the weather speak, it would commend
Such toward works as toward it do bend;
And praise (beyond the Moon) their muddy Brain
That builds with mudde to sport the wind and rain.
Plato and Socrates (the Mason free)
With Stone and Lime built too substantially.
And Aristotle (like a musing fool)
Would lay no stone without good Reasons rule;
What boot such BVILDINGS to wear Ages out?
A goodly piece of Work it is no doubt:
In Faith, in faith, their Wits were much misled,
To build for others now themselves are dead.
The wind may now go whistle while it will,
These weighty works for all that stand do still.
The Rain, by soaking showers, may fall amain;
Yet sure they stand for all such Showers of rain.
Yea, let all Weathers join their force in one,
They all unable are to stir one stone.
A mischief on the Fools, what did they mean,
To waste their Brains and make their Bodies lean,
To profit others which they never knew,
And build for Sots which after should ensue?
Who gape upon it with great admiration;
But dare not stir a foot from the foundation.
Ye need not fear to climb, the work is sure,
Else could it not so many Ages dure.
And, if a Flaw be found, through Builders blame,
Now mother-wit (some say) can mend the same.
And since ye have such steadfast footing there,
And yet will sink through sloth or faint through fear,
O Heavens increase your faith, and make it strong;
For ye, through weakness, do your wisdoms wrong.
The Soul of Man is like that Power Divine
That in himself all wisdom does contain:
Which Simily in Wisdoms faculty
Does hold, or else there is no Simily.
Man's Reason (if stird up) can mount as hie
As Souls themselves, and they to heaven can fly,
And from thence view what that Circumference
Does circumscribe, if subject unto sense.
Homer (though blind) yet saw with his Souls eye,
The Secret hid in deep'st Philosophy;
In State-affaires, and in the highest Designs;
All which he measures with immortal Lines;
Whereat we rather ever do admire
Than feel least fervor of his divine fire.
What Country, Marches, Navy; nay, what Host
Yea what Mindes-motions (both of man, and Ghost)
Are by Him, so expressed, that he (we wot)
Makes us to see that he himselefe saw not!
His Illiads describes the Bodies worth;
The Mind, his Odyssea sets forth,
For which seau'n Cities strove, when he was gone,
Which of them all should hold him as their own.
Then gentle Writers, be not so imploid
In writing everlastingly, (vncloid)
And let your reason idle be the while,
Let Reason work, and spare your Writings toil,
Till by degrees, she lifted has your Spright
Unto the top of Humane-Wisdomes height.
And when ye have aspired above your Sires
Then write a Gods-name, fill my Reames and Quires,
And with huge Volumes build a Babel* Tower
As high as Heaven (that shall the Heavens out-dure)
For your Sons Sons to climb; if so they please,
From Errors Floods and Perturbations Seas.
And flatter nor, (alas) O flatter not
Your selves as wise; for, you are wide (God wot.)
And though ye knew what Aristotle holds,
Think not, therefore, your Brain all truth infolds:
For, there are Truths (beside the Truth of Truth)
That never came near his Brain, much less his mouth.
All which (when Powers of the Intelligence,
In their pursuit use all their violence)
May well be apprehended, though black Clouds
Of vtter-darkenesse their abiding shrowds:
Which cannot be when Bounds are set to Wit
In Plato his Plus Vltra, touched not yet:
Or Aristotle's utmost travels reach,
Whose Muse made, through the Marble Heavens a breach
And past the inferior Orbs, until he came
Unto the highest Sphere of that huge Frame
That whoorles the lower with repugnant sway,
Yet had not power his mounting Muse to stay;
But it would pry into the imperial PLACE,
Where Glory sits enthroned in greatest grace.
Yet these be not true Wisdoms Bounds, whose scope,
Do far extend above the Heavenly Cope;
And more profound than the infernal Deep,
Heaven earth, and Hell, her Greatness cannot keep:
And though such Wisdom properly with God,
And not with mortal men does make abode,
Yet he imparts of his unbounded grace
So much as may Heaven, Earth, and Hell embrace
With Contemplations Arms, that all infold
Whose vncomprised reach no limits hold:
But if, through sloth, those Arms be not extended,
In Earths Circumference then, their Circuit's ended.
Now, you that seek by wisdom to aspire,
With study, impe the wings of your Desire,
And you thereby shall scale the highest Height,
Although your Minds be clogd with Bodies weight:
So may ye grace me with eternal lines,
That compass can, and gage the deep'st Designs.
Omnia sapientibus facilia.
A CONTINVED INQVISITION against Paper-Persecutors.
By A. H.
ANd shall it still be so? norist more hard
To repair Paul's than to mend Pauls-Churchyard?
Shall still the Youths that walk the Middle-Ile,
To whet their stomachs before meals, compile
Their sudden volumes, and be never barred
From scattering their Bastards through the Yard?
Shall still such fopperie fill up each Stall,
And never come to a due Funeral?
In so convenient a place? It is no wonder
That Paul's so often has been struck with Thunder:
It Was aimed at these Shops, in which there lie
Such a confused World of Trumpery,
Whose Titles each Term on the Posts are reared,
In such abundance, it is to be feared
That they in time, if thus they go on, will
Not only Little but Great Britain fill,
With their infectious Swarms; whose guilty sheets,
I have observed walking in the streets:
Still lurking near some Church, as if hereby
They had retired to a Sanctuary,
For murdring Paper so: as in old time
Persons that had committed some foul crime
Thus saved their lives: Each driueling Lozel now
That has but seen a College, and knows how
To put a number to John Setons Prose,
Starts up a sudden Muse-man, and straight throws
A Pack of Epigrams into the light,
Whose undigested mish-mash would affright
The very Ghost of Martial, and make
The Authors of th'Anthologie to quake.
Others dare venture a diuiner strain, (...)

And The Bible rimed in a petty volume like the Battle of Troy.
Rhyme the Bible, whose foul Feet profane
That holy ground, that wisemen may decide,
The Bible never was more Apochryphide,
Than by their bold Excursions: ( Bartas, thee,
And thy Translatours, I absolve thee free
From this my imputation: who in lines,
(Deserving to be studied by Divines,)
Did mask thy Sacred Fury, whose rare wit,
Did make the same another Holy Writ,
Who, be it spoken to thy lasting praise,
Gave Sunday raiment to the Working Days.
Others that never searched newborn Vice at all,
But the seven deadly Sins in general,
Drawn from the Tractate of some cloistered Friar,
Will needs write Satyrs, and in raging fire
Exasperate their sharp Poeticke strain,
And think they have touched it, if they rail at Spain,
The Pope and Devil; and while thus they urge
Their stinglesse gall, there is none deserve the scourge
More than themselves, whose weakness might suffice*
To furnish Satyrs and poor Elegies.
To run through all the Pamphlets and the Toys
Which I have seen in hands of Victoring Boys,
To rail at all the merry Wherrie-Bookes,
Which I have found in Kitchen-cobweb-nookes:
To reckon up the very Titles, which
Do please new Prentices, the Maids, and rich
Wealth witt^'d Loobies, would require a Mass
And Volume, bigger than would load an Ass:
Nor is it their fault alone, they wisely poyse,
How the blind world does only like such Toys.
A general Folly reigns, and harsh Fate
Has made the World it self insatiate:
It hugges these Monsters and deformed things,
Better than what Johnson or Drayton sings:
As in North-Villages, where every line
Of Plumpton Park is held a work divine.
If over the Chymney they some Ballads have
Of Chevy-Chase, or of some branded slave
Hanged at Tyborne, they their Mattins make it,
And Vespers too, and for the Bible take it.
If a Choise-Piece should come into their hand,
'T would be as hateful as a yellow-band
Was at the first; so if upon the Wall
They see an Antique in base Postures fall:
As, a Friar blowing wind into the tail
Of a Baboone, or an Ape drinking Ale,
They admire that, when to their view perhaps
If ye should set one of Mercators Mapps
Or a rare Piece of Albert Durer, they
Would hardly stick to throw the toy away,
And curse the botching Painter; see, alas,
The doting world is come unto this pass,
England is all turned Yorkshire, and the Age
Extremely sortish, or too nicely sage.
To pass a thousand other, do but look
Of late how they abused the Noble O(...) etc.
Duke.
What steeled patience could behold those Dawes
Praeuaricate the Muses sacred Laws,
And blabber forth His Funeral, in Rimes,
I needs must say, much like these wretched Times?
To hear the noselesse Ballad-woman raise
Her snuffling throat to His ill-penned praise:
Or the often beaten fellow make his moan,
Who in the streets is wont to read Pope Ioane:
To see each Wall and public Post defiled
With diverse deadly Elegies, compiled
By a foul swarm of Cuckoes of our Times,
In Lamentable Lachrymentall Rimes:
By this I hope, y'haue wronged him what you can
By those abortiue Broods of Barbican,
And such like Magazines of woeful things
Such as I nor the sober Poet sings.
Have you yet not to soil His spotless life
Ended those begging Chartells to His The
Wife?
Who, could She but have raised her woeful Eyes,
Had thought them Libells and not Elegies.
And ye who with more secrecy did write
Lines which you thought too precious for the light,
In reserved Manuscripts, for shame give over
Your hard-strain'd numbers, and disperse no more
Your heavy Rimes, which seem by quicker Eye
Would make one quite abjure all Poetry,
And study Stow and Hollinshed, and make
Tractates of Trauells, or an Almanake:
But sure the names were falsified, nor can
I think a Scholar or a Gentleman,
Would do His Memory so foul abuse:
Sure it was some Ballad-broker did traduce
Their Fame, or the one-leggd varlet who does sing
His roaring Nonsense, to a triuiall Ring
Of Prentices, about some arrant sent,
Or Boys, who, then leave Jack a Lent
To hear the noise, or women who stand there,
And at O-Hone ring forth a ready tear.
Touching the State, Ambassadors or Kings,
My Satyr shall not touch such sacred things:
Nor list I purchase penance at that rate,
As some Spoile-Papers have dearly done of late.
And such as these, whose names are justly spread.
Unto their shame, are to be pitied,
Rather than blamed; But to behold the walls
Buttered with weekly News composed in Paul's,
By some Decayed Captain, or those Rooks,
Whose hungry brains compile prodigious Books,
Of Bethlem Gabors preparations, and
How terms betwixt him and the Emperor stand:
Of Denmark, Swede, Poland, and of this and that,
Their Wars, Iars, Stirs, and I wot not what:
The Duke of Brunswicke, Mansfield, and Prince Maurice,
Their Expeditions, and what else but true is,
Yea of the Belgique state, yet scarcely know,
Whether Brabant be in Christendom or no:
To see such Batter every week besmeare
Each public post, and Church door, and to hear
These shameful lies, would make a man in spite
Of Nature, turn Satyrist, and write
Revenging lines, against these shameless men,
Who thus torment both Paper, Press, and Pen.
Th'Impostors that these Trumperies do utter,
Are, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and ( --)
Who if they do not soon these matters mend,
I Will shortly into the world, a Satyr send,
Who shall Them lash with dierie rods of Steel,
That ever after They my ierks may feel.
Mysteria mea mihi.

