A SELECT SECOND HUSBAND FOR SIR THOMAS OVERBVRIES* WIFE, NOW A MATCHLESS
WIDOW.

No Muse can make high flight,
Whose Luster lackes No Light.
LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creed and Barnard Allsopp, for John Marriott: and
are to be sold at his shop at the white Flower-de-luce, near Fetter Lane end
in Fleetstreete. 1616.

To the Reader.
NO Rest is in Motion. The Circle of Opinion is without Center: yet, past that
Compass, no lines have allowance. One singular Wit (affecting singularity, in
matter and manner of verse) lately put foot into that Circle, and there so
arrests the Worlds judgment, that it finds no coming forth; but, lies there
forth-comming to be justified, or condemned, as Reason, in Time shall find
Evidence. An Opinion without learning, cannot be good, say the learned.
Therefore, in this, to spend mine, were a sinful prodigality; because it may
be much to little purpose. But I will not long detain thee, Reader.
Fools-bolts are soon shot. Then take mine with thee: it is but light, and shall
cost thee nothing. In few; if all Poets, in their Poems, are said to sing;
then, they make harsh music, who, to please Judgment with the Ditty, offend
the Ear with the accent: and, he that sings much, out of tune, though he sing
well, out of cry, may, happily, sing to please himself, and few; but shall be
sure to displease many. In welldoing, it is well done to follow; but, in ill,
the imitation is worse than the example. Tomarre the music of the Line for
the reason of Sense, is against sense and reason: seeing words may be found as
well to fit the tune, as the sense in what line soever. But, to affect
harshnesse in fashion with some, should be an affectation out of fashion with
all: for can thou not sing sharp in sense but thou must sing flat in sound?
Thou may: else (peradventure) thou can SAY; but (without peradventure) thou
can not SING. Farewell; and sing in tune; else fast for me.

I. D.

To the right right Noble, for all that is in Nobility, Art, or Nature, William
Earl of Pembrooke, etc.
WIT, and my Will (dear Lord) were late at strife
To who^ this Bridegroom I for grace might send.
Whose Bride was erst the happiest husbands wife,
That ere was hapless in his Friend, and End.
Wit, with it self, and with my Will, did war:
For, Will (good- Will) desired it might be YOU:
But, Wit found fault with each particular
It self had made; since YOU were It to view.
Alleging YOU had all his Virtue got,
And left him graceless: so, was loath t'appeare
To your clear eyes: wherewith good. Will grew hot,
And said her love, to YOU, was all as clear:
Then, both agreed YOU should, for lasting-life,
Since best YOU could, make this man match that Wife.
Your honors now as ever most humbly devoted, John Dauies.

A SELECT SECOND HUSBAND FOR SIR THOMAS OVERBVRIE'S WIFE, NOW A WIDOW.
MAn is, of men the varied same and sum,
As rivers run the same, and not the same:
In Unity, the Odds do Odds or'ecome;
Diffring in Time, Place, Person, Face, and Name:
Yet, all is but Man; and Man is all: that he
Should all the World of Men, t'a Woman be.
But Man, made like, alike did mar his making;
So, must re-made be, to be like his Maker:
Which cannot be without a selfe-forsaking:
For, Sin of Grace can never be partaker.
Sin made him like Gods most unlike: then, he
To be like him that made him, graced must be.
He must be graced with Grace and Glory too;
For, God has both, who made him to his mood:
If Men have both, they win still what they woo:
For, naught they woo that is not passing good:
"Love lives in likeness; then, it dies when it
"Meets with Unlikenesse, both in Will, and Wit.
In Beauty, I had rather Virtue find,
Than seek it in Deformity; for, Grace
The graceful guides: and Nature makes the Mind
The Body like; the Jewel fits the Case.
Beauty's a beam of Heavens DIVINITY:
But, ugliness (like Hell) but plagues the Eye.
Beauty is good; for, Goodness made it so:
Which is Loves object: yet must good-men be
Haters of loving women, if they show
Less grace than beauty, in their goodness: he
Is no good husband that a wife will choose
For face, but grace; and grace, but grace to use.
Shape, is but Natures grace to Naturals
As well as wisemen: naught then therein lies
Worthy those Ladies precious Pectorals
That are as good, as great; and kind, as wise:
Yet where both in, and outward Beautie's rife,
There is an husband worth a Monarchs wife.
For, such rare Beauties ravish both the sense
Of soul and Body; such an heavenly spark
Does feast the eye of the Intelligence,
As well as that which sees by light more dark:
Queans have more choice then queens, that are as king^
Then seldom wiue they such celestial things.
Where Fortune plays the Prodigal, there can
Beseldome found but what Love still does hate*
A Rig the wife, a Rake-hell (often) the man,
Although a pair of Princes in their state:
Abundance clogs the soul, and so she stics
No more than swollen voluptuousnes can rise.
Would thou (wise Virgin) wiue no man thy foe?
Then taste, before thou touch him: store of salt
Eaten with him, does make him relish so
As he both seems and is: Nay, it is a fault
To trust thy touch, or taste; unless he be
By Time, on Trials touch, found right for thee.
Right, take not wrong: for, no right golden-back,
Right shape, state, birth, nor breeding, I intend:
If all these Rights, a right good-mind do lack,
They cannot make right Husband, or right Friend.
"He Is most-most-bad, although an Angel still,
"That is so bad but merely in his Will.
Form, is not matter: shape, no substance is:
And either neither is to be beloved
Or loathed, but as its meet, or most amiss:
As it with Vice, or Virtue still is moved:
Then, she that weds for forms sake, wives a shade
Or naught; or marred with nothing that is made.
Form, in an Image, gives no Essence to it:
Or, gave it Essence; if deformed it were,
It could but move to hate; which might undo it:
Then, would thou love aright? aright, then, fear
Ill-motions; whereto, worst ill will is best,
Since therewith naught, that is not worse, can rest.
Beauty's but skin-deepe; nay, it is not so;
It floares but on the skin beneath the skin,
That (like pure Air) scarce hides her fullest flow;
It is so subtle, vading, frail, and thin:
Were she skin-deepe, she could not be so shallow,
To win but fools her purity to hallow.
Say, that a Pair were matched without a Peer
For Beauties grace; yet, if they should but sin,
Their grace were more in crime, then beauty, clear:
And frailer then her Tiffany, the skin:
Their interchanged rays would then reflect,
Either to each, but dullness and neglect.
Heauen's outward beauty, love, and wonder would
In all procure, were it but seldom seen;
But, but to Copper, Custom turns their gold:
So, graiest love of Grace, is ever green
In beauty seld enjoyed; but, with it cloyd,
Both soul and sense thereby is still annoyd.
If beauty then, be not fair Uertues Inn,
Nay, not her Heaven, wherein she rests still,
She Is loathed of sense, if she do lodge but sin:
Though sin and sense be friends; Sense loves no ill
It has found ill: for ill can nere be loved;
Since naught can love that good that ill is proved
A man, in print, or made in wax, the so words
Transfer to our conceit the highest worth
Of outward-shape; which (dead) more life affords
Than quickest flesh, as nature sets it forth:
"Yet, if a man in print, be dull, or dead,
"He Is a fair body, but a soul of lead.
Nay, though that Body could be made to move
In measures, most immeasurably in grace;
Such measures, yet, but, sinke-apace her love
That is not lewd, if he dance not with GRACE:
"A lofty Cap^oll, is but high to rise
"Shaking, like one, nor great, nor good, nor wise.
Yet this mad-mean the mean mounts, now, and then;
In marr-age often: the goodness of the back
Is all that is beloved in such men;
Not well to back them; since no such they lack
Whose belles are all back, to undergo
The bellies charges, that the back undo.
To flatter Beauty is to raise it hie
(As fowls do shel-fish) so, to fall, and brast,
To prey, at pleasure, on it inwardly;
Than, keep off such: for they will come on too fast;
Such clawers will be scratchers from thy state,
And make the bed of love, the lodge of hate.
(...) These, like bemired Dogs, with sawning, file,
As Wit it self, has erst observed: then, look
She nere be tempted with such gawdy-guile:
Lest, with the Bait, she swallow down the Hook.
The best man's praises sound, his heart does joy,
Then, what will it do a Woman? make her toy.
Such gawds will make thee grieve, and grief go round
In her own Circle: issuing at her mouth,
To enter at her Ears: the secret wound,
Sharp Praise does give, though but for real Truth,
Proves often more mortal tha^ the wounds of death
That kill but flesh. Then, keep her from such breath.
I would she should be modest, but not sad:
Yet modest sadness does fair looks decore:
As Shadows do more life to Pictures add;
So, sober-lookes, make bright ones beam the more.
Beauty and Boldness often together go,
But still as Foes, themselves to overthrow.
The praised, will to their own Music dance:
For, naught is more melodious in the Ear,
Than our high praises that our hearts advance,
And make us (joyed) too wanton them to hear.
"The more Ambition in our Mind is nursed,
"The more our praise will swell it, til we burst.
The greatest good that bad Wives can disclose,
Is Beauty: but, in good Wives it is the least:
Yet Beauty is, to Sense, a Damaske-Rose,
That does for sweetness better Natures best:
But yet it is but the Sign where Beauty lies
More worth by grace; the minds good qualities.
Chaste Eyes give Eyes* to Cupid: then, thou must
(If she be fairly Modest) have a care,
And help her Love to shun Adultrers Lust,
That by her grace, grows more irregular:
For, Innocence is not always free
From causeless shame: then, help her eyes to see.
Her looks (if well she look) may frolike hope;
And bind it to the good-behauiour too:
Yet, this more fires close hearts (that dare not open
To give it vent) which then, by looks do woo:
And though they move not yet, the ouert thought
Makes modesty to blush as she were naught?
And blushing so, makes observations eyes
Mis-looke into the cause of that effect:
Whence rumors run, while Slanders do arise
Against the (...) of virtue in affect:
Then, since good-name's (like glass) as frail, as clear,
All care should keep it cracklesse in thy Deer.
And if the husband live as free from thought
As act of falsehood to the mariage-bed,
Much more the wife should, since much more she ought:
For, she may stain his blood, and pain his Head:
As lieue had I she should b'in deed untrue,
As wrong my right in thought, if it I knew.
Ioynes she with me, for issue; and disioynes
Her self from me therein, in her best part?
Then, for my share, she lends me but her loins,
While she to one, less worthy, gives her heart:
What patience can endure my base foes base
Should with my land run quite beyond my race.
Then, if her heart be gone; farewell my wife:
Nay, farewell I; perhaps she will me undo:
Or cast about, to cast away my life
Backward, and forward, till I cast It too:
Then, if a peerless Peer the husband grow,
The wife will match-lesse be, to mate him so.
The devil is a matchless Alchymist;
He can transmute the richest mettl'd-man
To Lead, in her conceit, that is so blist;
And, make her, so, her own good-fortune ban:
But, bann'd be all, that but assist herein,
To make the swolue with grace, to burst with sin.
(...) To burst with Sin! O, that that damndeffect
Had never Devil, to occasion it!
Then, Love might have what it should best affect
Without the Sin of such a banefull fit:
"But when the heavens, to wrack us, are decreed,
"They blind our judgments: so, we fall with speed.
O Damned Desire, what would? or what is it
That should to Change so much thy soul dispose?
No Bliss nor Beauty it is, conceyu'd by Wit:
For, Wit the truth of Natures secrets knows.
Though Beauty then seem Sol, at least as rich,
It will be found but Lune, on Trials touch.
O! whither wilt, proud Flesh? To fall in state?
Think, there secure in spite of Spite to stand?
No: soon thou will be thrown through publike-hate
To Ermines? nay: to Uermines Netherland;
Whre thou bemyr'd with Clay, still scor'nd shall lie
A Slaua to Spades and Spights just tyranny.
Good-wit still wins Good Will; and makes them glad
That have goodwit, yet have not all goodwill:
But yet goodwit, without goodwill, is bad,
Being Armed-vice, that wounds, unwounded still:
"That head is headstrong, that is full of Brains;
"And, runs awry if Grace hold not the Rains.
Learning and Wisdom are but seldome-when
Joined in one Sconse; since diverse in their power.
"The greatest Clarks are not the wisest men;
And wisemen often (like fools) for naught do lowre.
Then, as a Wife too witty, is too vain;
So, is a husband, bad, with too much Brain.
The search of Wisdom, since so close it lies
Obscured from sight, is full of pains that kill:
Then, since Ire burns (like Fire) in Agonies,
A good wiseman, makes no good Husband still:
For, he is wayward, and his Wife must woo
For kindness; yet not be too forward too.
Sacred Religion best they love and know
That run no Bace beyond her ghostly Geale
Such make good husbands, paying what they owe
To their kind other Half; not when the whole
Is willing, but the Half; though, but for Lust,
If she would what he could, then needs he must.
A Man with Woman never can be said
To sin, when sin, by some just circumstance
Is taken away, or justly so allayed,
That Grace it self the same does countenance:
"No deed's unjust, how ere unjust it be,
"If it be so, but in so just degree.
But Wit and Knowledge so the mind inflate
As make it most imperious: then, the Wife
That Is matched to him that is so stiff in state,
Must live a supple Slave, else die in strife:
Books better can the mind; but what they can
They do not, if they meet with such a man.
Then let him be divinely wise (like GOD)
Glad without Joy, and Sad, without Offense;
That Is all alike, to bear the Staff and Rod;
With Temperance, so, to feast his soul and sense:
Kind, and not Wanton; sober, yet not sour,
Still having all his Passions in his power.
Flow Numbers on deep streams of Helicon,
Which in a world of Art, are scarce found rife,
Till you have made one Husband- Paragon,
To fit one rare, but Ouer-buried Wife:
Hold Colors to the life, while I, by Art.
Line out a Husband fit to line her Heart.
Platonicall Ideas, stand aloof,
And let my purest Pen delineate
No Husband mere supposed; but, one of proof:
Without a check, to give a Queen the mate:
Which may be found in earnest, yet Art can
Scarce with Arts colors, paint so rare a Man.
He is a Lamb, whose All is all so dear
That naught of him is vselesse, love to get:
He is a Lion, making Beasts to fear
His virtues: so, is mild, stern, small, and great:
He is, What not, if good? and yet to God
He is not even: yet with him never odd.
His Birth and Breeding, (like his Body) right;
His Mind, with witty Flashes (fired above)
Does lighten often, to give his wife some light
To mend her miss; and all in mirth and love:
For, sour Reproofs, and Jests, how ever sweet,
That come too-sharply, wou^d when they do greet.
For she (if truly Noble) rather had
In private dye, then publicly be checked:
For, public shame makes Reas'n, in Greatness, mad:
And GRACES face itself will (so) be fleckt
With Uertues Rosy- rays. Then, closely move
To check thy mate in Game, to win her love.
God left his Son, and he his Sire forewent
But for his wife, the Church: then, for his wife
Man should himself forsake, ere himself rent
From her that is his (honor) life of life:
But, bitter taunts and checks, in public, be
A rending her, thy honors life, from thee.
God charge man to love (his bone) his wife,
As his own flesh; nay, as himself: that is,
Both soul, and body: then, decline such strife
As may incline thy whole to do amiss.
Who hates his wife, his own shame loves: for she
His honor is; or (honored) would be.
Are wives made helps, and comforts too, by God?
Then, should they such be made by husbands too.
Be man and wife made even; yet, be odd?
O! shame for one; that so, of One makes Two;
Yet cannot make Two, even! Shall a Third
Be brought to make Two, even? That were hard.
Then, at her errors wink with open sight,
As sacred Love requires thee: thou must be
The Atlas of her frailties; thou must right
What is amiss, in love, that faults does see
To hide them; yet, to mend them: so shall thou
But bear thine own Harts-ease, and never Rue.
Of outward cares thou must the Camel be,
And bear them soundly for your Commonwealth
Ore highest Lets; as Cares-domesticke, she
Must bear, though sickely, for thy ease and health:
Thou can not press her more to make her fall,
Than still to make her bear the weight of all.
Marriage contracted is (ere it be knit)
For strongth, (since two are stronger far than one)
Yet must the m^n, with manly strength and wit,
Bear all the heautest loads himself alone:
"The weaker by the stronger must be easd;
"As by the weak, the stronger must be pleased.
And, so Heavens queen, y'er knit, contracted was;
To show (though heaven holp) she help must have
But of a feeble husband, and an Ass,
The Lord of strength, made feeble, so to save:
Then, must the husband of the happy wife
Be strong, to bear her Bale; and guard her life.
For, what an abject weakness is it to see
Her wronged by brutish force, defamed by spite,
Yet have no strength or heart, in no degree
Of age, or state, her so great wrong to right:
"There is no Woman, though most full of fear*
But hates (as hell) a cowheard to her pheare.
Fear, is to cowardice more painful far
Then death to the courageous: a faint-heart
Is hartlesse but to hear a Trumpeter:
Nor is his fear by Nature cut'd, or Art.
Then is a wo-mans honor poor in plight,
That Is guarded by a man so poor in sprite.
(...) Marriage, that is most noble, should have naught
But what is noble in it; noble-moods
To scorn that frailiy, and despise that thought
That is not truly noble: mariage-goods
Are Ils, if good they be not made by these,
Else to have much, is much, but to displease.
It is of knots the sur'st: for, two in one
So fast it knits, that death can scarce divide:
Nay, many kindreds it does so atone,
That, to Posterity, they one abide.
The husband, then, for this strong unity,
Should strongly prop this long Posterity.
(Sm: Sermon: 1.)
For Time, it is noble; since at first the God
Of the Uni^rse, did institute it, when
Man lackt an helper (since he was but odd)
To fill the world with worlds of other men.
He, was an husband called yer he had wife:
So, next to God, an husband's Lord of life.
In Paradise it was ordained; and so,
For place it is noble: and, if innocence
May make that noble, which from thence does flow
Nobility therein has residence:
"The Lord of love, who hatred most does hate,
"Is matched to those that love in married state.
Then, Time, Place, Person, that did it effect,
Being so noble, noble it must be
Above all Friendships, which we should affect;
Since it is so transcendent in degree:
Woman, was made for man; and (for his aid)
Made of that help: that help, then, must be staid.
With Miracles 'twas honored; but none such
Are done but for Gods glory, and Men's love
To make a Man a God; least God might grutch
That Man (his Image) should not be above
The Angels: so, lest they his Grace should dym,
He made himself a Man, to grace but him.
Then, to his Prototype, if man will be
Like, he must like but what that Type does please
Who loves the married Paires that well agree:
But since men to their wives are winds and seas,
Who move as men do move, it them behoues
With breath and motion sweet, to win their loves.
For, of their Arch-type they this lore do learn;
The Church, his floting Spouse, he moves so:
His blessed wind blows ever in her stern,
And makes his mercies seas to ebb and flow
As best behoues her, till she has attained
The hau'n, for which she was both pleased and paind
The ribbe of man, whereof his wife was made
Was crooked: so, though wives be such by kind;
Yet man, of God, in wisdom, learned, the trade
To bow them straight: then, gently them to bind
With cords of love from starting back again,
Till, without stubburnnesse, they straight remain.
Of Earth, his Maker made man: but of bone
God made his wife: then, wives still harder are
Than men, for bent: yet, hu^bands must turn stone,
When, through their softnes, they their wives do mar
"Men may be hard, and good: but harldy can
"A husband soft, e're make a good wiseman.
While Eve was made, her Make did soundly sleep
But, often, while husbands sleep, their wives are marred
The house-wife, then the house does hardly keep:
When, in soft-sleepe, she sees he sleeps hard:
Then wakefull be, to keep thy wife from sin,
And running out, that marres thy commings in.
She made was of the Rib, not of the Head:
Then, keep thy headship, for thine honors sake:
And for her grace, and good: and, keep thy bed
(But sleep not much) from that which keeps thee wake
For, if they touch thy Brow, it will swell unseen,
Which ranking inward, outward shows thy teene.
The fertile- seed-plot of the world should be
Free from pollution; marriage should be clean:
Pure seed, well sown, from cockle should be free;
That so the crop, or fruit, might be a mean
Whereby the t^ibe, maintained, might still endure
In name as right, as in fame firm, and pure.
And so to keep it, it behooues thee much
To make thy wife no wanton; for, thou may
Make her thy whore, with many a wanton-touch:
Be prudent then, when e're thou with her plai'st:
And, set strait limits to thy lust; for, she
Will prove a libertine, if so thou be.
It Is thy fault; though thy right she wrong therein:
Art thou her stay, yet make her fall the more?
Yea, fall into adulterous threefold sin?
For, so she is thy widow, wife, and whore.
Then, let no lawless lust the bed pollute,
That may make sacred marriage dissolute.
Would have the body chaste, and not the head?
That cannot be: but, she the body is,
Whose head thou art: by thee she is bred or led
To good or ill: then, do not thou amiss.
"As good the head were empty, as not full
"Of brains to govern all beneath the scull.
The duties of the bed may, but may not
Be well, performed without some secret stain:
For, each least wandering thought incurres a blot:
From which, what love could ever thought restrain?
So, we are all too sinful, ere we sin,
Since we by this are all conceived therein.
Can the desire but think upon the deed
As it is an Act of Generation,
And never let the thought, on fancies breed
(Through heat of lust) some loathed corruption?
Lust mixed with love, begets the race of men:
Then, who knows lusts just sise; or keeps it then?
Say, it is but so much as but warmes Desire
To get our like; yet who does mete so much,
But in the measure may be found, a layer,
Since Justice scales are turned but with a touch:
Whose eye still waits, so, on their turning right
That each least trick of lust is found too light.
Then, let thy lust thy pure love never let:
For, love lusts not: or, if it do, it is
But complementall, or our likes to get,
While love is kept a-foote the more for this:
Yet love may be so pure and so entire,
That it will hate least heat of soraigne-fire.
O! to a soul that is simply pure, it is
Irksome to do pure marriage duest rights:
Whose spirit suspects frail flesh does still amiss
In all her works: so, with it, still she fights:
But women, weak'st of flesh, are yet so strong,
As if thou wrong'st thy self, thy right the'l wrong
From sense of ill then keep her: for, she is wax
To take impressions apt, and hold them too:
She Will lack no time nor place, nor wit she lacks
To do what her will, marred by thee, would do:
No marvel then, though Fame the bugle winds
Thou seek'st thy self: and follow what she finds
Teach not thy wife to speak facundiously;
Much less affectedly: but still to speak
Her native dialect with purity
(Yet short as seld) when e're she silence breaks:
To make thy wife a Parrat, she will give thee
A Daw (perhaps) or Cuckoo for thy fee.
Do thou thy self what thou would have her do
(Examples more than Precepts lead the way)
And, of her sex, rehearse Examples too
Mellow and modern: these will run away
With her Affections; so to emulate
Their Virtues that all worlds so celebrate.
To keep Love green, forbear the Custom gray
Of lying wholly, with thy Half each Night:
Yet not sans- leave, least the Half fall away
But, with consent, it breeds the more delight
In Loves delight: for, that does but annoy
Which loathd Society does still enjoy.
If she be fair, i'ts foul to bring her to
Mad merry-meetings, Reuells, or to Court:
Kinde-Natures, as their like, there needs must do;
So there thy Brows may battered be in sport:
"That's hardly kept that many do desire.
Then, not t'enflame her, keep her out of Fire.
If her (Sr Tho: Ouerb:)
Behavior be a surer Bar,
Then is her No: then, tempt not That too much:
She is a Woman; so, too weak to war
With Compleat-men, that take but with a Touch:
"Many that have resisted long, with strength,
"Yet striving still, grow weak, and fall at length.
The force of Women's love in virtuous course,
Is Lyon-like, not first to be withstood:
But sooner tam'de by following than by force:
For Bloods made hottest often, in coldest blood,
Like Wells in Winter; so, the Leacher can
Be first a good, and then a Beastly Man.
Is she but young? Then it is but young, to bring
Thine Olde-acquaintance to her. Is she old?
Olde-Doings yet may rise from Communing:
Then old and young from such Occasions hold:
Yet not so strait her, as she may epsy,
Through pure Restriction, thy gross Iealausie.
There Is none extremely good, or passing badde
Upon the sudden; but by slow degrees.
No sober soul is at an Instant mad,
But falls to it peece-meale in her Faculties:
First Fantasy, and then Intelligence:
Then Judgment, with each other Inward-sense.
So must thou look thy Wife vntyr'd may run
In Uertues progress, right, from grace to grace:
Since running back, she may be ouerrunne
By Uice: and so be ruined in the Race.
Custom, is Natures second-selfe: and so,
By Custom she will run right, and upright go.
The higher Powers do second Causes make,
As Accessaries to their just Decrees:
And that unwittingly; then, make thy Make
Unawares to do what with thee best agrees,
Who art the second Cause, of what she is;
Then, thou have chiefest Cause to look to this.
"Its good to keep a Hatch before the Door;
And yet that Hatch, to hatch no evil will
In Wife nor Friend; nor yet in rich, nor poor;
But, to do good, let it but keep out Ill.
An Husband should be careful of his Wife:
Then, can not be too careful of her life.
Its no mistrust of thy Wives truth, to keep
Thy Chest fast locked, wherein thy Treasure lies;
But, for she may be either Shrew, or Sheep,
Thou letst her keep it, while thou keepst the keys:
And so both keep it safe, and both enjoy
That which false-Friends by stealth would but destroy.
Care's no Distrust, the wittiest (Sir Tho: Ouerb: wife.)
Wife has said,
That ere was made for wisest Husbands use:
Care of her Honor, is her Honors aid:
Neglect may be her Honors deaths excuse:
Love's Lord himself is jealous of his Honor,
And loves those that with care do wayt upon her.
Nay, he is jealous likewise of our Love;
Yet he is God of Order, love, and right:
Then, what he does in Wisdom, we may prove
In Prudence, without jealousy, or spite.
If thou do love thy Wife, thou love her Fame
More than her life, since longer lives the same.
Yet look upon her Frailtyes with more Love
Then Judgment, so to hyde them; for, thou must
(So she be true to thee) as often prove
As she desires the Sport, though but of Lust:
All have not Continence, their Fame to crown:
Then must she be contained with her own.
And though it be a torment to a Man,
(Cold in this kind) to force Fire out of Ice:
Yet if she would, he should, though ill he can;
Since sin it is not then to pleasure Uice.
Grace makes sin Grace, in this necessity;
Since Grace, this wrong to Grace does rectify.
Then, love her not the worse for this, since that
It is (perhaps) Complexions sin: and so
Some other may be thine as deprauate.
She matched to know no more the^ she might know.
Then, if what well she may, she use at need,
Love her for that the more, since don with heed.
Man, Wife, and Children are Correlatiues.
Then must the Man, his Wife and Children use
As Uessells (not as Uassalls, chiefly Wives)
Of Honor, which he should no way abuse.
Gods, and thy grace, must make thy Children good;
And not the grace, nor glory of thy Blood.
A Bloody grace, is but a Beastly glory.
For, all the grace of Blood from Blood proceeds:
The brauest Uictor has the brightest Story.
Made of his Acts; That is, his Bloudy-deedes.
Then, from thy Spirit, into thy son infuse
More then thy Flesh in him could ere effuse.
Children are Blessings, if they blessed be;
Or else, with Cham, accursed. One going wrong
More grieves than ten right running: O! ay me!
This is the Burden of my heauyest Song:
Nature's more apt to grieve, then joy in all;
Since sold to Sorrow, by the First Man's fall.
It is an unknown Good then, to have none;
If none be had without such cause to mourn,
What need we for but Heirs to make such moan,
Since when we part, we never more return?
Have we no Kin, nor Poor? if either, then
We, have Heirs: for, all are our deer Brethren.
O! but our House, and Name, (two nameless Things,
For decrenesse) then (say we) must be extinct;
"But since Kings come of Slaves, and slaves of Kings,
As good its Common, as to be distinct
In Reason: and in Nature, all is one;
If odds there be, it is in grace alone.
What have we here to do, when we are hence
As far as Heaven or Hell, and ever there?
Can the Sons weal, the Syres woes recompense
That Is dampn'd? or's future hopes, his present fear?
Or, can heavens bliss, b'increasd by the sons mirth
In Earth? If neither, leave thy House to Earth.
The World and We do at one Instant end:
And, eythers Relickes, senseless are to each.
Then, from my Son, since I can-not ascend,
It skills not though my House receive a Breach
To let in others: I my Center keep
When well I wake in GOD, and in Earth sleep.
Children, and Comforts, are Correlatiues;
The first being good: or, if but dissolute,
How ere we may be blessed in our Wives,
Yet are we most accursed in their Fruit:
And naught there is, that can this Curse prevent,
But GOD, by grace; and thou, by Government.
Our Husband then must know the Rules of RVLE:
And when to use them too; and use them then:
Else, if an Ass be taught but by a Mule,
He Will still be brutish. Old must teach Young men;
As wise, the fond; And so, our Petty-god,
In his Homes- heaven, must use the staff, and rod.
With which these three must be or cheerd or checked:
Wife, Children, Servants, in their kinds: but, so
As thou may both thy good, and theyrs effect.
The Lamb and Lion must united go
To this great Work; and with them, still the Fox,
To work on These, with Kindness, craft, and knocks.
But, must thy self be subject to thy Red?
Thy Wife's thy Self; or half thy self, at least.
Why? must not Man (made like) be like his God
In Justice? Did not God, when Man trangrest,
Correct him Self as Man, for Man? Then must
A Man correct his Wife, when it is just.
Christ, and his Church are Two; yet make but One:
As Man and Wife do: yet, though she do err,
He did to appease his Ire for That, alone;
And yet, for That, he often chastises her:
So double beats himself for Single-sinne;
Himself the Shell of his Sweete-selfe within.
So, teach thy wife, by ruling, to obey;
And, by obedience, rule with greater might:
Thou rul'st aright, when she no worse does sway,
As Kings do when their judges judge aright:
Good Judges make ill Kings rule graciously,
But, thou must make hers, thy rule glorify.
Yet Blows are brutish, if thy Wife they touch,
Unless she mankind turn, in furious mood:
Then, may thou give her more, at least as much
As she bestows; and all but for her good:
"The pain of One that pleasure brings to Two
"Made One, makes love more free and faster too.
A man-kind-woman, is a monstrous man:
That Is, a she-man, or loathed Hermophrodite,
Taking the name, of what most in her can
Do in each sex: then, if she love to smite,
She is a monstrous wo-man, of man-made,
But man to mar; or, making, to invade.
Look howth' Angel staid great Abraham's stroke
At point to fall: so should the sacred Name
O Wife, alone, the falling Blow revoke
Yet fall ^her sorrow, and the strikers shame:
The God of Peace dwells not in Tents of war;
Much less with man and wife that so do jar.
Contention is resembled to a fire;
And fire leaves naught, but worse then naught behind;
That Is, Dust or smoke; and so, such hate and ire
Wastes all, save (worst of all) foul Rumors wind:
Which does pursue their cinders, till they ly
In Laethe, or in rotten memory.
The voice of Nature (which nere sounds amiss)
Still cries, that Peace, is Heaven; and war, is Hell:
Is thy wife good? then great thy Fortune is.
If ill; she is thy cross: yet bear it well:
And how so ere, let naught thy mind offend,
But what thou can, and yet thou will not, mend.
The parcels of thy self (thy children) strike
When they misdo; yet, not so ost as then:
Sometimes to wink at what we do mislike,
Is well to see to do like prudent men:
That is, when sweetness, more then sharpnes, will
Their proper good, keep from improper ill.
And such an hand still bear thou on the raines,
As bridle may, with ease, their Coltish will;
With ease to either; for, to neither, pains
Are pleasing; so that kindness do not kill.
As fond Apes do their young: Thy children, so,
Thy will, with ease, shall still both do and know.
Yet, to their carriage, ever have an Eye;
And check when least they trip, lest much they fall:
Nay, bear not with them even the light est lie;
The burden's more than may be borne with-all:
So, with strict use of going-well, they will,
With pleasure, bear the^ selves most upright still.
Thy Servants (Portions of thy goods) if ill,
Mend with sound strokes; but yet remembered be
Thou have a Master too, and thwartst his will;
Then, strike, for that, as he, for this, should thee:
Do as thou would be done to, is his Heast.
Than, do no more; but, so to do, is best.
Those of her Sex, set under her command,
Leave to her chastisement when they mis-do:
The Seruant-maide waits on her Mistress hand;
Then, by that hand she should be punished too:
It Is far more low, then man's worth should aspire,
To hurt a maid in sport; much more in ire.
Hirelings, that are not yet as meniall,
More freely use then thy bond-seruants still;
Yet not, as to one good, give grace to all:
But, let thy front distinguish good, from ill:
From whose squint-eyes, hide well thy il-vsd power.
For, it they will vent with breath as soft as sow'r.
Provision (soul of hospitality)
To Inn it well, must be the husbands care.
Magnificence lives by Frugalitie;
Be sparing, then, to spend; and, spending, spare.
Bear, and Forheare: forbear least vain expense
Of wealth, to bear up thy Magnificence.
Labor, to Be: but, idle be, to Seem:
(Since but to seem is idle) so, shall thou
Be held more dear, the less thou do esteem
Of thine own worth. To rise, then, is to bow:
But, in thy house thou must retain that state.
That there is fittest to predominate.
Thou must b'a King, a Prophet, and a Priest,
To govern, teach and pray: so Masters ought.
To be less good than wise, does ill resist:
To be more good than wise, is evil thought
For government: for, such will fall at length
By the strong power of their own weakness strength.
When thou do feast, (so that the poor fast not)
Feast thou as often, as well thy state may bear.
Have Guests that have no pleasure in the pot,
But, sadly game some; witty, as austere:
So, shall thou bind to thee (in love, at least)
Men worth thy meat; in earnest, and in jest.
Life, and Society do so accord,
As, if they be divided, die they will:
And, frolic Fate does (lightly) load that Board
That seeds the honest and the hungry, still:
Yet, board no Buffons, that are boorders broad;
Their Love is light; and yet, a heavy load.
They are but Baskets of the Devils alms,
Which keep his scraps of wit for wicked wills:
These wound with will, and then give witty balms;
With laughter seed; than, bring in saddest Bills.
Mere moaths of great-men; good-mens eyesores: O!
I would, nor good, nor great men, such did know.
Then, such to shun, and with them, other Pests,
Pray ever to be taught in Wisdoms schools;
And crave the Master of thy souls requests
To bless thee from the sacrifice of fools:
Be thou not Bell, whose guilefull Priests did eat
(While, senseless, he looked on) his means and meat
Let Mornes, and Eu'nings never pass their prime:
But, with the little Church, or petty state
In thy home's signiory pray out that Time,
To be preserved from Sense so reprobate:
Then, Wisdom, Fear, and Loves devotion shall
Be as Triumvirate, to rule thine All.
And, when thy life, thus spent, draws near her date
Let Prudence, and Compassion pen thy Will;
For, they will make Love and Right so part thy state,
As All shall like; and, for it, love thee still:
So, Thine, and the other Thine (the poor) shall be
Still joyed, in grief; and, grieved, in Joy, for thee.
Now sleeps this husband, in his latest home,
While heavenly glory watches when he wakes,
To take him to her temple, from his tomb;
Since Fame, her self, of him, an Idol makes:
But, Heavenly glory, enuy'ng his Fames praise,
Swallows Fames beams into her brighter rays.
Which will but more discover (by their light)
The best of husbands stains, that scarce appear:
By which their own clear rays become most bright
Yet all too brown for her that is more clear.
Then, shine fair Pair, tilsom more heavenly sprites
Do make your glory like the light of lights.
And let her Fame fly ever in the Air
Of the sweet'st Muses breath, that ere shall breath
The Air of Art and Nature: till Despair
Damn Envy, looking still but for her death:
But selfe-life cannot die. Then this dear Wife
Shall live till death be endless- Glories life.
Finis.
DIVERSE ELEGIES TOUCHING THE DEATH OF THE NEVER TOO MVCH PRAISED AND PITIED,
SIR THOMAS OVERBVRY.
T'Insult upon the wretched, is a Crime
That harsh and hateful makes the smoothest Rhyme.
If One all Ils, in one should perpetrate,
His Person should be priuiledg'd from hate
In love, that makes men God-like: for, if God
Be grieved, where he has cause to use his Rod,
The grief is for the Person, not the pain,
Which partly he, in love, does (so) sustain.
He made not Death: nor, does he take delight
To damn, for doing wrong; but, for his right:
Nor, for his right grieves souls to ruinate
But died, in love, to save them from his hate.
The Judge that would be like him, when he gives
His Doom on the Delinquent most that grieves,
Powders his words in Eye-brine, so to taste
Of grace, to them, that (so condemned) are graced.
Then, let no fault, how-euer capital,
The faulty Person make so loathed of al,
That he, for it, should so be'rest of heart,
As, in despair, to wrack his better part.
Though one should ruin all the world, yet he
(If we could help it) should not damned be:
For, for but temp'rall faults, eternal Torters
We cannot wish to our killers, and be Martyrs.
But, yet, (O yet!) To let the good man die
For goodness shown, without our lowdest cry
For Justice, for so damned, so diu'lish Crime,
Were just damnation to the Place and Time
Wherein we live; and Priests might sermon thus;
"Twere better to be ill than good, with us.
Enough, for that: but, never enough of Him
That so was wrackt: Then, flow my Tears, and swim
Sad Muse therein, till thou attain the Port
Of his Arts-fame, beneath his Good-report.
And yet that fame above our sight does fly,
For rich composure in sweet Poesy;
And, percht so hie above our cunnings sphere,
That All may follow still; but, None come near.
No Line in his rich- Numbers confluence
But more than bounds a boundless Sea of sense.
Through all the Cauernes of a Brain as pure
As ever did the Queen of Art immure
They glyded still, with vnconceiued slight,
Yer they to view, transported his conceit.
Nor only so; but, held the best things vain
That easly fall into a world of Brain:
But only that he took, that hardly falls
Into the Brains of Arts best Generals?
That ere his Theughts objected were to sight,
Our Sense might well perceive his thoughts to fight
For place and grace, and all to grace his Wife
(Now matchles widow) were they thus in strife.
His Common-sense, and fantasy conuey'd,
Their Objects to his Judgment, to be weighed
But for hervse; yet so, as he is thought
To be the Best that ever Art has wrought.
His Minds clear Eye pried narrowly, to spy
What well would grace her, yer it come to Eye.
Not like some idle Poets of our Time,
That ouersee great Reason, for small Ryme:
And from Invention, take what comes vnwaigh'd
(By Judgment, with the Understandings aid)
To farse great Books, with Ignorance far greater:
Which neretheless, often better sell than better.
Minerua, mend this Miss: or take them hence,
That strangle innocent Intelligence,
With lines too rude for Mules: But our Apollo
Made none, that made not all his Priests to follow
Drawn by the Ears, to the Similitude
Of his Arts beauty, and Beatitude.
But, envious FATE (unable to abide
A Man, that was, like God, so glorifide
For fair Desert) with Uenom did invent
A way to bane the wittiest Innocent
That ever did to live: for, live he must,
And shall, in fame, a Martyr, in his dust.
For, wrackthe was for his Integrity,
By the high hand of Power, and Injury:
Who, for but leading blinded Love aright,
Was (ah!) misdone by that Loves banefull spite.
O pity, past compare! O dire Event
Of truest loves so laudable intent!
Words cannot utter it; and Wit's too weak
To show the ruth of it. Swell heart, and break.
Then, since nor words nor wit can ere suffice
To show the ruth that from less falls does rise;
And t'vndergoe the blaze of this distress,
Makes my Pen straddle with the heaviness,
Rest here sad Pen; since all thy sable Tears
Are lighter than this Cause of cares and fears:
For, if from thee but one Tear should descend
So black as It, that Tear would fear a Fiend;
Or if, through thee, one Tear should fall in Print
So sad as it, that Tear would tear a Flint.
I. D.

An Epitaph.
WIt, Art, and Nature made a threefold war
To reign, (...) peace, in him which here does lie:
Wit straue with Art; and both (though regular)
With Nature, joining, straue for Sovereignty.
But, Prudence, with her powr's, (still bent to peace
Keeping the Sconse, that did his whole command)
The war surceased for his Worthiness;
That only It had then the vpper-hand.
Yet selfe-diuided-honesty beheld
That peace, in war with her own Charity.
The^, bent her powr's to make their powr's to yield
So, all sub du'd to selfe-Integrity.
But, Fate (best friend but to the most profane,)
Stirred up the hand of Hate, in heart of Power,
(And all in show of Love) to work his bane;
So, from Minerua's crown soon cropped this flower:
Yet ere it went, it left such Air, (though dim)
As makes all sweet that savors but of him.
Mirum in Modum.
IFeuer Time or Fate produced such Crimes
As may shake hell with horror but to near,
The instant NOW may flow to Aftertimes
To drowned the^ with amazement, grief, and fear:
For, if the fluxion of this instant NOW
Effect not That, noght will that Time does know.
Yet Time, as yet, but shows (as through a glass)
Part of the whole; but, by that parts extent
Judgment may guess, in evil, it does pass
As far beyond belief, as precedent:
Love fain would hide it; yet heavens iustest hate
Deems that grace damnd, that it would palliate.
Yet Justice naught reueales, but for the day
Wherein her trials be; and, that is no more
Than the Offender does himself bewray;
Which is but part of trecheries greater store:
This poyson-plague is so contagious, that
It Is feared it spreds, to inwards of more state.
Should I my self, at whom Love first does aim,
(And yet not self-love) so offend, I should
In Conscience damn my self t'an hell of shame;
Since neither Time nor Place such sin do hold:
"For, greatest Crimes but to extenuate,
"Is but the Doers crime to aggrauate.
To cloak a fault so foul, and yet so clear,
Is, in the Sun, the vgliest Toade to hide
With banefull air; through which it does appear
More ugly far, and by it more espide.
"Then, Penitence, not Impudence, does win
"The greatest grace t'acquit the greatest Sin.
None otherwise then as the Lion's said
To spare to spoil his humble yielding prey:
So, by highest grace is highest Justice staid
At point to strike, when yeelders mercy pray:
But her t'affront with pride, or stubbornness,
Makes her more horrid; and grace, merciless.
Say, Greatness; What account wilt make to heaven
For making those that tend thee, to attend
On naught but mischief not to be forgiu'n?
Standst thou not charged with both their crime and
If so; a world of Penitence must clear end?
A sin so base, performed at rate so dear.
And (O!) suppose you hear your captiue's calls,
Deep groans, and outcries while in's bowels raged
An hell ofhe ate; yet moand but by the walls
Resounding but his griefe's cries vnasswag'd:
In whom the force of Nature (being young)
Wrastled with pain, his torments to prolong.
As Life, and Nature had, with Bane, and Death
Co^spir'd, to make him feel more Deaths tha^ one;
So groaned he still, as Death would seize each breath
He fetched for life; yet lived but still to groan:
"Yea, groan alone: and that, in hells of pain,
"Augments the grief: nay, makes it more than
reign.
He took no meat: but in it Poison took;
Nor Drink he drank, but brewed was with Bane:
Yet, as if poison had it self for sooke,
It ceased to kill, but yet grew more immane:
For, so it raged within him, that it made
His Heart Strings crack; yet did their breach euade.
Justice (great Arbitresse of all that is done
In Time or Place) though outwardly but blind
(Because she knows no persons) needs must run
Upon thee blind-old, led thereto by Kind:
For, naught stands in her way, but down it goes
(Though high as heaven) to hellish overthrows.
Then deem I MERCY well prouides for such
As so offend, by Justice, so to fall:
For, so, though for their crime, their souls do grutch
Yet have they Time, and helps more special:
Then others further off the stroke of DEATH,
To save their souls, with losing well their breath.
That happie-haplesse Soul (the last of Three
That First were Well-misdone, for this misdeede)
Being bound to Death, yet spoke as being free;
And praisd the Justice that his death decreede:
So seemed, to glory in his death of shame,
Since it did glorify hie Justice Name.
Had Grace met Art and Nature, in his Head,
As Courage in his Heart, with Cunning met:
He might have rul'de those that have governed:
But rising with the Sommer-Sunne now set:
Did set with him, by whom he did ascend:
Whence brightly falling, graced a gloomy end.
(...) A Friend of Faith, or Heavens most faithful Friend
Still prayed to know the number of his Days:
To be prepared the better for his End:
Then, he that knows his latest moment, stays
On ^rer Ground, though near Deaths horrid house,
Than they that stand on Rocks more dangerous.
A prease of People (pressed to pray for grace
For him that dies) at heavens bright gates do beat:
And wings make of their Words to fan the Face
Of Highest Justice, so to cool her heat:
This was His privilege, that so did die,
Heau'd up to Heaven, past reach of Infamy.
A violent-death, then, to the soul is mild;
But, on the BED of Death, most stern is He:
Where often he makes our Minds and Manners wild;
Then, Grace nor Nature with it does agree:
But He (Al-wise, reposed in Passions strife)
Held this strait Death, the easiest door of LIFE.
The force of fear those succors (often) betray
Which Reason offers; but this ill-good Man
No council held with fear in Deaths affray;
But, in his Trial, tryde what Reason can
Afford for fence, without distracted mood;
So, made his worst of Ill, his best of Good.
To fall from Fortune, sitting on her Knee,
From Wife and Children, and what else is dear,
Yet from the helps of Reas'n not once to flee,
Is complete Virtue; making Uice to clear
Her way to GLORY through shames nether hell:
This Cast was ill; but, thus, he played it well.
So well, a Cast so ill is seldom played,
Scarce in a world of Time we meet with such:
whose worth (too cheap imploid) in judgment waid
Was found more dear then clear on trials Touch:
Abstracting from his fault, worth makes his fame
To fly to heaven, to glorify his shame.
If those in this sad Plays Catastrophe,
Play their dire Parts, no worse: all Dignity
Is less then is their Bliss, and gloryes-Sea,
Wherein, ore-wholm'd they shall still living dye:
"But Courage comes from Heaven; and it must give
"That Worth, in Death, on which Fame still shall
live.
But it is an Hell to all voluptuous hearts,
To leave Youth, Beauty, Honors, Wealth, and all
That Is dear to Sense, to play such dismal parts;
And from the height of State, with shame to fall:
"But, what of pure necessity must be,
"Must well be borne, to honor high-Degree.
For, publike-hate, though for the hatefull'st Cause,
Will soon be turned to Love, by playing well
Unpittyed parts: Nay, it makes Justice pawse
Ere doom them death, who (near it) so excel.
Though Common-hate the great'st Offenders tears,
Yet it bewails their wel-born death with Tears.
For, though it burn, as quenchlesse: yet it is
Extinguished quite, by seeing loathed ones play
Beloved Parts, in Death, or Miseries:
Their Eyes (that hold their hearts) their hearts do sway.
"A ruthful Object, though most loathed before,
"Is pittyed, when fell Spite can do no more.
O Diu'll, how can thou, (being, as thou wast
In thy Creation most Angelical;
And but in Will, for one proud Thought, disgraced)
How can thou joy in so much grief of all?
Why art so pressed, but on mere Fraylties Spells,
For Mankindes plague, to leave the nether Hells?
What Charms and Incantations have such strength
As from those Holls to hale thee, there being bound
With Chains of Darkness, of the shortest length?
Lies it in their words Sense, or in their sound?
No; it is no word of Reprobation can
Command thy Service, but to cousin Man.
Thou art a Spirit: and therefore can thou look
Into the Breast of NATVRE: and thence take
Her chiefest Secrets (from the darkest Nooke)
Or Love, or Lust, t'enflame, enrage, or slake:
Thou can by such make Puppets, tho of lead,
To strike Desire, in liuely'st Bodies, dead.
Thou on the Bodies often of blessed Souls,
Have leave to use thy power in various kinds;
But, for their Good: else He thy power controules
That guards their souls from harm: tro^ ill, their minds;
Yet waking and asleep, thou can to fight
Produce but Shades, to make the Mind too light.
And Minds so light, will lightly nothing weigh
Of Shame and heauyest Death, that lie between
Them, and their Ends: who make it but a Play
To drown a Comedye (through hate and teene)
In Blood and Bane: such Turners were of late,
Asturnd, upon these Poles, such Spheres of Fate.
Can Witchcraft, in the Abstract, so bewitch
The Minds of those of Mind and Means, to be
So base for Lucre, so to touch Shames Pitch
As still will cleave to their Posterity?
But Charms can make no souls to sin so sore,
But such as GRACE had less, for sin, before.
Now (prostrate) let me, deer Liege, turn my speech
To thee, who in thy Justice lookst' like God:
No such Crime spat'st thou; yet, sta^d'st in the Breach
Thy Justice makes, to stay Heavens iustest rod:
So thou (like God) do grieve, when thou have cause
To cut off those, whom thou have made, by laws.
And though thou lose their Bodies with just grief,
To please thy iuster Justice; yet, thy Care
(Dear Care!) to give their fainting souls relief,
Yer Death, gives leisure: so, do spoil and spare,
In just Ires grace: that (tho thou them forgo)
The HEAD, does with the Members suffer so.
Drad Lord, I would, thy patience were not proved
So much with crimes of so immense extent;
And, that thou, sphere of all our State, were moved
Upon no adverse Poles of discontent:
So, should thy lower spheres of rule, obey
But thine; and move, as thine, their diffrent sway.
The Care's a Canker to thy sacred life
Thou have to keep thy compound people, one.
Twixt worlds of adverse powrs are worlds of strife,
Which humane-powre can scarce in show atone.
O, then, who weighs a Burden of such stresse,
But is oppressed with weight past Heaviness!
But we, (that lie as far from wealth as wars)
In low obscurity of state, do see
(With sight the more contracted) all the stars
That light to see thy cause of jealousy:
Whose oppositions, in thy sphere of Power,
Often give, for which we grieve, thee cause to lower
But, as an Arch, of many stones composd,
Would fall but that they one another let:
So, may their odds, in thy states Arch inclosd,
Make it more even; so, more strength to get:
Though one Stone fall to ruin, let his place
Be soon supplyd by one of greater grace.
Then, the more weight of power they do sustain,
The firmer will the ARCH be, to uphold
Thine HONORS burden, folded in thy TRAIN,
And make thy state and stay more manifold.
So shall thy stay, when states re-chaosd lie,
Make thee great Steward to ETERNITY.
Finis.
SPECVLVM PRODITORI.
This takes the vulgar Ear
That loves the plain and clear:
But, neither mine, nor those
That hug proud Verse in Prose.
KIngs, Gods on Earth, so called by Him of Heaven,
How dismal is your Deities estate!
Who while you life do give, are life bereau'n;
And often, for too much lone, get too much hate:
Whose surest Forecasts, stand on six and seven;
Which, with you (Sovereigns) subject are to Fate.
What Diu'lls can envy, then, such Dcities,
Whose Heavens are hells, of short-sweet- miseries?
Toil ye to shield their lives, that shoot at yours;
And make your selves, of Soueraigns, sou'rain slaves?
Spe^ding your Brains, and strengths, and precious howrs
As if yous selves dig'd, for your selves, your graves
For, th'hollow subject (grave- like) you deuoures;
Whom ye make hollow, often with welfare's waves,
For, if ye fill Ambition, Spite, or Fear,
Ye fill the Sails will quite you ouer-beare.
Men-beasts, borne subject, yet can never bear
Your births allotment! What? O what is it
That makes ye, like vile timber-wormes to wear
The Poasts sustaining you? What grace, or Wit,
Appears in facts, where your own falls appear?
Will ye needs rise, to fall? not (sure) still sit?
If needs ye will, foul be your fairest fall;
Since ye would rise, by overthrowing All.
Cannot the ten times worse then ill success
Of graceless Gowries worse, far worse assay,
With heaps of horrors so your thoughts oppress,
That these should freez your souls w cold dismay.
Danger and Death (ye heard) could not distress
Our heaven holp King; who through both made his way.
For, kings are Gods, who with a frown can make
The Arm of flesh, for fear, all force forsake.
Or know you not a crown is of such weight,
That no disloyal hand can it transfer,
But crushed it is to nothing with it straight?
Cannot this thought your hands from this deter?
On Treason does an hell of horrors wait;
Which, in it self, against it self does war.
Then, that which in it self is at this stay,
Must fall (else Truth does lie) and soon decay.
Conspirators have naught but pale mistrust,
Sad thoughts and terrors ever them attending:
B^, Princes, on their sides, have subjects just,
T^r Guards, their Majesty's, their Laws defending
(What heart dare, maugre al these, be unjust)
All these their powrs against the traitor bending:
Then how can Traitors be so ouer-bold,
When such great fears their hearts do vnderhold?
Their tired wits (though beaten night and day)
Can make no shift a traitorous life to save:
The gultie conscience does it self bewray;
And thoughts turmoild, no staid aduisement have:
Fear strikes them so, that (tossed) they cannot stay,
But judgment makes uncertain as a wave:
The flowing streams of honied Eloquence
Can nere sustain the weight of great offense.
Pure Innocents with undefiled tongue,
By instinct of Nature, have perswasiue power:
But guilty ones, defilde with blood and wrong,
Their faltring tongues, are ever most unsure;
So full of Discords is Rebellions Song,
That it no ear in tune can ought allure:
Though Art aid Falsehood, with her powrs, yet shall
Truth, naked, trip them; so they needs must fall.
The bended brow of Justice, sore dismayes
The guilty, though their wits in glory shine;
And sickle Fear their judgment still betrays,
Presenting strange Chimeras to their eyne;
Which so the soul with horror ouer-layes
And Reasons right discourse so wrests in fine,
That all that from the Mind or Mouth proceeds
Within it self, then, disagree must needs.
The passions of annoy more strongly work
Within the mind then those from joy proceeding:
Now, if sweet Ioys, in merry minds that lurk,
Do hinder Reason, strange distraction breeding,
Much more will fear of pains, all pains exceeding
Reason must then, of force, forsake the Helm,
When waves of woe the bodies bark orewhelme.
Who enter Treasons maze, are like the men
That run too desperately into the Sea;
If they escape, it will be judged then
That they were fortunate the wrack to flee,
And out of Dangers mouth to come again:
But if they perish, then it said will be,
They cast themselves in, to be cast away,
By desperate forecast, cause of their decay.
For, as an Arrow glanceth on a stone
For want of softness in the stone to stay it:
So treason lightly will be overthrown,
Though for fit time, Wit wills to delay it,
And keep the same the while from all unknown,
That likely God nor man can well bewray it;
Yet out it will, and like an Arrow glance
Upon the foyling Flint, of hard mischance.
A blessed death, a cursed life excuses;
(For, no man's truly blessed before his end)
So, a cursed death, a blessed life accuses:
But, when that life and death, to death does tend,
It seems the soul, life wilfully refuses;
For, she in life, and death, does but offend:
From such a life and death, grace keeps all those
That to Prides Naturals are mortal foes.
The more that Empire does enlarge her bounds,
The more is Fortunes empire over it;
Who scorns to thrust at slaves, but kings she wounds
And on their Seats does often make slaves to sit:
And sitting there, in sport, she them confounds;
So, bandies kings, and slaves, as she thinks fit:
But, slaves are racket, kings are her hand- bals;
Which being greater, have the harder falls.
Senec.
These seldom meet with siluer-hairs, though care
Does (for that tincture) Time anticipate;
The Liege that lies on beds, that sumptuous are,
Sleeps more in fear than beggars at his gate:
Whom the gray morn has seen high, past compare,
The blushing even has seen in abject state.
A world of mouths they feed, and courts they keep
Whose stabbing dreams do make the^ start in sleep.
The purple robe is often re-purpelled
With royal blood, that from the heart does stream;
When homly rags (though rent) are nere made red
With th'owners blood, since they do range a reame
And yet not rule it, as the Sceptered.
These sleep secure, in many a golden dream,
While Princes lie on thorns of pricking fears,
That make their days to interdict their years.
In tooth som'st disb the banefull bait does lie;
And Treason dives into the sweetest wine;
At every bit they fear her treachery,
And doubt, each draught they drink, they drink their fine.
O! if as through a glass we might espy
The swarms of fears, and cares, their hearts confine
We would not stoop to gather up a crown,
If as the crown, the cares must be our own.
The princely Ports no sooner open are set,
But devilish Envy glides through all unseen:
But hates as hell, the Neat-heards Cabinet
Whilst (Princely Peasant, with his Summers queen)
He frolicks it, as free from dread as debt:
And living so, a King himself does ween:
But, if he err, it is an error sweet,
To meet Kings thoughts, and not their cares to meet.
In Maple Mazer, or Beach-bowle he quaffes,
And lifts it not to mouth with shaking hands:
His Love and He, eats, drinks, and sleeps, and laffs,
And she obeyes, and he in love commands:
Twixt them are neither Iealousies nor Chases,
For breaking Wedlock, or Subiections Bands:
But, they enjoy Love, peace, and merriment,
And therewithal, the Kingdom of Content.
They fear not Fortunes frowns, nor way her fawns;
Their great'st ambition is to live to love:
Much Coin they need not, much less precious pawns
That by a Cow can live, and pleasures prove,
Yea, feed with her, on Sallets in the Launds,
In Weeds yelad, as homely spunne as woue;
Milk being their best meat, and sour whay their wine,
And when they hunger, then they sup and dine.
They can no skill of States deep policies,
Not will they wade in deepes so dangerous:
This makes them live so free from Tragedies
That are to Heaven and Earth so odious:
They Actors are in Past'rall Comedies,
That tend to Love, and Mirth harmonious.
O heauenly-earthly life, life for a King:
That lives with nothing, as with every- thing.
They seeldome pass the vnreturned ways
That lead t'infernall Jove's Dominions.
Their silly Soul (with hopes assurance) stays
On CHRIST his Cross, and Faith's Conclusions:
They do distaste the delicate Assayes
Of Schoolemens Craft, and nice distinctions:
Nature and Grace in silence guides them well,
Whilst Doctors deep, dispute themselves to Hell.
Grace hates all sin, with hate most exquisit;
But none, so much (though more, then much, the- least)
As she does pride; for, that distracts the wit,
Contracts the Soul to sin, makes Man a Beast,
Confines Society, alone to sit;
Makes will a Law, and wrongs the Worst and Best.
This is Ambition, this is damned Pride,
Which God, nor Man, have patience to abide.
The steps of Man's ascent, on Fortunes-wheele,
Must needs be slippery, since it is so steep:
The Topp's most wau'ring, ready still to reel;
The going down, is like as in the Deep
A Ship goes down, with ouerturned Keele;
When ore a mounting Billow she does sweep:
And if the fall from High-estate be such,
How dreadful is it then, to mount too much?
For, Dignity on Virtue, grounded is.
Then, if the ground do fail, and false become,
The more is built thereon, the sooner it is
Sinking to ground, and ruined all or some:
The more our Power, the more of Peace we miss,
If Virtue adverse powers do not overcome:
That Envy, which high pride did life-inspire,
Humility must kill, or make retire.
I knew a Man, unworthy as I am,
And yet too worthy for a counterfeit
Made once a King; who though it were in game,
Yet was it there where Lords and Ladies met;
Who honored him, as he had been the same,
And no subiectiue duty did forget;
When to himself he smiled, and said, lo here
I have for noght, what Kings do buy so dear.
No odds there was in show (and but in show,
Kings are too often honored) save that he
Was but twelve gamesome days to king it so;
And kings, more years of sovereign misery.
His reign was short and sweet, theirs long in woe.
He after lived: they, with or for theirs, die.
He had a taste of reign, with power to leave;
They cannot taste, but life must take or give.
Kings for the treasons to them offered
Must offer them that offer it, whereby
The body still may hold up hie the head,
Lest otherwise they both too low might lie:
Yet by this means, blood, often, with hate, is shed,
If blood so shed, do fall or much, or hie;
But he without blood did be ^e^ead his foes,
So made him friends indeed, of foes in shows.
He sat in state, that mirth, and love did stay;
They sit in state that hate often undermines;
He, without fear, had some to take assay;
But they have such, for fear of sudden fines:
He poisoned some (to play as kings might play)
But it was with Sugar and perfumed wines:
He went with guards, yet stabbing feared not:
They go with guards, yet fear the stab or shot.
He could devise with Ladies, if he could
Devise with Ladies, without all suspect;
If they do so they do not as they should,
For 'twill be said their h^nors they neglect:
He could command, and have all as he would;
But their commands often have not that effect.
Then who had better Raigns, judge all of sense,
Either a king indeed, or in pretense.
A conscience clear out-dares Death to the face,
Laughing to scorn his greatest tyranny;
And with vnconquerd patience does disgrace
His utmost malice, spite, and villainy:
She wins place of Death, by giving place,
And by her yielding, gets victory:
Yea, triu^phs over Death, through virtues might:
For Virtue lives, when Death has spet his spite.
Never did Fear attend on Innocence:
She Wayters scorns, that with her dare not dye.
Though she from wrong and danger seek defense,
And may (if well she may) from either fly:
Yet is her Courage of that excellence,
That if she meet them she dares both defy.
Then to be Innocent, is still to dare
Death, Hell, and Vengeance, yea all Deaths that are.
This makes the Prince his person to expose
To Pistol, Poison, Dagger, and the like;
Among them all (so armed) he freely goes,
And starts not (as dismayed) when they do strike.
This make the^ deem (deer hearts) they have no foes
Because they ween they rule without mislike;
And if some hellish hand them ouer-beare,
They die, as live they did, without all fear.
Within their Countenance, Mirth, with Gravity
(Grave for their place and mirth, their grace to show)
In peace do strive for the precedencie:
Both which so sweetly grace them as they go;
As makes the public love, on them to pry:
With Eyes, which tears of joy (unfeigned) ore-flow,
While Princely kindness does it self employ,
To open like Floud-gates, into Seas of Joy.
When the stern Tyrant (with a folded Front,
And Eyes disturbed, through suspicious fear)
Does starting stalk, as if Death did confront
His steps, and to his Eyes did still appear;
His Hand on Hilt he bears, Death to affront:
Yet ghastly looks, as he still flying were;
And when a Mouse does cry, or Leaf does shake,
Out goes the Dagger, yet with fear does quake.
He fears his life, but more the second- death;
Which death, he doubts, will second death of life:
This makes him strait the dagger so vnsheath
T'in counter the first deaths approaching knife;
Lest, being overthrown, he should beneath
Still live in strife, as he has lived in strife;
The loss of Kingdom, life, and fear of that,
Makes him (as mad) to do he knows not what.
Who would a Scepter hold, in such an hell,
Like a commanding Fiend in horror still,
Where subjects, like his passions aye rebel
So live as Sovereign of a world of ill?
And in naught, but in naught so to excel
Is God (as much as in man lies) to kill:
Which is the cause (as proof has often told)
It Is hard to see an hellish Tyrant old.
Imbrude with blood, or else in poison drencht,
Away wends he the way the others sent;
For with his blood, his thirst of blood is quenched;
So, with a plague, repaid what he has lent:
Nor shall his blood, that flows amain be stencht,
Since Heaven and Earth against him still are bent.
"For, when both heaven and earth, pursues the spoil;
"No place but Hell is left then, to recoyle.
Gods Armies march, some seen, but most unseen;
Those seen, may be looked to, but not looked ore;
And how ere vile, Pride some of them may ween,
Yet men most high, are often foyld by the lower:
But th'vnseene Armies have such Weapons keen
And power to use them, that all Flesh they gore:
Who are so fly, that no man's wisdom may
Their Ambushments avoid, or them bewray.
For, can an Heart be wise that is profane?
(Nay, fleshly wise? we will dismiss the Spirit?)
It cannot be; for, Wisedome's in the wane
When it is forsaken of the Heavenly light:
A crazed Soul, must needs be Wisdoms bane,
whose powers want power to use their native might:
For, when the Soul's unquiet through offense,
Her fumes blind Judgment, and Intelligence.
We may not do ill, that thence good may springs
Nor cease to do good, though ill thence may grow;
The Ill that grows from good, is no ill thing:
And to reap such, we still much good should sow,
Its ill to have Gods hate, with love of King;
And worse, that hate to have for love more low.
Then to be good, in Death's to be secure:
And to be ill, in life's to be unsure.
The Sun sees not a more detested thing
Than is a Traitor, whose foul Crime is such
That they which love the Craft, y^ Crafts-ma^ sting
With deadly hate, and words that wound as much:
And he that would of other Crimes be King,
Abhor, but once this loathed Crime to touch.
That Hand that can behead a Commonweal,
Must have an heart, to help, of Flint or Steel.
And they that would transform a Monarchy
(Confirmed by many fair descents of Kings)
T'an headless misproporrion'd Anarchy
(That Rule and Order to Confusion brings,
To the end to give Misrule more liberty)
Are most condemned, if not most damned things.
For, what Man can (though half a Devil) see
All drowned in Gore, to purple his Degree?
Traitor! o word, of force to make a Man
Tear out his Eyes, that they see not the light!
Which All, with bitter Execrations, ban,
And at the very name, do spet in spite.
Traitor! o gall! which no Gall suffer can,
Odious to Heaven and Earth. to Day and Night;
The very Air of such a loathed name,
The Joints of strongest Patience can vnframe.
What can the Heart of Man excogitate
More odious, or in nature, or in name,
Than Treason? which even Hell it self does hate,
Although it be aduantag'd by the same.
For Hell holds Traitors more degenerate
From Nature, then her Fiends; so, more to blame:
For Fiends, by nature, are most impious;
But Men most impious, are most monstrous.
A Sou'raigns blood is sacred, and of power
To draw down Angels, from their glorious spears,
With Vialls, full of plagues, on Realms to power,
(If it be spilt by spite) Nay Princes hayres
Are numbered, and who makes but one unsure,
shall feel that wrath, whose heat the mou^tains mears:
O it is a dreadful thing but once to dream,
In Physic, to make Royal blood to stream.
It Is Blood of bloods; for, while it is bloud-warme:
And carries life with it through all the Veins.
It does preserve the subjects blood from harm,
That cold of fears to freeze else strait constrains:
Then it is the life-bloud of a Kingdoms Arm,
Which, while it is lively, her whole state sustaines:
O then how precious ought (in all men's eyes)
Such blood to be wherein such virtue lies?
Words, but in Wormwood steept, ate too too weak
To blazon Treasons bitter tyranny;
None but soule-wounding words for it are meet,
Because it wounds the Soul of Sovereignty:
Then Treason, thus, my Muse, thy guilt does grcete,
(Which is the quintessence of villainy)
Cursed be Thought, that thinks but on that Thought,
That thinks thou art not ten times worse then naught.
The Conclusion to Sir. Thomas Ouerbury.
Thou find'st more honor in th'vntimely Grave
Dear Ouerbury, then a King can have
With all kings power: for, they can give no grace
Beyond the span of life; Poor spacelesse-space!
Then, blessed was thy death, how ever bannd
It might be deemed by thee, for being ban'd:
Since Death, by poison, did but reaue thy breath;
But with That poison, thou have poisoned Death.
So, from his hand his weapon thou did wrest;
And, for thy safety, sheathed it in his Breast.
Yet comes thine honor, though it reach thus hie,
Short of thy merit for loues-puritie;
And, for as much besides, as Wit and Art
Can value give to any Head or Heart.
Thou wast a Pythias to an Anti-Damon,
Who, for thy true love, proved to thee a Demon.
Had he been Damon in integrity,
A King (perhaps) had made a Trinity
Of friends with you; for, your love- Angel-like
Had made him make that Body-politicke;
As whilom-did a Keisar in like case:
But three can nere make one, if one be base,
And two be dear; since Dissimilitude
Dissolues the knot of Loves beatitude.
Fortune on thee, in him, did smile and lowre;
Smile in his fortunes, in thy wisdoms power:
But lowr'd on thee, when he (false ladder) rose
For thee to climb, to both your overthrows.
He rose and fell from thee; and thou by him
Did rise and fall: but thou, in bane did swim
Past Laethe; and in blood and blame he tides
(As far beyond, as shame, past shame, abides)
With winds of his own sighs, without one tear
Of any ruthful Eye, though nere so near.
But, since naught stayed him to thee, but the air
Of words; who would ascend by such a staire?
Thou being on his breast, through want of stay
For thy worths-weight, from thee he fell away:
But, thou camst first to ground; and, with the fall,
Thy bowels brake, all-pickl'd with thy gall:
Thy Ghost, yet (if she know what mortals do)
Must needs exult; and have compassion too,
To hear thy praises peald-out as they be;
And see such justice done, on earth, for thee.
Yea, as thy Ghost had leave, in wrathful mood;
To surfeit with thy foes delicious- blood,
Which from the hie in place, still headlong, streams
Through thy late Soueraigns dearst of Diadems,
To fresh the flowers thereof, and her so cloy,
That she, as sick therewith, is grieved with joy.
So as thy shrill Uindicate's now do ring
With groans about the Palace of the King;
As if thy Soul, in bliss, in some degree
Did Suffer pain with sufferers for thee.
And if she (plagued) in life did hell endure,
Through their close hate who did thy death procure,
It Is openly revenged, so home, that all
The world may see thy worth's-weight in their fall.
For, as pure gold best known is by the TEST
In fire: so, that dear virtue of thy Breast,
In flames of Love, and fi'ry-tryals tried,
Does make thy Worth, in greatness, far more wide
Than Time: for, when he (stretched out) is laid forth
Thy glory shall entombe him in thy WORTH.
FINIS.

