DAY'S FESTIVALS OR, TWELVE OF HIS SERMONS: DELIVERED BY HIM AT SEVERAL times
to the PARISHIONERS of St MARYES in OXFORD, on the three Chief FESTIVALS of
the Year, CHRISTMAS, EASTER, and WHIT-SONTIDE. THREE OF WHICH SERMONS, are
touching our SAVIOVR; ONE, the HOLY GHOST; TWO, the TWO SACRAMENTS; The other
SIX, such several DVTIES, as belong to the several sorts of all CHRISTIANS.

diagram of clock or dial face DONEC DIES EST

JOHAN 9.4.

ECCLVS. 33.15. I am awaked up last of all, as one that gathers after them in
the Vintage.

GREG. IN EVANG. HOM. 14. Qui non dat pro Ovibus Substantiam suam, quomodo pro
his daturus est Animam suam?

Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes, 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Mr D. BLENCOW, Dr of the Civil Law, and Provost of
ORIEL COLLEGE in Oxford: and to the FELLOWS, FELLOW-COMMONERS, and STVDENTS
there: As also TO THE REST OF THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, WORSHIPFVLL, AND Others,
of the Parish of St Mary's, Prosperity and Welfare, both in Body, and in Soul.
IT is now well near Six Years since, Right Worshipful, and dearly Beloved,
that I preached unto you at the Christ-mas Day, December. 25, 1609.
first, of David's desire to go to Church. An Argument (it might be thought)
more befitting our Recusants, then any of our own Sort, and such as are
Protestants, but who so will visit our Parish Churches in time of Divine Service
on the Weeke-daies throughout the Year, I mean Wedensdaies, Frydaies, and
Saterdaies, and that in populous Towns, and Cities (to say nothing of the
Country, where they may seem to have some excuse by reason of dwelling far
from Church) shall find too too often, two sufficient Witnesses, the Minister,
and the Clarke, that Protestants even Protestants, are almost as peccant in
this kind as Popish Recusants themselves. Hereunto if we add withal the
preposterous zeal of a Many besides, who unless there be Sermons too, will
scarce be there on the Saboth Day, seldom or never on Holidays, and they of
the Preciser Sort, and who will take it in some snuff, if we account them not
more Religious, then the Meyny, or Multitude are, and what may we think
Religion it self, will come to even in our Days, who so little account of
DIVINE SERVICE, so Ne contemptui essent communes Ecclesiae Preces, eas
splendidis elogiis olim Deus ornavit: praesertim vbi Templum Vocavit Domu^
Orationis. Nam and praecipuam Cultus sui partem hac voce docuit esse Precandi
Officium, atque vt in eose Fideles vno co^sensu exercere^t, instar Vexilli
erectum illis fuisse Templum. Calvin. Instit l. 3. c. 20.. 29.
principal an Exercise of the same. This it was that made me at the first, as
to preach that First Sermon of David's Desire to the November. 5. in the
Afternoon, 1609.
University, so to Preach the Second to Your selves: and after that for your
sakes to commit them Both unto the Press. From whence that they came to You,
and in a manner to You only, and not to the Church in general: it was for I
would endeavor to be Mat. 25.23.
Faithful in a little, and in these perilous backsliding Times as much as may
be, to Cant. 1.5.
Keep my own Vine.

Since that time it has pleased the Lord, toward the Furtherance of your
Salvation, to put other Messages into my Mouth, all which as they were at
diverse and sundry times related unto You, I mean as many of you as could
co^veniently be present, so have J bin at a second Pains to deliver them now
unto you all, that no exception may be taken of not having heard what has
been spoken. When a man has done his best Ecclus. 18.6.
says the Son of Syrach, he must begin again, and when he thinks to come
to an end; he must again to his labor. I dare be bold to say that to Print
is to begin again, he knows not what Printing is that knows it not to be a
Labor. It was as Calvin. Praef. in Esaias, and in Esaias. c. 1. v. 1.
Calvin observes the Custom of the Prophets, after they had spoaken to Prince
or People, to make a Brief of what they had spoken, and to fasten it on the
Gates of the Temple, where it was to stand some certain days to the veiw of
every One that would pervse it. Printing is that in our Age, which that kind of
Publishing was in theirs, only the Unsavory Pamphlets have been so many, that
have passed the Press as well as Sermons, as that it makes us (a Many at the
least) esteem no more of having Sermons printed, then it did the Egyptians of
those three Miracles which Moses and Aaron wrought, namely the Exodus 7.11,
Serpent, V. 22.
Blood, and Exodus 8.7.
Frogs, which their Inchaunters wrought as well as they. You, I trust, are
otherwise minded, and will be toward these Sermons, the rather for they call to
mind what the most of you have heard, and some have been desirous to have in
this sort: as also for they are more Complete then when they were first
delivered to you, by reason of the Marginall Noats annexed thereunto. It is
Mountaignes Essays l. 1. c. 25
said of Epicurus, that in Three Hundred Volumes which he wrote, he made no
use of any one Allegatio^ at all. Macrobius borrowed much, but acknowledged not
his Creditors, and therefore is Macrobius homo satis quidem eruditus, sed
ingenio maxim ingrato, at prope impudenti: vt qui in tanto Aeris alieni cumulo
nusqua^ Creditoris nome^ profiteatur. P. Crinitus De honest. Discipl. l. 22. c
4. For an Instance, compare the Eleventh Chapter of the first Book of his
Saturnalia, with Seneca his Seven and Fortith Epistle.
taxed as Ungrateful above measure. They that list to follow the One, or the
Others Example, let them: J profess, I like neither, but had rather say with
that never enough praised My Lord of London upon Jonas, Lect. 40. p. 552.
Prelate upon Jonas, I never could be bold to offer mine own Inventions, and
Conceits to the World, when I have found them such in S. Augustine, and
Others, as might not be amended. And hence it was, as that worthy PRELATE
there So, B. Iuel: Origin, Magister Ecclesiaru^: Basil, Canon Fidei: Eusebius
Samo satensis Regula veritatis: Athanasius, Orbis Oculus. B. Iuel Defense of
the Apol. Part. 6. c. 16. Divis. 2. p. 765.
observes, that St Cyprian called Tertullian his Master; that St Cyprian
himself by St Austen, was reputed in the number of most excellent Men; that St
Austen was termed the Hammer of Heretics; that Athanasius called St Ambrose
the Eye of the World; that Athanasius was called by the World it self,
Athanasius the Great. Besides, that the Quoting in this sort, referres such
Novices as shall read my Books, to the principal Places themselves where they
may read of the Matter more at large, a necessary Help to young Students, such
as a many were that heard me, and to whom, as to the more Learned among you,
these Labors of mine are now dedicated.

I should here write more unto you, but that my Portion of Paper allotted me
to the self same purpose, is now far spent, and indeed what need I write
unto You now more, who both Write and Speak unto You, in all that follows.
I, as it was Heb. 11.4.
said of Abel, that By Faith being dead, he yet speaks: so I trust that
ETERNAL WORD, who has been the Fountain of all this, will permit me even
when I am Dead, to Praedicandi scientia est quodammodo Angelica vtrovis modo
iuvans, seu per Manu^, seu per Lingua^ operetur. Clem Alex. Strom. l. 1.
speak unto You by these Papers, and not unto You only, but also unto Yours,
to whom Your Selves shall leave them as a Legacy. This if his Great Goodness
shall grant unto me, it is in regard of this World, the Summa Votorum attigi.
Senec. Thyest Act. 5. Sc. Aequalu.
utmost of my VVishes* And it shall more content me at my parting from it, to
have been in this kind a Speaker thus, then to have gone even in this Age,
the Dealbatiores Vias saeculi. Aug. Confess. l. 7 c. 6.
Milky way of much Preferment.

Aug. Confess. l. 11. c. 2.
DOMINE, miserere mei, and exaudi Desideriu^ meum. Puto enim quod non sit de
Terra, non de Auro, and Argento, aut de Lapidibus, aut decoris Vestibus, aut
Honoribus, and Potestatibus, aut Voluptatibus Carnis, neque de Necessarijs
Corporis, and huic Vitae Peregrinationis nostrae, quae omnia nobis Mat. 6.33.
apponuntur quaerentibus Regnum, and Iustitiam tuam. Vide Domine Deus meus,
vnde sit Desiderium meum. Ps. 118.85.
Narraverunt mihi Iniusti Delectationes suas, sed non sicut Lex tua Domine.
Ecce vnde est Desiderium meum. Vide Pater, aspice, and vide, and approba, and
placeat in conspectu Misericordiae tuae, invenire me Gratiam ante te, vt
aperiantur pulsanti mihi interiora Sermonum tuorum. Obsecro per Dominum Nostrum
JESVM CHRISTVM Filium tuum, Virum Dexterae tuae, Filium Hominis, quem
confirmasti tibi Mediatorem tuum and nostrum, per quem nos quaesisti non
quaerentes te, quaesisti autem vt quaereremus te: Verbum tuum per quod fecisti
omnia, in quibus and me, Vnicum tuum per quem vocasti in adoptionem, Populum
Credentium, in quo and me, per eum te obsecro qui Romans 8.34.
sedet ad Dexteram tuam, and te interpellat pro nobis, in quo sunt omnes
Coloss. 2.3.
Thesauri Sapientiae and Scientiae absconditi. Rev. 1.6.
Ipsi Gloria, and Imperium, in saecula saeculorum, AMEN.

The Several Arguments, with the Several Texts of Scripture, of every
Several Sermon in this Book.
1 Of our Saviors Nativity. Esaias. 9.6. Page 1. 2 Of our Saviors Passion.
Esaias. 13.4. p. 25. 3 Of our Saviors Resurrection. 1. Cor. 15.20. p. 55. 4 Of
the Coming of the Holy Ghost. Ioh. 7.37. p. 81. 5 Of the Sacrament of
Baptism. Romans 6.3. p. 107. 6 Of the Sacrament of the Supper. Ioh. 6.53. p.
131. An Appendix of Certain Fragments, out of Some of the Best of our
Protestant Writers, concerning both the Sacraments in general, and the
Sacrament of the Supper in particular. Page 164. 7 Of Husbands, and Wives.
Prove. 14.1. p. 183. 8 Of Parents, and Children. Genesis 18, 19. p. 219. 9 Of
Masters, and Servants. Psa. 101.8. p. 247. 10 Of Virginity. 1. Cor. 7.32. p.
273. 11 Of Widowhood. Luke 2.37. p. 299. 12 Of Neighborhood. Prove. 3.29. p.
325. D. Cossens Answer to the Abstract. Page 342.
It is not the continual Abode amongst their Parishioners (which none of them
All do) nor the Vid. Dr Whitgifts Defense of the Answer to the Admonit.
Tract. 11. Divis. 1.2.3. p. 555. 556. 557. etc.
often, but the sound, orderly, and pithy Preaching upon necessary Points, that
discharges the Duty of the Pastor, who may be in truth as bad as
Non-Resident, though he were continually nailed to the Pulpit, as Luther once
pleasantly spoke of Pomeran.

OUR SAVIOVRS NATIVITIE.
Christmas day. December. 25. 1610.
THere was a time, Right worshipful, and dearly Beloved in our Savior Christ,
when this our Country much desiring what now it has in much Propria haec si
dona fuissent. Virg Aen. l. 6.
plenty, namely, issue, or male, or female, of the Prince there of then being,
it had well hoped that Queen Mary had been the Mother of such a Pearl, and
she her self, and a many besides, thought indeed she was with child. Great was
the expectation throughout the whole Acts and Mon. p. 1596. Edit. 1583.
Land, the preparation as great, Prayers every where for her safe deliverance,
and Masses thick and threefold. I, the very Cradle it self was made, and
these Verses wrote upon it: Quam Mariae sobolem Deus optime sum dedisti
Anglis incolumem read, tuere, rege.
Which upon the self same Cradle thus were englished, The Child which thou to
Mary, o Lord of might have send
To Englands joy in health preserve, keep, and defend.
But never was expectation to less purpose, preparation to less effect. Men
and women proposed, and God disposed far otherwise. The Midwiues, and Nurses,
and Rockers, were all of them gotten, and provided, only that was then wanting
which was to set them all a work. The Queen, whether giving it out first of
policy, or if not her self, yet some about her: or whether deceived by a
Tympany, or some (...)

For the better handling of which words, may you be pleased to observe with me
First the occasion of them, then whose they were, then who wrote them, then how
they were written, and when.

The occasion of these words was by reason of an accident that had formerly
befallen the Jews. The Jews as they ever had been Exodus 32.9. and 33.3 and
34 9 and Deuteronomy. 9,6.
Durae cervicis, a stiff-necked People, a People like unto their Forefathers,
a Ps. 78.9.
faithless, and stubborn generation, a generation that set not their heart
aright, and whose spirit cleaved not steadfastly unto God: so it pleased the
same God to give them a many times wicked Governors, that People, and Prince,
being all out of frame, from the soale of the foot unto the head nothing whole
as Esaias. 1.6.
speaks our Prophet, but wounds and swelling, and soars full of corruption,
some vengeance might come upon them their wickedness so Genesis 15.16.
full.

Now among the many Kings and Governors which they had in this kind, King Ahaz
the son of Iotham was scarsly second unto any. He did not uprightly, 2. King.
16.2
says the Scripture, in the sight of the Lord as David his Father did: he
walked in the way of the Kings of Israel: he made his son to go through the
fire after the abomination of the heathen, he offered, and burnt incense in
the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree: whereupon it
came to pass that Rezin king of Aram, and Pekah son of Remeliah king of
Israel came both up to Jerusalem to fight, and to besiege him. Once before this
time came these two Kings against him, and as the the Scripture 2, Chro. 28.5
says, they overthrew him, took of his People many Prisoners, slew many
thousands of them in one day. This being the first handsell king Ahaz had by
those Troops, what was he to look for this second time, but utter ruin and
destruction? (...), Cyril. Hieros Catech. 2. p. 45.
says St Cyril in an other case, (...): what expectation might he have, what
hope of safety? He that before, no not with all his forces could possibly
withstand them, how was it likely he now should, seeing of all those forces
which he had, he had lost already so many thousands? But see the goodness of God
above, when every man's heart began to fail him, and they feared utter ruin
indeed, comes me the word of the Lord to the Prophet Esaias, and the Prophet by
virtue of that word in the seventh, eight, and this ninth chapter we have in
hand, gives many a good comfort to the king, wills him not to fear his Enemies,
how they should in no wise be able to hurt him, and Ovid. Fast. l. 1.
Verba fides sequitur, as he had said, so it proved: They besieged Ahaz says
the Scripture, but could not overcome him, 2. King. 16.5.

Now among all the comforts given unto him by this our Prophet in those
chapters, the chiefest and greatest of all was from the Birth of the Messiah,
and of that he there speaks in two diverse and sundry places, First in the
seventh chapter, and secondly in this ninth. Esaias 7.14, the words be these:
Behold says the Prophet, the Virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and she
shall call his name Immanuel: butter and honey shall he eat, till he have
knowledge to refuse the evil, and choose the good. In this ninth chapter as
you have heard already, For unto us a Child is borne, and unto us a son is
given: and the government is upon his shoulder, and he shall call his name
wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, and so forth.

Here the Jews Beloved, make themselves Vid. Calvin. in hunc loc.
merry, and scoff and skorne at us Christians for making this to be the
meaning of both those places. What? say they, what could this avail king Ahaz
then besieged, that so many hundreds of years after that, the Messiah should
be borne. King Ahaz doubtless was to have present help, the City Jerusalem
was then in hazard, the Prophet was to yield him present comfort, but what
comfort could it be to hear how a king should be borne so many hundreds of
years after himself should be dead and gone. And indeed Beloved to look on
these words with a Jews eye, as they did (...)

(...) ^ry true. For he spoke by Oracles, he spoke by Visions, he spoke by
Dreams, he spoke by Exodus 28.30
Vrim and Thummim, the two precious stones that were on the breast plate of the
high Priest, but commonly by Infusing into those that were his Prophets, the
selfsame words they were to speak or to Prince, or to People. And so did the
Lord at this time to this our Prophet, and so is it declared in this Prophecy,
the words be these: Esaias 7.3.
Then said the Lord unto Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz (thou, and
Sheariashub thy son) and say unto him, Take heed, and be still, and so forth.
And thus much of the occasion of the words of this my Text, and whose they
were, and who wrote them, and how, and when.

Concerning the words themselves, I shall observe God willing, this order:
First to give you their true meaning that so the meanest of you may conceive
them: then to gather thence such Instructions as the same shall afford unto us.
This I take to be my best course, the rather for I speak to you who consist of
two sorts, the Learned, and the Unlettered, that so the Hungry among you, that
is, the Unlettered, may by this means be filled with good things, and yet the
Rich, that is, the Learned of you, not be sent altogether empty away. To come
then to the words, For unto us a Child is borne. A Child is borne.

They were the words of Our Service Book in Latin, calls it the song of S.
Ambrose, and S. Austen both Lib. Procum public p. 5.
St Ambrose, and parcel of our Service which we call to mind every day: When
thou tookest upon thee to deliver man, Non horruisti Virginis vterum, thou
did not abhor the Virgins Womb. Upon the reason of which word Horruisti,
To abhor, howsoever I cannot now stand, partly, for I have far to go,
partly, for it is not manhood to disclose those secrets of nature, which are
Arcana Puerperij, the mysteries of Childbirth, yet so far forth as Solomon's
wisdom has directed me in this kind, I may boldly go on forwards, even in
this place, and in your Audience. The Author then of that Book in the person
of king Solomon, thus discourses of Man's Birth. I my self am also mortal,
Wisd 7.1.
says he, and a man like all others, and am come of him, that was first made
of the Earth. And in my Mothers womb was I fashioned to be Flesh in ten
months. I was brought together into blood of the seed of man, and by the
pleasure that comes with sleep. And when I was borne, I received the common
air, and fell upon the earth, which is of like nature, crying and weeping at
the first as all others do. I was nourished in swaddling clothes, and with
cares. For there is no king that had any other beginning of birth. All men have
one entrance unto life, and a like going out. Here if so be we except this one
circumstance of Being brought together into blood of the seed of man, and By
the pleasure that comes with sleep, what is else said of Kings in general,
that they all had, and consequently shall have this beginning of Birth, may be
verified of the King of Kings our Savior CHRIST JESUS, that he had this
Beginning too. Humanae Nativitatis verecundiam subijt, Salvian. de vero iudicio
and provident Dei l. 6. p. 202.
says Salvianus, and contumeliosa terreni ortus principia suscepit. He
submitted himself to the uncleanness of humane nativitie, and was content to
undergo the reproachful beginning of worldly Birth. He himself would be
also mortal, and a man like all others, and come of him who first of all was
made of the Earth. And in his Mothers womb was he fashioned to be flesh in
ten months. He was brought together into blood (not of the seed of man,
indeed) but of the seed of the woman, (...), Cyril. Catech. 12. p. 276.
says S. Cyril, (...). He was not made of man and woman, but of a woman only,
and therefore the Apostle S. Paul, when the fullness of time was come, says
he, God sent forth his son made of a woman, Gal. 4.4. Maritus sermo, August.
de Temp. Ser. 11. p. 418.
says S. Austen, vxor auricula: the Angels word was the Husband, and the Ear
of the Virgin was the wife, Hoc splendore concipitur Dei filius, says he, hac
mundicia generatur: such was the glory and excellency of the conception of the
Son of God, such was the pureness of his Birth. I may yet go on with the
same King Solomon, when as he was borne, he received the common air, and fell
upon the earth which is of like nature, crying, and weeping at the first, as
all others do. He was nourished in swaddling clothes, and with cares. He had
with all men one entrance unto life, and a like going out. S. Ierom in a manner
says as much, The son of God, Hieron. ad Eustoch. de Custod. Virgin. p. 149.
says he, was made for our salvation the son of man. He expected in his
Mothers womb some nine months respite to be borne, he endured all distasts;
he issued forth in goare blood, he was swadled in clouts, he was appeased and
pacified with motherly moanes, he that held the whole World it self in his
fist, was content to be contained within the circumference of a maunger. So
Aug. de Temp. Ser 9. p. 410.
S. Austen, He that bears up all things by the word of his power, is borne
himself of weakness and infirmity. He that is not contained, nor in the
Earth, nor in the Sea, no nor yet in Heaven it self, is comprehended within
the compass of a little silly body. The Creator of all things is made his
own creature, and a great Fountain issues forth from out his own stream.
The root of all things else does grow from his own stem, and the true vine is
made the fruit of one of his own branches. And thus as Ioh. 1.14.
speaks S. John, was the word made Flesh, thus was he as Ro^. 1.3.
speaks S. Paul, according to the flesh made of the seed of Abraham: he Romans
8.3.
came in the similitude of sinful flesh: he was partaker of flesh and blood.
Diverse and sundry were the Prophesies in diverse and sundry ages, that
intimated to the world as much. The world it self was no sooner began, but the
promise also began of sending him into the world. I, says the Lord, will put
enmity between thee, and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed. He
shall break thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel, Genesis 3.15. Howbeit this
promise (as you see) was in general terms, nether showing what seed, nether
showing what kind of woman, or of what People this seed should be. A second
promise was made to Abraham, and it was a little more lightsome then this, for
it showed of what People he should be, namely of the Jews: In thy seed shall
all the Nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis 22.18. A third promise was more
lightsome then this too, for it showed of what Tribe he should be, namely of
the Tribe of Judah: The scepter, says Jacob, shall not depart from Judah, nor a
Lawgiuer from between his feet, until Shiloh come, and the people shall be
gathered unto him, Genesis 49.10. A fourth promise was yet more lightsome, for it
showed of what Family he should be, namely of the Family of David: Thy house,
says Nathan, shall be established, and thy kingdom for ever before thee, even
thy throne shall be stablished for ever, 2. Sam. 7.16. The fifth, and sixth, and
seventh promises were much more lightsome then this, for the Fifth declared the
Party that should bring him into the world, namely a Virgin, Esaias, 7.17. The
Sixth, the Place he should be borne in, namely Bethlehem a City of Judah,
Micah. 5.2. The seventh declared the Time, namely 70 weeks of years from the
time the Prophet Daniel lived in, that is four hundred, fourscore, and ten
years, Dan. 9.24. And thus when the fullness of time was come, says the
Apostle S. Paul, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, Gal. 4.4. For unto
us a Child is borne. It follows, And unto us a Son is given. A son is
given.

Our Savior thus given us, it puts us in mind of his being a Gift unto us, and
his being a Gift must call to mind from whence it is, this Gift comes. Every
good giving, Iam. 1.1^.
says S. James, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of lights. Now that this Gift was from above, and did come down
from the Father of lights, as it is evident by that of the Apostle before, God
sent forth his son, Gal. 4.4: so by our Saviors own words who indeed was this
Gift. God, Ioh. 3.16.
says our Savior, so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten
son that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life. And V. 17.
again, God sent not his son into the world, that he should condemn the
world, but that the world through him should be saved. And the Apostle S. John
to this purpose, In this appeared, 1. Ioh. 4.9.
says he, the love of God toward us, because God sent his only begotten
son into the world that we might believe through him. Herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to be a
reconciliation for our sins. The very time of sending Gifts from one Friend
to another drawing now near at hand, I mean of Newyeares Gifts, may call to
mind the pretiousnesse of this Gift given unto us, whether we respect the
Gift it self, or the Giver of it, the Father of lights. The Gift it self is a
world of happiness that we have with the Party given, for there shall be
nothing wanting to us. They are the Apostle S. Paul's words, who speaking of
this Gift who was to die for us: He, Romans 8.31.
says the Apostle, who spared not his own son but gave him for us all to
death, how shall he not with him give us al things also. Now if you would know
what these All Things are, the same Apostle in another place thus specifies the
same unto us. Let no man rejoice in men, 1. Cor. 3.21.
says he, for all things are yours. Whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas,
or the world, or life, or death: whether they be things present, or things to
come, even all are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ Gods. But if so be we
respect the Giver, then if we cast our eyes upon our selves withal, we may
well be struck with admiration. In these our Newyeares Gifts, or one Friend
respects another: or the Inferior the Superior, as the Poor the Rich, the
Tenant his Landlord, and so forth. In this Gift we are respected who cannot
challenge the title of Friends, but are Inferiors altogether, as poor as Job,
and Tenants but at will, by him who is the Superior, and Landlord of all the
world. Whence comes this to me, Luke 1.43.
says Elizabeth, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? and whence
comes this to us, that our Lord himself should so come to us? especially our
selves being in that plight whereof the Apostle to the Ephesians. 2.12.
Ephesians, ye were without Christ, and were aliants from the commonwealth of
Israel, and were strangers from the Covenants of promise, and had no hope, and
were without God in the world. Thus much of Birth, and of the Gift: now who it
was, was thus borne, who it was, was thus given, A Child, a Son. For unto us
a Child is borne, and unto us a Son is given.

The Infant here spoken of though in the first place he be named a Child,
yet in the second is it specified what manner of Child he was, namely a
Man-child. A Man-child indeed it was, that was expected by the Jews, and
concerning whom in holy Scriptures there were so many several promises made.
For howsoever in Christ Jesus all be one, and therefore the Apostle St Paul,
There is neither Jew, Gal. 3.38.
says he, nor Grecian: there is neither bond nor free: there is neither male
nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus: yet this Jesus Christ
himself, he was to be a Jew, he himself was to be free, he was to be male
himself, and all for the better effecting of what he was to do for our
Salvation. True it is, he needed not, if so it had pleased his divine Majesty
to have been borne in such sort, or to have indeed been borne at all. In
breui poterat patrari negotiu^, to speak in Cyp. de Nativit.
St. Cyprians phrase, there needed not so many proceedings of Infancy,
Childhood, Youth, and Ryper years, had it stood with his good pleasure. Genesis
18.2.
He that appeared unto Abraham in the shape of three men, unto Genesis 19.1.
Lot in the shape of two, unto Genesis 32.24.
Jacob in the shape of one, might have come in like sort into the world, and
have been of ripe age at the very first, but he would needs become a Child,
he would be borne as we our selves are, he would be wrapped in swaddling
clowts, he would be laid even in a Cratch, he would be partaker of our
infirmities. O blessed infancy says Aug de Temp. Ser. 9. p. 411.
St Austen, by reason whereof the life of mankind is thus repaired. O most
acceptable and pleasing Eyes by virtue whereof we have all of us now avoided
everlasting tears, and gnashing of teeth. Happy Clowts wherewith the
filthiness of all our sins is wiped away. O resplendent and rich Maunger
which comprehended therein both the fodder of Beasts, and the food of Angels.
But it was not enough for this Infant to be a Child in this sort, and a
male-childe to, and to be borne, and to be given: but all this must be for us,
and therefore is it doubled here, Unto us, unto us, For unto us a Child is
borne, and unto us a Son is given.

Nobis Bern. super Missus est, Hom. 3. p. 7. col. 4.
says St Bernard, non sibi, qui vtique ante tempora multo nobilius natus ex
patre, nasci temporaliter non indigebat ex matre. He who before all times was
borne so honorably of his Father, had no need at all to be borne in time, thus
of his Mother, and therefore was he borne not for himself, but for us. Non
Angelis quoque, says the same Father, qui cum magnum haberent, parvulum non
requirebant. Nor was he borne, says he, unto the Angels who enjoying him
already great as he was, desired not for their parts to see him lesser. Nobis
ergo natus, says he, nobis and datus, quia nobis necessarius. Borne then he
was to us, and to us was he given, for that necessary he was to us. Necessary
to us all in general, and necessary to every of us in particular, and
therefore high and low, rich and poor, one with an other, we may all of us
say, Nobis natus, nobis and datus, quia nobis necessarius: Borne he was to us,
and to us was he given, for that he was necessary unto us. Thus may the
Married, thus may the Unmarried, thus may the Master, thus may the Servant,
they may all of them say, Nobis natus, nobis and datus quia nobis necessarius.
Borne he was to us, and to us was he given, for that he was necessary unto us.
My conclusion shall be in this point as is St Bernards in that place, De nobis
nato and dato, faciamus ad quod natus est and datus. Vtamur nostro in nostram
vtilitatem, de salvatore salutem operemur. Him that was thus borne let us apply
to that purpose for the which he was so borne, and for the which he was so
given. Let us use our own to our own advantage. Out of our Savior let us
work our own Salvation. It follows, And the Government is upon his shoulder.

The Prophet having declared in the first place, the Birth of this Child: For
unto us a Child is borne: in the second his Sex, And unto us a Son is given,
he comes to show here in the third place what manner of Child he should be,
namely a great, and a mighty Prince, which as he shows in these words, And
the Government is upon his shoulder, so in all the rest that follow: And he
shall call his name Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The everlasting
Father, The Prince of peace, and so forth.

Concerning the words in this place, And the Government is upon his shoulder,
it is a certain kind of speech that was frequently used among the Jews,
signifying with them the having of Dominion. It is not a phrase of speech so
usual with us, and yet we have an other that comes somewhat near it, of
laying our shoulders to the burden, when any office is put upon us. But
concerning the words themselves we shall the better conceive them if so we but
cast our eyes upon an other passage of this our Prophet: In that day Esaias 22.22.
says the Lord, will I call my servant Eliakim. And the key of the house of
David will I lay upon his shoulder: so he shall open, and no man shall shut,
and he shall shut, and no man shall open. The key there spoken of, and that
kind of laying of it on the shoulder, may put us in mind what this government
here is, and why it is said to be on our Saviors shoulder. For it is our
Savior doubtless that has the key of David, Rev. 3.7.
which opens and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens. So that
as the Keys of a House are given unto the Steward to open and shut with all
even according to his pleasure, and with those Keys is given at one instant
the whole Government of the House, so are the Keys in that place meant, and
the Government thereby, so is the Government meant in this place, and the Keys
thereby, eve^ to be on our Saviors Shoulder, to signify unto us that he is
the Steward, even the Ruler of the House of God which is the Church of the
living God, 1. Tim. 3.15. Thus he rules even at this instant the whole
Catholic Church in general, and every member of it in particular. I, Mat.
28.20.
says he, am with you always until the end of the world: Non solum Nobiscum
se esse dixit Salvian. de vero iudic. and provident. Dei l. 1. p. 72.
says Salvianus, sed etiam omnibus diebus esse nobiscum. He is with us, and
always with us. And the same Salvianus a little after, Nunquid ad hoc nobiscum
est vt non respiciat and negligat? What: is he so with us that he respects us
not, or that he neglects us? No in no wise: all the Luke 12.7.
hairs of our head are numbered, and it is Aug. Hom. 14 p. 304.
St Austens inference thereupon, si sic custodiuntur superflua tua, in quanta
securitate est anima tua. If our superfluities be so kept, the Soul it self,
how is that kept? It follows, And he shall call his name Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, and so
forth.

He shall call his name? which He? for He no doubt is a Relative here, and has
his reference to somewhat before. If so be we look unto the premises, we shall
find, that in the third verse of this Chapter the Prophet has these words,
Thou have multiplied the nation, and not increased their joy. And again in the
fourth verse, For the yoke of their burden, and the staff of their shoulder,
and the rod of their oppressor have thou broken as in the day of Midian: but
then are we little the nearer, for who is this Thou mentioned there in those
places? Needs we must, no remedy, have recourse to the Chapter before, and
there shall we find often mention of The Lord. As in the first verse of that
Chapter, The Lord said unto me: and again in the fifth verse, The Lord spoke
yet again unto me: and again in the seventh verse, Behold, the Lord brings
up upon them the waters of the River, mighty and great, and so forth. So that
The Lord is this He here intimated in this place. Vid. Luth. in hunc loc.
The Lord shall call his name, Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, and so
forth. Which is not in this place so to be understood, as if he should be
called by all these names, like as our selves are called, when we are called by
our names, that might seem over long, and large, and to to tedious to be
still repeated, and therefore the meaning here is, that he may well be called by
these names in regard of his noble acts, and works, and offices performed by
him. But I am not at this time to come so far: I was now to speak of his
Birth only, which having thus far spoken of, I shall give you some few
Instructions out of the words already handled, and then God willing an end.
For unto us a Child is borne, and unto us a Son is given, and the Government
is upon his shoulder, etc.

First then from the Birth of our Savior here in these words, For unto us a
Child is borne: the Instruction I gather is: to abandon that Pride of heart
wherewith so many of us Christians, swel one against an other like so many
Toades. Not to be high minded as Romans 12.16.
speaks the Apostle, but to make our selves equal to them of the lower sort.
Philip, 2.3.
Every of us in meekenes of mind to esteem other better then himself. Rom,
12.10.
In giving honor to go one before an other. It is French Acad. Part. 2. c. 37.
p. 222.
reported of the Heart of man that it is the first thing that lives in man, and
the last that dies. Doubtless among all the Vices of the Heart, which our
Savior shows to be exceeding many, Marc. 7.21, Pride as it has a special
place, so has it this property, that it is the first there, and the last. True
it is, it appears not as soon as we are borne, but it shows it self not long
after, and even in dying, how with a many it is ready at hand to attend them,
witness the Aug. ep. 50. ad Bonifac. Com Vid. M. D. Reinold. Confer. c. 1
Divis. 2. p. 48.
Donatists of old, who loved their Errors better then their lives. Throughout
our whole life it shows it self nothing more, and yet it is as blind as a
Beetle, and therefore our Savior to the Angel of the Church of the
Laodicoeans: Thou say, Rev. 3.17.
says he, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and
know not how thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked. This it is that is the cause of so much difference in the world, when
the Rich contemning the Poor, and the Poor repining and envying again at the
Rich, they are both caught in Satan's wyles, as well the one, as the other, for
there is even in Hell a Dives, and a Beggar, as there is in heaven an Abraham,
and a Lazarus. Of all the Sins that are, we have greatest cause to beware of
this. It bereaved our first Parents Adam and Eve of Paradise, mighty
Pote^tates of their temporal kingdo^es, millions of Angels of the kingdom of
Heaven. Pride never goes before, but shame goes with it. King Solomon will tell
us as much, Prove. 11.2. The same King Solomon in another place, Pride, Prove.
16.18
says he, goes before destruction, and an high mind before the fall. The
examples are too many that may be brought to this purpose, as of
Nebuchadnezzar, Absolon, Haman, and the like. But it was a wise question of the
Son of Ecclus. 10.12.
Syrach, Why is earth and ashes proud, seeng that when a man dies, he is the
heir of serpents, beasts, and worms? But that which should move us most of
all to abhor and detest this vice of Pride, is the manner of our Saviors
Birth, and the baseness thereof. And therefore S. Austen, By reason of this Sin,
by reason of this great sin of Pride, Aug. in Ps. 18 p. 65.
says he, God became humble. This very cause, this huge Sin, this great
disease of Souls, brought down from heaven our omnipotent Physician. It
humbled him to the form of a Servant, it loaded him with reproaches, it hung
him on a tree, that by the means of a medicine so sovereign, this tumor might
be healed. His conclusion there is, Iam tandem erubescat homo esse superbus,
propter que^ factus est humilis Deus. Let us now says he, be ashamed, and
blush to be proud, for whose sake God himself became to be humble. And again
in another Aug de Temp. Ser. 25. p. 432.
place, Behold o man what God himself has been made for thee; learn now at
the length a lesson of humility even from the mouth of that Teacher, who is
not able as yet to speak unto thee by reason of his Infancy. Thou being once
in Paradise wast of such excellent intelligence that thou gave a name to
every living creature then being; and now for thy sake thy Creator became an
Infant, not able to call, no not his Mother by her name. Thou in that most
spacious Orchard of fruitful delights did by neglect of obedience utterly
loose thy self; He by obedience to his Father (mortal as he was) came into
the streights of a narrow room, that so by dying he might seek out thee that
wast dead. Thou being man would needs be a God that so thou might perish:
he being God would needs be a man to seek out that which had perished.
Humane pride so far overwhelmed thee, that but divine grace nothing else
could ever recover thee. And thus much of the first Instruction out of the
first words of my Text. For unto us a Child is borne.

The second Instruction I am to gather is out of the next words that follow,
And unto us a Son is given: and the Instruction I gather is, concerning the
Gift that thus was given us, and the great bounty of the Giver, who provided
for us such a Gift, when we for our parts had forfeited to him both our Bodies,
and our Souls. For we are not, Beloved, to think that because our Father
Adam did eat of that forbidden fruit, and we our selves after that, borne so
many thousand years, that therefore we were innocent, and free from that
offense. No the Apostle tells us plainly that Adams offense was our offense, we
are guilty no less then he, forasmuch as all of us came from him, and issued
forth of his loins. By one man, Romans 5.11,
says the Apostle, sin entered into the world, and Death by sin, and so Death
wen^ over all men, forasmuch as all men have sinned. Being all of us in this
pickle, every Mother, and Mothers Child, see the great bountifulness of God
above, see his mercies above measure, even to provide us such a Gift when he
might have challenged as already forfeited to him both our Bodies, as I said,
and Souls. If some great offender having been at the Bar, arraigned of the
most notorious crimes, accused by many witnesses, condemned by the Jury, the
Sentence pronounced by the Judge, were now dolefully marching to his long home,
having the Executioner at his heels, every one expecting the last Act of his
woeful Tragedy, there should come unto him in this nicke of time not only a
pardon from his Prince whom he had so grievously offended, but Chariots and
Horses to have him come unto him, and by his Prince he should be placed among
the first in all his kingdom; would not his Spirit reviue like Jacobs Spirit
when as Joseph sent for him into Egypt? Genesis 46,28.
would not every one stand amazed at the admirable clemency of that king, that
not only not punished, but so highly advanced this great Offender? We, Beloved,
are this Offender, we are every of us in this plight. We are in this world as
at a Bar. We are all arraigned of the greatest crimes that might possibly be
acted. We have every of us a thousand witnesses, even our own Consciences to
accuse us. We are cast by the twelve Prophets, as it were by twelve men. First
the Prophet Hosea says, Though I have redeemed them, yet have they spoken lies
against me, Hos. 7.3. The Prophet Joel says, The wine press is full, yea the
wine-presses run over, for their wickedness is great, Joel. 3.13. The Prophet
Amos, he says, I am pressed under you as a Cart is pressed that is full of
sheaues, Amos, 2.13. The Prophet Obadiah, he says, The pride of thy heart has
deceived thee, Obad. 1.3. The Prophet Jonas, he is impatient that we are not
already executed: you know in what case he was concerning the Ninivites, Ion.
4.6. I need not go over the Rest, the Prophet Micah, the Prophet Nahum, the
Prophet Habakuk, and so forth, they all sing the selfsame note, know one, and
know all. The Judge has pronounced the Sentence, Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every man that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the Law to do them. The Angels expect (as it were) our execution. Our
selves march dolefully onwardes with Satan our Hangman at our heels. And now
Beloved, what hope? Quae res? quae spes? what means to escape? what trust at
all? See the goodness of God above. Even in this (...).
nicke of time, this very, very instant, when there was but as a step between
our selves and eternal death, not only a Pardon comes from heaven to forgive
us all, even all that is past, but the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, our
true Elias, Jesus Christ, to have us up to God, and there to place us with his
Father in that everlasting and heavenly kingdom. God Ephesians. 2.4.
says the Apostle, which is rich in mercy through his great love wherewith he
loved us, even when we were dead by sin, has quickened us together in Christ
by whose grace ye are saved. And has raised us up together, and made us sit
together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus. And thus much of the second
Instruction.

The third Instruction is from these words, And the Government is upon his
shoulder: and the Instruction I gather is, the continual residencie of our
Savior Christ, his everlasting presence and perpetuity, as with all his Church
in general, so with every member of it in particular. I say his Presence with
us, not by a Proxy, but by him self, his own dear self, insomuch that every
of us may say as does the Psalm. 74.13.
Psalmist, God is my king of old, the help that is done upon earth, he does it
himself. It was a most kind and loving answer which Ruth made to Naomi her
Mother in Law, whenas Naomi returning homewards would have left her behind:
The Lord Ruth. 1.17.
says Ruth, do so to me and more also, if ought but Death depart thee and me.
Doubtless if Death could ever have parted our Savior and us, we had utterly
been deprived of him long ago. We had no more known him now a days, then we
know King Alfred, or William the Conqueror, who were so many hundreds of
years before us. But the truth is, and we may persuade our selves, that
neither Romans 8.38.
Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature has
been able to separate, or us from him, or him from us. Come we to the whole
Church in general, and whenas Saul began to persecute it, he Zach. 2.8.
touched the apple (as it were) of his eye, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? Act. 9.4. Come we to the several Churches throughout the world, and he
walks in the midst of their Candlestick^s, Rev. 1.12. Come we to particular
Congregations such as is this where we are now assembled, and he is in the very
midst of us, Mat. 18.20. Come we to our Houses in particular, and he passes a
many times over our doors, and will not suffer the destroyer to come into our
houses to plague us, Exodus 12.23. Lastly, come we to every member in
particular, what one is there amongst us that has not his presence with him?
First the Magistrate, I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee, Josh. 1.5.
Secondly the Citizen, The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in,
Psa. 121.8. Thirdly, the Countryman, His God does instruct him to have
discretion, and does teach him, Esaias 28.26. In a word: is any sick and ill at
ease? The Lord comfort him, says the Psalmist, when he lies sick on his bed,
make thou all his bed in his sickness, Psalm. 41.3. Does any man droope by
reason of sin, and does he go mourning in reguard thereof? I, says the Lord,
even I am he that puts away thine iniquities for my own sake, and will not
remember thy sins, Esaias 43.25. And again, Esaias 40.1.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, will your God say. Speak comfortably to
Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her
iniquity is pardoned: for she has received of the Lords hand double for all
her sins. And again, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me, all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. Nor is it
meant by so coming that we should betake our selves unto our Feet: say not
in thy heart, Romans 10.8.
says the Apostle, who shall ascend into heaven! (that is to bring Christ from
above.) The word is near thee even in thy mouth and in thine heart. This is
the word of faith which we preach.

But what need we these particulars to find out by peece-meale his presence
with us? Go we to the SACRAMENT to be now celebrated, and bar from thence a
corporal presence, a barbarous, Capernaicall, Cyclopical eating of him, Homer
Odyss. l. 9.
(...), the bowels, and blood, and flesh, and bones: and see if by
participating thereof, we enjoy him not as truly, as truly he is in heaven.
True it is we do it SPIRITVALLY, and we do it BY FAITH, but if ever Faith was
the evidence of things which are not seen, as the Apostle describes it to the
Hebrews, Heb. 11.1. then doubtless is this our Faith as fair an evidence to
us of our Saviors Presence with us howsoever unseen. Again if Spiritually,
and by such a Faith, he was so truly enjoyed by Abraham before his coming
into the world, as that Abraham rejoiced to see his day, Ioh. 8.56. Why should
not we rejoice alike, since alike we enjoy him as Abraham did, really, truly,
verily, effectually, only not corporally, not carnally. St. Hilary has an
excellent speech that aymeth both at this point, and at all that has been
spoken concerning the Birth of our Savior Christ. If the Word be truly made
flesh Hilar. de Trinit. l. 8. Vid. B. Iuels Defense of the Artic. Art. 5. p.
339. and B. Cranmer of the Sacrament against Winchest. p. 165.
says he, and truly we receive the Word being flesh, in the Sacrament: how is
the same Word to be thought not to dwell in us naturally (his D. Fulke against
Hesk. p. 199.
meaning is, Truly) seeing he has both taken the nature of our flesh now
inseparable to himself in that he is borne man, and also has adjoined the
nature of his flesh to the nature of his eternity under the Sacrament of his
flesh to be communicated unto us. So that we do truly and verily receive our
Savior by participating of the Sacrament, even as verily and truly as he is
now in heaven above. That he is now above in heaven St Peter will inform us,
Act. 3.21. Whom the heaven, says St Peter, must contain: that we truly and
verily do receive him, St. Hilary has taught us in these words. So that we
may go to the Lords Table with this resolution: He is not so contained in
Heaven but that here also we shall receive him verily and truly: and again,
we shall not receive him so truly and verily here, but that Heaven also does
contain him. But I hasten to my last Instruction.

My fourth and last Instruction is from the last words, And he shall call his
name Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, and so forth: and the Instruction
I gather is, that since our Savior was to be called by these names in regard
of his noble acts, and works, and offices to be performed, we also have a
care to answer the Name given to us. The name given to us is the name of
CHRISTIANS, and it was given to us first at Act. 11.26.
Antioch: but I know not how it comes to pass, vt etiam nos (as Salvianus
Salvian. de Provid l. 3 p. 112.
speaks) qui nos Christianos esse diximus, perdamus vim tanti nominis, vitio
pravitatis, we of this age by reason of our wickedness loose the worth of a
name so glorious. Our Savior, when as the Jews did so much boast of their
Parentage, Abraham is our Father: If ye were Ioh 8.39.
says he, Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham. But now ye
go about to kill me, a man that have told you the truth, which I heard of God:
this did not Abraham. Doubtless Beloved, there is much done by us which our
Savior never did: and if any of us can endure that when his Child is much
debosht, does him all the wrong that may be, live an odious and hateful life,
all the People should say Like father, like child: a Gods name let us go on,
let us sooth our selves in our sins: but yet there will be a time when he
that shall come, will come, and will expostulate with every of us for that his
Name is thus blasphemed, I say not among the Romans 2.24.
Gentiles, but which is all one in effect, among the Papists, through us. This
his first coming was base, in a Cratch, or Maunger, the Ox, and the Ass, (as
it were) his Attendants, his Birth, and Breeding, as you have heard: but his
Second coming shall be otherwise, with much glory, much pomp: For he shall 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
descend from heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the Archangel, and
with the trumpet of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then shall we
which live and remain, be caught up with them also in the clouds, to meet the
Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. I may end with the end
of my Text: The zeal of the Lord of hoasts will perform this.

The same Lord so bless us, and the seed that has been sown, that with you
of the Poorer sort, the Mat. 13.22.
cares of this world: with you of the Wealthier, the deceitfulnes of your
Riches, with Either of you of either sort, the lusts of other things, grow not
up like Thorns and choke it.
OUR SAVIOVRS PASSION.
Christmas day December. 25. 1612.
IT may seem no good congruity Right worshipful, and dearly Beloved, to
speak of our Saviors Passion, on the day of his Incarnation: of his great
distress, and misery, on the day of his Nativitie. A tale out of time, Ecclus.
22.6
says the Son of Syrach, is as Music in mourning, and surely upon this
Day, a relation of our Saviors Death, is as mourning in Music. Howbeit such
has been this whole year past, partly in respect of my self, the loss of so
M D H^lland his Majesty's Professor who died March. 17. and was buried Mar.
27.. 1612 My dear MOTHER, who died about Michaelmas after, and Sr George Carew
Mr of the Wards, in November next,
many of my dearest Friends, partly in respect of us all, the loss of PRINCE
HENRY.
ONE above all, that as Mourning befits Me best the Speaker at this time, so is
it not altogether unfit for you, at this time the Hearers. After so many
Objects of Sorrow then, as have been to a many of us this year past, either
of one Friend loosing another, or loss of Husband, or loss of Wife, or loss
of Parents, or loss of PRINCE, let us now behold the Death of ONE who was all,
and every of these unto us: For never FRIEND loved us better, never HUSBAND so
loved his wife, never WIFE her Husband, nor MOTHER her Child, nor PRINCE was
more lovely: then this Prince of Princes, this great Monarch I am now to speak
of, so much the more to be remembered of all and every of us here present, in
regard he died for our Salvation, and that a Death more grievous then the most
grievous Death that ever was.

To this end and purpose have I chosen at this time a certain passage of Esaias
the Prophet, who though he lived 700 years before that Death of his indeed,
described it notwithstanding so fully, so completely in every respect as that
S. Ierom, as I have told you Our Sav. Nativ. Ser. 1 p. 6.
before, sticks not to call him rather an Evangelist, then a Prophet. The
Prophet Esaias then, or rather the Evangelist Esaias, in his 53 Chapter, the 4 and
5 Verses, thus describes him to the full: Surely he has borne our
infirmities, and carried our sorrows: yet we did judge him as plagued, and
smitten of God, and humbled. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was
broken for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with
his stripes we are healed.



In which words for our better proceeding, I shall observe unto you three
points: First a woeful estate and wretched condition wherein all of us were
once wrapped, and yet by nature are wrapped still. For the Prophet Esaias
speaking in this place of Our Infirmities, Our Sorrows, Our Transgressions,
Our Iniquities, manifestly shows that we are the Parties to whom these
Infirmities, these Sorrows, these Transgressions, these Iniquities, of right
did appertain. Secondly, I note from hence how the Son of God came down
from heaven to rid us from that condition, and woeful estate wherein we were,
and that as out of these words: Surely he has borne. He has carried. He was
wounded. He was broken. The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with
his stripes we are healed. Thirdly, I note the means which he used to that
purpose, and that was his HOLY PASSION, and that as out of these words: He
has borne, and carried. Was plagued, smitten, humbled, wounded and broken.
Chastisement and Stripes. And of these three points in their order, and first
of that woeful estate and wretched condition wherein we were al of us once
wrapped, and yet by nature are wrapped still: Our Infirmities: Our Sorrows:
Our Transgressio^s: Our Iniquities. Surely he has borne our Infirmities, and
carried our Sorrows. He was wounded for our Transgressions, and broken for our
iniquities.

When as Adam the Top of our kin, from whom not we only may fetch our
petegree, but every Nation of the world, I, every Person of every Nation of
what Sex and state soever, was placed by God in Paradise to begin the world new
begun, it is not I hope unknown unto the meanest of us here, what high
Pererius tells of 10 Prerogatives which Adam had. Perer. in Genesis Tom. 1. p. 349.
favors they then were which he found at Gods hands: all which how he utterly
lost again, and we in him by his Transgression, who is ignorant that has
approached but to the Brink of Gods Book. Go we first of all to the first
Genesis 1.27.
Chapter, and there shall we read of his Creation, of great authority given
unto him over the Fish, and over the Foul, and over the Beasts of the Field.
Go we next of all to the Genesis 2.22.
second Chapter, and there shall we find him placed in Paradise, Eve our
Mother created of him, and Marriage ordained between them both. But go we then
unto the third Chapter, and we shall no sooner enter there, but we shall
immediately there find a strange Metamorphosis, this goodly Creature of God,
this Nexus Dei and Mundi, as Iaevel. Epit. in lib. Metaph. Tom. 1. p 357. col.
1.
some call him, as Piccol. Eth. l 2. c 32 p 174
others, Horizon inter corporea and incorporea; as a Vid. Conimb. de Coel. p.
184.
third, Copula and Hymenaeus mortalium and aeternorum: This Tie of God and the
World together: this Horizo^ between corporeal and spiritual creatures: this
Conjunction copulative (if I may so speak) of Mortality and Immortality, so
dejected, and cast down, as that he had no understanding at al, but was to be
compared to the Beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.20, Maphaeus V^g. Aeneid. l. ^.
Nate vbi forma nitens? niueaque in front serenus
Ille color, dulcisque oculorum aspectus, and altae
Syderius cervicis honos?


The Lord God called to the man, and Genesis 3.9.
said unto him, Where art thou? Non in quo, Ambr. de Paradis. c. 14. p. 109.
says S. Ambrose, sed in quibus es: non in quo loco quaero, sed in quo statu.
Not where thou art in respect of place, but where thou art in respect of grace,
namely in what case thou art. And Esdras to this purpose, O Adam, 2. Esd, 7.48.
says he, what have thou done! for in that that thou have sinned, thou art not
fallen alone, but the fall also redoundeth to us that come of thee. And indeed,
Beloved, so it does, for as if Adam then had held his hand, and had not tasted
of that Tree, we had all of us been partakers with him in those great
Prerogatives he then had: so on the contrary he offending by the instigation of
the woman, and she seduced by the Devil, we all of us offended too, forasmuch
as we were all and every of us contained in his loins. According to the
propagatio^ of the flesh, Secundum propaginem carnis in illo eramus omnes
antequam nati essemus, tanquam in Parente, tanquam in Radice ibi eramus. Aug.
de Verb. Apost Ser. 14 p. 325.
says S. Austen, we were all in him before we were borne, we were al of us in
him as in our Father, in our Root. Now as from a Root that is but rotten,
nothing can issue but rotten Branches, which Branches spread their rottenness
into other Twigs that come of them: so from our first Father thus corrupted,
came stained and corrupted Children, who afterward infected others, and those
others infected us. Hence that Deluge of Sin original surrounding the world
of mankind, and involving all and every of us that ever since have been borne.
Nay go we to our very Vid. B. Bills. Survey of Christ's Sufferings. p. 173.
Conception which is a time (you know) before our Birth, and was our Conception
without sin? Behold, Psalm. 51.5.
says David, I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my Mother
conceived me. For speaks he there of himself alone, or of the natural
Conception of all? Of all without all exception, as having done nothing
himself, why he alone should so be borne. What? accuses he then in that
place Matrimony it self of Sin? God forbid. No, Marriage is not Sin: Marriage
is honorable, Heb. 13.4.
says the Apostle, and it is a Bed undefiled. David's meaning then was, that
eve^ the whole lump, and substance of himself conceived, was corrupt with
sin, because they were Sinners of whose seed himself came. For such as the
Tree is, such is the Fruit. Do men gather grapes of thorns, Mat. 7.16.
says our Savior, or figs of thistles? A good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Nor in this case does
it avail us a whit, that we are begotten by faithful Parents, such as are
regenerate themselves, for as Avg. de Verb Apost. Ser. 14. p. 326.
S. Austen well observes, Every man's Father begets him, No^ vnde regeneratus,
sed vnde generatus est, as he himself was borne at first, not as in baptism
he was borne again. And he makes it clear unto us by this Similitude.
Suppose a good Father, says he, is as corn sowed at first without any chafe,
or husk at all. Do thou not mark how when it springs again, it arises
again with a husk, howsoever at first it was sown without it? Right so
Parents, says he, though themselves be good, holy, and regenerate, yet their
Children shall not so be borne. The reason is for that Children are to be
borne according to carnal generation, not that generation which is spiritual.

Such our own Conception, and our Birth, what are we likewise to bring forth
but Birds of the selfsame feather, Children as guilty as we our selves. True
it is they are baptized, and that Baptism of theirs does take away the Guilt
and Punishment of this Sin: but the Stain or Blot of it remains still, and
this experience shows even in Infants. Who if they have not what they would,
how waspish are they presently? how do they pule and cry? nay, how will they
show a shrewd stomach or ever they can go or speak? Imbecillitas membrorum
innocens est, Aug. Confess. l. 1. c. 7. p. 48.
says St Austen, no^ animus infantium: it is their Lims are harmeles, their
Hearts are cursed enough, and I my self, says he, did in that age things
worthy reprehension, but for I was not of capacity to understand what was
reproueable, nor Custom, nor Reason did suffer me at that time to be
reprooved. Come we from Infancy unto Childhood, and are we not then fraught
with the effects of Original Sin? Have we not the overplus of Actual
besides, Sins of omission, Sins of commission, Sins in thought, and word,
and deed? Yes without all doubt, and therefore hence those many precepts of
wise king Solomon concerning the correcting of Children, as Prove. 13.24. Prove.
19.18. Prove. 22.15 Prove. 23.13. and Prove. 29.17. I spare to allege the Places
you may look them over at leisure. Come we afterward to Man's estate, and then
we feel these Relics of Sin more then ever, Terent. And. Act. 1. sc. 1.
Nam antea qui scire posses aut ingenium noscere, dum aetas, metus, magister
prohibebant. While age, or fear, or the Rod does keep us in awe, we can
bridle it pretily well, but afterward who but we. All we like Sheep, Esaias
53.6.
says Esaias in the very next words to this my Text, have gone astray, we have
turned every one to his own way. And Solomon, as if some exception might have
been made to words so general, Even a just man Prove. 24.16.
says he, falls seven times a day, meaning perhaps seaventy times seven,
sure I am that Seven there in that place may be more, it cannot be less.

These things thus Beloved, we may see in some sort that woeful estate and
wretched condition wherein we were all of us once wrapped, and yet by nature
are wrapped still. For there being in us this Sin Original, and the same
since that time having sprowted forth, daily and hourly as it has, what are
we but a sort of Caytiffes, and miserable Creatures in Gods sight, in whom
there is nothing whole, but wounds, and swellings, and soars full of
corruption, and consequently but a step between us all, and eternal Death.
Which kind of state of ours will the better appear unto us, if so be finding
our selves thus Sinful, we consider in the next place, the Punishments due
to Sin.

The Punishments I grant are many, but I will reduce them unto three, Gods
wrath for sin: Gods curse, and Death of Body, and of Soul. Unto them, Romans
2.8.
says the Apostle, that are contentious and disobey the truth, and obey
unrighteousness, Indignation and wrath: there is the first punishment. Cursed is
every man Gal 3.10.
says the same Apostle, that continues not in all things which are written in
the law to do them: there is the second. The soul Ezech. 18.4.
says Ezechiel, that sins, it shall die: there is the third. First concerning
Wrath. Is the wrath of an earthly king as Messengers of death, for so king
Solomon speaks, Prove. 16.14? What is it to be subject to Gods wrath? The
Prophet David when he did but think of it, and but of the kindling of it
neither, how was he presently appalled with it? If his wrath Psalm. 2.12.
says he, be kindled, yea but a little, blessed are all they that put their
trust in him. The very horror of the word makes him presently (as it were) to
Mr Fentons Perfume against the Plague, p. A. 7. b.
bless himself, like a man astonished, and half frighted. Or he makes a
kind of sudden stop, as it were an Aposiopesis est vel solicitudinis and
quasi religionis, etc. De nostrum enim omnium; non audeo totu^ dicere Quintl
Instit. l. 9 c. 2.
Aposiop^sis, as if he durst not have said what followed, like that of Tully,
pro Milone: De nostrum enim omnium: non audeo totum dicere.

Secondly, concerning the Curse, were the Curses of Prophets in times past of
such present force and efficacy as that they brought Bears out of the wood to
2. King. 2.24.
destroy a number of graceless Children, nay Fire down from heaven, to 2
King. 1.10.
destroy an Army of graceless men? What is it to be cursed by him from whom
those Prophets had all their power? The Earth we tread upon can tell us
somewhat, concerning which since those words past, Genesis 3.17.
Cursed is the earth for thy sake: in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the
days of thy life: the Child was never yet borne, nor shall be to the worlds
end, that has not more, or less, his portion in that Curse. And howsoever the
Prophet David Psalm. 33 5.
says, The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord: yet want there not
signs enough withal, and (as it were) footsteps of this Curse. The Heathen
saw somewhat to this purpose though they erred in the cause, when they spoke of
the many Maladies that are in the world. Horat. Carm. l. 1. Od 3.
Post ignem aetheria domo
Subductum, macies, and nova febrium
Terris incubuit cohors:
Semotique prius tarda necessitas
Laethi corripuit gradum.
They imputed it to Prometheus his stealing Fire out of heaven: but Adam indeed
was the Prometheus, and his Disobedience was the Fire that has burnt us almost
all up.

Lastly, concerning Death, though it be indeed the last, yet is it not the
least of all. For to omit the former Death, the Death we die in this world,
which is no doubt a straight Gate, and the streightest Vid. B. Bilsons Survey,
p. 391.
perhaps that leads unto Heaven: what a Death of Deaths is the second, I
mean the Death of Soul which contains therein as a worthy Prelate B Bilson
Ib. p. 46. 47.
observes, Reiection, Malediction, Fire and Perpetuity of Fire, all included in
those words to be pronounced by our Savior in the day of Judgment to the
wicked, Depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41. Depart
from me, there is Reiection: ye Cursed, there is Malediction: into fire, there is
the vengeance of that element: into everlasting fire, there is the continuance of
it. If Reiection seem but slight, yet Malediction comes presently after: if
Malediction seem but little, yet Fire comes after that: if Fire seem little
to, yet Continuance comes after that, and in that Continuance that after comes,
how many Millions of endless Torments? If after so many thousand years Aug.
De spiritu and Anima l. 1. c 56.
says S. Austen, as all men that are, or shall be, have had hairs on their
head, there might be some hope of having those pains ended after that, they
might the better be borne and endured: but when after so many Volumes of Ages
the Party tormented is to begin a fresh, and to endure so many thousand
Prentiships, and ever be hopeless of being Free, the very thought thereof is
far beyond all thoughts, and the experience of it, beyond our understanding.

And thus you see Beloved, the case we stand in by reason of our Sins. Let no
man flatter himself, or suppose himself to be exempted, if he consider his
own nature. If thou Lord Psalm. 130.3.
says the Psalmist, wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss: oh Lord,
who may abide it? And our Savior to this purpose, Ye Luke 1^.^0.
says he, when ye have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we
are unprofitable servants. Mark, Beloved, Unprofitable Servants, and this as
the Rhemists themselves Rhem in tun^ loc.
confess, we must always confess to him in humility and truth. Now what was
said of that evil and sloathfull Servant, that did not a jot of that which was
commanded him, but that he was Unprofitable: Mat. 25.30.
Cast therefore that unprofitable Servant into utter darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. And now Beloved, what difference? May not the
same Eccles. 9.2.
condition be to the Just, and to the Wicked, to the Good, and to the Pure, and
to the Polluted, and to him that Sacrifices, and to him that Sacrifices not?
May not the Good be as is the Sinner, and as he that Swears, he that Fears
on oath? Yes without all doubt, and therefore the Apostle S. Paul, I 1 Cor.
4.4.
says he, know nothing by my self, yet am not I thereby justified. And indeed
it is to true. For how many Sins pass us to and fro that we do not so much as
think of? How many again do we think of, that we think of but very
slightly? If our Hands did never offer any violence to our Neighbor, why a
Thought against him is Vid M. Hookers learned Discourse of Justification works
etc. p. 9. 5. 10.
bloody enough, and arraignes us of Murder before God. If we but Look on
women to lust after them, it is Whoredom in his Consistory. To be but Angry
unadvisedly, and to say Racha and to Befoole our Brother, they are three
degrees of comparison, all of them mortal, though the one to be punished by
Mat. 5.22
Judgment, the other by a Council, the third by Hell fire. If then this Mint,
and Cummin of Sins, for so I may call them in respect, deserve and merit so
great punishments, what do those great and weightier ones, as Throats, when
they are open Romans 5.13.
Sepulchers, Tounges used to deceit, Lips repleat with the poison of Asps,
Mouths full of cursing, and bitterness, Feet swift to shed blood. These then
and the like to these, as also the former, and the like to them, are the Sins
here intimated in this place. For the Prophet speaking here, of Infirmities, of
Sorrows, of Transgressions, and Iniquities, and naming the^ to be our own: Our
Iniquities, our Transgressions, Our Sorrows, Our Infirmities, what does he else
but express unto us in what a pickle we al are, and in what a desperate case
we stand before the Tribunal seat of God. I will end this point with that of
Esdras: 2. Es. 4.30.
The corn of evil seed has been sown in the heart of Adam from the beginning
of the world, and how much ungodliness has he brought up unto this time, and
how much more shall he yet bring forth until the harvest come. And thus much
of the first point, namely that woeful estate and wretched condition wherein al
of us were once wrapped, and yet by nature are wrapped still. The second point
I noted hence, was that the Son of God came down from heaven, to rid us from
this condition and woeful estate where in we were, and that in these words,
Surely he has borne: he has carried, he was wounded, he was broken, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
HE, and HIM, and HIS.

Which three Pronownes being Relatiues, and therefore consequently rehearsing
to us the Party spoken of before: if so be we cast our eyes to the thirteenth
verse of the former Chapter, we shall find the Party here meant, to be
called there a Servant: Behold my servant shall prosper: he shall be exalted,
and extolled, and be very high. But if then we would farther know, who that
Servant there was, we must go to the Acts of the Apostles, and overtaking
there the Eunuch in his journey toward Jerusalem, we shall find him reading
this very Chapter from whence this Text of mine is taken. Now as Origin Origin.
in Number. Hom. 27. p. 277.
said of reading the Scriptures: It is a torment to the Devils above all kinds
of torments, and a pain above all pains, if they see any man reading the word
of God, and with fervent study searching the knowledge of Gods law, and the
mysteries, and secrets of the Scriptures: so on the contrary the Lord of heaven
took so great delight in the Eunuchs Reading, howsoever he understood not all
he read, that he sent him presently an Interpreter to unfold what he read unto
him. Then Philip, Act. 8.35.
says St Luke, opened his mouth, and began at this Scripture, and preached
unto him Jesus. So that JESUS is the Person to whom these words here have
relation: Jesus has borne our Infirmities, Jesus has carried our Sorrows,
the chastisement of our peace was upon Jesus, and with Jesus stripes we are
healed.

What? will some man say, and does the Lord then there in that place call Jesus
his Servant? what? Jesus his Son? and what? the Son of his womb? and what?
the Son of his desires? I, Beloved, even Jesus, and that not only there in
that place, but in a many more places besides, as Esaias, 42.1. Behold my servant
I will stay upon him, mine elect in whom my soul delights. And Esaias, 50.10,
Who is among you that fears the Lord, let him hear the voice of his servant.
I, and as the victorious Black Prince the Son of Edward the Third, used this
old english word, Remains of a greater work. p. 161.
ICH DIEN, that is, I SERVE (in imitation whereof our Princes use it to this
day, according to that of the Gal. 4.1.
Apostle, The Heir as long as he is a child differs nothing from a servant)
right so our Savior of himself (though past a child) The Lord, Esaias. 49.5.
says he, that formed me from the womb to be his servant: And Mat. 20.28.
again, The son of man came not to be served, but to serve. All to intimate
unto us, that howsoever he was coeternal, and coequall with God the Father, as
touching his Godhead, yet for our sakes would he be inferior to him, and take
upon him our Manhood, that being flesh of our flesh and bone of our bones, he
might recover for us that by obedience, which by Adams disobedience we had
lost. Thus the Apostle of him to the Philippians: Who being, Philip. ^ 6.
says he, in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God:
but he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant,
and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man. He humbled
himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross. And
therefore himself of himself, Ps. 40.8, Sacrifice, Vid. Heb. 10.35.
says he, and meat offering thou would not have; but mine ears have thou
opened. Burnt offerings and sacrifice for sin have thou not required: then
said I, lo, I come. In the volume of thy book it is written of me that I
should fulfill thy will, o my God, I am content to do it, yea, thy law is
within my heart.

Howbeit here, Beloved, we are to know that the name of a Servant in holy
Scripture is taken after diverse and sundry sorts. Every faithful Person being
bought and redeemed from the bondage of Sin, and Satan, to serve and obey
God in righteousness, and true holiness, is there a Servant, as Romans 6.22. and
Luke 1.74. Secondly, one that serves, and obeys God, not only in the common
profession of godliness, but in some particular function, and calling, is
there a Servant too. So Paul, and James, Tit. 1.1 and James, 1.1. Thirdly, one
whom God does use as an instrument, and means, to effect and perform his will
in the work of some particular mercy, or some particular judgment, is there a
Servant also. Nay every Creature of God obeying his will, is called there the
Servant of God, and therefore the Prophet David: Al, says he, are thy
Servants, Psalm. 119.91. Our Savior was a Servant here in the second sense, and
meaning, and his particular Function was, in that he executed as a Mediator
the will of God in working Man's redemption, and therefore himself of himself
(as I told you before) Mat. 20.28.
The Son of man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life for
the ransom of many. And thus much of the second point, that the Son of God
came down from heaven to rid us from that condition, and woeful estate wherein
we were. Come we now unto the third point, namely the means our Savior used
to that effect and purpose. The Means I told you was his Passion, and that
comprised in these words: He has borne and carried: he was plagued, smitten,
humbled, wounded, and broken: Chastisement, and Stripes. Surely he has borne
our Infirmities, and carried our Sorrows, yet we did judge him as plagued and
smitten of God, and humbled, but he was wounded for our transgressions, he was
broken for our Iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with
his stripes we are healed.

When I say the Means our Savior used was his Passion, I mean not so his
Passion, as if all his Vid. Master Deering on the Heb. Lect. 9. p. l. 4. and Mr
Fox of Christ crucified, p. 51.
Life besides had been impertinent to that purpose, for he was made our
Redemption, through the whole course of his Life, and what ever he did was
somewhat toward the effect of that Redemption. But the holy Scripture
attributing commonly our Redemption to his Death, because that Death of his was
the very chiefest, and the greatest work of all, hence it is I observe his
Passion to be the very true Means indeed. Concerning which his Passion, since
the four Evangelists so sufficiently record it in their Writings, and
whatsoever they record is oftentimes read unto you, I shall not need to
rehearse the particulars as being well known (I hope) to every of you, only
somewhat shall I say of his DEATH, as the very vpshot of all the rest. To omit
then his heavy Soul, even heavy to the Death, his Agony and bloody Sweat
trickling down unto the ground: his going forward, and recoyling back, and
going forwards again, and again recoyling, almost like that of the Poet:
Ovid. Trist. l. 1 cleg. 3.
Ter limen tetigi, ter sum revocatus, and ipse
Indulgens animo Pes mihi tardus erat.
As, Mat. 26 39.
O my Father if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me. And again, Ver. 42.
O my Father if this Cup cannot pass away from me, but that I must drink it,
thy will be done. And again the third time, O my Father if this Cup cannot
pass away from me, but that I must drink it, thy will be done. Alas what Ifs
were these? How almost liable in a vulgar appearance to that of Prosper de
vocat. Gent. l. 2. c. 26. p. 344. b.
Prosper, Virtus nolentium nulla est: Not to do a thing willingly is no virtue:
almost to that of Senec Epist. l. 18. ep. 108.
Seneca, Malus miles est, qui Imperatorem gemens sequitur: That Soldier is
none of the best, that marching after his General puts finger in the eye: to
omit I say all this, as also Judas that whorish Dalila that betrayed him with a
kiss: the Vid. Mr Fox of Christ crucified. p. 48. b.
tossing of him to and fro, from Annas to Caiphas, from Caiphas to Pilate, from
Pilate to Herod, from Herod to Pilate again: The Quae bona in illa beata vita
faciet cos sumere, pro quibus in hac miseria vnigenitum suu^ Filium voluit
vsque (...) mortem mal^ tanta p^rferre? Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 22. c. 24.
spettings in his Mat. 26.67.
Face, and buffettings, and vpbraiding him with Prophecy: the putting on him a
Mat. 27.28.
Scarlet Robe, the very die, and reflex of their bloody Sins: the investing
him with a Crown of Thorns, the precious Stones whereof, the clots of his
precious Blood: a Reed given him instead of a Scepter, as if he had been but a
king of Straw: their imposing his own Ioh. 19.17.
Cross upon his own Shoulders, who was scarcely able to carry himself: Ver.
18.
their crucifying him between two Thieves, as the most notorious Malefactor
of all three: Fresh volies of Skornes, and Skofs, as, Mat. 27.40.
Thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three days, save thy
self: If thou be the Son of God come down from the Cross. And again, Ver.
42.
If he be the king of Israel, let him now come down from the Cross and we
will believe him: but nay, nay, He saved others, but he cannot save himself.
And again, Ver. 43.
He trusts in God, let him deliver him now if he will have him. And again,
when as he prayed to God saying, Eli, Eli, That is, My God, my God, This man
Ver. 47.
say some, calls Elias: other said, let be: let us see if Elias will come and
save him, to omit I say all this, and to come to his very Death.

The torments of others when they are violent B. Bilson of Redemp. p. 7.
says a Reverend Prelate of our age, either hasten death, or overwhelme the
sense, and so the pain when it is most grievous, is least of all perceived.
Now concerning our Savior Christ there was in him no such thing: he dyed not by
Vid. Mr Perkins on the Creed p. 358.
degrees as we do, his senses did not decay, no pangs of death took hold of
him, but in perfect sense, and perfect patience both of Body and Soul, he
voluntarily, and miraculously, as he was praying to his Father, resigned his
Spirit into his Fathers hands. In all men else, be the Spirit never so willing,
and the measure of faith never so strong, yet unless it please God to shorten,
or lighten the rage of their pain, the Flesh repineth at the present anguish,
howsoever Grace support the Soul that it sincke not under the burden: but He
Bernard. de Pass. Dom. c. 41. p. 70.
says St Bernard, which or clean takes away, or lightneth, or shortneth the
force of torments in his Saints, when they are laid upon them by their
Persecutours, would not have his own pains lesned awhit. He spared not
himself, that knows how to spare his own. Now the Manner of rendering his
Soul to God, the Scriptures observe most carefully, and so do the Fathers to.
St John in his Gospel thus Ioh 19.30.
describes it: Now when Jesus had received of the Vinegar, he said, It is
finished, and bowed his head, and gave up the Ghost. Whereupon St Bernard: It
is Bern. Feria 4a Hebd. Paenos. p. 31. col. 2.
says he, a great infirmity to die, but to die after such a sort, argues a
power no less then infinite. St Luke Luke 23.46.
reports that Jesus cried with a loud voice and said, Father, into thy hands I
commend my spirit: and when he thus had said, he gave up the Ghost. Whereupon
St Jerome observes that the Centurion hearing his Prayer, and seeing him
presently of his own accord to send forth his Spirit, Moved, Hier. Quaest. ad
Hedib. Qu. 8. p. 146.
says he, with the greatness of the wonder, he said, truly this man was the
Son of God. St Austen observing the manner of this his Death thus described:
Who Aug. in Evan. Ioh. Tract. 119. p. 375.
says he, can so betake himself to sleep when he will, as Christ dyed when
he would? who can so put of his garment at his pleasure, as Christ put of his
flesh? Who can so easily remove from the place he stands in, as Christ removed
from his life? With how great power shall he come to judge, that showed so
great power when he dyed. And again in an other place, His power to die was
such Aug. in Evan. Joan. Tract. 31. p 172.
says he, as that some more admired it, then his power of working miracles.
Our Savior himself ratifieth these observations with his own mouth: I, Ioh.
10.18.
says he, lay down my life that I might take it again. No man takes it from
me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down, and have power
to take it again. The laying down then of his life was no punishment imposed
on him, for Ioh. 8.46.
who could rebuke him of sin? Nor was it a forcible invasion of Death, for 1.
Cor. 15.56.
the sting of Death is sin: but it was a Sacrifice most voluntary rendered to
God for our sakes. I, every thing he did, every thing he suffered, he
voluntarily did it, and voluntarily suffered it: Thou Aug. in Evan. Joan. Tract.
49. vid. B. Bilsons Survey. p. 355 and p. 526.
says St Austen, art troubled against thy will, but Christ was troubled
because he would. He hungered, says he, it is true, but because he would: he
slept; it is true, but because he would: he sorrowed; it is true, but because
he would: he died, it is true, but because he would. It was in his power to be
so, or so affected, or not to be affected at all. And this it is that here in
this place the Prophet intimates with so many words: He was plagued, smitten,
humbled, wounded, and broken: Chastisement and Stripes. Or if Stripes, and
Chastisement, and Breaking, and Wounding, and Humbling, and Smiting, and
Plaguing, be not sufficient to express this Death of his unto us, go we to
the seventh verse of this Chapter, and there shall we find him, Brought as a
Sheep to the slaughter. Or if that be not enough neither, go we farther to
the eight verse, and there shall we find him, Cut out of the land of the
living. Or if that neither be enough, then let us go to the twelfe verse, and
there shall we find him, Pouring out his Soul unto death, as if so be the
Prophet had now seen (and he saw it no doubt with the eyes of Faith) that
which the Evangelist saw with his bodily eyes, how one of the Soldiers with a
spear piercing his Side, there issued forth BLOOD, and WATER, Ioh. 19.34.

Why but the Ignorant perhaps will here reply, to what end and purpose is all
this? What is it to us or to any other, if so be Christ were thus handled? Be
it (as you say) he never sinned, and that he dyed guiltless, does that
advantage us? Yes Beloved, exceeding much, for had not he thus dyed, we had
dyed everlastingly Body and Soul. Now by this means the wrath of God is wholly
appeased, the law of God satisfied that lay so Deuteronomy. 27.26 Gal. 3.10.
heavy upon our Shoulders, and Satan that old Serpent our Adversary the
Devil, he was taken in his own trap. Muscipula Diaboli, Crux Domini, Aug. de
Temp. Ser. 174. p 698
says S. Austen, The Cross of our Lord, was a trap to take the Devil in, the
Bayt wherewith he was caught, was the Death of our Lord. It fared a while with
the Devil, as it did with Turnus that slew Pallas, and was so Ioviall
thereupon, Virg. Aeneid. l. 10.
Quo nunc Turnus ovat spolio, gaudetque potitus
who but Turnus now, having slain his Enemy in the field, but the Poet adds
shortly after, Turno tempus erit, magno cum optaverit emptum
Intactum Pallanta, and cum Spolia ista, Diemque
Oderit
The time would come whenas Turnus would much repent him of that bargain, and
hate those Spoils he had, and the very Time he took them in, and so indeed
fell it out with Satan. This proud Goliath, this Plaut. Miles. Glor. Act. 4.
sc. Iamne est.
Vrbicapus, occisor Regum, Sacker of Cities, and Queller of Kings, who thought
no man in all the world able to match him, found One even in Israel, Flesh of
our Flesh, and Bone of our Bones, not able to match him only, but also to Vid.
Mr Fox of Christ crucified p. 43. b. and p. 46. a.
overmaster him, and to do as David did by Goliath, with his own Sword to cut
of his Head. For Satan forsooth was so greedy to devour up all, and every of
us, I mean by Death, as that he swallowed up such a Morsel as made him cast
up all that ever he had eaten before. So that as Adam being Lord of Paradise,
for presuming upon ONE FRVIT that was forbidden him by the Lord, lost his
interest in all the rest, which he might have enjoyed all his life: right so
Satan having authority given him over all Sinners throughout the World, for
that he so far presumed over ONE that was in truth no Sinner at all, he
forfeited to him ipso facto all his Authority he formerly had. Thus our
Savior by his Death as it was prophesied long before, being bruised (as it
were) by the Devil, did break the Devils Head. Genesis 3.11.
For as if he had committed but one sin, one only sin whatsoever, he could
never have recovered himself, but by his Death, and Punishment, should have
satisfied eternally, even for that one only Sin: so being guiltless of
committing any, I, the very least that Heart can think, all what ever he did,
and suffered, was only for our sakes, even as many of us as believe in him, and
endeavor to live a godly life. And thus much of the third point, namely the
Means our Savior used in redeeming us from destruction. Now to apply what
has been spoken, and to make it the fitter for our Souls health. Surely he
has borne our Infirmities, and carried our Sorrows: yet we did judge him as
plagued, and smitten of God, and humbled. But he was wounded for our
Transgressions, he was broken for our Iniquities, the chastisement of our peace
was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.

It may seem, doubtless, somewhat strange, to such as are conversant in holy
Scriptures, that reading there of the Death of any, and finding mention also of
their Parents, they always find some Items concerning the Sorrows of those
Parents for the death of those their Children: only when we read of the Death
of our Savior, and how his Blessed Mother then was by, we can find nothing
there of her Sorrow, nor of any moan at all that she made. Stantem lego, Ambr.
de Obitu Valentiniani p. 9.
says St Ambrose, stentem non lego. I read how she stood by the Cross there,
but that she wept at all, I read not. Job, when after those many Messages,
first, of the loss of his Oxe^: secondly, of his Asses; thirdly, of his
Sheep; fourthly, of his Camels; and in every of these of his Servants
miscarying; news was brought him at the length, of the loss of his Children
too; Then Job arose, Job. 1.20.
says the Scripture, and rent his garment, and shaved his head, and fell down
upon the ground, in all which howsoever he sinned not, nor charged God
foolishly, as there it is Job. 1.22.
said in that place, yet he sorrowed no doubt very deeply, as was to be seen
by these Signs. Jacob saw but Joseph's Coat imbrued with blood, and supposing
him to be slain, he rent his clothes, Gen 37.34.
says the Scripture, and put sackcloth about his loins, and sorrowed for his
son a long season. Those tender Babes in Bethleem that were murdered by
Herod, Quibus in primo nascendi limine, as Aug. de Sanct. Ser 9.
one speaks, aeterna vita obviam venit: whom Life everlasting did meet (as it
were) on the very Threshold of their Birth, what a voice did they cause in
Rama, Mat. 2.18.
Mourning and weeping, and great lamentation, Rachel weeping for her children,
and would not be comforted because they were not. The Prophet David when his
Son Absolon died, that wicked and ungracious Son, what bitter moan did he
make for him? O my son Absolon, 2. Sam. 18.33
says he, my son, my son Absolon: would God I had died for thee, O
Absolon my son, my son. But come we to our Saviors Death, and cast we our
eyes upon his Mother, to see how she takes it, and all the Evangelist will
inform us concerning her is, that there indeed she was, not a word of her
Sorrow for the same, though no doubt it was then fulfilled which Simeon spoke
of long before, That a Sword should pierce through her soul, Luke 2.35. It is
Tully Orat. ad Brut. and Plin. Hist. Not. l 35. c. 10.
storied of a Painter that being to describe how a certain Damsel was going
to her Death (who upon occasion was to be sacrificed) he took upon him to
express it with all the cunning that he had. One of her Friends that was a
Mourner, and to go in the first rank, he painted, says Tully, with a
countenance exceeding sad, and sorrowful. After him there followed a nearer
Friend, and his countenance (as it was to be) so he made it much more sad. Next
to him followed her Uncle, and him he made the saddest of all. In setting down
of which three Sadnesses, when he had spent al his cunning, and the Father of
the Damsel was next to follow, who was in all congruitie, to be sadder then
all the rest, the Painter for he could not express that Sadness, in as lively
a sort as it should have been, drew a Veil over his face, as if so be his
Sorrow had been such, as that Art it self, or Pencill, could not possibly
express it. I cannot think, Beloved, that the Spirit of God did in this
respect conceal the Sorrow of the Blessed Virgin toward her Son, as unable
to express it. For what cannot he express that dives so deeply into our
thoughts, as not a corner there, but is disclosed to him, Psalm. 139.1. Nay if
it be Plin. Not. Hist. l. 35. c. 10.
written of Apelles, that he would seem to pourtray those things which indeed
cannot be pourtraied, as cracks of Thunder leames, or flashes of Lightnings,
Thu^derbolts, and such like, what could not the Spirit of God have expressed,
that is such a Discerner of our thoughts, and intents of the heart, Heb. 4.12.
And would you know the reason then why her Sorrow here is not expressed? It
is, as I conceive, to intimate thereby unto us, another point then to be
pensive, and to be sorry at his Cross. It is the manner of Friars, and Jesuits,
as an industrious Writer has Mr Perkins on the Creed p. 251.
observed, to use the consideration of the Passion of Christ, as a means to
stir up compassion in themselves: partly toward Christ, partly toward the
Virgin Mary, and withal to kindle in the hearts of their Hearers, an
indignation toward the Jews that put our Savior unto Death. And indeed to say
the truth, some place there is for this compassion, especially toward Christ:
some for this indignation toward the Jews, but yet we must not here rest,
we must go farther then so, we must acknowledge OUR SELVES the very causes,
of all that ever was done unto him: -- Virg. Aeneid. l. 9.
Mea fraus omnis, nihil iste nec ausus,
Nec potuit.
They were our own Sins that crucified him: our own Sins they were, that
nailed him to the Cross. And yet notwithstanding all this, if we consider the
case aright; that which Tully Tull. ad He^en. l. 2.
said of Tears in general, Nihil lachryma citius aresoit: Nothing sooner
dryes up the^ Tears, the same may be said, and done, concerning our Tears in
this kind. For unless our Savior thus had died, we had died everlastingly.
Si ille non occideretur, Aug. de Temp Ser. 174. p. 698
says St Austen, Mors non moreretur. And therefore St Austen again, Hodierno
die Dominus noster pependit in cruce, Aug. de Temp. Ser. 130. p. 638
says he, and nos epislamur, vt discati^ quoniam Crux Christi Feriae sunt and
Nundinae spiritales. O my Brethren, says S. Austen, it was upon this
Goodfryday that our Lord did hang upon the Cross, and yet we feast, and all to
learn thereby that the Cross of Christ is a Ioviall time, and a spiritual
kind of Mart. And again in another Aug. de Temp. Ser. 181. p. 706.
place, Illusiones and probra quae pertulit Christus. Crucem, Mortemque eius
non suspirijs ingemiscimus, sed continuis celebramus laudibus. Those Scoffs
and Scorns that Christ endured, that Cross and Death of his, we do not
bewail with tears, but laud and celebrate with continual praises.

Rowse up thy self then distressed Soul, thou that grievest, and groanest so
much under the Burden of thy Sins: thou whom Satan has made to see so many
Horses and Chariots about thee, whose names are LEGION for they are many, and
cryest out in great agony, Mark 5.9.
Alas Master, how shall we do? My answer shall be unto thee that of 2.
King. 6.16.
Elisha, Fear not, for they that be with us, are more then they that be with
them. Nay CHRIST thus crucified, and CHRIST once crucified but thus, and but
one only CHRIST, how is he more then all of them, were they again as many
more. Witness the Apostle to the Colossians, You Coloss. 2.13.
says he, which were dead in sins, and in the uncircumcision of your flesh,
has he quickened together with him forgiving you all your trespasses, and
putting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was
contrary to us, he even took it out of the way, and fastened it upon the
CROSS, And has spoiled the Principalities, and Powers, and has made a show
of them openly, and has triumphed over them in the same CROSS. And again to
the Romans 8.34.
Romans, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
justifies. Who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which
is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also
for us. And therefore in the words immediately following, Who Romans 8.35.
says he, shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall Tribulation, or
Anguish, or Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? In all
these things we are more then Conquerours through him that loved us. For I am
persuaded that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any
other Creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Oh, but thou will say, this is nothing unto ME in particular, this is to the
Elect in general, but what shall I find in Gods word in particular to My
self? What? But to apply by a true Faith that to thy self in particular, that
which is generally there set down. So the Prophet Esaias, as a Minister, to
another in particular, Esaias 50.8.
He is near that justifies thee, who will contend with thee? Behold the Lord
God will help thee, who is he that can condemn thee? So the Apostle S. Paul,
unto himself, I live Gal. 2 20.
says he, by the faith in the Son of God, who has loved ME, and given
himself for ME. Nay, will you see how the same Apostle applies that in
particular to any one, which in particular was spoken to an other? The place
is, Heb. 13.5, where that which was said to Joshua, Josh. 1.5, As I was with
Moses, so will I be with thee: I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee, the
Apostle applies to any Hebrew, any Christian whatsoever, Let your conversation
says he, be without covetousness, and be content with those things which ye
have: for he has said, I will not fail thee, neither forsake thee. To apply
then the words of my Text. Are they here set down in general, Surely he has
borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows: he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, and so forth? Heb. 4.2.
Mix with Faith but what thou hear, and thou may as truly say of thy
self in particular, Surely he has borne MY infirmities, and carried MY
sorrows. He was wounded for MY transgressions, he was broken for MINE
iniquities: the chastisment of MY peace was upon him, and with his stripes, I
am healed.

But alas to what end and purpose speak I now to Distressed Souls? Where are
they? Where live they? Where may we but hear of such an one? I for my part
would honor the ground that such an one treads upon, I would kiss even the
shadow of such an ones Feet. We may see on the contrary a world of hayry Psalm.
68.21.
Scalpes that go on still in their wickedness, that add (as Moses Deuteronomy. 29.19.
speaks) Drunkenness unto Thirst, that is, Security unto Sin, and assemble
them selves by Ier. 5.7.
companies in Harlots houses. To such indeed may I venture to speak, for where
are there not some such, and therefore even in this Assembly supposing there
may be ONE at the least, let me single him out in a word, or two, be it at his
own choice to be bettered by it.

When Israel Psalm. 114.1.
says the Psalmist, came out of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from among the
strange people, the Sea saw that and fled, Jordan was driven back. The
mountains leaped like Rams, and the little hills like young sheep. Whereupon
the Psalmist beginning to reason with them, What ayleth thee, O thou Sea, that
thou fleddest? And thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back? Ye mountains
that ye skipped like Rams, and ye little hills like young sheep? The answer
there is, as it is in one of our English Bible printed 1608.
Tra^slations, Psalm. 114.7.
The earth tre^bled at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of
Jacob. Ask in like manner, oh thou Miscreant, ask of that greater Light of
heaven, why at the death of JESUS he became so far eclypsed, as that he was
nothing like his wonted self when he so much Psalm. 19.5.
reioiced to run his course, and will not he tell thee of like presence of the
self same Lord, and God of Jacob, and how he then died on the Cross? Will not
he tell thee, that the same Jerusalem which JESUS had Psalm. 48.2.
crowned with such Glory, that it was the joy of the whole Earth, crowned him
again with thorns? That that People which JESUS Exodus 12.36
laded with spoils out of Egypt, spoiled him of the Robes he wore? That they
for who^ JESUS Psalm. 106.9.
dried up the red Sea, to lead them through the Deep as through a wilderness,
dried up the Ocean of his blood by spilling it on the ground? That they whom in
the day time JESUS Psalm. 78.15.
led with a clowd, and all the night through, with a light of fire, conspired
against him by day, and in the night came with Ioh 18 3. Mat. 26.55.
Lanterns, and Torches, and Weapons, as if they had come to take a Thief? That
JESUS who rained down Psalm. 78.24.
Manna for them, and made them bread of the wheat of heaven, had from them, and
by their means Ier. 11.19. Vulg.
Wood mingled with his bread? That JESUS who gave to them water out of the very
Number. 20 11.
Rock, had Mat. 27.48.
Vinegar and Gall given him again by way of amends? Exceeding great
Ingratitude, and as a Body would think unmatchable, and yet see, oh see, thou
Dan. 13.56.
Seed of Canaan, and not of Judah, whether thy Ingratitude toward him be not
more by much, much more. For they for their parts knew not, no they knew not
what they did, our Savior himself did bear the^ witness, Father, Luke 23.34.
says he, forgive them, for they know not what they do: and had they known
it 1. Cor. 2.8.
says the Apostle, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory: but thou
can not be ignorant, how thou do crucify him Heb. 6.6.
again. They did it then, and at that time when as his Glory was not known,
and the Psalm. 2.2.
Kings of the earth stood up against him, and the Rulers took counsel
together: thou when Kings are his nursing Esaias 49.23.
Fathers, and Queens his Nurses. They did it then, and at that time when they
had not yielded him any allegiance, nor cast down their crowns before him,
thou after thou have been named with that most sacred name of a CHRISTIAN, and
have been obliged to him by Baptism. But what do I speak to such Beloved,
as if such were now present. Such were I sure were here, I would speak unto
them as this our Prophet does to their like in his time: Esaias 1.10.
Hear the word of the Lord oh Princes of Sodom, hearken unto the law of our
God, oh People of Gomorrah. Such wete I sure were here, I would speak unto
them as the Prophet Jeremy does, Ier. 25.27.
Drink, and be drunken, and spew and fall, and rise no more, because of the
sword which the Lord will send among you. Such were I sure were here, I would
speak in the words of the Prophet Habakkuk: Habak 2.15.
Woe unto him that gives his Neigbour drink: thou ioinest thine heat, and
make him drunken also, that thou may see their privities. Thou art filled
with shame for glory: drink thou also and be made naked: the cup of the Lords
right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spewing shall be for thy
glory. But for in truth I am persuaded that there are no such here in this
Audience, let me now come to you that are here, and see what use our selves may
make, of all that hitherto has been spoken.

We have heard then out of this Scripture the Sum of the Whole Bible, even
of the Old, and New Testament, to wit, CHRIST JESUS, and him CRVCIFIED: or to
speak in the Apostle St Paul's Coloss. 1 20,
phrase, Sanguinem Crucis, THE BLOOD OF THE CROSS. We have seen what our
Savior has done for us many hundred years ago before that ever we were
borne. How the blood of JESUS CHRIST does 1 Ioh. 1.7.
cleanse us from all sin. St Peter speaking of this his Cross, and how our
Savior bare our Sins in his Body on the tree, infers immediately after: That
we, 1. Pet. 2.24.
says he, being delivered from sin, should live in righteousness. So
Zacharias, John Baptists Father, but he goes one step farther, That we, Luke
1.74.
says he, being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, should serve him
without fear all the days of our life, in holiness and righteousness before
him. So the Apostle unto Titus, and he adds one thing more then Zacharias did.
The grace of God, Tit. 2.11.
says he, that brings salvation unto all men, has appeared, and teaches us
that we should deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and that we should live
soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world. All comes to one
reckning, and you see, Beloved, withal, the true use we are to make of this
CROSS of CHRIST so much spoken of. If so be we make a B. Andrews Sermons of
the combat between Christ and Satan. Ser. 5. page 68. b and Ser. 7 p 95.
Dungcart of it to lade it every day with Sins, gross and enormous Sins,
and the next time it is brought unto us, to have as much more for it again,
and all for it has rid us so well already, we much mistake this CROSS of
CHRIST, nor is it given us to such purpose. The Mercies of God are great, but
his Judgments are great too. If after deliverance from Sin (the effect of
this his CROSS, and which principally we obtain in receiving the holy
Sacrament) we live not In righteousness, as speaks S. Peter, or serve him not
In Holiness, and Righteousness, as Zacharias speaks, or live not Soberly,
and Righteously, and Godly, as speaks the Apostle S. Paul, Soberly in regard
of our selves, Righteously in regard of our Neighbors, Godly in regard of our
Savior, well may we talk of this his CROSS, but we shall be benefitted by
it never awhit. Howsoever it prove to others, doubtless to us it may prove but
a Dream. An hungry man dreameth, Esaias. 29.8.
says this our Prophet, and behold he eats, and when he awaketh his soul is
empty: a thirsty man dreameth, and lo he is drinking, and when he awaketh,
behold, he is faint, and his soul longs. Right so in this case; They suppose
all is well, Come, Wisd. 2.6.
say they, let us enjoy the pleasures that are present, and let us cheerfully
use the creatures as in youth. Let us fill our selves with costly wine, and
ointments, and let not the flower of life pass by us? Let us crown our selves
with Rose buds before they be withered. Let us all be partakers of our
wantonness: let us leave some token of our pleasure in every place: for that
is our portion, and this is our lot: our Savior has paid all the Shot; And so
they betake themselves at length to Sleep, even to their Dead sleep. But when
the Trumpe shall awake them at last with this, or the like sound, Behold the
Bridegroom comes, Mat. 25.6. the Foolish Virgins can tell the^ how they
themselves sped in like case. Mat. 25.11.
Lord, Lord, open to us, was but silly Rhetoric to persuade that the Doares
of Heaven should be opened. Nor shall they speed a whit better, who shall use
more words to that purpose, Many, Mat. 7.22.
says our Savior, will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not by
thy Name prophesied? and by thy Name cast out Devils? and by thy Name done
many great works? And then, says our Savior, will I profess to them, I
never knew you: depart from me ye that work iniquity. Let us not flatter
then our selves in our Sins. Excellent are the words which the Son of
Syrach has, and worthy to be written in letters of gold: Say not I have
sinned, and what evil has come unto me? Ecclus. 5.4.
for the Almighty is a patient rewarder, but he will not leave thee
unpunished. Because thy sin is forgiven, be not without fear to heap sin upon
sin. And say not the mercy of God is great, he will forgive my manifold sins:
for Mercy and Wrath come from him, and his indignation comes down upon
Sinners. It is somewhat shorter which he has in another Ecclus, 7.8.
place, but it is as effectual to the purpose, Bind not two sins together:
for in one sin shall thou not be unpunished. True it is, it is very true,
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save Sinners, the Apostle St Paul 1.
Tim. 1.15.
says it of him, I, he says it of himself, The son of man, Luke 19.10.
says he, is come to seek, and to save that which was lost, and therefore he
preferred when time was, the Luke 18 14.
Publican, before the Pharisee, Luke 7 44.
Mary Magdalen before Simon, Luke 15.23.
banquetted his Prodigal Son more sumptuously then his ever obedient
Brother: Luk 15.5.
carried on his own Shoulders his lost Sheep, Luke 15.8.
looked most narrowly for his lost Groat, Mat. 20.10.
requited their Pains with equal Wages that came to work at unequal Hours:
in a word, that Mat. 18.22.
taught S. Peter that most Christian Arithmetike (and therefore himself no
doubt was most expert in it) of Multiplying Seven Times, by seaventie times
seven times, in forgiving his Christian Brother: and yet is that as true which
the Apostle has to the Hebrews, and ought especially to be heeded by us, Heb.
12.28.
Let us please the Lord with reverence and fear, for even our God is a
consuming Fire. He is not now as he was to the Bush, Exodus 3.2. The bush
burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed: no, For behold, the day
comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do
wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up, says
the Lord of hosts, and shall leave them neither root nor branch, Malachy 4.1.
As soon as Sin then begins to sprout in us, be it but (as it were) a dram
of Pride, a thought of Pleasure, a desire of Revenge, or unlawful Gain, etc:
let us do as was to be done to the Ps. 137.9.
Children of the Daughter of Babylon, even take them, and throw them against
the Stones. Dum parvus est hostis, Hier. ad Eustoch. de Inst. Virg.
says S. Ierom, interfice: ne zizania crescant, elidatur in semine: Let us
strangle Sin while it is but a Brat, least if we suffer it still to grow, in
continuance of time it strangle us. It was a wise saying of Ulysses in the
Senec. Treas Act 3. sc. Matris quidem.
Poet, Matris quidem me moeror attonitae movet,
Magis Pelasgae me tamen Matres movent,
Quarum iste magnos crescit in luctus puer.
Right so, Beloved, say to COVETOVSNES; Of a truth thou movest me somewhat, in
that thou do promise unto me such heaps both of Silver, and of Gold, yet our
Saviors words move me Mat. 16.26.
more, What shall it profit a man though he should win the whole world, if he
loose his own Soul? So likewise unto PLEASVRE; Of a truth thou movest me
somewhat, thy Beauty is so pleasing, and I well remember Solomon Prove. 9.17.
says, Stolen waters are sweet, and hid bread is pleasant: but forasmuch as
he adds withal, That the Dead are there, and That her Guests are in the
depth of Hell: pack hence, be gone, for out of Hell is no Redemption. So
likewise to CAROWSING; Of a truth thou movest me somewhat, thy Custom is now a
days grown so great, howbeit since the Prophet Esaias Esaias 5.11.
says, Woe unto them that rise up early to follow drunkenness, and to them
that continue until night, til the wine do inflame them: And Ver. 22.
again, Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and to them that are
strong to pour in strong drink: let them follow their Liquor that list, I
shall be rather of their Society, Psalm. 35.9. Vulg.
Qui inebriabu^tur ab vbertate Domus tuae: et Psalm. 36.8.
Torre^te voluptatis tuae potabis eos: who shall be satisfied with the
plenteousnesse of thy House, O Lord, and to whom thou shall give drink of thy
Pleasures, as out of the River.

Concerning Sins already past, you see what God has now done for you. He has
not only forgiven them to you, utterly wiped them away, but this Day as many as
would, he has admitted to his TABLE. He has given you there his best Welcome.
Thousands of his dear Children are this day desirous of the entertainment you
have had, and what in one respect, what in an other, they cannot obtain it, no
not with tears. Happy we, if we knew our Happiness. But if so be we now
return again as does the 2. Pet. 2.22.
Dog to his own Vomit, or as the Sow that was washed, to the wallowing in
the mire, our state is dangerous, our case fearful. St Austen speaking of the
Dog, Si Canis, Aug. in Psalm. 83. p. 630.
says he, hoc faciens horret oculis tuis, tu quid eris oculis Dei? If thou
abhorrest to see a Dog to do so beastly in thy sight, imagine what thou thy
self art, if so be thou should so do, in the sight of God. But enough now
at this time.

The God of Heaven so bless us, and the seed that has been sown, etc.
OUR SAVIOVRS RESVRRECTION.
Easter Day April. 8. 1610.
But now is Christ risen from the dead, and was made the first fruits of them
that slept. For since by man came death, by man came also, the resurrection of
the dead.

1. COR. 15.20.
THE comparison is not uneven, Right Worshipful, and dearly Beloved, which
that golden mouthed Father St Chrysostom does make, between St Paul, and that
glorious Sun in the Firmament. The Psalmist speaking of that Sun: It comes
forth, Psalm. 19.5.
says he, as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices as a Giant to
run his course. It goes forth from the uttermost part of the heaven, and
runs about unto the end of it again, and there is nothing hid from the heat
thereof. And St Chrysostom speaking of S. Paul, The Apostle S. Paul, Chrysostom.
Tom. 3. ele laud. D. Pauli. Hom. 8.
says he, is unto men as it were a second Sun, who with the radiant Beams
of his Tongue has illightned the whole World, and compassing about all Nations
has followed the course of the Sun indeed. Which that we may conceive the
better, let us compare more at large the Sun, and St Paul together. First then
for the Creating of this Sun, we shall find it in the ninth Chapter of the
Acts when like that other Sun in the firmament being produced out of darkness,
there fell from his eyes as it had been scales, and suddenly he received
sight, and rose, and was baptized, Act. 9.18. The rising of this Sun was in
the thirteenth of the Acts, and yonder Sun as it rises to us, when it
appears above our Castle of knowledge. p 54.
Horizon: so arose the Apostle St Paul above the Horizon of the Church, when
as it was said unto the Church by the mouth of the Holy Ghost, Separate me
Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them, Act. 13.2. The
way whereby the Sun goes is called by Astronomers the Zodiac, in the which
are twelve Signs, which being divided into four Triplicities, square out into
four parts, the four Seasons of the Year. The Signs, (as it were) in our
Apostles Zodiac, were the Regions of the world, which himself dividing into
as many parts as are the Seasons of the Year, in visiting every of them he
made (as it were) four Mosis Pstacheri Analys. Typ. p 546. etc.
Travailes. His first Travail is comprised in the 13. and 14. Chapters of the
Acts: his Second, in the 15, 16, 17, and part of the 18. Chapter: his Third,
from part of the 18. to the 26: his fourth, and last, in the 27, and 28. being
the two last Chapters of that Book. The Degrees (if I may so term them) of
every of these Signs, or (to speak a little more plainly for the capacity of
some among you) the Places through which he past in every of these his
Travailes, were in his first Travail, Selcucia, Cyprus, Pamphylia, Antioch in
Pisidia: and his more special Places of abode, were Iconium, and Lystra. The
places through which he passed in his second Travail, were Syria, Silicia,
Asia minor, and Greece: and the more special Places of his abode were
Thessalonica, Beraea, Athens, Corinth, and Ephesus. The Places through which he
past in his third Travail, were Galatia, Phrygia, and Greece again: and the
more special Places of his abode, were Ephesus again, Macedonia, Troas,
Assos, and Miletum: from whence returning by Coos, Rhodes, Phaenicia, Tyrus,
Ptol^mais, Caesarea, and so forth, he arrived at length at Jerusalem. The
places through which he past in his fourth and last Travail were Sidon, Cyprus
again, Mira, Gnidus and Creet, and the most special Place of his abode was
Rome. And at Rome this Sun did set, even as the Sun sets at his going down,
being (as Antiquity delivers to us) beheaded at Rome the self same day that
St Peter there was crucified. Then was Peter, Tertul Scorg. advers Gnost. p 615.
says Tertullian, girded by another, whenas he was girded to the Cross. Then
was Paul a freeman borne of the City of Rome indeed, when by the nobility of
Martyrdom, he was borne (as it were) again. And speaking in another place of
the Church of Rome: Where Peter, Tertul de Praescript. advers. Haeret. p. 83.
says he, was crucified like to our Savior Christ, and Paul beheaded like
John the Baptish.

Now Greece, Beloved, being one of the Places which this our Apostle past in
his second Travail, and Corinth in that his Travail, one of the more special
Places of his abode, we shall find in the 18 Chapter of the Acts, both from
whence it was he thither came, and what it was he there did, and how long it
was he there staid. The Place he came from, was ATHENS the most famous place in
all Greece. Athens, the Greece of Greece, as Thucyd Hist. l. 1.
one calls it; the Grecian Vesta, as Coel. Rhodig. l. 18 c. 25.
another; The Sun, the Soul of Greece, as a Demosth de Cor.
third; Athens, the common school of Mankind, for so Diodor. Sic. Biblioth.
Hist. l 12.
Diodorus Siculus terms it; Athens, Philo Iud. lib Quod omnis probus liber
says Philo Iudaeus, the same in Greece, that the Apple is in the Eye, or
Reason in the Mind; Athens within whose Walls the only wits of Greece were
enclosed, so Paterculus; In a word, Athens was as OXFORD is, an University,
and a City. What it was he did at Corinth, is related by himself in diverse
passages of this Epistle. He for his part there 1 Cor. 3.6.
planted, Vell. Paterc. l 1.
that is as Aug ep 48 p. 122
S. Austen understands it, he did there Evangelize, there it was Apollos
watered, that is, as the same Father interprets it, there Apollos did
baptize, Sed Deus incrementum dedit, but God gave the increase. According to
the grace of God given unto him, as a 1. Cor 3.^0.
skillful Master Builder he there laid the Foundation. 1. Cor. 4.15.
In Christ Jesus he beget them through the Gospel. They were his work in the
Lord, and had he not been (as himself 1. Cor. 9.1.
writes) an Apostle unto other, yet doubtless he was unto them, for they were
the seal of his Apostleship in the Lord. The abode he made in this City was
somewhat longer then usually he made in other places, it being some Twelve
month and an half: soiourning at the first with Aquila, and Priscilla, of
whom he speaks in diverse places: and afterward with one Iustus, who dwelt
Act. 18.7.
nearer to the Church then they did.

Having thus long staid among them, and gone at last from thence (and cause
there was he should be gone, for he was as the Sun I told you, not always
fixed in one place) then Satan, lo, began his prizes, he made havoc of the
Flock, he 1. Cor. 3.3.
sent in Envying, he sent in Strife, he sent in Co^tentions, and Divisions
among them. And as they that are once going down a steep Hill, cannot
possibly stay themselves till they come to the very bottom: so these
Corinthians forgetting their old Instructor, and wholly addicted now to New,
came at length to that downfall as that they stuck not to call in question
(nay more then to call) the very cheifest Article of Christian belief, THE
RESVRRECTION OF THE DEAD. Some Vid. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 15. Hom. 38. p. 625.
affirming that it was not at all; some that it was already past; and some that
it concerned not the Body so much as the Renewing of the mind, into so many
wandering Errors did they woefully cast themselves, who so wilfully forsook that
Path that the Apostle at first trod out unto them.

The Apostle, who upon this News was by all likelihood much daunted, and well
perceauing that if he helped not in time, it would be the hazard of so many
Souls, betakes himself unto his PEN, and Quod voce no^ poterat Manu and
Literis est locutus Ambr. in Luc. 1.2. de Zacharia Eva^gelizo manu and
scriptione quoad possum. Dr Reyn. de Idol. Eccl. Rom Ep. ad Com. Essex,
preaches now unto them by way of Writing, that he who in former times by the
high Prists Letters had so much persecuted the Christians, might by Letters of
his own, endeavor as much as might be, to preserve them again in all good
sort.

Among his several Letters to this purpose, some fourteen in all, is this
Epistle of his to the Corinthians written unto them from Philippi. Wherein
after sundry passages of a many matters he had in hand. As first and foremost in
the four first Chapters, concerning the Schisms that were among them: in the
Fifth, concerning the incestuous Person: in the Sixth, concerning their quarrels:
in the Seventh, concerning Questions about Marriage and Virginity: in the
Eight, concerning things that were offered unto Idols: in the Ninth, concerning
the weak Brethren: in the Tenth, concerning Punishments that befell the
Israelites for sin, and might in time befall themselves too: in the Eleventh,
concerning their behavior in their public Assemblies, and Congregations, and
Administration of the Sacraments: in the Twelfe, Thirteenth, and Foureteenth,
concerning Spiritual Gifts: he comes in this Fifteenth Chapter (from whence
the words of my Text are taken) to the grand Question of all, concerning the
Resurrection of the Dead, which until he comes unto my Text, he ha^dleth in
this manner.

First, and foremost, he makes a Preamble, and that in the first, and second
Verses. Secondly he proves by many Reasons the Resurrection of the dead: two of
them before my Text, four, come after. The First he proves it by, is by the
example of our Savior, and it is in this Chapter from the third verse to the
eighteenth, and it is in effect thus much: If there be no Resurrection of the
dead, then was Christ not raised from the dead: but Christ is raised from the
dead, therefore is there a Resurrection. The Second reason is in the nineteenth
Verse, and the Sum of it is this: If so be Christians in this life only, do
hope in Christ, then are they of all men the most miserable: but Christians are
not miserable, much less of all men the most miserable, therefore in this life
only, they hope not in Christ, and consequently they are to rise again from
the dead, that they may be partakers of that Hope concerning the Life that is
to come.

Being thus far on his way, he turns a little aside to the better confirming
of that which he had delivered a little before. He had delivered a little
before, namely in the sixteenth verse (and it was part of the first Reason he
had made) that if so be there were no Resurrection of the dead, the^ that
Christ was not raised at all. He now assumes that Christ is raised, and it is
the whole scope of this my Text, and whereof I shall God willing entreat at
this time, But now is Christ risen from the dead, and was made the first fruits
of them that slept, for since by man came death, by man came also the
Resurrection of the dead.

Which words, were I to handle before the Learned only, such as some of you
are, that here are present, I would observe out of the same these several
parcels to be considered: First, a Proposition: Secondly, the Reason of that
Proposition. The Proposition in these words: Christ is risen from the dead,
and was made the first fruits of them that slept. The reason in these, For
since by man came death, by man came also the Resurrection of the dead. In the
Proposition I would observe these points, First, the Matter, then the Manner.
The Matter in these words: But now is Christ risen from the dead. The Manner
in these, And was made the first fruits of them that slept. In the Reason I
would observe these points, First the Antecedent, Secondly the Consequent. The
Antecedent in these words, Man, and Death: the Consequent in these, Man, and
the Resurrection of the dead: Romans 1.14. 1. Cor. 3 1.
but being a many of you as you are, and my self being a Debtor to the Wise,
and to the Unwise, to such as are Strong in Christ, and to such as are Babes, I
will betake my self to a plainer Method, such as the meanest of you may
conceive, namely first by discoursing of the words of this my Text as here they
lie in order, and then by gathering thence such Instructions as the same shall
afford unto us. First and foremost then as touching the Words: But now is Christ
risen from the dead.

Who it is, is meant by Christ here, the meanest amongst us is not ignorant of.
Our very Belief informs us of him when even in our Infancy we learn to say,
And in Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord. Besides that afterward when we
come to greater groath we make not a Prayer or in the Church, or in our
private houses at home, but the Conclusion you know is, either in so many
words, or in sense, Through Jesus Christ our Lord. The ground whereof, is that
of our Savior, Ioh. 16.23, Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye
shall ask the Father in my name he will give it you. And again, Ask and you
shall receive, that your joy may be full, Ioh. 16.24. Howbeit all of us that
ask in Christ his name, do not all perhaps know why our Savior was named
Christ. The word in truth is a Greek word, and signifies Anointed. Now as
among the Jews before the coming of our Savior three sorts of men were
anointed with oil, as Saul and David. 1. Sam. 10.1. and 1. Sam. 16 13.
PRINCES, Aaron, and his Sons. Exodus 30.30. and Levit 8.12.
PRIESTS, and Elisha the Prophet, 1 King 19.16.
PROPHETS, Vid. P. Mart. Loc Com. Class. 2. Loc. 17.
partly to signify the great Conflicts they were every of them to endure,
partly the plentifulnesse of Gods Spirit, that by that anointing was given
unto the^: right so Beloved, our Savior himself being anointed by the Lord,
First to be our PROPHET, Secondly to be our PRIEST, and Thirdly to be our
PRINCE, had thereupon this name Christ, that is, Anointed, given unto him. He
was a Prophet, I, A Great Prophet, Luke 7.16. He was a Priest, I, An High
Priest, Heb. 5.5. He was a Prince, I, A Prince for ever, Luke 1.33. The time he
was thus anointed in, was the time of his Conception, even before he was
borne, and therefore he was no sooner borne, but an Angel Luk 2.10,
said unto the Shepherds, Behold, I bring you tidings of great joy that shall
be to all the People: that is, that unto you is born this day, in the City of
David a Savior which is Christ the Lord. So that this Anointing though it
were not with material oil, yet was he anointed notwithstanding. The Lord
anointed him, Esaias, 61.1. and God, eve^ his God, has anointed him with the
oil of gladness above his Fellows, Ps. 45.8. And thus much of Christ here in
this place, now concerning the Words annexed. But now is Christ risen from the
dead.

This word Now, here in this place Musc. in hunc loc.
says a learned Interpreter, Non temporis habet connotationem, sed praemissae
argumentationis conclusionem, betokens not the time when this Resurrection was
performed, but the Conclusion of the Reason that was made a little before. I
told you the Reason was, If there be no Resurrection of the dead, then was
Christ not raised from the dead: but Christ is raised from the dead, therefore
is there a Resurrection. The Assumption which in some respect may be called the
Conclusion of the former Reason, is here set down in the words of my Text, and
therefore the Apostle here in this place, But now is Christ risen from the
dead, without any reference to the time at all, like as he says elsewhere, Now
then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. And
thus much of these words, But now is Christ. It follows, Risen from the dead.

The rising of our Savior Christ from Death to Life, does argue that he past
when time was, from Life to Death. The time he past in from Life to Death, was
(as it were) three days since, when on GOOD FRIDAY, as we commonly call it (
Good for us indeed, though never Day more dismal to that Prophet, and Priest,
and Prince of ours, if we respect his manifold Sorrows in it) when on
Goodfryday I say, he humbled himself, and became Philip. 2.8.
obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross. When to speak in St
Bernards Bernard de Passione c. 17.
words, The incomprehensible God, would needs be comprehended; the highest,
humbled; the most mighty, despised; the most beautiful, deformed; the most
wise, be like a beast; the immortal would suffer death; and to speak all in
few words, when God would become a worm. What is higher then God, says he,
what is baser then a worm? Howbeit as Moses said to the Children of Israel
when they were environed with their Enemies, and they saw nothing at all but
Death, Death before them, and Death behind them, and Death on each side, Exodus
14.13.
Fear ye not, stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord, which he
will show to you this day: right so Beloved, let us not fear at what has
been said concerning our Savior, but behold the Salvation of the Lord which
he has showed unto us this day. This Day, this very Day, our Savior restored
himself to Life again, 1. Cor. 15.54.
Death was swallowed up into Victory. He that spoke to the Fish, and it cast up
Jonas, spoke to the Earth, and it cast up Jesus. Whom God Act. 2.24.
says St Peter, raised up, and loosed the sorrows of death, because it was
impossible that he should be holden of it. Praedixit Bernard in Pasc. Ser. 1.
says St Bernard, and revixit: he told us before that so it should be, and so
indeed it came to pass. Vid. My Lord of Land on Jonas, Lect. 30. p, 411.
The Earthquake at the very time of his Resurrection; the testimony of Angels;
his manifestation to his Disciples, to one, to two, to twelve, to more then
five hundred at once; his breaking of bread amongst them; the prints of his
Hands and Sides; their fingers and nails even thrust in his Sides; his
appearing at last to him who did most of all misbeleeue it, the Writer of this
Epistle, are all sufficient Witnesses of the truth of this matter. Quid
expressius atque signatius, Tertull. de Resurrect. carnis, p. 34.
says Tertullian, in hanc causam, aut cui alij rei tale documentum? What can
be alleged for better proof in behalf of the cause we have in hand, what
other thing has ever been better confirmed to us? So that as Tully Tully Orat.
pro Q. Rosc. Com.
said in Roscius his case, Hoc ego loco, soluto and quieto sum animo, and
quorsum recidat responsum tuum, non magnopere laboro: firmissimis enim and
sanctissimis testimonijs Viroroum optimorum causa Roscij communita est: we in
this case may say much better, that concerning our Saviors Resurrection, we
are, as we ought to be, fully resolved, nor do we pass a whit what Jew, or
Gentile, can say against it, since it is so confirmed to us by so many sundry
kinds of several Witnesses. It follows: And was made the first fruits of
them that slept.

That in this place by Them that Slept, are meant the Dead, is a Note perhaps
that needs not, were there not some in this Assembly, not so skillful in Holy
Scripture as are the rest. Such as they are, are to know, that it is an usual
phrase of speech both in Old, and the New Testament. Thus is it there said of
king David that he 1 King. 2.10.
slept with his Fathers, and of 1. King. 11.43.
Solomon, and 1 King 14 20.
Jeroboam, and Ver. 31.
Roboam, and the rest. Thus is it there said of Act. 7.60.
St Stephen also, and our Savior himself so Ioh 1.13
spoke of his Friend Lazarus being dead. The very Heathens spoke so of Death to,
and therefore one of them, he calls Sleep, the Stulte quid est so^nus geiidae
nisi more imago? Ovid. Amor. l. 2. cleg 9.
Picture and Counterfeit of Death: Consanguineus lethi sopor Virg Aeneid. l 6.
an other, the Kinsman of Death, Frater fratre^ amplectitur. Vid. Aelian Var.
Hist. l. 2. c. 35.
an other, The Brother of Death: a Menander in M^nostch.
fourth, (...), little mysteries of death. And to say the very truth, diverse
and sundry are the properties that Death has with Sleep, and Sleep, with
Death. First, no man living can always wake, and no man alive but once must
die. Secondly, a man going to his rest puts of his Garments, and we when we are
to die must of with this Body of ours, which is, as (...) Cyril. Hyeros. Catech
4 p 91.
St Cyril calls it, the Garment of the soul. Thirdly, Sleep as Philosophy
teaches us, comes from the vapors in the Head, and the fruit forbidden that
Adam our Head tasted of, has exhaled ever since such a noisome vapor in every
of us, that die we must, we must die, we must all and every of us fall at
length into this dead sleep. Fourthly, Sleep is a sweet Recreation to us for
all the labors of the Day past, Ovid. Met. l. 11.
Somne quies rerum, placidissime somne Deorum,
Pax animi, quem cura fugit, qui corpora duris
Fessa ministerijs mulces, reparasque labori:
and Death is a sweet Repose for all our Labors, and all our Travailes. O
Death, Eccles 41.2.
says the Son of Syrach, how acceptable is thy judgment unto the needful,
and unto him whose strength fails, and that is now in the last age, and is
vexed with all things, and to him that despaireth, and has lost patience
Fifthly, no man goes to his Rest but he hopes to rise again, and no man goes
to the Grave but he shall rise again indeed. Ideo dormientes appellat Aug de
verb. Apost. Ser. 32. p. 277.
says St Austen, Scripturae veracissima consuetudo, vt cum dormientes audimus,
evigilaturos minime desperemus. Lastly, he that is easily awaked if so he be
called, and so shall we awake when we shall be summond by sound of Trump, for
the Trump shall blow, and the dead shall be raised up incorruptible, and we
(that live) shall be changed; 1. Cor. 15.52. And again, The Lord himself
shall descend from heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the Archangell,
and with the Trumpet of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then
shall we which live and remain, be caught up with them also in the Clouds, to
meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians.
4.16. But it is not my project and purpose to deliver unto you at this time all
the mutual correspondences that are between Sleep and Death, it is enough
that you understand that the Dead are meant in this place by those that Sleep,
and now must I show unto you why our Savior is here named, The first fruits of
the Dead, in that it is here said, And was made the first fruits of them that
slept.

The First Fruits among the Jews were those Primitiva sunt animantiu^, and
inanimantium, quae prima nascuntur, and quae primum terra gignit. Hier. in
Ezec. c. 44. page 549. Col 1. Primitiae quantum ad terrae noscentia de septem
rebus tantum dabantur, scilicet de Frumento, Hordeo, Vinea, Oliva, Malogranato,
Ficu, and Palma. Lyra in Deuteronomy. 26. ex Rabbi Solomone
kind of fruits that were first of all ripe, and brought into the Temple. They
were brought into the Temple for the Priest to bless, that in blessing of the
same, the rest also that were as yet abroad in the Fields, might participate of
that blessing. This it is that this our Apostle says, Romans 11.16. If the first
fruits be holy, so is the whole lump: and if the root be holy, so are the
branches. Of First fruits we may read, Levit. 23.10. and 10.24. Deuteronomy. 26.1. and
Ezech. 44.30. Such then being the First fruits, the meaning is, That our
Savior was the First that rose again from the dead, who in that case being
sanctified as the first fruits of the dead unto God, the Dead likewise that
then were, and shall be to the worlds end, shall be sanctified alike with him.
I mean such as are such fruits as he himself was, Wheat, not Chafe, Grapes,
not Wild Grapes, Olives, not Wild Olives, and so forth of the rest. Howbeit
here it may be objected that seeing many before our Savior were restored from
death to life, as the 1. Kin 17 22
Widow of Sareptaes Son by Elias the 2. Kin. 4.34.
Shunamites Son by Elisha, the Mark. 5.42.
Daughter of Iairus by our Savior himself, as also the Luke 7.15.
Widows Son of Naim, and Ioh. 11.44.
Lazarus of Bethania, how our Savior could possibly be the first fruits of the
dead: it is true they were thus restored indeed, howbeit after their return to
life, they were still subject to Sin and Death as they had bin always before
that. Vid. B. Bilsons Full Redempt. p. 154. and p. 217.
But the first that ever rose into a happy and heavenly life, that without all
doubt was our Savior, who in that respect is termed The first that should
rise from the dead, Act. 26.23: and, The first begotten of the dead, Rev. 1.5.
The first begotten of the dead, Basil. Cont. Eunem. l. 4. p. 349.
says S. Basil, quia causa fuit, and est, vt omnes mortui resurgant ad vitam
immortalem: because he was, and is the cause that the Dead should rise again
to life immortal. It follows in the last words, For since by man came death,
by man came also the Resurrection of the dead.

How Death came first by Man, and by what Man, what Death, is apparent to all
such as have but read, or heard read, the first three Chapters of Gods Book.
It is a story set down at large, and should I as largely relate it to you, the
time would cut me of, and prevent my other meditations. The Sum thereof is
this. The Lord of heaven having made this great World as it were a large
Volume, made afterward an Epitome of it, and that was Man. All things else,
Tertul advers. Marcion. l. 2. p. 149.
says Tertullian, he created at the first, imperiali verbo, by his word. He
spoke, says the Psalmist, and it was done, he commanded, and it stood fast,
Psalm. 33,9. But as for Man he made him, familiari manu, with his fingers ends,
he bestowed (as it were) much more pains in co^triuing, and making him.
Concerning the rest of the Creatures made, Let there be light, Gen 1.3.
says he, and there was light, V. 7.
Let there be a firmament, and it was so. V. 9.
Let the waters be gathered into one place, and let the dry land appear, and
there was both Earth and Sea. V. 14.
Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven, and there was both Sun
and Moon, and Stars. V. 20.
Let the waters bring forth in abundance every creeping thing that has life,
and there was both Fish and feathered Foul. Genesis 1.24.
Let the Earth bring forth the living thing according to his kind, and there
were presently Beasts, and Catle: But when he came to make MAN, he said not
let there be Man, as he said of all the rest, which had been as sufficient for
the making of him, but first, V. 26.
Let us make Man: and then, In our image according to our likeness: and then,
Let them rule over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Foul of the Heaven, and
over the Beasts, and over all the Earth, and over every thing that creeps,
and moves on the earth: and then he made the Man of the Genesis 2.7.
dust of the ground, and then breathed in his face breath of life: and then of
the V. 22.
Rib of Man he made a Woman to bear him company, for as much as it was not
good that the Man should be himself V. 18.
alone. And here with Tertul advers. Marcion. l. 2. p. 149.
Tertullian, let us consider ere we go any farther, the many goodnesses of God
toward Man. The Goodness of God made him first of all, of the dust of the
Earth: the Goodness of God breathed life into him: the Goodness of God gave
him dominion over all the Beasts of the Field: the Goodness of God afforded
him such delights besides, that though he were Lord of all the world, yet his
abode should be in Paradise the beauty of the world: the Goodness of God
provided for him an Helper too, NE QVID NON BONI: says Tertullian, being
himself a married man, least any good thing might be wanting to him: the
Goodness of God gave him a Law too, that man himself might only be subject to
that God, who had made a little before, all things subject unto man: the
Goodness of God foretold him the peril that would ensue if he brake that
Law, unwilling doubtless, says Tertullian, that ever he should break it,
who foretold him so truly the punishment before. Thus was Man full of wisdom,
and perfect in beauty, as Ezec. 28.12.
speaks the Prophet. He was in Eden the Garden of God, every precious Stone
was in his Garment, I mean his Soul. The Ruby, the Topaz, the Diamond, the
Chrysolite, the Onix, the Jasper, the Saphier, the Emrod, and the Carbuncle: he
was the anointed Cherub; And yet for all this what became of Man at length?
Man, Ps. 49.20.
says the Psalmist, being in honor has no understanding, but is compared to
the Beasts that perish. Nay more then by way of comparison too. Those things
are compared to other, that in no wise are the same, but the condition of the
Children of Men, and the condition of Beasts, are (as the Prophet tells us) the
self same. As the one dies so dies the other Eccles 3.19.
says he, for they have all one breath, and there is no excellency of Man
above the Beast, for all is vanity. All go to one place, and all was of the
dust, and all shall return to the dust. And thus has Adam plunged us all into
a Gulf of miseries, insomuch that all and every of us may now say with 2. Esd.
7.48.
Esdras, O Adam, what have thou done? for in that thou have sinned, thou art
not fallen alone, but the fall also redoundeth unto us that come of thee. By
Man came Death.

But what? is there no Balm at Gilead? Is there no Physician there? may not
this Health of ours, this Sin, this Fall, this Death, be healed, or
recovered? Son of man, Ezec. 37.4
says the Lord to Ezechiel, can these bones live? To whom when Ezechiel
answered, O Lord God, thou know: Prophecy, says the Lord, upon these
bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord. Thus
says the Lord God unto these bones, Behold I will cause breath to enter into
you, and ye shall live. And I will lay sinews upon you, and make flesh grow
upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, that ye may live,
and ye shall know that I am the Lord. The Lord spoke it, and performed as
much, there was a V. 7.
noise, and a shaking, and the Bones came together, bone to his bone, the
Sinews and the Flesh grew upon them, the Skin covered them, and they did live.
And even as they did, so shall we, not a Bone of ours shall be missing, Sinews
and Flesh shall grow upon us, the Skin shall cover us, and we shall stand upon
our Feet an exceeding great Army. I, and that so certainly as if it now were
done already, For since by Man came Death, by Man came also, mark Beloved,
came also, not comes, or shall come, but by Man came also the Resurrection of
the dead. For as Adams Flesh was the POISON that infected all, and every of us:
so our Saviors Flesh is the Treacle that shall quicke^ us al, and every one. He
was the Firstborn of the Dead, he was the First Fruits of them that slept, so
that we also shall rise again, we shall reviue as he did. Our Bodies, as 1.
Cor. 15.42
speaks the Apostle, are sown in corruption, but they are raised in
incorruption: they are sown in dishonor, and they are raised in glory: they
are sown in weakness, and they are raised in power: they are sown natural
Bodies, and they are raised spiritual Bodies. Thou sowest not Ver. 37.
says the same Apostle, as it is in our last Translation, that Body that shall
be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain, but God
gives it a Body as it has pleased him, and to every seed his own Body.
Excellent are the words of Tertullian hereupon: The Grane of corn, Scritur
solum modo granum sine folliculi vest, sine fundamento sp^cae, sinc munimento
aristae, sine superbia culmi. Exurgit autem copia foeneratu^, compagine
aedificatum, ordine structum, cultu munitum and vsquequaque vestitum. Haec sunt
ei corpus a Deo aliud, in quod non abolitione, sed ampliatione mutatur. Tertul.
de Resurre. Carn. p. 57.
says he, is sown without an husk, or without an ear, or beard of an ear,
or without any stem or stalk; but it rises again in much more plenty, well
cowched together, in due order, fairly decked, and trimmed, and closed in on
every side. And this is the Body God gives it, not in that it is abolished, but
increased more at large. And such a change by way of proportion shall be in our
Bodies, and as we have 1. Cor. 15 49
borne the image of the Earthly, so shall we bear the image of the Heavenly.
Now whereas there may seem more likelihood of our Saviors Body rising again,
then may possibly be of Ours, forasmuch as he rose again the third day, our
Bodies are not like to rise again many hundreds of years after their Burial
(no more then theirs that have been buried so many several Ages gone and
past) that Aug. Epist. 49. p. 125.
says St Austen, is al one: for that both unto humane ability as they are
impossible alike, so both again to Heavenly Power are light, and easy to be
performed. For as the Sight of our Eye, Aug. Epist. 49. p. 125.
says he, reaches as soon to things a far of, as it does to things nigh at
hand, and it is not longer in seeing a Mile of, then in seeing things that are
hard by: even so the Apostle says he, enforming us that the Resurrection shall
be performed in the twinkling of an eye, 1. Cor. 15 52
it is as easy for Gods Omnipotency to raise up Carkases already dead many
thousands of years ago, as those that dyed but three days since. Nor shall it
be prejudicial hereunto says the same St Austen in an other place, though a
man be burnt to ashes, or torn with Dogs. Omnia Aug. in Psalm. 62 p. 438.
says he, quae discerpuntur, and in favillas quasdam putrescunt, integra Deo
sunt. All things whatsoever have by any manner of means been dissolved, or
turned into ashes, they are safe, and sound unto God. And thus much of the
Words as they lie in order in my Text, now as touching such Instructions as
the same shall afforde unto us. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and was
made the first fruits of them that slept. For since by man came Death, by man
came also the Resurrection of the dead.

First and foremost then from these words: But now is Christ risen from the
dead, the Instruction I gather is, that we always bear in mind our Saviors
Victory over Death. Remember 2. Tim. 2.8.
says the Apostle St Paul among his many Memorandums unto Timothy, that Jesus
Christ made of the seed of David, was raised again from the dead. If Timothy
Paul's 1. Tim. 1.2.
natural Son in the Faith, a 1. Tim 6.11.
man of God, one in whom was 2. Tim. 1.5.
Faith unfeigned, that 2 Timothy 3 10.
fully knew the Apostles Doctrine, and the 2. Tim 3 15.
Scriptures of a Child, and (if the Translation of the Postscript of St Paul's
second Epistle unto him, deceive us not) the First 2. Tim 4 22.
Bishop of the Church of Ephesus: if Timothy, I say, had such need to have this
Memento given unto him, that Christ was raised again from the dead, how should
we be remembered of it, and notwithstanding our learning of it heretofore, how
is it likely we may forget it. Fluitat humana Memoria Aug. de Consens. Evang.
l. 3. c. 13. p. 352.
says St Austen, nec in cuiusquam potestate est, quid and quando veniat in
mentem. The memory of man, goes often a wool-gathering, nor is it in any man's
power whatsoever to say aforehand, he will remember such a thing, and at such
a time. The most obnoxious to Faults of Forgetfulness are commonly Old men, and
yet Nec vero que^ quam Senum audivi oblitum quo loco thesaurum obruisset. Tul.
de Senect.
says Cato, I for my part have never heard of an Old man that ever forgot
where he hid his Gold. Doubtless Beloved, there is in this point a golden
Treasure, and though perhaps we should never forget where we had hid it in
times past, namely, in our Hearts, yet such is the subtilty of Satan daily
seeking to circumvent us, and to become Master of this Prize, that as Euclio
in the Poet had Nunc ibo vt visam, sune ita aurum vt condidi. Plaut. Aulul.
Act. 1. sc. Exi^inquam.
still a mind to his Pot of Gold for fear of false fingring, so, and more
then so it behooves us to be still having a care whether this our Treasure be
there or no. Concerning the worth of this Treasure, St Paul will tell us, no man
better: I, Philip. 3.8.
says he, count all things to be loss, and judge them to be dung, that I
might win Christ, and might be found in him, that is, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through faith, that I may know
him, and the virtue of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his afflictions,
and be made conformable unto his death. And this that we also may the better
do, let us call to mind first and foremost, how our Savior himself by his
own power did raise himself to Life again. I, Ioh. 10 17
says he, lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man takes it
from me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down, and have
power to take it again. Nor is it prejudicial hereunto that this his Raising
again is attributed Romans 4.^4.
sometimes to the FATHER, Romans 8.11.
sometimes to the HOLY GHOST, seeing the Holy Ghost, the Father, and Himself
are all one: the glory equal, the majesty coeternall. And howsoever the Father
is Almighty, the Son Almighty: and the Holy Ghost Almighty: yet as Athanasius
Athanasius Creed.
tells us, they are not three Almighties but one Almighty.

Secondly, let us call to mind how he arose again with an Earthquake. There
was Mat. 28.2.
says St Matthew, a great Earthquake: and this great Earthquake no doubt was a
Preamble (...)

(...) ^dy, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. Nether give ye your
Members, as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin: but give your selves unto
God, as they that are alive from the dead, and give your Members, as weapons of
Righteousness unto God. And again to the Ephesians. 5.14.
Ephesians, Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee light. What? and have thou not thy part then in this First
Resurrection? Do thou not find, and feel in thy self, the kingdom of God
in thee yet begun? Art thou now as prone to all evil, as ever in all thy life
before? as ready to rap out an oath, to drink and to be drunke^, nor to
reverence or God, or Man, but to follow thine own lust, to abandon thy self
to thy own pleasure? Fear and tremble: there is not a Second, without a
First: if so be thou beginnest not in this life with this first Resurrection
thus spoken of, there must concur a many Miracles to make thee partaker of
the Second. It is true concerning the Thief, Subito in ictu oculi de Cruce in
Coelum transiliuit: he made, Aug. de Temp Ser. 130 p. 634
says S. Austen, but a skip from the Cross he hanged upon into Heaven: but
that of S. Austen is as true again, and he has it in more places then Aug. de
Verb. Dom. Ser. 16. p. 49. and Ser. 59. p. 1512 and Hom. 11. p. 299.
one: God has promised, I grant, forgiveness of sins, when ever thou shall
repent, but if so be thou repent not to day before to morrow, he has no
where made promise to thee, that thou shall live till to morrow. I suppose, Sen
de Tranquil. vitae l. 1. c. 1
says Seneca, that a many might have attained unto Wisdom, had they not had a
selfe-opinion that they had attained unto it already: and many by much
likelihood, might have been Saints in the kingdom of Heaven, had they not
made themselves before hand too too sure and secure thereof. True it is, we
hold a CERTAINTY, but not a SECVRITIE of Salvation: Certus sum, Romans 8.38.
says the Apostle S. Paul, I am persuaded that neither Death, nor Life, nor
Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come,
nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, who Ephesians. 2.12.
wills the Philippians notwithstanding, Christians as good as were the Romans,
to make an end of their own Salvation with Fear, and Trembling. But thus much
of the Second Instruction.

The Third, and Last Instruction I am to make, is from the last words of my
Text: For since by Man came Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the
Dead: and the Instruction I gather is this: that since the Resurrection of the
Dead has come by Man, the Seed of the Woman, nor Man, nor Woman ought at all
to fear Death. Not that I would have Death despised altogether, since it came
in first by Sin: and it is the Punishment of Sin, and wholly to despise
Death, is an Argument, Gualter in Ioh. 12. Hom. 118. Vid. B. Bilsons Survey of
Christ's Sufferings. p. 150.
says a learned Writer, of a Mind scant religious. It is an ungracious Child
that despises the Punishment of his Father, and that Servant that sets but
light by his Masters Correction, is without all doubt a lewd Servant. Howbeit
here, Beloved, as it is exceeding hard for the best of us al to keep a Mean:
so are there none almost, but when Death approaches in very deed, betake
themselves to the worse Extreme, and are too too much frighted with it.
Behold, Job. 4 3.
says Elephaz unto Job, thou have taught many, and have strengthened the weary
hands. Thy words have confirmed him that was falling, and thou have
strengthened the weak knees. But now it is come upon thee and thou art grieved,
it touches thee, and thou art troubled. Right so, Beloved, in this case. How
many Hundreds are there that have at their fingers ends in another man's case,
an heap of several Sentences against the Fear of Death, as Senec. Epist. s.
17. ep. 103.
Dies iste quem tanquam extremum reformidas, aeterni natalis est. And again,
Senec. Epist. l. 7. ep. 55.
In hoc, nisi fallor, erramus, quod Mortem iudicamus sequi, quu^ illa and
praecesserit, and secutura sit. Quicquid ante nos fuit, Mors est. Senec Epist.
l. 1. ep. 1.
Quicquid aetatis retro est, Mors tenet. And again, Senec. de Co^solat. ad
Polyb. c 28.
In hoc tam procelloso, and in omnes tempestates exposito Mari navigantibus,
nullus portus nisi Mortis est. Sir, be of good courage, this very Day, which
you fear may be your last in this world, may prove your Birthday of
Eternity. It is but an error of ours that we suppose we shall but now die, we
intruth died long ago, for all our Life past what has it been but a kind of
Death? To those that sail in this troublesome and tempestuous Sea of the world
there is no Port, or Haven, but Death: and yet notwithstanding all this, let it
be a man's own case, and see Death come toward himself, and then, as the same
Seneca speaks, Tergiversatur, tremit, plorat: either he has a Aesop. Fab.
Burden for Death to help him up withal, or else he is too Ps. 102 24.
Young, and not old enough, or he has Wife, and Children, that must be
provided for, or the Dan. 5.6.
Ioints of his loins are loosed, and his knees smite one against the other, or
he puts 2. King. 20 3
finger in the eye. It fares with such an one in this case, as it did with the
Heart in the Fable, which Sr. Thomas Moore relates in these words: There was, Sr
Thomas Moore Comfort in Tribulat l. 3. c. 24 Oper. Angl. p. 1253.
says he, a great old Heart that had fled from a little Bitch which had made
suit after him, and chased him so long that shhe had lost him, and as he hoped,
more then half given him over. By occasion whereof having then some time to
talk, and meeting with another of his Fellows, he fell in deliberation with
him, what were best for him to do, whether to run on still, and fly farther
from her, or turn again, and fight with her. Whereunto the the other Heart
advised him to fly no farther, least the Bitch might happen to find him again,
at such time as he should with the labor of farther flying, be fallen out of
breath, and thereby all out of strength too: and so should he be killed, lying
where he could not stir him. Whereas if he would turn and fight, he were in no
peril at al. For the Man with whom she hunteth, is more the^ a Mile behind
her, and she is but a little Body scant half so much as thou, and thy Horns
may thrust her through, before she can touch thy Flesh by more then ten times
her tooth length. By my truth, quoth the The Other Heart, I like thy counsel
well, and me thinks that the thing is even soothly as you say. But I fear
when I hear once that vrchin Bitch bark, I shall fall to my feet, and forget
altogether. But yet, and you will go back with me, then me think we shall be
strong enough against that one Bitch between us both, whereunto the the other
Heart agreed, and so they both appointed them thereon. But even as they were
about to busk them forward to it, the Bitch had found the foot again, and on
she came gerning toward the place, who^ as soon as the Hearts heard, they to go
both twain apace. Death, Beloved, a great way of, it is an easy matter to
dare it, the veryest Coward that is, may be valiant so far forth, but when
we shall see him come staulking toward us, and singling us out from a many
Thousands, and aiming his Dart only at us, then to oppose our selves against
him, and to stand valiantly upon our Guard, and yet contentedly to say unto Him
to, Virg. Aeneid. l. 6.
Death, do thy office, thou art the Minister of Justice: Hieron. vita Hilarion.
Hoc opus, hic labor est, that were a point of Manhood indeed, -- Pauci quos
aequus amavit
Iuppiter, aut ardens evexit ad aethera Virtus,
Dijs geniti* potuere.


Few there are that can so do, and old Hilarion indeed did so: Egredere says
he, quid times? egredere anima mea, quid dubitas? Septuaginta prope annis
servisti Christo, and mortem times? Go out, my Soul, go out, says he, what
is it thou art afraid of? These threescore and ten years well near, have thou
served thy Lord Christ, and art thou now afraid to die? And with that he gave
up the Ghost. The truth is, DEATH in it self is, as Aristotle speaks, Arist.
Ethic. l. 3. 6.
(...), of Things Terrible, the most TERRIBLE, ^, Rex Terrorum, as Bildad Job.
18.14. Tremell.
speaks, The King of Fear: but since the WORD was made FLESH, and dwelt
amongst us: since the Sentence against the first Adam was reversed by the
Second: since by Death he destroyed Death, that is, he took out the Sting of
it, and the third day rose again, why should Death be fearful to us, and to
speak in Iam ex quo Verbum Car^ factum est, and habitavit in nobis: ex quo
primi Adae datam sententiam, Adam novissimus soluit, ex quo nostrum mortem sua
morte destruxit, and ab In feris die tertia Dominus resurrexit, iam non est
terribilis Mors fidelibus: non timetur occasus, quia oriens venit ex alto Aug.
de Consolat. mor. ^or, Ser. 1. c. 1.
Saint Austens phrase, Why should we fear the Sunneset of Death, seeing the
Day spring from an high shall visit us again. What is it says the same
Father that God has given us by his only begotten Son, if so be we (...)

THE COMING OF THE HOLY GHOST.
Whit-Sun-day. May 27. 1610.
Now in the lst great day of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried laying, If any
man thirst let him come unto me, and drink. He that believes in me, as says
the Scripture, out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life. This spoke
he of the Spirit, which they that believed in him should receive: For the Holy
Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified.

Ioh. 7.37,38,39.
AS Gods extraordinary presence, Mr Hooker Eccles. Pol l. 5.. 69. p. 192.
says a Reverend Writer, has hallowed, and sanctified certain Places, so
they are his extraordinary Works, that have truly and worthily advanced
certain Times. In regard whereof the Son of Syrach to a Question that might be
demanded, why one Day excells another, seeing the light of every of the^ comes
from that Sun above in the Firmament, answers immediately in these Ecclus
33.8.
words: The knowledge of the Lord has parted them asunder, and he has by them
disposed the times, and solemn Feasts. Some of them has he chosen, and
sanctified, and some of the^ has he put among the days to number. The times
which he has chosen, and sanctified, that is, sanctified to himself, and
commanded the Jews to observe, were ordinarily the Saboth, extraordinarily
the solemn Feasts, and Solemnities of the Year. The Saboth was every seventh
day: the solemn Feasts, and yearly Solemnities, were specially three: The
Feast of Unleavened Bread which was their Feast of Easter: the Feast of
Harvest, or of their first Fruits, which was their Whitsontide, and the Feast
of Gathering fruits in the end of the Year, which was the Feast of
Tabernacles. Three time: Exodus 23 14.
says the Lord in Exodus, thou shall keep a feast unto me in the year. Thou
shall keep the Feast of unleavened bread: the Feast also of the Harvest of the
first Fruits of thy labors which thou have sown in the field: and the Feast
of gathering fruits in the end of the year, when thou have gathered in thy
labors out of the field. Now Who they were, and How they were, to come unto
these Feasts, Moses declares to us as in this very place of Exodus, so Deuteronomy.
16.16. Three times in the year, says Moses, shall all the Males appear
before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall choose: in the Feast of the
unleavened bread, and in the Feast of the weeks, and in the Feast of the
Tabernacles, and they shall not appear before the Lord empty. Meaning their
Males Exodus 30.14. Vid Calvin in Exodus 23 16.
from twenty year old and above, not that Females came not to, but they were
not compeld to come. And whereas it might be thought it should be dangerous to
their Land to have the People go in such sort all of them at once, his Exodus
3^.24.
promise was that in the mean time their Land should be secured from all
invasion. Their Feast of Easter was in remembrance of their deliverance out of
Egypt, and it was called the Feast of the Passover, in reguard that when the Lord
past through the Land of Egypt, he smote all the first borne in the Land and
both Man and Beast, but passed over the Israelites, Exodus 12.13. Their Feast of
Harvest called Whitsontide was kept fifty days after Easter, partly in toke^
that the Law was given fifty days after their deliverance, partly in
remembrance that they were to bring their first Fruits of the Land into Gods
house, that so the rest of their Fruits might be holy to, Romans 11.16. Their
Feast of Tabernacles was in remembrance of their forty years travail through
the wilderness, when as they roamed up and down with out house, without home,
hungry, and thirsty, their souls fainted in them, Ps. 107.5. Our Savior
Christ that came to keep the Law, and to observe it every tittle, that it might
be truly said of him by the voice of God himself which Pilate Luc. 23.14.
said by his own experience, and by the experience of Herod to, I have found
no fault in this man, did in no wise neglect these Feasts being so great a
parcel of the Law, and therefore he himself not only went to every of them,
but St John in this his Gospel relates unto us that he went. That he was at
the Feast of Easter, he specifieth unto us in his Second, Third, and Fourth
Chapters. That he was at the Feast of Pentecost, in his Fifth, and Sixth
Chapters. That he was at the Feast of Tabernacles, in this Seventh Chapter we
have in hand, as also in the Eight, Ninth, Tenth, and Eleue^th Chapters. The
Feast here specified then, being the Feast of Tabernacles, and our Savior
being at this Feast, the next thing to be considered is his manner of Behavior
there.

His manner of Behavior, is in the words I have read unto you: wherein for our
better proceeding I shall observe unto you these points: First, the Substance
of a certain Sermon made by our Savior at that time: Secondly, our Saviors
Behavior, and manner in making it: Thirdly, the Evangelist St John his Noats
thereupon. The Substance of Sermon made is comprised in these words: If any man
thirst let him come unto me, and drink. He that believes in me as says the
Scripture, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of water of life. His Manner of
making it in these, Now in the last and great day of the Feast Jesus stood and
cried. The Evangelist his Noats thereupon, in these, This spoke he of the
Spirit which they that believed in him should receive, for the Holy Ghost was
not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. In the Substance of
the Sermon here made, I shall observe unto you these Points: First, an
Invitation of our Saviors, Let him come unto me: Secondly, Who they are that
are invited, If any man thirst: Thirdly, what it is they are invited to, namely
unto Rivers of water of Life: If any man thirst let him come unto me and drink.
He that believes in me as says the Scripture, out of his belly shall flow
Rivers of water of life. First of the Invitation, Let him come unto me.

He that by the Apostle St Paul gives instruction unto Bishops, that they should
be 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1 8.
HOSPITALES, Harberous and good Houskeepers, giving themselves to Hospitality
even in things concerning the Body: he being himself the chief 1 Pet. 2.21.
Shepherd, and Bishop of our Souls, gives himself even now adays 1 Pet. 5.4.
being at Gods right hand, to noe less Hospitality, in things concerning the
Spirit. Hence it is that the Apostle St Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians,
Ephesians. 4.8.
acquaints us with his benevolences, and how Grace is given to every of us
according to the measure of the gift of Christ, and out of the threescore and
eight Psalm proves manifestly unto us, that when he ascended up on high, he
led Captivity captive, and gave Gifts unto men. Howbeit those kinds of Gifts
there specified, were for the work of the Ministry, and for the edification of
the Body of Christ and therefore is it Ephesians. 4.11.
said immediately, that he gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers: now their are Gifts more general
then all these, whereof not the Pastors, and Teachers only, and Evangelists,
and Prophets, and Apostles, are capable, but all of what condition, and state
soever. So that as Abraha^s Hospitality, and his Nephew Lots, was Genesis 18.2.
Genesis 19.1.
specially observed herein, that when as Strangers arrived, they ran to meet
them, and courteously invited them to their Howses: Strangers, I say, unknown
unto them, not Familiars only, not Frinds: right so our Saviors Hospitality,
his courteous inuitation is herein seen, in that it is general, not
particular, nor to Frinds only, but to Strangers, eve^ to such as are without
Christ, aliants from the common wealth of Israel, and Strangers from the
Covenants of promise, Ephesians. 2.12. If any man thirst let him come unto me, and
drink.

Or, be it, he here spoke only to the Isralites who came unto this Feast, and
as he Mat. 15.24
speaks himself elsewhere, I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel: and as he willed his Apostles an other Mat. 10.5.
time, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into the Cities of the
Samaritans enter ye not. But go rather to the lost Sheep of the house of
Israel: yet since the partition Wall is now broken between Jew and Gentile,
and the Veil of the Temple is rent, and whatsoever things are written
aforetime, are written for our Romans 15.4.
learning, that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope, what was said unto the Jews here, was said unto us all, of what Nation,
Tribe, or Kindred soever, If any Man thirst let him come unto me. It is an
excellent Aug. de Verb. Dom. Ser. 16. p. 49.
saying of St Austens, Distribuite tempora, and concordat Scriptura:
Distinguish the times, and the Scriptures accord exceeding well. Our Savior,
who when time was, would not his Apostles should go into the way of the
Gentiles, Mat. 10.5. after his Resurrection from the Dead, bad them go, and
teach all Nations, Mat. 28.19. If any Man thirst, let him come unto me.

The word ME here in this place, Let him come unto me, puts us in mind as Who
it is to whom we should come, so also of his Name here, and by consequence of
his Nature. Who Prove. 30.4.
says Sol^mon, has ascended up to heaven, and descended? who has gathered
the wind in his fist? Who has bound the waters in a garment? Who has
established all the ends of the world? What is his Name, and what is his Sons
Name if thou can tell? As if he had said thou can not possibly name the
Man that ever has, or shall be able to do these things. And true it is, the
Man we cannot, but yet we can name that God, and Man, who may be said to ascend
up to heaven, and descend, in regard of his universal providence, Psalm. 113.5;
and to have gathered the wind in his fist, for he brings it out of his
treasures, Psalm. 135.7; and to bind the waters in a garment, for he gathers
them together as it were upon an heap, and lays them up as in a Wardrobe,
Psalm. 33.7. and to establish the ends of the world, for he has placed the Sand
for the bounds of the Sea by the perpetual decree that it cannot pass it,
Ier. 5.22. I, and we can name him, as St Jerome Hieron. Tom. 3. Epist. ad
Marcell. 1 El. 2 Elohim. 3 Elohe. 4 Sebaoth. 5 Gnelion. 6 Asher eheie. 7
Adonai. 8 Iah. 9 Iehova. 10 Shaddai.

observes, by Ten several Names. And as concerning his Sons Name, what
that Name is, we need not go far to find it, the Evangelist St John sets it
here down in the very Forefront of this my Text: Now in the last and great day
of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried. JESUS.

I have had occasion Our Saviors Resurr. Sermon. 3 p. 61.
heretofore to speak of his other Name, the Name of CHRIST, whiCh I told you
did signify as much as Anointed, for because he was anointed to be our
Prophet, Priest, and Prince, and he was anointed with the Holy Ghost; and with
Power, Act. 10.38. This name Jesus is of an higher strain for it signifies a
Savior, and therefore the Angel unto Joseph, Mat. 1.21.
Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins.
So St Paul, He humbled himself, Phil. 2.8.
says he, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross.
Wherefore God has also highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every
name. That at the Name of Jesus should every knee bow, both of things in
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and that every tongue
should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the glory of God the
Father. And St Peter in the Acts having professed that he healed a Cripple by
the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth: This is the Stone Act. 4.11.
says he, cast aside of you Builders, which is become the head of the Corner.
Neither is there Salvation in any other: for among men there is given no other
Name under heaven, whereby we must be saved. Osiander was of opinion that this
name Jesus came not of Iashang the Hebrew word, which signifies to Save, but of
Iehova the Name of God, by putting in, Shin, the Hebrew letter, and al to
signify, says he, Man's nature joined to the Godhead. Howbeit since Illyricus
has Vid. Illyrie. Clavem Ser. p. 622.
refuted this his conceit with diverse and sundry Reasons, and for because it
is somewhat finer then common Ears can well conceive, I will not trouble you
with it at this time, I had rather now relate unto you what St Bernard has of
this Name. The Name of JESUS Nec tantum Lux est nomen Jesus sed est cibus.
Annon totiens confortaris, quotiens ^ecordaris? Quod aeque mentem cogitantis
^mpingua^! Quid ita exercitatos repa^a^ ser ^ust virtutes rohorat. Vegetat
mores bonos a^que honestos: castas fovet affection^? A^ridus e^ on nis Anime
cibus si non ole^isto in^unditus Iosi^dus est, si non hac sat conditur.
S^scribas, non apit m^hi n^si legero ibi Ies^m Si, d^sputes aut co^as, non
sapit ^hi nisi ^nuerit ibi I^s^s. Jesus mel in ore, in aure melos, in cord
iubilus. Sed est and medicina. Tr^statur aliqu^s nostrum? Veniat in cor Jesus,
and indesa^t in os, and ecce ad exortum Nominis lumen, nubilum o^ne diffag^,
red^ Serenum. Labi^ur qu^s in ^ime^, currit insuper ad laqucum mortis
desperando? nonne si invoc^t Nomen Vitae, confestim ^espirabit ad vitam?

Huc t^ Electuarium habes o Anima mea, recoditum in vas^ule vocabuli huius quod
est Jesus, salut seru^ certe, quoaque nulli vaquam pesti tuae inventatur
inefficax. Bernard super Cant. Ser. 15. p 132. Col. 3.


says St Bernard, is not Brightness only, but Nourishment to. As often as thou
remembrest it, art thou not as often comforted with it? What is it that in such
sort makes the mind of him that thinks on it so far and well liking? What
does so restore our Senses, strengthen our Virtues, quicken and refresh our
good Behavior cherish and nourish our chaste Affections? Al Food of the Soul
is as dry as a kix, if it be not moistened with this Oil. It is unsavory, if it
be not seasoned with this Salt. If so be thou write unto me, all thy
vvriting seems harsh, unless I read in the Forefront, the Name of Jesus. If
thou dispute or confer with me, it seems all nothing worth, unless I hear
the sound of the Name of Jesus. The name of Jesus, is honey in the mouth, melody
in the ear, joy in the heart. I, and it is medicine to. Is any of us sad? Let
this Name Jesus come into our hearts, and pass from thence unto our mouths,
and behold at the very rising of the light of that Name, all Clouds are
dispelled, fair Weather comes again. Is any man fallen into some notorious
Crime, and would afterward through despair go and make away himself? if so
be he can but call upon this Name of Life: shall he not presently enjoy Life?
His conclusion there is: O my Soul, thou have this Electuary closed up, as it
were in the Box of this Name Jesus, doubtless exceeding wholesome and of
sufficient force and strength to expel any Plague that may possibly surprise
thee. You see who it is to whom we should come, and indeed as St Peter Ioh.
6.68.
spoke, to whom should we else go? Especially seeing he himself, and none
but he, invites us so kindly. Where we are to mark, Beloved, his Phrase of
Speech that he uses also in this case. For he says not, will he, nil he, come
he shall, but, Let him come, as it were remitting it to his own will whether
he come, or not. For Will from all Co-action we Libertatem voluntatis non
necessitas, sed vis and coactio tollit. Whitak. in Durae^m. l. 5. p 383.
grant is Free: and yet we abhor Freewill, as also those peevish Paradoxes
about it, which our Osorius de Relig. in Gualt. Haddon. Angl
Adversaries are pleased to lay to our charge. We grant that God works not
in us as he does upon Stocks and Stones that have no endeavor of themselves,
no motion at all, but as they are moved by an other, noe we Foxius cont. Osor.
l. 2. p. 119
say with Ambros. de vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 3. p. 6.
St Ambrose, Homo a Diabolo cum spoliaretur, non voluntate, sed voluntatis
sanitate privatus est: And again, A Diabolo iudicium voluntatis depravatum
est, non ablatum. The judgment of the Will is corrupted indeed, but not
utterly taken away: the Devil did not wholly bereave man of his Will, but of
the soundness and integrity of it. Eligant are the words of St. Austen
hereupon, Let them not Aug. de Correp. and Great. c. 2.
says St Austen, deceive themselves which say, to what purpose are we taught
and commanded to eschew evil, and to do good; If so be we cannot do it, but
as God does work the same in us even to will, and to work? Nay rather let them
understand, if they be the Children of God, that they are made pliable by Gods
Spirit, to do the things that ought to be done, and when they have have done
so, to yield thanks to him by whom they were made so to do. For they are
made pliable because they should do something, not because they should do
nothing, thus St Austen. But thus much of the Invitation, Let him come unto me:
now of the Parties invited, If any man thirst.

First for that Man here is only specified, we are not so to take it as if
Women were excluded. This name Man in holy Scriptures Clem Alex. Paedag. l. 1.
c. 4.
says Clemens Alexandrinus, is common to Men, and Women to. Father Latimer on
a time when Dr Weston disputed with him and asked him where he found that a
Woman should receive the Sacrament? I find it says he in the eleauenth
Chapter to the Corinthians, where the words being thus, Probet seipsu^ homo: he
asked the Doctor again what Gender Homo was? whereunto when it was replied,
that howsoever in Latin it were the common Gender, yet in Greek it was (...),
and in the Latin, Seipsum, What then quoth Father Latimer, I trow when the
Woman touched our Savior he spoke not in the Feminine, but in the Masculine
Gender, Quis tetigit me? And Scio quod aliquis me tetigit. The truth is, that
in Christ Jesus there is nor Male nor Female, Gal 3.21. nor is there a Woman
that trusts in God, but is to have an Hidden Man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.4. A
Point which for one Poststellus observed not as he should have done, grew (they
Vid. Gesn. Bibl. per Iosiam Simlerum.
say) to that Phrensy, that he stuck not to maintain that Women as yet were
not redeemd. I confess our Adversaries the Papists cast not this Man's Head in
our Dish, but by that you may be sure he was nor Luthera^, nor Calvinist, nor
Puritan, nor Protestant. Jesuits Catech. makes him one Jesuits Catech. lib. 1
c. 10.
I fear me he was a IESVITE. No marvel though our English Women be now
adays so enamored with them

A second Point to be observed here, is in that it is here said: If any man
thirst: that is, High and Low, Rich and Poor, one with another, from the Exodus
11.5.
First borne of Pharaoh that sits on his Throne, unto the First borne of the
Maydservant that is at the Mill. Harken, my beloved Brethren, Iam. 2.5.
says St James, Has not God chosen the poor of this world that they should
be Rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he promised to them that
love him? Yes it is even so, and that of S. Austen is no less remarkable for
us that are Scholars, Aug. Confess, l 8. c. 8.
Surgunt indocti, and coelum rapiunt, and nos cum, doctrinis nostris sine cord
ecce vbi volutamur in carne and sanguine? I need not english it

A third Point to be observed, is that after such a Feast as was the Feast of
Tabernacles, wherein they drank no doubt more then usually, (and it was
lawful for them so to do, Nehem. 8.12.) our Savior should use at that time
such a speech as this, If any man thirst. Doubtless it was to put them in
mind, as what the true Thirst was indeed, so what the true Quenching was. The
true Thirst indeed, is the Trouble and Terror of Conscience wrought by the
feeling and sense of Sin, and of the wrath of God for the same, which
therefore is termed Thirst for because it is so like to Thirst. Hunger, as it
is a desire of that which is hot and moist: so Thirst is a desire of that which
is both moist and cold. So grievous, and painful to them that have it, that
though Death it self approaches toward them, and is ready to seize upon
them once for all, yet will they more complain of that, then of any other
Torment else. Extreme no doubt were the Agonies of our Savior on the Cross,
the Pains he suffered most excessive, and yet as if they had al bin nothing to
the Thirst he did endure, he co^plaind not of the^ a whit, of the other, he
seemed to do, Sitio, says he, I thirst, Ioh. 19.28. Sisera in the Book of
Judges though he had had the loss of a foughte^ Field, and saw almost no
likelihood, but that he should loose also his own life, yet was Sorrow with him
so dry, as he respected not los of Life so much, that which he the^ respected
most, was the quenching of his thirst, Give me, says he, a little water to
drink, for I am thirsty, Judge. 4.19. Famous was that murmuring of the
Israelites against Moses by reason of their Thirst, Exodus 17.3.
Wherefore have thou thus brought us out of Egypt to kill us, and our Children,
and our Cattle with thirst. And Sampson, when he had slain so many with the
Iawbone of an Ass, he was sore a thirst, says the Scripture, and calling on
the Lord, Thou have given Judge. 15.18.
says he, this great deliverance into the hand of thy Servant, and now shall I
die for thirst, and fall into the hands of the uncircumcised? So it is, it is
even so, nothing in such a case more unsupportable then Thirst, and therefore
Diana in the Ovid. Met. l. 6.
Poet, Haustus aquae mihi nectar erit, vitamque fatebor
Accepisse simul,vitam dederitis in vndis.
She would esteem of a draught of water, as if they had given her an other
Life. And is it not thus with a crased Conscience? are not the pangs of a
troubled Conscience as grievous to be borne? The Spirit of a man Prove. 18.1.
says king Solomon, will sustain his infirmity: but a wounded Spirit who can
bear it? Even as if he had said, not one among a thousand, witness as good as
ever were. David, the Prophet David, how did he sing when time was, no man
alive a sweeter noate, Ps. 103.8.
The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, long suffering, and of great
goodness. He will not always be chyding, neither keeps he his anger for
ever. He has not dealt with us after our sins, nether rewarded us according
to our wickedness. For look how high the Heaven is in comparison of the Earth,
so great is his Mercy also, toward them that fear him. Look how wide also the
East is from the West, so far has he set our Sins from us. Yea like as a
Father pittyeth his own children, even so is the Lord merciful to them that
fear him. For he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are but
dust. And again in an other Ps. 108 3.
Psalm, I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the People, I will sing
praises unto thee among the Nations, for thy mercy is greater then the Heavens,
and thy truth reaches unto the clouds. And yet again in an Ps 145.8.
other, The Lord is gracious and merciful, long suffering, and of great
goodness. The Lord is loving unto every man, and his mercy is over all his
works. Yet let us visit him again at some other time, and how shall we find
him all a mort? What passions? What pensiuenes? What bitterness of Soul? Ps.
77.^.
Will the Lord absent himself for ever, and will he be no more entreated? Is
his mercy clean gone for ever, and is his promise come utterly to an end for
evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious, and will he shut up his loving
kindness in displeasure? And again in an other Ps. 102.3.
Psalm, My days are consumed away like smoke, and my bones are burnt up as
it were a firebrand. My heart is smitten down, and withered like grass, so
that I forget to eat my bread. For the voice of my groaning, my bones will
scaree cleave to my flesh. I am become like a Pelicane in the wilderness, and
like an Owl that is in the desert. I have watched, and am even as it were a
Sparrow, that sits alone upon the house top. Nay, he spoke with the least it
seems when he spoke of Groaning, his words in an other place are much more
passionate, I am brought Psalm. 38.6.
says he, into so great trouble and misery, that I go mourning all the day
long. For my loins are filled with a soar disease, and there is no whole part
in my body. I am feeble and sore smitten, I have roared for the very very
disquietnes of my heart.

By this then that has been spoken, we may now gather who they are that are
invited by our Savior. First, Men, and Women both, either Sex may be welcome.
Secondly, Rich and Poor, and the Poor as welcome as the Rich. Thirdly, such
as are truly thirsty whether Men, or Women, or Rich, or Poor. I say, Truly
Thirsty, that is, who are burdened with their Sins, and see nothing before
their eyes but Death and Desperation, and would full feign be eased of them, and
rely on our Savior to that purpose. It is with our Savior in such a case, as
it is with a full Mr Fentons Perfume against the Plague, p. B. 3. b.
Breast, which even aketh for desire to give the Milk which it has, and
welcome is the Child that can most hu^gerly suck the same. We have seen the
Parties invited: the Feast is now to be served in. Let him come unto me and
drink. He that believes in me, as says the Scripture, out of his Belly shall
flow Rivers of water of Life.

It is a world to see, how the whole World in these days is given to Drink,
and how Senecaes Words are now verified, Sen. de Benes l. 1. c. 10.
Habebitur aliquando Ebrietati honor, and plurimum meri cepisse, virtus erit.
The day shall come wherein Drunkenness shall be had in high esteem, and it
shall be accounted a point of Manhood to be able to quaffe, and to carowse. It
was not many years ago that our Nation much abhorred it in the best of our
Friends the Hollanders, insomuch that General History of the Netherlands
translated into English by M. Ed. Grimstone. In a Discourse of Advise to the
Earl of Leicester there, p. 939.
advice was given to his Excellency that then was Governor, by one (it should
seem) that wished us well, that the English should endeavor to bear with the^
for a fault that was so engrafted into them by nature, howsoever they
Themselves did detest it. Were that Wel-willer of ours now alive, he might
recall again that Passage, so are the Times changed since, and we the English
changed with them. Nor should there need so much complaint in this kind, were
Drunkenness now adays, but as it was in the Apostle S. Paul's time.
Drunkenness, in the Apostle S. Paul's time, it was but a Night-crow, and played
(it seems) least in sight, and therefore himself to the Thessalonians: They
that sleep 1 Thessalonians. 5.7.
says he, sleep in the night, and they that are drunken, are drunke^ in the
night. It rises now adays with the Lark, and S. Peter should he reason now,
as once he did when time was: Act. 2.15.
These are not drunken as ye suppose, since it is but the third hour of the
day (that is, Nine a clock before Noone) he should have more ado to make his
Reason sound, then he had to make the Creeple sound, Act. 3.7. Nor do I wrong
Drunkenness awhit, to say it rises with the Lark, seeing of Drunkards it may
be said what Tertullian Tertul. de. Cib. Iudaic p. 656.
says of the like in his days, Quales istos Sol in occasu reliquit, quos iam
marcidos vino Oriens aspicit: True it is, some of them see not, or Sunrising,
or Sunsetting, but yet there are others of them that do, if at the least they
may be said to see, whom the Sun sees rather in that pickle: or rather HE
whose Eyes are Ecclus, 23 19.
ten thousand times brighter, then the Sun. Good God! that so base a Vice
as this, so beastly, so beggarly (for you know our English Proverb, As drunk as
a Beggar) should dare to appear in our Horizon, the Beauty of our Land, and
that which is more in a Scholars habit, and that which is most, it should
take Degrees too. What? we to make our BODIES (those glorious Temples of the
Holy Ghost) but so many Barrells to hold Beer in? We to strive to be Tanto
Nequiores, as Aug. de Verb Apostol. Ser. 4. p. 179. Quae gloria est, capere
mulium? Cum penes te palma fuerit, and propinationes tuas strati somno ac
vomitantes recusaverint, cum superstes toti Convivio fueris, cum omnes vic^ris
virtute magnifica, ac nemo tam vini capax fuerit, vinceris a D^lia. Senec.
Epist. l. 12. ep. 84.
speaks S. Austen, quanto sub poculo Invictiores: the more conquering our
Pots, the more conquered by Sin? We to carry our selves more profanely then
ever Esaw did, who sold his Birthright (and it was but a worldly Birthright)
for necessary Food, and Sustenance, we our heavenly Birthright, and that most
unnecessarily, and all for a draught of Drink? For what do they else,
Beloved, what do they else do, who drink so roundly, and carowse so
profoundly, but spend their Birth right, and Patrimonies upon the Spicket here
in this world, and (which is the consequence of such drinking) sleeping again
as soundly, give that Roaring Lion opportunity, he that walks about (as S.
Peter 1. Pet. 5.8.
speaks) seeking whom he may devour, give that Roaring Lion (I say)
opportunity, to take them napping, and so to devour them much more easily,
then possibly otherwise he could have done. Tull Offic l. 1 Vid, Ovid. Met l 4.
and yet Strabo of that Fountain, Salmacis fons nescio qua^ obrem calumniatus,
tanqua^ emolliens eos qui inde bibant Strabo l. 14.
Salmacida Spolia sine sanguine and sudore. Sure I am the Devil has them
already by the Throat, and when the Wolf has once the Sheep at such
disadvantage, you know what follows. But to let these Tospots go, or
because commonly they cannot well go, to speak in the Prophet Ier. 25.27.
Ieremies phrase, To let them drink, and be dru^ken, and spew, and fall, and
rise no more, because of the sword which the Lord will send among them: Let us,
Beloved, repair to our Savior, and seeing we are invited to drink with him,
let us see what it is to drink with our Savior Christ Jesus, and what the
Ingredients are of that Drink. If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and
drink.

To drink with our Savior Christ, is no doubt to Believe in him, as himself
here expounds himself in the words immediately following. He, says our
Savior, that believes in me, as says the Scripture, out of his Belly shall
flow Rivers of water of Life. Well: and what is it then, to Believe in him? To
Believe in our Savior Christ, is First, to know him: Secondly, to acknowledge
him: Thirdly, to put our trust, and confidence in him. We then know him, when
we know him a Savior: we then acknowledge him, when we acknowledge him our
Savior: we then put our trust, and confidence in him, when we put our
confidence in him in that respect, Except Ioh. 8.24.
says our Savior, ye believe, that I am he, ye shall die in your Sins.
And again in an other Mark. 15.14
place, He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that will
not believe, shall be damned. You see Beloved, the consequence then, both of
Belief, and Unbelief. And concerning the consequence of Belief, it is that
which is in this place specified unto us in these words, that out of his Belly
shall flow Rivers of water of Life, meaning no doubt life Eternal; Everlasting,
and Endless life, which Everlasting life what it is, if so be we would feign
know, we may in some sort take a scantling by this Life of ours we now enjoy.
Skin for skin Job. 2.4.
says Satan, and all that ever a man has will he give for his life. And
therein I must needs say, as great a Liar as Satan is, he belies Man never a
whit. Amatur and qualiscunque. Vita ista Aug. de Temp. Ser. 113. p. 607.
says St Austen, and ipsam qualemcunque aerumnosam, miseram, finire homines
timent, and pavescunt. Be this Life of ours never so mean says he, yet no
man alive but loves it, and as miserable, wretched, and painful as it is,
every man is loath to leave it. And hence says he, may we rightly consider,
how we are to esteem of Life Everlasting, for if this miserable and wretched
Life, and which of necessity must one day end, is so much loved, and liked of
us, how is that other Life to be beloved, which shall never have an end. Now as
there are in the Book of God a many diverse and sundry Attributes that are
annexed to this Life, as first there is the Tree of Life, Rev. 2.7. the^, there
is the Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. then, there is the Book of Life, Rev. 3.5.
then, there is the Spirit of Life, Rev. 11.11. so is there nothing there so
oftentimes mentioned, as is the Water, or Fountain of Life: as First, in this
place, Ioh. 7.38. the^, in the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 2.13. then, in the Prophet
Zachary, Zach. 14.8. then, in the Revelation, and oftentimes there, as Rev.
7.17. Rev. 21.6. Rev. 22.17. And this is the Water indeed that can most truly
quench our thirst. Whosoever Ioh. 4.13.
says our Savior, drinks of this water (he meant the water of Jacobs Well,
of the self same nature, and substance that every other water is) whosoever
drinks of this water, shall thirst again: but whosoever drinks of the
water that I shall give him shall never be more a thirst: but the water that I
shall give him shall be in him a well of water, springing up into everlasting
Life. And thus much of our Saviors Sermon.

The next thing to be considered, is as I told you his Manner in making it,
which is expressed in these words, Now in the last and great day of the Feast
Jesus stood and cried: wherein I thought to have observed these points: First
the Time he made it in: namely in the last and great day of the Feast:
Secondly, his Gesture of Body, Jesus stood: Thirdly, his Manner of speaking,
Jesus stood and cried. In the First I had thought to have observed that it was
the Eight day, and as they began the Feast with such godly Exercises, how
they also ended it with the same. In the Second, how though our Savior did
usually sit and teach as the custom was in those times, yet here to his
greater pain, how he stood, and taught, according to that of St Austen, Cum
labor, statis and auditis, sed nos cum maiore stamus, et loquimur. You Aug. in
Evan. Joan. Tract. 19.
says St Austen stand to hear us preaching and I grant it is a pain unto
you, but yet it is a greater pain for us to stand and speak. I had thought
besides to have observed, that he both sat and stood teaching, who is now said
both to stand, and set at Gods right hand. In the Third, I had thought to have
observed that notwithstanding that of Esaias, He should not cry, nor lift up,
nor cause his voice to be heard in the Street, Esaias, 42.2, yet how that was no
prejudice to his crying, and lifting up, and causing his voice to be heard in
the Temple: the Prophet in that place commending him, as a mild, and gentle
Creature, the Evangelist in this, as a most excellent and earnest Teacher. I
had thought (I say) to have observed all this: but the time hastening as it
does, I also will hasten with it, and come to the third Point I proposed, the
Evangelist his Noates upon this Sermon, and those I told you were in these
words: This spoke he of the Spirit which they that believed in him should
receive. For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified. The Noats are two: First, and foremost, the true meaning of our
Saviors words in this place: Secondly, the Reason the Evangelist gives that
that indeed was his meaning. Of either in their order, and First of our
Saviors meaning: This spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believed in him
should receive.

That our Savior in this place spoke of the Spirit, that is, of the Holy
Ghost, when he spoke of Rivers of water of Life, does intimate unto us the
special correspondence between those Rivers, and the Spirit. The holy
Scriptures Chrysostom. in Evang. Joan. Hom. 31.
says St Chrysostom, term the Grace of the holy Ghost sometimes, Fire,
sometimes, Water, to give us thereby to understand, not his Substance, but his
Working. For the Spirit says he, consists not of different Substances (such
as Fire, and Water are) seeing he is invisible, and only of one kind. The holy
Ghost says St Chrysostom, is called Fire, to signify the shining of the
Graces of God in us, and the purging, and eating out of the dross of our Sins.
And the same holy Ghost again is called, Water, to signify the washing, and
cooling of us. For as by Water says he, an Orchard is continually kept
green, and has her Trees in due season still laden with fruit: so the holy
Ghost disposes our Orchards, even the Souls that are within us, that no care
and grief of heart may at any time distract us, no wyles, and traps of Satan
deceive us, but by virtue thereof we may quench his fiery darts whensoever he
throws them at us. Now the Holy Ghost is likened to Water, in three respects:
First, for that as the property of water is to cleanse, and purify the Body
from such filth and fowlenes as would otherwise cleave unto it, and therefore
Diogenes of a water that was not all of the cleerest, Qui hic se lavant Diog
Laevt. de vil. and mor. Philos. l. 6. in Diog.
says he, vbi lavantur? They that wash themselves in this water, where do
they wash themselves? Even so the Holy Ghost does spiritually wash away our
Sins, which are the Filth and Foulenes of our Souls, and wherewith as with
menstruous Clowts our Nature is defiled. Secondly, for that as the wearied
Travailer is ready to faint for want of water, and scantly able to go on
forwards, and therefore one in the Virg. Eclo. 5.
Poet, Tale tuum Carmen nobis divine Poetae,
Quale sopor fessis in gramine, quale per aestum
Dulcis aquae saliente sitim restinguere rivo:
and Hagar in the Genesis 21.16.
Scriptures when the water of her Bottle was spent, cast her Child under a
Tree, and she sat down her self over against him, and lift up her voice and
wept, so if we have not this Spirit in us, if we feel not the comfort of it,
we find a continual Fire in our Consciences, we frye in our own Fat.
Thirdly, nothing so necessary as Fire, and Water, we can by no means be
without them, and therefore among the Ancients, whom they condemned to
Bannishment, they forbad them Fire, and Water: so, nothing so necessary for us,
as this Fire, and Water, of the Spirit, and therefore our Savior to Nicodemus,
Ioh. 3 5.
Verily, Verily, I say unto thee, except a man be borne of Water, and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And thus much of our Saviors
meaning: now of the Reason the Evangelist gives, that our Saviors meaning thus
was, and it is in the last words of my Text: For the Holy Ghost was not yet
given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified.

Our Savior as for our sakes he came down unto us from his Father, so the
time was shortly to come, when he should return again unto his Father. This
News as it was exceeding doleful to the ears of the Apostles, who could have
wished to have had him still, their affection unto him was so great: so to
comfort them again for that his departure, being to leave them Orphans in the
world, he oftentimes promised to send unto them the Holy Ghost to be their
Comfort. The First and foremost Promise in this kind made, is in the Gospel of
St Matthew, where our Savior foretelling them that they should be delivered
up to Councels, and scourged in the Synagogues, and brought before Governors
and Kings for his Names sake, Take no thought Mat. 10.19.
says he, how, or what ye shall speak, for it shall be given you in that
hour, what ye shall say. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of
your Father which speaks in you. So likewise at an other time, I, Ioh. 14.16.
says our Savior, will pray the Father, and he shall give you an other
Comforter that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth. And
expressing a little after who this other Comforter should be, The Comforter
Ver. 26.
says he, which is the Holy Ghost, who^ the Father will send in my Name, he
shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance which I
have told you. So likewise at a third time, But when the Comforter Ioh. 15 26.
says he, shall come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the
Spirit of truth which proceeds of the Father, he shall testify of me. And
again in a fourth place, It is expedient for you Ioh. 16.7.
says our Savior, that I go away: for if I go not away the Comforter will
not come unto you, but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And being now
ready to ascend into Heaven, and to take his leave of the World concerning his
corporal presence, When he had gathered Act. 1.4.
says St Luke, his Disciples together, he commanded them that they should not
depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the Father, which said
he, ye have heard of me. For John indeed baptized with water, but ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost within these few days. And as he promised the
same at that time, so shortly after fell it out. And when the day of Pentecosi
Act. 2.^.
says St Luke, was come, they were all with one accord in one place, and
suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a rushing and mighty Wind, and
it filled all the house where they sat. And there appeared unto them cloven
Tongues like Fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were al filled with
the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave the^
utterance. And this it is, the memory whereof we celebrate this day. The Holy
Ghost was then given them, and our Savior before had been glorified, so that
when our Savior spoke these words, the Holy Ghost was not then given, because
that then he was not Spiritum noluit dare nisi cum esset glorificatus, vt in
suo corpore ostenderet vitam quam modo non habemus, sed in Resurrectione
speramus. Aug. in Evang. Joan. Tract. 32. p. 177.
glorified.

No? will some man say, was not the Holy Ghost then given? Spoke not the
Patriarchs, and Moses, and the Prophets by the Holy Ghost? Is it not expressly
said of David, Mark. 12.36, that David spoke by the Holy Ghost? Was it not
foretold of our Savior Christ that he should baptize with the Holy Ghost, Mat.
3.11? though Jesus himself baptized not, John 4.2. Did he not long before this
time breath upon his Disciples, and said unto them his own self, Receive the
holy Ghost, Ioh. 20.22? It is true Beloved, so he did, and the Holy Ghost I
grant was given before, to the Patriarchs, and to the Prophets, and to Moses,
and to David, and to the Disciples, and to many others, but it was not given in
that measure that it was given now at this time. God at this time gave so good
a measure of the Holy Ghost unto his Apostles, so pressed down, and shaken
together, running over into their bosoms, as Luke 6.38.
speaks our Savior in an other case, that some mocked, and Act 2.13.
said, they were full of new wine. Ridebant Aug. de Temp. Ser. 186. p. 721.
says St Austen, and aliquid verum dicebant. They mocked says he, and yet for all that, somewhat was true of what they said, for indeed they were as Vessels
filled with new wine. You heard says he, in this days Gospel, that No man puts
new Wine into old Vessels, a carnal man perceives not the things that are
spiritual. They were full of new Wine, and the new Wine venting out, the
Tongues of all Nations were immediately set a float. I, but the Apostles having
before received the Holy Ghost, to what end was this abundance? I answer with
the Aug. de Temp. Ser. 185. p. 719.
same St Austen: They had indeed Faith before, but the constancy of Faith
they had not. Well they might have preached Christ, but as yet to die for
Christ, that they hardly could. Insomuch that before the coming of the Holy
Ghost, not one of them all that had the Crown of Martyrdom. Before the
coming of the Holy Ghost about the time of our Saviors Passion, some of his
Disciples betook themselves to their heels, some so terrified with a silly
gyrle that they flatly denied their Lord and Master: but after the coming of
the Holy Ghost, and that they were confirmed by that good Spirit, howsoever
they were imprisoned, and had whipping cheer for their labor, yet they
rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for Christ his Name. He
feared not afterward, Rome, Leo in Not. Petri and Paul Ser. 1.
says Leo, the Lady of the World, who in the house of Caiphas the High Priest
was afraid of a silly Wench. And thus much of our Saviors Sermon here, his
Manner in making it, and the Evangelist his Notes thereupon. I should now come
with my own Notes, and gather out of the several Premises, several
Instructions, and Observations: but for we are some of us here present to
participate of these Mysteries, the BLESSED SACRAMENT here before us, a word or
two to that purpose, and then God willing an end.

There was a Time and some now present may remember it very well, when these
Creatures of Bread, and, Wine were so dignified, I, deified, in Church
Assemblies, that he was counted then no Christian, that would not say to the
Bread, and Wine, at least wise to a Wafer, that which some said in the Prophet
Ieremies time to a Tree, and to a Stone, Thou art my Father, thou have begotten
me, Ier. 2.27. They that saw the same then in those days, have lived now to
see the case so altered, that it is almost now at another Extreme, and these
Elements of Bread, and Wine, are so vilified, I, nullified, among a many, that
he is accounted now no Christian neither, or at the least wise a Popish
Christian, that will not speak as contemptuously of that Bread, and Wine, upon
the Table, after the words of Consecration, as King Ezechias did of the Brazen
Serpent when he called it Nehushtan, a piece of Brass, 2. King. 18.14. That
we, Beloved, may the better bear our selves between these two Extremes, and
take an even course in the middle way, not to high for the (Popish) Pie, nor to
low for the carrion Crow, it will not be amiss to harken to HER who has more
then Motherly authority over us, and by whose breeding and bringing up, we are
what we are, eve^ Ephesians. 2 19.
Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God. She then Catechizing us
at the first: What, Communion Book in the Catech.
says She, is the outward part, or Sign of the Lords Supper? And She
teaches us to answer, Bread, and Wine, which the Lord has commanded to be
received. And when She asks us again, What is the inward part, or thing
signified? She teaches us again to answer: The Body and Blood of Christ,
which are verily, and indeed, taken and received of the Faithful in the Lords
Supper. In her Art. 28.
Articles She speaks thus: To such as rightly, worthily, and with faith
receive (the Supper of the Lord*) the Bread which we break is a partaking of
the Body of Christ, and likewise the Cup of Blessing, is a partaking of the
Blood of Christ. And again, The Body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in
the Supper, only after an heavenly, and spiritual manner. In her Apology of
the Church of England, c. 13. Divis. 1.
Apology thus: The Bread and Wine are the holy, and heavenly Mysteries of the
Body, and Blood of Christ, and by them Christ himself, being the true Bread of
eternal Life, is so presently given unto us, as that by Faith we verily
receive his Body, and his Blood. All comes to this reckning: THEY WHICH
WORTHILY RECEAVE THIS SACRAMENT, RECEAVE THE VERY BODY AND BLOOD OF CHRIST:
For the better manifesting whereof, let us First of all see what it is to
receive worthily. Secondly, how the very Body and Blood of Christ is received.

What it is to receive worthily, the Apostle S. Paul will instruct us, in his
first Epistle to the Corinthians, who when he had there said: Whosoever shall
eat this Bread, and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty
of the Body and Blood of the Lord, immediately 1. Cor. 11.28
annexeth thereunto, Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat
of this Bread, and drink of this Cup. So that the way (you see) to be a
worthy Receauer is to examine a Man's own self before he presume to come and
taste of these mysteries. Let a Man, says the Apostle: that is Man, or Woman,
it mattereth not whether Sex, since Gal. 3.28.
both are one in Christ Jesus. Let a Man; that is, he must: not as it is in my
Text, If any man thirst let him come, remitting it to his own will, whether
come he would or no (as I told you) but, Let him, that is, he ought, there is a
Necessity laid upon him, and woe unto him if he does it not, as 1. Cor. 9.19
speaks the Apostle in another case. Examine; that is, from point to point,
seeking one by one, as did the Eccles 7.29.
Preacher to find the count. Himself; not another, no, that was Peter's fault
to be inquisitiue after others. Lord, Ioh. 21.21.
says Peter, what shall this man do? What, says our Savior, is that to thee?
follow thou me. Ole quid ad te Martial. Epig, l. 7. epig. 9.
Petre quid ad te? Peter what had thou to do, whether John should live or
die? If I will, says our Savior, that he tarry till I come, what is that to
thee? Follow thou me. Let a man therefore examine himself. For indeed to say
the truth, every of us in this case, is a Justice of Peace, and Quorum too. It
is that which the Prophet David says, Ps. 4.4, Stand in awe, and sin not:
commune with your own heart, and in your chamber, and be still. And showing
unto us his own example, I power out my heart by my self, says he, Ps. 42.4.
and Psalm. 77.6, I call to remembrance my song, says he, and in the night I
commune with mine own heart, and search out my spirits. Commune we then with
our own Hearts, or in our Chambers, or upon our Beds, search we out our own
Spirits, let us power out our Hearts by our selves. Nor let us do it Noli
superficiem compal^ pare Aug. de Temp. Ser. 214. p. 761.
superficially, but discuss we our own Discute conscientiam tuam, ascend
Tribunal mentis tue, noli tibi parcere Aug. in Ps. 101 p. 784.
Consciences, let us set our selves down upon the judgment seat of our own
Hearts, and in no wise be partial to our selves. Examine we our EYES, our
EARS, our HANDS, our TONGVES, our FEET, and cause we all, and every of them,
to give account of their Stewardship. No Man here, be he never so mean, no
Woman whatsoever, but has ever about them this Retinue. What? are they all of
them out of frame? is there none of them good, no not one? Then have thou Ioh.
19.10.
Pilats Power over them, either to crucify, or to loose the^: that is, if they
prove themselves to be Sins of Infirmity only, then to chasten them and let
them loose, as he would have done by our Savior, Ioh. 19.12. If Sins of
Iniquity and greater Consequence, if great and grievous Crimes, vastantia
Conscientiam, as Aug. de Civ. De. l. 11. c. 12.
speaks S. Austen, destroying and wasting our very Conscience, let us, or,
mortify them, as speaks the Apostle, Coloss. 3.5. or, as our Savior gives us
counsel, let us cut off their chiefest instruments, and cast them away from
us, Mat. 5.30. Eyes must out, and Hands must off, I, Cor ipsum revellendum, to
speak in Senecaes Senec. Epist. l. 7. ep. 52.
phrase, we must out with Heart and all, and pray with the Create in me a
clean heart, o God; and renew a right Spirit within me, Ps. 51.10. Our last
Translat.
Prophet David to create a New one in us. And thus much of the first Point what
it is to receive worthily.

How the very Body and Blood of Christ is now at this time to be received,
considering our Senses tell us that what we receive is Bread, and Wine; we must
of necessity have in this case the Help of FAITH to direct us, or we shall
rise again as we came, if not depart from hence a great deal worse. Now what
Faith is able to do, we need go no farther then to those words of our Savior
Christ, who speaking of Faith unto his Apostles: Verily I say unto you, Mat.
17.20.
says he, if ye have Faith as much as is a grain of mustard seed, ye shall
say unto this Mountain remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove,
and nothing shall be impossible unto you. And to show that they should be as
potent as well by Sea, as by Land: If ye had faith, Luke 17.6.
says he, as much as is a grain of mustard seed, and should say unto this
Mulbery tree, Pluck thy self up by the roots, and plant thy self in the Sea,
it should even obey you. Of the Mustard Seed he had told them Mat. 13.31.
before, that it was the least of all Seeds: and yet Faith but of that small
quantity, what works of quality brings it forth? Nay what does it not bring
forth, since as the Apostle Heb. 11.3.
speaks to the Hebrews: It subdueth kingdoms, works righteousness, obtaines
the promises, stops the mouths of Lions, quenches the violence of fire, makes
us to escape the edge of the sword, of weak makes us strong, makes us valiant
in battle, and turns to flight the Armies of the Aliants. And does Faith,
Beloved, all this, Really and Truly: and do our Adversaries the Papists still
scoff at us when we say we eat as truly, and really, the Body of our Savior
here by Faith, and by Faith drink his Blood?

Why, but thou will say, If this be all, what need then this Bread and Wine?
This, without these may well be done: we may every day feed of our Saviors
Body, and of his Blood in this sort. It is true, Beloved, so we may, and so we
do: howbeit, as S. Ierom Hieron. Palino.
speaks in another case, Habet nescio quid latentis (...) viva vox: and in
aures Discipuli de Autoris ore tranfusa fortius sonat: The voice of a Speaker
is much more forcible to the ears of him that hears, then when the Hearer
reads it himself: right so may we say in this case, we are much more moved
by an heavenly Force, when we See, and Receive, these very Elements, then when
as otherwise they are out of sight. Besides that our Savior Christ since he
has been pleased to use these Means to the purpose of enjoying him, and has
commanded us to do as himself did, until his next coming again, duty
requires at our hands that we in no wise neglect him, nor what in this ease
he has enjoined us, especially in a matter of such moment. Naaman no doubt
might have been healed of the Leprosy he had, had he never washed in Jordan,
would the Prophet Elisha but have spoken the word: but when that other word was
once gone out: 2. Kin. 5.10.
Go and wash thee in Jordan seven times, and thy Flesh shall come again unto
thee, and thou shall be cleansed, was it for Naaman to dispute when (...)

(...) ^tecost commonly called Whitsontide, were the only two Times of old
wherein Baptism was administered. Hence it was that whereas other Holy Days
have all some reference to our Savior Christ, and have accordingly their M.
Hooker Ecclesiast. Pol. l. 5.. 70. p. 195.
Names; as First, the Annuntiation of his Birth by Angelical Embassage,
commonly called our Lady Day. Secondly, his blessed Nativitie it self,
commonly called Christmas, (though there are that will not so speak, for fear
of I wot not what fear, happily that the Psalmist Ps. 53.6.
speaks of, They were afraid where no fear was, sure I am, where none is)
Thirdly, the ministry of his Legal Circumcision commonly called, Newyeersday:
Fourthly, the testification of his true Incarnation by the Purification of Her
which brought him into the world, commonly called Candlemas day: Fifthly, his
Resurrection: Sixthly, his Ascension: Seaventhly, the admirable sending down of
his Spirit, commonly called Whitsunday, and (which consequently ensued) the
notice of that incomprehensible Trinity thereby given to the Church of God,
commonly called Trinity Sunday: Eighthly, his Glorification in his Saints which
had the honor to suffer for his sake before they had age and ability to know
him; commonly called St Innocents day; in St Stephen that did know him; in
those Sages of the East that came to adore him, commonly called the Epiphany,
or the Twelfe Day; in John the Baptist; in the Apostles; his Glorification in
the Angels, as in Michael, and in all those happy Saints that are already
possessed of heaven: whereas I say these Holydaies, have all of them reference
to our Savior, and have accordingly their names: To Morrow, and the Next Day
after, to be annexed to this Feast, and the First Two Days in Whitsonweeke,
have no proper and peculiar Names given unto them, but are annexed to This
Feast, as also to the Other, by reason of Baptism then administered, and usual
at those two times.

Of Baptism then at this time, and for our better proceeding therein may you
be pleased to revise the words again, even now read unto you. Know ye not
that all we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized
into his Death? we are buried then with him by Baptism into his Death, that
like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory of the Father, so we
also should walk in newness of life.

In which words, I observe and note unto you two principal Points. First, a
Proposition: Secondly, a Consequence thereupon. The Proposition is here set
down by way of interrogation, and it is in effect this: All we which have
been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into his death. The
Consequence in that which follows: We are buried then with him by Baptism
into his Death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory
of the Father, so we also should walk in newness of life. The Proposition is
here set down by way of interrogation, for that it is a Truth that may by no
means be denied. The Orator will tell us so much, Interrogamus etiam,
Quintil. Instit. l 9. c. 2.
says he, quod negari non possit: We sometimes ask in such sort, as we
know that the Answerer cannot possibly deny it. Thus our Savior to his
Apostles, when I sent you Luke 22.35.
says he, without Bag, and Scrip, and Shoes, lacked ye any thing? Well he
knew they wanted not, and they themselves indeed confessed as much. And again,
to those two Disciples going unto Emaus, Cleophas and the other (St Ambrose
calls him Ambr. Ser. 1. p. 275. and Apol. David. p. 399.
Amaon, or Sermon. 71. p. 365.
Amaus) O Fools Luke 24.25.
says he, and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken,
ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
Thus this our Apostle also in an other place, speaking of the other Sacrament,
The Cup of Blessing which we bless 1. Cor. 10.16.
says he, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? Doubtless it was spoken
more significantly, then if he had said which indeed he meant: The Cup of
Blessing which we bless, and the Bread which we break, are the Communion of
the Blood, and of the Body of Christ. So likewise here in this place: Know ye
not that all we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized
into his Death? It is, as if he had said: This is a true 1. Tim. 1.15
saying, and by all means worthy to be received: I 1. Cor. 10 15
speak as unto them which have understanding, judge ye what I say: If there
2. Ioh. 1.10.
come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, namely, That All we which have
been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into his Death, receive
him not to house, neither bid him God speed.

Having thus resolved these words, I hold it now fit I show unto you, First,
what Baptism is: Secondly, what it is to be baptized into Jesus Christ:
Thirdly, what it is to be baptized into his Death. These three Points thus
handled, the Proposition will be evident, being this (as I said) in effect: All
we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ have been baptized into his
Death. First then what Baptism is: Know ye not that all we which have been
baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into his Death?

Baptism is a Greek word, and signifies a Bathing, or a Washing, and so is
used both by the Heathen Writers, and by the Evangelists themselves. I shall
not need now at this time to produce the Heathen to this purpose. As touching
the Evangelists, St Mark may stand for all, who speaking of the Jews and
Pharisees, When they come Mark. 7.4.
says he, from the Market, (...), except they wash they eat not, and many
other things there be, which they have taken upon them to observe, as (...),
the washings of Cups, and Pots, Brazen Vessels, and of Tables. So the Vulgar
does read it to, Nisi baptisentur, non comedunt: and Baptismata Calicum, and
Vrceorum, and Aeramentorum, and Lectorum, which the Rhemists interpret thus:
And from the Market, unless they be washed, they eat not: and many other
things there be that were delivered unto the^ to observe, the washings of Cups,
and Cruses, and of Brazen Vessels, and Beds. Where by the way, Beloved, it may
be wondered that our Rhemists treading so oftentimes the self same Steps that
the Vulgar does (their Fathers of Trent supposing the Muses, nay that God
himself spoke in that goodly Dialect, and not as Quint. Instit. l. 10. c. 1.
Varro would have thought, in Plautus his, had they ever spoken Latin) it may
be wondered I say, they translated it not, The Baptismes of Brazen Vessels,
doubtless it would have chimed wondrous well with Baptising of their Vid. D.
Willets Synops. p. 493. Edit. 1600 P. Martyris Loc. Com. Class. 4. Loc. 9.
Durant. de Rit. Eccle. l. 1. c. 22. 6. p. 177. Even Tom of Christchurch was
christened to, but D. Tresham it seems took him for a Wench, of whom D.
Hu^frey says: Qua^ ille (Treshamus) vt ad Missam clare vocaret, ante paucos
dies reparatam, novo nomine donavit, and Maria^ baptizavit. Humfred. Vit.
Iuelli. p. 81.
Bells. But to return unto my purpose.

Baptism signifying a Bathing, or a Washing of the Flesh, it is not unknown to
the^ that are conversant in holy Writ, that there were in the time of the Law
diverse and sundry kinds of Washings. All which for that they were Shadows of
Christ to come, and Appurtenances to the Sacrifices for Sin, and
Transgression, and the often Repeating thereof, declaring their Imperfection;
hence it was that when Christ was come, in liew and steed of them, there should
come with him an other kind of Washing never to be reiterated again, to wit a
Sacrament of that Washing, that is but once, and done for ever. And therefore
Aug. in Evan. Joan. Tract. 11. p. 68.
St Austen, Quomodo Vterus non potest repeti, sic nec Baptismus: And again in
an other Aug. in Evan. Joan. Tract. 12. p. 72.
place, Sicut ad Nativitatem carnalem valent muliebria Viscera ad semel
pariendum: sic ad Nativitatem spiritalem valent Viscera Ecclesiae vt semel
quisque baptisetur. Nor can a man be Borne twice, nor twice Baptized. And as in
respect of carnal Nativity the Mothers Womb is of force to bring forth once,
and but once: so the Womb of the Church in respect of spiritual Nativity. And
thus much of the Name of Baptism, go we now to the Nature of it.

Concerning Baptism, our Mother the Church has Book of Articles, Art. 27.
taught us to speak in this wise: Baptism is not only a sign of Profession,
and mark of difference, whereby Christian Men are discerned from others that
be not christened: but it is also a sign of Regeneration, or New Birth, whereby
as by an Instrument, they that receive Baptism rightly, are grafted into the
Church; the promises of the forgiveness of Sin, and of our adoption to be
the Sons of God, by the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed; Faith is
confirmed, and Grace increased by virtue of Prayer unto God. Baptism then such
a Sacrament, what does it else but sign unto us, that we are as certainly
washed from our Sins by the Blood of Jesus Christ, as our Bodies are
certainly washed, or sprinkled with Water. So Tertullian, Abluitur caro Tert.
de Carnis Resurrect.
says he, vt Anima emaculetur. The Flesh is washed, that the Soul may be
cleansed: and St Austen to this purpose, From whence Aug. in Evan. Joan. Tract.
80. p. 303.
says he, has this Water so great a virtue, that it but touches the Body,
and washes the Soul, but by reason of the Word, not in that it is spoken, but
believed. And hence it is that Tertullian calls Christians, FISHES. Wild Beasts
Tertull. de Baptismo p 597
says he, and Vypers, and Aspes, and Cockatrices, they are in love with dry
places, and those that are waterlesse: but let us little Fishes according to
our great Secundum (...) nostrum Iesum Christum. Alluding to those Acrosticke
Verses of Sibil whereof St. Austen De Civ. Dei. l. 18. c. 23
Fishes example Jesus Christ, be borne in water. Nec aliter quam in aqua
permanendo salui sumus. Neither out of that Element can we possibly be in
safety. He alludeth by all likelihood to that of our Mark. 16.16
Savior: He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that
will not believe, shall be damned: And again to Ioh. 3.5.
Nicodemus: Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except that a man be borne of
Water, and of the Spirit, he can not enter into the kingdom of God. And hence
it is, that we are taught by the Apostle St Paul Ephesians. 5.26.
that by the washing of Water through the Word, God does sa^ctifie and cleanse
his Church: that we are Heb. 10.22.
sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience, and washed in our Bodies with
pure water, not that the Baptism which saves us is (as Legal Purifications
were) a cleansing of the Flesh from outward impurity, but (...), 1. Pet. 3.21.
Vid Mr Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. 63. p 152.
as S. Peter speaks, an interrogatiue trial of a good Conscience toward God.
Nor is this Sanctifying, and Cleansing of us, in regard only of the Time
present, but in regard of the Time that is past also, as also of the Time to
come: according to which three Times the Scripture so speaks of Baptism as if
it intimated so much, as (...), He has saved us, Tit. 3.5. (...), That now
saves us, 1. Pet. 3.21. And (...), He shall be saved, Marc. 16.16. Nor is this
Sanctifying, and Clensing in part, but in whole. And therefore, He, Chrysostom in 1.
Cor. 15. Ho^, 40.
says S. Chrysostom, that is baptized, has his Soul more pure, then the
Beams of the Sun it self, even as pure as when it was created at the first.
And as the workman, says he, by melting Iron, or Gold, does make it pure, and
new: so the Holy Ghost in Baptism, as it were in a Furnace, does polish the
Soul, and form it anew, and by consuming sin, makes it more purely
bright-some then any Gold whatsoever. Which yet is not so to be taken, as if
we were not every day to be more and more purified, and cleansed more and more,
Iam vos mundi estis, Aug. in Evan. Joan Tract. 80. p. 303.
says S. Austen, mundi scilicet, atque mu^dandi, You are now says he, Clean;
Clean, and to be Cleansed: For had they not been Clean, says he, they
could not have brought forth fruit at all, and yet every Branch that bears
fruit, the Husbandman Ioh. 15.2.
purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit.

And here, Beloved, let us consider a while, First, the great Goodness of our
God that uses this very Element so greatly now adays unto our Good. For if so
be we be remembered, this is the Element wherein his Wrath was once declared,
when as he Genesis 7.17.
drowned with it the whole World. It was as Moses Rod when as it was Exodus 4.3.
turned into a Serpent. It was as S. Paul before his Conversion, Act. 9.1.
making havoc of a World of men. I, as Ananias spoke of St Paul, but not a
Saint then: Ver. 13.
Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he has done to thy
Saints at Jerusalem: right so, Beloved, may we say, Lord we have heard by many
of this Element how much evil it has done, and is it possible it should now
be so great a Blessing unto Man? But what cannot he work that commands 2 Cor.
4.6.
Light out of Darkness: and what will he not work for our sakes, who can Psalm
66.5.
turn the Sea it self, into dry Land.

Secondly, let us call to mind what base means the Lord imployeth in so
honorable a work as this is. For what is more common and usual then Water,
and what of less esteem, especially then common Water. -- Ovid. Met. l. 6.
Vsus communis Aquarum est:
Nec Solemn proprium Natura, nec Era fecit,
Nec tenues Vndas.
None are Lords Proprietaries of Water, Sun, and Air. True it is, in want
thereof nothing more made of, but where there is great plenty, nothing again
so little esteemed. And yet see, Beloved, even in this, the good Pleasure, and
Purpose of God, who has 1. Cor. 1.27
chosen the Foolish things of the world, to confound the Wise, and the Weak
things of the world, to confound the Mighty things, and Vile things of the
World, and things which are despised has God chosen, and things which are not,
to bring to naught things that are, that no Flesh should rejoice in his
presence. Thus the Midianites overthrown by Gedeon, what was the Cause
isntrumental, but as it were a Barley Loaf, even Lamps in one hand, and
Trumpets in the other, Judge. 7.20? Sampsons weapon that he slew so many
withal, what was it but an Asses iawbone, Judge. 15.16? With the Iaw of an
Ass, says he, are heaps upon heaps: with the Iaw of an Ass have I slain a
thousand men. Go we to the other Sacrament, and is the Substance of it any
more then a Morsel of Bread, and a Draught of Wine? And yet has it pleased
our Savior to say, This is my Body, This is my Blood, Mat. 26.26. But now to
proceed onwards.

You have seen, Beloved, what Baptism is, the Name, and the Nature of it: in
the next place we are to see, what it is to be baptized into Jesus Christ:
Know ye not that all we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have
been baptized into his death?

To be baptized into Jesus Christ, is to profess our selves to hold of him, to
addict our selves, Bodies, and Souls to the honor of his Name, Communion
Book in Public Baptism.
to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under his
Banner, against Sin, the World, and the Devil, and to continue his Faithful
Soldiers, and Servants, unto our lives ends. Doubtless there is no other Name
whereunto we are, or ought at all, to be baptized. And therefore the Apostle S.
Paul: Is Christ, says he, divided? was Paul crucified for you? 1. Cor. 1.13
either were ye baptized into the Name of Paul? No doubtless, and therefore
all those whom S. Paul himself did beget to Christ, or any other of the
Apostles, Non Paulianos, Aug. in Ps 44 p. 281.
says S, Austen, aut Petrianos, sed Christianos nominaverunt: They named them
not Paulians of Paul, or Petrians of Peter, but Christians, of our Savior
Christ. And this is that Iam 2 7.
Worthy Name after which we be now named. This it was that began at Antioch,
for Act. 11.26.
there the Disciples were first of all called CHRISTIANS, and this it is that
ever since has lasted in the World, and so shall it ever do, as long as the
World shall last. Nor is it a Name only, but diverse and sundry Prerogatives,
which we all of us have by reason of BAPTISM. St. Chrysostom Chry. Tom. 5.
Hom. ad Neophit.
reckons them to be these. First, in that we are Gal. 5,1.
Free: Secondly, in that we are 1. Cor. 6.11
Sanctified: Thirdly, in that we are Ibid.
Justified: Fourthly, in that we are Ioh. 1.12.
Sons: Fifthly, in that we are Romans 8.17.
Heirs: Sixthly, in that we are Romans 8.29.
Brethren with Christ: Seaventhly, in that we are Romans 8.17.
Coheires with him: Eighthly, in that we are his 1. Cor. 6.15
Members: Ninthly, in that we are the 1. Cor. 3.16.
Temples of God: Tenthly, and lastly, in that we are the Ephesians. 5.18.
Vessels of the Holy Ghost. All this will the better appear if so be we call
to mind those several styles of Honor given to Baptism by the ancient
Fathers. Dionisius, he Dionis. Eccl. Hierarch. c. 2.
calls it, the Mother of adoption: Basil. Hom. 13
S. Basil, the Grace of adoption: Clem. Alex. Poed. l. 1. c. 6.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Medicamentum Poeonium, A Sovereign Salve: Chrysostom in
Hom ad Bapt.
S. Chrysostom, Vitae huius Purgatorium: The purging place, or Furnace of this
Life: Ambr. de Sac. l. 1. c. 14.
S. Ambrose; Pascha Christianorum, The Christian man's Easter, or Resurrection:
Gregory Nazianzen, he heaps together a number of Appellations, and all (as he
thinks) too little too. Baptism, Naz in Sanct Baptism.
says S. Gregory, is the Beau^ (...)

(...) Faithful to be baptized into the Death of Christ, is as much to say, as
that by the Death of Christ, Sin in them did die, and was utterly abolished.
So that we may now speak of our Souls, and Bodies in Baptism, as does the
Apostle St Paul of 1. Cor. 15.24.
Bodies in the Resurrection of the Dead: They are sown in corruption, and they
are raised in incorruption. They are sown in dishonor, and they are raised in
glory. They are sown in weakness, and they are raised in power. They are sown
as Natural, and they are raised Spiritual: for they are both of them sealed
with the Holy Spirit of Promise, Ephesians. 1.13. And therefore St Austen, Sed tu
Domine misericordissime Aug Confess. l. 9. c. 2. p. 107.
says he, nonne and hoc Peccatum cum caeteris horrendis and funereis in Aqua
Sancta ignovisti, and remisisti mihi? But, oh most merciful Lord, says St
Austen, have not thou forgiven, and remitted unto me this Sin, and all other
my horrible and deadly Sins besides, in that sacred Water of Holy Baptism?
He knew no doubt he was forgiven them, and therefore in an other place: Quid
retribuam Domino Aug Confess. l. 2 c. 7. p. 57.
says he, quod recolit haec Memoria mea, and Anima mea non metuit inde? What
shall I render to the Lord, that these my Sins past, thus come oftentimes to
mind, and yet my Soul fears them not. Now as St Austen, so we: we have
committed like Sins; we have offended the same Lord; Our Memory recals them
often to mind, and yet for all that, we fear them not. Why? For that there is
No condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. We have seen what
Baptism is: what it is to be Baptized into Christ: what into his Death. And so
much of the Proposition. Come we now unto the Consequence, which I told you was
in these words: We are buried the^ with him by Baptism into his Death, that
like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory of the Father, so we
also should walk in newness of life.

The Consequence of our Saviors Death, was our Saviors Resurrection. and the
Consequence of our Death to Sin, is our Burial to Sin, and Newness of
Life. First concerning Burial, it was not enough (you know) in our Creed to
believe of our Savior Christ, that he was Mortuus, Dead; but that he was
Sepultus to, Dead and Buried; partly, for that the truth and certainety of his
Death might be the better confirmed unto us: partly to make way to his
Resurrection that followed after, for by no means could he have been said to
have risen again, if so be he had not been first buried. Now the truth is our
Savior Christ saw all that while no Act. 2.27.
Corruption. It could not be said of him, as of Ioh. 11.39.
Lazarus, that had been dead four days: but of every Body else may it well
be said, how that continually by little and little they moulder away. I will
not here with Solomon bid you go to the Prove. 6 6.
Pismire for example, or with the Prophet Esaias. 1.3.
Esaias to the Ox, and the Ass, or with our Savior himself to the Mat. 6.26.
Fowls of Heaven: but go we to the greatest Prince, to the greatest Potentate
that is, and may we not say of him, after he has enhabited his Toomb a while,
what the Poet Ovid. Meta. l. 12.
said of that great Achilles, Iam cinis est: and de tam magno restat Achille
Nescio quid,
so we: Iam cinis est: and de tam magno Principe restat
Nescio quid, parvam quod non been complete Vrnam?
He is now but Earth and Ashes, and nothing at all remaining of him, save only
a little Modicum, scarce an Handful to speak of? Indeed the Body when it goes
to the Earth, has then its whole and entire Proportion, every Part, and
Parcel of it, but come we some few Years after, perhaps few Months, and what
shall we find of that Proportion, but forsooth a Bone or two, a little Hair
untrimmed, and a Skull where was a world of Thoughts, but now are Psalm. 146.3.
perished. Right so it is, or ought to be, with every baptized Christian, when
once he is by Baptism dead to Sin: he is to be Buried with our Savior Christ,
but not to see no Corruption, but as other dead Bodies do, to moulder every
day to Sin more and more, even as a dead Corpse continually wastes in the
Grave, that it may be said of him as speaks this our Apostle immediately
before my Romans 6.2.
Text: How shall he that is dead to Sin, nay Dead and Buried to it, live yet
therein? And thus much as touching Burial.

As touching Newness of Life, there is nothing so often spoken of, throughout
the whole Scriptures, as Newness is. It is an Adiunct to most things there. We
there shall read of A New Ier. 31.31.
Covenant; A New Rev. 3.12.
Jerusalem; A New Psalm. 33.3.
Song; A New Rev. 21.1.
Heaven, and a New Earth; New Mark. 2.21.
Cloth; New Ver 22.
Wine. We shall there read of A New Ioh. 3.3.
Birth; A New 2. Cor. 5.17.
Creature; A New Ezec. 11.19
Heart; A New 1. Cor. 5.7.
Lump; New Mark. 16.17.
Tongues, and what not? Behold, says the Apostle St Paul, all things are
become New, 2. Cor. 5.17. Now then as we are dead to Sin, not to be Buried
only to it, and Buried we are to Sin, not only to lie in our Graves, and
there to putrify: so are we to understand, that as there was to our Savior
Christ a Resurrection unto Life, so there ought to be to us Christians, a
Renovation to Newness of Life. We are every of us now to say Ovid. Trist. l.
3. eleg. 11. Me quoque, quem no ras olim, non esse memento: Ex illo supera^t
haec Simulachra vire. Ovid. Ib.
Non sum qui fueram, or that in Ambros. de Poenitent l. 2. c. 10. p. 220.
St Ambrose rather, At ego, non sum ego, I for my part am not the Man, or I am
not the Woman, I was. Nor mattereth it what we have been. I, Phil. 3.13.
says the Apostle, forget that which is behind, and this is a good
Forgetfulness. Well might Tull de Orat. l 2. and de Fin. l. 2. and Academ. Quest
l. 4.
Themistocles have preferred this Forgetfulness above any Art Memoratiue
whatsoever. Lactantius alluding to this Newness: Give me a Man Lactant. Inst.
l 3. c. 26.
says he, that is yrefull, foul mouthed, rash, and heady, and with a few
words of holy Scripture I will make him as gentle as a La^b. Give me one that
is greedy, and Covetous and to to sparing of expenses, I will presently make
him Liberal, and giving out his Money by whole handfuls. Give me one that fears
grief, and is exceedingly afraid of Death, I will make him he shall contemn
al Torments, Fire it self, nay Phalaris Bull. Give me a fleshly and sensual
man, an Adulterer, or haunter of baudy houses, you shall see him in a trice
both sober, and chaste, and continent. Give me a Cruel man, and one that
thirsts after blood, that Fury of his shall be changed into Clemency. Give
me an unjust man, an Idiot, a Sinner, he shall presently become just, wise,
and innocent. For all this lewdness shall be abolished, only at and by the
Font. His Conclusion there is: Pauca Dei Praecepta sic totum hominem immutant,
and exposito vetere nouum reddunt, vt no^ cognoscas eunde^ esse. For a few
words and Precepts of God do so change the whole man, and by casting off the
Old, make him a New one, as that you will hardly suppose him to be the same
Man he was. We are to be then New Creatures.

What? and is this enough? Is it sufficient for us to put off the Old man, and
to put on the New? Needs there no more to this Newness? Nay: but we must
walk too, in newness of Life. That of Diog. Laert. in Socrat.
Socrates holds not here, Loquere vt te videam: Talk, that I may know thee:
no, but we must walk too, even walk worthy of the Coloss. 1.10
Lord, and please him in all things, being fruitful in all good works, and
increasing in the knowledge of God. We must not then be at a stand with Moab.
Moab, Ier. 48.11.
says the Prophet, has been at rest from his youth, and he has settled on
his lees, and has not been powered from vessel to vessel: therefore his taste
remained in him, and his sent is not changed. Again in Walking, we must not
go the Common Walk: For many walk, Philip. 3.18.
says the Apostle, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping,
that they are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is damnation,
whose God is their Belly, and whose Glory is to their shame, which mind
earthly things. Nor must we go the Gentiles Walk, who walk in vanity of
their mind, Ephesians. 4.17. The Prophet Esaias. 3.16.
Esaias tells us of Some that walk with Stretched out Necks: we must not walk
with such neither. 2. Pet. 3.3.
Saint Peter tells us of Some too, which walk after their Lusts, and Iud. 1.18.
S. Jude puts an Adiunct to them, and calls them Ungodly Lusts. We must be
the Antipodes also to these walkers, we must walk worthy of the vocation
whereunto we are called, Ephesians. 4.1. So shall we be true Peripateticks. I will
end this Point with the Counsel of S. Ierom which he gave unto Lucinius,
concerning a journey intended by him to go to Jerusalem, but we may better
apply it in our case: I beseech thee, Obsecro^te and mon^o Parentis affecta, vt
qui Sodomam: eliquisti, ad Montana festinans, post tergum ne respicias: ne a
ratri Stiua^, ne fimbria^ Salvatoris, nec Cincinnos eius, Noctis rore
madefactos, quos semel tenere coepisti, aliquando dimittas. Hier. ad Lucin.
says S. Ierom, and as a Father I admonish thee, that thou which have left
Sodom, and now hastest to the Mountain, look not back?: least the Plough, the
Hem of our Saviors Garment, his Locks wetted with the dew of Heaven, which
once thou tookest hold of, thou should carelessly let go again. Come not
down from the Housetop of Virtues to seek thy old Garments, return not home
again out of the Field. Regard not with Lot the Playnes of Jordan, which are
not watered from Heaven as Canaan was, but with the boisterous flood of Jordan,
after the changing of his sweet waters mixed with the Dead Sea. Coepisse
multorum est, ad culmen pervenisse paucorum.
A many begin, but few do end well. They, says the Apostle, that run in a 1
Cor. 9.24.
Race, run all, yet one receaueth the price. But it is otherwise said of us,
So run, that you may all obtain. The President of the Non est invidus
Agonotheta noster: nec alterius Palma, alteri parat ignominiam. Omnes Athletas
suos desiderat coronari. Hier. Ibid.
Masteries is not envious, nor is the Victory of one prejudicial to another.
He desires to crown all, and every of his Cha^pions. And thus much of the
Proposition, a^ also of the Consequence: now as touching such Instructions as
we may every of us take thereby, and then God willing an end. Know ye not,
that al we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ have been baptized into
his death? We are buried then with him by Baptism into his Death, that like
as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also
should walk in newness of life.

The First Instruction I gather hence, is from the Interrogation here, Know
ye not? and it being (as you see) an Interrogation, it is as if he had said,
which he said in another place, concerning the other 1. Cor. 10.15
Sacrament, I speak as unto them which have understanding, judge ye what I
say. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood
of Christ? The Bread which we break is it not the Communion of the Body of
Christ? So that the Apostle there in that place using a like interrogation, and
giving a Reason of the same, namely, for he spoke to them which had
vnderstanding', and they should judge what he said: no doubt, the self same
Reason is of the Interrogation here in this place. Then thus: Had the Romans,
and the Corinthians, understanding in the Sacraments, and could they judge in
those cases what the Apostle wrote unto them? How much more does it behooue you
to be expert herein, and in all other things of such nature, as are absolutely
necessary to your Salvation, considering your many Advantages which neither
the Romans, nor Corinthians had. For howsoever they outstript you in one only,
namely that they had the Apostle S. Paul himself to be their Instructour: yet
in how many points besides, may you be said to outstrip them. Then, was a time
of Persecution, now of Peace; Then, were Princes, and Potentates, Tygres,
Bears, Lions, and Wolves, now are they Esaias. 49.23.
Nursing Fathers, and Queens are Nurses; Then, was there much scarcity and
penury of Preachers, now so great Plenty that Store well nie is a Sore, sure I
am, so it is to a many of us; Then, wanted Books to further them in knowledge,
now the World is so full, that in a manner it surfets of the^; Then, 1. Cor.
1.26.
not many Wise men after the Flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble were
called, but God chose the foolish things, the weak things, the vile things of
the World, and things which are despised did God choose, and things which were
not; now Wisdom, and Might, and Nobility are like the three Senec. de Benef.
l. 1. c. 3.
Graces hand in hand, all concurring in loueliest sort to the upholding of the
Church, and of Christian Religion amongst us. And are we yet, Beloved, ignorant
still? Come we so far short of those old Christians? Do we still expect like
Babes to have our Spiritual Food chewed to us? Memorable is that of the
Apostle to the Hebrews: When as concerning the time, Heb. 5.11.
says he, ye ought to be Teachers, yet have ye need again that we teach you
the first Principles of the Word of God, and are become such as have need of
Milk, and not of strong Meat. What? and did he then say, Concerning the time,
meaning Those Times? what would he have said now a days, concerning Our Times?
What would he have said by this time, that we that are English, ought to have
been? Beloved, I speak it confidently, No Nation under Heaven, As concerning
the time, should rather have been Teachers then the People of this Nation, I
say it again, No Nation under Heaven: but while Some of us, cry out for
Preaching, for Lecturing, for Sermons, and practice not one syllable of all we
ever hear: Others, will choose themselves their own Teachers, and prefer a
Chamber before a Church: Others, surfeit of the Word, and are in truth glutted
with it: Others, except against those they hear, they are forsooth Formalists,
and Time-servers; or they preach but seldom, Strawbery Sermons; or they mix
the word with profane Learning, and I wot not what: we all of us put the Lord
to that old complaint of his, concerning the Esaias. 5.4.
Vineyard of the Jews, too too true of our Vineyard, I looked that it should
bring forth Grapes, and it brings forth wild Grapes. And indeed to say the
Truth, the Grapes are worse then Wild, even of those that bear the show of the
purest Professors amongst us. But thus much of the first Instruction.

The Second Instruction I gather hence, is that we often call to mind, what the
Lord already has done for us, when we for our parts were but INFANTS, and (as
it were) but of a Ier. Lam. 2.20.
Span long. How by reason of this Baptism here spoken of in this place, ^
Communion Book in Baptism.
he has favorably received us, he has embraced us with the arms of his
mercy, he has promised to give unto us the blessing of eternal life, and to
make us partakers of his everlasting Kingdom. This to the Romans indeed, and
to the Christians in those days, was done when they were at Men's estate, and
of a full and ripe age: but to Us, when we were but Children: even then, as Aug.
de Verb Apost. Ser. 10.
speaks S. Austen, When our Mother the Church lent us other Folks Feet to
come unto her with, other Folks Hearts to believe, and other Folks Tongues to
confess: that being harmed, as he speaks in another Aug. de Ver. Apost. Ser,
14.
place, by other Folks Deeds, we might again be healed by the Words of others.
When that admirable kindness past from David to Mephibosheth, and David began
unto him in these words, Fear not, for I will surely show thee kindness for
Jonathan thy Fathers sake, and will restore thee all the fields of Saul thy
Father, and thou shall eat Bread at my Table continually: Mephibosheths humble
2. Sam. 9.8.
answer was again, What is thy Servant, that thou should look upon such a
dead Dog as I am. Doubtless, Beloved, if we consider Our selves, and our
Nature we bring into the world, how much greater cause have we to say, then
Mephibosheth had to David, that we are Dogs indeed: we coming of that Race,
concerning which our Savior once Mat. 15.26. Last Translat.
said, It is not meet to take the Childrens Bread, and to cast it to Dogs.
For what, Beloved, what were we, before this Baptism of ours, but naturally
the Ephesians. 2.3.
Children of wrath, without Christ, Ver. 12.
Aliants from the Commonwealth of Israel, Staungers from the Covenants of
promise: insomuch that as we are not naturally Men, without the benefit of our
Natural Birth, no more are we Christian Men in the Churches Eye, without the
benefit of this New Birth. Ab eo tempore censemur Hieron. ad Heliodor. Epitaph.
Nepot.
says St Jerome, ex quo in Christo renascimur: we then begin to be reckoned in
the Checkroll of Christian Souls, when in Christ we begin to be borne again
by the benefit of Baptism. And St Austen to this purpose: Do you demand Quid
ergo petunt qui Baptismi Sacrame^ta desiderant? Quid vtique, nisi vt qui erant
Vasa Diaboli, mereantur effici Vasa Christi? Aug. de Temp. Ser. 116. p. 610
says he, what they desire, who desire to be baptized? What, but that they who
were the Vessels of Satan, might find the favor to be made the Vessels of
Christ. This our State then, wherein every of us did stand before our Baptism,
every Mother, and Mothers Child, how might we much better use the words of
Mephibosheth could we have spoken at such a time, to express thereby our
own Baseness. Besides that David at length failed Mephibosheth, who when he
made that most reasonable excuse for not going with him when he fled, and
showing him the treachery of his Servant: Why speak thou 2. Sam. 19.29.
says David, any more of thy matters? I have said, thou and Ziba divide the
Lands. Thus David to Mephibosheth, but whom did ever the Lord fail that were
half so trusty to him as Mephibosheth was to David. Nay how many of us even
after our Baptism, have played the pranckes of Ziba with him, what in one
respect, and what in an other, and yet He, even He, Return Ezec. 18.31.
says he, cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby you have
transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for why will ye die,
O house of Israel? And Ezec. 33.11.
again, As I live, says the Lord God, I desire not the death of the wicked,
but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn you, turn you from your
evil ways, for why will ye die, O ye house of Israel? I, and when a many
Admonitions will not serve us, either that our Parents bestow upon us, or our
Tutors, or our Masters, or our Magistrates, or our Ministers, how oftentimes
does he take the Rod immediately into his own hand, and to use Sr Thomas
Moors Comfort against Tribul. l. 3. c. 20. Mori Oper. Angl p. 1246. Col. 1.
words, how does he himself play the Iaylour with us, wringing some by the
Brows with a Meygreme; collering others by the Neck with a Quinsie; bolting
others by the Arms with a Paulsie; manacling the Hands of others with the
Gowte in their Fingers; wringing others by the Legs with the Cramp in their
Shinnes; binding others to the Bed-borde with a Cricke in the Back; till what
with these Diseases, or what with others, he cause them at length to say with
Dan. 4.34.
Nebuchadnezzar, I praise, and extol, and magnify the king of Heaven whose
Works are all truth, and his Ways judgment, and those that walk in pride, he
is able to abase. I come to the third Instruction.

The third Instruction I gather is, that being Baptized into our Saviors
Death, and by consequence Dead to Sin, Sin should now die in us, at least
wise it should not have Dominion over us. It is the Apostles Conclusion
hereupon in the twelfth verse of this Chapter: Let not Sin reign there fore in
your Mortal Body, that ye should obey it in the Lusts thereof. Non dixit not
sit Aug. Hom. 21. p 316.
says St Austen, sed non Regnet: The Apostle does not say, let not Sin there
be, but let it not Reign there, let it not play Rex, for be it will, no
remedy, but yet we may hinder it from Reigning there. And he calls them in
an other Sunt quidam inflati Vtres, spiritu elationis pleni, etc: superbiae
morbo tumentes, vt dicere audeant inveniri homines absque peccato. Aug. De
Verb. Apost. Ser. 29. p. 268.
place Puft-vp Bladders (meaning Pelagians, and Coelestinians, somewhat a kin
to our Popish Adversaries) who dared to say that Men in this Life might be
without Sin. But what (will some Man say) is it then to Reign? What to play
Rex? It is first of al, when Sin is not so much in us, as we in Sin, it is
the Apostle St Paul's phrase, 1. Cor. 15.17. Secondly, when we continue in
Sin, Romans 6.1. Thirdly, when we serve Sin, Rom 6.6. Fourthly, when we are
sold under Sin, Romans 7.14. Fifthly, when we fulfill Sin, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16.
Lastly, when we are laden with Sin, 2. Tim. 3.6. As for those that are
Infirmities, and surprise us ere we are aware, and nothing comparable unto
these, either in Quantity, or Quality, Those daily Sins, Illa quotidiana, and
levia, habent etiam sua lavacra quotidiana, etc: Tundat and de his pectus,
faciat and pro his elecmosynas, sed vita mutata: and inde recedat and huc
accedat. Aug. Hom. 19. p. 313
says St Austen, and light to speak of, have their daily Remedies to, he
means as is there specified Daily Prayer, Giving of Alms and amendment of our
Lives. But are our Sins, Beloved, Sins of Infirmity only, and such as
surprise us unawares? Cast we our Eyes abroad in the World, and shall we not
see every where, and in every place some other-gates Sins then these? Sins
of Gluttony, Sins of Drunkenness, Sins of Swearing, and Forswearing, capital
Crimes of this Age? It is storyed of Fulvius a Noble Man of Rome, that when a
Son of his had followed Cataline, and Fulvius had lighted upon him by chance,
Syrrha Ego, inquit, non Catilinae te genui, sed Patriae. So P. Martyr
relalateth it, in Romans c. 12. p. 614 But Salust only says: In his erat Fulvius
Senatoris Filius, quem retractum ex itinere Parens necari iussit. Salust.
Coniurat. Caetil. p. 33.
says Fulvius, I begat thee to thy Country, not to Cataline, and with that
drawing his Dagger, he stabbed him to the Heart. Right so Beloved, the Lord of
Heaven has begotten us to Christ, not to Belial; to Light not to Darkness;
which Belial the Prince of Darkness, if so be we will needs serve, no remedy,
who knows how near the Dagger may be unto his Heart? Because says the
Prophet Esaias, ye have cast of the word of God, and trust in violence, and
wickedness, and stay thereupon; therefore this iniquity shall be unto you as a
Breach that falls, or a Swelling in a high wall, whose breaking comes
suddenly in a moment, Esaias, 30.12.

I hasten to my Fourth, and last Instruction, and my last Instruction is this,
that we should not only die to Sin, but live unto Righteousness. It is the
same in effect which the Psalmist has, though in other words, Flee from evil,
and do the thing that is good, Psalm. 37.27. The same has the Prophet Esaias
1.16.
Esaias, the same the Prophet Amos 5 15.
Amos, and the Apostle Romans 12.^.
St Paul the same: both the Old, and New Testament, concur in this, that we
abstain not only from that which Evil is, but that we do what is Good also.
For indeed Beloved, to say the truth, what is it for us to live like Cyphars
here, some Days, or Months, or Years, and to depart at length from hence,
neither caring, nor cared for. Who dislikes not that Luke 10.31.
Levite, as also the Priest, who past by the wounded Man, and did not Proferre
de the sauro Cordis quod tribuerent, as Aug. Hom. 6 p. 289.
speaks St Austen, not so much as give him a God-speed. Nulli violentiam
facere, no^ cuiusquam Vicini agris, non limite pertur. bato, non spolitato
Paupere, non circumvento simplici, sid tantammodo vbi proprios Fructus
reconderet, cogitabat. Audite quid audi erit qui tenaciter servabat sua Aug.
Hom. 7. p 291.
The same St Austen speaking of that Rich Man, who saw his Goods come trolling
in, and resolving at the last to be Ioviall, and to live as merry as the Day
was long: What? says St Austen, did he then seek that which was an other
Man's? No, we read not there of any violence he offered, he removed not the
Meere-stones, he spoiled not the Poor, he circumvented not the Simple, only he
began to think, where, and how, to lay up his Stoare, and yet for all this,
Harken says he, to what himself heard, for being such an Hold-fast of his
own. O Fool, this Night will they take away thy Soul. Whereupon St Austen
again, God does not there befoole him, as one Man befooles an other. Such a
word from the mouth of God, is no less then Condemnation. For what? will he
give to Fools, trow ye, the kingdom of Heaven? No the five Foolish Virgins
can tell so much who for all their knocking, were unknown, Mat. 25.12. So the
Evangelist speaking of Dives, and calling him A certain Rich man; Rich he was,
Aug. Hom. 7. p. 425.
says the same S. Austen, the Evangelist says not, he was a Slanderer, An
Oppressor of the Poor, A Receauer of other men's Goods, or an Embesler of the
same, An Vndoer of the Fatherless, a Wronger of the Widow: and what was then
his Fault, but for the Poor man lay at his doors, void of help, full of
Soars. A Fault so great, that as the self same Father observes, Desideravit
Guttam, qui non dedit Micam: He that gave not a Crum of Bread was driven to
that exigence, as to crave a Draught of Drink. What? and are Alms then our
only Fruit we ought to bear? In living unto Righteousness, ought we to
bring forth nothing else? Nay, but there are a many besides, which we are to
bring forth in much abundance, which the Apostle S. Paul calls the Fruit of the
Spirit, and reckons them up to be these: The Fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.
says he, is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,
he means Faithfulness in keeping Promises, Mecknesse, Temperancy, against
such, says he, there is no law. And these, Beloved, are our Fruits, or if
they be not, oh let them now be: that al of us of One Body, sanctified by One
Spirit, through the Sacrament of One Baptism, may be knit to Christ by One
Faith, to our selves in One Love, to serve together One Lord, who after we
have suffered a little, shall make us 1. Pet. 5.10.
perfect, confirm, strengthen, and stablish us: to him be Glory and Dominion
for ever and ever. I will end with that of Aug. Hom. 20 p 315.
S. Austen, Now the Red Sea of Baptism consecrated with Christ his Blood, has
conveyed us, and waft us over. The Egyptians are overwhelmed. Take we now no
thought at all, for Sins already past, no more then did the Israelites for
those Egyptians then drowned. Henceforth bethink we our selves, how to pass
the Wilderness of this our Life, that so we may come to the Land of Promise,
Jerusalem which is above. But for thou O Lord can best guide us, in, and
through the same, Aug Tom. 10 Hom 27 p. 330 and Tom. 9. de Vtil. Poenit. c. 1
p. 705.
Adsis in itinere Auxiliator, qui in Aegypto fuisti Liberator: Thou that have
delivered us out of the Bondage of Egypt, help us we beseech thee amidst our
wanderings in the Desert: least what by the Exodus 15.24
Murmurings of a Many of us for not having all at will; Exodus 16.3.
Others, by Lustings after Fleshpots, and Number. 11.6.
Loathing thy heavenly Mannae; Others, by Number. 12.1. Number. 16.2.
Rebelling against our Moses, and in him against thy Ordinance; Others, by Number.
13.29
Discouraging of their Brethren, as did the Spies for obtaining of Canaan;
Others, by Number. 15.32
Breaking of thy Saboths far more grievously then in breaking Sticks; Others,
by Number. 25.1
Committing Fornication with the Daughters of the Moabites; Others, by Josh.
7.1.
Coveting, and Hording up, as did Achan the Wedge of Gold; We ALL of us kindle
thy Wrath, and thy Fury wax hot against us. 2. Esdr. 8.45.
Spare thy People O Lord, and give not thine heritage into reproach, that the
Heathen should rule over them. Wherefore should they say among the People,
where is their God? Amos. 7.2,
O Lord God, spare we beseech thee: who shall raise up Jacob! for he is small.

The same Lord, and God, so bless us, and the Seed that has been sown, etc.
THE SACRAMENT OF THE SVPPER.
Easter Day April. 12. 1612.
HAving heretofore upon occasion of this Days Solemnity, Right Worshipful,
and dearly Beloved, discoursed unto you of the Resurrection of our Lord, and
Savior Christ Jesus: I hold it convenient now at this time, to entreat of
another Argument, and yet such an one as is no less fitting, and suitable to
the Time.

Among the Constitutions, and Canons Ecclesiastical agreed upon by our whole
Church about the beginning of his Majesty's Reign, one was; Book of Constable.
Art. 11
That the Holy Communion should be administered in every Church so often, and at
such times, as every Parishioner might communicate at the least thrice in the
Year, whereof the Feast of Easter to be one. Now that every Parishioner should
so communicate, that was enjoined long before, and it is in the Every
Parishioner shall communicate at the least three times in the year of which
Easter shall be one. Book of Common Prayer, at the end of the Commun.
Book of Common Prayer, alluding belike, or to that of Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 16.16.
Three times in the year shall all the Males appear before the Lord, and they
shall not appear before him empty: or to that of the Council of Agatha, that
decreed long ago, Seculares qui in Natali Domini, Pascha, Pentecoste non
communicauerint, Catholici non credantur, nec inter Catholicos habeantur. Conc.
Agathens. Capitulo 18. Council. Tom. 1. p. 327. By that same token Carranza
leaves it quite out. Carranza Summa Council. p. 161. Edit. Lugd. 1587.
That they which do not communicate thrice every year, namely, at Christmas,
and Easter, and at Whitsontide, should not be accounted Christian Catholics,
nor had in the number of Catholic People. The Council of Lateran, a long
time after, brought it to Polydor. Virg says that Pope Zepherinus first
enjoined it. Polid de Invent. l. 5. c. 11.
Once a year only, and that at Easter, which when Popery was amongst us, so
prevailed then with that Custom, that the Relics of it remain with a Many (I
might say, the Most of us) eve^ to this day. Some Few indeed come at all times,
when ever the Sacrament is administered, but we come All of us at Easter, a
great probability that either the Law prevails with us more then does the
Gospel, Custom more then Conscience, or that indeed we know not yet the
Virtue of this Sacrament, and who it is that says unto us as well at other
times, as at Easter, Mat. 22.4.
Behold, I have prepared my Dinner: my Oxen, and my Fatlings are killed, and
all things are ready, come unto the Marriage. For were we persuaded in very
deed, that this indeed is Gods Dinner, and that his Oxen, and Fatlings are
here, that is, here is Strong Meat, and here is Milk, Vt abundet quod
perfectus comedat, abundet etiam quod parvulus sugat, to speak as does
Fulgent. De Dispens. Domin. p 611.
Fulgentius, Plenty of that which the Strong may eat of, and Plenty of that
which the Weaker may taste of too: that here, as Greg. ep. ad Leand. c. 4.
Praefix. Oper. Greg.
speaks S. Gregory, Et Agnus ambulet, and Elephas natet, The Lamb may wade,
and the Elephant may swim: that is, The Unlettered, and the Learned may have
sufficiency here, as the Israelites had of Manna each of them an Exodus 16.18
Homer full: would we come so seldom to it as we do? Should only Once
content us a whole Tweluemonth? No doubtless, but we would think even these
Three Times not sufficient, we would say to our Mother the Church that has
commanded us but Thrice a year, as said Elisha the Prophet to king Ioash when
he smote the Ground but thrice: 2. Kin. 13.19
Thou should have smitten five or six times, so thou should have smitten
Aram till thou had consumed it, where now thou shall smite Aram but thrice.
So She should have commanded us to have received Five or Six times a year: so
should we have smitten Satan till we had consumed him, where now we shall
smite him but Thrice. And I would to God, Beloved, we would endeavor to smite
him Thrice too, I mean in this sort, I would we would yearly smite him
Thrice, that as our great Captain Jesus Christ at his NATIVITIE, at his
RESVRRECTION, and Sending down the HOLY GHOST gave him Three most deadly
Wounds: so we might follow our true Gedeon, and as Iud. 7.17.
he did, so do we, even every Year at those several Feasts give him by
virtue of this Sacrament, so many several deadly Wounds. To the better
hartning of us to which Onset, and often Receiving of this Sacrament, may you
be pleased to consider with me a few Words of our Savior Christ as they are
related to us in the Sixth Chapter of the Gospel of St John, the three and
fiftith, four and fiftith, and five and fiftith Verses, the Words are these:
Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, Verily, I say unto you, except ye eat the
Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you.
Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has eternal life, and I
will raise him up at the last day. For my Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is
drink indeed.



For the better proceeding in which words, I shall First of all, observe unto
you: First, the Party speaking, Then Jesus said: Secondly, the Parties spoken
to, Then Jesus said unto them: Thirdly, the Words themselves, Verily, Verily, I
say unto you, and so forth.

Concerning the Party speaking, I have told you The Coming of the Holy Ghost.
Ser. 4. p. 86.
heretofore what the Name of Jesus signified; Osiander his conceits thereupon;
and what excellent Meditations St Bernard had of that Name: that which now I
will add concerning the Party, is not only that he spoke with authority, as
Mat. 7.29, or, that he spoke with a Super. excellency, as Ioh. 7.46, but that
he spoke in truth and verity, for he was even Truth it self, Ioh. 14.6. He
is, Aquin. Sum. Part. 1. Qu. 16 Art. 5.
says the Schoolmen, Summa and prima Veritas: The cheef and primary Truth of
all: and therefore Aug. ep. 28.
S. Austen: A quocunque verum dicitur illo donante dicitur, quiest ipsa
Veritas. By whomsoever Truth is spoken, spoken it is, and had from him, who is
in truth Truth it self. He is, Zanch. de Divin. Attrib l. 3. c. 3. These. 2.
says a worthy Writer, Truth in Himself, Truth in his Works, Truth in his
Words. And therefore, as the Lord spoke in the Prophet Esaias. 66.9.
Esaias, Shall I cause to travail, and not bring forth? shall I cause to bring
forth, and shall be barren? So may our Savior say in this case: Shall I be the
cause of Truth in others, and not speak Truth my self? Shall I cause others to
abhor a Lie, and not abhor it my own self? nay, rather, Romans 3.4.
says the Apostle S. Paul, Let God be True, and every Man a Liar.

I press this Point the more, Beloved, thereby to make way aforehand to the
Words here spoken by him, and now at this time to be handled, least as when
they were first spoken, they were spoken to the Ioh. 6.66.
loss of a many Disciples who forsook him utterly thereupon, so they should
be spoken now at this time too, to the loss of a many of Us, if so be we
should mistake them, as those Disciples the^ did. Who had they had but this
Ground that Truth it self had spoken them, and that for this cause was he Ioh
18.37.
borne, and for this cause came he into the World, that he should bear
witness unto Truth: they would never by reason of these words, or indeed of
any other, have fallen away from him by flock-meale as they did. For being Truth
it self in the Abstract, was it possible that the least Sparkle of Falsehood
could light on him? Can Whitnes it self be black? Whiteness in the Abstract?
A White thing may be soild indeed, I, a white thing may be black, but
Witness it self can by no means be, no more then Knowledge it self can be
Ignorance, or Light, Darkness. What Fellowship, 2. Cor. 6.14.
says the Apostle, has Righteousness with Unrighteousness? and what
Communion has Light with Darkness?

The Party thus speaking then, being Truth it self, and Truth so incapable of
Falsehood, let us believe as in general what ever our Savior speaks: so in
particular what he speaks here, and calling to mind what he once Mar. 24.35.
said, Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Words shall not pass away:
let us acknowledge it so to be, maugre all the doubts and difficulties that
may arise within our hearts, and say of these words here spoken, and the
Speaker of them, as is said of him in the Revelation: These things, says he,
that is Holy, and True, Rev. 3.7. And thus much of the Party speaking, Then
Jesus said. Come we now to the Parties spoken to, and they were the Capernaits:
Then Jesus said unto them.

Capernaum (whereof the Inhabitants were called Capernaits, Men famous for
their misbeleefe, and gross understanding of our Saviors words about the
Eating of his Flesh) was a City in Iudaea situate, and built, in the Mat. 4.13.
Borders of Zabulon, and Nephthalim, and near unto the Sea, I mean the Lake
of Gennezaret, for so in the Hebrewe phrase Lakes are termed. This City
Capernaum was very famous in many respects. When John Baptist was imprisoned
about Herod's Marriage with his Brothers Wife, it Mat. Ib. Mark. 1.21.
pleased our Savior Christ to leave his own Country Nazareth^, and to go and
dwell in this City. Here it was he sowed Vid. Aret. in Mat. 4.
first the first Seed of heavenly Doctrine; he here made choice of his
Apostles; many a great Miracle he wrought here, to bring them to Repentance,
which yet took so small effect, that on a time he could not but thunder against
them the Judgments of the Lord. Mat. 11.23.
And thou Capernaum says he, which art lifted up unto Heaven, shall be brought
down to Hell: for if the great works which have been done in thee had been
done among them of Sodom, they had remained to this day. And this was the
Place, and this the People our Savior preached to at this time, and it was
upon this occasion.

Our Savior a little Ioh. 6.10.
before had fed with Five Leaves and two Fishes, noe less then Five Thousand
Men. He had fed at an other Mat. 15.38.
time Four Thousand, but then he had Seven Loaves, which was doubtless a
great Miracle: how much greater was this, when as he had Two Loaves les to
spend, and a Thousand more Mouths to fill? But it was Christ Jesus that did
effect it, and it was so marveylous in their Eyes, that as Men in a sudden
passion, are oftentimes more Liberal the^ they would be, had they leisure to
take advice, so they would immediately, no remedy, make our Savior a King for
it. Our Savior that knew their intents, and had other matters to think upon,
then earthly Crowns and worldly Diademes, refused that Court Holy Water, and
fled from it amain. It was an other-gates Kingdom he sought after, No^ vt
talis Rex, says St Austen, qui ab Hominibus fieret, sed talis Rex qui
Hominibus Regnum daret: He was not to be such a King as was to be made by Men,
but such a King as was to give a Kingdom unto Men. Hence it was that at their
next meeting, upon occasion of this Miracle of Bread, he discoursed in their
Synagogue of the very true Bread indeed, Vt quorum satiauit Panibus ventres,
satiet Aug Ib.
says the same Father, and Sermonibus mentes: that whose Bellies he had filled
with the hidden Treasure of those Loaves, he might fill their Minds also with
the Treasure of his Words. Not with such a Bread as that was, the virtue
whereof was spent by this time, but with the very true Bread of God, that which
descended down from Heaven, and as it is in the three and thirteeth verse of
this Chapter, that which was to give Life unto the world. In process of which
Speech having said that he himself was then that Bread, and that that Bread
was his Flesh, and that that Flesh of his should be given for the Life of the
World (meaning upon the Cross, which was performed at his Death and Passion)
they mistaking this his meaning, and supposing he would carue it to them in
Gobbets, or Morsels, as St Austen Acceperunt illud stulte, carnaliter illud
cogitaverunt, and putaverunt quod praecisurus esset Dominus Particulas quasda^
de Corpore suo, and daturus illis. Aug in Ps. 98. p. 761 Quamodo in cadavere
dilaniatur, aut in Macello venditur Aug. in Evang. Joan. Tract. 27.
speaks, or that they should eat it, Sod, or Roasted, as Flesh out of the
Shambles, as Existimantes hoc eomodo dici, vt carnem eius vel elixam, vel
assam, sectamque membratim edere docerentur. Cyp. De Caena Dom. p. 444.
speaks St Cyprian, were presently up with their Jewish How? How should such a
thing come to pass? As if so be they had never read, or heard of that Noble
Man, who 2. King. 2.7.
said in like case, (but it cost him his Life for it) Though the Lord would
make Windows in the Heaven, could this thing come to pass? Nay, Cyril. in Ioh.
l. 4. c. 14.
says S. Cyril, it had been meet rather, that first they should have set the
Root of Faith in their mind, and then to have enquired those things which are
to be enquired after. But they before they believed, enquired out of season.
And thus much of the Parties spoken to, who will needs themselves be Speakers
now, who had they heard with more Humility what was spoken unto them by our
Savior, they had much more profited then they did, in the true understanding
of our Saviors Words. And so I come to the Words themselves, the Third Point
observed about my Text; Verily, Verily, I say unto you, except ye eat the
Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you.
Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood has eternal Life, and I will
raise him up at the last day. For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is
Drink indeed.

Which words do branch themselves, as it were, into three Stems: First, the
Necessity of feeding on the Flesh of our Savior Christ, and drinking of his
Blood, and that in these Words: Verily, Verily, I say unto you, except ye eat
the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you.
Secondly, the Profit, and Commodity of Feeding on the one, and Drinking of the
other, and that in these words: Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my
Blood, has eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Thirdly,
the Reason of both, as well of the Necessity, as of the Commedity, and that in
these, For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. First of the
Necessity. And yet before we come to handle this Necessity, necessary it is,
to consider, First, who this Son of Man was: Secondly what it is, to Eat his
Flesh, and Drink his Blood.

The Son of Man is sometimes taken for Man in general, and therefore the
Lord to the Prophet Ezechiel: Son of Man, Ezech. 2.1.
says he, stand up upon thy feet, and I will speak unto thee. And again,
immediately after, Son of Man, V. 3.
says he, I send thee to the children of Israel. So Bildad in the Book of Job:
Behold, Job. 25.6.
says he, the Stars are unclean in his sight, how much more Man, a worm,
even the Son of Man which is but a worm. And Ps. 8.4, What is Man that thou
art mindful of him, and the Son of Man that thou visitest him. So likewise in
the New Testament: The Saboth, Mark. 2.27.
says our Saviuor, was made for Man, not Man for the Saboth, wherefore the
Son of Man is Lord even of the Saboth. The Son of Man, that is, Man in
general, our Savior in that place pleading, for his Apostles the Sons of
Men. Howbeit the Son of Man is sometimes taken for our Savior in particular,
who being indeed the Son of God, calls himself notwithstanding the Son
of Man, as Mat. 8.20, and Mat. 10.23, and Ioh. 3.13. Idem ipse, Aug. in Ps. 74
p. 564.
says S. Austen, and Filius Dei per quem facti sumus, and Filius Hominis per
quem refecti sumus. He was both the Son of God by whom we were created, as
also the Son of Man by whom we were redeemed. Some Vid. Ferum in Mat. 8. p.
162
suppose he calls himself the Son of Man, for that he was borne of a
Virgin only, and without the help of Man at all, but it is more likely he so
calls himself, for that by this Name he would show unto us, how he accounts
himself (as it were) our Brother: Flesh of our Flesh, and Bone of our Bone,
and more it is that he calls himself the Son of Man, the^ had he called
himself Man only. He might, Ferus Ibid.
says Ferus, even of the Earth have made himself Man, as he made Adam at the
first, and so should he indeed have been Flesh, but he should not have been
Our Flesh: now in that he calls himself the Son of Man, sure we are, he is
Bone of our Bone, and Flesh of our Flesh, so that now what ever he did, for
Man's Redemption, done it was for our sakes, we had the benefit of it. You
remember what Our Sav. Nativ. Ser. 1. p. 14.
heretofore I have told you from S. Bernard, Non sibi, non Angelis, nobis ergo
natus, nobis and datus, quia nobis necessarius. He was not borne for his own
sake, nor yet for the Angels, but only for our sake: Borne he was for us, and
to us was he given, for that he was necessary unto us. And the Creed of The
Creed in the Communion Book commonly said after the Gospel.
Constantinople to this purpose: Who for us Men, and for our Salvation came
down from Heaven, and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and
was made Man. And thus, Beloved, have we seen who this Son of Man was: it
follows now to be considered, what it is, to eat his Flesh, what it is, to
drink his Blood: Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
Blood.

Right Worshipful, and dearly Beloved: I am now entreating of those Words,
about the true understanding whereof (and of those that are so nigh a kin unto
them, This is my Body, Mat. 26.26) there has been these many years, and yet
is, even to this day, so much ado throughout the World. Our Adversaries cry
mainely out to have the Fathers stood unto, for the true understanding of them,
and (all things well weighed) we refuse not that Trial. And though in respect
of Some of you, it be not altogether so befitting now to handle this Point in
such sort: yet considering their often Untruths in every petty Pamphlet they
set forth, that we admit not of the Fathers, that we quite and clean forsake
them, that we dare not be tried by them: I will show you concerning these Words
what the ancient Fathers say, that you may perceive whether we have cause to
refuse them, yea, or no. One of those Fathers then was S. Austen, and he giving
a many Instructions concerning the understanding of the Scriptures, If it be,
Si praeceptiva locutio est aut flagitium, aut facinus vetans, aut vtilitatem,
aut beneficentiam iubens, non est figurata. Si aute^ flagitium, aut facinus
videtur iubere, aut vtilitatem, aut beneficentiam vetare, figurata est. Nisi
manducaveritis inquit Carnem Filii hominis, and Sanguinem biberitis, non
habebitis vitam in vobis, facinus vel flagitium videtur jubere. FIGYRA est
ergo, praecipiens Passioni Domini esse communicandum, and suaviter atque
vtiliter recondendum in memoria, quod pro nobis Caro eius crucifixa, and
vulnerata sit. Aug. de Doct. Christ. lib. 3. c. 16. page 37. Edit. Basil. 1528.
says he, a speech of commandment, forbidding any wickedness, or heinous
offense, it is no Figurative Speech, but if it seem to command a wicked deed,
or an heinous offense, then is it a Figure. Now in what does he make his
instance, but in these self same Words, which we have in hand, and are parcel
of this my Text: Except ye shall eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink
his Blood, ye shall have no life in you. He seems, says S. Austen, to
command an heinous offense, or a wicked deed: therefore it is a FIGVRE,
commanding us to communicate with the Passion of our Lord, and sweetly, and
profitably to keep in memory, that his Flesh was crucified, and wounded for us.
So that St Austen (you see) not only takes the words to be Figurative in this
place, but he gives us the meaning of them to: he not only tells us how we may
not, but how we must understand, and take them. An other of those Fathers is
St Cyprian, and he more ancient then St Austen. He discoursing on these Words:
The Master Dixerat sane buius traditionis Magister, quod nisi manducaremus and
biberemus eius sanguinem, non haberemus vita^ in nobis: spirituali nos
instruens documento, and aperiens ad rem adeo abditam intellectum, vt sciremus
quod mansio nostra in ipso sit manduratio, and potus quasi quaedam
incorporatio, subiectis obsequiis, voluntatibus iunctis, affectibus vnitis.
Esus igitur carnis buius quaedam aviditas est, and quoddam desiderium manendi
in ipso. Cyp. de Caena Domini. p 446. Edit Basil. 1530.
says he, of this Institution said, that except we did eat (his Flesh) and
drink his Blood, we should have no life in us, instructing us with a
SPIRITVALL LESSON, and opening our Understanding for the conceiving of so
hidden a matter, thereby to let us know, that our abiding in him is Eating, and
(our) Drinking is, as it were, an incorporating with him, in that (mutual)
services are performed, wills joined, and affections united. The Eating
therefore of this Flesh, is a certain coveting, and desiring to abide in him.
And a little after: Potus and esus ad eandem pertinent rationem, quibus sicut
corporea nutritur substantia and vivit, and incolumis perseverat, ita vita
spiritus hoc proprio alimento nutritur: and quod est esca carni, hoc animae est
fides: quod cibus corpori, hoc verbum spiritui, excellentiori virtute peragens
aeternaliter, quod agunt alimenta carnalia temporaliger, and sinaliter, Cyp.
Ibid.
Such as the Eating is, such is the Drinking, by which Eating, and by which
Drinking, as our Corporal Substance is nourished, and lives, and is in
Health: so the Life of the Spirit is nourished by this peculiar, and proper
Food. And that which Food is to the Flesh, that is Faith unto the Soul: that
which Meat is to the Body, that the Word is to the Spirit by a more excellent
virtue perfourming that eternally which Carnal Food perfourmeth but for a
short, and certain season. Next to St Cyprian lived Origin, and he has these
words: Est in Evangetiis litera quae occidit, non solum in veteri Testamento
occidens litera de. prehenditur. Est and in novo Testamento litera, quae
occidat eu^. qui non spiritaliter quae dicuntur adverterit. Si enim secund^m
literam sequaris hoc ipsum quod dictum est. Nisi manducaveritis Carne^ meam,
and biberitis Sa^guinem meum, occidit haec litera. Origin. in Lev. Hom. 7. p.
141. Edit. Basil. 1571.
There is even in the New Testament a Letter which kills him that does not
spiritually harken to it: for if thou follow according to the Letter that which
is written, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
Blood, that Letter kills. Others also might be produced to speak to this
purpose. All Fathers, all Ancient, al within the compass of four hundred
years after Christ. Nay, it was an offer made long ago, by that worthy Prelate
B. IVEL, that if any Learned man of our Adversaries, or if all the learned men
that be alive, be able to bring any one sufficient Sentence out of any old
Catholic Doctor, or Father, or out of any old General Council, or out of the
holy Scriptures of God, or any one Example of the Primitive Church, whereby it
may clearly, and plainly be proved, that the People was then taught to
believe, that Christ's Body is REALLY, SVBSTANTIALLY, CORPORALLY, CARNALLY, or
NATVRALLY in the Sacrament, he was content to yield and to subscribe. It were
worth the while to make an Epitome of that which Mr Harding brought in this
Case, none of the meanest of those Adversaries, and how for want of Fathers to
prove that Christ's Body was REALLY, and CORPORALLY, in the Sacrament: he
altered the State of the Question, and endeavored to prove, that Christ's Body
is joined, and united, REALLY and CORPORALLY, unto us. A Point not denied by
his Adversary. But I am not at this time to speak of Controversies. Wherefore
to return to my matter in hand.

Go we now to the Text it self, and does not that convince as much, as the The
words of Christ teaching us in the Sixth of John that we must eat his Flesh
and drink his Blood before we can have any life in us, are by the common
consent of all the Fathers, Allegorical, Mystical and Figurative. B Bilsons
Difference between Christ, Subject. and vnchrist. Rebel. Part 4 p. 582. Edit.
Land. 1586.
Fathers have spoken thereupon? For where our Savior uses the present tence,
Except ye eat: And again, Ye have no life in you: And, whosoever eats:
Again, Has eternal Life: And, My Flesh is Meat: And again, My Blood is
Drink: all in the present tence, what does it mean in our Saviors
understanding, but that his Flesh was then Meat, and then at that time to be
eaten, or they were but Dead men then, and had no life in them then at that
time. Besides as the Words here spoken were a whole Twelue-month at the least
before his Passion, and consequently before the administration of the
Sacrament: so suppose that since they were many, some of them had dyed within
that Twelve months space before the Receiving of the Sacrament, and yet had
Believed in our Savior Christ, should those Some notwithstanding have been
said, not to have eaten of our Saviors Flesh, and by consequence to have been
damned? For our Saviors Words are peremptory, Except ye eat the Flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his Blood ye have no life in you. So that where our
Savior says in an other Ioh. 8.24.
place, Except ye believe that I am he, ye shall die in your Sins: they
might have Believed that he was he, and yet dyed in their Sins to, and all
for not Receiving the Sacrament according to these men's Opinion. But our
Savior doubtless was far from such a meaning: he commended to them no other
Eating, then they might presently have fallen unto, had their Stomaches then
served them, and so the Prophets, so the Patriarchs, so Abraham fed upon him.
Abraham says our Savior, rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad,
Ioh. 8.56. And the Apostle St Paul to this purpose, Brethren 1. Cor. 10.1.
says he, I would not that ye should be ignorant that all our Fathers were
under the Clowd, and all passed through the Sea, and were all baptized unto
Moses in the Clowd, and in the Sea, and did all eat the same spiritual Meat,
and did all drink the same spiritual Drink, for they drank of the
spiritual Rock that followed them, and the Rock was Christ. I will end this
Point with a saying of St Austens, a Riddle in show, but once conceived and
understood, excellently declaring the Eating, and Drinking we have in hand. Non
manducans manducat Aug. in Evan, Joan. Tract. 26. So says Seneca in another
case: Saepe and qui reddidit quod accepit, ingratus est: and qui non reddidit,
gratus. Senec. de Benef. l. 3. c. 7.
says St Austen, and manducans non manducat. He that eats not, eats: and
he that eats, eats not. His meaning is: he that thinks to eat our
Savior Christ by chewing, or by chamming, and use of Bodyly Mouth, utterly
mistakes this Meat, and knows not what he eats, he takes it, and takes it
truly, that takes it with the Inner Mouth of the Mind, that takes it
Spiritually. And thus have we now seen what it is to eat his Flesh, what it
is to drink his Blood, come we now to the Necessity of such an Eating, and
such a Drinking, which I told you was in these words, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood,
ye have no life in you.

Necessity in common speech is usually taken many manner of ways. There is a
Necessity by way of commodiousnesse, when it is expedient, and convenient, that
we use the help of an other thing. Thus having a journey to make, an Horse,
or a Coach is necessary, that is, it is more convenient to use them, then to
use them not. There is a Necessity by way of Violence, that compels a thing out
of his place to his proper place again. Thus a Stone when it is cast on high,
must needs fall down again, no remedy. There is thirdly a Necessity
Absolute, that cannot: possibly be otherwise then it is. Thus God, and his
Holiness, are absolutely necessary. Lastly, there is an Absolute Necessity by
way of Consequence, I mean when we cannot possibly attain unto a thing,
without the help of some other thing: and this is the Necessity I mean in
this place, a Necessity of such Consequence, as unless we do thus, or thus,
unless we do so, or so, we cannot possibly be saved. Now that Feeding on our
Saviors Flesh, and Drinking his Blood is thus necessary, is notified here unto
us two manner of ways. First, by our Saviors Protestation, Verily, verily, I
say unto you: Secondly, upon pain of eternal damnation, Except ye eat the
Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood ye have no life in you. First,
of the Protestation, Verily, verily, I say unto you.

The words Verily, verily, in the Original, are Amen, Amen, and Amen is a word
that has his fourth in every Vid. Beza in 1. Cor, 14.16
Language, howbeit in every Language it has not the self same force. Certain
it is, that it is a Speech, as often times used by our Savior, so never but
upon special and principal occasion. St Austen speaking of these words, What
is it Aug. in Evan. Joan. Tract. 41.
says he, our Lord means when as he says, Amen, Amen, dico vobis: Verily,
Verily, I say unto you? He does much commend says St Austen, and urge the
thing, that so he utters, by doubling the word. And it is, says he, if an a^
may be bold so to say, a certain kind of Oath of his. The like to this has St
Jerome: Gods Oath Hieron. in Ezech. c. 16.
says he, in the Old Testament is, As I live says the Lord: but in the New,
Verily, verily, I say unto you. But howsoever this be, for Fulleri Miscell.
Theolog. l. 1. c. 2.
Some in no wise will admit it to be an Oath, doubtless an asseveration it is,
and parrallel unto that, Ioh. 3.6, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except that
a man be borne of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom
of God. The word is Hebrew, and derived of a Word in that language that
signifies Truth, even as Verily our English word comes of Vere the Latin,
which comes of Veritas, signifiing Truth too. Of all the Words in holy
Scripture, we of the true Religion are not a little beholding to this Word. It
ministered S. Paul an excellent Argument to prove that Public Prayer, or
Prayer in the Church, should be in the Vulgar Tongue. I will pray with the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15
says S. Paul, but I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing with
the Spirit, but I will sing with the understanding also. Else when thou
blessest with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the
unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he knows not what thou
say. S. Ierom he Hier. in Mat c. 6. p. 21. Vid Days Dial, Lect. 10. p 274.
calls it, Sigillum Orationis Dominicae: The Seal of the Lords Prayer, and Mr
Perkins Mr Perkins on the Lords Prayer.
affirms that it is of more value, then all the Prayer besides. His reason is,
for it is a Testification of our Faith, whereas all the Petitions besides,
says he, are Testifications only of our Desires. But to return where I left.

You see, Beloved, what has been said concerning this Word: how it is never
doubled by our Savior but upon some special, and principal cause: how some
affirm it to be a kind of Oath of his: and how it comes of an hebrew Word,
that signifies Truth. I will end this Point with that of St Ambrose, who
speaking of this Word: This word Amen, Ambr. in Ps. 4.
says he, is a word of Confirmation, and so used by our Savior, but where the
Word is doubled, there it has the greater force, as is often to be found in
S. John's Gospel, our Savior there entreating of heavenly, and profound
Mysteries of Faith. And so our Savior here does, for the Eating our Saviors
Flesh, and Drinking of his Blood, is a profound, and heavenly Mystery indeed: a
Point so strange to the Ears of mortal man, that no marvel he thus
confirms it with so solemn a Protestation. And thus much of the Necessity,
as it is notified here unto us by the Protestation of our Savior. Now of the
same Necessity, as it is notified to us again upon Pain of Damnation: Except
ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life
in you.

First then where our Savior says, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you, we are first of al to know
what kind of Life is here meant. Haec non vtique Cadaveribus, Aug in Evan
Joan. Tract. 26.
says S. Austen, sed Viventibus loquebatur. He spoke not these things unto
Dead-men, but to Men that were alive. This Life then, is not here meant. And
indeed to say the truth, what great benefit should it be, to enjoy such a Life
as this, by eating our Saviors Flesh, and drinking of his Blood: a Life full
of Crosses and Calamities, wherein every Mat. 6.34.
Day has his Grief, and every Ps 91.5.
Night her Terror: 2. Cor. 7.5.
Fights without, and Frights within, and Troubles on every side: Great
travail, Ecclus. 40.1
says the Son of Syrach, is created for all men, and a heavy yoke upon the
Sons of Adam, from the day they go out of their Mothers womb, to the day
that they return to the Mother of all things. Namely their Thoughts, and Fear
of the Heart, and their Imagination of the things they wait for, and the day of
Death. And that you may know none to be exempted, no not one, it Ecclus. 40.3
follows immediately after: From him that sits upon the glorious Throne,
unto him that is beneath in Earth, and Ashes, from him that is clothed in blew
silk, and wears a Crown, even unto him that is clothed in simple Linen.
This Life, not the Life then, here meant in this place, what kind of Life might
it be? what? but Everlasting Life: what? but Life Eternal, for so our Savior
in the Ioh. 6.54.
next words: Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood has eternal
Life. The meaning then is, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and
drink his Blood, you have noe Life in you, that is, you have not Eternal
Life, and if you have not Life Eternal, then must you have Eternal Death, for
between such a Life, and such a Death, there is no mean, nor middle at all.
So that as the Apostle 1. Cor. 9.16
said in another case, Necessity is laid upon me, and woe is unto me if I
preach not the Gospel: that may we all of us say in this case, Necessity is
laid upon us, and woe is unto us, if we Eat not our Saviors Flesh, if we
Drink not our Saviors Blood.

I, but some will say, seeing this Eating our Saviors Flesh, and Drinking our
Saviors Blood may be done by every of us Spiritually in this sort, what need
we do it then by the Sacrament, seeing we may without it Eat Spiritually, and
we eat but Spiritually with it? Beloved, the Question is not what in this
respect we may, but what we must perform: and things standing as they do,
what it is that now in this case God requires at our hands. The time was,
Circumcision was not, and there was no use of it at all: from Adam unto Abraham
none were circumcised: howbeit after the Lord had made it a Covenant, and
protested that the uncircumcised Man-child should be Genesis 17.14
cut of from his People, was it, trow we, in their power whether they would be
circumcised or no? No doubtless, and therefore Moses, even Moses himself, for
he had neglected it in a Child of his, it had likt to have cost him his life,
Exodus 4.24. There was, 1. Kin. 20.35
says the Scripture, a certain Man of the Children of the Prophets, that said
unto his Neighbor by the commandment of the Lord, Smite me, I pray thee. But
the Man refused to smite him. Then said he unto him, Because thou have not
obeyed the voice of the Lord, behold, as soon as thou art departed from me, a
Lion shall slay thee. So when he was departed from him, a Lion found him, and
slew him. If Moses himself had like to have been slain, and another was
slain in very deed for not obeying the voice of the Lord in a matter he might
have seemed to have some Scripture on his side, Touch not mine Anointed, and
do my Prophets no harm, Ps. 105.15: how does it behooue us to repair to
these Elements, seeing the Lord himself has so commanded us, and not to
dispute as 2. King. 5.12
Naama^ did whether Abanah, and Pharpar, Rivers of Damascus, were not better
then all the waters in Israel.

Well then, will thou say: this may we do though we do it not often: if but
Once a year we receive, we this do, and if we do but yearly Once, what
need any more times. Indeed some things done but once, they are done for all
ever, and therefore Abishai said to David when Saul lay sleeping within the
Fort, God, 1. Sam. 26.8.
says he, has closed thine enemy into thy hand this day: now therefore I
pray thee let me smite him Once with a spear to the earth, and I will not
smite him again. Thus the Apostle of our Savior Heb. 7.26.
Christ, Such an high Priest it became us to have which is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from Sinners, and made higher then the Heavens: which
needed not daily as those High Priests, to offer up Sacrifice, first for his
own Sins, and then for the Peoples: for that did he once when he offered up
himself. And again, the same Heb. 9.27.
Apostle, As it is appointed unto Me^ that they shall Once dye, and after that,
comes the judgment, so Christ was once offered to take away the Sins of
many. Thus do we Once in Baptism put on Christ, and indeed but Once, and
therefore no reiteration of it. Rebaptization was an Heresy. But is it to be
so in this Sacrament? Nay, for the Apostle 1. Cor. 11.25
says, This do as often as ye drink it. And V. 26.
again, As often as ye shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show
the Lords Death till he come. As often, As often, He says not, As seldom as you
do it, or if you do it but Once, but (...). and (...).
Quotiescunque, Quotiescunque, As often, As often. And to say the very truth, Often
and Often are the Times, that it ought to be done by us. Witness, First of
all, the Name it has of being Food unto our Souls. For howsoever the
Comparison hold not in every respect, of being to be taken as is our corporal
Food often every day, yet does it hold to be taken often, and therefore S.
Chrysostom twice in one Homily Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Ephesians. Hom. 3. and ad Pop.
Antioch. Hom. 61.
Non es Oblatione, aut Communione dignus? igitur neque Precatione. When ever
the Communion is celebrated, art thou not worthy to Communicate? Then art thou
not Worthy to be present at Prayer. And St Ambrose to this purpose, If so be
Ambros. de Sacram. l. 5. c. 4.
says he, it be daily Food, why do thou take it but once a year, as the
Greeks are wont to do in the East? Nay rather receive it daily, seeing daily
it may profit thee: so live that thou may be worthy to receive it daily. He
that is not worthy daily to receive it, is not worthy to receive it once a
year. The very same words has Aug. de Verb. Dom. Ser. 28.
St Austen, though in an other Aug. de Ecclesiast. Dogm. c. 53.
place he say (if so be that Book be his) To receive the Sacrament every day I
neither praise it, nor dispraise it, only I would counsel, and exhort men to
receive it every Sabbath day, so that he have no will to commit (enormous)
Sins. Add hereunto the Word of (...). Dwells in me, and I in him, Ioh.
6.56.
Abiding, or Dwelling, which our Savior uses in this Chapter, which as a
worthy Writer Sadeel de spiritual. Manducat. Resp. ad Object. 8. p. 237. Col. 2.
observes signifies such a Conjunction as is not only to begin, but to last,
and to endure, and therefore to be cherished by such Means as our Savior
Christ has instituted to that end and purpose: the chiefest whereof are the
Preaching of the Gospel, and Administration of this Sacrament. Besides that
this Conjunction of ours is at first to be wrought by Faith, which Faith as it
is capable of Increase, and Decrease, so, that it ought continually to be
increased, witness these ensuing Places which you may pervse at your own
leisure, Mark. 9.24. Luke 17.5. Romans 1.17.2. These. 1.3. And thus much of the
Necessity as it is notified here unto us upon pain of Damnation. The Profit
and Commodity comes now to be handled, and that in these words, Whosoever
eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood has eternal Life, and I will raise him
up at the last day. Wherein we are to note: First, the Commodity it self,
which is twofold, Life Eternal, and The Resurrection: Secondly, the Extent of
that Commodity, to all and every one that eats and drinks thus, Whosoever.
Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has eternal Life and I will
raise him up at the last day.

First, concerning Eternal Life to show you what it is, I must needs profess
before hand, I for my part, am not able. The Apostle St Paul will excuse me: The
things 1. Cor. 2.9.
says he, which Eye has not seen, neither Ear has heard, neither came into
Man's heart, are which God has prepared for them that love him. Now as St
Austen notes thereupon, Aug. in Psalm. 85 p 650.
If it never came into the heart of man, it cannot possibly come into his
Tongue, for it is out of the Hearts abundance that the Tongue is able to
speak, Mat. 12.34. Nay De cuius excellentia si omnia dicta fuerint quibus
omnium hominum linguae sufficiant vix tamen infima eius particula delibata
fuerit Calvin. Instit. l. 3 c. 25 10.
says a worthy Writer, if all things should be spoken which all the Tongues of
Men should be able to speak, yet scarcely the smallest Parcel thereof should
be able to be expressed. And therefore the Prophets, for they could by no
words express that Spiritual Blessedness in it self, endeavor to portray it
out under Figurative Speeches drawn from external and carnal things. I might
instance in the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 54.11, and Esaias 65.19, but that I have far
to go.

Concerning the Having of Eternal Life [whosoever eats my Flesh, and
drinks my Blood, has eternal Life] Habet vitam aeternam Aug. in Evan. Joan.
Tract 26.
says St Austen, non quod patet, sed quod latet. He has eternal Life, not in
that that Life appears, but in that it is hidden and in secret. And our
Savior to this purpose, To him R^, 2.17. Our Rhemists translate it A white
Counter, unlearnedly, and ridiculously. God grant it be not Ominous, and that
they find not indeed when time shall be, only a Counter instead of that they
should be possessed of at that time. St John alludes to the Custom which was
in his days and long before, namely of writing in a little Stone the Names of
such as were elected to any Office: or such as were absolved or condemned of a
Crime. Mos erat antiquis niveis atrisque lapillis, His damnare reos, illis
absolvere culpa. Ovid. Met. lib. 15.
says he, that overcommeth will I give to eat of the Manna that is hid, and I
will give him a white Stone, and in the Stone a new Name written, which no man
knows saving he that receives it. So the Apostle St Paul: Ye are sealed
Ephesians. 1.13.
says he, with the Holy Spirit of promise which is the Earnest of our
Inheritance. This then is that Hidden Manna: this, that White Stone: this that
Earnest of our Inheritance, and as S. Austen noateth very wittyly, Rather an
Earnest, then a Pledge, for when we give a Pledge Aug. de Verb. Apost. Ser. 13.
p. 216.
says he, a Pledge is to be restored again, the Earnest is not: nay the
Earnest is part of that which is by promise to be given. We are sure then of
the rest, for we have part of payment already, and that by promise from him who
is most faithful of his Word. Paul Tit. 1.1.
says the Apostle, a Servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, according
to the faith of Gods elect, and the knowledge of the truth, which is according
to godliness, under the hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, has
promised before the world began. So likewise to the Hebrews, God, Heb. 6.17.
says the Apostle, willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of promise
the stablenes of his Counsel, bound himself by an Oath; that by two immutable
things wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might have strong
consolation. Nor is it in any ones power to dispossess us hereof. They are the
words of our Savior himself: My Sheep Ioh. 10.27.
says he, hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto
them eternal Life, and they shall never perish, nether shall any pluck them
out of my hand. My Father which gave them me is greater then all; and none is
able to take them out of my Fathers hand. So that now we may say in this case
with the Apostle Romans 8.35.
St. Paul, who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall Tribulation, or
Anguish, or Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? In all
these things we are more then Conquerours through him that loved us. Fot I am
persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any
other Creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. And thus much of the First Commodity, Life Eternal.

The Second Commodity (as I told you) was the Resurrection, or as Aug. in Ioh.
Tract. 26.
St Austen will have it, it is the forestalling of an Objection. For where our
Savior, says he, promised here Eternal Life to those that fed on him, least
they should imagine thereupon that Eternal Life was so promised, that, I am
nec corpore morerentur: They should not now die at all: it pleased our Savior,
to prevent such thoughts, and to intimate unto them, that die indeed they
should, howbeit they should be raised again, and that by him. As the Father
Ioh. 5.21.
says our Savior, raises up the dead, and quickneth them, so the Son
quickneth whom he will. And again, Ver. 28.
The hour shall come, in the which all that are in the Granes, shall hear the
Sons voice. And they shall come forth that have done good, unto the
Resurrection of Life: but they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of
Condemnation. Or thus: Ioh 6.54.
I will raise him up: I, that is, my Body Ego, dixit, (id est, corpus meu^ quod
comedetur) resuscitabo eum. Cyril. in Joan. l 4. c. 15. p. 172.
says St Cyril, that shall be eaten. So St Hilary, As the Son Quomodo per
Patrem vivit (Filius) eodem modo nos per carnem eius vivemus. Hilar. de Trin.
l. 8. p. 134.
says he, lives by the Father, even so shall we live by his Flesh. And
Tertullian to this purpose, Our Flesh Caro Corpore and Sanguine Christi
vescitur vt and Anima de Deo saginetur. Non possunt ergo separari in mercede
quas opera coniungit. Tertul. de Resurrect. Carnis. p. 31.
says he, enteth the Body and Blood of Christ, that the Soul may also be
fatted with God. And therefore can they by no means be separated in the
Resurrection seeing they shall both of them at that time have one Reward. And
hence it is that St Cyprian Maturatae Resurrectionis latabunda Solennia, Cyp.
de Coena Dom. c. 1^
terms the Sacrament, A joyful Solemnity of expedite and speedy
Resurrection; (...), Ign. Epist. ad Ephesians.
Ignatius, A medicine which procures immortality, and preventeth death;
Corpora nostra percipientia Eucharistiam, iam non sunt corruptibilia, spem
resurrectionis habentia. Iren. Advers. Haer. l. 4. c. 34. Vid. Mr Hooker Eccl.
Pol l. 5.. 68. p. 190.
Irenaeus, The Nourishment of our Bodies to eternal Life, and their
Preservatiue from Corruption. Howbeit here, Beloved, arises a doubt, and that
of no small importance. For seeing it appears unto us by these Premises,
that the Resurrection is a singular Benefit of Christ unto the Godly, how
comes it then to pass that the Wicked also shall rise again? Yes: the
Wicked shall rise again, and that by the Virtue of Christ to, but not as he is
a Redeemer, but as he is a terrible Judge, and is to execute justice upon them.
More hereof may be seen in Aqu. Part. 3. Qu. 56. Art. 1.. 2.
Aquinas, and Calu. Inst. l. 3. c. 25. 9.
Calvin. I hasten to the Extent which reaches to all, and every of us, that
eats, and drinks thus, Whosoever. Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks
my Blood.

Of a truth Act. 10.34.
says St Peter, I perceive that God is no Accepter of Persons, but in every
Nation he that fears him, and works righteousness is accepted with him.
The Word in the Original, which it seems he used there by word of Mouth,
(...), An accepter of Persons, he afterward used with his Pen, when writing
to the Faithful, he shows them that the Lord without respect of Persons
judges according to every man's Word. The Word, Zanch. in Ephesians. c. 6. v. 9.
says Zanchius, is a word of Assise, and properly belongs unto Judges, who
if in judgment they respect any thing, but only the truth, and equity of the
cause, that, says he, is, (...), and thereupon it comes, that they are
Accepters of Persons. Wherefore the Areopagites, says he, they used to hear
men's causes by Night, and all for they would not be carried away with any
by-respect whatsoever. Indeed it is in this world, as it was in S. James his
time: If there come, Iam. 2.2.
says S. James, into your company a man with a goldring, and in goodly
apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment, ye have a
respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and say unto him, sit thou here
in a good place, and say unto the poor, stand thou there, or sit here under my
footstool: and so it is with us now adays: but it is not so with God. Be he
Noble, or Ignoble; Poor, or Rich; Master, or Servant; Jew, or Gentile; all is
one to him, so that he fears him, and works Righteousness. Nay; He has
chosen, 1. Cor. 1.27
says the Apostle, the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and
the weak things of the world to confound the mighty things, and vile things
of the world, and things which are despised has God chosen, and things which
are not, to bring to naught things that are. Now as there are of al these sorts
that are to be placed in Heaven, so are they to have in this world their
Vocation thereunto. And this is that which is done in every Age by the
Ministry of the Word, and therefore our Savior Christ, Go, Mat. 28.19.
says he, and teach all Dei fons vberimus, alque plenissimus patet cunctis:
and hoc coeleste lumen vniversis oritur, quicunque oculos habent. Lact. Inst.
l. 3. c. 26.
Nations, baptising them in the Name of the Father, and the Son, and the holy
Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you,
and lo, I am with you always, until the end of the world. All that I need to
observe in this point is this. As GOD respects neither King, nor Keysar;
Noble, nor Ignoble; Poor, nor Rich; if so be they serve him not, and therefore
the Prophet Psalm. 2.10.
David, Be wise now therefore o ye kings, be learned ye that are Judges of
the earth. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence. Kiss
the Son least he be angry, and so ye perish from the right way: so if any
of them again believe in him, serve, and obey him, eat his Flesh, and drink
his Blood, according unto that Diet which our Savior prescribes here, he has
where withal both to feed the Hungry with good things, and yet for all that,
not to send the Rich (as Luke 1.53.
sometimes he did) empty away. And so I come unto the last Point, the Reason as
of the Necessity of Feeding in this sort: so of the Profit, and Commodity of
it. For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. For my Flesh is
Meat, and my Blood is Drink: there is the Reason of the Necessity of Feeding:
For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed:: there is the Reason
of the Commodity of it. They are both of them here joined, and therefore will I
handle both together. For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink
indeed.

Who so will ponder with himself a many Passages in this Chapter, as First, in
the three and thirteth verse: The Bread of God is he which comes down from
heaven, and gives life unto the world: Secondly, in the five and thirteth
verse: I am the Bread of life, he that comes to me shall not hunger, and he
that believes in me shall never thirst. Thirdly, in the eight and forteth: I
am the Bread of life. Fourthly, in the fifteth verse, This is the Bread which
comes down from heaven, that he which eats of it should not die. Lastly,
in the one and fifteth verse, I am the living bread which came down from
heaven: if any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever: and the Bread
that I will give is my Flesh, which I will give for the life of the world:
shall both understand what is here meant in the words I am now handling, namely,
that it is Bread, and how our Saviors Flesh is Meat, and his Blood, Drink: and
how his Flesh is Meat indeed, and how his Blood is Drink indeed. First, the
Meat meant here, that it is Bread, witness the Words of our Savior himself,
who when in the seven and twenteth verse he had said unto them, Labor not
for the Meat which perishes, but for the Meat that endures unto everlasting
life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you, discourses afterward of
Bread only, and how that Bread was his Flesh, and how Himself was that Bread.
The Bread of God, the Bread of Life, The living Bread which came down from
heaven, and gives Life unto the world: so incomparably beyond Manna, as Manna
was beyond it self, when as it was Angels Food, Ps. 78.26, and when it
stuncke, and was full of worms, Exodus 16.20. Now how our Saviors Flesh is
Meat, and his Blood, Drink; and his Flesh is Meat indeed, and his Blood,
Drink indeed, we shall the better understand, if so be we call to mind the
several Properties that Bread has (the Meat here understood) and the great
Pre-eminence that this Bread has, above all other Bread whatsoever.

One of the Properties of Bread, is to strengthen man's heart, as speaks the
Prophet David, Ps. 104.15, and therefore the Prophet Esaias, he Esaias. 3,1.
calls it The Stay of Bread: the Prophet Ezech. 4.16
Ezechiel The Staff of Bread. Indeed were it not for Bread, it would be woe
with Mankind, we being able no more to want that peculiar kind of Food, then
any one thing else whatsoever. This it was that made Satan presume so much
upon our Savior after his Fast of forty days, for he little doubted but at
that time, he would have done much for a morsel of Bread. But in vain did he
spread that Prove. 1.17. Last. Transl.
Net in the sight of that Bird. Our Saviors answer unto him was, Man lives
not by Bread only, Mat. 4.4.

Another Property of Bread, is, that Bread is good for Medicine: It has, Panis
hic ipse quo vivitur, innumeras pene continet Medicinas. Mollit collectiones,
duritias valde mitigat. Datur and ex vino ad discutionda quae praestringi opus
sit etc. Adversus acutas Pituitae fluxiones, quas Graeci Rheumatismos vocant:
item ad percussa, luxata Plin Hist. Not l. 21 c. 25.
says Pliny, almost an infinite number of medicinable faculties. It mollifies
impostumes, it asswageth any hardness, it is of force against Rhewmes, and
concerning bruised places, by reason of Stripes and Blows, and concerning
Dislocations, it is of singular virtue. So that Bread (you see) is Meat, and
Medicine. And is not our Savior CHRIST so? Nay, is he not more then so? First,
Bread, though it be never so necessary, yet is it the Meat which perishes, and
it must daily be renewed, or what will it help a man to have it now, and not
hereafter? But is it so with our Savior Christ? Nay, but as himself Ioh. 4.13.
said of Jacobs Well: Whosoever drinks of this water shall thirst again, but
whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him. shall never be more
athirst, but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water
springing up into everlasting life:. So may we say of this Bread, and so may
we say of that, whosever eats of that Bread, shall afterward hunger
again, but whosever eats of this Bread which our Savior shall give unto him
(he himself is the Giver, and he is the Gift too) shall never be hungry more,
but the Bread that he shall give him, shall be in him a World of Bread,
strengthening both Body and Soul to a Life perpetual and everlasting.
Secondly, is Bread good for Medicine? Has it such an infinite number of
medicinable Faculties? Does it mollify Impostumes? Assuage Hardness? Is it of
force against Rhewmes, and so forth? Even so our Savior Christ: First, he Mat.
11.29.
cures Prides Impostume, that which makes us swel so much, and think so
mainely of our selves, and so meanly of our Brethren. Secondly, he cures in us
Hardness of Heart, that which makes us so vn^ensible of Repentance, and to walk
on still, both Days, and Months, and Years in our wickedness. He is the most
cunning Anatomist that ever was, he can take the Ezec. 11.19
Stony Heart out of our Bodies, and place instead thereof, a Heart of Flesh.
Thirdly, he cures our Sinful Rhewmes, I mean that perpetual Flux of Sin
which lasts in every of us, as long as this Life does last. So that when
this 1. Cor. 15.54
Corruptible has put on Incorruption, and this Mortal has put on
Immortality, then shall be brought to pass, the saying that is written, Death
is swallowed up into Victory. O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is
thy Victory? Fourthly, he cures our Bruised Places by reason of Stripes, and
Blows, such as is likely the Apostle St Paul had, when as the 2. Cor. 12.7.
Messenger of Satan did buffet him. Lastly, he cures our Dislocations, I mean
our Members out of joint, be it an Arm, or an Hand, or a Leg, in not
perfourming such Christian offices as every of them ought, or should performed.
The Arm in strengthening the Widow, the Orphan, and the Poor, and defending
them from wrong. The Hand in giving of them sustenance, and reaching out Alms
unto them. The Legs in coming to Divine Service, and to al such Christian
Exercises as are usually performed at the Church. Nay he does more then all
this. Bread cannot reviue the Dead again: when once a Man is dead, farewell
the Medicine of Bread, and a many times before to. Howbeit our Savior, what he
is able to do in this kind, and what indeed he does every day, and how it
pleases him to make the Sacrament, an Earnest of the same, you have already
heard before, nor is it necessary now at this time, to make rehearsal of it
again. What has bin said concerning Meat; may be verified concerning Drink
to, and how our Saviors Blood is Drink, and how his Blood is Drink indeed,
namely, that it has both the several Properties that Drink has, and a great
pre-eminence above it. But I will end this whole Point with those excellent
words of Musculus. Let us Musc in. Ioh. 6.
says he, by the commendation which our Savior gives to his Flesh, and to his
Blood, be stirred up to seek not the Meat which perishes, and therefore not
the true Meat, but that which remains for ever, and is Meat indeed, that
feeds us unto Life everlasting. Let daily experience teach us now at the length
the frailty of worldly things, and let us remember, that whether we have them,
or have them not, there is no Truth in them, but only in those heave^ly and
eternal things we have by Christ. Are we moved with WORLDLY JOY? Let us
presently think with our selves that that is not true Joy. Are we on the
other side troubled with SORROW? Let it presently come unto our minds, that
that that is not true Affliction? Are we delighted with the SWEETNESS and
VARIETY of DISHES? Let the faithful Soul say, The Flesh of Christ is Meat
indeed, the Blood of Christ is Drink indeed. Do GLORIOUS BVILDINGS delight
us? Let us remember there are in our Fathers House many glorious Mansions
indeed, and everlasting Tabernacles. Do the VINES deceive our expectation in
not yielding us our wonted Fruit? Let us say that Christ is the true Vine, that
never does deceive us, so that we continue to abide in him. Lastly, are we
summoned hence, and called out of this LIFE? Let us say with Faith unfeigned,
Christ is Life indeed, even the true and everlasting Life.

And thus, Beloved, have you heard of the Necessity of eating our Saviors
Flesh, and drinking of his Blood. You have heard of the Profit, and Commodity
of it. You have heard the Reason as of the Necessity, so of the Profit, and
Commodity to. What remains but now at this time, and every time hereafter
when as the Sacrament shall be administered, we every of us endeavor (I mean
such as are of lawful That is, of sixteen years. The Canons and
Constitutions Ecclesiast. Can. 112.
age) to experiment what has been spoken: even to see with our Eyes, to look
upon, and our Hands to handle, that which hitherto has been but heard of. And
I nothing doubt but a Many at this time will indeed present themselves to the
Receiving of these Mysteries, but where Beloved, are so Many of us, or but
Half of half so many, when the Sacrament at other times is administered? Are
we not all of us so few at those times, that to speak in the Esaias. 10.19.
Prophet Esayes Phrase, even a Child may tell us? Is this the Fruit of so much
Preaching as has been, and is in our days? Or as the Aramites 1. King. 20.28.
said of old, The Lord is the God of the Mountains, and not God of the
Valleys: so our God, is he the God of Easter, and not of the other Festivals
to? Dare we offer this wrong unto him, and neglect his holy Testament, and
nothing fear what may in few Hours hang over our Heads for the same? Our
Adversaries the Papists, when ever they speak of our Communion, they spend
Cart-loads of Revilings, and Railings upon it. They term it, Rhem. in 1. Cor.
10.21.
A profane and detestable Table. A Table and Cup of Devils, wherein the Devil
they say, is properly served, and Christ's Honor (no less then by the Altars
of Jeroboam, or any profane Superstitious Rites of Ge^tility) defiled. It is,
say they, Idolatry, or Sacrilegious Superstition. Rhem. in Ioh. 5.20.
Calvin's Supper, and the Sacrament of Ceres, and Bacchus. Bristow he Bristowes
Motives. Motive. 7.
calls it, A Wicked, and a Divelish Communion. Bishop D. Bish. second Part. of
the Reform. of a Cath. Vid. D. Abbots against him, Part. 3. p. 363.
terms it, A cold Breakefast of a Morsel of Bread, and Sup of Wine. Harding
styles it, D Hard against the Apol. Part. 2. Vid. B Jewels Defense of the Apol.
p. 281.
A schismatic, mutable, and polluted Communion. Hard. Ib. Vid. B. Jewel p.
328.
A new devised toy. Hard. Ib. Vid. B. Jewel. p. 321.
A piece of Bakers bread, and a Cup of Wine. Hard. Artic. 24. Vid. B. Jewels
Defense of the Art. p. 629.
A bare piece of Bread not worth a point says he, Hard. Against the Apol.
Part. 2. Vid. B. Jewels Defense of the Apol. p. 320.
A lean and carrien Banquet. One Bristowes Motives Mot. 7.
tells us of One of his Fellows that being once at it, saw a foul Black Dog
to take it evermore at the Ministers hands, still as he offered it unto the
Communicants. Alas Beloved, how easily might all this be retorted upon their
Waser-Cake, but we can bear it at their hands: Let them aloane Mat. 15.14.
says our Savior, they be the Blind Leaders of the Blind: and he spoke it of
the^, at leastwise of their Co^sorts that said himself had a Devil to, nay
that they Mat. 15.14.
knew he had a Devil: but when in such a Sunshine of the Gospel amongst us,
after fifty years Preaching and upwards, the Children of the Marriage Chamber
themselves come so seldom to this Sacrament as that a Many of them could be
contented (it seems) to repair unto them yearly, no Contemptum solum non
vult cibus ille. Aug. Epist. 118. That meat can in no wise away with contempt
That is, either daily to be received with out regard, or to be still refused
upon pretense of unworthiness, B. Bilsons Difference between Christ. Sub. Part.
4. p. 536.
not Once, that it is that strikes deeper to the very hearts of us your
Ministers, nay of Religion it self, then Thousands of these Reproaches brewed
first by Satan himself, and broached by these Miscreants. Wherefore as the
Apostle to the Philip. 2 1.
Philippians: If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if
any fellowship of the Spirit, if any compassion, and mercy: right so say I, If
any of all these, or all of any of these, be in any of you, or in you all, If
whatsoever else be praise worthy, and pleasing unto God, amend this One Fault
of Receiving but Once a year, especially You that be Masters, and Mistresses
of Families, and bereave not your selue, of so many Probo sicut frequentem
verbi auditienem, sic etiam frequentationem C^ D^ nicae: quai cum Spiritus
Sanctus semper sit efficax in Ministerio, Elect^inde semper magis ac magis, in
pietate prosiciunt, and eorum salus promovetur. Zanch. in Epist ad Ephesians. c.
3.. 36. I approve as the often hearing of the Word preached, so, often
receiving the Sacrament: for seeing the Spirit is always effectual in the
Ministry, the Elect doubtless do always profit more and more thereby, and
their salvation is more set forward. Quisquis frater Dominicis non interest
Sacramentis, necessario apud Deum Castrorism deserior est divinorum. Ambros.
Ser. 1. p. 275.
Blessings as often Communicating may yield unto you. Remember what the Council
of Agatha said, They which do not communicate thrice a year let them not be
counted Catholics, or in the number of Catholic People. Nor meant it Roman
Catholics, but good true Catholics indeed. Remember what the Apostle says,
As often as ye drink it. And again, As often as ye shall eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup. Remember what St Chrysostom says: Art thou not worthy to
communicate, then art thou not worthy to be present at public Prayer.
Remember what St Ambrose says, If so be it be daily Food, why do thou take
it but once a year. Remember what St Ambrose, and St Austen, both say, He that
is not worthy to receive it every day, is not worthy to receive it once a
year. Or if Every Day be now to often, and not correspondent to our Times,
as it was to the Times they lived in, in regard that Then was a time of
Persecution, and they looked every day to Die, and therefore would they have
this Viaticum, this Voiage-Provision with the^, yet remember what our own
CHVRCH says, Every Parishioner shall communicate at the least three times in
the year, of which Easter shall be one. She is our MOTHER, and she commaundes
us, and she commaundes us but what is reason, and therefore as St Austen, Aug.
in Ps. 88 p. 682.
Quid tibi prodest non offensus Pater, qui offensam vindicat Matrem, what will
it avail thee though thou offend not thy Father, if so be thou offend thy
Mother, for whose sake he will punish thee no less then for his own: so let
us not think Beloved, that all is well seeing God himself has not put this
Commandment in Scripture: true it is, he no where says the selfsame
Syllables, or Words: but he oftentimes says unto us, that we should in any
hand obey our Mothers, and if the Mothers of our Bodies, how much more our
Mother the CHVRCH. 2. Tim. 2.7.
Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

The same Lord so bless us, and the Seed that has been sown, etc.
GEntle Reader, It was a Luke 12.3.
saying of our Savior: Whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness, it shall be
heard in the light: and that which ye have spoken in the ear in secret
places, shall be preached on the Houses. It is now some few Years since that
being requested to afford my help to Least some Fitz-Simon should here come in
with Nescio quem, aut quam: (as he did by Sr Edward Hoby: Scripsit Epistolam ad
M.T.H. nescio quem, aut qua^) to put him out of doubt it was Ea.
ONE of my own Parish that was to receive the Sacrament, and had never received
it before, I took the opportunity of doing my duty in that kind. To whom
afterward having sent this Letter, and some other Lines therewithal concerning
the Sacrament: I hold it now fit thus to publish them with some augmentation,
that if so be there be any Other of my Flock, who desire to be instructed in
like sort, they may repair hereunto, and duly meditating thereupon, may not
only be the better able to come at all to the holy Sacrament, but the more
willing also to come often.

Ovid. de Pont, l. 3. Eleg. 9.
Da veniam Scriptis, quorum non Gloria nobis Causa, sed Vtilitas, Officiumque
suit.


When at the Feast of Pentecost Whit-Sonday. may. 23. 1613.
last past (a Time never hereafter to be forgotten of you) the Lord of Heaven
was willing to admit you the first time to his Table: it pleased his Divine
Majesty to put it before in your Parents hearts to have you prepared by me
your Pastor for your better Carriage at that time. I esteeming it the best
course to begin with the Principles of Religion, made choice of M. Dr Nowels
Catechism, best A catechism, or Institution of Christian Religion to be
learned of all Youth next after the little Catechism, appointed in the Book of
Common Prayer, being an Abridgement of the longest Catechism, and allowed by
the Bishops of our Land in the year 1572.
approved of in our Church. Three Parts whereof when we had perused, and were
come at last unto the Fourth, namely to his handling of the Sacraments, which
was the first in our intention: after he had told us that Christ ordained but
two Sacraments, Baptism, and The Supper, he afterward defind a Sacrament, and
told us what it was: namely, An outward testifying of Gods good will, and
bountifulness toward us through Christ, by a visible Sign, represe^ting an
invisible and spiritual grace, by which the Promises of God, touching the
forgiveness of Sins, and eternal Salvation given through Christ, are as it
were sealed, and the truth of them is more certainly confirmed in our hearts.
Secondly, he showed unto us how a Sacrament consisted of two Parts, namely, of
the Outward Element, or Creature, being a visible Sign, as also of a Grace
invisible. Thirdly, coming to entreat of the SVPPER of the LORD, he showed us
the order of it out of the Evangelists, St Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and out of
the Apostle St Paul. Fourthly, he showed us the Parts of it, which were of two
Sorts, the One, earthly, and sensible, Bread and Wine: the Other, heavenly, and
removed from all the Senses, namely, The Body, and Blood of Christ, given,
taken, eaten, and drunken of the Faithful, after an heavenly, and spiritual
manner, but yet verily, and indeed, Fifthly, and Lastly, he showed unto us what
our Duty was to do, that we might, come rightly to this Supper, namely, to
examine our Selves, which consisted in four Points: First, to repent us of our
Sins: Secondly, to stay our selves, and rest in a sure hope of Gods mercy
through Christ with a thankful remembrance of our Redemption purchased by his
Death: Thirdly, to purpose with our selves to lead for ever after a godly life:
Fourthly, and Lastly, to bear brotherly love to our Neighbors, that is, to
all Men whatsoever, especially if they be Christians, as we our selves are.
Thus far He, and thus far We.

And this might seem sufficient either for Knowledge, or Practice, to the
common Sort of Gods People, that come to this Table. Howbeit for I would have
YOU to surpass the common Sort, who, or come but seldom to this Repast, or
commonly go as they come, I have here selected for you diverse Passages out of
some of our Best Writers, as well to hearten you to often coming, as also to
better your Meditations when ever you come, and go. Neither meddle I here in
this Point, with the diverse and sundry Controversies betwixt the Papists and
Our selves, that perhaps, as it has done too too much in these our days with
a many that come so seldom, would but dead your Devotion, only with these few
FRAGMENTS as you shall improve your own Provision laid up formerly in store,
so shall you stop the Mouths of them who usually give out, that we hold the
BREAD and WINE, to be but bare, and naked Signs.

The Lord of Heaven bless them to you, and as he has made me unto Your self,
1. Cor. 3.6.
both a Paul, and an Apollos, that is a Planter, and a Waterer both, a Planter,
in that already done, a Waterer in that I now do: so give He the Increase
himself, that having here in this World made you often his Guest at this
Table, He may bring you to the TABLE CELESTIAL, there to sit (as Mat. 8.11.
speaks our Savior) with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven.

ORIEL. COLL. March. 2.
SA^
(...) ^dued the Waters of the Poole called Bethesda with supernatural virtue
to heal, was not seen of any, yet the Time of the Angels Presence known by
the troubled motions of the Waters themselves. The Apostles by fiery Tongues
which they saw, were admonished when the Spirit, which they could not behold,
was upon them. In like manner it is with us. Christ, and his holy Spirit with all their blessed effects, though entering into the Soul of man we are not able
to apprehend or express how, do notwithstanding give notice of the times when
they use to make their access, because it pleases Almighty God to communicate
by sensible means those Blessings which are incomprehensible. Mr Hooker.
Eccles. Pol. l. 1.. 57. p. 127.

Calvin 1. Sacraments are that thing to us of God which Messengers of joyful
things, or Earnests in confirming of Bargains are unto Men: which do not of
themselves give any Grace, but do tell and show us, and (as they be Earnests
and Tokens) do ratify unto us those things that are given by the Liberality
of God. Calvin. Instit. l. 4 c. 14.. 17.

Calvin. 2. Why are not uncoined and coined Silver both of one value, since they
are both one Metal? Even because the one of them has nothing but Nature: but
when it is stamped with a common Mark, then is it made Money, and receives a
new Valuation. And shall not God be able to mark his Creatures with his Word,
that they may be made Sacraments, which formerly were naked Elements? Calvin
Instit. l. 4. c. 14.. 18.

Calvin. 3. Let this remain certain, that there is no other office of the
Sacraments then of the Word of God: which is to offer and set forth Christ unto
us, and in him the Treasures of heavenly Grace: but they avail or profit
nothing, but being received by Faith: even as Wine, or Oil, or any other
Liquor, though you pour it on largely, yet it will run beside, and perish,
unless the Vessels mouth be open to receive it, and the Vessel though it be
wet round about on the outside, shall nevertheless remain empty, and void
within. Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 14. 17.

Calvin. 4. Sacraments do both bring most clear Promises, and have this
peculiar more then the Word, that they lively represent them to us, as it were
painted out in a Table. Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 14.. 5.

B. Iuel. We allow the Sacraments of the Church, that is to say, certain holy
Signs, and Ceremonies, which Christ would we should use, that by them he
might set before our eyes the mysteries of our Salvation, and might more
strongly confirm the Faith, which we have in his Blood, and might seal his
Grace in our hearts. And these Sacraments together with Tertullian, Origin,
Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome, Chrysostom, Basil, Dionysius, and other Catholic
Fathers, we do call Figures, Signs, Marks, Badges, Prints, Copies, Fourmes,
Seals, Signets, Similitudes, Patterns, Representations, Remembrances, and
Memories. And we make no doubt, together with the same Doctors to say, that
these be certain Visible Words, Seals of Righteousness, and Tokens of Grace.
B. Iuel Apol. c. 10. Divis. 1.

Calvin. 5. St Paul when he speaks to the Faithful, so entreats of
Sacraments, that he includes the communion of Christ in them, and when he
says, All ye that are baptized have put on Christ. Again, We are all one
Body, and one Spirit, which are baptized in Christ. But when he speaks of the
wrongful use of Sacraments, he gives no more to it, then to cold, and void
Figures. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 14.. 7.

B. Bilson. Sacraments of their own nature, and by their first and chiefest
erection, are Visible Signs of invisible Graces; so that if they be no Signs,
they be no Sacraments: and though the Signs must be diligently distinguished
from the Things, yet for good causes in teaching and writing, do the Signs
bear the Names of the Things themselves, whose Signs they are. B. Bilson.
True Difference between Christian Subjection and Unchristian Rebellion. Part.
4. p. 561.

Of the Sacrament of the Supper in particular.
Mr Hooker IT is on all sides plainly confessed: First, that this Sacrament is a
true, and a real participation of Christ, who thereby imparteth himself even
his whole entire Person as a mystical Head unto every Soul that receives him,
and that every such Receiver does thereby incorporate or unite himself unto
Christ as a mystical Member of him, yea of them also whom he acknowledges to
be his own. Secondly, that to whom the Person of Christ is thus communicated,
to them he gives by the same Sacrament his holy Spirit to sanctify them, as
it sanctifies him which is their Head. Thirdly, that what merit, force, or
virtue soever there is in his sacrificed Body, and Blood, we freely, fully,
and wholly have it by this Sacrament. Fourthly, that the effect thereof in us,
is a real Transmutation of our Souls, and Bodies, from Sin to
Righteousness, from Death, and Corruption, to Immortality, and Life. Fifthly,
that because the Sacrament being of it self but a corruptible, and earthly
Creature, must needs be thought an unlikely instrument to work so admirable
effects in man, we are therefore to rest our selves altogether upon the
strength of his glorious Power who is able, and will bring to pass, that the
Bread and Cup which he gives us, shall be truly the Thing he promises. Mr
Hooker. Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 67. p. 177.

Mr Hooker We grant that these holy Mysteries received in due manner do
instrumentally both make us partakers of the Grace of that Body, and Blood,
which were given for the Life of the World, and besides also impart unto us
even in true, and real, though Mystical manner, the very Person of our Lord
himself whole, perfect, and entire. Mr Hooker. Ecclesiast. Pol. l. 5.. 67. page
177.

Mr Hooker The very letter of the word of Christ gives plain security that
these Mysteries do as Nails fasten us to [our Saviours] very Cross, that by
them we draw out as touching efficacy, force, and virtue, even the Blood of
his goared Side, in the Wounds of our Redeemer we there dip our Tongues, we are
died red both within, and without, our Hunger is satisfied, and our Thirst for
ever quenched, they are things wonderful which (...)

(...) ^ming down into earth, he has made a way for us to go up into
heaven: that putting upon him our Mortality, he has given us his Immortality:
that taking on him our Weakness, he has strengthened us with his Power: that
taking our Poverty to himself, he has conveied his Riches to us: that taking
to him the weight of our Unrighteousness wherewith we were oppressed, he has
clothed us with his Righteousness. Of all these things we have so full a
witnessing in this Sacrament, that we must certainly determine that Christ is
truly given us, as if Christ himself were set present before our eyes, and
handled with our hands. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 17.. 2. and 3.

Calvin. 4. This rule is always to be holden of the Godly, that so often as they
see the Signs ordained of the Lord, they certainly think, and persuade
themselves, that the Truth of the thing signified is there present. For to what
purpose should the Lord deliver to thee into thy hand the Sign of his Body,
but to assure thee of the true partaking of it? If it be true that a visible
Sign is given us to seal the Gift of an invisible thing when we receive the
Sign of the Body, let us no less certainly believe that the Body it self
also is given us. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 17.. 10.

Calvin. 5. They give me no satisfaction at all, who acknowledging that we have
some Communion with Christ, yet when they endeavor to express it, make us
partakers only of the Spirit, without making any mention of Flesh, and Blood.
As though all those speeches were spoken to no purpose that his Flesh is verily
Meat, that his Blood is verily Drink, that none has life but he that eats
the Flesh, and drinks that Blood, and such other sayings that belong to the
same end. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 17. 7.

Calvin. 6. That most near Fellowship whereby we are coupled with his Flesh,
he has yet set out with a more glorious Title, when he said that we are
Members of his Body, and are of his Bones, and of his Flesh. At the last to
declare it to be a matter greater the^ al Words, he concludes his saying with
an exclamation, This is says he, a great Secret, Ephesians. 5.30. Therefore it
should be a point of extreme Madness, to acknowledge no Communion of the
Faithful with the Flesh and Blood of the Lord, which the Apostle declares to
be so great, that he had rather wonder at it then express it. Calvin. Instit.
l. 4. c. 17.. 9.

Sadeel. 1. We use the word SPIRITVALLY, not that Spiritually should signify
that unto us which is but fained, and only consists in opinion: or that which
is only invisible: or that thereby we would convert the Body and Blood of
Christ into a Spirit: but we use the word Spiritually to signify thereby that
the Eating of the Flesh of Christ, and the Drinking of his Blood, is effected
by the work, and operation of the holy Spirit, as also that this Mystery is
received by that Faith which the Spirit himself, or the Holy Ghost, does
engender in our hearts. In a word we therefore use this word Spiritually, for
because this most excellent Food appertained to our spiritual, and eternal
Life. Sadeel. De Spirit. manducat. Corp. Christi. c. 1. p. 218.

Sadeel. 2. By the Name of FAITH in this Mystery we understand not that Faith
which is only Historical: but that which (...)

(...) we be found the Temples of the Holy Ghost, then to judge, whether we
have had such regard every one to our Building, that the Spirit which dwells
in us has no way been vexed, molested, and grieved. Or if it have, as no
doubt sometimes it has by Incredulity, sometimes by breach of Charity,
sometimes by want of Zeal, sometimes by Spots of Life, even in the best and
most perfect amongst us (for who can say, His heart is clean!) O then to fly
unto God by unfeigned Repentance, to fall down before him in the Humility of
our Souls, begging of him whatsoever is needful to repair our decaies,
before we fall into that desolation, whereof the Prophet speaks, saying, Thy
breach is great like the Sea, who can heal thee, Lament. 2.13. Receiving the
Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord after this sort (you that are Spiritual,
judge what I speak) is not all other Wine like the Water of Marah, being
compared to the CVP which we bless? Is not Manna like to Gall, and our BREAD
like to Manna? Is there not a Taste, a Taste of Christ Jesus in the heart of him
that eats? Does not he which drinks, behold plainly in this Cup, that his
Soul is bathed in the Blood of the Lamb? Mr Hooker. Second Sermon upon part of
St Jude, page 38, 39, 40.

B. Bilson. God forbid we should deny that the Flesh and Blood of Christ, are
truly present, and truly received of the Faithful at the Lords Table. It is
the Doctrine that we teach others, and comfort our selves with. We never
doubted but the Truth was present with the Sign, and the Spirit with the
Sacrament, as Cyprian says: we know there could not follow an Operation, as
speaks S. Ambrose, if there went not a Presence before. Let the Papists set
aside their carnal imaginations of Christ covered with Accidents, and his
Flesh chammed between their teeth, and say what they will either of his
Invisible Presence by Power, and Grace, or of the spiritual and effectual
Participation of his Flesh and Blood offered, and received of the Faithful by
this Sacrament, for the quickening and preserving of their Souls and Bodies to
eternal life, we join with them: no words shall displease us, that any way
declare the truth, or force of this Mystery. B. Bilson. True Difference
between Christian Subject. and vnchrist. Rebel. Part. 4. p. 631.

B. Bilson. Since the substance of the Creatures is not changed, the Signs
could not justly bear the Names of the things themselves, except the virtue,
power, and effect of Christ's Flesh, and Blood were annexed to them, and united
with them after a secret and unspeakable manner by the working of the holy
Ghost, in such sort that whosoever receaueth the Sign, is undoubtedly partaker
of the Grace offered unto all, but inioyed only by those that with Faith and
Repentance cleanse the inward Man from that corruption of Flesh, and Spirit
which Christ abhors. B. Bilson. True Difference between Christian Subject.
and vnchrist. Rebel. Part. 4. p. 601.

B. Bilson. God is wonderful in this, and all other his Sacraments, not by
casting away Substances, and leaving Accidents, but by working that in our
hearts by the mighty Power of his Spirit above Nature, which the visible Signs
import to our Senses. B. Bilson. True difference between Christian Subject.
and vnchrist. Rebel. Part. 4. p. 668.

Calvin. 9. We say that Christ as well with the outward Sign, as with his
Spirit descends to us, that he may truly quicken our Souls with the
Substance of his Flesh and of his Blood. In these few words he that
perceaueth not to be contained many Miracles, is more then senseless,
forasmuch as there is nothing more beside Nature, then that Souls should
borrow spiritual, and heavenly life of the Flesh which took her beginning of
the Earth, and which was subject to Death. Nothing is more incredible, then
that things distant and a sunder by the whole space of Heaven and Earth, should
in so great distance of Places not only be conjoined, but also united, that
Souls may receive Food of the Flesh of Christ. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 17.. 24.

D. Nowel. Christ by these words THIS IS MY BODY, meant that his Body was that
spiritual Food, and Bread of Life Everlasting, to us, being the Members of his
Mystical Body, which the Bread (that is, the bodily Food) is to our natural
Bodies, to the maintaining of them in this temporal life. Yea, and Christ's
Body is so much the truer Bread, and Food, by how much life Everlasting passes
this life present. D. Nowel. Confutation of Mr Dormans Disproofe. p. 165. b.

Calvin. 10. I exhort the Readers, that they do not restrain the sense of
their mind within these too narrow Bounds: but endeavor to rise up much
higher, then they can by my guiding. For I my self so often as I speak of this
thing, when I have travailed to say all think that I have yet said but little
in respect of the Worthiness thereof. And although the Mind can do more in
thinking, then the Tongue in expressing: yet with greatness of the thing, the
Mind also is surmounted, and overwhelmed. Finally therefore, nothing remains,
but that I must break forth into admiration of that Mystery, which neither the
Mind can suffice to think of, nor the Tongue to express. Calvin. Instit. l.
4. c. 17.. 7.

A Prayer to be said by us in our private Clossets the same Morning we intend
to receive the holy Communion, translated out of French, by a Religious, and
Virtuous LADY, at her being in France, in the year of our Lord God, 1606.
MY God, my Creator, and my Redeemer, JESUS CHRIST, which have offered thy
self to God thy Father a Sacrifice pure and immaculate to redeem Mankind:
give me grace by the virtue of thy precious Blood, the great Price of my
Salvation, that this Day, and all the times that I shall present my self to
thy holy Table, I may with a pure Heart, a spotless Thought, and an ardent
Zeal receive this so high and sacred a Benefit. I acknowledge my self
unworthy to approach unto this high Mystery for the infinite number of my great
Misdeeds, but make thou me worthy, o Lord, I humbly beseech thee, and give me
participation of thy admirable Virtues, with the which being filled, I may in a
good Conscience come to thy most holy Communion, to the end that it may be
unto me Salvation and Life by thy infinite mercy. Heal my Infirmities, wash
my Uncleanness, il-lighten my Blindness, and grant, that with all Reverence,
Repentance, Love, Faith, Purity, and Humility, I may be partaker of thy new
and eternal Testament. Amen.

Another by way of Thanksgiving to be said in like sort. Taken out of the
Practice of Piety, Page 773. Edit. 1613. with some alteration of it by reason
of the length there.
What shall I render unto thee, O blessed Savior, for all thy Blessings,
which thou have so graciously bestowed upon my Soul? How can I sufficiently
thank thee for them, when I am not able to express them? When as thou mighest
have made me a bruit Beast, thou madst me after thine own Image. When by
Sin I had lost, both thine Image, and my self: thou did by thy Spirit
renew in me thy Image again, and redeem my Soul by thy Blood: and this Day
have thou given unto me the Seal and Pledge of my Redemption: nay thou have
given Thy Self unto me, o blessed Redeemer. Oh what an inestimable Treasure
of Riches, and overflowing Fountain of Grace has he got, who has gained
thee? No man ever touched thee by Faith, but thou did heal him by Grace. For
thou art the Author of Salvation, the Remedy of all evils, the Medicine of the
Sick, the Life of the Quick, and the Resurrection of the Dead. Seemed it a
small matter unto thee to appoint thy holy Angels to attend upon so Vile and
wretched a Creature as I am, but that thou would enter Thy Self into my
Soul, there to preserve, nourish, and cherish me unto Life everlasting! O
Lord, what could I more desire, or what could thou more bestow upon me, then
to give me thy Body for Meat, thy Blood for Drink, and to lay down thy Soul
for the price of my Redemption? Thou, Lord, endurest the Pain, and I do reap
the Profit: I received Pardon, and thou did bear the Punishment. Thy Tears
were my Bath, thy Wounds, my Weal, and the Injustice done to thee, satisfied
for the Judgment which was due to me. Thus by thy Birth thou art become my
Brother, by thy Death my Ransom, by thy Mercy my Reward, and by thy Sacrament
my Nourishment. Now seeing it is thy free Grace, and mere Pleasure, thus to
enter, and dwell in my Heart, I would I had, oh God, so pure an Heart, as my
Heart could wish to entertain thee. And yet who is fit to entertain thee? Or
who though invited, would not choose with Mary Magdalen rather to kneel at thy
Feet, Luk 7.38.
then presume to sit with thee at thy Table? Howbeit though I want a pure Heart
for thee to dwell in, yet weeping Eyes shall never be wanting to wash thy
blessed Feet, as also to lament my heinous Sins. And seeing that now of thy
mere Mercy thou have accounted me (among others thy Chosen) worthy of this
unspeakable favor, and sealed by thy Sacrament the assurance of thy Law, and
the forgiveness of my Sins: O Lord confirm thy favor unto thy Servant; and
say of me as Isaac did of Jacob, Genesis 27.33.
I have blessed him, therefore he shall be blessed. 2. Sam. 6.11.
And seeing it pleased thee to bless the House of Obed Edom whilst thy Arc
remained in his House: I doubt not but thou will much more bless my Soul, and
my Body, and all that does belong unto me, now that it has pleased thy Majesty
of thine own good will to enter under my Roof, and to endeavor there to dwell
for ever, and ever. Bless me therefore O Lord, that my Sins may wholly be
remitted by thy Blood, my Conscience sanctified by thy Spirit, my Mind
enlightened by thy Truth, my Heart guided by thy Spirit, and my Will in all
things subdued to thy blessed Will, and Pleasure. Bless me with all Graces
which I want, and increase in me those thy Gifts which thou have already
bestowed upon me. Cant. 8.6.
Set me as a Seal on thy Heart, and as a Signet upon thine Arm: and grant, O
Lord, that as thou have this Day vouchsafed me this favor to sit at thy Table,
to receive the Sacrament in thy House of Grace: Luk 22.30.
so I may hereafter through thy mercy be received to eat and drink at thy
Table in thy Kingdom of Glory, Mat. 8.11.
there to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Rev. 5 13.
Praise, Honor, and Glory, and Power be unto him that sits upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb for evermore.
WHEREAS SOME MAY BE DESIrous to see the Places in Latin, alleged before out
of Calvin, and Sadeel, and have not themselves the Books by them, I have
annexed them here, with such Figures as the English had before, for the more
easy, and better direction of each to other.
De Sacramentis in genere.
Calvin. 1. SAcramenta id sunt nobis a Deo quod ab hominibus rerum laetarum
Nuntij, vel Arrhae in Pactis sanciendis: vtpote quae non a se quidem largiantur
aliquid Gratiae, sed renuntient and ostendant, atque (vt sunt Arrhae and
Tesserae) rata apud nos faciant quae divina largitate nobis data sunt.

Calvin. 2. Cur rude ac signatu^ Argentum non ejusdem sunt pretij, quum idem
prorsus sit Metallum? Nempe quia illud nihil habet praeter Naturam: forma
publica percussum, Nummus fit, and novam taxatione^ recipit. Et Deus suas
Creaturas verbo suo signare non poterit, vt fiant Sacramenta, quae prius nuda
erant Elementa?

Calvin. 3. Fixum maneat, non esse alias Sacramentorum quam Verbi Dei Parts:
quae sunt offerre nobis ac proponere Christum, and in eo coelestis Gratiae
Thesauros: nihil autem conferunt aut prosunt nisi FIDE accepta. Non secus ac
Vinum, vel Oleum, vel alius liquor quamlibet large infundas, effluet tame^ ac
peribit nisi aperto Vasis ore: Vas autem ipsum vndique perfusum, inane
nihilominus, ac vacuum manebit.

Calvin. 4. Sacramenta, and Promissiones afferunt clarissimas: and hoc habens
prae Verbo peculiare, quod eas veluti in Tabula depictas nobis and vivum
representant.

Calvin. 5. Paulus dum apud Fideles verba facit, sic de Sacramentis disserit vt
in illis Christi communionem includat. Vt quum dicit, Quicunque baptizati
estis, Christum induistis. Item, Vnum Corpus, and vnus Spiritus sumus omnes qui
in Christo baptizati sumus. Quum vero de praepostero Sacramentorum vsu
loquitur, nihilo plus illis tribuit, quam frigidis and inanibus Figuris.

De Sacramento Eucharistiae.
Calvin. 1. Quoniam Mysterium hoc arcanae Christi cum pijs vnionis natura
inco^prehensibile est, figura^ ejus and imaginem in signis visibilibus exhibet
ad modulu^ nostrum aptissimis: imo velut datis Arrhis ac Tesseris tam certum
nobis facit quam si Oculis cerneretur: quia in crassissimas quasque Mentes haec
tam familiaris similitudo penetrat, non secus animas Christo pasci, quam Panis
and Vinum corporalem vitam sustentant.

Calvin 2. Quum Panis nobis in Symbolum Corporis Christi datur, haec statim
concipienda est Similitudo: Vt Corporis nostri Vitam Panis alit, sustinet,
tuetur: ita Corpus Christi vegetandae ac vivificandae Animae vnicum esse Cibum.
Quum Vinum in Symbolum Sanguinis propositum intuemur: cogitandum quos corpori
vsus Vinum afferat, ut eosdem spiritualiter afferri nobis Christi Sanguine
reputemus: sunt autem f^vere, reficere, confirmare, exhilarare. Nam si satis
perpendimus quid nobis sacrosancti huius Corporis traditio, quid Sanguinis
effusio profuerit: non obscure perspiciemus, haec Panis and Vini Attributa,
secundum eiusmodi analogiam, optime illis erga nos convenire dum nobis
communicantur.

Calvin. 3. Magnum fiduciae ac suavitatis Fructum ex hoc Sacramento colligere
possunt piae Animae, quod testimonium habet in vnum corpus nos cum Christo
coaluisse, vt quicquid ipsius est, nostrum vocare liceat. Hinc sequitur vt
nobis secure spondere audeamus, Vitam Aeternam nostram esse, cujus ipse est
Haeres: nec Regnum Coelorum quo jam ingressus est, posse magis nobis excidere,
quam ipsi: rursum Peccatis nostris non posse nos damnari, a quorum reatu nos
absolvit quum ea sibi imputari voluerit ac si sua essent. Haec est mirifica
commutatio, qua pro immensa sua benignitate nobiscum vsus est: quod Filius
Hominis nobiscum factus, nos secum Dei filios fecerit: quod suo in terras
descensu, ascensum nobis in caelum straverit: quod accepta nostra mortalitate,
suam nobis immortalitatem contulerit: quod suscepta nostra imbecillitate, suam
in nobis virtutem confirmaverit: quod nostra in se recepta paupertate, suam ad
nos opulentiam transtulerit: quod recepta ad se, qua premebamur injustitiae
nostrae mole, sua nos iustitia induerit. Horum omnium adeo solidam habemus
testificationem in hoc Sacramento, vt certo statuendum sit, vere nobis
exhiberi, non secus ac si CHRISTVS ipse praesens aspectui nostro objiceretur,
ac manibus attrectaretur.

Calvin. 4. Omnino isthaec pijs tenenda Regula est, vt quoties Symbola vident a
Domino instituta, illic rei signatae veritatem adesse certo cogitent, ac sibi
persuadeant. Quorsum enim Corporis sui Symbolum tibi Dominus in manum porrigat,
nisi vt de vera ejus participatione te certiorem faciat? Quod si verum est
praeberi nobis Signum visibile, ad obsignandam invisibilis rei donationem:
accepto Corporis Symbolo, non minus Corpus etiam ipsum nobis dari certo
confidamus.

Calvin. 5. Neque mihi satisfaciunt qui nonnullam nobis esse cum Christo
Communionem agnosce^tes, eam dum ostendere volunt, nos Spiritus modo Participes
faciunt, praeterrita Carnis and Sanguinis mentione. Quasi vero illa omnia de
nihilo dicta forent, Carnem eius vere esse Cibum, Sanguinem eius vere esse
Potum: Non habere vitam, nisi qui Carnem illam manducaverit, and Sanguinem
biberit: and quae eodem pertinent.

Calvin. 6. Arctissimam illam societatem qua ejus Carni copulamur, splendidiore
adhuc elogio illustravit quum dixit, Nos esse membra Corporis eius, ex ossibus
eius, and ex carne eius. Tandem vt rem omnibus verbis maiorem testetur,
sermone^ exclamatione finit, Magnu^ (inquit) istud Arcanum. Extremae ergo
dementiae fuerit, nullam agnoscere cum Carne and Sanguine Domini Fidelium
Co^munionem: quam tantam esse declarat Apostolus, vt eam admirari, quam
explicare malit.

Sadeel. 1. Addimus Vocabulum, SPIRITVALITER, non quod, Spiritualiter, idem sit
nobis, ac fictitium, and quod in sola opinione consistit: nec rursum id quod
est tantum invisibile: nec etiam quod Corpus and Sanguine^ Christi in Spiritum
convertere velimus: sed ita loquimur, eo quod Manducatio Carnis Christi, and
Potus Sanguinis ipsius efficitur opera SPIRITVS SANCTI, and hoc Mysterium Fide
percipitur, quam ipse Spiritus in animis nostris ingenerat: denique quia
praestantissimu^ hoc Alimentum pertinet ad vitam spiritualem and aeternam.

Sadeel. 2. Nos in hoc Mysterio, nomine FIDEI, non intelligimus Fidem tantum
historicam: sed eam quae amplectitur Promissiones Evangelicas in Christo,
easque sibi applicat ad Salutem: ipsumque Christum cum suis Beneficijs vere
apprehendit.

Calvin. 7. Si Solemn conspicimus Radijs in Terram emicantem, ad generandos,
fovendos, vegetandos ejus Fructus, suam quodammodo Substantiam ad eam
trajicere: cur inferior Spiritus Christi esset irradiatio, ad communionem
Carnis and Sanguinis ejus in nos traducendam? Qua propter Scriptura, vbi de
nostra cum Christo Participatione loquitur, vim eius vniversam and Spiritum
refert. Pro multis tamen vnus locus sufficient. Paulus enim ad Romanos Capite
octavo, Christum non aliter in nobis quam per Spiritum suum habitare disserit:
quo tamen illam de qua nunc sermo est Carnis, and Sanguinis, Communionem non
tollit, sed ab vno Spiritu effici docet, vt totum Christum possideamus, and
habeamus in nobis manentem.

Calvin. 8. Praecipit Paulus vt probet seipsum Homo antequam de hoc Pane edat,
aut bibat e Calice. Quo (vt ego quidem interpretor) voluit vnumquemque in se
descendere, and secum reputare an interiore cordis fiducia in salutem a Christo
partam recumbat: an oris confessione agnoscat: deinde an ejus exemplo sese
Fratribus dare paratus sit, ac se ijs communicare quibiscum Christum communem
habet: an vt ipse a Christo censetur, ita vicissim Fratres omnes pro Corporis
sui membris habeat: an eos instar membrorum suorum fovere, tueri, iuvare
cupiat. Non quia haec tum Fidei, tum Charitatis Officia nunc perfecta in nobis
esse possint: sed quia huc nos contendere, and votis omnibus aspirare oportet,
vt inchoatam Fide^ magis indies, ac magis augeamus.

Calvin. 9. Dicimus Christum tam externo Symbolo, quam Spiritu suo ad nos
desce^dere, vt vere Substantia Carnis suae, and Sanguinis sui animas nostras
vivificet. In his paucis verbis qui non sentit multa subesse Miracula, plusquam
stupidus est: quando nihil magis praeter naturam, quam vt vitam spiritualem and
coelestem Animae mutuentur a Carne quae originem suam e terra accepit, and quae
morti fuit subiecta. Nihil magis incredibile quam res toto coeli and terrae
spatio dissitas ac remotas, in tanta locorum distantia non solum conjungi, sed
vniri, vt alimentum percipiant Animae ex Carne Christi.

Calvin. 10. Lectores hortor, ne intra istos nimium angustos fines, Mentis
sensum contineant: sed multo altius assurgere co^tendant, quam meo ductu
possint. Nam ego ipse quoties hac de re sermo est, vbi omnia dicere conatus
sum, parum adhuc mihi pro ejus dignitate dixisse videor. Quanquam autem
cogitando Animus plus valet, quam Lingua exprimendo: rei tamen magnitudine ille
quoque vincitur and obruitur. Itaque nihil demum restat nisi vt in eius
Mysterij admirationem prorumpam, cui nec Men's plane cogitando, nec Lingua
explicando par esse potest.

HVSBANDS AND WIVES.
Whit-Sunday, May 23. 1613.
THere are three several States, and Conditions of Men in the World, in the
true Relation whereof, and respective Carriage on either side, the Benefit of
Church, and Commonweal, does much consist: Man, and Wife: Parents, and
Children: Masters, and Servants. If every Man should love his Wife, even as
our Savior loved the Church; Wives again even as the Church is in subjection
unto Christ, so they would be unto their Husbands: if Parents would bring up
their Children in instruction, and information of the Lord, and be not bitter
unto them; Children again would obey their Parents: if Masters would do to
their Servants that which is just and equal, knowing that they also have a
Master in heaven; Servants again would be obedient to their Masters in all
things, not with eie-service as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart
fearing God: as we should have a Church and Commonwealth not to be paralleld
again in the whole world, so should that double Vid. B. of Lincolnes Answer
to a namelesse Cath. p. 79.
Epiphonema of the Prophet David be truly verified of us, Psa. 144.15.
Happy are the People that be in such a case: yea blessed are the People which
have the Lord for their God. Or if so be that be but the Worldlings
insultation of their own iollity, as Parsons Discussion p. 185.
Parsons endeavors to prove: then that of the Prophet Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.29,
Blessed art thou O Israel: who is like unto thee, O People saved by the Lord,
the shield of thy help, and which is the Sword of thy glory? Therefore thine
Enemies shall be in subjection to thee, and thou shall tread upon their high
places.

Now as in Church, and Commonwealth, so were the like observed by the like, I
mean by Man, and Wife, Parents and Children, Masters, and Servants in any one
PARISH whatsoever which is a little Church, a little Commonwealth, what an
orderly Parish should that be? What a Heaven upon Earth? The knowledge is not
great that we have here on Earth, concerning things that are done in Heaven,
notwithstanding thus much we may assure our selves that there is a Trinity in
Unity there, ONE that commands, Others that obey: God, he is there as a
MASTER, as a FATHER, as a HUSBAND: the blessed Angels, and Saints are there
to, as his Servants, as his Children, as his Spowse.

The consideration hereof Right Worshipful, and dearly Beloved in our Savior
Christ has caused me at this time, after so many several Arguments already
handled by me, as of our Saviors Nativity, of our Saviors Passion, of our
Saviors Resurrection, of the Coming of the Holy Ghost, of both the
Sacraments, to think now of some other Matters to be entreated of, for your
farther good: and amongst them, coming to mind these three Conditions, and
States of Men, to purpose with my self to entreat hereafter of every of them.
First then of Man and Wife: hereafter if God will, of Parents, and Children,
Masters, and Servants. The Text I have chosen to this purpose is in the
Foureteenth Chapter of the Proverbs of Solomon, the first verse of that
Chapter. The words be these; A wise Woman builds her House: but the Foolish
destroys it with her own Hands.

Where first of all let it not seem strange unto you that being to speak of
Man and Wife, I have chosen such a Text wherein the Woman only is spoken of:
you shall see how as at the first God Genesis 2.22.
framed Woman out of Man: so ere I have done with this my Text, I shall frame
Man here, out of Woman. For if a wise Woman build her House, why not a wise
Man: if a foolish Woman destroys it, why not a foolish Man. But of that more
hereafter.

Concerning the handling of the words, I will first consider the Speaker: then
the Words themselves. The Speaker was king Solomon, and who amongst us all has
not often times heard of wise king Solomon? King Solomon 1. King. 10.23.
says the Scripture exceeded all the kings of the earth, both in Riches and
Wisdom. Nay Solomon the 1. King. 3.12.
wisest that ever was, the wisest that ever was to be. The Queen of the South,
Mat. 12.42.
says our Savior, came from the utmost parts of the Earth to hear the
Wisdom of Solomon. She heard it and admired it. Now if it behooveth us when
a Wise man speaks to give special heed unto him, Shall a wise man Job. 15.2.
says Eliphaz, speak words of the Wind? shall he dispute with Words not
comely, or with talk that is not profitable? How much less when wise king
Solomon speaks so approved for his Wisdom, I, and registered in the Book of
God, by God himself. Nor yet speaks he here in this place by virtue of that
Wisdom so much, as by being the Spoaks-man of the Holy Ghost, the Apostle 2.
Pet. 1.21.
St Peter instructing us, that the Prophecy came not in old time by the will
of man: but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. So
that the Spirit infusing into him what here he teaches us by writing, we may
well say of him in this case as did Pharaohs Inchanters in an other, Exodus 8.19.
Digitus Dei est hic: This is the Finger of God. God it is, that here speaks,
the Things here spoken are Gods words. And so I come to the Words themselves, A
wise Woman builds her House, but the Foolish destroys it with her own
hands.

In which words we have to note: First, and foremost, two Sorts of women, Wise
and Foolish: Secondly, the difference between them both here made in regard of
their diverse Actions, the One a Builder, the Other a Destroyer: Thirdly, the
Manner of her destroying who is the Destroyer here, it is with her own Hands.
Of every of these in their several order, and First of the two Sorts of Women,
Wise, and Foolish: A wise Woman builds her House, but the Foolish destroys
it with her own hands.

First for the Name of Woman we shall learn in the Book of Genesis why she
was called so at first. For when the Lord at first had made her out of one of
Adams Ribs, and afterward brought her unto him again, This now Genesis 2.23.
says he, is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. She shall be called Woman
because she was taken out of Man. It is in the Original (...)
Ish and (...)
Isha: so that as her self was taken out of Man: so was her Perer. in Genesis l.
4. c. 2. v. 23.
Name also derived from the Name of Man. A kind of agnomination which neither
the English, nor Latin, nor Greek so well expresses. Some like affinity
there is in the Latin indeed between Vir, and Virago, and so the Vulgar
translates it, and Tremellius after him. Howbeit Tremellius Hoc vocabulo
vtendum fuit (quamvis non omnino praesenti loco significatione conveniat) vt
conspiceretur ex part, Hebraeorum dictionum coniugatio. Tremel. in Genesis 2.23.
confesses in his Noat thereupon, that the Term Virago is not altogether so
fit a word, as in very deed it is not. Others would have it Virissa: others,
Vira, but these are fained Names, sufficient it is for us to know that she had
her Name from Man, even as if Were it not perhaps for some FEW, Women in time
might be so termed.
Manna should signify in English a Woman, and Adam should have said to the
understanding of us English men, This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my
Flesh. She shall be called MANNA, because she was taken out of Man. But Woman is
the Name, and her Name and her self taken from Man at the first, it will be
expedient for us to consider, how she was not taken or created out of the Genesis
1.20.
Waters as the Fowls, and Fishes were: nor out of the Ver 24.
Earth as the Beasts, and Cattle were: nor out of the Genesis 2 7.
Dust of the Ground as Adam himself was: but out of the Ver. 21.
Substance of Man himself, out of his very Flesh, and very Bone. And here it
is not amiss to consider the Manner of her being made, partly, in respect of
the word the holy Ghost does use in the Original: partly, in respect of that
part of man whereof she was framed at the first. The word used in the (...)
Original does signify to Build, and Moses by all likelihood would intimate
by that word, that beautiful frame, and feature, that was to be principally in
that Sex. What? to make them proud thereof, as indeed too too many of them have
been? No: God forbid, but that taking special knowledge of this their
Perfection, they should the rather be guided by the Zeal of Honor, and the
Bridle of Shamefastness, as one Buoni an Italian his Probl. of Bewty, Probl. 3.
speaks, not to violate so unspeakable a Treasure, being assured that so
great a Grace was never given them from Heaven to defile with Luxury, but
rather to curb that heat of Concupiscence, which in their weak Natures would
otherwise gather strength. Besides, as the Poet Virg Aen. l. 5.
says, Gratior and pulchro veniens in corpore Virtus: Veniens.i. Proveniens,
ne^pe cresce^s. And yet Seneca has it, Veniens e Corpore virtus. Sen. Ep. l.
9. ep. 1. but I may say of him, as he of Virgil there, Errare mihi visus est
qui dixit, unless the Manuscript it self, or the Printer were in fault.

Their Virtues should be more lovely, appearing to the world in so lovely
Bodies, like as Saraes, and Rebeccaes, and Rachels, and Abigayles were, to the
admiration of them that knew them, and their perpetual praise in holy Writ.

Concerning that part of Man whereof she was framed, it was (as I said) of the
Rib of Man. She was not made of the Foot of Man, that so He might think to
make her his Slave: nor was she made of the Head of Man, that so She should
think to be his Master, but made she was of that part which being so nigh to
his very Heart, what did it intimate but that ever after, she should be his
Companion, his Fellow, his Mate. And yet not so his Mate, or Fellow either, as
if she should not acknowledge Him her Superior, nay unless she acknowledge so
much, there cannot be between them any Parity at all. The very Heathens that
never knew what God in this case said to Genesis 3.16,
Eve, saw so much by the light of Nature, and therefore Martial one of their
Poets, Martial. Epig l. 8. ep. 12.
Inferior Matrona suo sit Prisce Marito,
Non (...)


(...) brief it was thus: A many Gallants at the beseeging of Ardea, being on
a time merry among themselves, fell every one of them amidst their talk, in
high commendation of his Wife. Whereupon Collatinus, My Masters, quoth he, what
need many words, we may within few hours make a trial how my LVCRETIA is
far beyond all yours, and as we find them Hinc sciri potuit haud vsquam
alibi, quo studio vitam suam te absente exegerit, vbi de improviso interventum
est mulieri. Terent. Heaut. Act. 2. Sc. 3.
unawares, so let us judge of the^ accordingly. Agreed says one, agreed says
another, and with that they took horse, and as late as it was, to Rome they
went, where finding all the rest of their Wives gossipping with one another,
and with such as themselves were, Lucretia they found in the midst of her
Parlour among her Maidens hard at work. It it as memorable which our English
Story relates of Queen Catherine the wife of King Henry the Eight, how when
both the Cardinals were sent unto her about her Divorce, she came out unto
them in her Chamber of Presence with a Stow in Henry. 8. p. 916. Edit 1600.
Skeyne of white thread about her Neck, having been with her Maids at work
too. But to return unto my purpose.

From the Book of Exodus, let us come to the Book of the Proverbs we have in
hand, and from the Tenth Verse to the Nine and twenteth of the One and thirty
Chapter of that Book, we shall find so many several Parcells of Wisdom
required in Women, as that we shall not need to seek elsewhere, for any
farther Instruction in this kind. I will briefly run them over.

Who, Prove. 31.10.
says Solomon, shall find a virtuous Woman? For Her Price is far above the
Pearls. Far above Rubies, says our Last Translation, but whether Rubies, or
Pearls, both are very precious. Pliny speaking of Pearls, Principium, Plin.
Hist. Not. l. 9. c. 35.
says he, culmenque omnium rerum pretij Margaritae tenent: The most
sovereign commodity throughout the world, are Pearls. Gold is nothing in
comparison of the^. Plin. Ib.
Cleopatra the Queen of Egypt had two that were valued at Thirty Millions a
piece, whereof she drank up one of the^ after she had steeped it in vinegar. A
Ruby, Plin. Hist. Not. l. 37. c. 6.
says the same Pliny, is a Gem, or precious Stone of an ardent, and fiery
color. They have their name in Greek Cap. 7.
says he, of the likeness unto (...).
Fire, and yet has Fire no power at all over them. It was the First of those
precious Stones that was in Aarons Exodus 28.17
Breast Plate, and our last Translation that renders it in the Text a Sardius,
has in the Margent a Ruby. So likewise the Prophet Ezechiel, Thou have been
in Eden Ezec. 28.13.
says he, the Garden of God, every precious Stone was in thy Garment, the
Ruby, the Topaz, and the Diamond, and so forth, where our last Translation
having Sardius again in the Text, has in the Margent again a Ruby. So that a
Virtuous Woman is like this Ruby, she is like these precious Pearls, nay her
Price is far above them, of much more value, and estimation. Now where king
Solomon (...)
says, Who shall find a virtuous Woman? We must understand Difficultatem
inveniendi, non impossibilitatem oportet intelligi. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 217. p.
765.
says St Austen, the Difficulty, not the Impossibility of finding her: and
king Solomon as he speaks of women, so some where he says of Men to, Who
can find a faithful man, Prove. 20.6. It follows, Prove. 31.11.
The heart of her Husband trusts in her, and he shall have no need of spoil.

A right good Noat to begin withal, and which well deserves the first Rank.
She was made at first for Man, even to be an Help for him, Genesis 2.18, and his
Trial of her has been such, as that he reposeth now much confidence in her.
Be her Husband what be may, he shall have no need of Spoil. If a Magistrate,
not of Bribes; if a Patron, not of Simony; if a Private man, not of Purloyning;
if a Tradsman not of false Weights; if a Landlord not of extortion, and
oppression, and gryping of Tenants; her Huswyfry shall be such as that she
herself shall be his Ecclus. 26.3
Treasure. She will nether desire to fare more daintily, or to attire her self
more sumptuously, then may stand with her Husbands State. It follows: Prove.
31.12
She will do him good, and not evil, all the days of her life.

As was the First Noat, so the Second, both concerning her Husband, by whom we
shall easily know the true temper of his Wife. She has learnt in every thing
to endeavor her Husbands profit, nor is it said without good advice, that she
will do him good, and not evil. She may yield him a many Solaces, and mar
them all with one frown: she may yield him much good Milk, and dash it down
again with her heels. The virtuous Matron will not so, but continues ever
Constant, she is as obedient and tractable after twenty years trial, as at
the day of her Marriage: She remembers her promise made him, and that in the
face of the whole Communion Book in Matrim.
Church, of Obeying, Serving, Loving, Honoring, and Keeping him, in Sickness,
and in Health, and of Forsaking all other and Keeping her only unto him, so
long as they both shall live. It follows, Prove. 31.13
She seeks Wool, and Flax, and labors cheerely with her Hands.

Wool, and Flax are the Fuel of Women's Huswyfry. This virtuous Matron when
she must have Cloth, she runs not always to the Shop, or sets her Husband
upon the Score, but begins with the first Elements, Wool, and Flax. If so be
she have them not at home, she procures them by the Penny, and works upon
them as cheerfully as she earnestly sought them out. She sits not still until
she see them come into her lap, and if she have them, so: if not, she cares
not: nay she seeks them, and finds them out, she knows the consequence of
Idleness, namely that it brings much evil, Ecclesiastic. 33.26. It follows,
Prove. 31.14.
She is like the Ships of Merchants: she brings her Food from a far.

That a Ship, and a Woman are like, is an ancient old jest in Plautus, and
prosecuted by him at large. Nullae magis res duae Plaut. Poen. Act. 1. Sc.
Negotii.
says he, plus negotij habent. There are not two things again in the world,
about which there is so much ado. But it is not in those respects that our
virtuous Matron here is compared with a Ship: nor is it with a Ship, in the
singular, but with Ships in the plural number. So our former Translation, so
our last, both intimating unto us, that she is as a Navy, rather then a Ship,
in regard of the Wares, and Commodities that she continually brings with her.
The Merchant Mr Rob. Wilkins. Merch. Roya^ p. D.
says a worthy Divine, is of all men the most laborious for his life, the most
adventrous in his labor, the most peaceable upon the Sea, the most profitable
to the Land, yea the Merchant is the combination, and union of Land and
Countries. By this we may conceive what the Ships of Merchants are, and
consequently a good Wife, which yet will appear the better by that which
follows in the next verse, Prove. 31.15.
She rises while it is yet night, and gives the Portion to her Household, and
the Ordinary to her Maidens.

Medio iam Noctis abactae Curriculo Virg. Aeneid. l. 8.
says the Poet, expulerat Somnum, and so likewise She. She rises, as we say,
with the Lark, nor is she early up, and never the near, her whole Household
finds the benefit of those her early Pains. Some have their Portion, some
their Ordinary, whether it be Work, or Victuals, or both. Both indeed belong
to Servants, as well Wages, and Victuals, as Work, and if the Righteous man
regard the Prove. 12.10.
Life of his Beast, and indeed ought so to do, how much more precious unto
the^ ought their Servants to be, not now as Servants, but above Servants, even
as Brethren, or Sisters beloved, both in the Flesh, and in the Spirit, as the
Apostle St Paul Philem. v. 16
speaks. It follows, Prove. 31.16.
She considers a Field, and gets it, and with the fruit of her hands, she
planteth a Vineyard.

She is both a Purchaser, and a Planter, but she is not a Supplanter. She is
not as Iezabel was to Naboth. No, God forbid: that were a Job. 31.11.
Wickedness, and Iniquity to be condemned, as Job speaks. Nor gets she a
Field first, and considers it afterward, like him in the Luke 14.18.
Gospel that had bought a Farm, and afterward went to see it, but she first
considers, and then buys it. Nor spends she her money in Tyres, in Pearls,
and Precious Stones, upon which a many set so much Ad quae ardent, and
insaniunt studia Matronarum Hieron. ad Demetriad.
delight, but on that which yeeldes her much more profit to the good of her
Household, so that all what ever she does, is with reference to them. It
follows: Prove. 31.17.
She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengthens her Arms.

To gird our Loins in holy Scripture, signifies most commonly a Readynes with
all our might, to execute a Charge, or a Duty committed unto us. It was the
precept of our Savior, Luke 12.35.
Let your Loins be girded about, and your Lights burning. So the Apostle St
Peter, 1. Pet. 1.13.
Gird up the loins of your mind: be sober, and trust perfectly on the grace
that is brought unto you by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. It was the Vid.
Calvin in Job. 12. Conc. 154.
manner of that time, and of that Country also, to go in long Garments, and when
they did set forth either to Battle, or to Journey, they girded up their Loins
to weild themselves the better. So Elisha to Gehazi, Gird thy loins 2. King
4.29
says he, and take my Staff in thy hand, and go thy way: if thou meet any,
salute him not: and if any salute thee, answer him not, and lay my Staff upon
the face of the Child. So the Lord unto Job, Job. 40.2.
Gird up now thy loins like a man, I will demand of thee, and declare thou
unto me. So likewise our Matron here, she girdeth her Garments about her Loins
that in her household Affairs they prove no hinderance to her. And forasmuch
as it is not enough, to Psalm. 34 13.
eschew evil, but to do good also: she not only takes this course of
Removing all impediments, but She strengthens her Arms, that is, she is
always in action, never idle, according to that of St Jerome, Facito aliquid
operis vt te semper Diabolus inveniat occupatum. Hieron. ad Rust.
Be always a doing somewhat that the Devil when he comes to tempt thee, may
find thee still employed. And again, Si tantis operu^ varietatibus fueris
occupata, nunquam Dies tibi longi erunt. Hieron. ad Demetriad
If thou shall always employ thy self with such variety of Works, the Day
will never prove long, and tedious. Nor does it indeed to this our Matron, nay
it seems rather over-short, and therefore to the le^gthning of it, she is
feign sometimes to borrow of the Night, according to that which follows:
Prove. 31.18.
She feels that her merchandise is good: her Candle is not put out by night.

The Day, and Night, Chrysostom. ad Pop. Antioch. Hom 9.
says St Chrysostom, are as it were two Sisters dividing their Fathers
inheritance between themselves. And though our Savior say in another sense,
The night comes when no man can work, Ioh. 9.4, yet there are that labor
night and day, Ecclus. 38.27. So our Matron here in this place: and as I told
you before of Lucretia, that she was in the night time at work with her
Maids, right so this virtuous Matron here, Virg. Aen. l. 8.
Noctem addens operi, famulasque ad lumina longo
Exercens penso.
She borrowes of the Night some Hours to work in, and before she goes to Bed
sees her Maidens perform their Task. The cause of this her industry, is for
she sees her Merchandise good; She sows not much, and brings in little;
eats, but has not enough; drinks, but is not filled; clothes her self, but
is not warm; earneth wages, and puts the wages into a broken bag, as Ag. 1.6.
speaks the Prophet: but she is as Genesis 39.3.
Joseph rather, the Lord makes all that she does to prosper in her hand. It
follows: Prove. 31.19.
She puts her hands to the Wheel, and her hands handle the Spindle.

It was S. Ieroms counsel to Laeta for bringing up of her Daughter Paula a
Damsel in those days of Noble Ancestors: Let her learn, Discat and laenam
facere, tenere colum, ponere in gr^mio calathum, rotare fusum, stamina pollice
ducere. Hieron. ad Laetam de Instit. Filiae.
says he, to card Wool, to hold the Distaffe, to have the Worke-basket in her
lap, to reele, and spin. And writing to Demetrias, Be you always carding of
wool, Habeto lanam semper in manibus, vel staminis pollice fila deducito, vel
ad torquenda subtegmina alveolis fusa vertantur, aliorumque neta aut in gl^bum
collige, aut texendo compone. Hieron. ad Demetriad.
says he, or be spinning, or weauing, or make your self Bottomes of that
which other folk do, or make them fit to be so made. So our Matron here in
this place, She puts her hands to the Wheel, and her hands handle the
Spindle, mean works a Body would think, especially to be remembered here in
this place, and yet you here see how it pleases God to join it with Lands and
Merchandise, accounting it nothing inferior to either of those two in the
performance of our Duties, in regard of a true Vocation. It follows: Prove.
31.20.
She stretches out her hand to the Poor, and puts forth her hands to the
Needy.

We have already seen her Industry, in these words may we see her Faith, and
Charity. She relieth not in this case upon her Husbands Bounty, and says,
that as for her, She is but under Covert Barn. No: she is persuaded that it
shall in the latter day be said as well to Women, as to Men, Mat. 25.35.
I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, I thirsted, and ye gave me drink:
I was a Stranger, and ye lodged me: I was naked, and ye clothed me: I was
sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Wherein is
apparent, as I said, her Faith to, for she does not in general terms, Feed the
Hungry, Lodge the Harbourlesse, Refresh the Needy, and Cloth the Naked, but
she restrains all these to her very Faith she has of our Savior, for Whose
sake, and for his Name, She does, what ever She does in this kind. And so our
Savior accepts it too. In a word she is such an one as S. Ierom speaks of,
Aurum vsque ad annuli signaeculum repudians, and magis in ventribus Egenorum,
quam in marsupiis recondens. Hier. ad Principiam.
So little enamoured with Gold, as that she refuses to wear any Rings upon
her Fingers, and thinks her Gold laid up better in poor men's Bellies, then in
her Bags. She gi^s and lends, lends and gives with good alacrity, sometimes
Openly, sometimes In secret, and both, as with good Devotion, so with good
Discretion too. Openly; that Others may see her Good Works, and glorify her
Father which is in heaven, Mat. 5.16. In secret, that her Left Hand may not
know what her Right Hand does, Mat. 6.3. It follows: Prove. 31.21.
She fears not the Snow for her Family: for all her Family is clothed with
Scarlet.

It was the saying of the Prophet David: Ps. 147.16.
He gives Snow like wool, and scatters the hoary Frost like ashes. He
casts forth his ice like morsells, who is able to abide his Frosts? Indeed
there is nothing so obnoxious to humane Bodies, as is the extremity of the
Air in this kind. It is not long since that this our own Country, and our
Neighbor Country of France had sufficient experience of it. It is true, that
Winter Season is not always so violent, but be it, as commonly it is,
Garments, and Clothing are most necessary. Our Matron it seems provides
accordingly, for all her Family is clothed with Scarlet, or as it is in the
Margent of our last Translation, With double Garments: that is, as Conrad.
Pelican. apud Lavater. in hunc loc.
Some interpret, They have a Garment for Summer, and they have a Garment for
Winter too, nor her Children only, but her Servants. It follows: Prove. 31.22
She makes her self Carpets, fine Linen, and Purple is her Garment.

She has for Necessity, and she has for Ornament too, and all of her own
making Garments, and Ornaments in their nature are things indifferent, we may
use them, and we may abuse them. If so be they be too Sumptuous, or above our
Calling, or we take a Pride in them, there is the Abuse, nay there are many
Abuses, for where Pride is there are many. And therefore is it exceeding good,
even in the midst of our Bravery, to think of Q. Hesters words, which she
Esther. 14.^
spoke to God himself: Thou know al things O Lord. Thou know my
Necessity, for I hate this Token of my Pre-eminence which I bear upon my
Head, and I abhor it as a Menstruous Cloth. Notwithstanding wear it she did,
and by reason of her place was of Necessity indeed so to do. But you see how
Proud she was of it: she, even in all her Glory accounted her self arrayed,
shall I say like a Mat. 6.29.
Lilly? and like a Lilly of the Field? No; but like some other Flowers. What?
and is it unlawful then for Women to be so attired? Indeed S. Peter speaking
of Women, Whose apparrelling, 1. Pet. 3.3.
says he, let it not be outward, as with broided hair, and Gold put about, or
in putting on of apparel: but did he mean it of all Women? No doubtless, as
a glorious Martyr Arch. Bish. Cranmer, against Transubst. l. 2. c. 12. Or, his
Answ. to Steph. Guard p. 336. Edit. 1580.
observes, for that every One must be apparelled according to their Condition,
State, and Degree. His meaning hereby was, says he, clearly to condemn all
Pride, and Excess in apparel, and to move all Women that they should study
to deck their Souls inwardly with all Virtues, and not to be curious
outwardly to deck and adorn their Bodies with Sumptuous Apparel. Like as our
Savior, says he, when he wild us not to lay up Mat. 6.1^.
Treasures upon the Earth, meant not but that worldly (...)

(...) unto her, We shall surely die, because we have seen God: If the Lord
Judge. 13.23. Last Translat.
says she, were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt
offering, and a meat offering at our hands, neither would he have showed us
all these things, nor would as at this time, have told us such things as these.
Honor as it may signify here, that respect and estimation which is to be
given to such in this world, so likewise may it here signify that glorious and
blessed estate of the Saints in heaven, when they shall have Glory, and Honor,
and Peace, Romans 2.10. And I am so much the rather induced to think that this
latter also may be mea^t, for as much as it follows in the next words, that
in the latter Day she shall rejoice. Whether it be the Latter Day of her Life
in particular, concerning which she may say with the Apostle St Paul, I have
fought a good fight, and have finished my course: I have kept the Faith. For
henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day, 2. Tim. 4.7: or it be the Latter Day
of the World in general, when she shall look up, and lift up her head, for
her Redemption draws near, Luke 21.28. It follows: Prove. 31.26.
She opens her mouth with wisdom, and the Law of Grace is in her Tongue.

We are now come to that P^rt of a Woman which either makes all, or marres
all, I mean her TONGVE. Nobile Lingua bonum, si fari in tempore novit: Nobile
Lingua malum si fari in tempore nescit. Borbo^.
Nobile Lingua Bonum, nobile Lingua Malum,
Esops Best Dish, and Esops Worst, that was to be had in all the Esop. Vit.
Market. That the Tongue is the Best Member that Man, or Woman has, witness
that of a Prophet, Psalm. 108.1.
O God, my heart is ready, my heart is ready, I will sing and give praise with
the best member that I have: that the Tongue is the Worst, witness that of an
Apostle, which you heard read unto you this day, Iam. 3.6.
The Tongue is Fire, yea a World of wickedness: so is the Tongue set among our
members, that it defiles the whole Body, and sets on fire the course of
Nature. And again, Ver. 8.
It is an unruly Evil, full of deadly Poison. This Fire, this World of
wickedness, this unruly evil, this deadly Poison is far from our Matron, as
far as the East is from the West: She speaks not except she must, and when
she Sermo in omnibus moderatus and parcus, et qui necessitatem magis loquendi
indicet, quam voluntatem. Hieron. ad Celant.
needs must, no remedy, the^ opens she her Mouth with wisdom, and the Law
of Grace is in her Tongue. Thus Abigail, thus Livia: the Stories are somewhat
long. The Sum is this: 1. Sam. 25.32.
Abigail persuaded David even in the midst of Fury, to hold his hand from
murdering her self, and all hers: Livia persuaded Augustus her Husband to
forgive Cinna a Traitor, who afterward ever prooved most loyal unto him. It
follows: Prove. 31.27.
She overseeth the vvayes of her Household, and eats not the Bread of
Idleness. Senec. de Clement. l. 1. c 9. Vid. Xiphilinu^ ex Dione Nicaeo in
Augusto, p. 75. 76. 77. etc.


It was exceeding well said by (...). Aesch. in Tragoed. cui Tit. Persae.
Citatur a Lavater in hunc loc.
Aeschylus, that the Masters Presence was the Eye of the House: howbeit the
Master cannot still be at home, the Mistress may: in regard whereof she was
of old compared to a Tortoise that had his Shel, as it were his House, always
upon his Back. Now, the ways of her Household are so diverse, partly in
respect of Servants, and those of either Sex, partly in respect of Children,
and those of either Sex to, that as she had need of Argus his Eyes to be
watching in every Corner, so of Gyges his Ring besides, to see, and not be
seen. This doubtless is most certain that if she bestirre her self
accordingly, neither shall she her self eat the Bread of Idleness, nor
shall Idleness eat her Bread. It follows in the last place, and is the
Vpshot of all before: Prove. 31.21.
Her Children rise up, and call her Blessed: her Husband also shall praise her
saying, Ver. 29.
Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou surmountest them all.

It may seem here somewhat strange that it should be put amongst Women's
Praises, that their Children, or Husbands should praise them. It is the Duty of
Children to praise their Parents, and the Praises that Husbands have given
their Wives, have prooved so Periculosa est omnis viri de vxore sua lauda ^io.
Lud. Vives de Offic. Mariti. l. 1. c. 6 p. 128.
harmefull to themselves, that he is but a Novice in History, that has not
Examples at his fingers ends. As of Caudaules in Heroditus, of Collatinus in
Herod. l. 1.
Livy, whose unseasonable Praises of their Wives wrought at length their own
overthrow, Live. Dec. 1. l. 1
at the least wise much woe. It is true, Beloved, so they did, howbeit the
Praises here intimated, they are not of that strain. First the Children rise
up, and call her Blessed, when being come to sufficient age, they remember not
so much the long Matri longa december tulerunt fastidiae menses. Virg Eclog. 4
Toil of Ten Months wearysomnesse which their Mothers endured for them in
their Womb, as the Benefit of Education their Mothers bestowed on them, their
Fathers dead and gone. And indeed we of this Place, I mean a many of us, if
any Children in the world, have greatest cause of all, to remember this
BENEFIT. As touching the bearing of us in their VVombs, what is it they
specially do, which all Women else whatsoever, perform not as well as they.
They all of them bear, and bring into the world (doubtless all Mothers) but
our Mothers besides their Bearing, and Bringing us into the world, when they
have vowed us to the Lord, and brought us hither, and to such like Places, as
did 1. Sam. 1.24
Hannah her Samuel to Silo, and themselves though but Luke 10.24.
Marthaes in respect of their own Vocations, have notwithstanding provided for
us even Mary's Coyce how are they ever to be blessed by us. Blessed by us in
their Lives, blessed by us after their Deaths, and consequently in their
Memories, who (poor Souls) did so much for us, and saw so slender recompense
before their Departure hence. It is a golden passage which St Austen has
concerning his Mother, and I doubt not but a many of us may apply it to our
own. I, Non praeteribo quicquid mihi Anima parturit de illa famula tua quae me
parturivit and Carne, vt in hanc temporalem, and Cord, vt in aeternam lucem
renascerer. Aug. Confess. l. 9. c. 8. p. 111.
says St Austen, will not forget to set down in writing whatsoever my Mind
is in travail concerning my Mother thy Servaunt, which brought me forth both
according to the Flesh into this Life temporal, as also according to the
Spirit into Life eternal. Happy Mother, happy Son, and by so much the more,
more happy Mother, in that thou had so happy a Son, such a Publisher of thy
Praises.

Concerning the Husbands Praises, they are not unseasonable in this kind, nor
is Folly, and Lightness, the cause of them. They are his Wives virtuous
Actions which having been many, and manifold, he cannot choose but in his
Life time adorn with good Words, and at his Death (if he dye before her) with
a goodly Portion convenient for her. Although our Law may seem somewhat
rigorous toward the Wives, yet for the most part, they ca^ handle their
Husbands so well, and so dulcely, and specially when their Husbands be sick,
that where the Law gives them nothing, their Husbands at their Death of their
good will give the^ all. St. Thomas Smyth. Common wealth of Engl. l. 3. c. 8.


And thus, Beloved, have we seen the several Properties of a virtuous Woman.
Not that she is not Virtuous, who has not all these, for all and every of
these, belong not to all Women. King Solomon describes in this place a Woman of
Account, of Place, and of Reputation, as is to be seen by some Particulars,
howbeit there are besides many other Qualities here mentioned, which may befit
any Woman, and such a Woman as has such Qualities is that Wise one my Text
speaks of. All which if they seem to many to be remembered of us, I will
reduce them unto Seven, even to those Seven which Reverend Hooker commended
in One of his own Flock. She lived a Dove, M Hooker. Remedy against Sorrow
and Fear, delivered in a Funeral Sermon on Ioh. 14.27. p 8.
says he, and died a Lamb. And if amongst so many Virtues, hearty DEVOTION
toward God, toward Poverty tender COMPASSION, MOTHERLY AFFECTION toward
Servants, toward Friends even serviceable KINDNESS, mild BEHAVIOVR, and
harmless Meaning toward all. If where so many Virtues were eminent, any be
worthy of special mention, I wish her dearest Friends of that Sex to be her
nearest Followers in two things, SILENCE, saving only when Duty did exact
speech, and PATIENCE even then when extremity of Pains did enforce Grief. If
these Seven seem to many too, I will reduce them but to Four: RELIGION,
GOOD-HVSWIFRY, SILENCE, and CHARITY. They that have these Four, and continue
therein, they I dare be bold to say, are the Wise here spoken of.

Where by the way, Beloved, we may note that Beauty is none of these Virtues,
none of the Properties here spoken of, nor of the Four, nor of the Seven, nor
of those Many before mentioned. Nay it seems wise King Solomon did not only
omit it of purpose, but gave a Reason for omitting it, for he Prove. 31.30.
says immediately after, Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vanity. As if he
had said. Would you know why among so many Notes and Properties of a Virtuous
Woman, I have omitted this of Beauty? It is a deceitful Note, it is a vain
Note, it is a Note worth Nothing. And indeed, Beloved, so it is. Beauty is
Vain, and Deceitful too. Vain, for it stands only in Men's opinions. She
that is Naevus in articulo pueri delectat Alcaeum. At est corporis macula
Naevus. Illi tamen hoc Lumen videbatur. Tull. de Not. Deor. l. 1. And again,
Constitera^ exo^rientem auroram etc. Mortalis visus pulchrior esse Deo. Huic
pulchrior Deo? at erat, sicut hodie est, perversissimus oculis. Tul. Ib.
Fair in one man's eye, is Foul in an others: and there are none again so
Foul, but they are Fair enough to some. Besides that among the Blackamores
the Blackest is the Fairest. Deceitful, for that Beauty when it is at the
fairest, is subject to many Casualties. One Wem, one Wart, nay one Hair out of
place, how of the most beautiful that is, may it make a defourmed Creature.
Over and above, that all Corporalia omnia processu aetatis, aut aegritudinis
inaequalitate marcescunt. Ambros. Hexam. l. 6. c. 6
worldly Things, by reason of Age, or Sickness, consume, and wither away.
Besides that it is the cause of Pride, and Arrogance, as S. Chrysostom Chrysostom.
in Ephesians. Hom. 20.
observes, and a special cause of Jealousy too, and it pleases, says he,
for a Month, perhaps for twain, it may be a whole Year, howbeit afterward
the case is altered. Custom makes it of less esteem. But to return unto my
purpose.

We have seen, Beloved, one sort of Women in my Text, namely the Wiser: it may
be that after these, you care not much to see the Other. I will therefore show
you them in brief. They are the Foolish Women, that either have not these good
Properties (or at the lest wise, a Many of them) before alleged, or that have
Others contrary to them. In a word. Is she a wise Woman, that is Religious?
Then She that never comes, or very seldom, to such Assemblies as these are,
or when she comes, regards not, or what she hears, or what she prays, She
is the Foolish? Is She a wise Woman that is Painful in her Vocation, that
bestirres her self all the day about some business, or other, and sees that
her Servants so do? then She that does not so, that cares not which end goes
forward, Prove. 6.10.
Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to
sleep, She is the Foolish. Is She a wise Woman that is always adorned with
Silence, unless Duty to her Husband, and Necessity to her Neighbors, and
Friends, cause her to open her Mouth? Then She that is babbling and loud, whose
feet cannot abide in her house, now she is without, Prove. 7.11.
says Solomon, now in the Streets, and lies in wait at every corner: She is
the Foolish. Lastly, is She a wise Woman that is Charitable toward the Poor,
and turns not her face from them but casts her Bread upon the Eccles. 11.4.
Waters? Then She that is over-hard, and will not part with what she has, and
gives the^ hard Si dare nihil placet, noli tame^ maledictis prosequi. Si non
vis naufragio liberare, noli in profundum demergere Chrysostom. in Ioh. Hom. 76.
language to, She is the Foolish. And thus having now seen who the Wise and
Foolish are, let us see in the next Place, the difference between them here
made in regard of their diverse Actions, in that the One of them is a Builder,
the Other a Plucker down. A wise Woman builds her house, but the Foolish
destroys it.

To Build an House in the Scriptures, Aedificare domum in Scripturis significat
ea^ locupletare, conservare, Lavat. in Prove. 24.3.
says one, signifies to enrich, and to preserve it. The Benefit of Building
what it is, as there was never Age heretofore, better testified the^ this, so
is there no Place in the world again, that will better witness the same unto us,
the^ the place wherein we live. There be Some, Psalm 49.6.
says the Psalmist, that put their trust in their Goods, and boast themselves
in the multitude of their Riches. V. 11.
They think that their Houses shall continue for ever: and that their dwelling
places shall endure from one Generation to another, and call the Lands after
their own Names. But go we from one Coast to another, from City to Country,
from Gentry to Nobility, and where are the dwelling Places, where the Mansion
Houses of Thousands that heretofore have been famous in their times. Only the
HOUSES of the MUSES here, that were built by glorious Founders so many hundred
Yeeers ago, those we see as they were at first, nay we see them far fairer,
and so I trust shall the Ages to come, as long as the Deuteronomy. 11.2^.
Heavens are above the Earth. Now the^ as there is no place in the World that
better testifies unto us then this, what the Benefit of Building is, so may it
best of all put us in mind of the Building here meant. For if so be Tully
Tull. de Senect.
said true of Old men that they planted Trees, the Benefit whereof Posterity
should reap an other day: and they sowed their Corn for the Gods, whose will
it was that as they themselves received from their Ancestors, so they should
leave somewhat also to Posterity that came after: how ought our endeavors for
our Families to be in such sort, as that they also after us may reach to a many
Generations? It was a barbarous Speech of Nero, who when he heard one saying,
(...), When I am dead let all the world be burnt: Suet. in Neron. c. 38.
answered again in a trice, (...), But while I live, let all the world be
burnt: so loath was that Miscreant, that any after should surviue him. It is
not so with a virtuous Matron. She as she provides for her own time, so does
she for Posterity too, and howsoever she is not ignorant, that the 2. Pet.
3.10.
World indeed shall burn at the last, yet as long as the World lasts, she
has a care of Times to come. For to care but for the Present only, is the
Property of Beasts. This then it is which is by Building here intimated, she
considers before hand what is to be done, and she builds upon the Mat. 7.25.
Rock, even the Rock, CHRIST JESUS.

Non sic Impij; no^ sic. As for the Ungodly Psalm. 1.5.
says the Prophet, it is not so with them: nor is it so indeed with Foolish
Women. They are like the Mat. 7.27.
Rain, and Flowds, and Winds, that beat upon their own Houses. Nay they pull
them down at once, and make a quick riddance. Even as Sampson in the Book of
Judges Judge. 16.30.
plucked down the House on his own head. Which yet I would not have so to be
taken, as if their material Houses so fell, nay it may be the Houses in that
kind may stand strongly enough, and yet their Mistresses destroy them too. For
as Job discoursing of the wicked: They wax old Job. 21.7.
says he, and grow in Wealth: their Seed is established in their sight with
them, and their Generation before their eyes. Their Houses are peaceable
without fear, and the Rod of God is not upon them. Their Bullock gendreth,
and fails not, their Cow calveth, and casts not her Calfe. They send forth
their Children like Sheep, and their Sons dance. They take the Tabret, and
Harp, and rejoice in the sound of the Organs. They spend their Days in wealth,
and suddenly they go down to the Grave: So all this, and more then this, may
be verified of these Fools, and yet they Destroyers to, whether we take House
here for Family, and Posterity, as 2. Sam. 7.18: or for Substance, Goods, and
Worldly Riches, as Mat. 23.14: or for Soul, and Body, our true House indeed,
2. Cor. 5.1. And so I come to her Manner of doing it, which is with her own
Fingers ends: A wise Woman builds her House, but the Foolish destroys it
with her own hands.

Except the Lord, Psalm. 127.1.
says the Psalmist, build the House, their labor is but lost that build it:
thereby to intimate unto us, even in this case, that though 1. Cor. 3.6.
Paul plant, Apollos water, yet God must give the increase; and Ver. 7.
again, That neither he that planteth is any thing, neither he that waters,
but God that gives the increase. And indeed, Every good giving, and every
perfect Gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights, as
speaks the Apostle St James: howbeit when it is added here, that a Foolish
Woman destroies her House, then is it added withal, that She indeed does it,
even with her own hands. So it is, it is even so, Hos. 13 9.
Perditio tua ( Ex te, is not in the Vulgar, but it is commonly so alleged:
otherwise if we read Perditio tua Israel: the Accent is to be in u.
ex te) Israel: tantummodo in me auxilium tuum: Our Last Translat.
O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help, and indeed
it is from our Selves that al our Harm comes. No Man is hurt, says St
Chrysostom, but only by himself, nor does he say it only in so many words,
but he has an whole Quod nemo laeditur nisia semet. Chrysostom. Tom. 5.
Homily thervpo^. The Devil B. Andrews Christ's Combat with the Devil, Ser. 4.
p. 52. b.
says a worthy Prelate of ours, did not cram Eve with the forbidden Fruit, but
when she saw it, she took it, and eat it. So the Devil, says he, when he
enters into the Soul of a Man, he does not break open the Doare, no, nor so
much as draw the Latch, but when he comes, he finds it swept, and
garnished, and so he goes in. Our Savior in St Lukes Gospel acquaints us
with the manner of it. When the unclean Spirit Luke 11.24.
says our Savior, is gone out of a Man (meaning a Woman to) he walks
through dry places, seeking rest, and when he finds none, he says, I will
return to my House, whence I came out. And when he comes, he finds it
swept, and garnished. Then goes he, and takes to him seven other Spirits
worse then himself, and they enter in, and dwell there, so the last state of
that Man, is worse then the first. Right so it is with Foolish Women. When the
Unclean Spirit is gone out of them, suppose by the Preaching of the Gospel, or
by some kind of Punishment God does send them (for when we his Ministers can
do no good, he will sometimes take the Rod into his own hands) he Walks
through dry places: that is, he tempts the Hearts of the Faithful to see if
he can harbor there, and when he finds that he cannot, he hies him to his
old hoame which he finds Swept, and Garnished: Swept within, and Garnished
without: Within, in respect of Words; Without, in respect of outward Behavior,
both which when he seeeth they come not from the Heart, but that they are like
Mat. 23.27.
Painted Sepulchers, Fair without, but Foul in the inmost Room of all, then
does he associate unto him Seven other Spirits worse then himself, suppose
the Spirit of Pride, the Spirit of Envy, the Spirit of Wrath, the Spirit of
Avarice, the Spirit of Gluttony, the Spirit of Sloth, and that which always
accompanies that Spirit, the Spirit of Letcherie, and they enter in, and dwell
there, and so is the Foolish Woman in this kind as was Mary Magdalen before
her Conversion, possessed of no less then Seven Devils, Mark. 16.9.

And thus, Beloved, have you heard of two Sorts of Women, Wise and Foolish. You
have heard of the Difference, that is between them, the one a Builder, the
other a Plucker down. You have heard in the third place of her Manner of
Plucking down, how it is done with her own Hands. It is not besides my Text,
at least wise besides the Meaning of it, to tell you now as much on the other
side of two Sorts of Men, Wise and Foolish: Secondly, of the self same
Difference that is between them both: and Thirdly, of their Destroying to, how
it is done with their own Hands. But I trust what has been spoken concerning
the one Sex, the Other by way of Proportion will apply unto themselves: but
still with this special Item: that if Women be Foolish; if Women destroy; if
Women do it with their own Hands; how much more should Men be Foolish, how
much more should Men destroy, and how much more with their own Hands, seeing
Men have the opportunity of destroying more in a Day, then has a Woman in
Seven Years. Besides that as our Savior Mat 6.23.
says, If the Light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness:
so thou being the Head of thy Wife, if thou be out of frame, the Case is
far more dangerous. Vt in corporibus Plin. Epist. l. 4. ep. 22. A Capite bona
valetudo. Sen de Clement. l. 2. c. 2.
says Pliny, sic in Imperio gravissimus est Morbus qui a Capite diffunditur.
If the Disease be a Head Disease it is the most dangerous disease that is.
Nor shall it prejudice this Application that here is mention made of Wool, and
Flax, of the Wheel, and the Spindle. Neque ista Lanificia, Aug de Temp. Ser.
217. p. 766
says St Austen, sunt a Viris aliena. These very Matters concerning Wool, may
beseem our own Sex well enough. For as the Yarne says he, is wrapped about
the Distaffe, and afterward by lengthning out, and by being made a Thread, is
wound upon the Spindle: so our Good Works, and Good Deeds should be in the
Spindle, not in the Distaffe, that is, they should be such as have past our
Hands already, they should not be still to come. His Reason is, that being now
of ability to do good works, and neglecting the opportunity, we may chance
not to have the like times offered hereafter again unto us. To draw then
toward an end, and to apply what has been spoken to both your Sexes at once.

His Excellent Majesty in that Golden Book of Instructions to PRINCE HENRY
(whom our manifold Sins would not suffer to continue longer amongst us) among
many admirable Passages therein, worthy to be written in Letters of Gold,
Would you see, ASILIKON DOPON, or his Majesty's Instructions to his dearest
Son Henry the Prince Lib. 1 p 9 Edi. 1603.
says he, how Good Men are rewarded, and Wicked punished? Look the
Historical Parts of the Books of Moses, together with the Histories of
Joshua, the Judges, Ezra, Nehemias, Esther, and Job: but especially the Books
of the Kings, and Chronicles, wherewith ye ought to be familiarly acquainted:
for there shall you see YOUR SELF as in a Mirror, in the Catalogue, either of
the Good, or the Evil Kings. Beloved, suffer me with a little alteration to
say as much concerning Your selves. There being in this world two Sorts of Men
and Women, Wise and Foolish, and the one Sort being Builders, the other
Destroyers, would you see how the Wise are rewarded, the Foolish punished?
Look the Historical Parts of the Books of Moses, together with the Histories
of Joshua, the Judges, Ezra, Nehemias, Ester, Job, the Books of the Kings and
Chronicles, but especially the Book of Proverbs, wherewith you ought to be
familiarly acquainted, for there shall you see Your selves as in a Mirror,
either of the Wise or Foolish Men, or of the Wise or Foolish Women. But I
hope all of you that here are, are rather of the VViser Sort, and so shall you
prove your selves, if you be Builders, not Destroyers, and Builders shall you
be if you live and love together. They that are Brethren, Chrysostom. Op.
Imperfect. in Mat. 19. Hom. 32.
says an ancient Writer, howsoever they be borne of one, yet therefore are
they borne, that they may betake themselves to diverse ways: but Man and Wife
howsoever they be borne of Diverse, yet therefore are they borne, that they
should both agree in one. Let them then, Dearly Beloved, disagree with one
another, let them be always wrangling, and brangling, and snarling and biting
too, who know not the worth of this Estate: who know not how it is Communion
Book in Matrimon.
honorable, and was instituted of God in Paradise, and that in the time of
Man's innocence: how it signifies to all that be married the Mystical Union
that is betwixt Christ, and his Church, and was adorned and beautified, not
only by our Saviors Presence but with the first Miracle he ever wrought: in a
word, who enterprised it at the first, and took it in hand, not reverently,
discreetly, advisedly, soberly, and in the fear of God, but indiscreetly,
unadvisedly, lightly, and wantonly to satisfy their carnal Lusts, and
Appetites like bruit Beasts that have no understanding. As for those on the
contrary who being HVSBANDS, Coloss. 3.21.
love their Wives, and are not bitter unto them, that Ephesians. 5.25.
love them as our Savior loved the Church, or as they V. 28.
love their own Bodies, or as they V. 33.
love their own Selves: and those who being WIVES, Ephesians. 5.33.
fear their Husbands, and Coloss. 3.18
submit themselves unto them as it is comely in the Lord; I, that Ephesians. 5.22.
submit themselves unto their Husbands as unto the Lord; I, even as the V. 24.
Church is in subjection to Christ, even so are they to their Husbands in every
thing, Happy, thrice Happy are they, if they thus continue with one another.
What know thou o Wife, 1. Cor. 7.16.
says the Apostle, whether thou shall save thine Husband? or what know thou
o Man whether thou shall save thy Wife. And indeed who knows whether the
Virtuous behavior of a Wife may better recall a debosht Husband then all the
Sermons may be made him: or the exceeding Patience of an Husband more avail
with a wayward Wife the^ all the Precepts may be given her. As for Such on the
other side whom an inseperable Tie of true Love holds together, nor is that
Love of theirs dissolved by Chidings, Squablings, and Brawlings, as long as
they both shall live, they are more then thrice Happy: Herat. Carm. l. 1. Od.
13.
Faelices ter, and amplius,
Quos irrupta tenet Copula: nec malis
Divulsus querimonijs
Suprema citius solvet Amor die.
I will end with that of the Apostle S. Paul: Ephesians. 5.33.
Let every one love his Wife even as himself, and let the Wife see that she
fear her Husband.

And thus much of the First of those three several States and Conditions of Men
in the true Relation whereof, and respective carriage on either side, the
Benefit of Church, and Commonwealth does much consist: MAN and WIFE. The Fruit
of Marriage is Birth, and the Companion of Birth Travail, and the End of
Travail Children, who are as S. Ambrose Ambr. in Luc. l. 1. c. 1. p. 13.
speaks, in respect of their Mothers, Stipendia Foeminarum Militiae, The wages
of Women's warfare, in respect of their Fathers, as Ps. 127.3. Vulg.
speaks the Prophet David, Sicut novellae Olivaru^ in circuitu Mensae tuae:
Ps. 128.3.
Like the Olive Branches round about his Table. I, presupposing that God has
blessed you with a many Branches in this kind, or with some One, or Other, at
the least, be it an He, or be it a She, Iuvenal. Sat. 5.
Parvulus Aeneas, aut Filia dulcior illo,
will make it God willing, my next care, to entreat of those your Children,
and of the true Relation, and respective Carriage that is, or is to be,
between You and Them, Them and You.

In the mean time, God so bless us, and the Seed that that has been sown,
etc.
PARENTS AND CHILDREN
Christmas Day, December. 25. 1613.
For I know him that he will command his Sons, and his Household after him,
that they keep the way of the Lord, to do righteousness, and judgment, that
the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that he has spoken unto him.

Genesis 18.19.
THese words, Right Worshipful, and dearly Beloved in our Savior Christ, as
they are a Sequence of those which went before, so they represent unto our view
Four kinds of several Persons. First, the Person of the Lord, I; For I
know. Secondly, the Person of Abraham, Him, and He; For I know Him, that He
will command. Thirdly, the Persons of his Children, Male, and Female,
comprehended in the word Sons; His Sons. Fourthly, the Persons of his
Servants, Men and Maids; And his Household after him.

First, for the Person of the Lord here, who was indeed God Almighty, we are
first of all to consider why He appears in this place. The Story is famous.
It was to destroy whole Cities of Men, that were at that time of a most debosht
behavior. The Lord himself relates the Cause in the next two Verses to this
my Text. Because, Genesis 18.20.
says the Lord, the cry of Sodom, and Gomorah is great, and because their Sin
is exceeding grievous. I will go down now, and see whether they have done
altogether according to that Cry which is come unto me, and if not, that I may
know. So that the wickedness of those ROARING BOYS (pardon me if I use this
Phrase, of those days Miscreants, the Cry of Sodom here calls it to mind)
caused the Lord to come from Heaven, nay it caused HELL to come from Heaven,
for so Salvianus speaks in one, or two Places. He sent Hell, Super impium
Populum Gehennam misit e Coelo. Salv. de vero Iudic. and Prove. Dei. l. 1. p. 53.
faith he, out of Heaven upon a wicked People. And again in another Tam male
de Deo meruit, vt Gehennam quae in futuro Iudicio datur, etiam in hoc Saculo
sustineret. Salv. Ib l. 4. p. 132.
place: That People so ill deserved of God above, that that Hell which is
reserved for the Judgment to come, they endured even in this World. But thus
much of the first Person, the Person of the Lord, and why he appeared here in
this place.

The second Person is the Person of Abraham, Abraham the Father of the
Faithful. So well known unto God as one Esaias. 41.8.
Friend to another: nay better known then so to. Abraham was known unto God
as David was, and David was so well known, that speaking of himself, and of
the knowledge God had of him, O Lord, Ps. 139.1.
says he, thou have searched me out, and known me, thou know my down
sitting, and my vprising, thou understand my thoughts long before. Thou art
about my Path, and about my Bed, and spiest out all my ways. For lo, there is
not a word in my Tongue, but thou O Lord know it altogether. Thou have
fashioned me behind and before, and laid thy hand upon me. And again a little
after, My Bones, Ps. 139 14.
says he, are not hid from thee, though I be made secretly, and fashioned
beneath in the Earth. Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being imperfect, and
in thy Book were all my Members written. Though why do I speak of such a
Knowledge? Every Man is thus known, as well the Wicked, as the Godly, Abraham
was known to God after a more peculiar kind of sort. God in this place gives
him a SCIO: Scio enim quod praecepturus sit Filijs suis and so forth. Scio. It
is (as it were) an Academicall kind of Knowledge, Tum Moribus, tum Scientia, a
knowledge of Abraham's Sufficiency both for Life, and true Learning.

The third Persons were his Children, Male and Female, which though he had not
in the Plural Number now at this time, but only One, namely Ismael, yet are
they intimated here in this place by the Name of Sons. An usual Phrase
throughout the Scriptures, when under the Name of Sons, both Sexes are
comprised, as Prove. 10.1, Romans 8.14, and Rev. 21.7. I spare to allege the
Places.

The fourth, and last kind of Persons here mentioned, were his Servants, Men
and Maidens, and of those it is likely he had great stoare, for they are said
to be many, both Menservants, and Maidservants, Genesis 12.16.

Of all the Persons here specified, I intend Godwilling to speak at this time,
of those in the second, and third Place only, namely of Abraham, and his
Sons: under which Name of Sons as we shall comprise all Children
whatsoever, so shall we comprehend all Parents under the Name, and Person of
Abraham. Now then as touching the words: For I know him that he will command
his Sons, and his Household after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, to
do Righteousness, and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that he
has spoken unto him.

Why the Lord here appeared to Abraham, you have heard before, namely to
destroy whole Cities, Sodom and Gomorah, and Others annexed thereunto. Now as
the Prophet Amos speaks in his Amos 3.7.
Prophecy, Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals his Secrets
unto his Servants the Prophets; So did he purpose nothing now at this time
which he acquainted not his Servant Abraham with, for so is Abraham styled,
Genesis 26.24: nay Abraham a Prophet, for so he calls him, Genesis 20.7: nay
Abraham his Friend, for so is he called to, Esaias 41.8. Why he should
acquaint Abraham herewith, he alleges in this Chapter two several Reasons:
the Former in the eighteenth verse, namely, for he had already vouchsafed him a
singular Privilege of Honor, seeing that Abraham should be (...)

(...) had them honored, when he spoke like a Arist. Ethic. l. 4. c. de Magnam.
Philosopher, not a Counselor, like a Scholar, not like a Courtier, how
should we come short of Duty to Parents, should our Parents be Vicious, who be
they what be may, are still to be honored by us. But of the Honor we owe them,
hereafter: we are now to speak of their Pre-eminence, and Authority over their
Children: which as in some sort it has appeared to us by the Place our Parents
have in the Decalogue of Moses, and the Honor there specified, so will it be
unto us much more evident by the Word Command here in this Place: For I know
him that he will command.

The Command of Parents over their Mr Doctor Ryues sometimes Warden of New
Coll. in a Sermon at St Mary's, upon Ier. 35.5.6.7. etc.
Children in ancient times was such that being in want, and necessity, they
might dispose of their Children by laying them to pledge, or selling them
outright, as it seemed best unto themselves. Neither so only, but for Cod Lib.
4. tit. 44. L. Si quis
Criminal matters and Offenses committed within doares, they were authorized to
punish their Children, even with loss of very Life. Patribus olim Cod. Lib. 8.
tit. 47. l. 10.
says the Civil Law, vitae necisque potestas concessa est. Fathers in times
past had power over their Children for Life and Death. And therefore in the
time of Nature, even before the Law was given, when Judah was told how Thamar
his Daughter in Law had played the Harlot, without any other foreign hearing,
or carrying her before any other Magistrate: Bring her forth Genesis 38.24.
says he, and let her be burnt. Now if over a Daughter in Law, and a Widow, a
Father in those days had such Power, how much more over his own Children, and
such as issued from his own Loins. True it is that in Continuance of time
this absolute Power of Parents was somewhat pared, and diminished by the Civil
Constitutions of Princes, who either thought it derogatory to their own
Authority, or by experience did find it inconvenient, that a Power of that
nature should remain in private hands, and so took from Parents their
immediate use of the Sword: yet as well to keep Children in awe of their
Parents, as upon a presumption that no man could hate him whom he had begotten
without just and evident cause, the Sword of the Magistrate was ever ready at
the request of the Father to be unsheathed against his Child, if so be he
proved disobedient. Witness the Example of one Rhacoces of whom Aelian. V^.
Hist. l. 1. c. 34.
Aelian makes mention, who brought his dissolute, and disobedient Son before
the Judges of the Country, desiring that they would command him to be put to
Death: which though they referred to Artaxerxes the Prince of that Country, and
he for that time forboare that Punishment, yet Gravissimam Mortem interminatus
est, says Aelian, he threatened him a cruel kind of Death, if so be afterward
he should be delinquent in the like kind of Crime against his Father. And
least it should seem that this was the Custom of a barbarous Nation only,
such as that Country might seem to be, we shall read of the self same Power
granted unto Parents even in the Digest. ad Legem Corneliam de Sicariis and
Venef. and Cod. l 8. de Patria Potest. L. 3.
Civil Law. And herein the Civil Law is all one in effect with the very Law
of God, which in the Book of Deuteronomy, concerning stubborn and disobedient
Children, is thus set down. If any man, Deuteronomy. 21.18.
says Moses, have a Son that is stubborn and disobedient, which will not
harken unto the voice of his Father, nor the voice of his Mother, and they have
chastned him, and he would not obey them, then shall his Father, and his Mother
take him, and bring him out unto the Elders of his City, and unto the Gate of
the place where he dwells, and shall say unto the Elders of his City: This
our Son is stubborn, and disobedient, and will not obey our admonition, he
is a Riotour, and a Drunkard: It V. 21.
follows, Then all the Men of his City shall stone him with stones unto
death: so thou shall take away evil from among you, that al Israel may hear
it, and fear. In which words, but that I hasten, I might observe unto you
many Points, as First, the making equal the Mothers Authority with the
Fathers, and the due respect of Children as well to the one, as to the other, a
Point much neglected now adays, whether the Fault is in the Child, or in the
Father, or Mother herself. Secondly, the sole accusation of the Parents, all
sufficient in it self without other proof at all, to vnsheath the Sword of
the Magistrate, and to cause execution to be done. Thirdly, the Faults here
mentioned which are no greater then Stubbornness and Disobedience in not being
reclaimed from a dissolute and riotous Life. Fourthly, the manner of his Death
in that he was to be stoned by ALL, as one that had offended in a Point that
concerned all, or rather as a Monster that was worthy to be hated, and to be
pursued by all Lastly, the Ends for which that Sin of Disobedience in
Children was so grievously to be punished, the which were two: First, that
Evil might be taken away from among them, intimating thereby that only for the
Disobedience of Children left unpunished, the Wrath of God lies upon a Land:
Secondly, that all Israel might hear it, and fear, that is, fear to be
found disobedient to their Parents, whom God commanded to be honored. Now
howsoever by Corruption of Time, or Decay of good Discipline, or upon Reasons
seeming good to them that are in Authority, these Laws, Civil, and Divine,
are abrogated, and abolished, yet the Power of Parents over their Children
founded in the Laws of God, and Nature is still the same, and the Sin of
Disobedience as great as ever.

By all then that has been spoken, we may all of us perceive that the Name
of a Father, as Appellatio ista and pietatis, and potestatis est. Tertul. de
Orat. p. 657.
speaks Tertullian, is a Name, Non Pietatis solum, sed etiam Potestatis: not
of natural Affection only, but of Power: And commands over Children not only
concerning inferior Actions, as that Children in their Marriage were to be
disposed of by their Parents, at least wise, not to marry with out their
Parents Zanchius nullifies all such Marriages as are made without the consent
of Parents. Zanch de Oper. Part. 3 l. 4 c. 1. These. 8. p. 704. Col. 2.
Consent: that Parents expelled their Children from house and home, as Val.
Max. l. 5. c. 8.
Manlius Torquatus did Syllanus his Son for receiving of Bribes: that their
very Numb. 30.6.
Vows made to God were all reversible by the will of their Parents, if so be
their Parents disallowed them: but also concerning Religion too, their Parents
being bound to teach it them, or by themselves, or by some others. And this is
that Righteousness, and Judgment here spoken of in this place, For I know
him that he will command his Sone and his Household after him, that they keep
the way of the Lord to do Righteousness, and Judgment. Righteousness in
regard of the First Table, their Duty toward God: Judgment in regard of the
Second Table, their Duty toward their Neighbor. Or if they both belong to
the Second Table, as Calvin in hunc loc.
Some are of opinion, then is the First by the Figure Synecdoche comprised
under the Second. So the Apostle to the Galathians: All the Law, Gal. 5.14.
says he, is fulfilled in one word, which is this, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. All the Law, says the Apostle: which yet our Savior
Mat. 22.39.
called but the Second Commandment.

Neither was this Authority of the Parents expyred when as their Children came
to Age, but where ever they lived, whatsoever became of them, Parents did
evermore challenge this Right, and their Children held all that the Parents
commanded, both sacred, and to be performed. True it is, that King Salomo^
gave but little heed to a Suit his Mother made, but there was Reason of P.
Martyr in hunc locum. See Sr Walter Raleighs Hist. of the World Part. 1. Lib.
2. c. 1.. 1. p. 495. 496.
State for it, who notwithstanding as he was a Son, and out of matters of
State how did he give her all Reverence. Bathsheba, 1. Kin. 2.19.
says the Scripture, went unto King Solomon, to speak unto him for Adoniah:
and the King rose to meet her, and bowed himself unto her, and sat down on
his Throne, and he caused a Seat to be set for the Kings Mother, and she sat
at his right hand. And when She began to tell him that she had a Suit unto him:
Ask on my Mother, quoth he. for I will not say thee nay. So that had her Suit
been lawful indeed, She had obtained it without all doubt, but as for the
Suit she then made, Senec. Troas. Act. 3. Sc. Matris.
Non hoc Ulysses, sed negat Chalcas tibi,
It was not Solomon her Son, the Kingdom it self said nay unto it. Nay,
come we to Heathen Examples, and shall we not find in Live. Dec. 1. l. 2.
Livy how Venturia the Mother of Coriolanus, when neither the Ambassadors sent
unto him, nor the religious persuasions of the sacred Priests could incline
unto compassion, but needs he would force the City of Rome, and make it a pray
unto their Enemies, shall we not find (I say) how She by her motherly
Authority caused him to retire with all his Forces, and immediately to depart?
Come we to Calauius in the same Live. Dec. 3. l. 3.
Story, who when his Son the valorous Perolla had resolved to slay Hannibal,
and came armed to that purpose, how did he immediately disarme him again, and
by the authority of a Father, how did he master that great heart, which daring
(as the case then stood) to set upon Hannibal, was not otherwise to be daunted
with a world of Enemies. I omit to tell you here how the Parents authority
over their Children was such in times past, that their Commandment was a Law,
not only for their Children whilst they lived, but for their Childrens Children
unto many Generations after. It appears, as by the Ier. 31.6.
Recabits who after the death of Ionadab held themselves tied by their Fathers
Precepts for the space of three hundred years: so also by the Children of
Israel, who after the space of four hundred years, yet held themselves tied by
Exodus 13.15.
Joseph's Will, and by the Oath of their Forefathers made unto him, for the
carrying with them his Corpse into Canaan. But thus much of that Authority which
God and Nature have given unto Parents, for the Bringing of their Children up.
I come now unto the Second Point, namely the Duty that Children owe, and ought
to perform unto their Parents, intimated also in the word, Command: For I
know him that he will command his Sons, and his Household after him, that
they keep the way of the Lord to do Righteousness, and Judgment. For I
know him that he will command.

The Duty that Children owe, and ought to perform unto their Parents, as it
is intimated here in the word, Command (for in vain are Parents to Command,
unless the Children be bound to Obey) so is it specified to us in the word
[Honour] what kind of Obedience that should be, when as it is said in the
fifth Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, Exodus 20.12. Now for our
better proceeding in this point, let us First consider with our selves of how
many several Parcels this Honor does consist: Secondly, the several Reasons
why such Honor is commanded.

The several Parcels of this Honor are First, Reverence; Secondly, Obedience;
Thirdly, Gratitude. First Concerning Reverence, it is that which the Fashion,
and Custom of the Country does usually challenge, wherein such Fathers, and
Children live. Be it Capping, or Bowing the Leg, or Kneeling, or whatsoever
Gesture else, is to be performed by the Body. I, be our Place never so great,
either in Church, or Commonwealth, insomuch as that our Parents Genesis 37.9.
Sheaues should in such respect reverence ours, and their Stars fall down
before us (it was Joseph's Dream of his Parents, and so indeed it came to
pass) yet are we not to neglect this Duty, we are still obliged to them in
this Bond. I could here produce the Example of the self same Genesis 46.29.
Joseph, of 1. King. 2 19.
Solomon before mentioned, of our Savior Luke 2.51.
Christ himself, but I will go no farther then our own Country, and content
my self with that Example which She has afforded in like case. I mean the
Example of Sr Thomas Moore, who being Lord Chancelour in his time, and
consequently in an Office next and immediate to the King himself, and having
his own Father then living, and at that time a Judge, for he was one of the
Judges of the Kings Bench, never went to Westminster Hall to sit in the
Chauncery there, but N.H.L.D. His New-yeerse gift to M^ William Roper. MS. Vid.
Stapl. de Trib. Thom. c. 1. p. 12.
First he would up to the Kings Bench, where as his Father then sat, and there
on his Knees would ask him Blessing before a World of Lookers on. A worthy
Pattern in those days for all such Children as then lived, and no doubt a
Terror unto such as should ever in those days have once come under his
Fingers for misdemeanour toward their Parents. True it is our Church of
England only, has this Vid. Mr Bu^nies Corner Stone. l. 1. c. 5.. 11. p. 110.
Custom of Asking Blessing, an Argument that the Children of our Church,
should be more conformable and dutiful, then any other of other Churches,
being brought up from their Adeo in teneris consuescere multum est. Virg. Geor
l. 2
tender years in such a comely, and decent behavior. But I come unto
Obedience.

Over and besides this Reverence, our Parents may challenge Obedience to, and
Obedience we must perform, least with the Soldiers in St Mathews Gospel we
bow the knee indeed, Mat. 27.29, and yet smite them with our Reeds to, Mat.
27.30. Howbeit concerning this Point, two diverse and most repugnant Opinions
there are, which in this case harm the Truth. Some mainetaine it to stand with
all reason that Children should Hereof we may read more in P. Aerodius a
French Civilian in a Treatise of his which he wrote unto his Iesuited Son,
and of late translated into English by Mr D. Budden.
simply, and without exception, be obedient to their Parents in all their
Commandes whatsoever. For they hold it to be in the number not only of
needless, but hurtful Curiosities to dispute wherein, and wherein not, they
that are Children should obey. To this purpose they allege that of the
Apostle to the Coloss. 3.20.
Colossians, Children obey your Parents in all things. Howbeit Parents are Men,
and have their Passions, by which they are oftentimes transported in their
desires beyond the Bounds of that which is agreeable to the Will of God. Now
Children are so in subjection to the Fathers of their Bodies, as that they may
not forget their Duty to the Fathers of their Souls. Honor thy Father Honora
Patre^ tuum, sed si te a vero Patre non separat. Tam diu scito sanguinis
Copulam, quam diu ille suum noverit Creatorem Hier. ad Furiam de Viduit.
Servand.
says St Ierom, so he endeavor not to withdraw thee from thy true Father
indeed. Acknowledge so far forth Consanguinity of Blood, as long as he himself
shall acknowledge his Creator. A Child in this case may speak as Aug. de Verb.
Apost. Ser. 28. p. 265.
St Austen teaches him: Te quidem habeo Genitorem sed plus et tuum, and meum
timeo Creatorem. I acknowledge your self my Father indeed, but I fear him
more, who is the Creator of us both. And Ambros. de Obitu Valentir. ^7.
St Ambrose to this purpose, Debeo affectu^ Parenti, says he, sed magis
obsequiu^ debeo Salutis Auctori. I owe my affection to my Father, but my
Service much more to the Author of my Salvation: and our Mat. 10.37.
Savior him self also: He that loves Father, or Mother more then me, is not
worthy of me. And Luke 14.2^.
again, If any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife,
and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, he
cannot be my Disciple. Nay even in matters of the Second Table we may reneage
our Parents to. Like as Alexander the Great, who when his Mother demanded of
him the Death of an Innocent, and taking it unkindly that he had denied her her
Request, saying withal that a Son should deny his Mother nothing, who had
borne him in her Womb the space of nine Months: Oh Mother Ammian. Marcell. l.
14.
faith Alexander, I beseech you ask of me some other Reward for those Pains,
for the Life of Man cannot be recompensed by any Benefit what soever. As for
that of the Coloss. 3.20.
Apostle, Children obey your Parents in all things, it is to be understood of
al those things which appertain to the Right that Parents have to command, as
Thomas Aquinas well Aquin. 2a. 2^. Quest. 104. Art. 5.
observes. Wherewith Cardinal Bellarmine, it seems not fully satisfied,
though the Answer might content any Reasonable Body, will needs give another
though worse, Vel certe tenentur Filij, Bell. de Monachis l. 2. c 21. Vid. D.
Willets Synops. p. 298. Edit. 1600.
says he, per omnia Parentibus obedire, sed dum parvuli sunt: Or we may say,
says he, that Children are held to obey their Parents in all things, but while
they are but little ones. What? and no longer? Was not Eli punished for not
chastning his Children: and likewise his Children again for not harkening unto
him, who (it may be) were as Big (though not as Old) as Cardinal Bellarmine
himself? Notwithstanding 1. Sam. 2.25.
says the Scripture, they obeyed not the voice of their Father, because the
Lord would slay them. So that it was not enough then to say with Bellarmine
they were no longer little Ones: or with another in the Plaut. Bacchid. Act. 1.
Scen Iamdisdum.
Comedy, I am excessit mihi aetas ex Magisterio tuo: We are now past your
Government: no, they should have harkened to their Father, and so had they
saved his Life, and their own Lives to.

Others there are which by a silly Sophisme, go about to elude all Fatherly
Authority over their Children under this pretext and device. That if the Things
which Parents command be Good in themselves, we ought to do them, not because
they are commanded, but because they be good. But if they be Evil, then ought
we not to do them, though our Parents command them to be done. To which it may
be answered: First, that the Division is insufficient, for besides Things that
are absolutely Good, or Evil, there are a many which the A. Gell Noct. Attic.
l. 2 c 7.
Grecians call (...), or (...), Things indifferent, and of a middle sort, all
which being neither simply Good, nor simply Evil, but as they come accompanied
with their circumstances which give form unto all Moral Actions, are fit
Subjects for the Commandments of Parents to work upon. Now in these things as
St Bernard Fat non est sensum nostrum praescribere sententiae Superiorum.
Bernard. ep. 7. ad Ada. Monach.
speaks, It is not fit that Inferiors should prescribe to their Superiors:
nay rather as One A Gell. vbi supra.
speaks, Quia Pater iubet obsequendum est: we ought to obey for that our
Father so commandes. Secondly, as touching the Things which are Good in
themselves, or as Bernard vbi supra.
St Bernard calls the^, Pura Bona, Purely good, it cannot be denied, but that
they must be done though they be not commanded by our Parents: yea though our
Parents do forbid them. Yet it must be confessed also that the Parents
Commandment, coming unto Things that are simply Good of themselves ought to
incite him that is most willing, and to redouble his alacrity in doing them. So
that it cannot be said of these, that there is no Obedience due to Parents, for
notwithstanding that the principal respect of our Obedience in such things be
carried unto God, yet nevertheless for as much as God does draw us by means
unto himself, of which our Parents are the chiefest, it must needs be that
even in these Things we must be obedient to their Comma^dements, least that
neglecting the means appointed by God, we fail for ever to attain unto them.
Hence it is that the Lord, thus speaks in this place: For I know him that he
will command his Sons, and his Household after him, that they keep the way of
the Lord, to do Righteousness, and Judgment. Where were see that the Things
here mentioned for the Subject of Abraham's Command are Para Bona, those Things
which are purely good, namely to keep the way of the Lord, to do righteously,
and justly. Thirdly, as touching Things that are simply Evil, our Parents I
grant are by no means to be obeyed: for such an Obedience should be joined
with a greater Disobedience, and a seeming Piety toward our Parents, would
be an open Impiety unto God. It is, Valde perversum est te obedientem
profiteri in quo nosceris superiorem propter inferiorem, and divina^ propter
humanam solvere obedientiam. Bernard vbi supra.
says S. Bernard, a very overthwart kind of dealing to profess Obedience in
those things wherein thou shall be convinced, to break thy superior Obedience
for that which is Inferior, divine Obedience for that which is humane. And yet
notwithstanding even in those things wherein we are not to harken to our
Parents, there is a good Parcendum paululum verbis est: quia etiam in bona
causa humilis esse, in quantum res sinit, Filii apud Parents debet oration.
Salvianus Ypatio and Quietae Parent. p. 10.
manner to be observed in the not doing of that which we are not to do,
though they command. For the Authority of a Father commanding that which is
not to be done, must rather be reclined, then resisted, and the Evil that he
commands, must be relinquished rather, then rejected. For if that Vultu
saepe laeditur Pietas. Cic. pro Sext. Rosc. Amerin
saying of Tully be true, that An angry Countenance toward our Parents is a
breach of Duty, how much more do we offend in this kind, if to the
disappointing of our Parents Desires, we add Protervitie, Stubbornness, and
rude Behavior, especially whereas the Peto quidem veniam, quia irascimini: sed
non postum dicere malum esse quod seci. Again, Quid feci? quid commerui?
Ignoscite quicquid illud est: veniam peto, etsi delictum nescie. Salvian. vbi
supra, and p. 11.
Sweetness of the one may temper the Harshnesse of the other, and that by so
doing we well declare unto our Parents, the Difference that we make between
them and other men. But thus much of Obedience.

The third thing intimated in this Honor is Gratitude, and Gratitude we must
perform, not by saying unto our Parents Of Corban see D. Reyn. Conf. c. 7.
Divis. 4. p. 322. who renders it there, By the gift, thou shall have no profit
by me. And, By the Gift, if thou have any profit by me.
Corban, that is, by the Gift that is offered by me, thou may have profit,
no: that is Pharisaicall, Mat. 15.5. the very Fowls perform Gratitude unto
their Parents, and therefore Pliny writing of Storks: Storks, Ciconiae nidos
eosdem repetunt Genetricum Senectam invicem educant. Plin. Hist. Not. l. 10 6.
23.
says he, keep the self same Neast, and never change, and the young feed
their Parents when they be old, as kindly as their Parents fed them when they
were young. A duty in our days so grown out of kind, that nothing is more
common in the mouths of many Parents, then to counsel one another not to
make their Cradles their Heads. Belike they have seen too too many Examples of
Childre^s Ingratitude in this kind, who utterly forgetting the Womb that bare
them, and the Paps that gave them suck, have proved Vipers, rather then
Storks, so impetuous have they been against their Parents. It was an usual
Speech of old, and yet is to this day, Ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris, Call a
Body but ungrateful, and you call him all that naught is, you cannot call him
by a worse Name. Ingratitude indeed, is a Vice of Vices and hateful to it
self, De Ingratis etiam ingrati queruntur, Sen. de Benef. l. 3. c. 1.
says Seneca, even Ungrateful Men themselves, will complain of those that are
Ungrateful: and whereas some, says an L.G. Gyrald. advers. Ingrat. p. 261.
Other, have praised Wrath; some have praised Pride; some, Ignorance; some,
Injustice; I, Drunkenness, Sloth, Folly, have had their Homers to set them
fourth; never any man durst venture to praise Ingratitude, nay rather, they lay
on load of bitter Reproaches against it; how much more when it is toward
Parents, by whom we enjoy what ever we have, and therefore S. Austen, Caninum
est, Aug. de Tem. Ser. 95.
says he, Parents non agnoscere: to snarle against Father, or Mother, is the
property of CVRRS. What my Son? Prove. 31.2.
says Salomons Mother, and what the Son of my Womb? and what o Son of my
Desires? Doubtless, Beloved, so is every Son. Every Son that is, has these
Degrees of Comparison. He is a Son, and a Son of the Womb, and a Son of
his Parents Desires, and should he prove ungrateful to them? What, to those
whom he ought to Reverence? and what, to those whom he ought to Obey? and what,
to those whom he can never Recompense? In a word, to those whom by Gods
express Commandment he ought to Honor? I will end this Point concerning
Honor, and the Precept of God that commands it, with that of Tertullian: You
may know In prima fre^te sanctissimae Legis, in primis titulis coelestis
Edicti, principalium vtique Delictoru^ proscriptione signatam, de loco modum;
de ordine statum; de confinio Meritum cuiusque dignoscas. Tertul. de Pudicit.
p. 630
says he, by the placing of every Commandment, the Manner; by the Order, the
State; and by the Limits, the Dignity of it. So that seeing this Commandment
of Honoring our Parents is placed before the Commandments of Murder,
Adultery, and Stealth, we may conclude that he which honors not his
Father, and his Mother, is worse then a Thief, worse then an Adulterer, nay
worse then a very Murderer. And thus much of the Honor commanded in Gods Law
to be performed by us toward our Parents: now as touching those Reasons in
reguard whereof, this Honor is thus commanded us.

The Reasons no doubt are many, but we may reduce them unto Two: First, in
regard of Bearing us: Secondly, of Bringing of us up, both specified by the
Son of Syrach: Remember, Ecclus. 7.28
says he, thou wast borne of them, and how can thou recompense them, the
things that they have done? Remember thou wast borne of them: There Is the former
by way of Asseveration: And how can thou recompense them, the things that
they have done? There Is the latter by way of Interrogation. A point I note the
rather for that the Vulgar observes it not, and therefore reads it with less
grace, as Iansenius himself Iansen. in Eccles. 7.29.
ingeniously. confesses

Now in Bearing us, our Mothers Pains ought by no means to be forgotten,
which should I endeavor to express what the self same Pains were, both
before, or at, or after our Birth, I might endeavor as well to single out unto
you the Nec Nomina quae sint est numerus. -- Quem qui scire velit, Libyci velit
Aequoris idem Discere quam multae Zephyro turbentur arenae. Virg. Geor l. 2.
Sands of the Sea. Suffices us to know in general, that the Lord himself
made Promise that he would greatly increase their Sorrows: and how hitherto
he (...)

(...) ^dren up, and that in these words: That the Lord may bring upon Abraham
that he has spoken unto him.

What it was that was spoken to Abraham, and the Promise made unto him here
intimated, was made mention of before, Genesis 12.2. Get thee out of thy Country,
says the Lord, and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house, unto the Land
that I will show thee, and I will make of thee a great Nation, and will bless
thee, and make thy Name great, and thou shall be a Blessing. This Promise was
renewed, Genesis 13.14, Lift up thine Eyes now, says the Lord, and look from the
place where thou art Northward, and Southward, and Eastward, and Westward. For
all the Land which thou see will I give unto thee, and to thy seed for ever.
And I will make thy Seed as the Dust of the Earth, so that if a man can number
the Dust of the Earth, then shall thy seed be numbered. The Promise was made the
third time, Genesis 15.4. where when Abraham had said to the Lord: O Lord God what
will thou give me, seeing I go Childlesse, and lo a Servant of my house shall
be mine Heir: This man says the Lord, shall not be thine Heir, but one that
shall come out of thine own Bowels, he shall be thine Heir. Look up now unto
Heaven, says the Lord, and tell the Stars, if thou able to number them. And
he said unto him, so shall thy Seed be. It was made also the Fourth time, Genesis
15.18. It was made the Fifth time, Genesis 17.4. It was made the Sixth time, Genesis
18.10. It was made the Seventh time, Genesis 22.18, where the Lord speaking to
Abraham, And in thy Seed says he, shall all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed. Now for an excellent Commentary of all these Places, especially of
this Last, we have a worthy Passage of the Apostle St Paul in his Epistle to
the Galathians: Now to Abraham Gal. 3.16,
says he, and his Seed were the Promises made. He says not, And to the Seeds,
as speaking of Many: but, And to thy Seed, as of one which is Christ. So that
this was the Thing to be brought upon Abraham, even our Savior CHRIST JESUS,
as if he had said: In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed:
that is, I of mere Mercy do promise unto thee, that CHRIST shall come of thy
Seed, who shall bring the Blessing upon all Nations oppressed with Sin, and
Death. That is, which shall deliver the Nations from the Everlasting Curse of
Sin, and Death, receiving this Promise by Faith, In thy Seed shall all the
Nations of the earth be blessed. Ioh. 8.56.
In regard whereof our Savior said of Abraham unto the Jews: Your Father
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad.

What? and were all these Promises to Abraham alone? No doubtless, no more
then once it was meant to Adam alone, when as it was said unto him, In the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, Genesis 3.19. Abraham here, as he was in
this place the Father of the Faithful, so he sustained their Persons to, and
therefore what was said to him, was said also to all such Parents as would
follow the Steps of faithful Abraham in the Bringing up of their Children.
Like as speaks the Apostle St Paul, Romans 4.12, how he was the Father of
Circumcision, not unto them only which are of the Circumcision, but unto them
also that walk in the Steps of the Faith of our Father Abraham, which he had
when he was uncircumcised. And again in the three and twentieth verse, Now it
was not written for him only, that it was imputed to him for Righteousness,
but also for us, to whom it shall be imputed for Righteousness, which believe as
he did. So was it said to Joshua, Josh. 1.5.
I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee: but was it to be interpreted of
Joshua alone? No doubtless, for then the Apostle had done amiss, when in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, he applied it to any Heb. 13.5.
Hebrew, any Christian whatsoever. Whatsoever things are written afore-time,
Romans 15.4.
says the Apostle St Paul, are written for our Learning, that we through
Patience, and Comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. And as Whatsoever
things are written, so Whatsoever Persons are mentioned to, in the self same
Scriptures, they are there mentioned for our example, that we in them may see
our selves, or to have a Reward, if we do well, or if we do otherwise, to be
punished. Concerning Punishment, the Apostle St Paul tells us, 1. Cor. 10.6:
concerning Reward, the Apostle St James, Iam. 5.10.

And thus, Beloved, have you seen effected, what I promised at the first. You
have heard of the Authority which God, and Nature, have given unto Parents over
their Children, in the Bringing of them up. You have heard of the Duty that
Children owe, and ought to perform unto their Parents. You have heard of the
Blessing that does ensue upon Parents thereupon. And what, Beloved, shall I now
say? The Application is soon made: Be you to your Children such Parents as
Abraham was, and you shall not want such Blessings as Abraham had. Now that you
may endeavor to be such, I will commend unto you two Points, First, that you
remember with your selves who it is that has made you Fathers of Children:
Secondly, why and wherefore he has made you such.

If we think that to be a Father is a necessary Consequence of the Marriage
Bed, a thousand Instances in every Age may be yielded to the contrary. Even
Abraham here, of whom we have spoken so much, after he had been married a long
season, how was he Childlesse notwithstanding. You heard even now what he said:
O Lord God Genesis 15.2.
says he, what will thou give me, seeing I go Childles, and the Steward of my
House is this Elaezer of Damascus. I, and Abraham V. 3.
said again, Behold to me thou have given noe seed, wherefore lo a Servant of
my House shall be mine Heir. You that are Childlesse may imagine with what depth
of sorrow he thus spoke. I for my part am persuaded that every Syllable he
uttered, had annexed therewith a Flood of Tears. What? Abraham Childlesse, who
had received so many several Blessings from the hand of God before? Abraham,
who had otherwise the World at will, Rich in Cattle, in Silver, and in Gold,
nay very Rich, Genesis 13.2? Abraham, who had built an Altar, and called on the
Name of the Lord, Genesis 12.8? Abraham Childlesse? when as Genesis 10.6.
Cham, wicked Cham, had long before, Cush and Mizraim, and Put, and Canaan: and
V. 15.
Canaan, cursed Canaan, had Zidon, and Heth, and Iebusi, and Emori, and a many
other besides? Abraham Childlesse? I, Beloved, even Abraham, and so every
Married man, until the Lord do say unto him as he did to Abraham, I will
certainly come unto thee according to the time of Life, and Sarah thy wife
shall have a Son, Genesis 18.10. Lo Children, Ps. 127.4.
says David, and the Fruit of the Womb, are an Heritage, and Gift that comes
of the Lord. And therefore Jacob, when Rahel said unto him, Give me Children,
or else I die: What, Genesis 30.2.
says he, am I in Gods steed, which has withholden from thee the fruit of
the Womb? Indeed it is God himself that withholdeth such Fruit, and therefore
the Prophet David Ps. 113.8.
again, He makes the barren Woman to keep house, and to be a joyful Mother
of Children. I, the Lord himself of himself, Esa. 66.9, Shall I cause to
travail, and not bring forth? shall I cause to bring forth, and shall be
barren says thy God? And indeed, how he caused to travail, and also to bring
forth, witness those many Examples in holy writ, of Rahel, Hannah, Elizabeth,
and the rest, whose Barrennesie for a long time, he afterward recompensed with
admirable Births. Children then thus given to Parents, they are to remember in
the next place, why, and wherefore they are given them.

The Prophet David when he shows unto us how they are an Heritage and Gift,
that comes of the Lord, infers immediately thereupon, Like as the Arrows
Ps. 127.5.
says he, in the hand of the Giant: even so are the young Children. Happy is
the Man that has his Quiver full of them. They shall not be ashamed when they
speak with their Enemies in the Gate. Indeed the Church of God at that time
had so many Bickrings with their Enemies, so many several Battles did they
fight, that no marvel if they talked then of Arrows, and Quivers, and
Enemies, and of nothing but War. The case is now altered, we now enjoy the
Time of PEACE, and therefore Arrows, and Armor ceasing, what more requisite
now for Parents then to breed up their Children, to the peculiar Service of
God, as also of such Peaceable Times as God has given unto us. Let us remember
then that our private Families are the Nurceries out of which our Children are
to be taken, either for Church, or Commonwealth. Such for the most part as we
frame them at home, they prove themselves abroad when once they go into the
World. The new Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa diu. Hor.
Epist. l. 1. ad Lollium.
Cask will ever smatch of that wherewith it has been seasoned. Be it good, be
it bad, that which was the first Liquor pleads Prescription to all other that
ever after shall succeed. It is good for a man, Ier. Lam. 3.7
says Jeremy, that he bear the Yoke in his Youth. And the wisest that ever
was to this purpose, Teach a Child, Prove. 22.6. Vid. Days Dial Preamb. Lect.
1 p. 6.
says he, in the trade of his way, and when he is old he shall not depart
from it. Thus Daniel was but twelve years old, when as he judged those Judges
of Israel. Solomon himself about that age, when as he gave that famous
Sentence concerning the true Mother of the Child. Our Savior himself at that
age too, when he Luke 2.42.
disputed with the Doctors: The Children that cried Hosanna, Mat. 21.15. Vid.
Fulk in Rhem. Test. in. 1. Cor. 14. 14.
perhaps not so old. Timothy was but young when he was a Preacher of the Word,
an Argument he was brought up in it, when he was but very young. Continue
thou, 2. Tim. 3.25.
says the Apostle, in the Things which thou have learned, knowing of whom thou
have learned them, and that thou have known the Holy Scriptures of a Child. Of
a Child, says our Translation, From thine Infancy, say the Rhemists, who yet
cannot endure that Children should be put to the Reading of the Scriptures.
Suffer little Children, Mat. 19.14.
says our Savior, and forbid them not to come to me: for of such is the
kingdom of Heaven. Nay, but we must not imagine, Rhem. Praef. in Test. Nov.
say the Rhemists that in the Primitive Church the translated Bibles into the
Vulgar Tongues, were in the hands of every Husbandman, Artificer, Prentice,
Boys, Gyrles, Mistress, Maid, Man, and so forth. And what if we may not
imagine that, by reason of the difficulty of procuring unto them Books, (
Printing at that time not invented) were they not necessary for them
notwithstanding? No, not for Boys, and Gyrles, say they. Yes, St says
Chrysostom, And, (...). Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Ephesians. Hom 21 p. 193. Edit. Veronae.
Maxim Piseris, Specially for BOYS, and GYRLES, for so much as that Age wants
Wisdom most, as also Discretion. But to return where I left.

As it is our best way to train them up, while they are thus young, in all
these Duties: so the neglect in you of this Duty, will breed in your Children
a neglect of their Duty toward your selves. Let me instance even in David. Who
did ever more cocker his Son, then he did Ammon? He was loath, says One
Noluit contristare spiritu^ Ammon Filii sui, queniam diligebat cum, quia
Primogenitus erat ei. 2. Reg. 13.21. Vulg.
Translation, to greiue his son Ammon, because he was his Firstborn. But
what ensued thereupon? First, Lust; Ammon was in Love, but that Love was Lust,
for it was with his own Sister. Secondly, Hypocrisy; Ammon was sick for
Love. Thirdly, Incest; Ammon must needs lie with her. Fourthly, Murder; nay
Parricide; for who would slay him but Absolon; and after that a World of woe.
Remember the^, dearly Beloved, as many of you as are Parents, that your
Children are so many Treasures committed unto you by God himself. Imagine he
says unto you, when he gives you a Son, as was said by the Prophet in an
other 1. Kin. 20.35
case, Keep this Man, if he be lost and want, thy Life shall go for his
Life. And it seems old Elyes Life so went indeed. Ely 1. Sam. 4.18.
says the Scripture, fell from his Seat backward by the side of the Gate, and
his Neck was broken, and he dyed. Would you know the very cause? It was for he
corrected not his Sons, as he should have done. Behold, 1. Sam. 3.11.
says the Lord, I will do a thing in Israel, whereof whosoever shall hear,
his two ears shall tingle. In that day I will raise up against Eli all things
which I have spoken concerning his House: when I begin, I will also make an
end. And I have told him, that I will judge his House for ever for the
iniquity which he knows, because his (...)

Whereas this Page was to be empty, I thought it good to annex the Canon of
our Church concerning Confirmation, which is the 60 in Number.

FOrasmuch as it has been a solemn, ancient, and laudable Custom in the
Church of God, continued from the Apostles times, that all Bishops should lay
their hands upon Children Baptized and Instructed in the Catechism of
Christian Religion, praying over them, and blessing them, which we commonly
call Confirmation, and that this holy action has been accustomed in the
Church in former age, to be performed in the Bishops Visitation every third
year: We will and appoint, that every Bishop, or his Suffragan in his
accustomed Visitation, do in his own person carefully observe the said
Custom. And if in that year by reason of some infirmity, he be not able
personally to Visit, then he shall not omit the execution of that duty of
Confirmation the next year after, as he may conveniently.

MASTERS AND SERVANTS.
Easter Day April. 24. 1614.
BEing to speak according to Promise of Masters, and Servants, Right
Worshipful, and dearly Beloved, in our Lord and Master Christ Jesus, it may
be, you expect at my hands, that I should continue that Portion of Scripture
which I have have handled heretofore concerning Abraham. And the Words indeed
there follow: Genesis 18.19.
And his Household after him. Howbeit hitherto since for several Arguments, I
have always taken several Texts, and Variety is ever grateful, and the
Scriptures affourd much Variety, I will now betake me to a new Text, and leaving
Moses, come to David, who in his Hundred and First Psalm, the eight, and
ninth, and tenth verses has an excellent Passage to this purpose, the Words be
these: Mine eyes look unto such as be faithful in the Land that they may
dwell with me. Who so leads a godly Life, he shall be my Servant. There shall
no deceitful Person dwell in my House: he that tells Lies shall not tarry
in my sight.

That all the Psalms in this Book are not of David's own making, is a Point
without controversy: but that this was one of David's Psalms, is evident by the
Title, for it has in the Front thereof as it is in our Bibles, A Psalm of
David. When David first wrote it, it is uncertain, but by all likelihood it
was, when he first entered upon the Kingdom, and considered with himself as
the disordered State thereof, so the many Faults and Obliquities of his
Predecessor King Saul. As concerning the Psalm it self it may be called his
BASILICON DORON (a Title well known unto us all) His Royal Gift unto the
People, whereby they should know before, what they were to expect at his hands.
It may be called his Promise, and Vow, made to God above, for the future
Administration of his Kingdom, whereunto since the Lord had taken him from Ps.
78.1.
following the Ewes great with young ones, he protested to feed Jacob his
People, and Israel his Inheritance with a faithful and true Heart, and to rule
them prudently withal his Power.

Now among al his Protestations here, there is One that concerns his own
Household, which is much material to that purpose. For if so be himself had
been never so Good, the best that ever sat upon a Throne, and yet his
Servants bad about him, what a great Flaw would that have been in the
Administration of his Government, and how at length might it have prooved a
wrack to his own Person. For though to Private men (...). Xiphilinus in Galba.
says Xiphilinus, it is sufficient if themselves do no Wrong, yet a Prince
must provide that none do it about him, for that to them which once suffer
Wrong, it is all one in effect, by whom that wrong was formerly done. And
therefore the Emperor Galba though himself were altogether ignoarnt of
exceeding much harm that passed under his Name, yet because he suffered them
to do it, whom he ought to have withdrawn, or was ignorant of that which he
ought to have known, he utterly lost his reputation, and opened the way to his
own overthrowe.

Our Prophetical Prince here to avoid the like, acquaints his People with his
Project betimes, and as he remembers himself now at this time, to be a King
of Israel, so will he by no means forget that he is to be a Atque in Rege
tamen Pater est Ovid. Met. l. 13.
Father also of a Family. Whence, if I take not my aim amiss Right
Worshipful, and dearly Beloved, as you that are Masters of Families, may
learn by this great Master here, what unto you does appertain, so you that
are Servants on the other side may learn by Such as here are spoken of, what
appertains also to you. Which if every of you shall perform whether Masters,
or Servants by looking on this Original, and harkning unto that which shall be
treated hereupon, I dare pronounce of you as did our Savior of One in another
case, Mark. 12.3^
Non es long a Regno Dei: Thou that art a Master; thou that art a Servant;
thou art not far from the Kingdom of God. To come then to the Words
themselves, may you be pleased to observe therein two several sorts of
Persons, A Master, and his Servants. The Servants here are twofold, Good, and
Bad: the Master is King David, and he without all doubt is Good. First,
concerning good Servants they are doubly described here: they are First
described to be Faithful: Secondly, to lead a Godly Life. Bad Servants are
described doubly too, First of all by being Deceitful: Secondly, by Telling of
Lies, and of both these, Good, and Bad, we may speak as Jeremy did of the
Figgs he saw, Ier. 34.5.
Ficus bonas, bonas valde: and malas, malas valde: The good Figs very good,
and the naughty, very naughty. The Goodness of the Master is in Choosing,
and Refusing, in Choosing of the Good, and Refusing of the Bad: Mine eyes look
unto such as be Faithful in the Land that they may dwell with me, who so
leads a godly life, he shall be my Servant; There Is his Choice of the Good:
There shall no deceitful Person dwell in my House, he that tells Lies shall
not tarry in my sight; There Is his Refusal of the Bad. Of every of these in
their several Order: but first of Service or Servitude in general, that so we
may at the length come more orderly to these Particulars. Mine eyes look unto
such as be Faithful in the Land, that they may dwell with me, etc.

As by the Sin of Adam, Death entered into the World, so by Chams Sin, the
Son of Noah, Service, or Servitude. The very first notice that is given us in
Scripture of this word Servant, is upon occasion that the foresaid Cham
committed a Trespass against his Father. The Story is famous. Noah was Genesis
^.21.
drunken, and lay uncovered in the midst of his Tent, and Cham not content to
be a Beholder only of that Sight, would needs be a Proclaimer of it to his
Brethren. Noah awaking and knowing what was done, Cursed, Ver. 25.
says he, be Canaan, a Servant of Servants shall he be unto his Brethren. Now
Canaan was the Ver. 18.
Son of Cham, and though the Father might seem exempted in that his Child was
cursed, not himself, yet was the Father indeed included, for that the Curse
taking hold of his Child, it did in a sort take hold of him too. And therefore
S. Chrysostom, Behold, Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 19.
says he, a Brother borne of one and the self same Father, and issuing forth
of the same Womb, by his sin made a Servant, and his Liberty now lost the Yoke
of most base Bondage was imposed on him, whence Servitude afterward had her
beginning. And Saint Austen to this purpose: We never read, Nusquam
Scripturarum legimus, servu^, antequam hoc Vocabulo Noc iustus peccatum Filii
vindicaret. Nomen itaque istud Culpa meruit non Natura. Aug. de Civ. Dei. Lib.
19. c. 15.
says he, in the Scriptures of a Servant, before that Righteous Noah avenged
by this word the Sin of his own Son. Not Nature therefore but Offense first
procured this Name. Concerning the Original of the Word Servi, as the self
same Father there observes, it is a Servando, of Preserving, or keeping alive,
for that Men being taken in Wars, and their Lives preserved by those that
took them, they were bound ever after in regard thereof, to perform their
Service to them. Afterward the Word was applied to such as were bought for
Money, or otherwise, or left by Succession unto Posterity, forasmuch as Such
also served those, as in such sort did enjoy them. Pliny Servitium invenere
Lacedaemonii. Plin. l. 7. c. 56.
tells us that the Lacedaemonians brought in Bondage, and Slaverie first, but the
Sacred Book of God sufficiently controles that Error. The Lacedaemonians it
should seem Func c ii Chronol. ad Annum Mundi. 2865.
began about that time that King David was borne, but the Hebrews were long
before King David's time, who as they themselves had been in Bondage to the
Egyptians, so had they others before King David's time that were in Bondage unto
them. But whosoever were the Beginners of it, the Romans made use of it no Men
more, and therefore this kind of People, and the disposing of them, and about
them, takes up (they Sr Thomas Smyth. Commonwealth of Engl. l. 3. c. 10.
say) the most part of the Digests and the Code. Now of Servants the Romans had
two sorts, the One called Servi, or Vernae ( Servi were such as I told you of
before, Vernae such as were borne of their Bondwomen) the Other were called
Adscriptij Glebae, Bound to the Manor, or to the Place, insomuch as they
always belonged unto him who had purchased the Manor. There is no doubt but
this our Kingdom, and other Kingdoms besides, that had been subdued by the
Romans, and consequently were subject to their Laws, had their Servants in this
sort, how be it afterward when Christian Religion was once embraced, which
makes all of us Quanto dignius Fratres dicuntur, and habenur, qui vnum Patrem
Deum agnoverunt, qui vnum Spiritum biberunt sanctitatis, qui de vno vtero
Ignorantiae eiusdem ad vnam lucem expiraverunt veritatis. Tertul. Apologet. c.
39. p. 7^9.
Brethren in Christ, and in respect of God, and Christ, Conservos,
Fellow-Seruants, Men began to have Conscience to hold in such Captivity and
extreme Bondage, those whom they were to account for Brethren, and therefore
in tract of time betook themselves to a milder course. Now among all the Courses
they then took, there was, and still is, especially in our Land, a twofold
kind of Servitude, or indeed of Service rather then Servitude. The one of
Serving Men: the other of Prentises.

Serving Men, are such as having no Revenewes to maintain themselves, betake
themselves to serve Others, and are hired for wages to serve by the year, and
perform such daily Duties as their Masters put them to. Such while they are in
Service, are for the most part exceeding well, but when they are once cashird,
and put out of Service, or put themselves out, and have not wherewithal to
maintain themselves, then are they forced a many of them to steal, and then
you know what follows. This made Sr Thomas Moore say long ago, Quid aliud
quaeso quam sacitis Fures, and iidem plectitis. Mori Vtop. l. 1. Mari Oper.
Let. p. 3. col 2.
(but he spoke it by a Strangers mouth) that our Country first makes Thieves,
and then hangs them up. And indeed how have our Prisons in every age been
replenished with such, as by the Registers of them that have suffered,
remains in Record to this day. Which, I would to God, M D. Nowel Confut. of
Mr Dormans Disproofe c. 3. p. 119.
says a Reverend Divine, might admonish such Serving men as now live, to
learn to practice some profitable Exercise at their vacant times, to stand
them instead when Age shall come, or Service (which is no Inheritance) shall
fail them, that they may escape that miserable end, that Idleness, Ignorance,
and Fullness first, and after, Lack and Hunger finally brings many Men unto.
And thus much briefly of Serving Men.

The second kind of Servitude, or rather of Service, is that which we call
Apprentiship (of the French word Apprendre, which signifies to Learn) and it
is a Service by Covenant, and dureth some certain Years, most commonly
Seven. The ground whereof I take to be that which the Lord said in Exodus,
when he gave Laws unto the Israelites, If thou buy, Exodus 21.2.
says he, an Ebrew Servant, he shall serve six years, and in the seventh he
shall go out free. The like we find in Deuteronomy. 15.12.
Deuteronomy, and there is an excellent Conclusion thereupon, Let it not grieve
thee, Ver. 18.
says the Lord, when thou let him go out free from thee: for he has
served thee six years, which is the double worth of an hired Servant: and the
Lord thy God shall bless thee in all that thou do. And again in the
Prophet Jeremy, I, Ier. 34.13.
says the Lord, made a Covenant with your Fathers, when I brought them out of
the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Servants, saying, At the term of seven
Years, let ye go every Man his Brother an Ebrew which has bin sold unto
thee: and when he has served thee Six years, thou shall let him go free from
thee: but your Fathers obeyed me not, neither inclined their cares. And
afterward reproving them to, for not obeying him herein, Ye have not Ier.
34.17.
says the Lord, obeyed me in proclaiming Freedom every Man to his Brother,
and every Man to his Neighbor: behold, I proclaim a Liberty for you, says
the Lord, to the Sword, to the Pestilence, and to the Famine, and I will make
you a terror to all the kingdoms of the Earth. But whatsoever were the Ground of
Seven years Prentiship, whether these Six years of the Israelits fully
complete, and going out free in the Seventh, or the very complete Number of
Seaue^; for that Jacob served so long for Rachel, Genesis 29.20, or for that God
himself rested the seventh day from all the Work which he had made, Genesis 2.2;
necessity and want of Bondmen has caused Men to use even Freemen to servile
Offices: but yet more liberally, and freely, and with a more equality, and
moderation, then in heathen times Slaves, and Bondmen were wont to be. Thus the
Apostle of Onesimus in his Epistle to Philemon: Not now as a Servant Philem. v.
16
says he, but above a Servant, even as a Brother beloved, specially to me: how
much more then unto thee, both in the Flesh, and in the Lord. Whence you may
note, Beloved, you that are Servants, the great Good, and singular Commodity
that every of you have by Christian Religion. Your Service I confess, is a
Servitude for the time, but how many Hundreds of such as you are, have been
seated at the length with Men of Honor and Renown. It is a Slavery for the
while, but how many Thousands have we heard of, that have at length been
Masters themselves. It is a Bondage for a season, but how many Millions have
we seen as free at length as their own Masters. This I grant fell out
sometimes among the very Heathen themselves. We in our days Hoc est insigne
vaenalitiis Gregibus, opprobriumque insolentis Fortunae: quod and nos adeo
potiri rerum vidimus, vt Praetoria quoque Ornamenta decerni a senatu iubente
Agrippina C Caesaris viderimus libertis: ta^tumque non cum laureatis Fascibus
remitti illo, vnde cretatis pedibus advenissent. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 35 c. 18.
says Pliny, have seen with our own eyes enfranchised Slaves to be sent
again with the Axes and Knitches of Rods decked with Laurel (he means, with
Authority) to govern in those Countries from whence they came at first poor
Slaves having their Feet chalked, and bra^ded for the Market. Howbeit this was
not ordinary, and if One perhaps so did, there were Thousands again for him
that remained Slaves all their lives long. Add hereunto that Christian
Religion has abridged that Power, and Dominion, which the Heathen had over
their Servants, in regard it is now a days. Upon the least occasion that was,
many times upon none at all, but because it was their pleasure, they would Lips
Elect. l. 2. c. 15. p. 49.
send them or to the Mill, or Quarry, or to their Farms in the Country, there
to labor their hearts out. That in the Comedy is well known of a Servant
concerning his Master, Terent. And. Act. 1. Sc. 3.
Si libitum fuerit, causam ceperit, quo iure, quaque iniuria, praecipitem me in
Pistrinum dabit. And that in the Poet of a Master concerning his Servant. --
Horat. Sermon. l. 2. Sat. 7.
Ocyus hinc te
Nirapis, accedes Opera agro nona Sabino.
One of their Servants had by chance but broken a drinking Glass, and Pollio
his Master condemned him to be thrown into his Xiphilinus in Augusto.
Fish-poole, there to be Food unto his Fish. And though Augustus the Emperor
interceded for him, -- Horat. Sermon. l. 1. Sat. 3.
Caesar qui cogere possit.
Augustus that might otherwise have commanded more the^ that, yet much ado had
Augustus to obtain a Pardon for him. The Master indeed had Power of Life, and
Death, and Lycurgus, Alex. Genesis Dier. l. 3 c. 20. p. 158. b.
he made a Law among the Spartans to that purpose. If now in these days it be
otherwise with Servants either in respect of that maine Matter, Life, and
Death; or of selling them like Bruit Beasts; or of barbarous Sorts of
Punishments; Christian Religion is the Cause, they are wholly beholding
thereunto for those great Prerogatives they now enjoy, which Servants in those
days enjoyed not. And thus much of Service, or Servitude in general, come we
now unto Particulars, the Good and Bad Servants in my Text, and for the Good
are first and foremost, let us formerly speak of them. They are first described
to be Faithful then to lead a Godly Life: Mine eyes look unto such as be
faithful in the Land, that they may dwell with me. Who so leads a Godly
Life, he shall be my Servant. First of the Former: Such as be Faithful in the
Land.

Fideles Terrae, says the Old Translation: Veraces Terrae, says Tremellius:
our Translation here renders it, Such as be Faithful in the Land. Now this
Word Faithful as it signifies them, who believe the Promises of Christ, and
therefore they are usual Phrases with the Apostle St Paul, Ephesians. 1.1.
To the Saints which are at Ephesus, and to the Faithful in Christ Jesus.
Coloss. 1.8.
To them which are at Colosse, Saints, and faith full Brethren in Christ. 2.
Tim. 2.2.
What things thou have heard of me the same deliver to Faithful men, and so
forth: so it signifies them most commonly (and so it does in this place) who
faithfully, and truly perform that Office, and Charge, that their Masters
put them in trust with, be it little, or be it great. Thus the Apostle St Paul
to Titus: Let Servants Tit. 2.9.
says he, be subject to their Masters, and please them in all things, not
answering again, neither Pickers, but that they show all good Faithfulness,
that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things. So that
Faithfulness in a Servant, is a Jewel (we see) to Religion it self, it
adorneth the Doctrine of our Savior, and doubtless as such Servants adorn
our Saviors Doctrine: so will our Savior adorn them. Such a Faithful
Servant was the Patriarch Jacob, and how was he himself adorned at length?
Twenty years had he been with Genesis 31.38.
Laban, he was in the Day consumed with Heat, and with Frost in the Night, and
his Sleep departed from his eyes, and yet afterward, when he went from him:
With my Staff Genesis 32.10.
says he, came I over this Jorden, and now have I gotten two Bands. Joseph was
a Servant as Faithful as Jacob was, and though his ungrateful Master had
cast him into Genesis 40.3.
Prison causelessly, Psalm. 105.18
The iron entered into his Soul: yet were his iron Fetters at length
miraculously turned into a Genesis 45.42.
Chain of Gold. We may speak of him as St Austen speaks of Wisdom: Aug. in
Psalm. 149. p. 1201.
Incipit a Vinculis ferreis, sinitur ad Torquem auream. Wisdom begins with
iron Fetters, but ends with a Golden Chain. Such a Servant also was David, he
that is the Master in this my Text, of whom Ahimelech to king Saul (as
ungrateful a Master as Joseph's Master, or Jacobs Master either) Who is so
Faithful, 1. Sam. 22.14.
says he, among all thy Servants as David? howbeit the unkindness of that
Master, was recompensed at the length with the great Bounty, and Liberality of
his Masters Master that was in Heaven. 2. Sam 12,7.
The Lord anointed him king over Israel, and delivered him out of the hand of
Saul, and gave him his Lords House, and his Lords Wives into his Bosom, and
gave him the House of Israel, and of Judah, and would moreover (if that had
been too little) have given him such, and such things, meaning indeed a great
deal more. So that we may see the Reward of Fidelity, and Faithfulness in
Servants, should their Masters forget it never so much, and consequently we
see the Reason to, why St Peter might say to Servants: 1. Pet. 2.18.
Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the Good, and
Courteous, but also to the Froward. And St Paul to like purpose: Ephesians. 6.5.
Servants, be obedient unto them that are your Masters, according to the
flesh, with fear, and trembling, and singleness of your hearts, as unto
Christ, not with service to the eye, as Men-pleasers, but as the Servants of
Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, with good will, serving the Lord,
and not Men, and know ye that whatsoever good thing any man does, that same
shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. Now if we must be
Subject, and Obedient, and Faithful unto Such, how much more unto those that
are Good, and Courteous, especially seeing we serve not them so much as our
Savior Christ Jesus. But thus much of Faithfulness, the former of those two
Points that are required in Good Servants. Come we now unto the Second, A Godly
Life. Who so leads a Godly life, he shall be my Servant.

Ambulans in via immaculata, says the Vulgar; Via integra, says Tremellius;
The Bible Translation, and our Last Translation, A Perfect way. All comes to
one reckning, in that by this Undefiled, and Pure, and Perfect way, a Godly
Life is understood. Which Godly Life here in this place is therefore immediately
joined to Faithfulness that went before, for that it were to little purpose to
be Faithful to our Master on Earth, if through Impiety we should forget our
Duty to our Master in heaven. But seeing so many Translations do use both the
Word Walking, and the word, Way: First, of the Way there specified, as also of
Walking in it.

Walking is a Motion of the Body going forward from place to place, as when the
two Disciples walked to Emaus, Mark. 16.12. Hence it is, that as it is applied
figuratively to such as take a bad course, as Ps. 1.1, Blessed is the Man that
has not walked in the Counsel of the Ungodly: and Prove. 2.14, The wise man's
Eyes are in his Head, but the Fool walks in darkness: so is it applied also
to such as take a good Course in hand, who walk on step by step (as it were)
till they come to their Iourneyes end. The Apostle to the Philippians makes
special mention of both these Walkings: Brethren, Philip. 3.17.
says he, be Followers of me, and look on them which walk so, as you have
us for an ensample. For many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell
you weeping, that they are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is
damnation, whose God is their Belly, and whose Glory is to their shame, which
mind earthly things. And thus having now seen what this Undefiled, and Pure,
and Perfect way is, and what it is to Walk therein, we have seen by way of
Consequence what it is to lead a Godly Life. If now in brief you would have
me tell you wherein a Godly life does consist, I may refer it to three
Points, as the Apostle S. Paul seems to do, Tit. 2.12: who having spoken of
Servants immediately before, The Grace of God, says he, that brings
Salvation unto all men has appeared, and teaches us that we should deny
Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, and that we should live, SOBRIE, and IVSTE,
and PIE: Soberly, and Righteously, and Godly, in this present world. Soberly,
and Righteously, and Godly. Soberly, in respect of our selves, Sobrie quoad
Nos, Just quoad Proximum, Pre quoad Deum, Lyra in hunc loc.
says Lyra, Righteously, in respect of others, and Godly, in respect of God,
or of Religion. Zacharias, John Baptists Father, he reduces these Three to
Two, Holiness, and Righteousness: That we, Luke 1.74.
says he, being delivered out of the Hands of our Enemies, might serve him
without fear in Vox (...) ad secunda^ tabulam: Vox autem (...) ad primam
refertur ab Interpretibus. Zanch. in Ep. ad Ephesians. c. 4. v. 24.
Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days of our life. So the
Apostle to the Ephesians, saving that he places Righteousness first, and
Holiness after: Be renewed, Ephesians. 4 24.
says he, in the spirit of your Minds, and put on the New Man which after God
is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness. The matter is not great
whether of both have precedence. If Holiness, that is, Devotion toward God,
be first, it ends commonly with Righteousness, that is, our Duty toward
Others: if Righteousness be first, and we be Just toward Men, it ends as
commonly with Holiness. But thus much both of Faithfulness, as also a Godly
Life, and consequently of those Virtues that are to be in good Servants. Come
we now to entreat of bad Servants, and of the Vices which in the^, which Vices
here are twofold, Deceit, and Telling of Lies. There shall no deceitful Person
dwell in my House, he that tells Lies, shall not tarry in my sight.

Deceitful is a word derived from Deceit, and Deceit does usually signify
Subtlety, Craft, or Cunning, when Men hide their evil Meanings by some
colorable words, and deeds, that they may more easily entrap those with whom
they have to deal. The Word in the (...) of (...) Sagittavit, eiaculatus est.
Vid Scheraei Itinerat. Number. 1028. and Sadeel in Ps. 32. v. 2. Oper. Theol p.
899. Col. 2.
Original is primarily fetched from those who out of some lurking, or secret
place, set upon those that pass by, with force of weapon. For as if we see the
Blow once coming, there may be many ways to avoid, and shun it, as by taking
it where it may least harm us, or recoyling back, or stepping aside, and so
forth: so if once it come unawares, and we have no warning of it before, it is
a Thousand to one but we then miscarry indeed. Thus Diomedes, he was hurt, and
Achilles was slain by Paris, Homer. Il. 11.
-- Ovid. Met. l. 12.
Tantorum Victor Achille
Victus es a timido Graiae Raptore Maritae.
I am not ignorant how the Vulgar in this place reads, Qui facit superbiam,
and then has it Reference to Pride and Haughtiness, namely the Haughtiness
of such Servants as Dance upon the Theshold so proudly, as speaks the Prophet
Zephany, Zeph. 1.9. Poor Suitors know full well what the Prophet there
means. But Faciens Dolum, says Tremellius, and Dolus is, Aug. in. Ps. 5.
says S. Austen, cum aliud agitur, aliud simulatur: when we make show of one
thing, and do another. A Vice that of al Vices takes up most of the Lodgings
about us: as First of all, our Spirits, Ps. 32.2. Secondly, our Thoughts, Psalm.
38.12. Thirdly, our Hearts, Prove. 12.20: Fourthly, our Mouths, 1. Pet. 2.22.
Fifthly, our Lips, Ps. 34.12. Sixthly, our Tongues, Ps. 15.3. Seaventhly, our
Bellies, Job. 15.35. Lastly, our Feet, Job. 31.5. Nay, it takes up all our
Members from top to toe, and therefore S. Paul to Elimas, O Plene omni dolo, O
full of all Subtlety, Act. 13.10. Indeed the Deceitful has many Traynes, as
Ecclus 11.2^
speaks the Son Syrach, but he has as many Curses too, which are not such
as commonly proceed from an intemperate and impotent Tongue, which rebound as
commonly on the Speaker again, but such as proceed from the Word of God. And
would you know what those Curses be? First, The Lord, says David, will abhor
him, Ps. 5.6. The deceitful Person shall be affamished, says Solomon, Prove.
19.15. He shall not roast what he takes in hunting, that is, he shall not
enjoy the Goods he has got, Prove. 12.27. They shall not live out half their
days, Ps. 55.25. In a word. Cursed be the Deceauer, says Malachy, Mal. 1.14.
So that Deceit being thus attended on with such a Troop of Curses, it is
exceeding good Counsel that S. Peter gives us, (...), to lay it aside, nay to
cast it utterly away from us, for that is the meaning of that Word, 1. Pet 2.1.
Wherefore, says he, laying aside all Malitiousnesse, and all Guile, and
Dissimulation, and Envy, and all evil speaking, as newborn Babes desire the
sincere Milk of the Word that ye may grow thereby, if so be that ye have
tasted how bountiful the Lord is. But thus much of Deceit, the former of those
Vices which the Prophet observes in bad Servants: the latter is like unto it,
and that is, Telling of Lies: He that tells Lies shall not tarry in my sight.

And who then should be his Servant? For as when our Savior said to his
Disciples, It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then
for a Rich Man to enter into the kingdom of God, they presently Mat. 19.24.
replied, Who then can be saved? For that al men were either Rich, or Cum pauci
sint Divites in comparatione multitudinis Pauperum, intelligendum quod omnes
qui talia cupiunt, in eoru^ numero haberi animadverterint. August. Quaest.
Evan. l. 1. Qu. 26.
desired to be Rich, which was all one in effect: so if he that tells Lies,
is not to tarry in his Masters sight, who is then to be a Servant, forasmuch as
all men not only desire to Lie, but are absolute Liars in very deed. Lying, to
say the truth is a Vice so common, I say not with Servants only, but even with
all Sorts of all People, that the whole World it self may be said to lie
bedred of this Disease. Our Prophet on a time supposed he had spoken it in
have, whenas he had said upon occasion, that All Men are Liars, Psalm. 116.10.
but the Apostle S. Paul took leisure enough, and yet said he no less, Romans
3.4. I know what S. Austen notes upon that Passage of Holy Scripture, Omnis
homo mendax, All men are Liars, namely, that this Aug. Cont. Mendac. c. 20.
Sin of Lying in particular, is taken there for Sin in general, and I
remember that Cardanus writes of himself that he was so great a Lover of
Truth, that from the time he was Fourteen years old, he never told a
Cardan. de Genitur. Genit. 1. p. 85.
Lie: in another Cardan. Ib. Genit. 8. p. 58.
place that as he remembered, he never lied in all his Life: I do not think
but his Memory failed him, but whether it did or no, it is not a Swallow that
makes a Summer. Lying, as I said, is a Vice so common, as that there is not a
creek or crany in the World, but seems to be fraught with it. Nor is there
any Vice besides, Satan's so peculairly as indeed the Vice of Lying. When he
speaks a Lie, Ioh 8.44.
says our Savior, then speaks he of his own, for he is a Liar, and the S.
Austen by the Devil in this place, means Cain and makes Pater eius to have
relation to the Devil indeed. Aug. Tom 4. Quaest. ex Nov. Test. vel Quaest.
mixtim. Qu 98. p. 553. which might be the cause that some translated ( Dorman
by name) the Devil is a Liar, and so was his Father before him. See D. Nowels
Confut. of Dormans Disproof. c. 10. p. 339. b.
Father thereof. So that Lying is as it were his Son, even his Firstborn,
for it was the first Sin committed in Paradise, Genes. 3.3. No doubt it has
gotten him as many Souls as any one Sin besides whatsoever, for the Mouth that
speaks Lies slays the Soul, Wisd. 1.11. The very Phrase of Slaying the
Soul may put us in mind how dreadful a Sin it is, and to be feared of
every of us. For if so be our Savior bad us, not to fear them which kill the
Mat. 10.28.
Body, but are not able to kill the Soul: this Sin being of Power to kill
the very Soul, how it ought to be scared, judge ye. Nor is it sufficient for
us to use Shifts and Shuflings in Lying, as Equivocations, Mental Evasions, or
Secret Reservations, and so forth: St Austen is very peremptory, Quolibet artis
modo mentiatur, os quod mentitur occidit Animam: Use we whatsoever Tricks or
Devises we can, the Mouth that lies, slays the Soul. The same St Austen
has left unto us a Couple of Treatises concerning Lying: The One is De
Mendacio: The Other, Contra Mendacium, both in his Fourth Tome. Zanch. in
Epist. ad Ephesians. c. 4.
In the Former of them he makes mention of Eight sorts of Lies, which Others
have reduced to Three, D. Boys Exposit. of the Dominic. Epistles and Gospels
the twe^tith Sunday after Trinity, p. 152.
One contracts the^ into Two: but whether Two, or Three, or Eight, Aug. de
Conflictu Vitiorum and Virt. c. 19 p. 714.
St Austen there shows that no one of them is lawful. And he often there
August. de Mendacio ad Consent. c. 14. and 21.
repeates that of the Prophet David, Psalm. 5.6, Odisti Domine omnes qui
operantur iniquitatem, perdes omnes qui loquu^tur mendacium. Thou hate al
them that work vanity, thou shall destroy them that speak leasing. The Latter
he ends with this excellent Passage, Aut ergo cavenda Mendacia recte agendo,
aut confitenda sunt paenitendo: non aute^ cum abunden: insoe^ vive^ (...) s^
and ^ad. Aug. Cont. Mendac. c. 21.
Either by well doing we are to beware of Lying, or to confess it by
repenting, not when by bad living, Lies abound, and multiply in us, we are to
aggravate them by teaching. And thus much of the two Vices, Deceitfulness, and
Lying, which are to be found in bad Servants, and consequently, of both kind of
Servants, Good, and Bad. Come we now unto the Master whom we presumed to be
Good for that he made choice of Good Servants, and refused the Bad. Mine eyes
look unto such as be faithful in the Land, that they may dwell with me: who
so leads a Godly Life, he shall be my Servant. There shall no deceitful
Person dwell in my House, he that tells Lies shall not tarry in my sight.

But did I say we must presume of the Goodness of the Master here, for that
he made choice of Good Servants, and refused the Bad? Why, who would not
willingly have Good Servants? Who would not as willingly be free from Bad?
Indeed it is very true, there can be none so wicked, but he would desire to
have his Servants Good, howsoever he will be loath perhaps to take the course
to have them so. He will see, it may be, with other men's eyes, and hear with
other men's ears, be the Servants what be may. But where is the Master among
a many, that either consults with his own eyes, as king David here said he
would do, or if his Servants be not as they should be, rids his hands of them
presently. I speak of such Masters as may lawfully make their choice, and
whose Servants are of ripe years. As for those that have Apprentises who most
commonly are but young, it lies such Masters upon (if they be not so Good as
they should be) to use them in such sort what by fair means, what by foul
(if Fair means will not serve, and foul be not toto foul) as if his
Servants should be never so bad, they might prove better at the length, and
how many toto bad at first, have prooved at length exceeding good. I say, If
foul means be not toto foul, for howsoever the Scripture Prove. 29.19.
says, A Servant will not be chastised with Words, meaning as St Austen Cum
dixit Verbis eum non emendari, non eum iussit deseri, sed tacit ad, monu t
vnde debeat emendari. Aug ad Bonif. Epist. 50.
notes that Blows must be used to: yet such is the Fury of some Masters in
punishing, and correcting, as that they forget themselves are Christians, as
also those that belong unto them. This it was that caused the Lord to set down
a stint of Punishment to the Jews, who howsoever they themselves had been
Servants in Egypt, yet when they came to be Masters, were likely enough to
forget themselves herein. When there shall be strife Deuteronomy. 25.1.
says he, between men, and they shall come unto judgment, and sentence
shall be given upon them, and the Righteous shall be justified, and the wicked
condemned, then if so be the wicked be worthy to be beaten, the Judge shall
cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face, according to his
trespass, unto a certain number. It Ver. 3.
follows: Forty stripes shall he cause him to have and not past, least if be
should exceed, and beat him above that with many stripes, thy Brother should
appear despised in thy sight. Now if such good order were taken when as the
Judge was not a Party, how much more does it concern a Master of a Family who
might in that respect much more easily forget himself, then a Judge might do.
Others there are of a contrary strain, and they again are toto pitiful, who
mar as many by to much cockering, as do the other by to much punishing. A
golden mean is best, and best befitteth us Christians which serve a Master in
heaven who by the Qui in bonitate Misericordiae non perdit Iudicii Severitatem,
ne^ in iudicando cum Severitate amittit Misericordie Boritatem. Aug. in Psalm.
100 p. 771.
Bou^tifulnes of his Mercy loses not the Severity of Judgment, nor by
judging with Severity does he loose the Bountifulnes of his Mercy. No man
better coupleth these two together then does Jesus the Son of Syrach: The
Fodder Ecclus. 33.23.
says he, the Whip, and the Burden, belong unto the Ass: and Meat,
Correction, and Work unto thy Servant. And again a little after: The Yoke and
the Whip, bow down the hard Neck: so tame thine evil Servant with the Whips
and Correction. Send him to labor that he go not idle: for Idleness brings
much evil. Set him to Work for that belongs unto him, if he be not obedient,
put on more heavy Fetters. But be not excessive toward any, and without
discretion do nothing. It follows: Ver. 29.
If thou have a Faithful Servant, let him be unto thee as thine own soul,
for in Blood have thou gotten him, that is, Lyra in hunc locum.
says Lyra, for the necessity of thy Life. His Conclusion there is: If thou
have a Servant, entreat him as thy Brother, for thou have need of him as of thy
self. And indeed so it is, need we have of Servants as of our Selves, nay
Servants may do that for us, which we for our selves cannot do. Thou can not
Non tibi potes aquam implere, non tibi potes coquere, non tibi potes ante equum
currere, iumentum tuum non potes curare. Aug. in Epist. Joan. Tract 8. p. 434
says St Austen, power water upon thine own hands, thou can not dress
thine own Meat, thou can not lackey by thine own Horse, thou can not
tend thine own Beast. All this, and more then this a Servant does. Besides that
we ought to remember what St Austen tells us in an other place, the better to
put us in mind of the good entreating of our Servants: Neither art thou Tu non
valde verus Dominus seruitui, ambo Homines, ambo egentes Deo. Itaque nullus
vestrum vere Dominus, and nullus vestrum vere Servus Aug. in Psalm. 69 p. 516.
says he, thy Servants Master indeed, nor is he thy Servant indeed, both of
you are Men, both of you have need of God. And therefore is it a pretty (...),
or Inversio^ of words, which the Apostle has to the Corinthians: He that is
called in the Lord being a servant 1. Cor. 7.22.
says he, is the Lords Freeman: likewise also he that is called being Free, is
Christ's Servant. Howbeit for worldly Policy has according to Gods word made
this necessary difference between Man, and Man, that the one should be a
Master, the other a Servant, and that the Master should have Prima and
quotidiana Potestas Hominis in Hominem Domini est in Servum. Non ideo
Christianus factus es, vt dedigneris servire. Aug in Psalm. 124. p. 1007.
Authority, and that a Servant is not therefore a Christian, that he should
disdain to serve, hence it is that as Masters on their parts are required in
Gods Book, to do that unto their Coloss. 4.1.
Servants which is just and equal: so Servants likewise to be obedient to them
that are their Coloss. 3.22
Masters, according to the Flesh, in all things. And thus Beloved, have you now
seen, what out of these words I have had to say, concerning Masters and
Servants. I will but apply what has been spoken, and so commit you unto God.
Mine eyes look unto such as be Faithful in the Land that they may dwell with
me, etc.

First concerning Servants, of whom I entreated First of all, I may say to them
as Moses did unto the Deuteronomy. 30.19
Israelites: I call Heaven and Earth to record this day against you, that I
have set before you Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing: therefore choose
Life, that both thou, and thy seed may live. Right so, Beloved, have I at this
time set before you a Faithful, and a Deceitful: a Godly, and a Godless
Servant. It is in you to make the Choice, to whether of both you will frame
your Selves. And in truth who among you considering the Premises, would not
rather be of the Faithful, and Godly, then of the Deceitful, and Lying Sort,
considering what Rewards Faithfulness, and Godliness have, Deceitfulness,
and Lying, what Punishments. Neither were the Rewards, and Punishments, so much
to be respected, were they of this Life's continuance only, but they reach to
the World to come, when for Millions and Millions of years or Eternal
Happiness is prepared, or if not that, Eternal Pain. To the better
furtherance of which your Choice, see what God for his part has done already.
He has created you when you were not: he has made you Men, and Goodly
Creatures, that might have made you Worms, and Serpents, and Toads, and
Vipers, and what not: he has made you Christian Servants, that might have
made you (as Millions at this day) Without Ephesians. 2.12.
Christ, Aliants from the Commonwealth of Israel, Strangers from the Covenants
of Promise, having no Hope, and being without God in the World: he has made
you Christian Servants, that might have made you Slaves, and Bondmen, borne
then, and at those times, when any light Offense against your Masters, might
have cost you your very Lives. Nay more then this. He has given unto you, as
to your Masters, the same Lord, the same Faith, the same Baptism, I, to set
with them at the self same Table, as you have seen with your Eyes this day.
Where you have eaten of the Flesh or Christ, and drank of the Blood of Christ,
no less then your Masters did. In a word, he has bred you in that Church
where you may have Soule-saving Truth Truth enough, and brought you up in that
Commonwealth, where you may all of you come at length to be Masters and
Mistresses your selves, nay to certain Eminences of Honor, either in City, or
Country you dwell in. And should you not then be Faithful? Should you not
endeavor by all means to be Religious? What? Shall Deceitfulness, or Lying,
sway with us more, then all this already done? Divelish Deceit? Base Lying?
Shall we call Death unto us, Everlasting Death both with Wisd. 1.15.
Words, and Hands? Shall the Example of a wicked Ziba prevail more with us,
then the Examples of Jacob, of Joseph, of David, of whom I have spoken already
so much? Let me instance in Joseph again, as Faithful a Servant as ever
breathed. What a maine Temptation did assault him of being Unfaithful to his
Master, and yet how constantly did he repel it? Proffer was made unto him of
that which was his Masters chiefest Jewel. He sought it not, he watched not a
time, he fore-casted not to have it. It was in a manner brought unto him, and
laid (as it were) at his Feet, and yet he, How can I do, Gen 39 9.
says he, this great wickedness, and so sin against God? How could he do it?
How? Nay, how could he not have done it? There was Opportunity, there was
Importunity. Opportunity, for it was D. Mayo Almoner to K. Henry 7. being
asked by the King what he would have done, if he had not been Joseph, but in
Joseph's steed, By my truth Sir, quoth he, and it like your Grace, I cannot tell
you what I would have done, but I can tell you what I should have done. Sr Th.
Moore. Dialog. of the Venerat. and Worsh. of Images, l 1. c. 26. Mori Oper.
Angl. p. 164. Col. 2.
offered him, She said unto him, Lie with me, Ge^. 39.7. Importunity, for She
spoke unto him day by day, Genesis 39.10: and yet he for all this, How can I do
this great wickedness, and so sin against God? Mirror of Chastity! Honest
Joseph, and worthy of all admiration! how art thou much more to be admired then
David was, when he returned to King Saul with the 1. Sam. 17.54
Head of Golias in his hand? Nay the Miracle was not so great of those three
Children that walked in the midst of the Fiery Dan. 3.25.
Oven, considering the Flames that surrounded thee, who mighst not only have
had thy Pleasure, but by all worldly likelihood Preferment too. But Joseph
would none of that Pleasure, Joseph would none of that Preferment: A good
Heart, D. Hals Contemp. l. 3. p. 233
says a worthy Divine, will rather lie in the dust, then rise by wickedness.
How can I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God?

I, but thou will say, such a Wickedness indeed had been great, such a
wickedness had been a grievous Sin, both against God, and against his Master:
but what if I sin but a little? A little embeasling of my Masters Goods, a
little pilfering of a few Pence, a little Purloining of that is his, Is it not
a little one, Genesis 19.20.
said Lot in another Case, and my Soul shall live! Oh but yet contemn not
these Littles, be they in truth never so little, Every Days Little, Quod ponis
quotidie per modicum, posteae Massam inventurus es, and de minimis Guttis
flumina implentur. Aug in Ps. 93. p. 720.
says S. Austen, makes a mickle at the length, and they be but little Drops
that cause in time Great Floods. And what matters it, says the same Father in
another Aug ep. 108. p. 327. Vid. Aug. de december Chord. c. 11. p. 636. and de
Te^p. Ser. 244. p. 807
place, whether a Ship be cast away with an huge and mighty Wave, or that it
leake by little and little, and at length for want of looking to, it chance
indeed to sink. But shall I end with thee in a word? Animae Conscientia,
Tertul. advers. Marcion. l. 1. p. 134.
says Tertullian, est Dei Dos. Conscience is Gods Dowry bestowed upon the
Soul, and will thou endeavor to hazard that Dowry of thine, It should be a
bad Inference hereupon, If all the Pictures and Patterns of a Merciles Prince
were lost in the World, they might all again be Painted to the life out of the
History of this King, as Some upon such like Particulars conclude upon K. Henry
8.
and all for a little Pelf, not worth the taking up if it lay at thy Feet,
did thou but know the danger of it? But I come to them that are Masters.

And First concerning this Graund Master, and this his Protestation of
Choosing, and Refusing, what great expectance by these words might there have
been of a great good Family now, nay of a Court, and consequently of greatest
Good both to Church, and Commonweal? But was this Prince indeed as good as
his word? Did he make that very Choice? that very Refusal he here speaks of?
Oh no: Alas he did not. Doubtless sometimes he did it not. Witness the Blood
of Vrias spilt by his means, as Faithful a Sudiect unto him as ever was.
Witness the continual employment of Ioab that had slain Abner with the
Sword. Witness the Lamentation for wicked Absolon that stoale away from him
the Peoples hearts Witness the Punishing of faithful Mephibosheth with loss
of his Lands for no cause. Witness the bestowing of them on Treacherous Ziba
whom he should rather have punished with the loss of his Head: all to teach us
how exceeding wary we should be in this kind, least our Goodness, as Hos. 6.4.
speaks the Prophet, that is, our good Motions, such as David's were at this
time, should be as a Morning Cloud, and as the Morning Dew they should go
away. When Elisha the Prophet saw more in Hazael, then Sylla saw in Caesar, in
whom he saw yet so many Suet. Iul. c. 1.
Marij, but when Elisha saw in Hazael the Evil he should do to the Children
of Israel, namely how he should set on fire their strong Cities, slay their
Young men with the Sword, dash their Infants against the Stones, and rent in
pieces their Women with Child: What 2. King. 8.13
says Hazael, is thy Servant a Dog, that I should do this great thing? Hazael
doubtless would have sworn at that time, that he would never have done half
so much, and yet it was not long after that Hazael did as much indeed. I doubt
not, there have bin a Many who when they were or Servants themselves, or newly
come to be Masters, have said as much as David did, and would have said as
Hazael to, could any have foretold the^, how cruelly they should afterward use
Christian Servants. Howbeit since; the Case is altered, they are not now the
Men they were, they have quite forgotten in their latter times from whence
themselves were first raised. Why, but be it thy Servants have offended thee,
and it may be mainely to, will thou offend on the other side by toto immoderate
Correcting of them? No care? no regard at all, Whether the Fault were unawares,
or upon advisement? Whether once, or often? Whether of Infirmity, or Villainy?
You have heard how the Lord himself did stint such Strokes as should be given
unto Offenders, and he yielded a Reason for it, Least thy Brother, Deuteronomy 25.3.
says he, should appear despised in thy sight? What? and be they then thy
Brethren? and must thou in no wise Despise them? Or does God himself yield a
Reason, and will thou despise that Reason to? Have thou forgotten the Scripture
which Ephesians. 6.^.
says: And ye Masters put away threatening: and know that even your Master
also is in heaven, neither is there Respect of Persons with him? Nay then let a
Heathen teach thee, Seneca by name, and fear least he hereafter may iustle
thee out of Heaven. Are they Servi sunt? Imo Homines. Servi sunt? Imo
Contubernales. Servi sunt? Imo humiles Amici. Servi sunt? Imo Conserui, si
cogitaveris tantundem in vtrosque licere Fortunae. Senec. Ep. l. 6. ep. 47.
says he, thy Servants? Nay but they are Men to? Are they thy Servants? Nay
rather they are Companions. Are they thy Servants? Nay rather thy humble
Friends? Are they thy Servants? Nay rather thy Fellow Servants, if thou could
but know this, that Fortune has as much power over thee, as over the^. Mark
Beloved, That Fortune has, had he said, Divine Providence, what an admirable
Speech had it been: and had he known as much of that Providence, as either
our Selves do, or should do, how much would he then have spoken in behalf of
Clemency in this kind.

I speak not this Beloved, as if there should be no Checking, no Controlling
of Servants at all. They that are given to any immoderate Mildnes, and offend
as much on that side, let them fear old Elies Example, who for being remiss
unto his Children, how did he exasperate the Lord against him? The end of all
was, that he had a fearful end: Ely fell 1. Sam. 4.18.
says the Scripture, from his seat backward by the side of the Gate, and his
Neck was broken, and he dyed. Now if this befell old Eli that would not
correct his Sons (in whose behalf Fatherly affection might have made, and no
doubt did make, some kind of Apology) of how much soarer punishment shall they
be worthy who are so remiss unto their Servants, between whom and natural
Sons the difference is so great. The Servant Ioh. 8.35,
says our Savior, abides not in the house for ever, but the Son abides
for ever.

Oh but thou will say, if so be I punish my Servant, how can I my self
whenever I offend, crave forgiveness at Gods hands? How shall I say as our
Savior wills me, Mat. 6.12.
Forgive us our Debts, as we also forgive our Debtors. And again, V. 15.
If ye do not forgive Men their Trespasses, no more will your Father forgive
you your Trespasses. And how shall I observe that Precept of his to Peter, Mat.
18.22.
I say not to thee seven times, but seaventy times seven times. St Austen
thus answers, and his Instance is in Scholars that commit some Faults when
they are at School. They perhaps will say Obsecra^t Pueri indisciplinati and
noluat vapulare, qui sic praescribunt nobis, quando volumus dare disciplinam.
Peccavi, ignosce mihi. Ecce ignovi, and iterum peccat, Ignosce, ignovi. Peccat
tertio, Ignosce: tertio ignovi Ia^ quarto vapulet. Et ille, Nunquid septuagies.
septies te fatigavi? Si hac praescripti one severitas disciplinae dormiat,
repressa disciplina saeuit impunita Nequitia. Quid ergo faciendum est?
Corripiamus verbis, and si opus est, and Verberibus: sed Delictum dimittamus,
Culpam de Cord abiiciamus: ideo enim Dominus subdidit, De cordibus vestris, vt
si per charitatem imponitur disciplina, de cord lenitas non recedat. Quid enim
tam pium quam Medicus ferens ferramentum? Plorat secandus, and secatur: plorat
vrendus, and vritur. Non est illa Crudelitas, absit vt Saevitia Medici dicatur.
Saevit in vulnus, vt homo sanetur: quia si vulnus palpetur, homo perditur. Aug.
de Verb. Dom. Ser. 15. p. 45.
says he, I have offended, forgive me. Well: I do forgive, and being
forgiven, he offends again: he cries again Forgive me, and I forgive him once
more. He cries the third time, and I forgive him the third time to. But if the
Fourth time he do the like, then is he ierkt indeed. Happyly he will say, why
Sir, have I offend you seaventy times seven times? Nay says St Austen, if
severity of Discipline should lie a sleep so long, by reason of such
Prescription, then would Wickedness fly abroad in every place uncontrolled. And
what then is to be done says he? What? Let us correct with Words, and if need
be with Stripes to, but let us forgive the Offense, let us not keep that in
mind still. His conclusion there is. What is so just and fit to be done, as
when the Physician takes an iron Instrument to lance his Patient with. The
Patient it may be cries, and yet is he cut for all that. When he is to be
seared, he cries again, and yet is he seared notwithstanding. Now that, says
St Austen, is not Cruelty, God forbid, that that should be termed Cruelty, and
Fierceness of the Physician. He is fierce indeed upon the Wound, that so his
Patient may be healed, because should he dally with it, it might be his
Patients utter overthrow. I will end with that of Nec promiscuam habere, nec
vulgarem Clementiam oportet, nec abscisam. Nam tam omnibus ignoscere,
Crudelitas est, quam nulli. Senec. de Clement l. 1. c. 2.
Seneca: Neither ought Clemency to be toto cheap, vulgar, and common, nor on
the other side toto strict. Seeing it is Cruelty al alike, when as every Fault
committed is or pardoned, or punished.

And thus, Beloved, have I now absolved at three several times, that threefold
Task I took in hand, concerning Husbands, and Wives: Parents, and Children:
Masters, and Servants. I have showed the mutual correspondence, that is to
be between every of them, and the several Duties of each to other. All which
Duties would vou now but practice, every of you in your several Callings, I my
self will promise nothing, our Savior shall promise, and perform, To him
that overcommeth: that is, to them which shall preserve themselves from the
many Corruptions of the Times they live in, such as Neglect of Duty is, whether
on the Husbands, or Parents, or Masters behalf: or on the Wives, or Children,
or Servants: To him that overcommeth, Rev. 2.7.
will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise
of God. The Way indeed to that Tree of Life was once kept from us by him that
set the Cherubims, and the Blade of a Sword shaken to keep the way thereof,
Genesis 3.24: but now is it opened again unto us, and who that will may enter in,
Verily, I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43.

The God of Heaven so bless us, and the Seed that has been sown, etc.
VIRGINITY.
Whit-Sunday. June 12. 1614.
The Unmarried cares for the things of the Lords, how he may please the Lord:
but he that is Married cares for the things of the World, how he may please
his Wife. There is a Difference also between a Virgin and a Wife. The
Unmarried Woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both
in Body and in Spirit: but she that is married, cares for the things of the
World how she may please her Husband.

1. Cor. 7.32,33,34.
I Have here made choice of a Text, Right Worshipful, and dearly Beloved,
which well agrees with all and every of us in general: but with how many, or
with how few of us in each particular, there is the Question. The Text speaks
in general of Married, and Unmarried, Wives, and Virgins, and who amongst us
all is none of these? But where it speaks of the Unmarried, that he cares
for the things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord; of the Ma^d, that he
cares for the things of the World, how he may please his Wife: Again of the
Unmarried Woman caring for the things of the Lord that she may be Holy both in
Body, and in Spirit; of the Married caring for the things of the World, how
she may please her Husband; and who amongst us all is one of these? I confess
it is my purpose at this time, to speak principally of Virgins, for that of
the Married, and of Wives, I have spoken heretofore, howbeit for the Apostle in
this place joins the Unmarried, and Married together, Virgins, and Wives, I
also shall say somewhat of the Married, and of Wives, but my chief intent and
purpose is especially concerning VIRGINS. An Argument now adays seldom
treated of, yet frequent with the Fathers, who (a many of them) have compiled
whole Treatises to this purpose. Namely S. Ierom, S. Austen, S. Ambrose,
Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Fulgentius, Bernard: all of them
writing in their times, or whole Tracts of Virginity, or Exhortations unto
Virgins. Of Virginity, and Virgins, then at this time, and that with our
Saviors help, who was as S. Austen Aug. de Sanct. Virgin. c. 1.
speaks, Virginis Filius, Virginum Sponsus, Virginali Vtero corporaliter
natus, Virginali Connubio spiritaliter coniugatus. The son of a Virgin, a
Bridegroom to Virgins, corporally borne of a Virgin Womb, and spiritually
yoaked in Virgin Wedlock. The Text, you see, is a Passage of the Apostle S.
Paul, who was himself a Virgin too, though there are of the Ancient Ignatius,
and Clemens. Vid. Days Dial Lect. 8 p. 200. In Marg.
Fathers, that say he had a Wife. I for my part am otherwise minded, and all,
for he says here in this V. 7.
Chapter, I would that all Men were even as I my self am, and yet says
Erasmus, Erasm. Annot in 1. Cor. 7. p. 414. Edit. 1527
Velex hoc loco conijcere licet, Paulo fuisse Coniugem, posteaquam de
Coniugatis agens sui facit mentione^. We may guess, even by this place, that
St. Paul had a Wife, for that in speaking of Married Folks, he makes mention of
himself. I will not now discuss this point, nor conclude of, or on. Only I am
persuaded that if S. Paul had been married indeed, he would not have said
simply here. I would that all Me^ were even as I my self am, but as he Act.
26.29.
said in another case to King Agrippa, I would that all were altogether such as
I am, (...), except these Bonds. Now that Marriage is as Bonds, witness that
of S. Ambrose, Bona Vincula Nuptiarum, sed tamen Vincula, Ambr. de Virgin. l.
3. p. 115.
says he, et si Vincula, tamen Vincula Charitatis. And again in another
Ambros. ad Virg. Exhort. p. 134.
place, Bonum quidem Charitatis vinculum est, sed tamen Vinculum, de quo cum
velit se exuere Nupta non possit, nec Liberum sui habere arbitrium. His meaning
is, that Marriage is as Bonds indeed, but Bonds of Love, yet such as the
Parties bound cannot possibly be rid of, though they would perhaps never so
feign. Wherefore if S. Paul were Unmarried himself (as I for my part, am of
opinion) and advises us to that course of Life, as it is in the five and
twentieth verse of this Chapter, to whom may we better harken then to S. Paul,
in this case, especially if it be true which C. Livius says in Neminem
fidelius dare posse Consilium quam cum qui id alteri suaderet, quod ipse si in
eodem loco esset, facturus fuerit. Live. Decad. 4. l. 7.
T. Livius, that No man gives more faithful counsel, then he that persuades
another to that, which or he himself follows, or at the least wise would
follow, were he himself in like case. To come then to the Matter in hand.

That our Apostle was at Corinth, the most famous City of Asia, and most
flourishing in those days, we read it in the Acts, and from whence it was he
thither came, and for a Twelue-month and a half, what it was he there did. He
continued there a Year, and six Months, Act. 18.11.
says S. Luke, and taught the word of God among them. Howbeit afterward being
compelled by the wickedness of the Jews to sail into Syria, in his absence
it so fell out, that false Apostles did enter amongst them, and made havocke of
the Flock. Whereupon the Corinthians wrighting unto him, and acquainting him
with their State, it should seem that in their Letter unto him, they moved
certain Questions wherein they desired to be resolved, and which S. Ierom thus
Hier. Advers. Iovin. l. 1. Vid. Defense of Priests Marriages, p. 126. where it
is alleged amiss, Contra Iulianum.
specifies: Among other things the Corinthians enquired by their Letters,
whether after the Faith of Christ they ought to live a single Life? And whether
for Continency sake, they should forsake their Wives which they had already?
Whether they that were Virgins when they received the Faith might take
Matrimony upon the^? And if both Parties were Paynims, and one should receive
the Faith, Whether the Believer should forsake the Unbeliever? And if Wives
were to be married, whether they should marry Christians only, or also Paynims.
Now to al and every of these Questions the Apostle makes special Answer in the
whole Process of this Chapter. And therefore S. Ierom, Videamus igitur quid ad
haec Paulus rescripserit. Let us therefore now see what S. Paul did write
again to these Matters. But it is not of all these, that I have purposed now
to speak, my Text confines me to only One, namely unto Virginity. The
Question then by all likelihood, being this, or to this effect: Whether they
that were Virgins when they received the Faith, might marry yea, or no: the
Sum of the Apostles Answer seems to be that in the five and twentieth verse,
that concerning Virgins he had no Commandment, only his Advice unto them
was, that in regard of those Times, it was good for them so to be. Which being
good so to be, that he might the better prove unto them, he compares in
this my Text, Virginity, and Marriage both together. He shows the Easiness
of the One, the Difficulty of the Other, the Nature, and Property of Both:
and forasmuch as themselves were Christians, and consequently had vowed in
Baptism The things of the Lord: that is, as our Communion Book Communion Book
in Baptism.
expresses them, To forsake the Devil, and all his Works, the vain Pomp
and glory of the World, with all covetous Desires of the same, the Carnal
Desires of the Flesh, so that they would not follow, nor be led by them, he
shows what advantage Virginity has toward the fulfilling of all this, what
distractions were in Marriage, and therefore if they intended indeed The things
of the Lord, they should betake themselves to a Virgin-life. Which is not
Beloved, to be so understood, as if all Virginity had all these Commodities,
and every Marriage had every encombrance, that the One could not but care for
The things of the Lord, the Other would not but care for The things of the
World: very Experience shows the contrary that this is not always so, neither
sometimes in respect of Virgins, that are careful enough for The things of the
World, neither in respect of Married Folks that are as careful for The Things
of the Lord. What? and does the Apostle then take his aim herein amiss? Makes
he a Distinction without a Difference? No, in no wise. He shows the Nature of
Virginity in general, and the Nature of Marriage in general: if some certain
Virgins on the one side, and certain Married Folks on the other swerve from
thence in particular, that is merely accidental. The Speech here of the
Apostle is like a Speech of our Saviors when as he said in St Matthewes Mat.
12.34.
Gospel, That out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: which is
not so to be understood, as if it were alwais so (except it be in one sense,
namely, that the Abundance of the Heart will make the Mouth at sometimes bewray
that, which lies in the Heart, notwithstanding all Hypocrisy) for there were,
and he knew there were, that Mat. 15.^.
Drew near to him with their Mouths, and honored him with their Lips, but
yet their Hearts were far of from him. To come at length then to the Words
themselves, we are therein to consider three special Points. First of all,
two several States, and in them both Sexes, Male and Female. Unmarried, and
Married; there is the Male: Virgins, and Wives; there is the Female. Secondly,
the Objects where abouts they are. The things of the Lord, and The things of
the World. Thirdly, their Actions about those Objects, and those are Cares,
both of them taking care, The Unmarried, and Married: The Unmarried, for the
One; the Married, for the Other. And of every of these in their several order,
and first of the Unmarried, and Married, Virgins and Wives. The Unmarried
cares for the things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord: but he that is
married cares for the things of the World, how he may please his Wife. There
is a Difference also between a Virgin, and a Wife: the unmarried Woman cares
for the things of the Lord that She may be holy both in Body, and in Spirit:
but She that is married cares for the things of the World, how She may
please her Husband.

Virginity is a State of Life that in all Ages for the most part has been
exceeding much set by: I say, for the most part, for that as Causabon has Vid.
Causab. ad A^les. Baron. Ex^rcit. 8. p 215.
noted, the Jews so little respected it, that if any among them remained a
Virgin, it was esteemed a Reproach, and a kind of Curse upon her. And
therefore the Daughter of Iephtah when her Father had vowed her to the Lord:
Suffer me Judge. 11.37.
says she, two Months that I may go to the Mountains, and bewail my
Virginity, I, and my Fellows. So Elizabeth the Mother of John Baptist when she
first became to be with Child: Luke 1.25.
Thus says she, has the Lord dealt with me, in the days wherein he looked on
me to take from me my Rebuke among Men: or as it is in our Last Translation, to
take away my Reproach. But for that indeed was Barrennes, rather then
Virginity, to come to Virginity again. In that day Esaias 4.1.
says the Prophet Esaias, shall seven Women take hold of one Man, saying, We
will eat our own bread, and we will wear our own Garments: only let us be
called by thy Name, and take away our Reproach. And as it was of little esteem
among the Israelites, and Jews, so among some of the Heathens to, the Grecians
by name. And therefore not Helen only twits Electra the Daughter of Agamemnon
with her stale Virginity, but her Brother Orestes also, I, and she her self
of her self, I, (...). Eurip. Orest.
says she, poor Soul shall live for ever unmarried, and never be Mother of
a Child. And Lycurgus he made a Law to punish such as would not marry, and it
was a Plutarch. in Lycurg.
strange kind of Penance that the Magistrate by his Law was to put them to,
Quod Templo dicere non est: not to spoken of in this place. Howbeit among the
Romans it was of so great esteem, as that the Keeping of the Sacred Fire, was
committed unto them, I mean to the Vestall Vid. Mr Th. Godwin Romanae Hist.
Antholog. l. 2. c. 18. and Plutarc. in Numa and Qu. Romans Quaest. 96. and Alex.
ab Alexand. Geniales Dies l. 5 c. 12 p. 269. b.
Virgins. Of whom there were first of all but Four, afterward Two were added
more, and so they came to be Six, at length to be Twenty. They never walked
abroad but with a Scepter in their hand, and both Consuls and Praetors the
chiefest Magistrates of those days were as they met, to give them the Wall.
They might make their Will and Testament although their Fathers were alive:
they might do all they did without a Tutor as having the Benefit of the Law,
of them that had three Children. Whenever they went abroad, they had their
Seriants to wait upon the^, and if at the same time a Malefactor had been
going to his Death, he escaped the Punishment, if so be She took her Oath,
that she met him but by chance. Howbeit this was the Honor that was done to
some Virgins, namely to the Vestal. The estimation that was had of Virgins, and
Virginity in general, was since the time of our Savior Christ, and a many
were the Causes as Peter Martyr P. Martyr de Votis and C^libatu. p. 460.
observes, why Virginity about the beginning of Christian Times, was had in
such esteem. One was for that Christ had Mat. 19.12.
said: There are some Chaste which were so borne of their Mothers Belly: and
there be some Chaste which be made Chaste by men, and there be some Chaste which
have made themselves Chaste for the Kingdom of Heaven. An Other cause was, for
that at that time there were great Persecutions in every place. Now Christians
were then for the most part in Heb. 11.38.
flight, roming up and down the World, and turned out of all they had, so that
in time of Persecution it was far less trouble for the^ to fly in such sort
alone, then had they had Wife, and Children with them. A Third Cause was, for
that at that time Christian Religion was much defamed. For in regard of the
Fear of the Magistrate making their meetings very early, the People had the^
in suspicion that they lay promiscuously with one an other. A Fourth cause was,
for that a great part that came to Christ were of the Heathen themselves, who a
many of them esteeming much of Virginity before their Conversio^, partly in one
Respect, partly in an other, held it in honor ever after. I might here allege
a Fifth cause which Sadeel Sadeel. Resp. ad Fidei Profes. a Monachis Burdegal.
edit. Art. 53. Oper. p. 509. Col. 1.
brings, namely, that so many even of Christians themselves addicted at the
first both to Polygamy and Fornication, in so much that for Fornication the
Apostles were feign to forbid it in their General Act. 15.29. Mr Hooker is of
opinion that Unlawful or incestu^s Marriag^ were meant by Fornication in that
place of the Acts. And indeed St Paul, as he alleges, calls Incestuous
Marriage, Fornication, 1. Cor. 5.1. Mr Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 4. 11. p. 192.
Council at Jerusalem, they which did abstain even from lawful Marriage it
self, thereby to show their Tempera^ce the more, were highly esteemed of, and
so much the rather, for that there was in those days so much Turpitude in the
world. But the chiefest cause of al, was no doubt the words of our Savior, who
Mat. 19.12.
said when time was, Qui potest capere, capiat. He that is able to receive
this, let him receive it. Now the Fathers when they commended Virginity so
much, meant not Virginity of Body only, but Virginity of Mind. For Perit and
mente Virginitas Hieron. ad Eustoch. de Custodia Virgin.
says St Jerome, the very Mind may loose her Maydenhead. And again in an
other Hieron. in Ierem. l. 2. c. 7.
place, Quid prodest Corporis Pudicitia, animo constuprato? To what end and
purpose is Chastity of Body, if so be the Mind be once deflowred? But thus
much of Virgins, come we now to the State of Matrimony.

The State of Holy Matrimony, is no where in fewer words so fully set down, as
it is in the Book of Common Prayer. Holy Matrimony Communion Book in
Matrimony.
says that Book, is an honorable Estate, instituted of God in Paradise in
the time of Man's innocence, signifying unto us the mystical Union that is
betwixt Christ, and his Church: which holy estate Christ adorned and beautified
with his Presence, and first Miracle that he wrought in Cana of Galile, and is
commended of S. Paul to be honorable among all men, and therefore is not to be
enterprised, nor taken in hand, unadvisedly, lightly, or wantonly, to satisfy
Men's carnal Lusts and Appetites, like bruit Beasts that have no understanding,
but reverently, discreetly, advisedly, soberly, and in the fear of God, duly
considering the Causes for which Matrimony was ordained. And thereupon it tells
us of Three. One, the Procreation of Children to be brought up in the fear and
nurture of the Lord, and Praise of God. Secondly, for a Remedy against Sin,
and to avoid Fornication, that such persons as have not the Gift of Continency
might marry, and keep themselves undefiled Members of Christ his Body. Thirdly,
for the mutual Society, Help, and Comfort, that the One ought to have of the
Other both in Prosperity and Adversity. Thus far our Book of Common
Prayer. So that whether we regard the Necessity, the Antiquity, the Dignity,
the Place, the Time, the Author, the Allower: all show how reverend an account
is to be made of holy Matrimony. First, The Necessity thereof was such, as
that God himself found it good to give Man a Wife: the Antiquity, such as
that it was ordained in the beginning of the World: the Dignity such as that
the Apostle S. Paul calls it Honorable: the Place was Paradise: the Time was
Innocence: God the Author: the Allower Christ Jesus who approved it not only
by his own Birth in Marriage, but by his Presence at a Marriage Feast, when as
purposing in time to cause the Blind to see, the Halt to go, the Leapers to be
cleansed, the Deaf to here, the Dead to be raised up, he would work his first
and foremost miracle at a Marriage Feast, by turning Water into Wine. In this
world; M. Hooker Eccles Pol. l. 5. 73. p. 214.
says Reverend Hooker, there can be no Society durable otherwise then only by
Propagation. Albeit therefore Single Life, says he, be a thing more
Angelical, and divine, yet since the replenishing first of Earth with blessed
Inhabitants, and then of Heaven with Saints everlastingly praising God, did
depend upon Conjunction of Man and Woman, he which made all things complete,
and perfect, saw it could not be good to leave Men without any Helper unto the
fore alleged end. And again a little after: That which is borne of Man, must
be nourished with far more travail, as being of greater price in Nature,
and of slower pace to Perfection then the Offspring of any other Creature
besides. Man and Woman being therefore to join themselves for such a purpose,
they were of Necessity to be linked with some straight, and insoluble knot.
And this it is, that may be said of Marriage in general. Howbeit Marriage a
(...)

(...) thought, word, and deed. And we ought so much the more to have a care
unto our Thoughts for that they can by no means be hid from God above. Man,
Grande Profundam est ipse Homo, cuius etiam Capillos tu Domine nu meratos
habes. Aug. Confess. l. 4. c. 14. p. 70.
says S. Austen, is a great Gulf, howbeit thou o Lord have the number of
every hair of his Head. And again in another Quomodo Aures nostrae ad voces
nostras sic Aures Dei ad Cogitationes nostras. Aug. in Ps. 148. p. 1188
place, As our own Ears are to our Words, so are the Lords Ears to our
Thoughts. Nay unless Words be spoken we cannot possibly hear what is said, he
had need be very Peritum esse nec esse est eum, qui silentium quid sit,
intelligat. Tull. de Divin. l. 2.
Skillful that knew what Silence means, but as for the Lord our God O Lord,
Ps. 139.1.
says David, thou have searched me out and known me, thou know my down
sitting and my vprising, thou understand my Thoughts long before. I will end
this Point with that of Fulgentius, who speaking of Virginity both of the
Body, and the Soul, The Virginity of the Body, Virginitatem Carnis per
Hominem nititur Diabolus praetipere, Cordis vero Virginitatem per seipsum
conatur auferre. Fulgent. de Virgin. and Humil. Epist. 3. p. 504.
says Fulgentius, the Devil endeavors to get by another, but to get and to
obtain the Virginity of the Mind, that will he do by his own self. And
thus having in some sort seen what the Things of the Lord are, we may now
conceive the better, what are the Things of the World: He that is Married
cares for the things of the World, how he may please his Wife. And again,
She that is married cares for the things of the World, how she may please her
Husband.

The Good Quantum boni Virtus habeat, Vitia demo^strant: Clariusque fit lumen
comparatione Tenebrarum. Hier. ad Rustic.
says St Jerome, that Virtue has, appears by the contrary Vices, and Light
seems much cleerer when it is once compared with Darkness. Having seen then
what the Things of the Lord are, we may now more easily have a glimps of the
Things of the World. The World as it is sometimes taken for evil and wicked
Lusts, such as reign in the Children of this World, and therefore the Apostle
1. Ioh 2.16.
St John, Love not the World, nor the things of the World: sometimes for the
Pomp, and Glory that is in Men, and therefore the Apostle Gal. 6.14.
St Paul, The World is crucified to me, and I to the World: so in this place is
it taken here for the Condition, and State of this Earthly Life, when with much
carking, and caring, we provide for such things as belong unto our
mainetenance. And instance is here made of Pleasing the Wife, and Pleasing the
Husband, for that the pleasing of both them, is indeed all in all. For if so
be the Wife begin to fret and fume, It is better Prove. 21.19.
says Solomon, to dwell in the wilderness, then with a contentious and angry
Woman: In the wilderness; that is, Ecclus. 25.18.
says the Son of Syrach, with a Lion and a Dragon: And if the Man be wayward
to, king Solomon says as much of him. Make no friendship Prove. 22 24.
says he, with an angry man, neither go with a furious man, least thou learn
his ways, and receive destruction to thy Soul. And, Potest hoc Lavater in
hunc loc.
says Lavater, ad Foedera, Coningia, and alias Societates etiam extendi: This
Sentence of Solomon may extend to Friendship, Marriage, and other Societies
whatsoever.

We have seen what the Things of the Lord are, we have seen the Things of the
World. Thus much therefore of the Objects, come we now unto the third Point,
namely to the Actions of the Unmarried, and Married, Virgins, and Wives that
are about these Objects, and those are Cares: The unmarried cares for the
things of the Lord, he that is Married cares for the things of the World. The
unmarried Woman cares for the things of the Lord, She that is married cares
for the things of the World.

It is in the Original (...) in all four places; as well for the Unmarried, as
Married, Virgins, as Wives. The Vulgar has Solicitus est in the two Former,
and Cogitat in both the Latter, Beza has Curat in all. The word (...) in the
Original was used by our Savior in his Sermon on the Mount, when speaking to
his Disciples, Be not careful for your Life Mat. 6.25.
says he, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your Body
what ye shall put on: And again, Care not for the Morrow: for the Morrow
shall care for it self: the Day has enough with his own grief. So that the
Apostle means in this place, a thought-taking, or Fullness of Cares which is
done by the One, that is, by the Unmarried, and Virgins, for the Things of the
Lord; by the Other, that is, by the Married, and Wives, for the Things of the
World. Stapleton Lepide ac suaviter exponit Calvinus. Staplet. Antid. Apost in
1. Cor. 7. p 324.
scoffs at Calvin for expounding Sollicitudines, Cares in this place, to
signify Ineptias Nuptiales, Iocos, and alia quibus Coniugati occupantur.
Nuptial Meriments, Sports and Jests between the Man, and the Wife. Indeed
whereas the Apostle had made mention of Trouble before, namely in the eight and
twentieth verse, Such shall have trouble in the Flesh: Calvin seems afterward
to make a Quia superius Tribulationem posuit, nunc Curas commemorat, vel
Solicitudines, dubitari possit an hae: sint diversa, necne. Ego Tribulationem
nasci puto ex rebus tristibus, vt orbitate, viduitate, iurgiis and friviculis
(vt vocant Iurisconsulti) ex multis fastidus, delictis Liberorum, difficultate
alendae familiae, and similibus: Solicitudines etia^ rerum laetarum esse puto,
vt sunt ineptiae nuptia les, ioci, and alia quibus Coniugati occupantur.
Calvin. in 1. Cor. 7 32.
doubt, whether Trouble before spoken of, and Care here in this place be all
one, yea or no. I think Trouble, says he, does issue from sad and heavy
Events as from Lack of Children, Widow-hood, Home-contentions, Brawlings. If
Children be had, from their misdemeanors, from difficulty of housekeeping,
and the like: but as for Cares says he, I take them to signify here, Nuptial
Merriments to, and so forth. Where he does not deny but that they signify the
same that Troubles do, but that they may signify withal nuptial Sports and
Pastimes also. And indeed why not? For if so be notwithstanding this Word, the
Unmarried may with all alacrity go about The things of the Lord, and be
sometimes also in a pleasant vain, as was Elias the Prophet, when he 1. King.
18.27.
mocked the Baalites (not as this Priest of Baal, who mocks an Elias rather,)
what hinders but that married Folks notwithstanding this Word to, may be
pleasant in their kind, and be careful even in this sort, how to please each
other. Had Stapleton been ever married, he would better have understood
Calvin's words: and he might have married such an One, as he would have bin far
more Careful how to have pleased, then careless to displease. But to return
unto my purpose.

The Apostle had said immediately Ver. 32.
before, (...), I would have you without care: not meaning in general without
all Care at all, for himself says in an other 1. Tim. 5 8.
place, If there be any that provideth not for his own, and namely for them of
his Household (which cannot be done without some Care) he denies the Faith, and
is worse then an Infidel. The Apostles meaning then was, that he would have
them (if it might be) prompt and ready without Let, or Hinderance, to run the
Course they had taken in hand, to propagate the Gospel of Christ Jesus, to
follow, and further their own Vocations. And by this may we gather the Sense
also of the Apostles words in this my Text. For where he says that the Married
cares for the Things of the World, his meaning is that he does not always so,
for then would he not have used that If, If there be any Man that provideth
not. His meaning then is, that for the most part, it so falls out, that they
care for the Things of the World, and that they have most occasions so to do.
Duxi vxorem Terent. Adelp. Act. 5. Sc. 4.
says one in the Poet, quam ibi miseriam vidi? Nati Filij, alia cura: porro
autem dum studeo illis, vt quam plurimum facerem, contrivi in quaerundo vitam,
atque aetatem meam. It was the saying there of One, it may be of Thousands. I
married a Wife, what an heap of Troubles did I there find? Then came
Children, thereupon more Troubles, much more Care: and I, while I have
endeavored to carke and care for them all, have spent my whole life, and worn
my self to the very stumps. True it is, that if the Married man, or Married
Woman be Godly, they have a promise from the Lord, for their Comfort in this
case. It is no less then a whole Psalm that David bestows upon them to this
purpose. Namely the hundred eight and twenty Psalm, the Sum whereof is this:
that He should eat the Labors of his Hands, that he is well, and Beatus es,
de presenti estibene tibi erit de futuro est. Aug. in Psa. 127. Vulg. 128.
should be happy: that his Wife should be as the Fruitful Vine upon the Walls
of his House: that his Children should be like the Olive Branches round about
his Table: that he should see Jerusalem in prosperity al his Life long: that he
should see his Childrens Children, and Peace upon Israel. But yet
notwithstanding as St Austen Quid sibi vult, labores fructuum tuorum
manducabis? Modo labores habemus, fructus postea erit. Aug. in Psalm. 127. Vulg.
128.
notes, the Labors must be first in this World, the Fruit hereafter. And
indeed many have been the Labors of the best that ever were, that betook
themselves unto Marriage. Let me instance in those three Patriarchs, so famous
in Gods Book (...)

(...) be more angry with that which follows there in that place, and
therefore no more now, but so much for a Wife. Oh, but thou want Children
then, who may solace thee in thy Youth, and succor thee in thy Age, who may
succeed thee in thy Fortunes, and in whose well-doing thou may take exceeding
joy. Indeed Children are a great Blessing if so be they do well: if
otherwise, a greater Cross. Even as the Wind a Meteor whereby we live in some
sort, and is, as it were a Fan in the hands of God to purge the Air, is
sometimes converted to be a Plague. Like as the My Lord of London on Jonas,
Lect. 4. p 51.
Mariners in Jonas were scourged with a Wind, which otherwise is a principal
Furtherance and benefit required to Sailing. But what? is there no Solace? No
comfort without Children? Hannah, 1. Sam. 5.8.
says Elkanah, why weepest thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart
troubled? Am not I better to thee then ten Sons? Surely, if Elkanah were
better then ten, much more may the Lord be said to be, who is much more able
then Elkanah was to recompense this loss some other way. Besides that a many
Parents as Plutarch Plut. de Amore Prolis.
observes, depart hence out of the world, or ever their Children make show of
that whereunto they have been bred. As Neocles never saw his Son Themstocles
his Victory at Salamis, nor Miltiades what his Son Cimon performed at
Eurymedon, Xantippus never heard his Son Pericles when he pleaded, nor Aristo
his Son Plato when he discoursed, and disputed so divinely in the Schools.
Plutarc. Comment. Non suaviter vivi posse secundum Epicuri Decreta.
For all have not Epaminondas Fortunes, who accounted it the chiefest good that
ever happened unto him that his Parents were alive to see a Trophe set up by him
for a Victory he had over the Enemy. But above all add hereunto, that when we
are our selves to leave this World, we shall not be necessarily tied by reason
of Children though they be never so bad, to bestow our Goods upon them, and
consequently to give occasion of S. Austens words, Aug de Temp Ser. 50. p. 484.
Omitto dicere qualibus Filijs, I will not tell you what Children; no; but our
Charity shall be free to make advised choice of the M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l.
5.. 49. p 94.
Soil wherein her last Seed may most fruitfully be bestowed, even as our
worthy Fou^ders that have gone before us, and by whom we are what we are, nay
by whom the Church and Commonwealth does even at this day fare so well. If all
this content thee not, harken then what the Lord himself says, Let not the
Eunuch say, Esaias, 56.3. Vid. Aug. de Sancta Virgin. c. 24 and 25.
says he, Behold, I am a dry Tree. For thus says the Lord unto the Eunuchs
that keep my Saboth, and choose the thing that pleases me, and take hold of
my Covenant, even unto them will I give (...) mine House, and within my walls a
Place, and a Name better then of the Sons, and of the Daughters, I will give
them an everlasting Name that shall not be put out. Not like the Builders of
Babel, who to make themselves a Shem, that is, a Name, at length ^ound a M
Broughtons Concent of Scripture, Prefat.
Shame: nor like to them the Prophet speaks of, who think that their Houses
shall continue for ever: and that their dwelling places shall endure from one
generation to another, and call the Lands after their own Psalm. 49.11.
Names, notwithstanding they see it fall out otherwise in every Age: but a Name
that shall always last indeed, and that once in, shall never out, maugre all
that Sin and Satan, shall ever be able to effect.

These things thus, Beloved, you see what Reason the Apostle had here to say,
that the Unmarried cares for the things of the Lord, how he may please the
Lord: Again, the Unmarried Woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she
may be holy both in Body, and in Spirit. And his meaning is of such Unmarried,
whether Men, or Women, as have the Gift of Continency, otherwise if they Burn,
it is better for them, a great deal better, to Marry then to Burn. The
Apostle himself says as much in the Ninth verse of this Chapter. Nor will
Bellarmines Interpretation of those words, stand them in any steed. For saying
that by Burning the Apostle should mean there Incontinency, or Bell de Monach.
l 2. c. 30, 7.
Fornication, as if so be, he should have said: He that decrees with himself,
or to commit Fornication, or to Marry, he does well if he Marry: what does he
else but by restraining Fornication to the material and external Act, not
taking it as our Savior does, Mat. 5.28, but show of what House he comes,
namely of no better Progeny the^ the Pharisees. The truth is, as there is an
outward, so is there an inward Transgression too, which inward Transgression is
formally Vid. Iunii Animadv. in Bell. Controvers 5. l. 2. c. 30. 9.
Adultery, howsoever the material, or outward Act is not annexed thereunto.
Vrimur intus, Ovid. Epist. Phaedr. Hippol.
says She in the Poet, Vrimur, and caecum pectora vulnus alunt.
And Senec. Hippol. Act. 2. Sc. Quis me dolori.
again, -- Pectus insanum vapor
Amorque torret, intimas saevus vorat
Penitus medullas, atque per Venas meat
Visceribus ignis mersus, and venis latens
Vt agilis altas Flamma percurrit trabes.
And so the Poet of Virg. Aeneid. l. 4.
Dido: Vulnus alit Venis, and caeco carpitur igni.
And Virg. Ib.
again, -- Est mollis Flamma medullas
Interea, and tacitum vivit sub pectore vulnus.
Vritur infaelix Dido, totaque vagatur
Vrbe furens.
And this is that, and the like to this that the Apostle intimates here unto
us, in the word (...), to Burn. If they cannot abstain, let them marry, for
it is better to marry then to burn. I will end this Point with that of Calvin:
We may gather Calvin. in hunc Loc.
says he, from this Sentence of St Paul, that no Chastity at all is pleasing
to the Lord unless it be in Mind, as well as in Body. And I would to God
says he, that they that prattle so prowdly of Chastity (he means our
Adversaries the Papists) would consider that they had in this case to do with
God himself: they would not then strive with us so confidently as they do.
And thus much of these words, a word of Application, and then God-willing an
end. The Unmarried cares for the things of the Lord, how he may please the
Lord: but he that is married, cares for the things of the world, how he may
please his Wife. There is a difference also between a Virgin, and a Wife: the
Unmarried Woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in
Body and in Spirit: but she that is married cares for the things of the
World, how she may please her Husband.

And here, me thinks, ere we go any farther, a many of us will be ready to
apply to our Adversaries the Papists whatsoever has been said concerning
Virginity, or Wedlock. First concerning Virginity, that their Friars, and
Nuns are not the Virgins they are taken for: that their Cloisters are but
Receptacles for Dorrs and Droanes: that they seek not the Things of the Lord
so much, as worldly Pomp and Pre-eminence, and indeed the Things of the World.
Concerning Wedlock, that they make it a Sacrament indeed, but speak most
spightfully against it to: that they banish the Clergy from it as from an
unclean, and polluted thing: that they eve^ surfeit of the Apostles words, He
that is married cares for the things of the World, how he may please his Wife:
And again, She that is married cares for the Things of the World how she may
please her Husband. And indeed should we thus do, we should do them but
reason, and yield them Legem Talionis, like for like. For will you hear what
they say of us, first concerning Virginity, and then concerning Wedlock? No
Maids amongst us, say they, but such as can get no Matches; so Bristow.
Motive. 35. p. 145.
says Bristow. The Calvinists and Bezites who hardly have escaped the Flames
of Sodom, full fraught with Villainy, have drive^ Virginity out of the World: so
Weston de triplici Hominis. Officio. l. 2. c. 4. p. 58.
says Westo^. And when we had a MAIDEN QVEENE, A Queen that enritched, and
fortified her own Land, Camden in Middle-Sex.
Freed Scotland from the French, Relieved France, Supported the Netherla^ds,
Awed Spain, and so forth, Would God D. Allens Answer to the Execut. of
Justice, c. 8. p. 190.
says Allen, insteede of her Majesty's Virginity (so that it had stood with
Gods will and hers) we might rather have had for the Realms safety, issue of
her Body in honorable Wedlock. In which State, says he, there is godly
Continency also, and perhaps (as things If the Doctor here meant basely (as not
unlikely but he did) the Answer to Tigellinus was fit enough for him. Tacit.
Annal. l. 14.
stand) as meritorious, and glorious to her self as her Virginity. It is most
odious to be repeated what they published of her in her Life time, and since
she is dead and gone. And he is Nobody with them now adays, who in every
Among the rest Examen Catholicum, under the Name of Stanislaus Christanovicus
printed at Paris 1607. whereof that worthy old Gentleman, and a true lover of
his Country, Mr George Broom of Halton, gave the first notice at the coming
forth. Whereupon the Honorable S. George Carew then Lord Ambassador (upon
complaint made by himself) had the Printer clapped in Prison, and the whole
Impression of Books, as many as were unsold, brought unto his House, where he
caused them to be burnt in his Court yard. Aug. 12. according to the French
computation. There was not in all France a fayrer FIRE that Day.
Pamphlet he sets forth has not somewhat concerning Her. But to return to
Cardinal Allen.

Is Wedlock now with him become so Honorable? Is there Continency, I, and
godly Co^tinency even in that State? And may VVedlocke, even Wedlock, in any
one kind of Person be as meritorious, and glorious as Virginity it self? Then
Fie on them on his side, who speaking of those that are lawfully made Priests,
and such as have formerly made vow of Chastity, that they forsooth cannot marry
at all, and therefore that in them there is no Comparison betwixt Marriage, and
Fornication, or Burning. For their Marriage is but pretensed (say they) and is
the worst sort of Incontinency, and Fornication, or Burning; so say the Rhem.
Test. in. 1. Cor, 7.9.
Rhemists. Fie on them on his side, that say Marriage profanes the sacred Order
of Priesthood, and makes it mere Laicall, and Popular; so says Gregory Martins
Discovery, c. 15.. 11.
Martin. But how many Fies shall we say on them, or how many Anathemaes rather
shall we give the^, who speaking of the Marriage of Ministers, which Ministers
in their opinion are neither Priests, nor otherwise have made Vow of Chastity,
teach others to abhor it in special terms as a commentitious and fained
Matrimony; so do a Fidei Professio a Monach. Burdegal. edit. Art, 53. Sadeel.
Oper p. 506. Col. 2.
Troop of Papists together. But it is not to Papists I am to speak, neither
is it to them, or their Priests, that I would you should apply what has been
spoken of this my Text, I only say of them as said our Savior of those that
came to take him and his Disciples would feign have bin bustling with them,
Suffer them thus far, Luk 22.51.

Others there may be, and amongst us to, that will be as ready to apply wha^
has been spoken of this my Text to the Prelates and Pastors of our own
Church, that they forsooth if they be Unmarried, care not as they ought for The
things of the Lord: if they be Married, that they are too much addicted to The
things of the World: that Housekeeping with them is decayed, that al they can
wrap and rend is little enough for Wife and Children. And it cannot indeed be
denied but where there are so many both Married, and Unmarried, but that Some
there are that will be such ( Terent. And. Act. 2. Sc. 5.
Et quod dicendum hic siet, Tu quoque perparce nimiu^, non lando) howbeit, it
little becomes the Sheep to censure such as are their Pastors, to prescribe
unto them their Duty, or to talk of them their pleasure. It was an excellent
saying of Nazianzen, and worthy to be written in Letters of Gold, Greg. Naz.
Orat. 6.
Presume no^ ye that are Sheep to make your selves Guides of them that should
guide you, neither seek ye to over-skip the Fold which they about you have
pitched. It suffices for your part if you can well frame your selves to be
ordered. Take not upon you to judge your Judges, nor to make them subject to
your Laws who should be a Law to you. For God is not a God of Sedition, and
Confusion, but of Order and of Peace. St Ierom speaks it of Monks, I may say
it of Christians in general, Illius Monachi vita laudan da est, qui
venerationi habet Sacerdotes Christi and non detrahit Gradui, per quem factus
est Christianus. Hieron. ad Furia^ de Viduit. Servand.
His, or her Life is to be praised, who has the Priests of our Savior in good
estimation, and slaundereth not or reports not ill of that degree and estate,
whereby He, or She was made at the first a Christian. It is not then to our
Prelates, or Pastors, that I would should be applied, what has been spoken
in this kind. But we may thank a many of our own Coat for these Obliquities,
who have no other Food for the People to feed them with, but to tell them
ever, and a none, what the Pastor is to do, so that they have made them very
ripe in the Duty of the Pastor, but as raw again in their own Duties. It
would have better become their Pains, and Good Discretion, to have followed
the Counsel of our wise M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. 22. p 49.
Iethro, namely, to have given Ecclus. 51.27 Mat. 12.20.
encouragement to the People; to have put them in mind that it was not the
deepenes of their knowledge, but the 1. Tim. 1.5. Romans 14.1. 1. These. 3.10.
singlenes of their Belief which God accepted; that they which Mat. 5.6.
hunger and thirst after Righteousness, should be satisfied; that no Philip. 1
6. 1. Pet. 5.10. Mat. 3.9.
imbecility of means could prejudice the truth of the promise of God herein;
that the weaker their helps were, the more their need was to sharpen the edge
of their own 1 Thessalonians. 4.18 Heb. 10.24. Iud. v. 20. 1. Pet. 4.10.
industry; and that Luke 11.31.
painfulness by feeble means should be able to gain that, which in the
plenty of more forcible Instruments should through sloth, and negligence be
lost. Such Arguments would have done better (and we who are Pastors should have
so found it) then Doctrines and Uses of Dumb Dogs, Unpreaching Prelates, of Vid.
Causab. Exercit. 16 ad Annals Baron. p. 564.
Predestination, Reprobation, and the like, which if in a Vulgar Auditory they
may do good perhaps to One, or Two; there may be Twenty for that One, and
Forty for those Two, who possibly may be little edified by it, if not hindered
in their Salvation. But their manner of Episcopus Laicis loquor, sed inde scio
quam multis futuris Episcopis loquor Aug. de Sanct. Ser. 42 p. 897.
Meating in this kind, has made me forget my self in giving them the like
Measure, and to preach unto you of their Duty: though in regard of a many
Novices that hear me this day, and may in time be Mat. 7.2.
Preachers themselves, it shall not be much amiss to have said thus much: and
so I come to the matter in hand.

Seeing we are not then now at this time, to apply the words of this my Text,
or to our Adversaries abroad, or to our own Pastors at hoame, what remains
but that now at length we apply them wholly to our selves. Every Man, every
Woman, every Maid amongst us, let us go search our own Hearts, let us see how
the Apostles Words, and our Deeds agree together. First then, are we Married
Folk? True it is, the Apostle here says, that He that is married cares for
the Things of the World, how he may please his Wife, and She that is married
cares for the Things of the World how She may please her Husband, but seeing
he means not to the contrary, but that they may be both careful for the Things
that pertain to God, and Marriage may be so used, as that it shall be no
hinderance at all to a good and godly life, let us as many of us as be married,
say with our Selves: I will take my lot as it has befallen me, I will make a
Virtue of this Necessity. Gregory, S. Basils Brother shall be my Pattern, of
whom it is Niceph. l. 11. c 19.
written, that although he had a Wife, yet was he in other things nothing
inferior to his Brother who had none. As many of you therefore as are Husbands,
follow the steps of faithful Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, who were devout
and religious Men: as many of you as are Wives be loving and amiable as
Commun. Book in Matrimon.
Rachel, wise as Rebecca, faithful and obedient as Sarah, remembering whose
Daughters ye are whilst you do well, not being afraid of any Terror.

But are we of the other sort, Unmarried, and Virgins? Let us first remember
to ask this Gift of God above, as also the continuance of it, if it be for
our greater good. St Austen did ask for Co^tinency, but he was Da mihi
Castitatem and Contiuentiam, sed noli modo. Timebam enim ne me cito exaudires,
and cito sanares a Morbo Concupiscentiae quam malebam expleri, quam extingui.
Aug. Confess. l. 8. c. 7. p. 103.
loath to have it then. He was afraid least God would hear him to quickly, and
too too soon heal him of his malady of Concupiscence, which he had rather
should have been satisfied, the^ quite extinguished. I pray God there be not
too many of S. Austens mind in this point, they are loath to pray for Chastity
for fear God should hear them indeed. Secondly, when we have it, let us
remember the Care we ought to have in keeping of it. Onusta incedis auro,
Hieron. ad Eustoch. de Custod. Virgin.
says S. Ierom to a Virgin, Latro tibi vitandus est. Thy Virginity is unto
thee a Charge of Gold, beware of Thieves that will assault thee: and showing
the loss of it, if once lost, to be irrecoverable, I dare be bold, Audenter
loquar, cum omnia possit Deus suscitare Virgine^ no^ potest post ruina^.
Hieron. Ib. Virginitas si labitur, nullo modo reparatur nam quamvis quis per
paenitentiam recipiet veniam, tame^ incorruptionem nunquam recipiet pristinam.
Bernard. de Modo been Vivend. c. 21.
says he, to speak it, that God that can do al things, can by no means
repair Virginity, when once it is lost and gone. Thirdly, let us not bear
our selves overbould in that we have been Chaste heretofore. It is S. Ieroms
Counsel too, In praeterita Castitate ne confidas: Trust not thy self too
much, for thou have been Chaste in former times. Thou art not more holy, Nec
Sanctior David: nec Salomone potes esse sapientior. Memento semper, quod
Paradisi Colonum, de possessione sua Mulier eiecerit. Hieron. ad Nepotian.
says he, then David was, nor wiser then Solomon. Remember ever and anon that
it was a Woman that cast the Owner of Paradise out of Possession. And this I
take to be a cause, as also some other besides, why S. Austen, and Fulgentius,
and S. Bernards Tracts concerning Virginity, have very much in them concerning
Humility too. Indeed, Humility is like the Cyphar in Arithmiticke which being
it self of no value, gives value yet to other Numbers. First then, having had
a care to procure unto us this Jewel; Secondly, a care in keeping it; Thirdly,
in keeping it with Humility; let our Fourth and last care be, to care for the
Things of the Lord indeed, every of us in our Vocations, be we of the one
Sex, or of the other, and so much the rather for that whatsoever times may
happen hereafter, (and who knows what Times may happen, considering the Plenty
of Sin in our Land) we that are Unmarried may bear them the better, and
pass over Jorden with a Genesis 32.10.
Staff alone, if so be it be our hap, as many of our Worthies have done
before us, and Jacob the Patriarch before them. But as those Times I trust shall
never happen, so in any wise let us not now forget to make a Benefit of these
Times when as we may care for the Things of the Lord never better, whether we
are Pastors, or of the Flock. Pastors, for such a great Doare, Ier. 7.13.
and effectual is opened unto us, notwithstanding there are some Adversaries
to, 1. Cor. 16.9. You that are the Flock, for you are still in hearing the
voice of the Lord, which still he is uttering to you, or by your Pastors, or by
your Curats, that is, by Moses, and by the Prophets, Luke 16.29. God forbid it
should now follow, what follows in Jeremy: But when I spoke, ye would not
hear me, neither when I called would you answer.

The God of heaven so bless us, and the seed that has been sown, etc.
VVIDOVVHOOD.
Christmas Day, December. 25. 1614.
WHO is a Faithful Steward, and wise, Luke 12.42.
says our Savior Christ Jesus, whom the Master shall make Ruler over his
Household to give them their Portion of Meat in season. Their Portion of Meat.
It is in the Original (...): that is, a certain Quantity of Meat, Drink,
and Corn, given to Erasm. et Beza in hunc lo^.
Servants of old, to find them a certain time. Now as many several
Congregations, or Parishes, as are in the Church of God Militant, so many
several Households are there. The several Ministers are the Stewards, and
though Steward here, and Household, be both but Singular, yet are they put for
the plural Number. I for my part, among those several Stewards, who are of
those several Households, can neither challenge unto my self, or Faithfulness,
or Wisdom, but how You for your parts heretofore have had every of you your
Portions, as many of you as here are present, and are of this Household, whether
Husbands, or Wives, or Parents, or Children, or Masters, or Servants, or
Virgins: you may remember, if you call to mind, my several Texts to those
several purposes. There is one Portion still remaining, and it belongs unto
WIDOVVES, which I have not as yet delivered to them, which Portion of theirs,
since it is their due, and they may challenge it at my hands, God forbid, but I
should do them right, and now deliver it unto them. May you be pleased then,
Right Worshipful, and Dearly Beloved in our Savior Christ, to see this
Portion of theirs served in. It is for them I grant in particular, but it is
likely also that somewhat thereof will fall unto your Shares. The Text I have
chosen to this Purpose, is in the Second Chapter of S. Lukes Gospel, the Six
and thirtith, Seven and thirtith, and Eight and thirtith Verses, and part of
the Second Lesson read unto you at Morning Prayer. The words be these: And
there was a Prophetess, one Anna the Daughter of Phanuel of the Tribe of Aser,
which was of a great Age, and had lived with an Husband seven years from her
Virginity. And she was Widow about fourscore and four years, and went not
out of the Temple, but served God with Fastings, and Prayers night and day. She
then coming at the same instant upon them, confessed likewise the Lord, and
spoke of him to all that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.



The Text, you see, is of a Widow, and as our Savior Luke 4.25.
said in an other case, Many Widows were in Israel, in the days of Elias,
when Heaven was shut three years, and six Month, when great Famine was
throughout the Land, but unto none of them was Elias sent, save into Sarepta a
City of Sidon, unto a certain VVidow: the like, Beloved, may I say, there are
in this Israel, the Sacred Scriptures of God, a many, many Widows, but nor I,
nor you, at this time, are sent to any of them, save to this Widow here spoken
of. The First that we read of there, is Genesis 38.11.
Thamar the Daughter of Judah, but She was a Vicious Widow. She lay with Judah
her Father in Law. His Signet, and Cloak and Staff, were Signs sufficient,
that howsoever in his Eyes, She was more Ver. 26.
Righteous then He, yet that She was in the Eyes of God, both Unrighteous, and
Incestuous to. An other Widow we read of there, is the woman of 2. Sam. 14.5
Tekoah, but She was a Subtle Widow, She had Tears at will to shed, but they
were but feined Tears. She did it indeed with a good Mind, but good Minds
must use good Means to: we must not do Evil, that Good may come thereof, Romans
3.8. We may read also, though not in the Scriptures themselves, yet in the
Apocrypha hard by, of Judith. 9.2.
Judith the Daughter of Merari, but She was a Genesis 49.5:
Bloud^ VVidow, She slew Holofornes with her own Hands. Wherefore as the Lord
1. Chron. 28 3.
said unto David, Thou shall not build an House for my Name, because thou have
sh^d Blood, when as notwithstanding he had shed but the Blood of Gods Enemies,
so shall not Judith now be our Example, for that She also shed Blood, though
it were but the Blood of an Enemy. Our Savior even in this Gospel Luke 18.3.
tells us of a VVidow that was in Law, but She was a Clamorous Widow, fit indeed
to vex an unrighteous Judge, but far unfit to be followed by us. -- Senec.
Theb. Act. 2.
Causa repetentis bona est,
Mala sic petentis.
Cause She had to call for her own, but not in that clamorous sort. She
should have committed her Cause to him, who judges righteously, as St Peter 1.
Pet 2.23.
speaks, and in so many Psalm 68.5. Ier. 22.3 Psalm. 146.9. Zach. 7 10. Exodus
22.22. Esaias, 1.17. Esaias, 10.2.
Places of holy Scripture, takes special care concerning Widows. She should
have remembered how miraculously God did use to work with Widows Tears, that
howsoever naturally they do Ecclus 35.15. Dic mihi quod Flumen soleat
conscendere Coelum.
descend in running down the Cheeks, yet indeed how they ascend also, in going
high up to Heaven. There are Widows, I confess, better then these, and whose
Steps are rather to be followed, as the VVidow to whom Elias was 1 King. 17.9.
sent, to be sustained in a Dearth: the VVidow that cast in those two Mark.
12.42
Mites into the Treasury of the Temple: the Widows that Act 9.39.
wept so much for the Death of Dorcas their Benefactrix: the VVidow Ruth. 1.16.
Naomi, that brought up Ruth her Daughter in Law so religiously; the Widow
Judge. 4.4.
Deborah that was so famous both in War, and Peace: but Anna is the Widow
indeed we are now to speak of at this time, ANNA in this our Age, the Best of
Names, and Anna in that Age, as it may be thought, the Best of Widows. The
Commendations given Anna here are thick and threefold, as First in regard of
her Condition, Family, and Age, and that in the Six and thirtieth, and part of
the Seven and thirtieth Verse, and that in these Words: And there was a
Prophetess, one Anna the Daughter of Phanuel of the Tribe of Aser, which was
of a great Age, and had lived with an Husband seven years from her Virginity.
And She was Widow about four score and four years. Secondly, in regard of
her Religion, and that in the other part of that Verse, and that in these
words: And went not out of the Temple, but served God with Fastings and
Prayers, night and day. Thirdly, in regard of her Words, and Testimony she gave
of Christ, and that in the Eight and thirtieth Verse, and that in these words:
She then coming at the same instant upon them, confessed likewise the Lord,
and spoke of him to all that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem. Of every of
these in their several Order, and First of her Condition, Family, and Age. And
there was a Prophetess, one Anna the Daughter of Phanuel, of the Tribe of
Aser, etc.

Concerning her Condition it is here, you see, set down, that She was a
Prophetess, and much there is in holy Scripture concerning Prophets, and
Prophetesses. The very first time we find the Name of a Prophet there given,
was given to Abraham by God himself, when king Abimelech had taken his Wife,
supposing her to be his Sister. To whom when God had threatened Death for taking
Abraham's Wife from him, and the King excused himself, that he for his part was
innocent, in regard he knew not She was his Wife: I know Genesis 20.6.
says the Lord, that thou did this even with an upright mind, and I kept
thee also that thou should not sin against me: therefore suffered I thee
not to touch her. Now then, says he, deliver the Man his Wife again: for he
is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee that thou may live, but if thou
deliver her not again, be sure that thou shall die the death, thou, and all
that thou have. Whereunto David the Prophet alluding: He suffered no Man Psa.
105.14.
says he, to do them wrong, but reproved eve^ kings for their sakes. Touch
not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. But Prophets were De Origin
Prophetiae quod ad tempus attinet certum est eam primum fuisse in Adamo. P.
Martyr. Loc. Commun. Classo. 1. Loc. 3.
long before Abraham's time: Henoch is said to Prophecy, Jude the foureteenth
verse, nay, Adam himself did prophecy, Genesis 2.23. She shall be called Woman
says he, because She was taken out of Man. Therefore shall Man leave his
Father, and his Mother, and shall cleave to his Wife, and they shall be one
Flesh. After Adam, and Henoch, and Abraham, and others, succeeded Moses, and
Joshua, and Samuel, and Esaias, and Jeremy, and a many more, till the time of our
Savior Christ, who was the End and Perfection of all. Who therefore were
called Prophets, for they had a certain Faculty given them of God, by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, whereby they knew his secret Counsels, and
declared them to his People. And therefore St Peter, No Prophecy 2. Pet. 1.10.
says he, in the Scripture, is of any private motion. For the Prophecy came
not in old time, by the will of Man, but holy men of God, spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost. Nor was this Gift of Prophecy given unto Men only,
but sometimes unto Women to. And so Miriam the Sister of Moses sang in Public
the Praises of God, and Judge 4 4.
Deborah was a Prophetess, Exodus 15.20.
and judged Israel. 2. King. 22.14
Huldah also a Prophetess asked counsel of King Josiah, and 1 Samuel 2.1.
Hannah the Mother of Samuel set forth a most godly Hymn. The Wife of Esaias was
a Esaias, 8.3.
Prophetess to, and Phillip the Evangelist had four Act. 21.9.
Daughters that did prophecy. This it was the Prophet Joel did tell of, so
long before: Your Sons Joel. 2.28*
says he, and your Daughters shall prophecy, and upon the Servants and upon
the Maids will I power my Spirit. I, it was usual it should seem in the
Primitive Times of the Church, that Women did Prophecy, and therefore the
Apostle St Paul in his First Epistle to the Corinthians, Every man 1. Cor. 11.5.
says he, that prays, or prophesies bare headed, dishonors her Head: so
that Women then did prophecy, and they were permitted so to do, so they did
it not Bare-headed. P. Martyr in Iud. 4.4.
I, but Some will say, the same Apostle in the same 1. Cor. 14.34.
Epistle, as also in his First to 1. Tim. 2.11.
Timothy, wills that Women keep silence in the Churches, and shows that it is
not permitted to them to speak. True it is, he so does, but those his words
are to be understood, not of Examples extraordinary, and in Cases of
Necessity, but of the Ordinary Ecclesiastical Office which is given to Men
only. Concerning this, more may be seen in P. Martyr, and others. I refer you
not in this point to Calvin, for Causes best known unto the Sea D. Bridges
Defense of the Government established in the Church of England. l 9. p. 674,
675, 676, etc.
Learned of our own side. Why we have not Prophets now adays, much less
Prophetesses, it is for the Scriptures now contain such Sufficiency in them,
as that the Church has no need at all either of the One, or of the Other. When
as the Church began to grow, God stirred up a Many both Men and Women to that
purpose: now since there are so many Preachers and Pastors raised up, God has
ceased that Gift, even as he Josh. 5.12.
ceased to rain Manna down from heaven, when as once the Israelites had
tasted of the Fruit of the Land of Canaan. We may say in this particular, as S.
Gregory in his time spoke of Miracles in general. Miracles, Nunquid Fra tres
mei, quia ista signa non facitis: minime creditis? sed haec necessaria in
Exordio Ecclesiae fuerunt. Vt enim ad fidem cresceret multitudo credentiu^,
miraculis fuerat nutrienda: quia and nos cum Arbusta plantamus, tam diu eis
aquam in fundimus: quo vsque ea in terra iam coaluisse videamus, and si semel
radicem fixerint, irrigatio cessabit. Greg. in Eva^g. Hom. 29. p. 119. Col. 2.
says he, were necessary in the Churches beginning, because the multitude of
Believers to the end they might the better grow up unto Faith, were to be
nourished (as it were) by Miracles. Even as we our selves, says he, when as
we use to set young Plants, power water on them every day, till such time as
we see they are come to a pretty height, and then when as we perceive, they
have taken deep root, we leave to water them any longer. And S. Austen to
this purpose: Miracles, Cur, inquiunt, nunc illa Miracula quae praedicatis
facta esse, non fiunt? Possem quidem dicere necess^ia fuisse prius quam
crederet Mundus, ad hoc vt crederet Mundus. Quisquis adhuc predigia, vt credat
inquirit, magnum est ipse Prodigium, qui Munde credente, non credit. Aug. de
Civ. Dei. Lib. 22. c. 8.
says he, were necessary before the World did believe, to the end and purpose
it should believe, but whosoever now adays seeks after Miracles to the end
he might believe, is himself a great Miracle, who (the World believing as it
does) will needs be himself in unbelief. But to return unto my purpose.

As Miriam, and Deborah, and Huldah, and Esays Wife were Prophetesses in their
time, so was Anna here in this place. And as our Savior Mat. 11.11.
said of John the Baptist, Verily I say unto you, among them which are begotten
of women, arose there not a greater then John Baptist, meaning, he was the
greatest of all, for that Others spoke of him a Long, a great way off, John
the Baptist did point, and show him with the Finger: right so may we say of
Anna here, that she was the greatest Prophetess of all before her, forasmuch
as She had the honor to see our Savior in the Flesh. She might say as did S.
John: 1. Ioh. 1.1.
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the
Word of Life (for the Life appeared, and we have seen it, and bear witness,
and show unto you the eternal Life, which was with the Father, and appeared
unto us) That, I say, which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you. But
thus much of Anna as She was a Prophetess. Come we now unto her Family,
concerning which it is storied here that She was the Daughter of Phanuel, of
the Tribe of Aser.

As touching the Name Phanuel, it may seem to have come at first from the Name
of that Place which Jacob so termed, whenas he had wrastled with an Angel. For
that which in some Translations is there termed Peniel, the Vulgar translates
Phanuel, and it signifies as much as the Countenance, or Face of God, whereupon
Jacob so termed that place. And Jacob, Genesis 32.30.
says the Scripture, called the name of the Place Peniel: for said he, I have
seen God face to face, and my Life is preserved. Who this Phanuel here spoken
of was, is now uncertain unto us, but it is likely he was in those days well
known to all the People, and well might Anna here have been the Daughter of a
Phanuel, who saw our Savior Christ thus, and consequently God himself, Face
to face. Concerning the Tribe of Aser, whereof her Family was, it was none of
the meanest among the Twelve. Jacob prophesying of that Tribe: Concerning Aser,
Genesis 49.20.
says he, his Bread shall be fat, and he shall give Pleasures for a King. His
Bread shall be fat, that is, he should have Plenty of Corn, and by Giving
Pleasures for a King were meant rare and precious Things that were to grow in
his Country. Moses in Deuteronomy speaks of this Tribe a little more fully.
Asher, Deuteronomy. 33.24
says he, shall be blessed with Children, he shall be acceptable to his
Brethren, and shall dip his Foot in Oil. Thy shoes shall be Iron and Brass,
and thy strength shall continue as long as thou live. Where first by Being
blessed with Children, his Abundance of People was understood: by his
Acceptablenesse to his Brethren, the sober and quiet disposition of all for the
most part of that Tribe: by Dipping the Foot in Oil, the Plenty of that
Liquor, whereof there was in those days so much use: by Iron, and Brass,
those two Minerals in their Country more then in all the Tribes besides: by
Continuing of his Strength as long as he should live, the fresh and lively hew
of a many in that Tribe when as they should come to great Age. Like as Cyrus
Tully de Senect.
said in Xenophon, that he found himself as strong in his Age, as he had
been in his Youth: or Moses in Deuteronomy. 34.7.
Deuteronomy, who being an hundred and twenty years old, yet his eye was not
dim, nor his natural Force abated: or Caleb in Joshua who speaking of himself,
I, Josh. 14.10.
says he, am this day fourscore and five year old, and yet am as strong at
this time, as I was when Moses sent me, as strong as I was then, so strong am I
now, either for war, or for Government.

Now her Age is intimated here to be more by much then Calebs was. She had
been a Widow within a year, as long as Caleb was old. She had been a
married Wife the space of Seven years. It is likely that before she was
married, she was some Sixteen or thereabouts, so that she must need be above
an Hundred. An Age which howsoever came short of the Ancient before her,
according to that of Genesis 47.9.
Jacob: The whole time of my Pilgrimage is an hundred and thirty years: He
that has bin long at Sea in Storms and Tempests, and has never arrived at a
safe Port, cannot say that he has sailed much, but that he has been long
tossed with a Tempest: In like manner he that has lived long in the Crosses
of this Life, cannot say that his Life has been long, but that he has
continued long in the waves of this World H^st. of Lewis the eleventh l. 10 p
112. Translat by M Grymeston.
few and evil have the days of my Life been, and I have not attained to the
years of the Life of my Fathers, in the days of their Pilgrimages: yet by
those Few among many Millions that usually come to that Age, we may conceive
what a Blessing it was to Anna here in this place. Nay what a Blessing it was
to her whole Tribe. For if so be among all the Curses threatened to old Eli,
this in particular was one, 1 Samuel 2.31.
Behold the Days come that I will cut of thine Arm, and the Arm of thy
Fathers House that there shall not be an old man in thy House, meaning indeed
nor Man, nor Woman. I, and the words are doubled V. 32.
again, There shall not be an old Man in thy House for ever: how singular a
Blessing was it, that there was One thus Aged in this Tribe, and as the World
perhaps then went, of the greatest Age that was. The Beauty of young Men, Prove
20.29.
says Solomon, is their Strength, and the Glory of the Aged is the Gray Head.
I, concerning Gray Hayres, it was the Commandment of God himself, Lev. 19.32.
Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the Person of the old
Man. A point which the Athenians knew full well it should be done, but the
Lacedaemonians put it in practice, and let Scholars take heed, it be not said
of them as was said of those Athenians, Tull. de Senect.
Scire quae recta essent, sed facere nolle, I need not English it in this
Assembly. But thus much of Annaes Condition, of her Family, and of her Age:
come we now to her Religion, and that in these Words: And went not out of the
Temple, but served God with Fastings, and Prayers, night and day. Wherein for
our better proceeding, let me First observe unto you, her Piety toward God:
then the Manner of it. Her Piety toward God in these Words: And went not out
of the Temple: The Manner of it in these: But served God with Fastings, and
Prayers, night and day.

First, concerning the Phrases here, of not Going out of the Temple, and of
Serving God Night and Day: that is, Continually (for so Night, and Day, Day,
and Night, sometimes signify) I have showed you David's Desire, Ser. 1. p. 23.
heretofore out of Lyra and Beda in hunc loc.
Lyra, and out of Bid, how the Words are to be taken. Not that She was in the
Temple always, and never absent, no not an Hour, but as we say of a good
Student, that he is never out of his Study, who is most necessarily
notwithstanding to be out of it a many times. So the Apostle St Paul unto the
Colossians, We give thanks Coloss. 1.3
says he, to God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, always praying for
you. And Ver. 9.
again, We cease not to pray for you. And so to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.16.
I cease not to give thanks for you. And this our Evangelist St Luke speaking
of our Saviors Disciples, after they had seen him carried up into heaven:
They returned Luke 24.52.
says he, to Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the Temple
praising, and lauding God. But now concerning her Piety here, And went not out
of the Temple.

The Temple here spoken of, was the Temple of Jerusalem, that glorious and
famous Temple, so much renowned in holy Scripture. This indeed was Gods House
wherein it pleased him to dwell, and whosoever made Prayers unto him, repaired
commonly to this place. Nay the Praying of the People but 1. King 8.44.
toward this place, when they were in Warfar, or in Dan. 6.10.
Exile, and could by no means come unto it, even that was sufficient enough to
procure them Blessings from the Lord. Hitherto then it was that this Widow did
repair, here She spent her whole time, it is likely there was no Sacrifice
here, either Morning, or Evening Sacrifice (and Morning and Evening Sacrifices
were to be performed every Numb. 28.4.
day) but She made her self Partaker of them, as also of the Prayers here
made. She remembered no doubt to this Purpose the words of David, Psalm. 84.1.
O how amiable are thy Dwellings, thou Lord of Hoasts. My Soul has a desire,
and longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord, my Heart and my Flesh rejoice
in the living God. Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, they will be
always praising thee. One day in thy Courts is better then a thousand. And
again in another place, a Place not unknown unto you, Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require, even that I may
dwell in the House of the Lord, all the days of my Life, to behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple. I, and which is more, considering
the Times that now were, She could not be ignorant how in respect of the many
Abuses in this Temple, this House was now made a Mat. 21.13.
Den of Thieves, the Faithful City become an Esaias 1.21.
Harlot, her Silver become Dross, her Wine mixed with Water, and yet Anna for
all this would by no means turn Recusant. No, She rather practiced that at
those times, which this Infant taught long after, Mat. 23.2.
The Scribes, and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat. All therefore whatsoever
they bid you observe, that observe and do, but after their Works do not. And
yet there were in those Days to, that Mat. 23.15.
compassed Sea and Land, to make one of their Profession, but they taught not
as our Priests and Jesuits do, that they should refrain from going to Church.
Especially not to go in one Kingdom, and yet to go in an Other, as for
example to go to Church in Mr Charles Paget at my being in France was asked in
my hearing, by an English Gentlem^n a Pap st, whether it were lawful for a
Catholic to go to Church in England. His answer was, that though himself
did not go, yet he saw not but a Catholic might. For when I was, says he,
in Scotland, and demanded of a Jesuit there, the selfsame Question, (in
behalf of Some of my Friends in England) his Answer was, they might not: to
who^ when I, says he, replied again, that he, and his Fellows gave le^e in
Scotland, of my own knowledge, to go to Church there: It is true, says he,
so we do, for Going to Church here in Scotland, is not Signum Distinctivum, as
in England it is. But why it should be in England, and why not in Scotland;
neither could I then learn, neither do I think, says he, he was able to
tell. Since that time, I have read the Distinction in Howlet, from whom (it may
seem) the Jesuit had it. Howlets Reasons for not going to Church. Rat. 3.
Scotland among the Protestants there, but in England by no means, Signum
distinctivum, was not thought of in those days. But to return unto our VVidow.

Cardinal Baronius in his Annals would prove her to be a Nun, and that by
the Testimony of St Cyrill. Indeed St Cyrils Interpreter calls her in Latin
Monialis, and Monialis so signifies, but how truly in that word he expresses
the Greek word (...), the word which St Cyrill uses, is a matter of much
doubt, concerning which I refer the Learned to that which Vid. Casaubon.
Exercit. 1. c 23. p. 117. and Exercit. 2. c. 13. p. 190.
Casaubon has observed, and written thereupon. But such as are troubled with
the Lurida praeterea fiunt, quae cunque tuentur Arquati. Lucret. l. 4.
Yellow Iaundise, deem all things they look upon to be yellowish, those which
are sick of the Disease the Physicians call Hyposphagma, imagine that all
things they see are bloody and red, and so our Romanists if they but look on
Anna, they descry her presently for a Nun: if on Elias, and St John Baptist,
they must immediately be Monks, no remedy. Anna by all likelihood was no
Nun, but we are sure she was a Widow, and by that which has been spoken,
you see how devout a Widow she was. Thus much then of Annaes Piety, come we
now to the Manner of it: But served God with Fastings, and Prayers, Night and
Day.

Of Fasting, and of Prayer apart, I have spoken, you know, Days Dyal Lect. 10.
and 11.
elsewhere, now am I to speak of them both together. Prayer is good Tob. 12.8.
says Toby, with Fasting, and Alms, and Righteousness: and there is Mat. 17.21.
says our Savior, a kind of Devil, that goes not out, but by Prayer, and
Fasting. Two are better then one Eccles. 4.9.
says the Preacher: for they have better Wages for their Labor. And If two,
Ver. 11.
says he, sleep together then shall they have heat: but to one how should
there be heat? And if one overcome him, two shall stand against him, and a
threefold cord is not easily broken. Thus it is with Fasting and Prayer.
Fasting Chrysostom. ad Pop. Anti. Hom. 71.
says St Chrysostom, makes us of Men to become Angels, and it fights with
spiritual Powers, Sed non per se: opus enim est and Oratione, and Oratione
primo: but not by it self alone, for need it has of Prayer to help it, and
especially of Prayer. Hence that of S. Ierom, Fasting Ieiunium non perfecta
Virtus. sed caeterarum virtutum Fundamentum est. Hieron. ad Demetriad.
says he, is no perfect Virtue, but a Foundation of al other. And writing to
Celantia: Think not Cave ne si ieiunare, aut abstinere coeperis te putes iam
esse Sanctam. Haec enim Virtus adiumentum est, non perfectio Sanctitatis,
Hieron. ad Celant.
says he, that thou art holy when thou have begun to fast, for this Virtue of
Fasting is only an Help to Holiness, not a Perfection thereof. And therefore
the Son of Syrach: He that washes himself because of a dead Body, and
touches it again, what avails his washing? So is it with a Man Ecclus.
34.27.
says he, that fasteth for his Sins, and commits them again: who will
hear his Prayer? or what does his Fasting help him? But it may seem, Beloved,
somewhat unseasonable to speak of Fasting now at this time. Du^ de Ieiunio
disputo Ambros. de Heliae and Ieiun. c. 12.
says S. Ambros, strepitus audio Conviviorum: while I speak of Fasting, I
hear the clattering of Dishes about mine Ears: and how soever CHRISTMAS
HOSPITALITY has far fewer Friends in England, then She had wont to have, yet
some She has in some Places, and the Poor I trust so find it. Thus much then
of our Widows Piety, as also of the Manner of it, come we now to her Words,
and Testimony she gave of our Savior Christ, and that in the Eight and
thirtieth verse, and that in these words: She then coming at the same instant
upon them confessed likewise the Lord, and spoke of him to all that looked for
Redemption in Jerusalem.

Prophetaverat Simeon Ambros. in Luc. c. 2.
says S. Ambrose, prophetaverat Virgo, prophetaverat copulata Coniugio, debuit
etiam Vidua, ne qua aut Professio deesset, aut Sexus. First Simeon he had
prophesied, the Virgin Mary she had prophesied, Elizabeth that was Married,
had prophesied to, it was requisite next of all that a Widow also should
prophecy, least any one of any Condition, or of either Sex should have bin
wanting. What it was that Anna prophesied, is not expressed unto us in
particular, only it is here said in general, that She confessed the Lord, and
spoke of him to all that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem. It is in the
Original, (...): and our Last Translation renders it, She gave thanks unto
the Lord: no doubt, for she had now seen the Lords Anointed in this sort.
Nor so only, but She spoke of him to, to all that looked for Redemption in
Jerusalem.

And (...)

(...) dum non vidimus Christum, videmur ei dum facta legimus interesse. Now
thanks be given unto the Gospel, by means whereof, we that have not seen with
our Eyes, Christ his Coming into the World, seem Present with him
notwithstanding while we read therein his Deeds. Did Anna then thus Prophecy
upon so small a Sight of our Savior? His Nativitie was nothing to his Life,
nor his Life to his Passion, nor his Passion to his Resurrection, and therefore
the Apostle S. Paul, If Christ, 1. Cor. 15.17
says he, be not raised, your Faith is vain, ye are yet in your Sins. And
so they which are asleep in Christ, are perished. But now is Christ risen from
the dead, and is made the First Fruits of them that sleep, and who were the
First Trumpets of those Tidings to the World, but Women, silly Women, they were
the Apostles to the Apostles, as S. Bernard Missae ab Angelo opus faciunt
Evangelistae factaeque Apostolae Apostolorum, du^ festinant ad an nunciandum
mane misericordiam Domini. Bernard. super Cantic. Ser. 75. Col. 2. p. 179.
speaks of them.

Concerning her Family as it was of a great Tribe, so may it teach them that
come of high Parentage, and have the world at will, how to advance with their
Wealth, and Revenews, the glorious Gospel of this Infant. It was an excellent
saying of a worthy Writer: Adiuvistis Viduae nascentis Evangelij Primordia,
tueamini Functionem vestram quam semel occupastis. O ye Widows, Erasm. de
Vid. Christ. Tom. 5. p. 603.
says he, you were chief Helpers when as the Gospel first began, go forward
in that Function wherein Women of your sort have begun. Those which are
Lobourers in the Lords Harvest, let them partake of your Stoare, and do them
such other Offices as is convenient for you to do. True it is, there is not
(Thanks be to God) now adays, such need of helping those, that are Laborers
in Gods Harvest, especially in our Land: they have Livings, Some of them,
thick and threefold, and they are, a Many, most worthy of them, but though
Some have in abundance, Some others again may want, who may very well say as
it is in the Luke 16.3.
Gospel, they cannot Dig, and to Beg they are ashamed. I understand,
Mountaignes Essays, l. 1. c. 34
says a worthy French man, to the infamous Reproach of our Age, that even in
our Eyes, two most excellent Men in knowledge, have miserably perished for want
of Food, and other Necessaries, LILIVS GYRALDVS in Italy, and SEBASTIAN
CASTALIO, in Germany. And I verily believe, says he, there are many Thousands,
who had they known, or understood their wants, would either have sent for
them, and with large Stipends entertained them, or have conveyed unto them some
succor where ever they had been. So indeed are we all affected, when it is
to late, and the Time has past us. Horat. Carm. l. 3. Od. 24.
Virtutem incolumem odimus,
Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi.
Caesar could weep when Pompey was dead and gone, -- Lucan. l. 9.
Tutumque putavit
Iam bonus esse Socer.
Whereas but a Tear in Pompeyes life time might have preserved Pompey, and
himself too. Howbeit here we are to be very careful that we yield our
furthera^ce to true Learning, otherwise if it be Learning that has a POPE in
the Belly of it, I, or a MAR-PRELATE either, we may chance to do but as the
Bird does (some call it the Titling) that Plin. Not. Hist. l. 10. c. 6.
hatcheth the Cuckooes Eggs, our Kindness may cut our own Throats, or which
is worse, the Throat of the Church. But I come to our Widows Age.

Her Age, as it was exceeding great, so was it exceeding Religious too. Her
Body, Cum Corpori: agnoscere^ Senectutem, Pietatis tamen nesciret aetatem.
Ambr. de Vid. p. 142.
says S. Ambrose, was old, but her Devotion as young as ever. To teach us the
truth of that which Solomon Prove. 22.6.
says: Teach a Child in the trade of his way, and when he is old, he shall not
depart from it. Age, Prove. 16.31.
says the self same Solomon, is a Crown of Glory, when it is found in the
way of Righteousness: And, Vere senectus illa venerabilis, Ambros. Epist. l.
8. ep. 60.
says S. Ambrose, quae non Canis, sed Meritis albescit: That Age is truly
honorable, which is not white so much with gray Hayres, as with good and
virtuous Deeds. And such were the Deeds no doubt of this our Widow. It was not
with her, as it is with too too many, Aug. de Verb. Dom. Ser. 36. p. 94.
Mayor aetate, mayor iniquitate: the Elder she waxt, the worse, She was old
now, and therefore must keep herself warm at home, let the Younger go to
Church. No She would not hold herself so excused, she would rather be an
Example to the younger, that since she went with such readiness, they should
go with all cheerfulness. And so I come unto her Piety in that she
frequented so much the Temple, and Fasted, and Prayed so much.

And indeed without such PIETY what is all we have in this world whereof we are
Mistresses. What is Parentage, what is Wealth, what is Honor, what is all?
Haman, wicked Haman, when he had all the World at will: Glory of Riches, and
Multitude of Children, and Pre-eminence above the Princes and Servants of the
King, and was invited moreover by Hester the Queen, and none but he unto a
Banquet to bear the King company: yet all this Ester. 5.13.
says he, does nothing avail me, as long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at
the Kings Gate. But how much better may we say that without Piety, and
Devotion, nothing at all does indeed avail. Had we Mountains of Silver, and
Gold; had we all the Honors of the Earth; had we all the Kingdoms of the
World subject to us, and yet had not Piety, we were, to speak in the Apostles
1. Cor. 13.1.
phrase, but as sounding Brass, or tinckling Cymbals. Nay we were just
nothing: all this All would profit us nothing. O Death, Ecclus. 41.1.
says the Son of Syrach, how bitter is the remembrance of thee, to a Man
that lives at rest in his Possessions, unto the Man that has nothing to vex
him, and that has prosperity in all things? Whereas to the Godly and devout
Man, nothing so welcome as Death, Death is to him Philip. 1.21.
advantage. I but our Piety and Devotion must be in the Temple then, it must
not be in our Closets only, and privately at hoame, especially now in these
times when the Churches stand open to us, and we may so easily repair unto
them. This St Paul knew full well, and therefore though by private Prayer, he
were likely to prevail with God as much as any One, yet did he think it much
better, both for Gods Glory, and his own Good, if 2. Cor. 1.11.
Prayers might be made, and Thanks yielded in his behalf, by a Number of Men.
This St Chrysostom knew full well to, and therefore to the Objection made by
Some, of Praying at hoame, as well as at Church: Te Homo decipis Chrysostom. de
Incomprehens. Dei Natura Hom. 3.
says St Chrysostom, Man, or Woman, who ever thou art, thou deceivest thy own
self, and errest intolerably. For howsoever we have opportunity given us of
Praying privately at hoame, yet can thou by no means pray there so well as
thou may in the Church, there being in the Church so many Fathers to bear
thee company, so many Voices carried up to God, with so happy an association,
and joining them together. Much more has St Chrysostom in that place to that
purpose, and there cannot indeed be said too much in regard the Fault of
Slacknes in coming to Church is so general. It is Mr Bunnies corner Stone. l.
1. c. 7. 9. p. 152.
noated by a worthy Devine, that whereas the Tabernacle was so little, and the
People so many, that God himself made no other reckning of them, but that Few
of them would at any time (to speak of) much regard to visit his Sanctuary,
not only not in the way of any true devotion indeed, but also but seldom,
howsoever. I trust the Lord of Heaven makes no such reckning now a days, the
rather for he has provided for us such store of room. But when he has
provided for us in such good sort, and we will be careless notwithstanding,
when we cause him to send his Servants about to invite the Poor, and the
Maimed, and the Halt, and the Blind, nay to go into the High ways, and Hedges,
and to compel them to come in, that his House may be filled: it is a soar
Conclusion that there Luke 14.24.
follows, I say unto you, that none of those Men which were bidden, shall
taste of my Supper. But I come to the last Point remarkable in our Widow,
concerning her Thankesgiving, and her Testimony she gave of Christ. And first
of her Thanksgiving.

Thanksgiving, and Praise, is properly, and peculiarly, a Service of God. It is
in a manner all one with Prayer. Though Prayer Etsi Oration proprie ad Vota and
Preces restringitur, tanta est tamen inter Petitionem, and Gratiarum actionem
affinitas, vt commode sub nomine vno comprehendi queant. Calvin Instit. l. 3.
c. 20. 28.
says Calvin, properly signifies only Wishes and Petitions: yet there is so
great affinity between Petition and Thanksgiving, that they may be fitly
comprehended both under one Name. And hence it is, that the Prophet David
ioynes them both together in one sentence: Call upon me, Psalm. 50.15.
says he, in the time of trouble, so will I hear thee, and thou shall praise
me. Thus Ezechias, thus Jonas: The Lord Esaias 38.20.
says Ezechias, was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my song all the
days of our life in the House of the Lord. So likewise the Prophet Jonas, I,
Jonas, 2 4.
says he, am cast away out of thy sight, yet will I look again toward thine
holy Temple. And this Beloved, is the cause that so great a part of our Divine
Service is spent in Psalms and Himmes, which for the most part comprehend such
Praises of God, and Thanksgivings, and to this end and purpose is it, that
rather then any other Scripture besides, they are said by interlocution, and
with a mutual return of Sentences from side to side by the Minister, and the
People. Deum laudare Casaubon. Exercitat. 14. ad Annals Baren. c. 8. p. 325.
says an excellent Wrighter, et quidem formulis e Sacra Pagina depromptis,
nemo queat nimis, vel si Dies totas illi Officio Pietatis impenderit. Should we
in this sort praise our GOD whole Days, and whole Nights together, it were not
sufficient enough. But I know not how it comes to pass, as Satan in former
Ages under color of Long Prayer drove Preaching out of the Church, so we in
this Age take the Quarrel of Vid. Mr Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. 32. p. 68.
Sermons in hand, and revenge their cause by requital, thrusting Prayer in a
manner out of doors under color of long Preaching. But blessed be our Mother
the Church, that has taken such special good order for it, namely that it be
not Constit. and Canons Ecclesiastical. An. 1603. Can. 14.
diminished in regard of Preaching, or in any other respect. But to return
again unto my Purpose.

If this VVidow here were thus thankful for our Saviors Nativity only, and
more she saw not, what ought You Your selves, or we to be for those many
Blessings before specified, his Passion, his Death, his Resurrection, his
Asce^tion, seeing what ever was done in these Particulars was done for us, and
our Salvation. Nor ought we to content our selves that we our selves only
should thus do, but we must endeavor to be Helps to other, that they may also
do the same. It is toto apparent now a days what Popery has gained in our
Land by Female Assistance. It is not unknown how by such means to, Puritanisme
conceiues in private Parlours. It is Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 18.
storied of one Pambo, a Religious man of old time, that seeing a Woman
gorgeously attired (Such an one by all likelihood as King Solomon speaks of,
Prove. 7.10.) fell presently into a weeping, and being demanded the cause he
wept: I weep, says he, for two causes: First, for that Woman there, goes
about so industriously her own destruction: Secondly, that I my self do not
endeavor with that care to please my God, which she so takes to please lewd
and wicked Men. And surely Beloved, when we 1. Tim. 5.13.
read in St Paul of the Younger Widows in his time, how being idle, they
learnt to go about from house to house, and that they were Pratlers, and Busy
Bodies, speaking things which are not comely, and how they may be matched now a
days with some such like in some Places, who would not weep as Pambo did that
such should be more diligent to serve or Popery, or the Presbitery, then a Many
of our own, Religious enough in respect of themselves, otherwise little
reckning whether Religion go forward, or no. Thus if Anna had here done, and
contented her self with her own Devotions, what a singular Commendation had
she lost, but She Confessed, or Gave thanks unto the Lord, and spoke of him
to all that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem. Happy Woman! Happy Widow!
Wheresoever this Gospel shall be Mark. 14.5.
Preached, this also shall be published for an everlasting Memorial of her.
Great is her Reward in Heaven, but great in Earth also. Many Prove. 31.29.
Daughters have done virtuously, but she surmounted them all.

And so, Beloved, have You now seen wherein this Widow of ours was most
remarkable. You have seen those several Points besides, wherein it were to
be wished that Widows of our days did resemble her. There are I confess of
the ancient Tertul. ad Vxor. l. 1. and 2 and Exhort. ad Cast. and de Monogam.
and de Ieiun. Origin. in Luc. Hom. 17 Hieron. ad Furiam.
Fathers, that prescribe her as a Pattern in an other Point besides, namely
for Single Marriage, utterly misliking Second Marriages, and consequently
Third, and Fourth. Howbeit this is more then can be concluded from my Text, or
indeed from any other Scripture whatsoever besides, the Apostle teaching as he
does, that the 1. Cor 7.29.
Wife is bound by the Law, as long as her Husband lives: but if her Husband be
dead, she is at liberty to marry with whom she will, only in the Lord, says
he, that is, Beza in hunc loc.
says Beza, Religiously, and in the fear of God. The Church of Rome though it
be not so far gone as some of the Fathers are in this Point, yet it hobleth
a pace after them, and howsoever they make such Marriages to be lawful
enough, and tolerable, yet they Honor them never a whit, nay rather they
Dishonor them. First, such kind of Marriages with them are not made with the
Ring. Secondly, they have not that Blessing given the^ which the First Marriage
had. Thirdly, the Husband that has been twice married, or that has married a
VVidow, could not be capable of Holy Orders. And thus they dignifie Holy
Matrimony, as did the Mat. 27.28.
Soldiers our Savior Christ. They put the scarlet Roab of a Sacrament on it,
( Marriage with them forsooth is a Sacrament) and yet they spit it in the Face
too, it shall not be Sanctified in some Parties, and those twice married
Parties that have taken it, shall in no wise betake them to holy Orders. And
this is Mother Catholic Church of Rome with whom so many of our English Women
are so much enamoured now adays. Thus does She teach her Followers to stumble
at Strawes, and leap over Blocks. Married they may be, but if but twice, they
shall want these three Benefits: the Ring, Benediction, Orders: Harlots they
may have thick and threefold, and with them keep Bishoprics. Can any honest
Matron, I say not speak for, but endure that Religion that thus preposterously
preferres even Harlots before them? But to stir no more in this Puddle. I
come to Second, Third, and Fourth Marriages, and indeed without stint, Aug. de
Bono Viduit. c. 12.
it being St Austens resolution, that he would condemn no Marriages, though
never so often iterated, only he required in them that often would marry, a
certain kind of Moderation in regard of the Speech of the World, which is
prone enough to speak most spightfully of such as have S. Ierom tells us of a
Man that had had Twenty Wives who married with a Woman that had had Two and
Twenty Husbands. Hieron. ad Geront. de Monogam.
buried or many Husbands, or many VViues. To draw then toward an end.

First, it were to be wished that Widows would keep themselves Widows
still. Propemodum, Ambros. de Vid. p. 175.
says S. Ambrose, non inferioris virtutis est eo abstinere Coniugio quod
aliqua^do delectaverit, quam Coniugij oblectamenta nescire. It is almost as
Praiseworthie to abstain from Marriage, the Delights whereof we have formerly
known, as to be ignorant of them altogether. Again, Widowhood is an
Honorable Estate: Honor Widows, 1. Tim. 5.3.
says the Apostle, which are Widows indeed, and he spoke it, as S. Ambrose
Ambros. vbi sup. p. 170.
notes, to Timothy that was a Bishop. Nay more, it is a Blessed Estate, so
says the same Apostle, who when he had said, as I told you before, The Wife is
bound by the Law, as long as her Husband lives, but if her Husband be dead,
she is at liberty to marry with whom she will, only in the Lord: he
immediately adds: 1. Cor. 7.40.
But she is more Blessed if she so abide. Indeed More Blessed, for She is not
so cumbred now with worldly Cares: She has not an Husband to please now,
perhaps a cruel Lamech, perhaps a churlish Nabal, perhaps One that is worse
then both these, I mean such an One, as is possessed with the Number. 5.14.
Spirit of Jealousy. Howsoever: The Eccles, 3.5.
Time of embracing is now past, and the Time is come to be far from
embracing. The Unmarried Woman, 1. Cor. 7.34.
says the Apostle, that is, the Widow, cares for the things of the Lord, that
she may be holy both in Body, and in Spirit. And therefore Fulgentius, Let
them, Fulgent de Statu Viduat. p 464.
says he, hold themselves fast to their Husbands, who are bound unto them in
Wedlock Bands: as for the Widow, She is to say with the Prophet David, It is
good for me to hold me fast by God, to put my trust in the Lord God. And
therefore S. Ambrose to Such as had Children, and needs would marry again: O
my Daughter, Tu Filia quid moliris? Cur Haeredes quaeris extraneos, cum habeas
tuos? Non Filios desideras ques habes, sed servitutem quam no^ habes. Ambr. de
Vid. p. 189.
says he, what is it that thou do attempt? why do thou seek Foreign
Heirs, when as thou have Heirs of thine own? Thou desire not Children for
those thou have, but thou desire a Servitude, and that indeed thou have not.
And again a little after: Thou will bring forth more Children, Generare
Liberos vis non Fratres futuros tuorum, sed Adversarios Filiorum. Quid est ergo
generare alios Liberos, nisi spoliare quos habes Liberos? Quibus pariter
auferuntur and Pietatis Officia, and Compendia Facultatum. Ambros. Ib.
says he, not to be the Brothers of those thou have, but their Adversaries.
And what is it then to bring forth more Children, but to spoil those thou have
already: whom thou do not bereave only of thy Motherly affection, but of thy
Goods too.

Howbeit seeing Widows are not all of one metal, and All as Mat, 19.11.
speaks our Savior, cannot receive this thing, that is, abstain from
Marriage, save they to whom it is given, such as like that Estate so well, and
will needs betake themselves once more to those much desired, but dangerous
Seas, let them take with them these few Caveats, and then sail forwards, and
spare not. First, that they match with their Equals as near as may be, both in
Condition of State of Life, as also in Years. They that marry their Inferiors,
and all for they would control, not be controlled themselves, find perhaps
ere long, that they made but a wrong Match. Or if they do not in that kind,
and they have the Masterie as they wish, yet let them remember that they can
never Master him, who will call them to sharp Accounts for the words he spoke
to Eve, and consequently to them, which they so much neglect, Thy desire shall
be subject to thine Husband, and he shall rule over thee, Genesis 3.16. Secondly,
that they that have Children, or are like to have by Second Matches, beware how
they come where Si evenerit vt ex secundo Marito habeas. Filios, domestica
^ritur pugna, intestinum praelium Non licebit tibi amare Liberos, nec aequis
aspicere oculis, quos genuisti. Clam porriges Cib^s, invidebit Mortu^, and nisi
ode^is Filios, adhuc eorum amare videberis Patrem. Hieron. ad Furiam de
Viduitat. Servand. Again, Superinducit Matter Filiis non Nutritium sed Hostem,
non Parentem, sed Tyrannum. Hieron. Ibid.
Children are already, or are like to be. The very Name of a Stepmother is a
great Prejudice to all good Offices she shall ever endeavor to perform. And
that Woman that can carry herself in just and equal terms, between her
former Children, and her Children in Law, and those which she has by a New
Husband (I say not She shall be able, but If, If she be) she shall deserve by so
doing, to be the Miracle of her Sex, and the Wonder of VVomen-kind. Thirdly,
that they that have their Childrens Portions in their Hands, beware in any wise
how they put them into the Hands of their Husbands to be. If so be they die
before those Husbands (as who does know but that they may) it is the
Observation of a worthy Mr Dr. Ridly. View of the Civil, and Ecclesiastical
Laws. p. 221.
Civilian, that by the Common Law of our Land (and the Common Law is now adays
all in all) there is no Remedy against the Second Husband to recover the said
Portions, because he is neither Executour, nor Administrator, and because he
came not to those Goods by wrong, but by the delivery of the Executrix with
whom he married. Fourthly, that having this Worlds Good in much abundance, they
match with such as are known unto them, to be both Virtuous, and Religious,
so shall they not see that, which is oftentimes seen now adays, spent in a
Moment which their thrifty former Husbands were a gathering many years. As for
the Custom of Some again, who (supposing to prevent this) make over their
State to a Friend in trust, before they join themselves to another Husband, it
is a treacherous kind of dealing, and far unbeseeming a Virtuous Matron. Frost,
and Fraud have ever a foul end. Fifthly, and Lastly, that making choice of such
Unthrifts, as they will needs betake themselves unto, notwithstanding all good
Counsel to the contrary, they lay not the fault on God, or say they were
Ordaind thereunto. Whiles it remained, Act. 5 4.
says S. Peter in another case, appertained it not unto thee? and after it was
sold, was it not in thine own power? how is it that thou have conceived this
thing in thine heart? Indeed it is their Hearts that thus conceive, and have
deceaved them, and they must thank themselves for it, and therefore
Tertullian, Cum quod in mo potes, Tertul. Apolog. p. 720.
says he, nisi velim non potes, iam meae Voluntatis est quod potes, non tuae
Potestatis. That which thou art able to do unto me, if thou art not able at
all, unless I be willing also, it is not an Ability now in thee, as a
willingness in my self. And indeed it is we our selves give way to the Tempter,
by setting the Doares of our Hearts wide open, who otherwise should stand
without, as not able of his own power to draw so much as the Latch. But enough
at this time. Only, let all and every of us now pray, that whereas Anna here
so much spoken of, lived a Widow so long, our ANNA, our Gracious ANNA, may (if
God be so pleased) live a Wife as long, and Wife to HIM who now lives, and
long, Oh Lord, may he live, even till this Infant here come again, the Subject
of Annaes Speech. Not as he was brought into the Temple here in Swaddling Bands,
but as he shall come again with Glory, and descend from heaven with a 1 Thessalonians. 4.16
Shout, and with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trumpet of God. At
what time, the Dead in Christ shall rise first. Then shall we which live, and
remain, be caught up with them also in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the
Air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

The same Lord so bless us, and the Seed that has been sown, etc.
NEIGHBOVRHOOD.
Easter Day April. 9. 1615.
Intend none Hurt against thy Neighbor, seeing he does dwell without fear by
thee.

PROVE. 3.29.
I See, you see, at what I aim. I may say as did St Bernard, Bernard super
Cantic. Ser. 15. p. 132. Col. 1.
Credo vos praevolare, and scire iam quid dicere velim. I verily believe, you
know already, what it is I intend to speak of. Indeed it is of NEIGHBOVRHOOD.
You shall have Godwilling at this time a Sermon of Neighborhood, I could wish
it might be said, of Good Neighborhood, a Good Sermon.

Men, and Brethren, Right Worshipful, and dearly Beloved in our Savior
Christ. Diverse and sundry have bin the Particulars wherein I have spoken unto
you heretofore, according to your several Sorts, and States, and Conditions of
Life. I have spoken to Husbands, and to their Wives; spoken to Parents, and to
their Children; spoken to Masters, and to their Servants; spoken to Virgins;
spoken to Widows; and to every of these in particular, at several times. I
purpose at this time to speak to you ALL, for you are all of you Neighbors:
You are not all of you, or Husbands, or Parents, or Masters; or Wives, or
Children, or Servants; or Virgins, or Widows; but Neighbors you are all. The
greater care I trust will al, and every of you now take, to that which at this
time shall be spoken, and by so much the more, be the more attentive, by how
much a common Good is intended unto you all.

The Words I have chose^ (you see) to this purpose, are the words of wise King
Solomon, or indeed of a wiser then Solomon, they are the Words of GOD himself.
Who howsoever he did not write them here, as he did the two Tables of Stone,
Digito, with his Exodus 31.18.
Finger, yet did he prompt them to King Solomon, Spiritu, by his holy Spirit,
and made Him as it were the Penman and Publisher of the same. The Words
themselves are plain enough, there is no difficulty in them at all: I may say
of them, and of King Salomo^, as St Austen Aug. Hom. 29. p. 334.
spoke of Esaias, and of some of his Words: Manifest dixit, nec Expositorem
habent ista necessarium, sed Factorem: King Solomon speaks in this place
plainly and manifestly enough, nor do these words of his want so much an
Interpreter, as a Practiser of the same. Howbeit for the plainest Words in
Holy-writ, if so be they be discoursed upon, will affourd us much more Matter
then we could otherwise have thought of, like as Spyces being beaten small,
smell sweeter, and stronger, then when they be whole and vnbroke^, let us fall
to discourse of these Words, and see the Particulars to be thence observed,
even as if we should come into a Cic. de Orat. l. 1.
Wardrobe, and seeing some excellent Pieces foulded up, we would be desirous
for our better view thereof, to have the^ unfolded to us more at large. First
and Foremost then, for our better proceeding I observe in these Words two
Points. First, an Instruction given unto us: Secondly, a Reason of the same.
The Instruction is in these words, Intend none hurt against thy Neighbor: the
Reason in these: Seeing he does dwell without fear by thee. In the Instruction
I shall note unto you. First by Neighbor here, who is specially meant:
Secondly, the Hurt forbidden here to be intended, what it is. In the Reason I
shall observe, First, for that our Neighbor here is said to dwell by us, The
Benefit of having a Neighbor dwelling at any time near unto us. Secondly, in
that it is said, he dwells by us without fear, His beginning of Kindness to us
in that he distrusts us not. Of every of these in their order, and First of the
Neighbor here specially meant: Intend none hurt against thy Neighbor.

I am not ignorant that the Vulgar reads in this place, Amico tuo: Intend no
hurt against thy Friend: Arias Montanus, Socium tuum: Intend no hurt against
thy Fellow, the word in the Original signifying Vid. Scheraei Itinerar. Number.
1036. p. 898.
both. Howbeit for it Vid. Scheraei Itinerar. Number. 1036. p. 898.
signifies a Neighbor to, as Ps. 15.3, and Ps. 101.6, hence it is that both
this Translation, as also our Last, and Tremellius before them both, has the
word Neighbor here in this place. Now I have showed you Days Dial Lect. 9.
p. 243.
elsewhere in what a general signification the word Neighbor is sometimes
taken, in regard whereof St Austen Aug. in Psalm. 118. Conc. 8. p. 922.
says, Omnis homo, omni homini proximus: All men are Neighbors to one an
other. And Aug. de Te^p. Ser. 221. p. 771.
again, Proximus omnis homo; Proximus tuus ille est, qui tecum natus est ex
Adam and Eva. Every man is thy Neighbor. He is thy Neighbor, that is born as
thou art, of Adam and Eve. And again in a third Aug. de Te^p. Ser. 59. p 500.
Vid D. Reyn, Confer. c. 7. Divis. 4. p. 318.
place, Proximus omnis homo. Omnes Proximi sumus condition terrenae
Nativitatis, and Mortalitatis, and etiam spe coelestis Haereditatis. Every man
is our Neighbor. We are all of us Neighbors, or in respect of our earthly
Nativity, or of Mortality, or of the hope we have of heavenly Felicity. He
excepts not in regard of earthly Nativity, and Mortality, or Jew, or Heretic,
or Pagan. The like he has in a Aug. in Psalm. 25. Praefat. in Enarrat. 2.
Preface of his upon the Five and twentieth Psalm. But this is not the
Neighborhood here specially meant in this place. This Sense, and Meaning is to
general.

An other Neighborhood in holy Scripture is in regard of some certain Nation,
when as the whole People in general may be said to be Neighbors, to one an
other. So was the Nation of the Jews. Act. 7.27.
And therefore St Stephen in the Acts of the Apostles relating that falling out
that was between two Israelites, and how Moses would have set them at one
again, saying, Sirs, ye are Brethren: why do ye wrong one to an other? He,
Act. 7.27.
says St Stephen, that did his Neighbor wrong, thrust him away, saying, Who
made thee a Prince, and a Judge over us? So Samuel the Prophet to king Saul,
The Lord, 1. Sam. 28.17
says he, will rent the Kingdom out of thy Hand, and give it thy Neighbor
David. So in the Exodus 20.16
Ninth, and Tenth Commandments. And in this Sense is a Brother taken, Deuteronomy.
23.19, as also in the Words before alleged, Sirs ye are Brethren, Act. 7.26.
But, nor this is the Neighborhood, here meant in this place. This Sense and
Meaning, though not so general as was the Former, yet is it to general to.

A third kind of Neighborhood in holy Scripture, is in regard of those that
dwell near us, or at the leastwise not far of, and commonly in the self
same Street. Hence Vicinus the Latin Word, which signifies a Neighbor: and
Vicinia, and Vicinitas, Neighborhood, of Vicus, a Street. So is Proximus, a
Neighbor to, though Tully ad Attic. l. 2. ep. 14.
Tully, and Plaut. Merc. Act. 2 Sc. Pentheum.
Plautus both, join Vicinus, and Proximus both together. And such may be the
Neighborhood here meant in this place, namely the Neighborhood, and Nighnes
of Such as dwell in the self same Street, or in the selfsame Parish that we
do. I say in the selfsame Parish, for that howsoever Parishes, as they be now
a days, were not thought of in King Salomons time, but were divised long after
by St Denis a Vid. Archbishop Whitgifts Defense of the Answer to the Admonit.
Tract. 5. c. 2 Divis. 7. p. 249.
Bishop of Rome, about the year of our Lord God 267, and consequently could
not properly be understood here in this place, yet since Parishes contain in
the^ such a Nighnesse as Neighborhood does, and have so many special sundry
Ties to unite the People of them one with an other, as the same Church, the
same Prayers, the self same hour of Prayer: the same Word, the same
Sacraments, the self same Pastor of their Souls, hence it is that there being
no nearer a Neighborhood, then of dwelling together in one Parish, all
PARISHIONERS especially, may be meant in these words. SCHOLARS also among the^
selves may be said to have a Neighborhood: and that which one Street, or one
Parish is to you, the same is one House, or one College unto them. There may
they friendly talk together, and communicate their Studies each with other, in
regard whereof S. Austen wrote upon a time unto S. Ierom, Aug. ep. 12. p. 37.
O si licuisset etsi non cohabitante, saltem Vicino te in Domino perfrui ad
crebrum and dulce Colloquium. I would to God, says S. Austen, it were my hap,
if not to enjoy your Company in one and the self same House, yet that we might
be nigh Neighbors, that so we might often and sweetly confer together. But I
know not how our Genius now a days is quite averse from such Conference.
Every one now will follow his own course, and direct himself in his own
Studies. And whereas there are of the Papists that defend Freewill in words,
but practice Blind Obedience: we indeed will not defend Freewill, but yet will
practice it in our Actions. Epicurus like we will be beholding to Ego debe^
Nulli. H. S of himself, as Mr Parker relates of him in his Book De descensu
ad Inferos Epist. Caendido Lectori.
no man, but pick out all from our fingers ends, Ita metuimus, as Tully Tully
de Natura Deor. l. 1.
spoke of him, ne quid vnquam didicisse videamur. But to return unto my
Purpose. You have seen, Beloved, in the First place, who by Neighbor here,
may be specially meant. Come we now unto the Hurt forbidden to be intended,
what it is: Intend none hurt against thy Neighbor.

The Hurt intimated here in this place, is that Evil the Prophet David speaks
of, Psalm. 15.1. who having asked the Question there, Lord who shall dwell in
thy Tabernacle, or, who shall rest upon thy holy Hill, answers himself with
his own words, Psalm. 15.5.
He that has used no deceit in his Tongue, nor done Evil to his Neighbor,
and has not slaundered his Neighbors. Now Malum, Evil in that place, and
Hurt in this, may be in three respects. In respect of the Evil, or Hurt, that
may be done to our Neighbors BODY; in respect of the Evil, or Hurt, that may
be done to our Neighbors GOODS; and in respect of the Evil, or Hurt, that
may be done to our Neighbors GOOD NAME. First concerning the Body, it is that
which next unto the Soul, is to be esteemed of most of all. This Body of ours,
Tertul. de Anima, c. 30. p. 573.
says Tertullian, is in Platoes opinion the Prison of the Soul ((...), quasi
(...)) howbeit the Apostle S. Paul calls it, the Temple of God when it is in
Christ Jesus: his meaning is, when it is baptized into Christ. The same
Tertullian in another place, calls it the Quid Anima invides Carni? Nemo tam
proximus tibi, quem post Dominum diligas: nemo magis Frater tuus [quam] qui
tecum etiam in Deo nascitur. Tertul de Resurrect. Carnis. p. 65.
Brother of the Soul, borne (as it were) at one birth. (...). Cyril. Hierosol.
Catech. 4. p. 91.
S. Cyrill, he calls it the Instrument, and as it were the Garment of the Soul,
Greg. Nyssen. de Resurrect. Christi. Orat. 3. p. 167.
Gregory Nyssen the Souls Companion. I, and Plato himself as Theodoret. ad
Graec. Infid, Ser. 5. p. 71.
Theodoret observes, having clean forgotten, what he had Plato in Cratyl^.
formerly said concerning the Bodies being a Prison, speaks in another Plato
de Rep.
place quite contrary, and shows that the Body is to be cared for, in regard
of that Harmony which is betwixt it Self, and the Soul. For if so be, we
would witness a truth, says he, it is the Body whereby we live, and whereby we
live well. The Body then to be thus esteemed of, what special care ought we
to take, least our Neighbors Body should be endamaged, or by our selves, or by
any other. This it was that when time was, made Moses so meek a Man, even the
Number 12.3.
Meekest upon the Earth, so wrathful as he was, who when he saw an Egyptian
smiting an Hebrew, he Exodus 2.11.
slew the Egyptian outright, and when afterward he saw two Hebrews strive,
as you heard even now, he said to him that did the wrong, Ver. 13.
Wherefore smitest thou thy Fellow? Or, as it is related by S. Stephen, Sirs,
ye are Brethren why do ye wrong one to another? As if he had said: Have you
not Enemies enough besides, but that you must thus brangle with your selves? Is
all Egypt with you at odds, and will you be at odds with one another? Is it not
enough that you are both in Bondage here, in Egypt, the House of Bondage, nay
in this Iron Deuteronomy. 4.20. 1 King. 8.51 Ier. 11.4.
Furnace, but that you will needs thus wrangle, Act. 7.26.
and add more affliction to your selves? Sirs, ye are Brethren, why do ye
wrong one to another? Or, as Moses himself relates it, Exodus 2.13.
Wherefore smitest thou thy Fellow? As if he had said: Be it he provoked thee
by a Word, nothing presently but Blows? Say he is Unjust, will thou be
Ungodly? Say he is a Slanderer, will thou be a Murderer? I, our Savior unto
S. Peter, that drew his Sword in the iustest Quarrel that ever was, or was
like to be, Put up thy sword into his place, Mat. 26.51.
says he, for all that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword. And
therefore was it Moses Law in the Book of Exodus 21.24
Exodus, Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, Hand for Hand, Foot for Foot, Burning
for Burning, Wound for Wound, Stripe for Stripe: or as it is more plainly in
Leviticus: Lev. 24.20.
If a Man cause any blemish in his Neighbor, as he has done, so shall it be
done to him: Breach for Breach, Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, such a Blemish as
he has made in any, such shall be repaid to him. They were Samuels words to
Agag, 1. Sam. 15.33
As thy sword has made many Women childles, so shall thy Mother be childlesse
among other Women. And Adoni-bezek of himself, Threescore and ten Kings, Judge.
1.7. Last Translat.
says he, having their Thumbs, and their great Toes cut off, gathered their
meat under my Table: as I have done, so God has requited me. It was an
excellent observation of the Wisdom of Solomon: Because of the foolish devises
of their wickedness, Wisd. 11.13.
says he, wherewith they were deceived, and worshipped Serpents, that had not
the use of Reason, and vile Beasts, thou sendedst a multitude of vnreasonoble
Beasts upon them for a vengeance, that they might know that wherewith a Man
sins, by the same also shall he be punished. Thus the Sodomites, as
Chrysostom. ad Pep. Antioch. Hom. 19.
S. Chrysostom observes having found out a barren or fruitless way of
Procreation, had a punishment inflicted on their Land that made it Barren ever
after. And thus the Daughter of Herodias, that by her Dancing had bereaved
John Baptist of his Head, was her self as she went on the Ice, bereaved of her
own Head, which seavered from the Body, daunced, as Niceph. Eccles. Hist. l.
1. c. 20.
says Nicephorus, upon the self same Ice. But thus much of the Body, come we
now to our Neighbors Goods.

Which are so appropriated to our Neighbor, as but the Desire thereof, much
more the Procuring them unto us without his good leave and liking, is with the
Lord our God a deadly Sin. Witness the Tenth Commandment of not so much as
Exodus 20.17
coveting our Neighbors Goods, the Lord commanding therein, that we abstain
not only from al Actual wrong, but even from the Motions thereunto. But to let
the Motions pass, consider we the Act of Stealing, and by the Punishment
thereof, acknowledge the heynousnesse of the Fault. The Punishment, you know,
by our Laws is no less then Death it self, and how many Thousands have the
Assizes of our Land cut of in that case. True it is, it was not so by Moses
Law, the Children of Israel were not to die for it. Only they were to make, or
a Exodus 22.4.
Twofold in some Cases, or a V. 1.
Fourefold in some, or in some other a Fiuefold, or as King Solomon Prove. 6,31.
speaks, a Seave^fold Restitution. If the Delinquent were not able, then was he
to be sold for his Thoft. Howbeit King David besides a Restitution, and that
Fourefold, assigned 2. Sam. 12.5.
Death to, in the Poor man's Case, though there are that take his meaning to
be, not that the Rich man should have Vid. P. Martyr. in 2. Sam. 12.5.
dyed for it, but that he was worthy of Death only. But howsoever that be,
certain it is, it is Death with us, and though it oftentimes so fall out that
the Stealth is unknown to Man, and consequently unpunished, yet can it by no
means be hid from God, who has ever in this case a most watchful Eye. He
that planted the Ear Ps. 94 9.
says David, shall he not hear? Or he that made the Eye, shall he not see?
Yes, he knew it full well by his own Experience, and therefore said in an other
place, Ps. 139.1.
O Lord thou have searched me out, and known me: thou know my down
sitting, and my vprising, thou understand my thoughts long before. Thou art
about my path, and about my Bed, and spyest out all my ways. And again a
little after, Ver. 10.
If I say, peradventure the Darkness shall cover me, then shall my Night be
turned to Day. Yea, the Darkness is no Darkness with thee, but the Night is
as clear as the Day, the Darkness and Light to thee are both alike. Nay let
us consider but some Creatures, and Darkness Tenebrae non omnibus Creaturis
obscurum faciunt. Arnob in Ps. 138.
says Arnobius, is not obscure to all of them. Some there are that Sce, some
that Fly in the dark, how much more may Darkness be evident to him, whose
Eyes are ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, as speaks the Son of
Ecclus. 23.19.
Syrach, beholding all the ways of Men, and the ground of the Deep, and
considers the most secret parts.

But it is not enough not to take our Neighbors Goods without his good leave
and liking, but in some Cases we ought not to take them; though he seem
contented to give them to us, much less to bind him by Bond unto it. I mean
when he gives the^ to us by way of Use, or Interest, or Rent, or by what Name
and Title soever, Many and excellent are the Treatises that have bin written
against Usury, as of B. Iuell, Dr Wilson, and Others, but that of M Fentons,
in my opinion surpasses them all, by reason he answers all that may be
alleged out of Calvin, and other Divines in the Reformed Churches. l. 2. c. 6.
7.
VSVRY is or may be called. For you are to know that our Usurers are not like
the Macedonians, of who^ Phillip their King was wont to Plutarch. Apoptheg.
say that they were plain and blunt Fellows, and called Ligonem Ligonis nomine,
a Spade, a Spade. No, they resemble the People of Bengala rather, who are so
much afraid of Tygres, as that they dare not call them Tygres, but give them
some other gentle Names. The reason is, says the Relator, Ne si propriam
Nomenclaturam tribuant, continuo dilacerentur: if they should give them their
own Names, they are afraid they should immediately be torn in pieces. And
indeed the very Name of Usury, is hateful and odious to the Usurer himself,
he will in no wise be called an Usurer, to say the very truth he were as good
be called a Jew. But I will end this point of Goods, with that of the Prophet
Micah: Woe unto them that imagine iniquity Michah. 2.1.
says he, and work wickedness upon their Beds: when the Morning is light
they practice it, because their hand has power. And they covet Fields, and
take them by violence, and Houses, and take them away: for they oppress a Man,
and his House, Nic. Pimenta. Relat. Rerum in Iudia Occident. gestar.
even Man and his Heritage. And thus much of our Neighbors Goods.

But the chiefest Harm of all that may be intended against our Neighbor is in
respect of the Evil, or Hurt, that may be done to our Neighbors Good Name.
Injury done unto the Body, may be recompensed again, as Malchus Ear was Luke
22.51.
restored again safe, and sound, which St Peter had cut of. And for Purloyning
our Neighbors Goods sufficient amends may be made by making as you heard
before, or a Twofold, or Fourefold, or Fiuefold, or Seavenfold Restitution. You
know what was said to Zacheus upon a Fourefold Restitution made by him, Luke 19
9.
This day is Salvation come unto this House, for as much as he is also become
the son of Abraham. And doubtless without There is no Remedy, but
Restitution open, or secret, or else Hell. Father Latymer in a Sermon. before K
Edward.
Restitution, if Men be able to restore, and will not, their Sin cannot be
pardoned. Poenitentia non agitur sed fingi^ur. Aug. ep. 54.
St Austen gives the Reason, for that their Repentance, is no Repentance. But
if once we wrong our Neighbors Name, and slander his Reputation, we do him
then a lasting Injury, which we shall hardly after recompense all the days of
our lives. The reason is, for that the Things we speak be they never so false,
and at length so known, yet Plutarch. de Adul. and Amici Disc.
Cicatrix manet, somewhat still sticks behind, which do the best a man can,
he shall not easily wipe away. A good Name, Prove. 22.1.
says Solomon, is to be chosen above great Riches, and loving Favor is above
Sylver, and above Gold. I need not tell the worth of Silver and Gold unto you,
you know what ado there is to attain thereunto: With what tempestuousnes and
trouble Quibus tempestatibus and procellis, quam horribili and tremendae
saevitiae Coeli and Maris, importuni sunt Mercatores vt Divitias ventosas
acquirant, maioribus quam quibus acquisituri sunt periculis and tempestatibus
plenas. Aug. de Te^p. Ser. 48. p. 479.
says St Austen, how importunate, and urgent Merchants are, notwithstanding
the Roughnes of Wind, and Weather, to procure unto themselves inconstant
Riches, more full and repleat with peril and danger being once got, then all
those Perils and Dangers whereby they were gotten at first. A good Name then of
such Consequence, what may we say of those Divelish Tongues, that are always
snarling at their Neighbors. When upon the least occasion given, happily upon
none, wanted they not Discretion themselves to judge of the Action done, they
rail, and revile their Neighbor, and in every Company they come, have a
flirt, and a Fling at him, not remembering that if they must one day give an
account of every Mat. 12.36.
idle Word, much more of a Word pernicious, and hurtful to their Neighbor.
And yet Such forsooth will boast of Religion to. These kind of Creatures
cannot be ignorant, that St James Iam. 1.26.
says peremptorily, that If any Man seem Religious, and refraineth not his
Tongue, this Man's Religion is vain. These kind of Creatures cannot be
ignorant, that the same St James also Iam. 3.6.
says, that the Tongue is Fire, yea a World of Wickedness, that it is so set
among our Members that it defiles the whole Body, and sets on Fire the
course of Nature, and is set on Fire of Hell. Lastly, these kind of Creatures
cannot be ignorant, how St James likewise Ver. ^.
says, that the Tongue is an unruly Evil, full of Deadly Poison, how we
therewith bless God, and how therewith we curse Men, which are made after the
Similitude of God: and yet for all this, neither will they Refrain at all, nor
once endeavor to quench this Fire, nor procure a Preservatiue against this
Poison. They say in their Hearts as it is in the Psalm. 12.4.
Psalm: With our Tongues we will prevail: we are they that ought to speak
(or, as it is in some Translations, Our Lips are our own) who is Lord over us?
Nor shall you find for the most part any more Peccant in this kind, then are
the Basest of the People. For they are not all like Luke 16.20.
St. Lukes Lazarus, that are Poor, and Needy, and go from door to door. The
Son of Syrach will tell us of Some that are Poor and Proud, and how they are
hated and abhorred of God, Ecclesiasticus, 25.2.

Now for us, Beloved, who are thus Tongue-bitten and Reviled in such sort: we
may comfort our selves with that of David when as he was cursed by wicked
Shemei. Abishai desiring leave of him to go and worm that unhappy Tongue of
his (indeed, to take away his Life) Suffer him to curse 2. Sam. 16.11
says David, for the Lord has bidden him. It may be that the Lord will look
on my affliction, and do me good for his cursing this day. And indeed without
all Maybees, the Lord is never more gracious to his Servants, the^ when they
have most patiently endured the Venom of such Tongues. When Miriam, and Aaron
both, did both speak against Moses, how did the Lord take his part? How
vouchsafed he himself to give an honorable testimony of him? and how did he
punish Miriam for her Tongue? Miriam, Number. 12.10.
says the Scripture, was leaprous like snow: And Aaron looked upon Miriam, and
behold she was leaprous. When Korah, Dathan, and Abira^, rose up after that,
against Moses, and Aaron both, how did the Lord cause Aarons Rod to Numb. 17.8
blossom, and to bring forth ripe Almonds, to signify thereby his Election to
the Priesthood? What? and was this all? Nay but he punished those Quarrellers
too, Even the Ground, Number. 16.31.
says the Scripture, claue asunder that was under them, and the Earth opened
her mouth, and swallowed them up with their Families and all the men that were
with Korah, and all their Goods. So they, and all that they had, went down
alive into the pit, and the Earth covered them: so they perished from among the
Congregation. So it is, it is even so, Romans 12.19,
Mihi Vindictam: Vengeance is mine, I will repay says the Lord. They therefore
that avenge their own Quarrels, and will needs become their own Carvers,
intrude on Gods Throane, and what do they make themselves in very deed but
Fore-stallers of his Right. As for them who thus Bite, and Ban, and Curse their
Neighbors, I will but commend unto them that of David, Ps. 109.16.
His delight was in Cursing, and it shall happen unto him, he loved not
Blessing, therefore shall it be far from him. He clothed himself with
Cursing, like as with a Raiment, and it shall come into his Bowels like Water,
and like Oil into his Bones. It is somewhat more then that which Solomon Prove.
26.2.
says, The Curse that is causeless shall not come; yes, it comes with a
witness, but like a Ecclus. 27.25
Stone upon the head again of Him, or Her that casts it. But to return unto
my purpose.

You have heard of the Hurt forbidden to be intended here, what it is. How the
same extends it self to our Neighbors Body, Goods, and Name. What? and is
this all that King Solomon here intimates? means King Salomo^ nothing else?
Yes doubtless, his meaning is, that besides intending our Neighbor no Hurt,
we endeavor by all means to do him Praeceptorum observatio duplici genere
co^tinetur, vt nihil eorum quae prohibentur facias, and omnia quae iubentur
implere contendas. Hoc est enim quod Psalmista dicit, Recede a malo and fac
bonum. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 59
Good. Eschew evil, Psalm. 34 13.
says David, and do good. And again in another place, Psalm. 37.27. Vid.
Sermon. 5. p 128.
Flee from evil, and do the thing that is good, and dwell for evermore. True
it is, that Evil is an Absence, or Want of Goodness, howbeit Goodness is not an
Absence, or Want of Evil only. What is it in effect, says a worthy Mornaeus
de Veritat. Relig. Christ. c. 16. p. 292.
Writer, to define an honest Man to be such an one as does nothing at all, then
to define a good Archer, to be such an one as never shoots at al. Whereas
King Solomon then in this Precept wills us to intend no Hurt, his meaning is,
that we perform to our Neighbor, all the Good we possibly can. And as in the
Ten Commandments, the Vid Days Dyall, Lect. 9. p. 225.
Affirmative Precepts include the Negative; the Negative, the Affirmative;
right so in this place, by the Negative here set down, the Affirmative is
understood. Does King Solomon then give us warning here, that we offer no
Violence to our Neighbors Body? The meaning is, that we refresh it, as
Occasion shall be offered, and our own Ability permit, with Meat, and Drink,
and Cloth. I was an hungered, Mat. 25.35.
says our Savior, and ye gave me meat. I thirsted, and ye gave me drink,
I was a Stranger and ye lodged me. I was naked, and ye clothed me. I was
sick, and ye visited me. I was in Prison, and ye came unto me. Nor spoke he
this of the Poor only, that go from door to door, but of our poor
Neighbors to. Must we not bereave our Neighbor of his Goods? The meaning is
that we restore unto him, whatsoever we have of his, I though we find it by
mere Chance. St Austen has an excellent Story to this purpose, of a Poor
Man that found a Purse of some Twenty Pounds in it, and restored it to the
Owner. The Owner, Aug. de Verbi Apost. Ser. 19. p 244. and Hom. 9. p. 295.
says St Austen, by way of Gratification would have given him (as it were) the
Tith of it, and offered him Twenty Shillings. The Man that found it, would
none. He offered him Ten. The Man would none neither. The Owner would needs
fasten Five upon him. He refused Five too. With that the Owner in a chafe,
threw the Purse unto him again: Nay then, says he, since thou will have
nothing at all, take all and spare not, I for my part lost nothing. When the
Other saw no remedy, he took the Five Shillings, yet would he not pocket a
Penny of it, but as poor as he was himself, gave it the Poor
notwithstanding. There, says the Worldling, was Folly, but We say there was
Conscience and grounded on that Rule, Do as thou would be done unto. Lastly,
must we not wrong our Neighbors Good Name? The meaning is, that we defend it
when ever we hear it wronged by Others. Even as Jonathan did David's, and that
against his own Father. Wherefore shall he die, 1. Sam. 20.32
says Jonathan, what has he done? And this, Beloved, this but one Point,
should it be practiced well amongst us, what a World of Happiness should we
live in, what an Heaven upon Earth should we have? But Jonathan is dead long
since, and with him I fear me this Point of Neighborhood: and it is verily to
be believed that nor Papists with their Miracle, nor Puritans with their
Presbytery, shall ever put life into it again. Well may they hold with one an
Other, and make a Factious Neighborhood among themselves, I mean Papists with
Papists, Puritans with their Like, but they Both give us pregna^t Proofs, that
as long as they hold their wonted Course, they will never prove true
Neighbors. Here might I take occasion to speak of those Neighbourly Meetings,
when at certain times of the Year, whole Parishes meet together, and friendly
feast with one another. I know how bitterly it has been inveighed against, by
Some of our Coat, who had they spoken against the Sea a pretty Discourse hereof
in Mr Carewes Survey of Cornwell. Lib 1. Fol. 69. 70. 71
Abuses only, and Obliquities thereof, much amiss might have been amended. For
to say that every such Meeting, or Recreation on the Saboth Day; is a
Profanation of the Saboth, is like the Shoe of Hercules upon the Foot of a
Dwarf. Me thinks they themselves if they have Eagles wings to soar so high,
as to keep the Saboth so exactly, should not like the Luke 18.11.
Pharisee be offended to see others fly near the Ground: especially not to
preach (as Some by Vid. Mr. Tho. Rogers. Defense of the Artic. Prefat.
report have done) that to throw a Bowl on the Saboth Day: or to make a
Feast, or a Wedding Dinner on it: or to ring more Bells then one, though to call
the People to Church, is as great a Sin as to commit Murder, or as if a Father
should take a Knife, and kill his Child. Such Doctrines and Uses have Some of
them taught, by report, with whom the Dicuntur and hodie repullulascere
Sabbatarii, quiseptimi diei ocium incredibili superstitione observant. Erasm
Ecclesiastae sive de Rat. Conc. l. 3.
Saboth is now as great, as was Act. 19.34.
Diana with the Ephesians. The truth is, the Sabbath might spare such Proctors.
And I fear me, I may say in this case as Tacitus did in another, Tacit. Vit.
Agricol.
Pessimum Inimicorum genus Laudantium: The greatest Adversaries of the Saboth
have been such immoderate Co^menders of it to the People. Will you speak
wickedly, Job. 13.7.
says Job, for Gods defense, and talk deceitfully for his cause? Will you
make a Lie for him, as one lies for a Man? But to return unto my purpose.

If we would view the special Heads of all those Negatiues, and Affirmatiues,
here intimated by King Solomon, that which the Apostle says concerning Love,
let us apply it to Neighbourly Love, and the Summa Totalis will be this: 1.
Cor. 13.4
Love suffers long; it is bountiful; Love envieth not; Love does not boast
it self; it is not puffed up; it disdaineth not; it seeks not her own
things; it is not provoked to anger; it thinks not evil; it rejoices not in
iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth; It suffers all things; it believes
all things; it hops all things; it endures all things. And all, and every of
these Things does Neighbourly Love. And thus much of the Hurt intended here,
what it is, and consequently of the Instruction. Come we now unto the Reason
of it, wherein I noted unto you two Points: First, for that our Neighbor here
is said to dwell by us; The Benefit of having a Neighbor dwelling at any time
near unto us: Secondly, in that it is said, He dwells by us without fear; His
beginning of kindness to us, in that he distrusts us not. And of each of these
in their order, and First of the Benefit of having a Neighbor dwelling at any
time near unto us: Seeing he does dwell without fear by thee.

All the whole Heavens, Ps. 115.16.
says David, are the Lords, the Earth has he given to the Children of Men.
And yet not so neither has he given it, as that it is in common among them
all, only such several Parcels they have, as or Patrimony, or Purchase, or some
other lawful Means has allotted to them. The time was, when Abraham himself,
had no inheritance in the Land of Canaan, no not the Act. 7.5.
breadth of a Foot, yet had he all of it afterward both to himself, and to
his Seed. He was feign (you know) to buy a Field to bury Sarah his Wife in, and
Jacob also was a Purchaser, Genesis 33.19. Purchasing, as it is a lawful Act, and
the common effect of good Husbandry, so has it been in all Ages, at all
Times, and with all People. Only when it has no Bounds, and knows no
competent end of extending it self, but ever and anon, -- Horat. Sermon. l. 2.
Sat. 6.
O si Angulus ille
Proximus accedat, qui nunc deformat agellum,
and when they have once gotten it: Hoc iuvat and melli est:
1. Kin. 21.15.
Up and take possession of the Vinyard of Naboth, then make Purchasers an ill
bargain, for they purchase a Curse unto themselves. Witness the Prophet Esaias:
Woe unto them, Esaias. 5.8.
says the Prophet, that join House to House, and lay Field to field, till
there be no place, that ye may be placed by your selves, in the midst of the
Earth. And indeed, Beloved, strange it is, but that nothing is strange now
adays, that Hamlets, and Houses, and Churches, and all must down, to give
some New Master more elbow room, whom perhaps within a few Years,
peradventure few Months, it may be, few Days, if not this Night before to
Morrow, Luk 12.20.
they will fetch away his Soul from him, and as for his Carcass, a Coffin
shall cover it, and there an end of our great Purchaser. I my self, Ps. 37.36.
says David, have seen the Ungodly in great power, and flourishing like a
green Bay Tree, and I went by, and lo he was gone, I sought him, but his
place could no where be found. I speak not against Lawful Purchasing, it is
that Transcendency I strike at, when Men depopulate whole Countries, to people
the Land forsooth with Sheep. Our Sheep Oves vestrae, quae tam mites esse,
tamque exiguo solent ali, nunc (vti fertur) tam edaces atque indomitae esse
caeperunt, vt Homines devorent ipsos, Agros, Domos, Oppida vastent, ac
depopulentur. Mori V. top l. 1. Mori Oper. Lat. p. 2. Col. 4.
says Sr Thomas Moore, that were wont to be so meek, and tame, and so small
Eaters, are now become so great Devourers, and so Wild, that they eat up and
swallow down the very Men themselves. I, they consume, destroy, and devour,
whole Fields, and Houses, and Cities. Thus Sr Thomas Moore almost an hundred
years ago. What would he have said of our times? And yet in Sheep there is
some Profit to. Their Woole, their Fleece, their Flesh, I, the very Dung they
make, are exceeding profitable in their kind: but when Depopulation is made not
for Gain, but for Game, and Plough must give place to Pleasure, Good Husbandry
to a Keeper, and his Hound: the Game is not so usually and commonly trespassed
upon by Men, as the Commonwealth is by the Game. It is now Six hundred years
thereabouts, since William the Conqueror The Lives of the three Norman Kings
written by I. H. p. 218. and p. 227.
peccant in this kind, had two of his own Sons slain in a Forest which he
had made, Mr Fox says this Richard was Son to Robert his Son. Act. and
Monum p. 189. Col. 2 Edit. 1583.
Richard in his Fathers life time, and William the Cuncta Secunda licet Veteres
Foelicia dica^t, Omen inest numero, praesertim Regibus Anglis, Vita quibus
talis cognominis omnis iniquis Est excepta modis [Guil. 2. Henr. 2. Edward. 2.
Rich 2.] Nec opino vulnere Primus Occidit: Alter habet Natos sibi saepe
Rebels, Tertius, and Quartus Regnum, vitamque coacti Linquere. Rob. Moore
Diar. Historico. Poet. Men's. Feb. Ad Annum Mundi, 5362. p. 19.
Second, or William Rufus, his next Successor. Now if the Lord has so dealt
with the Cedars, and Fur Trees of our Land, what may the Shrubs look for?
Nay be we as strong as Oaks, there is One to speak in the Prophet Amos words,
that Can destroy our Fruit from above, and our Root from beneath, Amos 2.9.
But to come unto my Purpose.

They who would be such Purchasers as the Prophet Esaias speaks against, can by
no means conceive the Benefit of having a Neighbor dwelling nigh them. Man by
nature is a sociable Creature, and yet they, says the Prophet Esaias, would be
placed by themselves. Man Arist. Pol, l. 1. c. 2.
says Aristotle, is more sociable then any Be, or what other Creature soever
that desires Society. The reason is, for that Nature says he, has bestowed on
Man the Power of Speech. Voice indeed is given to other, says he, but Speech
is given to Man only. But if so be we would see the Benefit, that accrewes unto
us by Neighborhood, let us counsel with Antiquity, and see what the Ancient
say thereof. First Terence, he makes Neighborhood a kind of Friendship. Vel
Virtus tua me, vel Vicinitas Teren. Heaut. Act. 1. Sc. 1.
says he, quod ego in propinqua part Amicitiae puto, facit vt te audacter
moneam, and familiariter. And in the Person of Chremes whom he makes to speak
those Words, describes unto us an excellent Pattern of a right Good Neighbor
indeed. Hesiod. Opera and Dies.
Hesiod the Poet, he preferres it before Kindred it self, and excellent are the
Verses (some Ten in all) which he has about Neighborhood. (...) Had Hesiod
been a Christian he would have learned, and taught an other Lesson, namely
that of our Savior (...). Love your Enemies, Mat. 5.44.
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...):
(...).
They may, till they shall be better, be Englished thus: Thy Friends about thee
ever call,
whenas thou make a Feast:
As for thy Foe it mattereth not,
though he be not thy Guest.
But specially of all thy Friends,
invite thy Neighbors still,
Such as dwell nere: For if to thee
should happen any ill,
They presently would yield their help,
I, should they be undressed:
When commonly in such a Case,
Kinsmen will take their rest.
A Neighbor bad is greatest Bane:
a good One is a Bliss,
Happy is he that has a Good:
His Ox unharmed is.
When as thy Neighbor lends thee ought,
see that he meat aright,
And yield him back as much, or more,
when thou do him requite.
I mean if thy Ability
be such as that thou may,
And then for ever afterward,
a Friend of him thou have.
St Ambrose Super Fraternam charitatem frequenter est Vicini Gratia. Ille enim
saepe long, hic in proximo est, Vitae omnis testis, Co^versationis Arbiter.
Ambros. Epist. l. 7. ep. 44. p. 182.
preferres Neighborhood eve^ above Brotherhood, his Reason is that of Hesiods,
for that a Brother is most commonly a great way of, a Neighbor is nigh at
hand, and a Witness says he, of our whole Life, and one that is still ready
to testify in our behalf. The Scriptures are so for Neighborhood, as that
they make him a Sinner that despises his Neighbor. You shall find King
Salomons Words to this purpose, Prove. 14.21, and Prove. 21.10. Add hereunto the
many Casualties that may betide us in this Life, as of Fire, and Water, and so
forth, all which howsoever oftentimes we cannot possibly avoid, though we have
never so many Neighbors, yet may good Neighbors be a Benefit, and an Help
unto us in such Cases. And how Many or for want of Neighbors miscarry at such
times, or are damaged the less by reason of having Neighbors.

But the Benefit of having a Neighbor will the better appear, if so be he
begin in kindness (as King Solomon here presupposes he does) in that he dwells
by us without Fear. And indeed there is no one thing that should be more
powerful to draw us to love, then when we see that in that kind we are
begun unto by others. Nulla mayor ad Amorem invitatio Aug. de Catechizand.
Rud. c. 4. p. 639.
says St Austen, quam praevenire amando. Et nimis durus est Animus, qui si
dilectionem nolebat impendere, nolit and rependere. There is no greater
invitation to Love, then when an other loves us first. And that Heart is toto
hard, which if it be loath to begin to love, will not answer Love when it is
begun. The Love wherewith our Neighbor then begins unto us, is the good Opinion
he has of us, the Trust he reposeth in us, the Good he hopes to find by us,
esteeming us happyly such Neighbors as dwelled near to the Land of
Themistocles when as Themistocles was to sell it. He Plutarch Apophth.
commanded him that cried the Sale, to make Proclamation what a Good Neighbor
he should have that bought it. And indeed a Good Neighbor about us, is (as it
were) a Brase^ Wall to all that ever we possess. So was David unto Nabal. 1.
Sam. 25.16. Vid Erasm^ Adag.
Ne Bos quidem perierit cui Vicinus bonus, as it is in the Proverb, and as you
heard out of Hesiod, his Ox shall not miscarry, who so has a good Neighbor, so
that he shall dwell by thee with out fear, and thou without fear by him. What?
and have thou a Desire then to be beloved of thy Neighbor? Even that Desire of
thine imposes upon thee, a natural Duty, of bearing to him-ward fully the
like affection. Hence those several Rules and Vid. Mr Hooker Eccles. Pol. l.
1. 8. p. 65.
Precepts which Natural Reason has drawn for direction of Life, as that
because we would take no harm, we must therefore do none: that since we would
not be in any thing extremely dealt with, we must our selves avoid all
extremity in our dealings: that from all violence and wrong we are utterly to
abstain, etc.

I, but you will say, suppose he does not bear this natural affection
toward me. Suppose he is so far from beginning to me in this kind, as that he
will not answer the Love begun. Suppose I have put some confidence in him, and
he has utterly failed my expectation. Why, Suppose all this, and more to, yet
what said St Austen in an other case? Plue mihi mitigationes in Cor, vt
patienter tales fera^. O my God Aug. Confess. l. 12. c. 25. p. 152
says St Austen, shower down thy gentle appeasings into my Heart, that I may
patiently bear with such men as these. Oh, but Patience thou will say, is the
Virtue of Asses, a Refuge for Cowards, the Subject of Phlegm: I, Jonas, 4.9.
says Jonas, do well to be angry to the Death. I, but Jonas, be Ephesians. 4.26.
angry, and sin not, Let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath, neither give
place unto the Devil. As for those opprobrious terms concerning Patience,
brued by Satan, and broached by Miscreants, Patience has facility of Nature
enough to forgive, and to forget. Imagine She then speaks thus unto thee.
Upon Genesis 27.13.
me be these Proverbs my Son, only hear my Voice, and be not impatient for
all this. Art thou better then he that Made thee? Love your Enemies, Mat. 5.44.
says our Savior, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them which hurt you, and persecute you, that you may be the
Children of your Father which is in heaven: for he makes his Sun to arise on
the Evil, and the Good, and sends Rain on the Just and Unjust. Art thou
better then he that Redeemed thee, our Savior Christ Jesus? Voluit deseri,
Ambros. in Luc. l.. 5 p. ^65.
says S. Ambrose, voluit prodi, voluit ab Apostolo suo tradi, vt tu a Socio
desertus, a Socio proditus, moderate feras tuum errasse iudicium, perisse
Beneficium. Our Savior would be forsaken, he would be given over, he would be
betrayed by his Apostle, that thou forsaken of thy Fellow, suppose a Neighbor,
or a Friend, and even betrayed by him, should moderately bear the Error of
thy Judgment, and that a Benefit of thine has been cast away. Lastly, art
thou better then he that Sanctifies thee, I mean the Holy Ghost? It is true,
Whosoever shall speak against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, Mat.
12.32,
neither in this World, nor in the World to come, and yet for all that, even
for those to who^ S. Stephen had Act. 7.51.
said: Ye stifnecked, and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye have always
resisted the holy Ghost: the same Spirit gave him power to pray immediately
after, B. Stephanus orat pro eis a quibus lapidabatur, quia no^dum Christo
crediderant, neque adversus illam commune^ Gratiam dimicabant. Aug de Temp.
Ser. 59.
Lord, lay not this sin to their charge, Acts. 7.60. If thou art not moved
with all this, why then remember thine own Sins formerly committed against
God, and say unto thy self as Pharaos Butler did to Pharao, Genesis 41.9.
I call to mind my Faults this day. Remember how thou thy self have wronged
thy Creator, and as S. Austen spoke in another case, Aug. de Verb. Apost. Ser.
12. p. 209.
Mirari noli, si ea quae deseruit Superiorem, poenas patitur per inferiorem:
Marvel not if so be the Soul that forsook the Creator her Superior, be
punished by the Flesh which is inferior to her: so let us not marvel at Man's
Ingratitude, let us acknowledge rather our just Punishment deserved at Gods
hands, toward whom we are much more, more by much ungrateful, then Man to us
can possibly be. We that are Scholars may call to mind those Verses of the
Poet, and apply them to this purposes -- Virg. Aeneid. l. 12.
Non me tua fervida terrent
Dicta, ferox: Dij me terrent, and Jupiter hostis.
And thus much of the Instruction here, as also of the Reason of it, and
consequently of these Words: Intend none Hurt against thy Neighbor, seeing he
does dwell without fear by thee. A word or two of Application, and then
God-willing an end.

If ever Age might justly complain of neglect of Good Neighborhood, I suppose
this wherein we live, may not justly be exempted-Witnesse those many Quarrels
now a foot between Neighbor and Neighbor, especially in the Country. Witness
that multiplying of Lawyers in our Age more then ever in former times. Witness
that Thryving of them in our days, and those superlatiue Purchases which they
make in Lands, and Lordships, Pers. Satyr. 4. Tot Milvos intra tua Pascua
lissos. Iuvenal. Sat. 9.
Quantum non Milvus oberret
As much as a Kite would be wearied to compass about. All this and more then
this, tells us with shame unto our Faces, that we are as a worthy M. D.
Westerman. Prohibit. of Revenge. p. 62.
Doctor once spoke, a Sort of wrangling Christians, without Justice, without
Patience, without Love, without Wisdom. And yet mistake me not, I speak not
what I speak, as if I held it in no wise lawful to go to Law. I acknowledge
the truth of those Words which an excellent Prelate of our Church once spoke to
his own Flock. Next after the Gospel, B. Iuell in 1 Thessalonians. 4.9 p. 139 Vid,
Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 20 17, 18, 19. etc.
says he, the Law is the greatest comfort that God has given to the Sons of
Men. It remedieth Injuries, and gives to every man that is his. He that goes
to a Judge, goes to him that is the Minister of Justice, and that sits in the
room of God to do right. For the seat of Justice is the seat of God. If there
were, no Law to be ministered, but every man might do what he would, and
reckon all his own, whatsoever he could get, or come by, what a Life would it
be? How should any man be Master of that he has? who can imagine what
Injuries, Cruelties, Murders and Streams of Blood would follow? Thanks be to
God, who in mercy has given us a Law, and Justice to guide us by. Let us be
content to seek help at this Law without wrath, or malice. Let us come to it,
as we would come unto our Father. Let us ask counsel at it, as we would at
the mouth of God. As every Man thinks it lawful to use his own, or to require
his own: so let every man be contented to leave that he holds, when LAW
says it is none of his. The Law is no Breach of Charity, it is the Bond, and
Knot to keep Men in love. A Son, may attempt Law with his Father, yet do it
in such duty, as becomes a Son. A Subject may attempt Law even with his
Prince, and yet love and reverence his Prince as it becomes a Subject.
Whosoever, says he, uses the Law otherwise, does abuse it. All Strife, and
Contention must be laid aside. Love may avoid wrong, Love may require Right,
Love may stand forth and seek defense before a Judge. Thus far that worthy
Prelate. So, that the Law you see is good, I, as necessary for the Commonwealth
as is that Sun in the Firmament, only such Abuses there are about the Law, as
also in some Lawyers what with Delays, Demurres, and Quirks: what with
exorbitant Fees, and what with Bribing, and consequently Deuteronomy. 16.19.
Blinding, or the Master, or the Man, he that Daunceth on the Threshold so
proudly, Zeph. 1.9, as Might, and Right most commonly bandying, and Right being
overcome, Neighbors remain ever after full of Hatred as before.

But we perhaps of the City offend not in Suits so much as in some other
vnneighbourly Parts. I mean, in seldom Visiting each other: In being so far
from doing such Offices as belong to Neighborhood, as that we acquaint our
selves most of all with those that dwell farthest of: In Backbiting, and
Slaundering our Neighbors, and suffering our Tongues to run riot on them.
The TONGVE indeed has the vantage of all the Members of our Bodies besides.
Should a man endeavor, Aug. de Verb. Apost. Ser. 28. p. 267
says S. Austen, to perform any thing with his Hands, they might easily be
commanded to hold themselves: were he with his Feet to walk abroad, he must
take some pains to styr them, least Sloth might happen to hold him at hoame:
but as for the Tongue, says he, Facilitatem habet motus, in vdo posita est,
facile in lubrico labitur. It has a facility of motion, it is situate in a
moist place, and easily slides in a place so slipperie. And yet mark it,
Beloved, when you will. Such as in a serious Matter can hardly speak three
Words together without some notable incongruity, if once they begin to Rail,
to Backbite, and to Slander they are voluble enough for whole Hours together.
I, and such, as I told you before, will seem Religious too. But S. James will
tell them again. Iam. 1.26.
If any Man among you seems Religious, Viris and Mulieribus commune Nomen
Homo est. Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 1. c. 4.
meaning any Woman too, and refraineth not his Tongue, but deceaueth his own
Heart, this Man's Religion is vain. Even as if he had lived in these Days and
should have said: It is not the Name of a Roman Catholic, no nor of a
Sanctified Brother, or Sister, that will in this case serve the turn. Nay,
will you see how by way of Prophecy he may be thought to have aimed at both
these, in the Words immediately following? Pure Religion, Iam. 1.27.
says he [An Item for Puritans, who suppose themselves so Pure, that they
forsooth must have their Meetings apart; they mislike our Common Prayer; they
cannot away with their own Pastor, they will trot some Miles to hear another]
And undefiled before God, [An Item for Papists, who so much vaunt of the Church
of Rome, and that She forsooth is Holy Catholic Church, Undefiled, and that
cannot Erre] but, Pure Religion, and vndefivndefiled before God the Father is
this: to visit the Fatherless, and Widows in their Adversity, and to keep
himself unspotted of the World. But to leave both these, and to come unto our
selves.

It shall little avail us, Beloved, to be neither of these Twain, if so be we
offend in such sort as do these Twain. Though thou Israel play the Harlot
Hosea 4.15.
says the Prophet Hosea, yet let not Judah sin, least as the Lord had a
Controversy with Judah, and visited Jacob according to his Hos. 12.2.
Ways, so according to our Works he recompense us. Let us, Beloved, bear
affection then, to all of the Household of Faith, especially unto such as
Neighbor at any time near unto us. Let us not Forsake the Heb. 10.25.
Fellowship that we have, or ought to have among our Selves, as the manner of
Some is. Such as a General of the Field does place together in one Troop, he
is fully persuaded of Such that they will always Primum Militiae Vinculum est
Religio, and Signorum Amor, and deserendi Nefas. Senec. Epist. l. 15. ep 96. p
235
hold together; that upon any occasion whatsoever, they will Societas nostra
Lapidum fornicationi simillima est, quae casura nisi invicem obstarent, in hoc
ipso sustinetur. Senec. Ibid.
second one an other; that they are in their hearts (as 2. Cor. 7.3.
speaks the Apostle St Paul) to die and live together; and therefore Nehemias,
he set all of one Kindred together, Nehem. 4.13, whereas Strangers when they
come to Service, Non fide, non affectu tenentur Tacit. in vit. Agric.
says Tacitus, sine pudore flagitij fugiunt. They are not retained by
affection, nor regard any Promise made. They shame not to fly to save their
Skins. Our whole Life you know, is a Warfare; our Savior Christ, our General;
So many Parishes, so many Troops, both of Men and Women, and Children. He has
given us our dwelling together, because we should troop together. He has set
us all in one Border, and al for we should grow together. He has wrought us
(as it were) in one Knot, that so we might seem the more sightly together.
Numb. 24.5.
How goodly are thy Tents o Jacob, and thy Habitations o Israel. As the Valleys
are they stretched forth, as Gardens by the River side, as the Aloe Trees,
which the Lord has planted, as the Cedars besides the Waters. What? and shall
we now, do nothing but iangle with one an other? Nothing at all but wrangle?
We who live in one Age? So nigh Neighbors one to an other? There might have
been some Hundreds of Years, there might have been distance of some Hundreds
of Miles between us, and shall we be falling out? We that are tied to one an
other in that threefold Knot of Friendship: Christian Religion? Neighborhood?
Brotherhood? Shall we break every of them, and snap them asunder, as easily as
Sampson did his Judge. 16.9.
Cords? Live. Decad. 1. l. 3.
Hoc vulgari? Shall this be noysed abroad? Hoc Socios audire? hoc Hosts? Quo
cum dolor hos? quo cum gaudio illos? Shall our Friends? shall our Enemies
hear of it? What exceeding Grief will it be to the One? What excessive Joy to
the Other? Be it our Neighbor has none of the best Dispositions that be: that
he is hasty, and humerous, proane to Anger, and to take Offense. Besides, that
Aug. de Te^p. Ser. 202. p. 741.
St Austen tells us, Qui velociter irascitur, tam celeriter mitigatur: It falls
out a many times, that He that is soon Angry, will as soon be Pleased
again, and he speaks it of Patricius his own Father, that he was Aug.
Confess. l. 9. c. 9. p. 112.
Sicut benevolentia praecipuus, ita ira fervidus: Exceeding Kind, but
exceeding Choleric to, let us somewhat our Selves be bettered by wise King
Solomon, who tells us in this very Book what a soft Answer will do in such a
Case. A soft Answer Prove. 15.1.
says he, puts away wrath. And again in an other place, A soft Tongue
Prove. 25.15.
says he, breaks the Bones, that is, Men or Women as Lavater in hunc loc.
hard as Bones, or rather as Flint and Stones. You know what 1. Sam. 25.24
Abigail did in such a Case. So did Judge. 8.2.
Gedeon with the Ephramites. And 1. King. 12,16.
Rehoboam for he would not so do, with his Subjects when time was, lost his
Patience, and his People both. Be it our Neighbor then is far incensed,
shall we add Fuel to the Fire, who might at the first even have Ecclus.
28.12.
spit it out? I, but what then shall become of the Apostle St Paul's Counsel,
1. Cor. 6.7.
Why rather suffer ye not wrong? Why rather sustain ye not harm? What of
king Salomons, Of doing good for ill, that so we may at the length, Lay Prove.
25.22.
Coals upon his Head? What of our Savior Christ's of Mat. 5.39.
Turning the Check? Shall we be all of us Rehoboams, and forsake the Counsel
of these Ancients, and cleave to the Counsel of those Younglings our Lusts
and Affections? Wherefore, Beloved, to grow to an end. If there be any Philip.
2.2.
Consolation in Christ, If any Comfort of Love, If any Fellowship of the
Spirit, If any Compassion of Mercy, fulfill: shall I say with the Apostle St
Paul, my Joy? no, but the Joy of the Apostle St Paul; the Joy of wise King
Solomon; the Joy of our Savior himself; that ye be like minded, having the
same Love, being of one Accord, and of one Judgment, that nothing be done
through Contention, or Vain Glory, but that in meekness of mind, every man
esteem other better then himself. And thus shall you be Every of you right
good Neighbors indeed, and after your Neighborhood here on Earth, you shall
be Neighbors to the Habes Apostolos Proximos, habes Martyrs Proximos.
Ambros. de Vid. p. 183.
Saints above, the holy Apostles and Martyrs, and the Elect Angels of God; nay
Neighbors to our Savior himself, who being the Ephesians. 4.15.
Head; we the Members, Nihil tam proximum, quam Caput Membris Ambros. in Luc.
l. 7. c. 10. p. 101.
says St Ambrose, There cannot be so nigh a Neighborhood, as between the
Members, and the Head.

My Conclusion shall be that of Joseph to his Brethren, Genesis 45.24.
Ne irascamini in via, Fall not out by the Way. You have this day been as it
were in Egypt, where you have had all of you Sufficiency of Corn, and Food.
You have this day been with your Brother Joseph, our Savior CHRIST JESUS, who
is Rev. 1.18.
alive but he was dead, and behold he is alive for evermore. You have this day
sat at his Table, the Genesis 43.33.
Eldest according to his Age, and the Youngest according to his Youth. You have
all of you had, none excepted, your Genesis 45.22.
Change of Raiment. You are now as King Solomon Cant. 4.2.
speaks, like a Flock of Sheep in good order, which go up from the
washing. You are like the Cant. 5.12.
Doves upon the Rivers of Waters which are washed with Milk, and remain by the
full Vessels. You are now like Judah, whose Garment was washed in Genesis 49.11.
Wine, and his Cloak in the Blood of Grapes. You know whose Saying it was,
Cant. 5.3.
I have put of my Coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my Feet, how
shall I defile them? This said the Spowse unto our Savior, unkindly, I
confess, and undutifully: but how exceeding fitly may we say it both to Sin
and Satan: We have put of our Coats, how shall we put them on? We have washed
our Feet, how shall we defile them? Nay, we have put of our very Skins. We have
cast of, concerning the Conversation in time past, the Ephesians. 4.22.
OLD MAN, which is corrupt through the deceivable Lusts: and put on the NEW
MAN, which after God is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness. We have
washed our Feet, and He that is washed, needs not save to wash his Ioh. 13.20.
Feet, but is Clean every whit. We have put of our Coats, how shall we put
them on? We have washed our Feet, how shall we defile them? And this, Beloved,
if so be we say, imagine our Savior also says to Us, Ioh. 5.14.
Behold You are made whole, sin no more, least a worse thing come unto You.
2. Tim. 2.7.
Consider what He says, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

The same LORD so bless us, and the Seed that has been sown, that with YOU
of the Poorer sort the Mat. 13.22.
Cares of this World, with YOU of the Wealthier, the Deceitfulnes of your
Riches, with EITHER of YOU of either sort the Lusts of other Things, grow not
up like Thorns, and choke it.
FINIS.

