THE good husvvifes Jewel.

Wherein is to be found most excellent and rare Devises for Conseites in
Cookerie, found out by the practice of THOMAS DAWSON.

Whereunto is adjoined sundry approved reseits for many sovereign Oils, and
the way to distill many precious waters, with diverse approved medicines for
many diseases.

Also certain approved points of husbandry, very necessary for all Husbandmen
to know.

Newly set forth with Additions. 1587.

Imprinted at London by John Wolf for Edward White, dwelling at the little
North door of Paul's at the sign of the Gunne. 1587.

Here follows the order of meats, how they must be served at the Table, with
their sauces for flesh days at dinner.
The first course. POtage or stewed Broth. Boiled meat or stewed meat.
Chickins and Bacon. Powdered Beef. Pies. Goose. Pigge. Roasted Beef. Roasted
veale. Custard. The second course. Roasted Lamb, Roasted Capons. Roasted
Conies. Chickins. Pehennes. Baked Uenison. Tart. The first course at Supper. A
Salet. A Pigges Petitoe. Powdered Beef slised. A Shoulder of Mutton or a
Breast. Ueale. Lamb. Custard. The second course. Capons roasted. Connies
roasted. Chickins roasted. Pigions roasted. Larkes roasted. A pie of Pigions or
Chickins. Baked Uenison. Tart. The service at Dinner. A dosen of Quayles. A
dish of Larkes. Two pasties of red dear in a dish. Tarte, Ginger bread.
Fritters. Service for Fish days. Butter. A sallet with hard Eggs. Potage of
sand Eles and Lamperns. Red Hearing green broyled strowed upon. White hearing.
Ling. Haburdine. Mustard. Salt Salmon minced. Two pasties of fallowe Dear in a
dish. A Custard. A dish of Lieches. The second course. Jelly. Peacocks, Sauce
wine and Salt. Two Conies or half a dosen rabets, sauce Mustard and sugar.
Half a dosen of Pigions. Mallard. Toil. Sauce mustard and vergious. Gulles.
Storke. Heronshewe. Crabbe. Sauce Galentine. Gurlew. Bitture. Bustarde.
Feasant. Sauce, water and Salt, with Onyons sliced. Half a dosen Woodcocks,
Sauce, Mustard and Sugar. Half a dosen Teales, Sauced as the Fesants. A dosen
of Quayles. A dish of Larks. Two Pasties of red Dear in a dish, Tarte. Ginger
bread. Fritters. Service for fish days. Butter. A Sallet with hard Eggs.
Potage of sand Eeles, and Lamperns, Red Hearing, green broyled strowed upon.
White hearing, Ling, Haburdine. Sauce, Mustard. Salt Salmon minced. Sauce,
Mustard and vergious, and a little Sugar. Powdered Conger. Shadde. Mackrell Sauce
vinegar.

Whyting: Sauce, with the Liver and Mustard. Playce: Sauce. Sorrel, or wine,
and Sault, or Mustard, or Uergious.

Thorneback: sauce, Liver and mustard, Pepper and sault strowed upon, after it
is bruised. Fresh Cod: Sauce green sauce. Dace, Mullet, Eeles upon Soppes. Roch
upon soppes. Perch. Pike in Pikesauce. Trowte upon soppes. Tench in Gelly or
Gresyll. Custard.

The second course. Flounders or Flokes Pike sauce. Fresh Salmon. Fresh Conger,
Brette, Turbut. Halybut. Sauce Uineger.

Breame upon soppes. Carpe upon soppes. Soles or any other Fishes fried. Roasted
Eele: Sauce the dripping. Roasted Lamperns. Roasted Perpos. Fresh Sturgion.
Sauce Galentine.

Creuis, Crab, Shrimps. Sauce vinegar.

Baked Lampray, Tarte, Figs, Apples, Almondes blaunched, Cheese, Raysins,
Pears.


FINIS.
A Book of Cookerie.
To boil Larkes.
TAke sweet Bread, and strain it into a pipkin, and set it on the fire, and
put in a piece of Butter, and skimme it as clean as ye can, and put in
spennedge, and Endive, and cut it a little, and so let it boil, and put in
Pepper, Cloves and Mace, Synamome and Ginger, and a little Vergious, and when
you serve them up, lay soppes in the dish.

To boil Conyes.
TAke a Cony and perboyle it a little, then take a good handful of persely and a
few sweet herbs the yolke of iiii. hard eggs chop them all together then
put in pepper and a few currantes, and fill the Conies belly full of Butter
then prick her head between her hinder legs and break her not and put her
into a fair earthen pot with mutton broth and the rest of the stuff roll it
up round and put it in withal and so boil them well together and serve it
with soppes

To boil a Cony.
YOu must boil your Cony, and streine your Sweet bread into a Pipkin, and put
in your meat, skumme it as clean as you can, and put in a good deal of
Endive, and cut it a little, and a good piece of Butter, and all kind of spices,
and a little vergious, and so serve it on soppes.

To boil Chickins.
FIrst you shall take Chickins and boil them with grapes and with a rack of
Mutton together and let the rack of Mutton boil before the Chickins one hour
and a half and then make a bunch of herbs with Rosemarie, Time, Sauory and
Isope, and also Margerum and bind them fast together, put them in the pot, and
when you see your time put in your Chickins with Persely in their bellies and a
little sweet butter, vergious, and peper, and when you have so done boil your
grapes in a little pipkin by themselves with some of the broth of the Chickins,
but take heed you boil not them too much nor yet too little, and then take the
yolks of six eggs and streine them with a little broth of the pot, and when
they are streyned put them in the pipkin to the grapes and stir them and when
they begin to boil take them from the fire and stir them a good while after
you have taken then up and then have you Syppets ready in a platter, and lay
your meat upon it, and then take your pipkins and grapes and all that is in
them and power it upon the meat. And after this sort serve it in.

To boil Mutton and Chickins.
TAke your Mutton and Chickins and set upon the fire with fair water and when
it is well skimmed, take two handful of Cabbadge Lettice, a handful of
currants a good piece of butter the juice of two or three leammans a good deal
of gross Pepper and a good piece of Sugar, and let them sees all well
together, then take three or four yolks of eggs together hard roasted and
strain them with part of your broth, let them sees a quantity of an hour.
Serve your broth with meat upon Sippets.

To boil Chickins.
STreine your broth into a pipkin, and put in your chickins, and skumme them as
clean as you can, and put in a piece of butter, and a good deal of Sorrel,
and so let them boil, and put in all manner of spices, and a little vergyce
pycke, and a few Barberies, and cut a Lemman in pieces, and scrape a little
Sugar upon them, and lay them upon the chickins when you serve them up, and
lay soppes upon the dish,

An other way to boil Chickins.
YOu must streine your broth into a Pipkin, and set it a boiling, and skumme it
and put in a piece of butter, and endive, and so let it boil, and a few
currants, al manner of spices, and so serve it on soppes.

To boil Plouers.
YOu must streine your swet broth into a pipkin, and set them on the fire, and
when they boil, you must skumme them, and then put in a piece of butter, and a
good deal of spinnedge, and a little persely, and a piece of carret root cut
very small, and a few currants, and so let them boil, and all manner of
spices, and a little white wine, and a little vergice, and so serve them upon
soppes.

To boil Teales.
TAke sweet broth and Onions, and shred them, and Spennedge, and put in butter
and pepper, and then leyre it with tostes of bread, with a little vergious, and
so serve it on soppes.

To boil steaks between two dishes.
YOu must put Persely and Currants, and Butter and vergious, two or three
yolks of Eggs, and Pepper, Cloves and Mace, and so let them boil together,
and serve them upon soppes.

To boil a neates tongue.
IN primis, in fair Water and salt, then peele it, and cut it in the middle,
and then boil it in red wine, and fill him full of cloves, and a little sugar,
and then wash it with a little sweet broth, to do away the sent of the wine,
and you must make a little red Musket with red wine and pruines boiled together,
then streine it, and streine a little Mustard in a fine cloute together, and so
serve it up.

To boil a Capon.
PVt the Capon into the powder beef pot and when you think it almost tender
take a little pot and put therein half water and half wine, marie, currants,
dates, whole mace, vergice, pepper anda little time.

The boiling of a Capon.
Sees the Capon it self in water and salt and nothing else and to make the
broth Videl. take strong broth made with beef or mutton or both, so that it be
strong broth and put into it, rosemarie, perselie and time, with iiii. leaves
of sage, this let sees in it a good while, and then put into it small raysons
and a few whole mace, A quarter of an hour before it be ready to be taken
from the fire have ready sodden four or v. eggs boiled hard take nothing out
but the yolks streyne the eggs with a little of the same broth and vergice,
have a little marie cut in small pieces, and an apple pared and cut in small
pieces, and if that time of year do serve take the best of lettice cutting of
the tops to the white and best, and take a few prunes with a few dates two
or three.

Thus let it sees a quarter of an hour or more and when it is ready to take
up have your dish with soppes ready, and the water well strained out of the
capon, and then season the broth with a little pepper, then take it and dish it
and scrape upon it a little sugar laying ye Prunes round about the dish side.

To boil a Capon with Orenges and Lemmans.
TAke Orenges or Lemmans pilled and cut them the long way, and if you can keep
your cloves whole and put them into your best broth of mutton or capon with
prunes or currants and three or four dates, and when these have been well
sodden put whole pepper great mace, a good piece of sugar, some rose water, and
either white or claret wine and let all these sees together a while and so
serve it upon soppes with your capon.

To boil a Capon in whit broth with Almondes.
TAke your Capon with marie bones and set them on the fire, and when they be
clean skimmed take the fattest of the broth, and put it in a little pot with a
good deal of marie, prunes, raisons, dates whole maces, and a pint of white
wine, then blanch your Almonds and strain them, with them thicken your pot
and let it sees a good while and when it is enough serve it upon soppes with
your Capon.

To boil a Capon in white broth.
TAke a good Capon and scalde him and trusse him and when he is fair washed
put him in your pot, and take a good marie bone too, or if you have no marie
bone take a neck of Mutton and when your capon is half boiled take a pottle
of the uppermost of your broth and put it into a fair posnet, Then take two
handfulles of fine currants, and viii. dates cut every one of them in four
pieces and four or five whole mace, four sponfulles of vergious, and as much
sugar as a negge, a little Time, and a little Persely, and a little margerum, and
if you have no Margerum, then one small sprig of rosemarie, bind al your herbs
fast, together, and when you have clean washed them put to the said herbs
sugar, currants, mace, and vergice into your posnet and a grated nutmegge, and
let them boil all together, and when it is almost enough have a small handful
of Almondes blanched and beaten and streyned with a little of the same licor,
and put that into your broth a good quarter of an hour before you take it up
and that will make it white, you must also put in some good pieces of marie,
and let not the marie and the dates sees above half an hour, you must take a
good handful of prunes and tie them in clean clothes and sees them in the
broth where the Capon is, when you take up your Capon to serve it in, lay a few
sippets in the bottom of your platter and lay a few Prunes and Barberies both
about the brimme of the platter, and also upon the Capon, you may boil
Chickins in the like sort.

To make boiled meats for dinner.
TAke the ribs of a neck of mutton and stuff it with margerum, sauery,
time, perselie chopped final, currants, with the yolks of two eggs, pepper,
and salt, then put it into a posenet with fair water, or else with the liquor
of some meat with vinegar pepper and salt, and a little butter and so serve it.

To boil meats for supper.
TAke veale and put it into a posnet with carret roots cut in long pieces then
boil it and put thereto a handful of prunes and crummes of Bread, Then season
it with pepper salt and vinegar.

To boil a leg of Mutton with a Pudding.
FIrst with a knife raise the skin round about til you come to the joints and
when you have perboyled the meat, shred it fine with sweet or marie,
Perselie, Margerum and penyriall then season it with pepper, and salt, cloves,
mace, and synamom, and take the yolks of ix. or x. eggs, and mingle with your
meat a good handful of currants, and a few minced dates and put the meat
into the skin of the leg of mutton and close it with pricks and so boil
it with the broth that you boil a Capon and let it sees the space of two
haures.

To boil Pigges feet and Petitoes.
TAke and boil them in a pint of vergice and bastard take iiii. dates minced
with a few small raysons then take a little time and choppe it small and season
it with a little synamon and ginger and a quantity of vergice.

To make a mortis.
TAke almondes and blanch them, and beat them in a Mortar, and boil a
Chickin, and take all the flesh of him and beat it, and streine them together,
with milk and water, and so put them into a pot, and put in Sugar, and stir
them still, and when it has boiled a good while, take it of, and set it a
cooling in a payle of water, and streine it again with Rose water into a dish.

To boil a Lambs head and purtenance.
STreine your broth into a pipkin, and set it on the fire, and put in butter,
and skumme it as clean as you can, and put in your meat, and put in endive,
and cut it a little, and streine a little yeaste, and put into it, and currants
and prunes, and put in all manner of spices, and so serve it upon soppes.

To boil Quails.
FIrst, put them into a Pot with sweet broth, and set them on the fire: then
take a Carret root, and cut him in pieces, and put into the pot, then take
parsely with sweet herbs, and chop them a little, and put them into the
Pot, then take Sinamome, Ginger, Nutmegges, and Pepper, and put in a little
Uergice, and so season it with salt, serve them upon soppes, and garnish them
with fruit.

To make stewed Steakes.
TAke a piece of Mutton, and cut it in pieces, and wash it very clean, and
put it into a fair pot with Ale, or with half wine, then make it boil, and
skumme it clean, and put into your pot a faggot of Rosemarie and time: then
take some Parsely picked fine, and some onions cut round, and let them all
boil together, then take prunes, and reasons, dates, and currants, and let it
boil altogether, and season it with Sinamon and ginger, Nutmegs, two or three
Cloves and Salt, and so serve it on soppes, and garnish it with fruit.

To stewe Calves feet.
TAke calves feet fair blanched and cut them in the half, and when they be
more then half boiled, put to them great raisons, mutton broth, a little
saffron and sweet butter, pepper, sugar, and some sweet herbs finely minced,
boil calves feet, sheep feet, or lambs feet with mutton broth sweet
herbs and Onions chopped fine, butter and Pepper, and when they boil, take
the yolke of an egg and strain it with vergice so serve it.

To stewe a Mallard.
TAke your Mallard and sees him in fair water with a good marie bone and in
cabbadgeworth or cabbadge lettice or both or some persneps roots, and carret
roots, and when all these be well sodden put in prunes, put in prunes enough
and three dates, and season him with salt, cloves, and mace, and a little sugar
and pepper and then serve it forth with syppets and put the marie upon them,
and the whole mace lay on the syppets, and the dates quartered and the prunes
and the roots cut in round slyces, and lay them upon the sippets also and the
cabbadge leaves lay upon the Mallard.

To make Aloes.
TAke a leg of veale, or mutton, and slice it in thin slices, and lay them
in a platter and cast on salt, and put thereon the yolks of ten eggs and a
great sort of small raisons and dates, finely minced, then take veniger, and a
little saffron, cloves, and mace, and a little pepper, and mingle it together and
power it al about it, and then al to work it together, and when it is thoroughly
seasoned put it on a spit, and set platters underneath it, and bast it with
butter, and then make a sauce with vinegar, and ginger, and sugar, and lay the
aloes upon it and so serve it in.

To make Fritters of Spinnedge.
TAke a good deal of Spinnedge, and wash it clean, then botle it in fair
water, and when it is boiled, then take it forth and let the water run from
it, then chop it with the back of a knife, and then put in some eggs and
grated bread, and season it with sugar, sinamom, ginger and pepper, dates
minced fine, and currants, and roll them like a ball, and dippe them in butter
made of Ale and flower.

A Fritter to be made in a Moulde.
TAke Ox white and mince it fine, then take Dates, and mince them fine, then
take Currants, Eggs, white grated bread and season it with sugar, synamon and
ginger, cloves, mace and saffron, and stir it well together, then drive a
thick cake of paste, and lay in the mould, and fill it with the stuff, and
lay an other cake of past upon it, then iogge it about and so fry it.

To boil Pigeons in black broth.
FIrst roste them a little, then put them into an earthen pot, with a little
quantity of sweet Broth, then take Onions, and slyce them, and set them on
the Coals with some butter to take away the sent of them, put them into the
Pigions, and leyre it with a toste of bread, drawn with Uineger, then put some
sweet herbs half cut, and synamom and ginger, and gross Pepper, and let
them boil, and season them with salt, serve them upon soppes, and garnish
them with fruit.

To smere a Conie.
TAke the Livers and boil them, and chop it, and sweet herbs, apples, and
the yolks of hard eggs, and choppe them altogether, and currants, sugar,
synamom, ginger and persely, and fill the Conny full hereof, then put her into
the sweet broth, and put in sweet butter, then choppe the yolks of hard
eggs, synamom, ginger, sugar, and cast it on the Cony when you serve it up,
season it with salt, serve it on soppes, and garnish it with fruit.

To boil a Mallard with Cabbedge.
TAke some Cabbedge, and prick and wash them clean, and perboyle them in
fair water, then put them into a Collender, and let the water run from them
clean, then put them into a fair earthen pot, and as much sweet broth as
will cover the Cabbadge, and sweet butter, then take your Mallard and roast it
half enough, and save the dripping of him, then cut him in the side, and put
the mallard into the cabbedge, and put into it all your dripping, then let it
stew an hour, and season it with salt, and serve it upon soppes.

To boil a Ducke with Turnips.
TAke her first, and put her into a pot with stewed broth, then take persely
and sweet herbs, and chop them, and perboyle the roots very well in an other
pot, then put unto them sweet butter, Synamome, Ginger, gross Pepper and
whole Mace, and so season it with salt, and serve it upon soppes.

To make white Estings.
TAke great Otemeale, and lay in milk to steep, then put in the yolks of
some Eggs, and take Ox white and mince it sinal, then season it with sugar,
synamom, ginger, cloves, mace, and saffron, and salt, and so fill them.

To make black Puddings.
TAke great otmeale and lay it in milk to steep, then take sheep blood and
put to it, and take Ox white and mince into it, then take a few sweet herbs
and two or three leeke blades, and choppe them very small, and put into it
then the yolks of some Eggs, and season it with Synamom, ginger, cloves,
Mace, pepper and salt, and so fill them.

To make strong broth for sick men.
TAke a pound of Almonds and blanch them, and beat them in a mortar very
fine, then take the brains of a capon and beat with it, then put into it a
little cream, and make it to draw through a strayner, then set it on the fire
in a dish, and season it with rose water and sugar, and stir it.

To boil a Breame.
TAke white wine, and put it into a pot, and let it sees, then take your
breame, and cut him in the midst, and put him in, then take an Onion and chop
it small, then take nutmegs beaten, synamome and ginger, whole mace, and a
pound of butter, and let it boil al together, and so season it with salt,
serve it upon soppes, and garnish it with fruit.

To boil Muskles.
TAke water and yeste, and a good dish of butter, and Onions chopped, and a
little pepper, and when it has boiled a little while, then see that your
Muskels be clean washed, then put them into the broth shells and all, and when
they be boiled well, then serve them broth and all.

To boil Stock fish.
TAke Stockfish when it is well watered, and pick out all the baste clean
from the fish, then put it into a pipkin, and put in no more water then shall
cover it, then set it on the fire, and as soon as it begins to boil on the
one side, then turn the other side to the fire, and as soon as it begins to
boil on the other side, take it off, and put it into a Colender, and let the
water run out from it, but put in salt in the boiling of it, then take a
little fair water and sweet butter, and let it boil in a dish until it be
something thick, then power it on the stockfish and serve it.

To make bake meats.
TAke a leg of Lamb, and cut out all the flesh, and save the skin whole,
then mince it fine and white with it, then put in grated bread, and some eggs
white and all, and some Dates and Currantes, then season it with some Pepper,
Synamome, Ginger, and some Nutmegges and Carrawaies, and a little cream, and
temper it all together, then put it into the leg of the Lamb again, and let
it bake a little before you put it into your Pie, and when you have put it into
your pie, then put in a little of the Pudding about it, and when it is almost
baked, then put in vergice, sugar and sweet butter, and so serve it.

An other bake meat.
TAke a leg of Veale, and cut it in slices, and beat it with the back of a
knife, then take time, margerum and penniriall, sauerie, and persely, and one
Onion, and chop them altogether very small, then break in some eggs whites
and all, and put in your herbs and season it with pepper, nutmegs and salt,
and a little sugar, then stir them altogether, and then lap them up like
allows, and cast a few currants and dates, and butter amongst them.

An other bake meat.
TAke two pound of White and a little veale, and mince it together, then take a
little peniriall, sauerie and margerum and unset Leekes, and chop them fine, and
put in some eggs and some cream, then stir it all well together, and season
it with pepper, nutmegs and salt, then put it into the pie, and cut the lid,
and let it bake till it be dry, then serve it.

To make Marie pies.
MAke fine past, and put in the white of one egg and sugar, and when they are
made in little coffins set them into the Oven upon a paper a little while then
take them out and put in marie, and then close them up and prick them, and set
them in again, and when they are broken serve them with blanch powder strowed
upon them.

To boil pie meat.
TAke a leg of mutton and mince it very fine with suet and sees it in a
little pan or an earthen pot with butter and season it with cloves, mace,
great raysons and prunes, and salt, and serve it in a dish, and if you will put
in some juice of Orenges and lay half an orange upon it.

To make fine Cakes.
TAke fine flower and good damask water you must have no other liquor but
that, then take sweet butter, two or three yolks of eggs, and a good
quantity of sugar, and afewe cloves, and mace, as your Cooks mouth shall
serve him, and a little saffron, and a little Gods good about a sponful if you
put in too much they shall arise, cut them in squares like unto trenchers, and
prick them well, and let your oven be well swept and lay them upon papers and
so set them into the oven, do not burn them if they be three or four days
old they be the better.

To make fine cracknels.
TAke fine flower and a good quantity of eggs as many as will supply the
flower, then take as much sugar as will sweeten the past, and if you will not
be at the cost to raise it with eggs, then put thereto sweet water Synamome
and a good quantity of nutmegges and mace, according to your bread, take a
good quantity of Annis seed, and let all this be blended with your flower,
and the putting in of your eggs or other moisture, then set on your water and
let it be at seething, before you put your Crackenelles in it they will go to
the bottom and at their rising take them out and dry them with a cloth then
bake them.

To bake Connies.
Have fine past ready, wash your Connies, and perboyle them then cast, them
into the cold water, then season them, with salt and ginger, lay them into the
past and upon them lay leached, larde close them and bake them.

To bake a breast of Veale.
TAke and break the bones thereof in the midst and perboyle him and take out
the bones, and season him with pepper and salt, and lay him in the coffin with
a little sweet butter, and close him up then make a caudell of the yolks of
an egg and strain it, and boil it in a chafing dish of coals and season it
with sugar, and put it in the pie and set it into the Oven again.

To make a pudding in a breast of Veale.
TAke Peresely, Time, wash them, prick them, and choppe them small, then take
viii. yolks of eggs grated bread and half a pint of cream being very
sweet, then season it with Pepper, Cloves, and Mace, Saffron, and Sugar small
Raisons and Salt, put it in and Roste it and serve it.

To bake a Gammon of Baken.
TAke a gammon of Baken, water it six days and perboyle him half enough and
lay him in press then take the sword of him and stuff him with cloves, and
season him with Pepper, and saffron. And close him up in a standing pie, bake
him and so serve him.

To make fine Bysket Bread.
TAke a pound of fine flower, and a pound of sugar, and mingle it together, a
quarter of a pound of Annis seeds, four eggs, two or three sponfuls of
rosewater put all these into an earthen Pan. And with a slyce of Wood beat
it the space of two hours, then fill your moulds half full your mouldes must
be of Tin, and then set it into the oven, your oven being so whot as it were
for cheat bread, and let it stand one hour and a half, you must anoint your
moulds with butter before you put in your stuff, and when you will occupy of
it slice it thin and dry it in the oven your oven being no whotter then you
may abide your hand in the bottom.

To bake a Turkey and take out his bones.
TAke a fat Turkey, and after you have scalded him and washed him clean, lay
him upon a fair cloth and slit him through out the back and when you have
taken out his garbage, then you must take out his bones so bare as you can,
when you have so done wash him clean, then trusse him and prick his back
together, and so have a fair kettle of seething water and perboyle him a
little, then take him up that the water may run clean out from him, and when
he is cold, season him with pepper and salt, and then prick him with a few
cloves in the breast, and also draw him with larde if you like of it and when
you have made your coffin and laid your Turkey in it then you must put some
butter in it and so close him up in this sort you may bake a Goose, a Pheasant,
or Capon.

To bake a Kidde.
TAke your Kidde and perboyle him and wash it in vergice and saffron and season
it with pepper, salt, and a little mace, then lay it in your coffin with sweet
butter and the liquor it was seasoned in, and so bake it.

To bake a Mallard.
TAke three or four Onions and stamp them in a mortar then strain them with a
saucer full of vergite, then take your mallard and put him into the juice of the
said Onions and season him with pepper and salt, cloves and mace then put your
mallard into the coffin with the said juice of the onions and a good quantity
of Winter sauorie, a little time, and persely chopped small and sweet Butter,
so close it up and bake it.

To make a pie of Humbles.
TAke your humbles being perboyled and choppe them very small with a good
quantity of mutton sweet, and half a handful of herbs, following time,
margerum, borage, persely, and a little rosemarie, and season the same being
chopped with pepper, cloves and mace, and so close your pie and bake him.

To bake Red dear.
TAke a hand full of time, and a hand full of rosemarie, a hand full of winter
sauorie, a hand full of bay leaves and a hand full of fennel, and when your
liquor seeths that you perboyle your venison in, put in your herbs also and
perboyle your venison until it be half enough, then take it out and lay it
upon a fair boorde that the water may run out from it, then take a knife and
prick it full of holes, and while it is warm have a fair traye with vinegar
therein, and so put your venison therein from morning until night, and ever
now and then turn it up side down, and then at night have your coffin ready,
and this done season it with synamome, ginger, and nutmegges, pepper and salt,
and when you have seasoned it, put it into your coffin, and put a good
quantity of sweet butter into it, and then put it into the Oven at night,
when you go to bed, and in the morning draw it forth, and put in a saucer
full of vinegar into your pie at a hole above in the top of it, so that the
vinegar may run into every place of it, and then stop the whole again and
turn the bottom upward and so serve it in.

An other bakemeate for Chickins.
FIrst season your Chickins with sugar, sinamom and ginger, and so lay them in
your pie, then put in upon them Gooseberies, or grapes, or Barberies, then put
in some sweet butter, and close them up, and when they be almost baked, then
put in a Cawdle made with hard eggs and white wine, and serve it.

To bake Calves feet.
TAke Calves feet and boil them and chop them fine, and a pound of white, and
chop it with them, then chop an onion small, and put it in them, then take
prunes, dates and currants, and put to them, season them with Pepper, Nutmegs,
and a little large Mace, then put in some Eggs, and stir it altogether, and
put it into a Pie, and let it bake two hours, then put in a little vergice and
sugar, and so serve it.

To sowce a Pigge.
TAke white Wine and a little sweet broth, and half a score Nutmegs cut in
quarters, then take Rosemarie, Baies, Time, and sweet margerum, and let them
boil altogether, skum them very clean, and when they be boiled, put them
into an earthen pan, and the syrop also, and when ye serve them, a quarter in
a dish, and the Bays, and nutmegs on the top.

The order to boil a Brawne.
TAke your Brawne, and when ye have cut him out, lay him in fair water four
and twenty hours, and shift it four or five times,, and scrape and bind up
those that you shall think good, with Hemp, and bind one handful of green
Willowes together, and lay them in the bottom of the Pan, and then put in
your Brawne, and skumme it very clean, and let it boil but softely, and it
must be so tender, that you may put a straw through it, and when it is boiled
enough, let it stand and roll in the pan, and when you take it up, let it
lie in Trayes one hour or two, and then make sowsing drink with Ale and
water, and salt, and you must make it very strong, and so let it lie a week
before you spend it.

To make Almond Butter.
TAke Almondes and blanch them, and beat them in a mortar very small, and in
the beating put in a little water, and when they be beaten power in water into
two pots, and put in half into one and half into an other, and put in Sugar,
and stir them still, and let them boil a good while, then strain it through
a strainer with rose water, and so dish it up.

To roast an Hare.
YOu must not cut off her head, feet nor ears, but make a pudding in her
belly, and put paper about her ears that they burn not, and when the Hare is
roasted, you must take synamom and Ginger, and grated bread, and you must make
very sweet sauce, and you must put in Barberies and let them boil together.

To make Fritter stuff.
TAke fine flower, and three or four eggs, and put into the flower, and a piece
of butter, and let them boil all together in a dish or chafer, and put in
Sugar, synamom and ginger, and rose water, and in the boiling, put in a little
grated bread to make it big, and then put it into a dish, and beat it well
together, and so put it into your moulde, and fry it with clarified butter,
but your butter may not be too whot nor too cold.

For to bake a Hare.
TAke your Hare and perboile him, and mince him, and then beat him in a mortar
very fine, liver and all if you will, and season it with all kind of spices
and salt, and do him together with the yolks of seven or eight eggs, and
when you have made him up together, draw larde very thick through him, and
mingle them altogether, and put him in a Pie, and put in butter before you
close him up.

To preserve Orenges.
YOu must cut your Orenges in half, and pare them a little round about, and let
them lie in water four or five days, and you must change the water once or
twice a day, and when you preserve them, you must have a quarte of fair water
to put in your sugar, and a little rose water, and set it on the fire, and scum
it very clean, and put in a little Sinamome, and put in your Orenges, and let
them boil a little while, and then take them out again, and do so five or
six times, and when they be enough, put in your Orenges and let your sirroppe
stand till it be cold, and then put your sirrop into your Orenges.

To make all manner of fruit Tartes.
YOu must boil your fruit, whether it be apple, cherie, peach, damson, pear,
Mulberie, or codling, in fair water, and when they be boiled enough, put them
into a bowl, and bruise them with a ladle, and when they be cold, strain them,
and put in red wine or claret wine, and so season it with sugar, sinamom and
ginger.

To make a Tarte of preserved stuff.
YOu must take half a hundredth of Costerds, and pare them, and cut them, and
as soon as you have cut them, put them into a pot, and put in two or three
pound of sugar, and a pint of water, and a little rose water, and stir them
from the time you put them in, until the time you take them out again, or else
you mar all, and put it into a dish, and when your Tart is made, put it into
the Oven, and when it is caked, endore it with butter, and throw sugar on the
top, and then do on your sauce, and set comfets on the top, and so serve it up.

To make Tartes of Proines.
PUt your proines into a pot, and put in red wine or claret wine, and a little
fair water, and stir them now and then, and when they be boiled enough, put
them into a bowl, and streine them with sugar, synamom and ginger.

To make a Tart of Rise.
Boil your rice, and put in the yolks of two or three Eggs into the Rice,
and when it is boiled put it into a dish, and season it with sugar, synamom and
ginger, and butter, and the juice of two or three Orenges, and set it on the
fire again.

To make a Custard.
Break your eggs into a bowl, and put your Cream into another bowl, and
streine your eggs into the cream, and put in saffron, cloves and mace, and a
little synamom and ginger, and if you will, some sugar and butter, and season it
with salt, and melt your butter, and stir it with the ladle a good while, and
dubbe your Custard with dates or currants.

To make a tart of Wardens.
YOu must bake your Wardens first in a Pie, and then take all the wardens and
cut them in four quarters, and coare them, and put them into a Tarts pinched,
with your sugar, and season them with sugar, synamome and ginger, and set them
in the Oven, and put no cover on them, but you must cut a cover and lay on the
Tarte when it is baked, and butter the Tart and the cover too, and endore it
with sugar.

To make a tarte with Butter and Eggs.
Break your eggs, and take the yolks of them, and take butter and melt it,
let it be very hot ready to boil, and put your butter into your eggs, and so
streine them into a bowl and season them with sugar.

To make a Tarte of Spinnedge.
Boil your Eggs and your Cream together, and then put them into a bowl, and
then boil your Spinnedges, and when they are boiled, take them out of the
water and streine then into your stuff before you streine your Cream, boil
your stuff and then streine them all again, and season them with sugar and
Salt.

To make a Tarte of Staweberries.
VVAsh your strawberies, and put them into your Tarte, and season them with
sugar, synamom and ginger, and put in a little red wine into them.

To make a Tart of Hippes.
TAke hippes and cut them, and take the seeds out, and wash them very clean,
and put them into your Tarte, and season them with sugar, sinamon and ginger.

So you must preserve them with sugar, Sinamom and ginger, and put them into a
gellipot close.

To bake the humbles of a Dear
MInce them very small, and season them with pepper, Sinamom and ginger, and
sugar if you will, and cloves and mace, and dates, and currants, and if you
will, mince Almonds, and put unto them, and when it is baked, you may put in
fine fat, and put in sugar, sinamom and ginger, and let it boil, and when it
is minced, put them together.

To make a Veale Pie.
LEt your Veale boil a good while, and when it is boiled, mince it by it
self, and the white by it self, and season it with salt and peper, sinamom
and ginger, and sugar, and cloves and mace, and you must have proines and
raisons, dates and currants on the top.

For to make Mutton Pyes.
MInce your mutton and your white together, and when it is minced, season it
with pepper, sinamon and ginger, and cloves, and mace, and proines, currants
and dates, and reasins and hard eggs boiled and chopped very small, and throw
them on the top.

To bake calves feet.
SEason them with salt and pepper, and butter, and currants if you will, and
when they be baked, put in a little white wine and sugar, or vinegar and sugar,
or vergious and sugar.

To bake Chickins in a Cawdle.
SEason them with salt and pepper, and put in butter, and so let them bake, and
when they be baked, boil a few barberies and proines, and currants, and take a
little white wine or vergious, and let it boil and put in a little sugar, and
set it on the fire a little, and streine in two or three yolks of eggs into
the wine, and when you take the dish of the fire, put the proines and currants,
and barberies into the dish, and then put them in altogether into the pie of
Chickins.

To bake Pigeons.
SEason them with Pepper and Salt and Butter.

To bake a Conie.
SEason him with Pepper and Salt, and put in butter and Currants, and when it
is baked, put in a little vergice and sugar into the Pie, and serve it up.

To bake a Gammon of Bacon to keep cold.
YOu must first boil him a quarter of an hour before you stuff him, and
stuff him with sweet herbs and hard Eggs chopped together, or Parsely.

To bake a Fillet of Beef to keep cold.
MInce him very small, and sees him with Pepper and salt, and make him up
together accordingly, and put him in your pie, and Larde him very thick.

To make fine bread.
TAke half a pound of fine sugar well beaten, and as much Flower, and put
thereto four Eggs whites, and being very well beaten, you must mingle them
with Anniseedes bruised, and being all beaten together, put into your mould
melting the sauce over first with a little butter, and set it in the Oven, and
turn it twice or thrice in the baking.

To bake a Neats tongue.
FIrst powder the tongue three or four days, and then sees it in fair
water, then blanch it and larde it, and season it with a little Pepper and Salt,
then bake it on Rye paste, and before you cloase up your pie, strowe upon the
tongue a good quantity of Cloves and mace beaten in powder, and upon that
half a pound of butter, then close up your Pie very close, but make a round
hole in the top of the pie. Then, when it has stood more then four hours
in the Oven, you must put in half a pint of Vinegor or more, as the Vinegar is
sharp, then close up the hole very close with a piece of past and set it in
the Oven again.

To make Muggets.
FIrst perboyle them, and take white and chop them both together, and put
Currants, Dates, Sinamome and Ginger, Cloves and Mace, and gross Pepper and
Sugar if you will, two or three yolks of Eggs, and sees them all together
with Salt, and put in the stuff into the (...) of Mutton, and so put them in
dishes, and take two or three eggs white and all, and put them on the cawles,
and make some pretty sauce for them.

To make Fillets of beef or clods, in stead of red Dear.
FIrst take your Beef, and Lard it very thick, and then season it with
Pepper and Salt, Sinamome and ginger, Cloves and Mace good store, with a great
deal more quantity of Pepper and Salt, then you would a piece of Venison, and
put it in covered Paste, and when it is baked, take vinegar and sugar, Sinamom
and Ginger, and put in, and shake the Pastie, and stop it close, and let it
stand almost a fortnight before you cut it up.

To make a tart that is a courage to man or woman.
TAke two Quinces, and two or three Burre roots, and a Potaton, and pare your
Potaton, and scrape your roots and put them into a quart of wine, and let them
boil till they be tender, and put in an ounce of Dates, and when they be
boiled tender, Draw them through a strainer, wine and all, and then put in the
yolks of eight Eggs, and the brains of three or four cock Sparrowes, and
streine them into the other, and a little Rose water, and sees them all with
Sugar, Synamom and ginger, and Cloves and mace, and put in a little sweet
butter and set it upon a chafingdish of Coals between two platters, and so let
it boil till it be something big.

To stew a Cock.
YOu must cut him in six pieces, and wash him clean, and take Prunces,
Currantes and Dates cut very small, and Reasons of the Sun, and Sugar
beaten very small, Synamome, Ginger and Nutmegs likewise beaten, and a little
maidens hair, cut very small, and you must put him in a Pipkin, and put in
almost a pint of Muskeden, and then your spice and Sugar, upon your Cock and
put in your fruit between every quarter, and a piece of Gold between
every piece of your Cock, then you must make a lidde of wood fit for your
Pipkin, and closet it as close as you can with paste, that no air come out,
nor water can come in, and then you must fill two brass pots full of water,
and set on the fire, and make fast the Pipkin in one of the Brass pottes, so
that the Pipkins feet touch not the brass pot bottom, nor the pot sides, and
so let them boil four and twenty hours, and fill up the pot still as it
boiles away, with the other pot that stands by, and when it is boiled take out
your Gold, and let him drink it fasting, and it shall help him, this is
approved.

To preserve all kind of fruits, that they shall not break in the preserving
of them.
TAke a platter that is plain in the bottom, and lay sugar in the bottom, then
Cheries or any other fruit, and so between every row you lay, throw sugar,
and set it upon a pots head, and cover it with a dish, and so let it boil.

To make a sirroppe for bakemeates.
TAke Ginger, Cloves and Mace, Nutmegs, beat all these together very fine, and
boil them in good red vinegar until it be somewhat thick, this being done,
draw your pie when it is hard baked, and a small hole being made in the cover
thereof at the first, with a Tunnell of Past, you must power the sirroppe into
the Pie, that done, cover the hole with paste, and shalb the Pie well, and set
again in the Oven till it be thoroughly baked, and when you have drawn it,
turn the bottom upward until it be served:

To roast a Carpe or Tench with a pudding in his belly.
TAke the Rones of a Pike and choppe them very small, then put in grated
bread, two or three Eggs, Currants, Dates, Sugar, Sinemome and Ginger, and Mace,
Pepper and salt, and put it in his belly, and put him on a Broche, and make
sweet sauce with Barberies or Lemmons minced, and put into the sweet sauce,
and then put it on the Carpe when you serve him up.

To make a fresh Cheese and Cream.
TAke a gallon or two of milk from the Cow and sees it, and when it does
sees, put thereunto a quart or two of morning milk in fair cleansing pans,
in such place as no dust may fall therein, and this is for your clowted Cream,
the next morning take a quart of mornings milk and sees it, and when it does
sees, put in a quarte of Cream thereunto, and take it off the fire, and put
it into a fair earthen pan, and let it stand until it be somewhat blood
warm, but first over night put a good quantity of Ginger, with Rose water,
and stir it together, and let it settle all night, and the next day, put it
into your said blood warm milk to make your cheese come, then put the Curdes
in a fair cloth, with a little good Rosewater, and fine powder of Ginger, and a
little Sugar, so last, great soft rolls together with a threede, and crush out
the Whey with your clouted Cream, and mix it with fine powder of ginger and
Sugar, and sprinkle it with Rose water, and put your Cheese in a fair dish,
and put these cloutes round about it, then take a pint of raw Mike or Cream,
and put it in a pot, and all too shake it, until it be gathered into a frothe
like snow, and ever as it comes, take it of with a spoone, and put it in a
Collender, then put it upon your fresh Cheese, and prick it with Wafers, and
so serve it.

THE NAMES OF ALL things necessary for a banquet.
Sugar. Sinamome. Licoras. Pepper. Nutmegs. All kind of Comfets. Safron.
Saunders. Anniseedes. Coleander. Orenges. Pomegranat. seeds. Damask water.
Torneseli. Lemmans. Prunes. Rosewater. Dates. Currants. Reasons. Cheries
conserved. Barberies co^serued. Rye flower. Ginger. Sweet Orenges. Paper White
and brown Cloves and Mace. Wafers. For your March-panes seasoned and
unseasoned, Spinnedges.
To make manus Christi.
TAke six spoonefull of Rosewater, one grain of Amber greece, and 4. grains
of Pearl beaten very fine, put these three together in a Saucer and cover it
close, and let it stand covered one hour, then take four ounces of very
fine Sugar, and beat it small, and search it through a fine search, then take
a little earthen pot glased, and put into it a spoonefull of Sugar, and a
quarter of a spoonefull of Rosewater, and let the Sugar and the Rose water
boil together softely, till it do rise and fall again three times. Then take
fine Rye flower, and sift on a smooth board, and with a spoone take of the
Sugar, and the Rose water, and first make it all into a round Cake, and then
after into little cakes, and when they be half cold, wet them over with the
same rose water, and then lay on your gold, and so shall you make very good
Manus Christi.

To make a Caudle to comfort the stomach, good for an old man.
TAke a pint of good Muskaden, and as much of good stale Ale, mingle them
together, then take the yolks of twelve or thirteen Eggs new laid, beat
well the Eggs first by themselves, then with the wine and ale, and so boil it
together, and put thereto a quarterns of Sugar, and a few whole Mace, and so
stir it well, til it sees a good while, and when it is well sod, put therein
a few slices of bread if you will, and so let it soke a while, and it will be
right good and wholesome.

To make a Trifle.
TAke a pint of thick cream, and season it with Sugar, and Ginger, and
Rosewater: so stir it as you would then have it, and make it luke warm in a
dish on a Chaffingdish and coals: and after put it into a silver piece or a
bowl, and so serve it to the boorde.

To make Marmelat of Quinces.
YOu must take a pottle of water, and four pound of Sugar, and so let them
boil together: and when they boil, you must skumme them as clean as you can:
and you must take ye whites of two or three Eggs, and beat them to froth, and
put the froth into the pan for to make the skum to rise, then skumme it as
clean as you can, and then take off the kettle and put in the Quinces, and let
them boil a good while, and when they boil you must stir them still, and
when they be boiled you must box them up.

To make butter paste.
TAke flower, and seven or eight Eggs, and cold butter and fair water, or
Rosewater, and Spices (if you will) and make your paste and beat it on a
board: and when you have so done, divide it in two or three pieces, and drive
out the piece with a rolling pin, and do with butter one (...) by another,
and then fold up your past(...) (...)pon the butter and drive it out again;
(...) so do five or six times together, and (...) not cut for bearings, and
put them int(...) (...) Oven, and when they be baked scra(...) (...)ger on them
and serve them.

To make Fritter stuff.
TAke fine flower, and three or four eggs and put into the flower, and a
piece of Butter, and let them boil altogether in a dish or a Chafer, and put
in Sugar, Synamom, and Ginger, and Rosewater, and in the boiling put in a
little grated bread to make it big, and then put it into a dish and beat it
well together, and so put it into your mould, and fry it with clarified butter,
but your butter may not be to whotte nor too cold.

To make a made dish of Artechokes.
TAke your Artechokes and pare away all the top even to the meat and boil
them in sweet broth till they be somewhat tender, and the^ take them out, and
put them into a dish, and sees them with Pepper, (...)namom and Ginger, and
then put in (...) dish that you mean to bake them in, (...) (...)ut in Marrowe
to them good store, (...) let them bake, and when they be ba(...)t in a little
vinegar and Butter, and (...) three or four leaves of the Artechoks (...) dish
when you serve them up, and (...) Sugar on the dish.

To fry Bakon.
TAke Bakon and slice it very thin, and cut away the lean, and bruise it
with the back of your knife, and fry it in sweet Butter, and serve it.

To fry Chickins.
TAke your Chickins and let them boil in very good sweet broth a pretty
while, and take the Chickens out, and quarter them out in pieces, and then put
them into a Frying pan with sweet Butter, and let them stewe in the pan, but
you must not let them be brown with frying, and then put out the butter out of
the pan, and then take a little sweet broth and as much Vergice, and the
yolks of two Eggs, and beat them together, and put in a little Nutmegges,
Synamom and Ginger, and Pepper into the sauce, and then put them all into the
pan to the Chickens, and stir them together in the pan, and put them into a
dish and serve them up.

To make a boiled meat after the French ways.
TAke Pigions and larde them, and then put them on a Broach, and let them be
half roasted, then take them off the Broach, and make a pudding of sweet
herbs of every sort a good handful, and chop Ox white amongst the herbs
very small, and take the yolks of five or six Eggs and grated bread, and
season it with Pepper, synamom and ginger, cloves and Mace, sugar, and
currants, and mingle all together, and then put the stuff on the pigeons round
about, and then put the pigeons into the cabbeges that be perboyled, and bind
the cabbege fast to the Pigeons, and then put them into the pot where you mean
to boil them, and put in Beef broth into them, and cabbeges chopped small,
and so let them boil, and put in Pepper, Cloves, and Mace, and prick the
Pigions full of Cloves before you put the pudding on the^, and put a piece of
Butter, Sinamom, and Ginger, and put a little Vinegar and white wine, and so
serve them up, and garnish them with fruit, and serve one in a dish, and but a
little of the broth you must put into the dish when you serve them up.

To make a Sallet of all kind of herbs.
TAke your herbs and pick them very fine into fair water, and pick your
flowers by them selves, and wash them all clean, and swing them in a strainer,
and when you put them into a dish, mingle them with Cowcumbers or Lemmons
payred and sliced, and scrape Sugar, and put in vinegar and Oil, and throw the
flowers on the top of the Sallet, and of every sort of the aforesaid things,
and garnish the dish about with the foresaid things, and hard Eggs boiled
and laid about the dish and upon the Sallet.

A sauce for a Conie.
CVt Onions in rundels and fry them in butter, then put to them wine vinegar,
salt, ginger, camimel and pepper, and a little sugar, and let it boil til it be
good and fast, then serve it upon the Conie.

To make a Sallet of Lemmons.
CVt out slices of the peele of the Lemmons long ways, a quarter of an inch
one piece from an other, and then slice the Lemmon very thin, and lay him in
a dish cross, and the peeles about the Lemmons, and scrape a good deal of
sugar upon them, and so serve them.

To make a Sausedge.
TAke Martinmasse Beef, or if you can not get it, take fresh Beef, or the
lean of Bacon if you will, and you must mince very small that kind of flesh
that you take, and cut Lard and put into the minced meat, and whole Pepper,
and the yolks of seven Eggs, and mingle them altogether, and put the meat
into a gut very salt, and hang him in the Chimney where he may dry, and there
let him hang a month or two before you take him down.

To make a Pie.
FIrst perboile your flesh and press it, and when it is pressed, season it
with pepper and salt whilst it is whot, then larde it, make your Paste of Rye
flower: it must be very thick, or else it will not hold, when it is seasoned
and larded lay it in your Pie, then cast on it before you close it a good deal
of Cloves and Mace beaten small, and throw upon that a good deal of Butter,
and so close it up: you must leave a hole in the top of the lid, and when it
has stand two hours in the Oven, you must fill it as full of vinegar as you
can, and then stop the hole as close as you can with paste, and then set it
into the Oven again: your Oven must be very whot at the first, and that your
Pies will keep a great white, the longer you keep them, the better they will
be: when they be taken out of the Oven and almost cold, you must shake them
between your hands, and set them with the bottom upward, and when you set
them into the Oven, be well ware that one Pie touches not another by more the^
ones hand breadth: Remember also to let them stand in the Oven after the vinegar
be in two hours and more.

To make white broth with Almondes.
FIrst look that your meat be clean washed, and then set it on the fire, and
when it boyleth scumme it clean, and put some salt into the pot, then take
rosemarie, time, Isope and margerum, and bind them together, and put them into
the pot, and take a dish of sweet butter, and put it into the pot amongst
your meat, and take some whole mace, and bind them in a clout, and put them
into the pot with a quantity of vergice, and after that take a quantity of
Almondes as shall serve the turn, blanch them, and beat them in a mortar,
and then strain them with the broth your meat is in, And when these Almondes
are strained put them in a pot by them selves with some Sugar, and a little
Ginger, and also a little Rose water, and then stir it while boil, and after
that take some slyced orenges, without the kernelles, and boil them with the
broth of the pot upon a chaffing dish of Coals, with a little sugar, and then
have some sippets ready in a platter, and serve the meat upon them, and put
not your Almondes in till it be ready to be served.

To make pottage to loose the body.
TAke a chicken and sees it in running water, then take two handfuls of violet
leaves, and a good pretty sort of reasons of the Sun, pick out the stones,
and sees them with the chickins, and when it is well sodden, season it with a
little salt and streine it and so serve it.

To make another very good potage to be used in the Morning.
TAke a chickin and sees it in fair water and put to it violet leaves a
handful or two, or else some other good herbs, that you like in the stead of
them, and so let them sees together till the chicken be ready to fall a pieces
then strain it, and cut thin pieces of bread, and sees in it till the bread
be very tender, and then season it with salt. And on the fish day sees the
herbs as before in fair running water and strain it and sees bread as
before in it, and season it with salt and put in a piece of butter.

To boil diverse kinds of Fishes.
BRet, Conger, Thornebacke, plaice, fresh Samon all these you must boil with a
little fair water and vinegar, a little salt, and bayleaues, and sauce them in
vinegar, and a little of the broth that they are sodden in with a little salt,
and as you see cause shift your sauce, as you do beef in brine, and also fresh
Sturgion, sees it as is aforesaid, and sauce it as ye did the other, and so
ye may keep it half ^^^eare are with changing of the sauce, and salt
Sturgion sees it in water and salt, and a little vinegar, and let it be cold,
and serve it forth with vinegar, and a little Fenell upon it but first or ye
sees it, it must be watered.

To make broth for one that is weak.
TAke a leg of veale and set it over the fire in a gallon of water skimming
it clean, when you have so done put in three quarters of a pound of small
reasons, half a pound of prunes, a good handful of burrage, as much
langdebeefe, as much mintes and the like quantity of hart's-tongue, let all
these sees together till all the strength of the flesh be sodden out, then
strain it so clean as you can, and if you think the patient be in any
heats, put in violet leaves and sauorie as you do with the other herbs.

To boil a Capon with a Syrrope.
Boil your Capon in sweet broth, and put in gross Pepper and whole Mace
into the Capons belly, and make your sirrope with Spinnage, White Wine, and
Currants, Sugar, Sinamome and Ginger, and sweet Butter, and so let them boil,
and when your Capon is ready to serve put the Sirrope on the Capon, and boil
your spinnage before you make your Sirrope.

To dress a hare.
VVAsh her in fair water, perboile her, then lay her in cold water, then lard
her and roast her, and for sauce take red wine, salt, vinegar, ginger, pepper,
cloves and mace, put these together, then mince onions and apples and frye them
in a pan, then put your sauce to them with a little sugar, and so let them
boil together, and then serve it.

To bake a Hare.
TAke your Hare and perboile him, and mince him, and then beat him in a mortar
very fine, liver and all if you will, and season him with all kind of spice
and salt, and do him together with the yolks of seven or eight eggs, when you
have made him up together, draw Lard very thick through him, or cut the Lard
and mingle them altogether and put him in a Pie, and put in butter before you
close him up.

To roste Deares tongues.
TAke Deares tongues and lard them, and serve them with sweet sauce.

To make Blewmanger.
TAke to a pint of cream twelve or sixteen yolks of eggs, and strain them
into it, and sees them well, ever stirring it with a stick that is broad at
the end but before you sees it put in sugar, and in the seething taste of it
that you may if need be put in more sugar, and when it is almost sodden put in
a little rose water* that it may taste thereof, and sees it well till it be
thick, and then strain it again if it has need, or else put it in a fair
dish and stir it till it be almost cold, and take the white of all the eggs
and strain them with a pint of Cream and sees that with sugar, and in the
end put in rosewater as into the other, and sees it till it be thick enough,
and then use it as the other, and when ye serve it ye may serve one dish and
another of the other in rolls, and cast on Biskets.

To make peascods in Lent.
TAke Figs, Kaisons, and a few Dates and beat them very fine, and season it
with Cloves, Mace, Sinamom and Ginger, and for your paste sees fair water and
Oil in a dish upon coals, put therein saffron and salt and a little flower,
fashion them then like peascods, and when ye will serve them, frye them in Oil
in a frying pan, but let the Oil be very hot, and the firesoft for burning
of them, and when ye make, them for flesh days, take a fillet of veale and
mince it fine, and put the yolks of two or three raw eggs to it, and season
it with pepper, salt, cloves, mace, honey, sugar, sinamom, ginger small
raisons, or great minced, and for your paste, butter, the yolke of an egg, and
season them, and frye them in butter as ye did the other in Oil.

To bake Quinces, Pears and Wardons.
TAke and pare and coare them, then make your paste with fair water and
butter, and the yolke of an egg* then set your Oringes into the paste and then
bake it well, fill your paste almost full with Sinamom, ginger and sugar. Also
Apples must be taken after the same sort, saving that whereas the core should
be cut out they must be filled with butter cuerie one: the hardest Apples are
best, and likewise are Pears and Wardons, and none of them all but the wardons
may be parboiled, and the Oven must be of a temperate heat, two hours to
stand is enough.

To make a Tarte of Spinadge.
TAke Spinadge and sees it stalk and all, and when it is tenderly sodden*
take it off, and let it drayne in a Colliander, and then swing it in a cloute
and stamp it and strain it with two or three yolks of eggs, and then set it
on a chasing* dish of coals and season it with butter and sugar, and when the
paste is hardened in the Oven put in this Comode struck it even.

To make blame mangie.
TAke all the brain of a Capon and stamp it in a mortar fine, and blanched
Almonds, and sometimes put to them rose water, and season it with powder of
sinamom, ginger, and sugar, and so serve it.

To make a Tarte of a near of Veale.
TAke two pound of great raisons, and wash them clean, and pick them, and
take out the stones of them, and take two kidneys of veale, and a piece of the
leg which is lean, and boil them altogether in a pot with the straint of
the broth of mutton, and boil it, and let it boil the space of one hour,
then take it up and choppe it fine, and temper it with cromes of bread finely
grated, and take nine yolks of eggs and temper them altogether and season them
with sinamom, ginger, sugar and small raisons, great raisons minced, dates and
saffron. Then take fine flower and water and three yolks of eggs, butter and
saffron, and make them like a round tarte close with a cover of the same paste,
and set him in the Oven, and let him stand one hour, then take him forth, and
indore it with butter, and cast a powder of sinamom, ginger and sugar and so
serve it.

To make a Tarte of Strawberies.
TAke Strawberies and wash them in claret wine, thick and temper them with
rosewater, and season them with Sinamom, sugar and ginger, and spread it on the
Tart and endore the sides with butter, and cast on sugar and biskets and serve
them so.

To make a close Tarte of Cheries.
TAke out the stones, and lay them as whole as you can in a chardger, and put
mustard in, sinamom and ginger to them, and lay them in a Tarte whole, and
close them, and let them stand three quarters of an hour in the Oven, then
take a sirrop of Muskadine and damask water and sugar, and serve it.

To make a close Tart of green pease.
TAke half a pecke of green pease, sheale them and sees them and cast them
into a colliander, and let the water go from them, then put them into the Tart
whole and season them with pepper, saffron and salt and a dish of sweet butter
close and bake him almost one hour, then draw him and put to him a little
dergice and shake them and set them into the Oven again and so serve it.

To make a Tarte of Damsons.
TAke Damsons and sees them in wine, and strain them with a little cream,
then boil your stuff over the fire till it be thick, put thereto sugar,
sinamom and ginger, but set it not in the Oven after but let your paste be
baked before.

To make a florentine.
TAke the kidneies of a loine of veale that is roasted, and when it is cold
shredde it fine and grate as it were half a mancheete very fine, and take
eight yolks of eggs, and a handful of currants, and eight dates finely
shred, a little sinamom, a little ginger, a little sugar and a little salt, and
mingle them with the kidneys, then take a handful of fine flower and two
yolks of eggs, and as much butter as two eggs, and put into your flower,
then take a little seething licquor, and make your paste and drive it abroad
very thin, then struck your dish with a little butter, and lay your paste in
the dish and fill it with your meat, then draw another sheet of paste thin
and cover it withal, cut it handsomely upon the top, and by the sides, and then
put it into the Oven, and when it is half baked draw it out, and take two or
three feathers, and a little rose water, and wet all the cover with it, and have
a handful of sugar finely beaten, and straw upon it, and see that the rose
water wet in every place, and so set it in the oven again, and that will make
a fair ise upon it, if your Oven be not hot enough to rear up your ise, then
put a little fire in the Ouens mouth.

To make Almond butter after the best and newest fashion.
TAke a pound of Almonds or more, and blanch them in cold water or in warm as
you may have leisure, after the blanching let them lie one hour in cold water,
then stamp them in fair cold water as fine as you can, then put your Almonds
in a cloth, and gather your cloth round up in your hands, and press out the
juice as much as you can, if you think they be not small enough beat them
again and so get out milk so long as you can, then set it over the fire, and
when it is ready to sees put in a good quantity of salt, and rosewater that
will turn it, after that is in, let it have one boiling, and then take it from
the fire, and cast it abroad upon a linen cloth* and underneath the cloth
scrape of the whay so long as it will run, then put the butter together into
the midst of the cloth, binding the cloth together, and let it hang so long
as it will drop, then take peecees of sugar so much as you think will make it
sweet, and put thereto a little rose water so much as you will melt the sugar,
and so much fine powder of saffron as you think will color it, then let both
your sugar and saffron steep together in the little quantity of rose water,
and with that season up your butter when you will make it.

To make Oister Chewets.
TAke a pecke of Oisters and wash them clean, then sheal them and wash them
fair in a Culliander, and when they be sodden strain the water from them, and
chop them as small as pie meat, then season them with pepper, half a penny
worth of claues and mace, half a penny worth of sinamom and ginger, and a penie
worth of sugar, a little saffron and salt, then take a handful of small
raisons, six dates minced small and mingle them altogether, then make your
paste with one penny worth of fine flower, ten yolks of eggs, a half
penniworth of Butter with a little saffron and boiling water, then raise up
your chewets and put in the bottom of every one of them a little butter, and so
fill them with your stuff, then cast proines, dates, and small raisons upon
them, and being closed, bake them: let not your Oven be two hot for they will
have but little baking, then draw them and put into every one of them two
spoonefull of vergice and butter, and so serve them in.

To make a Tart of Medlers.
TAke medlers that be rotten, and stamp them, then set them on a chaffing dish
and coals, and beat in two yolks of eggs, boiling it till it be somewhat
thick, then season them with sugar, sinamom and ginger, and lay it in past.

To make a Quinces moyse, or Wardens moyse.
YOu must roast your wardens or quinces, and when they be roasted pill them* and
strain them together, and put in sugar Sinamom and Ginger, and put it in a
plate, and then smooth it with a knife, and scrape a little sugar on the top,
and nicke a little with a knife.

To make an other pretty dish, with dates, and the juice of two or three
Orenges.
Strain them into a dish, and so make Chambers of paste upon a stick, put the
sticks upon a loaf of bread, and so dry them in the Oven, and then clarify
a little butter and fry them in it, and lay them in a dish and scrape sugar on
them.

To make hypocrase.
TAke a gallon of white wine, sugar, two pound of sinamom, ij. d. ginger. y. d.
long pepper. ij. d. mace. ij. d. not bruised grains, ij. d. gallingall, i. d.
ob. cloves not bruised, you must bruise every kind of spice a little, and put
them in an earthen pot all a day, and then cast them through your bags two
times or more as you see cause, and so drink it.

To make marmalet of Quinces.
TAke very good Quinces and pare them and cut them in quarters, then core them
clean, and take heed it be not a stony Quince, and when you have pared and
cored them, then take two pintes of running water and put it into a brass pan,
casting away eight spoonfuls of one of the pintes, then weigh three pound of
fine sugar and beat it, and put it into the water, make your fire where you may
have a good light, not in a chimney, then set on your pan upon a treuet, and
when your sugar and water begins to boil, you must skimme it clean, then
put in six spoonfuls of rose water, and if there rise any more skumme, take
it off and so put in your three pound of quinces, and let them boil but
softly, and if you see the color wax somewhat deep, now and then with a fair
slice be breaking of them, and when your liccor is well consumed away, and the
color of your quinces to grow fairer, then be still sturring of it, and when
it is enough you shall see it rise from the bottom of your pan in ttirring of
it, and so box it, and ye shall have it to be good marmalet and a very orient
color, if you will you may put some musk into it, some rose water, and rub
your box withal, it will give it a pretty sent, and it is a very good way.

To make a sirrop of Quinces to comfort the stomach.
TAke a great pint of the juice of Quinces, a pound of sugar, and a good half
pint of vinegar, of ginger, ye weight of five grotes, of sinamom, the weight of
six grots, of pepper, the weight of three grotes, and two pence.

To make Marmalet of Quinces.
TAke very good Quinces and pair them and cut them in quarters, then core
them clean, and take heed it be not a stony quince, and when you have pared
and cored them, then take two pints of running water, and put it into a brass,
casting away eight spoonefulls of one of the pints, the weight of four pound
of fine sugar, and beat it and put it into the water: make your fire where you
may have good light, and not in the chimney, then set over your pan upon a
Treuet, and when your sugar and water begins to boil you must strain it
clean, then put in six spoonefull of rose water, and if there rise any more
skimme, take it off and put it into boxes.

To make Codamacke of Quinces.
TAke fine quartes of running water, and a quart of french wine, put them
together, then take quinces and pair them and cut them till you come at ye
coares, then weigh ten pound of the quinces, and put them into your pan of
water and wine and boil them over a quick fire till they be tender, keeping
your pan very close covered, then take a piece of fine canuas and put your
quinces and liquor in it, and when your sirroppe is all run through, put in
so much fine sugar as will make it sweet, and set it over a quick fire again,
stirring with a stick till it be so thick that a drop will stand upon a
dish, then take it from the fire, and put it in Boxes.

To make cast cream.
TAke milk as it comes from the cow* a quart or less, and put thereto raw
yolks of eggs, temper the milk and the eggs together, then set the same
upon a chafingdish and stir it that it courd not, and so put sugar in it, and
it will be like cream of Almonds, when it is boiled thick enough cast a little
sugar on it, and sprinkle Rose water thereupon, and so serve it,

To make good Resbones.
TAke a quart of fine flower, lay it upon a fair board and make a hoale in the
midst of the flower with your hand, and put a spoonefull of Ale yeast
thereon, and ten yolks of eggs, and two spoonefuls of sinamom and one of
ginger, and one of cloves and mace, and a quartern of sugar finely beaten, and
a little saffron, and half a spoonefull of salt, then take a dish full of
butter, melt it and put it into your flower, and therewithal make your paste as
it were for mancheat, and mould it a good while, and cut it in pieces of the
bigness of Ducks eggs, and so mould every piece as a mancheat, and make them
after the fashion of an inckhorn broad above and narrow beneath, then set them
in the Oven, and let them bake three quarters of an hour, then take two dishes
of butter and clarify it upon a soft fire, then draw it out of the Oven, and
scrape the bottom of them fair and clean, and cut them overthwart in four
pieces, and put them in a fair charger, and put your clarified butter upon
them, and have sinamom and ginger ready by you, and sugar beaten very small,
and mingle altogether, and ever as you set your pieces together, cast some of
your sugar, sinamom and ginger upon them, when you have set them all up, lay
them in a fair platter, and put a little butter upon them, and cast a
litle-suger on them, and so serve them.

To make a vaunt.
TAke marie of beef as much as you can hold in both your hands, cut it as big
as great dice, then take dates and cut them as big as small dice, then take
forty prunes and cut the fruits from the stones, then take half a handful
of small raisons, wash them clean and prick them, and put your marie in a
fair platter, and your Dates, Prunes and small raisons, then take twenty yolks
of Eggs, and put in your stuff before rehearsed, then take a quarterne of
Sugar or more, and beat it small and put in your marrow, then take two
spoonefulles of Sinamon and a spoonefull of Ginger, and put them to your stuff
and mingle them altogether, then take eight yolks of eggs, and four
spoonefuls of Rosewater, strain them and put a little sugar in it, then take a
fair frying pan and put in a little piece of butter in it, as much as a
walnut, and set it upon a good fire, and when it looks almost black, put it
out of your pan, and as fast as you can put half of your eggs in the
midst of your pan, and fry it yellowe, and when it is fried, put it into a
fair dish, and put your stuff therein, and spread it all the bottom of your
dish, and then make another vaunt even as ye made the other, and set it upon a
fair board, cut it in pretty pieces, of the length of your little finger, as
long as your vaunt is, and lay it upon your stuff after the fashion of a little
window, and then cut off the ends of them as much as liefh without the
inward compass of the dish, then set the dish within the Oven, or in a baking
pan, and let it bake with leisure, and when it is baked enough, the marrowe
will come fair out of the vaunt to the brimme of the dish, then draw it out,
and cast a little Sugar on it, and so serve it in.

To preserve Quinces whole.
TAke a pottle of fair water, and put it into a clean pan, and beat iij.
pound of fine sugar, and put into it, then set it on the fire, and when you
have skimmed it, put in twelve spoonefuls of rosewater, then take x. fair
Quinces, and pare them, and core them clean, then put them into your syrrup,
and so cover them very close for the space of two hours with a fair platter,
and let them boil a good pace at the two hours, and uncover them, and look
whether you find them tender, and that they have a fair crimson color, then
take them up and lay them upon a fair platter, covering your syrruppe again,
And let it sees while it be somewhat thick, then put your Quinces into your
syrrup again, and so have a fair gallie pot, and put in both your syrrup and
quinces as fast as you can, and cover your pot close that the heat go not
forth, you must not put them in a glass for it will break.

To preserve Pear Plummes.
FIrst take two pound and a half of fine Sugar, and beat it small, and put it
into a pretty brass pot with xx. spoonefulles of rosewater, and when it
boyleth skimme it clean, then take it of the fire, and let it stand while it
be almost cold then take two pound of pear plummes, and wipe them upon a
fair cloth, and put them into your syrruppe when it is almost cold, and so
set them upon the fire again, and let them boil as softely as you can when
they are boiled enough the kernelles will be yellow, then take them up, but let
your syrrup boil till it be thick, then put your plummes upon the fire
again, and let them boil a walme or two, so take them from the fire, and let
them stand in the vessel all night, and in the morning put them into your pot
or glass and cover them close.

To preserve Orenges.
Choose out the fairest, and the heauiest, that is full of liquor, and cut them
full of little specks, then make a little round hole in the stalk of the Orange,
and break the stringes of the meat of the Oringes and close the meat to the
sides of your Oringes with your finger, then will part of the juice and kirnels
come out, and lay them in water three days and three nights, then take them
out, and set a pan with water over the fire, and when it seeths, put in your
Orenges, let them not sees too fast, then you must have another pan with
water ready seething to shift your orenges out of the other water, when they
have sodden a pretty while and so have one pan after another to shift them
still upon the fire x. or xij. times to take away the bitterness of the
Orenges, and you must keep them as whole as you can in the boiling, and then
take them up one by one, and lay them upon a platter the hole downward, that
the water may run the clearer out of them, then let them stand so until you
have boiled your syrrup, ready for them. Now to make your syrrup take to
every two Orenges, a pint of water, and a pound of sugar, let your sugar be
finely beaten before you put it into your licor, and look that the kettell you
boil them in, be sweet brass, then take x. whites of eggs, and put them into
your kettle with your licor and sugar, and beat your whites of eggs, and the
liquor together a good quarter of an hour, then set your liquor upon a soft
fire of coals, and let it sees so soon as you can, having a fair skymmer,
and a Coliander ready, and set your Coliander in a fair basin, and as your
whites of eggs rises in skumme take them up with your skimmer and put them in
your Colliander, and you shall have a great quantity of syrrup come from your
skumme through your Coliander into your Basin, and that you must save and put
it into your kettle again, and when your great skumme is off, there will arise
still some skumme, which you must take off with a skymmer, as clean as you
can, and when your syrrups has sodden a pretty while, then put in your Orenges,
and let them boil softly, till you think they be enough, and the sirrup must
be somewhat thick, then let your Orenges stand all night upon the fire, but
there must be nothing but imbers. And in the morning take them up, and put them
in Glasses or Gallie pottes.

To preserve Cheries.
TO every pound of Cheries take a pound of sugar, that done take a few Cheries
and distreine them to make your syruppe, and to every pound, a pound of Sugar,
and Cheries, take a quarter of a pound of syrrup, and this done take your
syrrup and Sugar, and set it on the fire, then put your Cheries into your
sirrup, and let them boil five several times, and after every boiling skum
them with the backeside of a spoone.

To preserve Gooseberies.
TAke to every pound of Gooseberies, one pound of Sugar, then take some of the
Gooseberies and distraine them, then take the syrrup, and to every pound of
Gooseberies take half a pound of sirrup, then set the sugar, and the sirrup
over the fire, and put in the gooseberies, and boil them four several times
and skumme them clean.

To make Apple moyse.
ROste your apples, and when they be roasted, pill them and streine them into a
dish, and pare a dozen of Apples and cut them into a chafer, and put in a little
white wine and a little Butter, and let them boil till they be as soft as Pap,
and stir them a little, and streine them to some Wardens roasted and pilled,
and put in Sugar, Sinamom and Ginger, and make Diamonds of Paste and lay them
in the Sauce, then scrape a little Sugar upon them in the dish.

A powder peerless for wounds.
TAke Orpiment and Uerdigreece, of each an ounce, of Uitrial burned till it be
red two ounces, bray each of them by it self in a Brazen mortar as small as
flower, then mingle them altogether that they appear all as one, and keep it
in Bags of Leather well bound, for it will last seven year with one virtue,
and is called Powder peereles, it has no peer for working in Chirurgerie: for
put this powder in a wound, whereas is dead flesh, and lay scrapt Linte about
it, and a Plaster of Duiflosius next underneath written, and it, etc. The rest
wants.

A medicine for the Megrime, Impostume of the Rewme, or other diseases in the
head.
TAke Pellitorie of Spain the weight of a groate, half so much Spegall, beat
these in powder, take the tops of Isope, of Rosemarie with the flowers, three
or four leaves of Sage in the hole, of these herbs one small handful, boil
all these herbs with the Spices in half a pint of White wine, and half a
pint of Uineger of Roses, until one half of the liquour be consumed, then
streyne forth the herbs, and set the liquor to cool, and being cold put
thereunto three spoonefull of good Mustarde, and so much honey as will take
away the tartnes of the medicine, and when the patient feels any pain in his
head, take a spoonefull thereof and put it into his mouth, and hold it a
pretty while gargasing, and then spit it forth into a vessel, and so use to
take ten spoonefulles at one time in ye morning fasting, using this three days
together: when they feel themselves troubled with the Rewme, at the fall and
spring of the leaf is best taking thereof, and by the grace of God they shall
find ease.

You must keep this same medicine very close in a glass, whose goodness
will last ten days, and when you take it, warm it as Milk from the Cow.

A Copy of Doctor Stephans water.
TAke a gallon of Gascoigne wine, then take Ginger, Galingale, Camamill,
Sinamome, Grains, Cloves, Mace, and seeds, Fennel seeds, Carraway seeds,
of every of them one dram, that is two pence half penny weight, then take
Sugar minced, red Roses, Time, Pellitorie of the wall, wild Margerum,
Peniriall, Penymountain, wild Time, Lauender, Auens, of every of them one
handful, then beat the spice small and bruise the herbs, and put all to the
wine, and let it stand twelve hours stirring of it diverse times, then still it
in a Limbecke, and keep the first pint of water by it self, so is it best,
then will come a second water which is not so good as the first, the virtue of
this water is this: It comfort the spirits, and preserves greatly the
youth of man, and helps inward diseases coming of cold, against the
shaking of the Palsy: it cures the contraction of sinews, and helps the
vnception of women: it kills the worms in the belly, it helps the
toothache, it helps the cold Gowte, it comfort the stomach, it cures the
cold Dropsy, it helps the Stone in the Bladder, and the Reins of the
back, it cures the Canker, it helps shortly a stinking breath: And who so
uses this water now and then and not too often, it preserves him a good
liking, and shall make him seem young very long.

A medicicine for all manner of Sores.
TAke unwrought Wax, Turpentine, oil Olife, sheep fallowe, or Deeres Sewet,
a quantity of every of them, and then take a quantity of the juice of Bugel,
the juice of Smallage, a quantity of Rossen, and boil them all together over
a soft fire, stirring them always till they be well mingled, and that the
greenes of the joyce be come, and then strain it through a fair cloth, into a
clean vessel, and this shall heal wound or sore whatsoever it be.

Another for all sores.
TAke a quarter of a pound of Pitch, as much of Wax, as much of Rossen, as
much of capons grease, or other soft grease, and put them in a pan, and sees
them al together, till they be melted, and then strain them through a fair
cloth: and make a plaster to lay to the place grieved.

To defend Humors.
TAke beans, the rind or the upper skin being pulled of, and bruise them and
mingle them with the white of an Eg: and make it stick to the Temples, it
keeps back humors flowing to the eyes.

To make Rosemarie water.
TAke the Rosemarie, and the flowers in the midst of May, before sun arise,
and strippe the leaves and the flowers from the stalk, take four or five
Alicompane roots, and a handful or two of Sage, then beat the Rosemarie, the
Sage and roots together, till they be very small, and take three ounces of
cloves, iij. ounces of Mace, iij. ounces of Quibles, half a pound of
Annisseedes, and beat these spices every one by it self. Then take all the
Herbs and the Spices, and put therein four or five gallons of good white
wine, then put in all these Herbs and Spices, and Wine, into an earthen pot,
and put the same Pot in the ground the space of sixeteene days, then take it
up, and still in a Still with a very soft fire.

To make Biscuit bread.
FIrst take half a Pecke of fine white flower, also eight new laid Eggs, the
Whites and Yolks beaten together, then put the said Eggs into the Flower,
then take eight Grains of fine Musk, and stamp it in a Mortar, then put
half a pint of good Damaskewater, or else Rosewater into the Musk, and mingle
it together, and put it into wine, or Muscaden, but Muscaden is better, and put
it into the flower, also one ounce of good Annisseedes clean picked, and put
therein, and so to work them altogether into a Paste, as ye do bread, and
then make your biskettes into what fashion you think best, and then put them
into an Oven and bake them hard if you will keep them long, or else but
indifferent, if you will have it candite, take rose water and Sugar, and boil
them together till they be thick, and so slices of bread, then set hot in the
Oven until the same be candit,

Certain approved points of Husbandry, very necessary for all Husbandmen to
know.
First of Oxen.
TOkens whereby an Ox is known to be good and toward for the work, are
these: ready and quick at the voice, he moves quickly: he is short and
large, great ears, the Horns lively and of mean bigness and black, the
head short, the breast large, a great panche, the tail long touching the
ground with a tuffe at the end, the hair curled, the back straight, the
raines large, the leg strong and sinowes, the houffe short, and large, the best
color is black and red, and next unto that the bay and the pyed, the white is
the worst, the greye and the fallowe or yellowe is of less valor. The charge
of one that keeps them is chiefly to use them gently, to serve them with
meat and good litter, to rub or kembe them at night, to strike them over in
the morning, washing sometimes their Tails with warm water, also to keep
their stable clean, and that the poultrie or Hogs come not in, for the
feathers may kill the Oxen, and the dung of sick Pogges breeds the Murren.

Item he must know discreetely when oxen have labored enough, and when but
little, and according to that they are to be fed.

Item that he work them not in a time too cold or to wet.

Item that he suffer them not to drink presently after a great labor, and
that he tie them not up forth with, until they be a little refreshed abroad.

The Ox desires clear or running water like as the Horse desires the puddle
or troubled water.

Item that at their coming home, he always ouerlooke them, whether there be
any Thorns in their feet, or if the Yoke have galled them.

In France they gelde all their Bulcalues about the age of two years, and
that at the fall of the leaf.

The day when they are to be cut, they must not drink, and must eat but
little. They suddenly clippe the sinnowes of the stones with a pair of
tongues, and so cut out the stones in such sort, as they leave behind the end
that is tied unto the sinnowes for so the Calfe or Bullock shall not bleed
overmuch, nor shall leese all his virilitie and courage.

At the age of ten months the Bullock changes his foreteeth, and at six
months after they scale the next teeth, and at the end of three years he
changes all his teeth*

Note when an Ox is at best, his teeth are equal, white and long, and when he
is old, the teeth be unequal and black.

If an Ox have the laske, which often times is with blood, and makes him very
weak, they keep him from drink four or five days, they give him Walnuttes
and hard Cheese, tempered in thick wine, and for the vttermoste remedy, they
let him bleed in the mids of the forehead.

To make him loose bellied they give him two ounces of aloes, made in powder
with warm water.

An Ox pisseth blood of being too much chafed, or of eating il herbs, or
flowers, they keep him from drink and drench him with Treacle in two pintes
of Wine or Ale, putting thereto Saffron.

For the Cough they sees I soap in his drink.

For the biting of an Adder or venomous dog, they anoint the place with oil
of Scorpion.

If he be lame of cold in his feet, they wash him with old urine warmed.

If he be lame of the abundance of blood fallen down into the pastornes and
hoof, they dissolve it by rubbing and launcing.

Item the better to keep their Oxen in health, whether they be to be labored
or to be fatted, they wash his mouth eight days with urine, and there is taken
away much fleame, which takes from an Ox his tasie and stomach.

If the fleame have made him have the murre, which is known by the watering of
the eye, they wash his mouth with time and white Wine or rub it with water
and salt.

Of Horses.
TOkens of a good Colte, the head little and lean, the ear straight, the eyes
great, the nostrelles wide, the neck little toward the head, the back short
and large, close bellied, the cullions or stones equal and small, the tail
long tuffed with hair thick and curled, the legs equal high and straight,
the houffe black hard and hye, he should be quick and pleasant.

The age of Horses is known partly by the hooffe, and principally by the
teeth. When the Horse is two years and a half, the middle teeth above and
beneath do fall.

When he is four year old, the dog teeth fall and others come in their
places, before he be six year old the great teeth above do fall, and the
sixth year the first that fell come again, the seventh year all is fulle, and
they be all shut.

Of Sheep.
Certain days before the Rams be put to the Yowes, they drench them with
Salt water, thereby the Yowes will took the better, and the rams (they say)
wax more full of appetite.

To have many male lambs, they choose a dry time, the wind at North, letting
the Yowes go in pasture that lays open against the Northern wind, and then
put in the Rams.

To have many female Lambs, they contrariewise observe the South wind.

When a You is with lamb, if she have a black tongue they say, the lamb will
be black, and if the tongue be white, the lamb likewise will be white.

Tokens of a good sheep: a great body, the neck long, the woll deep, soft
and fine, the belly great and covered with woll, the tets great, great eyes,
long legs and long tail.

Tokens of a good Ram, the body high and long, a great belly covered with
woll, a fliece thick* the forhead broad, eyes black with much woll about them,
great ears covered with woll, great stones, well horned but the more writhed
the better, the tongue and pallat of the mouth all white, to the end that the
Lambs may be all white.

Of Hogs.
THe Hog of himself though filthy, yet they say he prospers the best, if
he lodge in a clean stye, and every month his stye should be cast over with
fresh grauaile or sand, to make his lying fresh, and to dry up the piss and
filth.

They geld their pigges when they are a year old or six months at the
least, for they wax much greater if they be gelded at the said age.

They choose them Bores that have the head short and large, the breast large,
color black or white, the feet short, the legs great, and those that have
strongest hair on the top of their back.

Those are to be kept for sowes which be longest, with hanging bellies, great
Tettes, deep ribbed, a little head, and short legs.

Hogs be sick when they rub much their ear or refrain their meat, but if
none of these signs appear, they pluck of one of his hairs on the back, if
he be clean and white at the root, he is well, if he be bloody or foul, he
is sick.

They will have their hogs either all white, or all black, and in any wise
not speckled or of two colors.

They refrain from dunging their land while the moon increases, for that
they note more abundance of weeds to come thereby.

Touching the sowing of Beans they observe this. At the fall of the leaf, in
strong land they sow the great Beans. At spring time in weak and light
ground, they sow the common small Beans and both sorts at the full of the
Moon, that they may be better codded.

They use to cut them at the new of the Moon before day.

Their flax as soon as they have gathered it, they set it under a house or
houell, and suffer it not to take rain or dew as we do.

To make Chese yelow, they put in a little Saffron.

To keep Apples, they lay them on straw stro wed, the eye of the Apple
downwards, and not the stem.

And when they would have any great store, well and long kept from perishing,
they gather and choose the soundest, heauiest and fairest, being not over riped,
they provide a Hogshed, Fat, or great Whitch, they bring the Apples where it
shall stand, then they lay a lain of straw, and upon the same a lain of
Apples, and then straw again, and Apples likewise until the vessel be full
to the brimme, shuting it close, with the head or cover that no air come in.

To cure the malladie of trees that bear wormeaten fruit, which comes of
much wet or a moist season, at that time they pearse the trees through with an
Auger as near the root as they may, to the end that the humor whereof the
worms do breed, may distill out of the tree.

If trees through oldnesse or otherwise leave bearing of fruit usually, they
use not to loppe them, but only cut away the head boughs, they uncover the
roots after all Saints tide, and cleave the greatest of the roots, putting
into the clefts shiuers of flints or hard stones, letting them there remain,
to the end that the humor of the earth may enter and ascend into the tree,
after about the end of winter, they cover again the roots with very good
earth, if they have any dead Carrens, they bury them about the roots of
such Trees.

Approved Medicines for sundry diseases.
An excellent drink for the Tissicke well approved.
TAke a handful of fennel roots, as much persly roots, as many Alisander
roots, half a handful of Borrage roots, and put out the pith of all the
said roots, then take half a handful of Peniryall, as much of Uiolet
leaves, and as much of cinckfoyle, as much Succary, Endive, Holly hocke leaves,
Mallow leaves, and redd gardene mints, of all these the like quantity as of
these next before, half a handful of Licoris sticks scraped, bruised and
beaten to fine powder, a gallon of fair running water, boil therein all these
simples, and boil these seeds with them, that is, three spoonefull of
Anniseeds, as much Fennel seed, the like of Colliander seed and Commin
seed, a good handful of Dandelion roots, and so boil altogether from a
gallon to a pottell, and let the patient drink thereof first and last, and it
will help him in short space. probatum est.

To make water imperial for all wounds and Cankers.
TAke a handful of red Sage leaves, a handful of Selondine, as much of
woodbind leaves, take a gallon of conduit water, and put the herbs in it, and
let them boil to a pottle, and then strain the herbs through a strainer, and
take the liquor and set it over the fire again, take a pint of English honey, a
good handful of Koch Allam, as much of white Copper as, Time beaten, a
pennieworth of grains bruised, and let them boil all together three or four
wawmes, and then let the skumme be taken off with a feather, and when it is
cold, put it in an earthen pot or bottle, so as it may be kept close, and for
a green wound take of the thinnest, and for an old wound of the thickest,
cover the sore rather* with Veale or Mutton, skimme them with dock leaves, when
that you have dressed them with this water.

To make water imperial an other way.
TAke a handful of Dragon, of scabious, of Endive, a handful of Pimpernell, a
handful of Wormwood, of Kew, of Tansie, of Fetherfoye, of dasie leaves, of
Conslips, of maiden hair, of sinckfoyle, of dandelion, of Time, of bawne, of
each of these herbs a handful, of Treakle a pound, of Bole armoniacke four
ounces, and when you have all these herbs together, you must take and shread
them a little, not too small, then take the Treakle, and the Bole armoniacke,
and mingle them and the herbs together, then put them in a stillatorie, and
still them: and fiet.

To make Sinamom water.
TAke Rennish wine a quart, or Spanish wine a pint, rose water a pint and a
half, Sinamom bruised a pound and a half, let these stand infused the space of
four and twenty hours, then destill it, and being close stopped and luted,
then with a soft fire destill the same softly in a Limbeck of glass and
receive the first water by it self.

Also if ye be so disposed to make the same water weaker, take three pints of
rose water, and a pint and a half of Rennish wine, and so distill the same,
and you shall have to the quality of stuff the quantie of the water, which is
three pints, but the first is best, and so reserve it to your use both morning
and evening.

To make Sinamon water another way.
TAke three quarts of Museadine, and a pound of Sinamon, and half a pint of
good Rosewater, and so let them lie infused the space of four and twenty
hours, and destill it as aforesaid, and you shall receive to the quantity as
to the quallitie, but the first pint is the best and the chiefest of all the
other as is manifest by practice,

To make Aqua composita for a surfeit.
TAke rosemarie, Fenell, Isope, Time, Sage, horehound, of each of these a
handful, Penniryal; red mints, marierum, of each six crops, a root of Enula
Campana, of Licoras, Anneyseede bruised of each two ounces, put all these to
three gallons of mighty strong Ale, and put it into a brass pot over an easy
fire, and set the Limbecke upon it, and stop it close with dowe or past, that
no air do go out, and so keep it stilling with a soft fire, and so preserve
it to your use as need requires.

To make the water of life.
TAke Balm leaves and stalks, burnet leaves and flowers, a handful of
rosemary, turmentill leaves and roots, Rosa solis, a handful, red roses a
handful, Carnations a handful, Isop a handful, a handful of Time,
redstrings that grow upon Sauerie a handful, red Fennel leaves and roots a
handful, red Mints a handful, put all these herbs into a pot of earth
glased, and put thereto as much white wine as will cover the herbs, and let
them soake therein eight or nine days, then take an ounce of Sinamom, as much
of Ginger, as much of Nutmegs, Cloves and Saffron, a little quantity, of
Anneyseedes a pound, great Raisons a pound, Sugar a pound, half a pound of
Dates, the hinder part of an old Cony, a good fleshly running Capon, the flesh
and sinews of a leg of mutton, four young Pigio^s, a dossen of Larks, the
yolks of twelve eggs, a loaf of white bread cut in sippettes, Muscadell or
Bastard three gallons, or as much in quantity as suffices to distill all
these things at once in a Limbecke, and thereto put off Methridatum two or
three ounces, or elswith as much perfect treakell, and destill it with a
moderate fire, and keep the first water by it self, and the second water
alone also, and when there comes no more water with strings, take away the
limbecke, and put into the pot more wine upon the same stuff, and still it
again, and you shall have an other good water, and shall so remain good. In
the first ingredience of this water, you must keep a double glass warely, for
it is restoratiue of all principal members, and defends against all
pestiliencial diseases, as a against the Paulsie, Dropsy, Spleen, yellowe or
black Jaundice, for worms in the belly, and for all agues be they hot or
cold, and al manner of swellings, and pestilenciall sorrows in man, as
melancholy, and fleugmatike, and it strengthens and comfort all the spirits
and strings of the brain, as the heart, the milte, the liver, and the
stomach, by taking thereof two or three spoonefuls at one time by it self, or
with Ale, wine or bear, and by putting a pretty quantity of Sugar therein,
also it helps disgestion, and does break wind, and stops laske, and
binds not, and it mightily helps and eases man or Woman of the pain af
the heart burning, and for to quicken the memory of man, and take of this
water three spoonefuls a day, in the morning, and an other after he goes to
dinner, and the third last at night.

To make a good plaster for the strangurie.
TAke holly hocks, and violets, and mercury, the leaves of these herbs, or the
seeds of them, also the rind of the elderne tree, and also leyd Wort, of each
of these a handful, and beat them small, and sees them in water till half
be consumed, then do thereto a little oil Olive, and all hot make thereof a
plaster, and lay it to the sore and raines, and also in Summer thou must make
him a drink in this manner: take Sapifrage, and the leaves of elderne, five
leafed grass, and sees them in a pottell of stale ale, till the half be
wasted, and then strain it and keep it clean, and let the sick drink
thereof first and last, and if you lack these herbs because of winter, then
take the roots of five leaued grass and dry them, and make thereof powder,
and then take Oyster shelles and burn them, and make powder of them, and
mingle them together, and so let the sick use thereof in his pottage and
drink, and it shall help him.

To make a powder for the stone and strangullian.
TAke black bramble berries while they be read, Juie berries, the inner pitch
of the Ash Keys, the stones of Eglantine Berries cloven, rubbed from the
hair. Nutte Keys, the roots of Philopendula, of all these a like quantity,
Accorne kernels, the stones of Slowes, of each a like quantity, dry all these
on platters in an oven til they will be beaten to powder, then take gronsell
seed, Sapifrage seed, Alisander seed, coliander seed, parsley seed, comin
seed, fenell seed, anniseede, of each of these a like quantity, as much as is
before written, and dried in like sort, then beat al these to fine powder, and
take Licoras of the best that you can get fair scraped, as much in quantity
as of all the other, and beat it fine, and mingle it with the same powder, and
so keep it close that no wind come at it, using it first and last with posset
drink made with white wine, or Ale, and when you eat your potage or other
broth, put some in it if you be sore pained, and if you have any stone, it will
come away by shiuers, and if it do so, when you think that your water
begins to clear again, take this drink that follows, and it will clean
your bladder, and it will leave no corruption therein.

The drink.
TAke Rosemary, wild Time, and sees them in running water, with as much Sugar
as will make it sweet from a quart to a pint, use the quantity of your
herbs according to your discretion, so that it may sauer well of the herbs,
and so use it 9. mornings 6. or 7. spoonefulles at a time.

For the shingles a remedy.
TAke Doves dirt that is moistie, and of Barley meal heaped half a pound, and
stamp the^ well together and do thereto half a pint of vinegar, and meddle
them together, and so lay it to the sore cold; lay wall leaves thereupon, and
so let it lie three days unremoved, and on the third day if need require,
lay thereto a new plaster of the same, and at the most he shall be whole within
three plasters.

For all manner of sinnewes that are shortened.
TAke the head of a black sheep, Cammemill, Lorrell leaves, Sage of each, a
handful, and bray these herbs in amorter, then boil them altogether in water
till they he well sodden, and let them stand till that they be cold, then
draw it through a strainer and so use it.

A sufferaigne ointment for shrunken finnowes and aches.
TAke eight Swallows ready to fly out of the nest, drive away the breeders
when you take them out, and let them not touch the earth, stamp them until
the Feathers can not be perceived, put to it lauender cotton, of the strings of
strawberies, the tops of mother time, the tops of rosemarie of each a
handful, take all their weight of May butter, and aquar more, stamp all the
Feathers that nothing can be perceived, in a stone mortar; the make it up in
bales, and put it into an earthen pot for eight days close stopped that no
air take them, take it out, and on as soft fire as may be sees it, so that it
do but simper, then strain it, and so reserve it to your use.

For sinowes that be broken in two.
TAke worms while they be knitte, and look that they depart not, and stamp
them, and lay it to the sore, and it will knit the sinowes that be broken in
two.

For no knit sinowes that be broken.
TAke archangel, and cut it small in gobbets, and lay it to the sore, and take
milfoile, and stamp it, and lay it above it hard bound, and let it lie so
three days, and at the three days end take it away, and wash it with wine,
and then make a new plaster of the same, and at three days end put thereto an
other, and do nothing else thereto.

Also take peniryall, and bray it, and put salt enough to them, and temper it
with honey, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it upon the sinowes that be
stiff, and it will make them to stretch.

An oil to stretch sinowes that be shrunk.
TAke a quart of Neates foot Oil, a pint of Neates Gall, half a pint of
Rose water, as much Aqua Vita, then put all these together into a brass pan,
then take a handful of Lauender cotton and as much of Bay leaves, a good
quantity of Rosemary, a good quantie of Lauender spike, of Strawbery leaves
the stringes and all, then take thread and bind them all in several branches,
and put them into the pan or pot, and set them over the fire upon clear
coals with the oils altogether, and so let them boil a good while, and when
it is boiled enough, it will boil but softly, then take it of the fire, and
let it stand till it be almost cold, then strain it out into a wide mouthed
Glass, Bottle or pewter pot, and stop it close, it will not continue in no
wodden thing, and where the sinowes be shrunk, take of this being warmed, and
anoint the place therewith, and chafe it well against the fire, and use this
morning and evening, and keep the place warm, and you shall find great ease.

For to staunch blood.
TAke Bole Armoniake, and Turpentine, and make a plaster, and lay it too. Also
take the moss of the Hazell tree, and cast it into the wound and it will
staunch forthwith, and the longer that it is gathered the better it is. Also
take a good piece of Martinmas Biefe out of the roufe, and heat it on Coals,
and as hot as ye may suffer it lay it thereto. Also take a piece of lean Salt
Biefe, and let the Biefe be of that greatness that it may fill the wound, and
lay it in the fire in the hot Ashes, till it be hot through, and all hot thrust
at in the wound, and bind it fast, and it shall staunch anon the bleeding, when
a master vain is ^ut, and if the wound be large.

For swelling that comes suddenly in man's limbs.
TAke hearts tongue, cherfoyle, and cut them small, and then take dregs of
Ale, and Wheat branne, and sheep tallowe molte, and do all in a pot, and
sees them, till that they be thick, and then make a plaster, and lay it to
the swelling.

Also take fair water and salt, and stir them well together, and therein wet
a cloth, and lay it to the swelling.

For to make one slender.
TAke Fennel, and sees it in water, a very good quantity, and wring out the
juice thereof when it is sod, and drink it first and last, and it shall swage
either him or her.

A good ointment for scabs, and for itching of the body.
TAke four ounces of oil de bay, and an ounce of frankensence, and two ounces
of white wax, and three ounces of swines grease, and an ounce of Quickesiluer
that must be slacked with fasting Spittle, an ounce of great Salt, as much of
the one as of the other, and of all these make an ointment, and if the scabs or
itch be upon all the whole body as well above the girdle as beneath, then when
thou go to bed wash both thy hands and thy feet with warm water, and
battle them well therein by the fire, and after dry them with a cloth of
linen, then take up with thy fingers of that ointment, and do it in the
palms of thy hands, and in the soles of thy feet, and rub it well together
that it may drink in well, and if it do soke in well, thou must put gloves on
thy hands and sockes on thy feet, and thus do every night when thou do go
to bed, and in the scabbe or itch be above the girdle and not beneth, then
anoint but the hands, and if the scabbe be beneath the girdle, them look that
you anoint the soles of your feet, and the scabbe or itch be in all thy body
as well above the girdle as beneath, then thou must anoint both thy hands and
thy feet as thou sit by the fire, and thou shall be whole: this has been
proved.

For all manner of scabbes.
TAke Enela Campana, red docke roots, nightshad, woodbind leaves, and then
cast in a piece of Allam, and put in Vitriol Romana rubrified, when it is cold,
and wash the scab there with.

Also take white pintment* Brimstone, Quicsiluer, verdigrease, and mingle them
together, and therewith anoint the sore scab.

For a man that has drunken poison.
TAke betony, and stamp it, and mingle it with water* and the poison that the
party has drunk, will presently come forth again.

To restore speech that is lost suddenly.
TAke penerial, and temper it with aysel, and give it to the sick to drink
it, lay also a plaster of this to his nosthrils so grieved.

FINIS.
The table of the Book Following, gathered according to every folio throughout
the whole Book.
TO boil Larkes fol. 4. To boil Conies. fol. 4 To boil a Conie. fol. 4 To
boil Chickins. fol. 4 To boil Mutton and Chickins. fol. 4 To boil Chickins.
fol. 4 An other way to boil Chickins. fol. 4 To boil Plouers. fol. 4 To boil
Teales. fol. 4 To boil steakes between two dishes. fol. 4 To boil a neats
tongue. fol. 4 To boil a Capon. fol. 4 The boiling of a Capon. fol. 4 To boil
a Capon with Orenges and Lemmons. fol. 5 To boil a Capo^ in white broth with
Almondes. fol. 5 To boil a capon in white broth. fol. 5 To make boiled meats
for dinner. fol. 6 To boil meats for supper. fol. 6 To boil a leg of
mutton with a Pudding. fol. 6 To boil pigges feet and petitoes. fol. 7 To
make a mortis. fol. 7 To boil a lambs head and purtenance. fol. 7 To boil
quails. fol. 7 To make stewed steakes. fol. 7 To stewe Calves feet. fol. 8 To
stewe a Mallard. fol. 8 To make Aloes. fol. 8 To make fritters of spinnedge.
fol. 8 A fritter to be made in a moulde. fol. 9 To boil Pigeons in black
broth. fol. 9 To smeare a Conie. fol. 9 To boil a Mallard with Cabbege. fol. 9
To boil a Ducke with Turnips. fol. 9 To make white Estinges. fol. 10 To make
black puddings. fol. 10 To make strong broth for sick men. fol. 10 To boil a
breame. fol. 10 To boil Muskles. fol. 10 To boil stock fish. fol. 10 To make
bake meats. fol. 11 An other bake meat. fol. 11 An other ibidem. fol. 11 To
make Marow pie. fol. 11 To boil pie meat. fol. 14 To make fine Cakes. fol. 12
To make fine cracknels. fol. 12 To bake Conies fol. 12 To bake a breast of
Veale. fol. 12 To make a pudding in a breast of veale. fol. 13 To bake a Gammon
of Baken. fol. 13 To make fine Biscuit Bread. fol. 13 To bake a Turkey and take
out his bones. fol. 13 To bake a Kidde. fol. 14 To bake a Mallard. fol. 14 To
make a pie of Humbles. fol. 14 To bake Red dear. fol. 14 An other bakemeate
for Chickins. fol. 15 To bake Calves feet. fol. 15 To sauce a pigge. fol. 15
The order to boil a Brawne. fol. 15 To make Almond Butter. fol. 15 To roast an
Hare. fol. 16 To make fritter stuff. fol. 16 For to bake a Hare. fol. 16 To
preserve Orenges. fol. 16 To make all manner of Fruit Tartes. fol. 17 To make
a tarte of preserved stuff. fol. 17 To make tartes of prunes fol. 17 To make a
tarte of Rise. fol. 17 To make a Custard. fol. 17 To make a tarte of Wardens.
fol. 17 To make a tart with butter and eggs. fol. 17 To make a tarte of
Spinnedge. fol. 17 To make a tarte of strawberies. fol. 17 To make a tart of
Hippes fol. 17 To bake the humbles of a Dear. fol. 17 To make a veale pie.
fol. 17 For to make mutton pies. To bake Calves feet. fol. 19 To bake Chickins
in a Cawdle. fol. 19 To bake Pigeons. fol. 19 To bake a Conie. fol. 19 To bake
a Gammon of Baken to keep cold. fol. 19 To make fine bread. fol. 19 To bake a
neates tongue fol. 18 To make Nutmegs. fol. 18 To make fillets of Beef or
clods, in steed of red Dear. fol. 18 To make a tart that is a courage to man
or woman. fol. 18 To stewe a Cock. fol. 21 To preserve all kind of fruits,
that they shall not break in the preserving of them. fol. 21 To make a
sirruppe for bakemeates. fol. 21 To roast a carpe or tench with a pudding in his
belly. fol. 19 To make fresh cheese and Cream. fol. 19 THE NAMES OF al
things necessary for a banquet. To make manus Christi. fol. 23 To make a
Caudle to comfort the stomach, good for an old man. fol. 23 To make a trifle.
fol. 23 To make marmelet of Quinces. fol. 24 To make butter paste. fol. 24 To
make fritter stuff. fol. 24 To make a made dish of Artechokes. fol. 24 To fry
Baken. fol. 25 To fry Chickins. fol. 25 To make a boiled meat after the
French ways. fol. 25 To make a Sallet of all kind of herbs. fol. 25 A sauce
for a Conie. fol. 26 To make a sallet of Lemmons. fol. 26 To make a Sausedge.
fol. 26 To make a Pie. fol. 26 To make white broth with Almondes. fol. 27 To
make pottage to lose the body. To make another very good potage to be used in
the morning. fol. 27 To boil diverse kinds of Fishes. fol. 28 To make broth
for one that is weak. fol. 28 To boil a Capon with a Syrrup. fol. 28 To
dress a hare. fol. 28 To bake a Hare. fol. 29 To roast deares toungs. fol. 29
To make blackemanger. fol. 29 To make pescods in lent. fol. 29 To bake Quinces,
pears, and Wardens. fol. 30 To make a tarte of Spinnedge. fol. 30 To make
blame mangie. To make a tart of a near of veale. fol. 30 To make a tart of
strawberies. fol. 31 To make a close tarte of Cheries. fol. 31 To make a tart
of green pease. fol. 31 To make a tart of Damsons. fol. 31 To make a
florentine. fol. 31 To make Almond butter after the best and newest fashion.
fol. 32 To make oister chuets. fol. 32 To make a tart of Medlers. fol. 33 To
make a quinces moise or Wardens moise. fol. 33 To make an other pretty dish,
with dates, and the juice of two or three orenges. fol. 33 To make hypocras.
fol. 33 To make Marmelet of Quinces. fol. 33 To make a sirup of quinces to
comfort the stomach. fol. 34 To make Marmelet of of Quinces. fol. 34 To make
Codamacke of Quinces. fol. 34 To make cast cream. fol. 35 To make good
resbones. fol. 35 To make a vaunt. fol. 35 To preserve Quinces whole. fol. 36
To preserve pear plums. fol. 37 To preserve Orenges. fol. 37 To preserve
Cheries. fol. 38 To preserve gooseberies. fol. 38 To make apple moise. fol. 38
A powder peerless for wounds. fol. 39 A medicine for the Megrime, Impostume
of the rewme, or other diseases in the head. fol. 39 A Copy of Doctor Stephans
waters. fol. 39 A medicine for all manner of sores. fol. 40 An other for all
sores. fol. 40 To defend Humors. fol. 43 To make rosemarie water. fol. 41 To
make biscuit bread. fol. 41 Certain approved points of husbandry, very
necessary for all husbanmen to know. fol. 41 First for Oxen. fol. 41 Of
Horses. fol. 43 Of Sheep. fol. 43 Of Hogs. fol. 44 An excellent drink for
the Tissick well approved. fol. 46 To make water imperial for all wounds and
cankers. fol. 46 To make water imperial an other way. fol. 46 To make sinamom
water. fol. 47 To make Sinamon water another way. fol. 47 To make Aqua
composita for a surfeit. fol. 47 To make the water of life. fol. 47 To make a
good plaster for the strangune. fol. 48 To make a powder for the stone and
strangullian. fol. 49 The drink. fol. 49 For the shingles a remedy fol. 50 For
all manner of sinowes that are shortened. fol. 50 A sufferaigne ointment for
shrunken sinowes and aches. fol. 50 For sinowes that be broken in two. fol. 50
For to knit sinowes that be broken. fol. 50 An oil to stretch sinowes that be
shrunk. fol. 51 For to staunch blood. fol. 51 For swelling that comes
suddenly in man's lims. fol. 51 For to make one slender fol. 52 A good ointment
for scabbes, and for itching of the body. fol. 52 For all manner of scabs. fol.
52 For a man that has drunken poison. fol. 52 To restore speech that is lost
suddenly. fol. 52
FINIS.

