A RELATION OF THE TROUBLES Of the three foreign Churches in KENT.

Caused by the Injunctions of William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury. Anno Dom.

1634. etc.

Written by J. B. Minister of the Word of God.

Et quorum pars magna fui.

2 SAMUEL 10. 12. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people; and
the Lord do that which seems him good.

Imprinted at London for Sam. Enderbie at the Star in Popes head Alley. 1645.

To the Christian Reader.
THE Honorable House of Commons assembled in Parliament did exhibit diverse
Articles against William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury unto the Lords of the
upper house the twelft whereof is set down in these words: He has
traitorously indevoured to cause division and discord betwixt the Church of
England and other Reformed Churches; And to that end has suppressed and
abrogated the Privileges and Immunities which have been by his Majesty and
his Royal Ancestors granted to the Dutch and French Churches in this Kingdom:
and diverse other ways has expressed his malice and dis-affection to these
Churches; that so by such disunion the Papists might have more advantage for
the overthrow and extirpation of both. The truth of this appears by the
Archbishops proceeding against our foreign Churches in England, for although
the Deputies of all the foreign Churches met at London, Anno 1625. and held a
Synod, whereof I was a Member, deputed by the Church of Canterbury, and went to
the King, who was accompanied with the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of
Pembroke, and Sectetary Morton, all deceased, and others, and a Speech was made
in French to the Kings Majesty by M. Primrose, containing among other things a
Petition for the continuance of our Privileges concerning our Discipline,
according to our custom granted heretofore by his Ancestors and Royal
Progenitors. The King gave us a gracious Answer and (...) Promise, and gave us
his hand to kiss; and we enjoyed our Privileges as long as Archbishop Abbot
lived. Yet as soon as (...) was warm in his Archbishops seat, he endeavored
with tooth and nail to suppress and abrogate our Privileges and Immunities
granted to our foreign Churches by his Majesty and his Royal Ancestors; to
introduce the Book of Common Prayer in our Churches, and subject us to the
English Liturgy translated into French, etc. and to withdraw from our Churches
those of the first and second descent, to have them go to the English
Parishes, as may fully appear by this Relation. True it is that in King James
his reign the two foreign Churches French and Dutch in Norwich, were
assaulted and troubled by Dr. Overald Bishop of Norwich, and especially by his
Chancellor, but that was about two points; the one was a prohibition to
observe Public Fasts without the Kings permission (which the Churches had
implicit in the toleration of their Discipline.) The second was, A command to
the Communicants of both Congregations to receive the Communion not sitting but
standing. Indeed when the French foreign Churches held their Synod at Norwich,
Anno Dom. 1619. to the which I was deputed, and was chosen Scribe by the Synod;
at that time the Bishops Chancellor came to our Synod, and told us, That my
Lord would have the Communicants kneel at the Communion, which seemed very
strange to us. I was chosen to go to the Chancellor, accompanied by the whole
Synod, and declared to him what Privileges we had from time to time from King
Edward, Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, and from King James then reigning.
The Chancellor answered us, That the King might alter his word and revoke his
promise. But we replied, That we esteemed the Kings word as much as a Patent.
We went afterward to the Bishop, who told us that his Chancellor had abused
him, he never intended that those of the foreign Congregation should receive
the Communion Kneeling but Standing as they did in France. He told us that his
Majesty commanded him to look to his Diocese. We answered, That the two
foreign Congregations in Norwich were in his Diocese, but not of his
Diocese; and desired his Lordship to let the Churches be in quiet till we had
communicated the business to our Consistories, and returned our answer to the
two Churches. Which he promised to do. In the mean time the Bishop died. The
Bishop who succeeded him was content to let the two Congregations enjoy their
Discipline in their Fasts and Communion, so that Archbishop Abbot would set his
hand to such a permission; which was a strange Condition: for he might have
considered, that the Archbishop did not trouble the foreign Churches in his
Diocese, but let them enjoy their Privileges quietly. But after the Bishop
had heard the Kings answer to the foreign Churches, permitting the continuance
of their Discipline, he did not molest them, but the two Congregations lived in
peace till Archbishop Lauds time, who was not content to trouble the three
foreign Churches in his Diocese, but endeavored to assault all the foreign
Churches in this Kingdom; and did cite their Deputies to appear, and meant
not to deprive them of two or three points of their Discipline, but to
dispossess them of all, and to submit them to the English Discipline. Yet when
he saw he could not bring it to pass, he would have persuaded the world he
never intended such an Injunction, as will appear by this following Treatise.
We intend not to write of the troubles of all the foreign Churches in England,
or those of London or of Norwich, but by the by, or a touch of them by
occasion; our purpose is to write principally and summarily what happened to the
three foreign Churches in Kent. In which Narration it will appear the malice
and dis-affection of the Archbishop of Canterbury to the Dutch and French
Churches in this Kingdom which stood in his way, intending the dissipation and
extirpation of them, that so his fine design of bringing in Popery might have
taken effect and sure footing in England to the overthrow of the true
Protestant Religion, had not God in his great mercy put an end and set a period
to his ambition, his tyranny, designs, and life.

A Relation of the Troubles of the three foreign Churches in KENT.
AFter the death of George Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury, William Laud Bishop
of London was promoted to that See, and made Archbishop thereof; who at his
entrance obtained of the Kings Majesty a Patent for a general Visitation of
all the Diocesses under his jurisdiction, as well of those that were exempts as
otherwise. And although the foraigne Churches of this Realm were not
comprehended in that Patent (for whereas Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Canons,
prebendaries, ministers and others were nominated, the foreign Churches were
not named) yet the Archbishop presupposed and pretended them to be; and
therefore in the visitation of his Diocese of Canterbury, by his
Commissioners in April Anno Domini, 1634. he caused the three foreign
churches to be cited to appear by their deputies in Canterbury; namely of
Canterbury, Sandwich, and Maidston, the Deputies of which churches appeared on
the 14. day of April, in Master Deanes house before his Commissioners, which
were Sir Nathaniel Brent, the Deane of Canterbury, and others, the Bishop of
Rochester being sick and absent; where were

Questions propounded to the Walloone Congregation at Canterbury, and the
Dutch Congregations of Sandwich and Maidston, whereunto they are to make
answer in writing, severally, or jointly, on Saturday next in the afternoon,
between the hours of one and five of the clock.

First, What Liturgy they use, and whether they have not the English Liturgy
in Dutch, or French in use.

Secondly, Of how many desents for the most part they are borne Subjects.

Thirdly, Whether such as are borne Subjects will corforme to the Church of
England?

The Deputies were, Gasparus Nieren minister of the Dutch Church of Sandirich;
Jeha Bulteel, and Philip Deline, ministers of the French Church in Canterbury.
John Miller minister of the Dutch Church of Maidston, and some Elders. John
Bulteel was requested by the (...) to (...) the speaker, he therefore answered
the Commissioners, that though (...) three foreign Churches were in my Lord
Archbishop of Canterburies Diocese, they were not of his Diocese, and that
they were of the erempts; and whereas Doctor Warner said, that the Deane and
Chapter were of the exempts also, yet were comprehended in the patent and were
visited; he answered, they were in a manner doubly exempted, and not contained
as they conceived expressly and by name as they were (Deanes, Archdeacons,
prebends, and others nominated in the patent) they added also that no
Archbishop did ever propound any such question to their Churches; and that it
might be easily known, and was known what Liturgy they had it being added
ordinarily to the end of the psalms, as it was practiced and used in France,
Germany and Holland, in the French Walloone and Dutch Congregations. As for
the English Liturgy, it was translated into French, but not in Dutch that they
knew; neither was it in use among them, they having their own Liturgy. Now the
Deputies being pressed to answer more particularly to the three questions
desired of the Commissioners a longer time to answer to those propositions,
because they were to communicate them to their congregations and they of
Sandwich and Matdston could not return an answer so soon. So the
Commissioners did prorogue the time and did appoint the day of answering to
those questions that day three weeks, namely the fifth of May, Sir Nathaniel
Brent, Deane Bargrave and Doctor Iackson, spoke of their governmenr and
discipline concerning refractary and deboshed perions; and praising them for
the care they had of their poor, in setting them on work, and not permitting
them to beg, giving them sufficient maintenance. But Doctor Warner could not
endure to hear those praises, startled and snuft at it, using some discurteous
words, as if those praises were to the disparagement of the English Churches,
etc. notwithstanding some Justices of peace at Sessions, in giving the charge,
would often make honorable (...) of the foreign Churches in England and wish
theirs would (...) them, propounding them as patterns and examples to English
Churches, concerning their poor, in setting them to work, and hindering them
from begging.

The Church of Canterbury being assembled together, according to its custom
namely, the Ministers, Elders and Deacons, and considering it was a subject of
great importance, and a matter of consequence, that concerned all the foreign
Churches found it sitting to write to the Coetus, that is to say to the two
stranger Churches, the French and Dutch Consistory of London, and to ask their
council, advice, and help: who returneo their answer, that the three
Congregations of Canterbury, Sandwich and Maidstone, should do well to depute
some of every Church, and send them up to London to confer there, together
with the Coetus, about the business, as being a subject of great concernment.
The Church of Canterbury deputed their two Ministers, John Bulteel and Philip
Delme, and two of their Elders, with instructions to confer with those of
London, and gave them in writing the answer to the three propositions, which
were to be showed to the company there but not to be delivered up to the
Archbishops Vicar-generall but with the advice and consent of the Coetus, and
but upon necessity: the Answer was this,

Upon the first Question.

THat we have that Liturgy, which all the Churches of the French tongue, both
in France and in the united provinces of the estates have had since the blessed
reformation, and which our Churches refuged here have had this sixty or siventy
years or more, and which is annexed to the (...) of the book of psalms.

That the English Liturgy is translated into French, but we use it not; we know
not whether it be in Dutch or no.

On the second Question.

THat the greatest part of the heads of the families are not borne here, but
about a third part; because that the greatest part of the old ones are
strangers borne, and many others are newly come since a few years.

To the third Question.

THe mentioned in that proposition desire not to do that which is inquired of;
because they see that the (...) of the Church would ensue, both in regard of
the entertainment of the Ministry (...) particularly for the subvention of the
poor; to the whch they are not only brought up, but also engaged by promise
made unto God and the church.

Besides, many of the Natives understand not nor speak so well the English as
they should, to understand well the Sermons and prayers. Moreover, the families
would be divided in the public exereises of piety; therefore they find it fit
and necessary that a (...) be made by all means, that they may continue as
they have hitherto done: And that, first, according to the privileges since
Edward the sixth, both by royal word and promise, with approbation of our
order, as by letters of the most honorable privy-counsell under whom we have
and do as refuged subsist and continue. (...), on the testimony both of the
(...) or (...) a (...) of this town, as also the certificate of the gentry and
country concerning our good behavior, etc.

This was made and subscribed by diverse of the said Church, in the name of all
the rest, April 27. 1634.

Whereupon the Deputies of the said Church with those of Sandwich went up to
London, where they met with the Minister of Maidston, and having conferred
together with the Coetus or two foreign Churches of London; they made this
answer in writing to my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Questions propounded to the Walloon Congregation at Canterbury, and the Dutch
Congregations at Sandwich and Maidston, by the right worshipful Commissioners
of my Lord Archbishop of Canterburie's Grace, Aprilis 14. 1634.

First, what Liturgy they use, and whether they haeve not the English Liturgy
in Dutch or French in use.

Secondly, of how many descents for the most part they are borne Subjects.

Thirdly, whether such as are borne Subjects will conform to the Church of
England.

To the which Questions, the answer of the said Churches is,

THat they do greatly honor and respect the dignity, person and merit of my
Lord Archbishop his Grace; but do most humbly beseech his grace not to be
offended, if in particular they do not answer the said Questions: Because it
is a thing not used heretofore by any of the Lords Archbishops his
predecessors. And because the foreign Churches of this Kingdom have obtained
a patent from King Edward the sixth, confirmed by Queen Elizabeth, by the late
deceased King James Princes of glorious memory, and by his Majesty's now
reigning (whom God long bless and preserve) In which patent, by a special
grace, the said foreign Churches in regard of their Liturgy and
Ecclesiastical discipline, are exempted from the jurisdiction of the Lord
Archbishops and Bishops, as also from (...) Officers and Justices of this
Kingdom, therefore the said churches do most humbly beseech my Lord
Archbishop his grace for the avoiding of the ruin and dissipation of the said
churches to show them his favor in the continuance of the modest and peaceable
exercise of their said Liturgy and Ecclesiastical discipline; seeing the said
exercise is grounded on the royal promise of his Majesty, for the preservation
and prosperity of whose person, as also of the Queens Majesty and the royal
issue, they make continual prayer to the Lord: And also in testimony of their
gratitude and acknowledgement, they will not fail to pray, etc. April 30.
1634.

John Bulteel. Ministers of the Word of God to the Walloon congregation of
Canterbury. Philip Delme. Ministers of the Word of God to the Walloon
congregation of Canterbury. John de Bever Elders of the said church. Ph.
Lernott, Elders of the said church.
Gasparus Nierenius Ecclesiae Belgicae quae est Sandwici pastor.

Jo. Vanden Broumker, Elder of the said church.

John Miller Minister of the Word of God in the Dutch congregation at Maidston.

In the name of the said congregations.

This Answer was delivered up to Sir Nathaniel Brent by the Deputies at his
house in London; who said it was a modest answer and with respect, and that he
would deliver it to my Lord; desired them to show the parent of King Edward the
sixth, or a copy thereof, that my Lord might have a fight thereof; who were not
willing to show him the Original, but gave him a copy thereof (written by a
Notarie) to deliver it to my Lord. So taking their leaves of Sir Nathaniel
Brent and dilmissed with very courteous words, the Deputies returned to their
several Churches and charges.

The Churches were in good hope that their answer would have given my Lord
satisfaction and content, and nothing was heard from my Lord or his
Vicar-generall for a long time; all seemed hushed and asleep, but not dead: for
Sir Nathaniel having ended his perambulation and visitation of diverse provinces
for that year, returned to Canterbury, and intimated unto the Ministers of the
French congregation, that my Lord was not satisfied nor content with their
precedent answer, and had order to cite them to appear with those of Sandwich
and Maidston before him and other commissioners the 19. of December in Master
Sumners house, to hear my Lords injunctions: The Deputies of Canterbury and
Sandwich appeared at the place and time before them, who propounded the
injunctions spoke somewhat of the English Liturgy, wished it were received in
their churches for the glory of the English churches; and seeing that both the
english and strangers had but one Religion in substance, why should there be a
different Liturgy and discipline between them? told them that if they would
conser and discourse with the Divines (the Deane and Master Casaubon) they
might go down into the Garden and there talk and communicate together: The
Deputies answered, they came not there to conserre or dispute together, but to
hear what they had to say from my Lord; and because the time to answer to the
said injunctions was short, as that the natives should resort to their parish
churches the third day of January, and the Liturgy should be read in the
foreign churches the 14. of February; they demanded some more respite for
their answer; the commissioners were content to give them time to the first of
March, and so Master Sumner by charge of Sir Nathaniel Brent sent them (...)
Act, and in this form.

Decimo nono die Decembris Anno Domini 1634. coram venerabilibus viris Domino
Nathanaele Brent milite, legum Doctore Reverendissimi in Christo patris ac
Domini Domini Gulielmi (...) Archiepiscopi and (...) in spiritualibus generali,
Isaaco Bargrave saerae Theologiae professore, Decano Ecclesiae cathedralis and
Metropolicae Christi (...), and Merico Casaubon sacrae Theologiae bacchalanreo,
ejusdem Ecclesiae Praebendario, commissariis Reverendissimi Domini
Archiepiscopi, in and pro visitatione sua Metropolitica constitutis in aedibus
ac in praesentia Willielmi Sumner notarii publici Registrarij principalis
deputati.

Quibus die and loco, comparuerunt magister Joannes Bulteel Clericus and
magister Philippus Delme Clericus, (...) Ecclesiae (...) apud Cantuarium, una
cum senioribus (uti vocant) ejusdem Ecclesiae quibus Domini Domini commissarij
intimarunt: that all the Natives of their Walloon congregation must resort to
the several parish churches of those (...) wherein they inhabit to hear
divine service and Sermons, and perform all duties of parishioners required in
that behalf; and that the Ministers and all others of the same Walloon or
French congregation which are Aliens borne, shall have and use the Liturgy used
in the English churches; as the same is, or may be faithfully translated into
French: and (...) eos, to inform their congregation hereof, and to conform
them and themselves hereunto by the first of March next.

Examinatur per me Willielmum Somner notarium publicum.

The like was given unto those of Sandwich, and the Vicar-generall passing
through Maidston gave the like charge unto the Minister and Elders of the Dutch
congregation there; the Deputies of Canterbury and Sandwich found it fitting
that the passages of the business should be related unto their own churches
and thought good to write to the two foreign churches or coetus of London,
and certify them what had passed between them and the commissioners; who
returned an answer, that seeing it was a case that concerned all the foreign
churches French and Dutch of this Kingdom, and their case was a leading case
to the other churches; it was fitting, nay, necessary, that they should be
advertised thereof: So the Deputies of both churches Canterbury and Sandwich
wrote to all the foreign churches Dutch and French or Walloon in this
Kingdom, entreating them to send their Deputies to London armed with good
instructions and reasons, for the maintaining of the subsistence of their
churches, (...) bring with them their writings and privileges to that end; and
to be at London the fifth of February following there to confer together
concerning those injunctions. But because the time prefixed seemed somewhat
long, which notwithstanding could not well be abreviated by (...) of the great
distances of the Churches, and their preparation, and that the (...) required
haste, for it was thought the Kings Majesty would be gone from White Hall the
16. of the month of February, and that some presupposed that my Lord of
Canterbury, might be (...) with complements, in (...) him and offering him
their service (although there were others that thought otherwise) requesting
him to let them enjoy their privileges as they had hitherto done, and not be
troubled but permitted to live in peace; the Deputies therefore of the three
forementioned Churches, whom it most and primarily concerned, were counseled
to anticipate the time and go to London; to go first to my Lord of Canterbury
and beseech him to revoke his injunctions; and in case he would not be moved to
recall them, they might prepare matters besore the arrival of the Deputies of
other Churches; and if need were, go jointly together to the King: So the
Deputies of Canterbury and Sandwich went for London and met there the Deputies
of Maidston, where consulting together with the Ministers and Elders of the
French and Dutch congregation in their Coetus; it was found expedient to go to
the Archbishop, to petition him by word of mouth: So the Deputies went to the
Vicar-generall, told him the cause of their coming, and the desire they had to
speak to my Lord, who told them he would go to my Lord, and wished them to be
at White Hall at my Lords lodging on the last of January, where the Deputies
went at the appointed time: my Lord did not call them into his inward room, but
came out into his outward, there being but a curtain between him and the
people; who coming there and sitting in his pontisiciall Chair, not so much
as vailing his Bonnet to the Deputies, who came in the name of their Churches,
John Bulteel made this speech unto my Lord in the name of the rest.

Most reverend Father in God:

WE the Ministers with some Elders of the three (...) Churches of Canterbury,
Sandwich and Maidston, deputed by the said congretions, do present our selves
before you tendering in humility our service to your Grace, knowing the (...)
place which you have under our gracious Sovereign, whom God long preserve.

But my Lord interrupted him saying, I know your dostrine, parity of Ministers,
hatle fellow well met, and used discurteous words, and would hear no more of
the speech; telling the Deputies he had appointed the Monday following for the
day of hearing, and had no leisure to hear a thing twice; had spoken to his
Vicar general and Sir John Lamb Judge of the Arches to be there at the
appointed time, so he put it off and dismissed then; who much wondered at his
harsh salutation and hard words at the first meeting, and began to conjecture
what the issue would be, being woe roughly dealt at their first coming, and
found the contrary by experience, of what they had heard that my Lord was
affable and courteous to those that came to him.

The same Deputies returned to my Lord at the appointed hour, where the
soresaid Minister who began the former speech, and had pezed his words the
former time, as namely when he said knowing the eminent place he had under the
King (he said not under God) for he had it not (...) divino, but by the
liberality and munificence of the King: The said J. B. omitting that which he
had said before, proceeded on.

My Lord:

WE return here to represent unto your grace, that the injunction which has
been made unto us by your Commissioners, are (...) to our privileges, which we
have enjoyed for the space of fourscore years, by the grace, favor,
liberality, permission and protection of three high and mighty Princes of
blessed and happy memory, King Edward the VI. Queen Elizabeth and King James,
and confirmed by the royal promise of our dread Sovereign (whom God long
preserve) and never were as yet hindered by the command of any of the Lords
Archbishops your predecessors, we hope we shall enjoy the like favor, as
having never abused of the same liberty, as may appear by diverse certificates
of our good behavior and (...) conversation in the places Where we live. As
for the observation of those injunctions it will be very prejudicial unto our
Churches as an occasion of the dispersion and diseput on of them, the ruin of
many Families, and a hinderance of the conversion of many papists which come
from beyond the seas to our churches. We beseechmost humbly your grace, that
you would be pleased to revoke these injunctions, and to permit us to continue
to enjoy our privileges, with out any (...) and molestation, to the comfort of
our churches, that are very much perplexed with these injunctions: so shall we
be the moreobliged and bound etc.

My Lord made a discourse of his proceedings before he answered to the
discourse told them he had a visitation to make in all the Diocesses of his
Jurisdiction, and would begin with his own house and Diocese, and so with
them; he thanked them for their prayers and wishes, and he would pray for them:
but whether they prayed for him or no, he would go on, and would them good,
but in a Canonical way; that he did nothing but that he had communicated it to
the King and Counsel, which had been there debated, that their discourse
contained some reasons, but he could see no reason that the observation of the
injunctions could or would bring such inconveniences; that he had a copy of the
patent of King Edward the VI. (which he drew out of his pocket) and said that
would not serve them, and that they were much mistaken. He spoke often very
harshly and bitterly unto the Deputies, and in a jeering and scoffing way,
spoke very basely of their communion, said, that their Churches used
irreverence at their communion sat altogether as if it were in a Tavern or
Alehouse, where one drunk to another the Minister beginning and the people
following him; that their Ministry and Discipline was not secundum Evangelium,
the english was, and Bishops (...) divine, that he would engage his Arch.
bishopric thereon, and would dispute with the best of them, that all they did
was to take away Bishops, that they were the wise and religious, and he with
the rest, the superstitious and idolaters, that they were Israel in Egypt,
that they would make a state in a state, and if they did so, he needs not be
there in that place; that their Churches were nests and occasion of scisme,
that his intention was to hinder the scisme in Kent, where there are so many
factious, who though they were not guilty of death, yet worthy to be punished;
that it were better there were no foreign Churches nor strangers in England,
then to have them thereby to give occasion or prejudice to the Churchgovernment
of England; that his intention was to govern the Church of England according
to the Canons, except the King would restrain him; that he told the King that
he would begin with his own Diocese, that they vanted they did not fear him
nor care for his injunctions, but he hoped the King would maintain him; he
could not abide to hear so much of Churches, and said, there was but one
Church, and many such like things; these criminations and scoffs, were not
uttered with one breath but intermixed in his discourse.

The Deputies that came not there to dispute and answer every thing but to
request and hear what my Lord would say, did answer but now and then as they
durst or might, not going beyond their commission, told him that they were not
the cause of scisme, and that there were many such (scismaticks, as he termed
them but indeed godly reformed Protestants) in those places where no strangers
Churches were, as in Devonshire, Dorsetshire, and other Counties, that they
never vanted in that manner, did never exalt their own discipline, but
contented with their own meddled not with theirs; they hoped they should enjoy
their privileges as heretofore, that they could show certificates of their
good behavior, civil and quiet carriage, both of the Mayor, Aldermen, yea,
Bourmouth of Canterbury, of the Deane and Chapter of Christ's Church, and of the
Lords, Knights and Gentry of the Country. He told them, he had heard good
report of them, and would not disgrace them so much as to ask for
certificates, and that he thought charitably of them, that they were not the
cause nor counselors and maintainers of scismaticks, but the permission of
the foreign Churches and discipline was the occasion of many factious persons
in his Diocese. The Deputies told him, that the execution of his injunctions
would be the dissipation, yea, the destruction of their Churches, that the
ministry and poor could not be maintained; he seemed not to believe it, and
said, that they were not to regard two or three Ministers; they replied they
did not speak for themselves, but for their Churches; many among them not
understanding the english tongue; he said, that was but a design, and that
from the beginning they should have sent their children to the parishes to
learn the language and accustom them to it from their infancy and youth. In
fine, his full resolution was to have his injunctions put in full execution on
the day prefixed, and that they should look to it to their perils, and
commanded Sir Nathaniel Brent his Vicar-generall to go on with them: the
Deputies said, they had the Kings royal promise, who said he would show unto
the foreign Churches the same savor which the King his Father had showed
unto them, my Lord said, that they might go unto the King if they would (as
any Subject might do) and his hand should not be the heavier on them for it;
those that were English borne, and the Kings Subjects, should be subject to his
jurisdiction, and if they had any thing to say to him hereafter, they might
come to him again, and so dismissed the Deputies.

Now because mention is made of the certificate and good testimony of the
Chapter of Canterbury, it may be fitly inserted in this place.

We, the Deane and chapter of the cathedral and Metropoliticall church of
Christ canterbury. At the request of the Walloon congregation here being and
residing; do testify and declare, that the body of the same congregation for
many years past, and still do very religiously, obediently, orderly and
civilly demean and behave themselves toward God and all the Kings Majesty's
officers, and others in these parts (for any thing we have ever heard to the
contrary) and most painfully and industriously labor in their several
vocations, so as none of them are chargeable or axy ways burdensome to the
English, but rather very helpful to the poorer sort, by setting them to
spinning and other works, whereby they are much relieved (...) kept from
idleness. Neither have we known or heard of any just complaints made against
the same Congregation for any hinderance or prejudice done by them to the
English people (...) these parts. And we are verily persuaded that the example
of their painful industry and diligent labors, does move and stir up the
honest poor of our Nation to set themselves to work. In testimony whereof we
have set our cemmon seal. Dated (...) our chapterhouse the 25. of March, in
the year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord James, by the grace of God King
of England, France and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc. the one and
twentieth, and of Scotland the six and fiftieth, Anno Dom. 1623.

There was another certificate of the Knights and Gentlemen near Canterbury,
couched in the same tenor and words, and there was one of the Major Bourmouth
of Canterbury in the same style, only an exception by parenthesis (except some
few of them whom the body of the said Congregation did not nor do approve of.)

The Deputies related to the Coetus what had passed between my Lord Archbishop
and them, who together found it fitting that they should stay till the fifth of
February the day appointed for the assembly of the Synod of all the Deputies of
all the stranger Churches in this Kingdom and then and there to make a
relation of all the passages which had happened unto that day. The Deputies of
the foreign Churches appeared at the appointed time and showed their letters
of credence the persons chosen to be the moderator, the Assistant, and the
Scribe of the Synod according to its custom (we intend not to write down the
acts of that Synod in this short Epitome, but only what concerns this
business) the Deputies of Kent made a discourse to the Assembly of what they
had done, and were approved, as having begun there where they should, namely
with my Lord of Canterbury, who otherwise would have been very much offended if
they had gone first to the King; who would without doubt have sent them to his
Archbishop; but they seeing the Deputies could not by their petition to my
Lord cause him to revoke his injunctions, and that my Lord told them they might
go to the King if they would, they holding their privileges from the Kings
Majesty immediately, and not from my Lord, and that they had no other way then
to go directly to the King. there being especially no Parliament assembled at
that time: the Synod found it fitting. yea, necessary to send jointly together
some Deputies to the King in the name of the whole Synod, who represented the
foreign Churches of this Kingdom with a petition to his Majesty, and a
speech to be made unto him.

The Deputies were Master Marmet, Master Primrose, Master Gasparus, Master
Proast, Master Beauuois and John Bulteel Ministers, besides Master Lucie, and
Master du Mont Elders, Sir William St. Ravi a French Gentleman was the man, who
at the request of the Deputies went to the King to know his mind; who told him
he was content to receive a petition but would not hear any discourse: so
those that were deputed to that action, on the 12 of February, waited for the
King at his coming forth out of his Chapel going to dinner; and Master
Marmet one of the Ministers of the French Church of London, accompanied by the
foresaid Deputies, Ministers and Elders, gave unto his Majesty the petition:
This was the Petition.

To the KINGS most excellent Majesty.

The humble Petition of the foreign Churches in this Realm of ENGLAND.

Humbly shows to your sacred Majesty, That the Petitioners and their
predecessors, by your Highness favor, and your noble Progenitors, have and
do (...) enjoy several privileges concerning the state of government of
their Churches.

But of late they have been acquainted with an Injunction made by the right
honorable the Lord of Canterbury his grace, and directed to the foreign
Churches which are in his Diocese. By the execution whereof, (...) will ensue
the dissipation not only of the said Churches, but also of all other foreign
Churches in this your Majesty's Kingdom.

The Petitioners therefore humbly beseech, that your sacred Majesty would
extend your highness favor toward them still, and be graciously pleased to
hear the Petitioners deputies in your most honorable Privy Council, upon
the most humble Remonstrances which the Petitioners will produce unto your
Majesty and their Honors therein.

And as in duty bound, the Petitioners will continue to pray to God for your
Majesty's long and prosperous reign, etc.

The King going to dinner gave the Petition to my Lord Chamberlin to give it to
one of the Secretaries; who told the King many considerable things in the
behalf of the foreign Churches which he affected and favored: to whom the
King said, We must believe our Archbishop of Canterbury in the hearing of
Master Gasparus, one of the Deputies.) My Lord Chamberlin came and told the
Deputies what he had told the King, and what the King had charged him with, and
that he went to give the Petition to Sir John Cook Secretary: they thanked his
Honor for his good will toward them, and care of them; glad that the Petition
should fall into the hands of that religious Secretary (...), that good
Patriot; and not in the hands of Sir (...) that Popish Secretary, and my Lord
of Canterburies creature. The said afternoon Sir William Saint (...) waiting
on the Kings Majesty in Saint James Park, give unto his Majesty the Speech in
French, which should have been made unto him in the morning. The Tenor
whereof was this, thus translated into English.

To the King.

Most gracious Sovereign,

The foreign Churches, which under the favor, maintenance and support of the
Kings your Predecessors (whose memory is blessed) have been established, and
who do as yet subsist in your Kingdom, under the same favor of your Majesty.
Having (...) prejudication or fore-judgement of their dissipation in an
Injunction directed from my Lord Archbishop of canterbury, to those churches
that reside in his Diocese are here in the persons of (...) Deputies at your
Majesty's feet, to entreat your Majesty most humbly that with the same
affection and royal promise, with the which it was pleased at its happy
coming to the crown, to confirm unto them their privileges granted unto
them by your Majesty's predecessors, it will be also pleased now to prevent
their (...) just apprehensions, and stop the blow of their ruin.

The said Injunction has two branches, the one whereof is directed unto (...)
that are borne in this land; tending that they are to separate themselves, and
to go and remain every (...) in his own Parish: the other concerns the
strangers, that they are to leave and quit their ordinary Liturgy, and to range
and rank themselves to that of England.

The first command (Sir) does undermine at one blow, and overthrow the
foundation of the subsistence of their churches. For although the natives do
in some places make the greater, and in some others the least part thereof; yet
nevertheless they are every where the most important and considerable part,
because they only possess some means, and by their extraordinary liberal
relief the Ministry is entertained, and a great quantity of Poor maintained
(...) they are charged. So that those withdrawing themselves, the Pastors will
remain without entertainment, (...) churches without exercise, the Poor
without assistance; and the rest being composed of no others then Artificers,
ignorant of the English tongue, and whose abode (being not stable for want of
means) is as uncertain as indifferent; shall be constrained to go and seek
elsewhere the exercise (...) their religion. Thus all being dissipated by this
first command, the second will remain very unprofitable.

The singular Piety of your Majesty is well known of all, and we have seen
with our eyes notable effects of its good natural and merciful disposition
toward those that profess with it the same purity of doctrine, to make us
ever to believe that it will suffer under its reign, or can see with his eyes
so great adesolation.

That these poor flocks, who has escaped the fire, the massacres and
persecutions, are come here, and have been received, and put under covert as in
a place of refuge and sanctuary of a holy Temple; shall be now dispersed, and
compelled to seek elsewhere some certain and sure seat and dwelling.

That these foreign plants, cast by diverse storms and violent tempests on
the coasts of this Island, so carefully gathered together by the good Edward
the VI. and welcomed by him, so favorably maintained and entertained by that
virtuous Princess Queen Elizabeth, attained to perfection under the reign, as
happy, as peaceable of that great and wise King James your Majesty's Father;
and in this time flourishing as much as ever under your gracious dominion and
government, shall be now plucked up by the roots? as it were to the blame,
check and contempt of the prudence and charity of all those who hitherto have
beheld it with a good eye and favored their growth?

That those lively Monuments erected to the everlasting memory of all those
good Princes, and that do highly publish over all the world the fame and glory
of their piety, charity and hospitality toward the afflicted members of the
Lord Jesus, should be cast down and reduced into dust?

That those (...) and expressed testimonies of the union of this Kingdom, with
the reformed Churches of France and of Germany, and of the united Provinces, so
religiously kept and upheld hitherto: should now be broken and sent back as in
sign and token of a sad and total separation? they are things unto the which
we hope your Majesty will never wholly condescend and resolve?

Especial at this time, wherein the Churches of Germany swimming in their own
blood those of France in their tears, all in the midst of their ruin and
apprehensions of a greater desolation; they have no other then your Majesty on
whom they can turn, cast and settle both their eyes and their hope?

What trances, perplexities and despaires will fame (which publishes things
worse then they are ordinarily) seize on the afflicted hearts? publishing every
where that there are no foreign Churches in England? that there is now no
place of resuge, nor of succor and safeguard to those that are persecuted for
the true Religion sake?

(...) and agonies which will be redoubled by the reproaches of (...), who will
show their condemnation in ours, and will never fail to tell them, and it may
be to cause them to feel, that it is with more then reason and justice, that
the popish Princes do persecute and (...) them away, seeing that they cannot
be tolerated and supported even by those that are of their own profession.

We most humbly beseech your Ma esty that you would be pleased to (...) well
these things; and as our consciences (...) testify unto us, that by our
demeanor, which even to this day have by the grace of God avoided the blows
and girds of (...) it self; we have not made our selves unworthy of the
continuation of your royal favors; you will be pleased in this (...) to cause
us to feel the effects thereof, and receiving the most humble petitition which
we present unto your Majesty, to answer it as favorably as you have been
graciously pleased heretosore to promise us that our entertainment and usage
shall not be worse under your government then it has been under the dominion
of your royal predecessors.

And so filled with joy and comfort, we will continue our servent prayers unto
God for your Majesty's health long and prosperous life, the good of the Estate,
the increase, the glory and prosperity of your royal and most flourishing
Family.

This Speech was set down in its own language and terms, which cannot be so
well expressed in another tongue; for, nunquam tmitator par fit authori:
containing, as you see, reasons and arguments sufficient to move his Majesty
to permit the continuance of enjoying the privileges granted unto the
foreign Churches, and confirmed by his Predecessors and his royal Majesty.

The Sinod held it convenient to depute some of their Assembly to the Duke of
(...), to entreat his Highness to go and speak to the Kings Majesty in their
behalf (because they had not nor heard any answer from him) that he would be
pleased to hear the Deputies of the Churches in his most Honorable Privy
Council. The said Lord, a very religious Prince, who had done much for the
Churches in France, spent his means and blood for the true Religion, refuged
in England, and as a member of the foreign Churches in England; much in
favor with the King, being his Godfather and Cozen, did willingly and freely
promise to do it. The very same day he went to the King, made the motion to
him in the behalf of the stranger Churches. The King and the Duke had some
discourse about it; among many words, he said that we were more afraid then
hurt; and that his intention was only touching the first proposition
concerning the Natives.

The Synod omitting no means for the continuance of the subsistence of their
Churches; hoping, as Nicodemus said, the Law judges no man before it hear
him, and know what he does; and esteeming that the King, as another Alexander,
would give them an hearing as he had given to my Lord of Canterbury, and so
reserve an ear for them: in case the King would hear them before his
Council, according to their Petition, chose some of the Company, and that but
few who should accompany him, that was to speak in the name of the rest, who
had all the writings and papers requisite: the President was chosen to be the
foreman, who upon some considetations desired to be excused; whereupon John
Bulteel was elected to be the man; which charge though he refused at the first,
yet was feign at last to accept and undergo it; who among other paper, had two
especially which contained the Fundamentals and reasons, all which were given
into his hands by the Assembly; the reason why it was thought convenient one of
the Company should do it and rather one of Kent then of any other Province,
was because if a Counselor had spoken, none of the Deputies should have had
the liberty to speak; whereas they could best answer to the Objections and
difficulties; and none of the Churches were charged by my Lord of Canterbury at
that time, but those of Kent.

The Sinod was glad that the Petition was in Master Secretary Cooks hand, and
found it convenient to send to him two of the Company. Master Primrese and John
Bulteel, to solicit him in the cause of the Church that he might well
understand the state of their Churches, see their reasons and inconveniences
that would arise and arrive upon the execution and observation of the
Injunctions; that so by his means the King might be the better informed; they
presented unto him the fundamentals and the reasons which were to be presented
to the King and his Council, in two several papers. As for the Fundamentals,
they were these:

Fundamentals for the subsistence of the foreign Churches within this Realm.
Anno 1550.

The parent of King Edward the VI. where these words are found:

1. Quod (...) facti sunt corpus corporatum, and successionem habeant. 2. Quod
habeant authoritatem, (...) Ministros. 3. Mandatur omnibus Archiepiscopis and
episcopis, ut permittant (...) quiet frui, gaudere (...) exercere ritus and
caeremonias suas proprias, and disciplinam ecclesiasticam propriam and
peculiarem non (...) quod non conveniant cum ritibus ac (...) in regno nostro
uisitatis, absque (...) impetitione (...) aut in quietatione.
Per breve de privato sigillo and de actis praedict a authoritate Parliaments.

Anno 1573.

The Letters of the Privy-Counsell to the Church of London containing these
words.

Non ignoramus in varijs ecclesijs, varios ac diversos iam ab initio (...)
Religionis semper fuisse ritus ac caremonias, dum hi stamtes, alij in (...)
procidentes, alij (...) procumbentes adorant and precantur, and tamen (...)
Pietas est ac Religio si vere and ad verum Deum or at (...) tendat, absitque
impietas ac superstitio etc. non contemnimus ritus vestros, nee vos ad nostros
cogimus, probamusque caeremonias vesiras, ut vobis and vestris reipublicae unde
orti estis aptas and convenientes.

Anno 1574. The order of the Privy-counsell the 29. of June.

If others would join themselves to the said Churches, that such people shall
be counseled to betake themselves to some other parts of the Kingdom, where
they may be commodiously received: If they do (...), we will call in willingly
our former commandment.

Anno 1630. The Answer of King James to the French and Dutch Ministers, the 21.
of May.

Je vous (...) ainsi quil convient a un bon Prince, de defendre (...) ceux qui
(...) abandonne leur patrie pour la Religion. Mondesir est de vous defendre
(...) a fait la Reyne defuncte (...), renommee par tout le monde qui vous a
receuen son royaume and pour la quelle vous (...) Dieu. Que si aulcun estoit si
ose que de vous molester en vos Eglises vous addressant a (...) je vous en
feray tell justice qu'il (...) point d'envie par apres d'y retourner.

Anno 1612. The perpetuity granted to the Dutch of Colchester Anno 10 Jacobi
the 17. of October:

As also their orders in their (hurch and Assemblies there, tending to the good
government of the said congregation, in as free large and ample manner in all
respects and to all intents, constructions and purposes, as heretofore they
have used, and have been tolerated and allowed unto them according to the true
intent of this our present Ordinance; any law, act, statute, ordinance,
provision or jurisdiction to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Anno 1613. The Order of the Privy-Counsell for the French Church of
Canterbury, the 2. of May.

That the said congregation within the city of Canterbury, shall accordingly to
his Majesty's gracious pleasure peaceably and freely (...) such privileges,
liberties and immunities, and be permitted to use their Assemblies and
congregations in as ample manner as heretofore has been allowed unto them in
the time of Queen Elizabeth or since.

Anno 1616. The Order of King James under the Signet, the 30. of June.

These are therefore to will and command all our courts of (...) and others our
loving Subjects, to permit and suffer the said (...) members of the Outlandish
Churches, and their children to ^ of our favors before declared in this
behalf. (...) the (...) kindness and good entertainment which our Subjects
and their children do receive and find beyond the seas.

Anno 1621. The Order of the Privy-Counsell for the Walloons of Norwich, the
10. of October.

Those of Norwich although borne in the Kingdom, shall continue to be of the
said church and society, and shall be subject to such (...) as has been all
the time (of 55 years) practiced among them; and if any shall be refractory,
they shall be bound to appear at this Board.

Anno 1625. The gracious Answer of King Charles to the Deputies of the
foreign Churches the 30. of April.

I thank you for this, and I assure you I will continue unto you the same
favor which the King my Father did show unto you; and I hope my marriage shall
not be any damage unto you, but rather an occasion of much good to your
Countrymen.

Anno 1625. The Order of King Charles for all strangers the 13. of November.

We will and command our Judges, etc. to permit and (...) the (...) strangers,
members of the Outlandish Churches and (...) children, (...) to enjoy all and
singular such privileges and immunities as have been formerly granted unto
them, without any troubles, arrests, or (...), by way of information or
otherwise; considering the fair usage and good intertainment which our
Subjects and their children do receive (...) the seas.

Anno 1630. The Order of the Privy-Counsell for the Dutch of Norwich, the 7. of
January.

That all those that are now or that hereafter shall be members of the Dutch
congregation, although borne within the Kingdom, shall continue to be of that
church and society, so long as his Majesty shall be pleased, without any
prejudice to their privileges or birthright: and shall be subject to such
discipline as has been by all the time aforesaid usually (...) among them; and
from time to time contribute to the maintenance of the ministry and poor, and
the defraying of all other necessary charges of the same congregations, as they
shall be assessed, and occasion shall in that behalf require.

The second Paper or writing contained the Reasons in a Petition to his Majesty
in this form.

To the KINGS most excellent Majesty.

The most humble Petition of the Foreign Churches within this REALM.

Most gracious Sovereign,

A sentence having been pronounced by the (...) of my Lord Archbishop has
grace to the foreigne churches of Canterbury, Sandwich and Maidston, (...)
these two Injunctions.

The one that some of (...) as are borne in this Kingdom should resort to
their parish churches.

And the other of the strangers which shall remain, shouldreceive the book of
Common Prayer of this Kingdom.

Whereupon the other foraigne churches of the said Kingdom being advertised
thereof by letters, are all met together according to their order and ancient
practice to cast themselves at your Majesty's feet by their Deputies, and to
entreat your Majesty in all humility to consider, if the said sentence be
executed, that there will follow much more hurt then good, as your Majesty
clearly may perceive by the reasons following.

As for the hurt, it will fall very great, as well in regard within as without
this Realm, of this sentence be executed.

For thereby will be abolished the privileges granted and confirmed to the
said churches by King Edward the VI. Queen Elizabeth, and the late King James
your Father, all excellent Princes and of glorious memory.

Thereby likewise the royal promise of your Mrjesty given at your coming to
the Crown, will remain fruitless and without effect; from thence will follow
a great confusion in families, some going to one Church, some to another, and
many of the natives not understanding the English tongue; so that the heads of
the said families will not be able duly to discharge themselves of the duty
toward those that are under them.

Yea, from thence infallibly will ensue the dissipation of the said churches,
forasmuch as the Natives (who are the pillars thereof) being cut off, there will
be no means left to entertain the ministry nor to help the necessities of a
great number of poor.

By reason of that, many good workmen will retire themselves elsewhere, who
daily furnish excellent manefactures to this Kingdom and of all kind; and by
their retiring many thousands of your Subjects who are employed by them will
find themselves destitute of work, yea from thence your custom is like to
receive a great prejudice.

If this sentence be executed in this time of confusion and trouble, it will
cause a most sensible and sharp displeasure to all the reformed churches of
diverse countries, and more particularly to those of France.

Yea, which is more, this will make the said churches not only more hateful
and contemptible to their adversaries, but even will be able to draw
persecution upon them, their enemies judging by this change, that the good will
of your Majesty will be changed toward them.

And Sir, if the persecution should begin there, as always it is much to be
feared; with what courage could the poor afflicted ones retire themselves
hither, as formerly they have done, knowing that their Liturgy should have been
there overthrown.

Your Majesty will be also pleased to consider, that this alteration will
hinder the conversion of many that are out of the way, living in the
Lowcountries under the dominon of the King of Spain, who to the increase of
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, come hither in great number.

Thereby will be broken the outward union and good intelligence of the English
church with all other reformed churches, whereof our adversaries of the Romish
church will triumph and make bonefires thereof at Rome.

From thence will follow, that there will remain but one Sacrament in our
churches, being not admitted to administer baptism to little children which
shall be borne in this Kingdom, yea, it will come to pass that the use of
catechizing will fail amongst us, having no children to be catechized.

To make short, most gracious Sovereign, thereby will be abolisht the entire
use of our Liturgy and discipline, which we have enjoyed so many years
together, and have common with many churches in Germany with those of the
Low Countries, and of the Kindome of France; all renowned in regard of the
purity of their doctrine, common with that of this Kingdom: As also in regard
of great and excellent persons, which from time time are come out of the midst
of them.

And for all the good that can be pretended for it, will be.

That by this means your Majesty's Subjects will be seen to go to their
parishes, and to serve God after the ordinary form of the Land; but in the
most part of the said churches this is done hitherto by them going thither many
times, being employed in all sorts of charges and offices at others, causing
their children to be baptized there, and often receiving there the holy
communion, and contributing for the Ministers and other Officers even as the
rest of the Kingdom.

Briefly, making profession with them of one and the same Religion and (...)
they join themselves often in (...) which concerns the Liturgy and divine
service; but besides, they come themselves with liberty amongst those of their
own tongue, to maintain unity among them, and to provide for the
entertainment of the ministry, as also for the relieving of the poor and needy.

Which things, the late King your glorious and wise Father having ripely
considered would never consent to the change, howsoever he were many times
solicited thereunto.

Wherefore, most gracious Sovereign, seeing by these reasons it is altogether
evident, that this change going forward, there will issue out of it more hurt
then good, your Majesty is entreated in all humility, by all the said foreign
Churches to enjoyne that the said sentence of my Lord Archbishop's grace be not
executed; and that the said churches continue in their liberties and
privileges that they have peaceably enjoyed hitherto. And so our selves being
full of consolation and joy we will more and more beseech the Almighty for the
conservation of your royal person of the Queens Majesty, of your royal Issue,
as also for the good and continual prosperity of your Crowns.

Now because the Strangers seemed in the opinion of many to be very many in
number in this Kingdom, and especially many thousands in London, as if they
were Israel in Egypt, as my Lord of Canterbury said, whereas they are but few;
the two forenamed Ministers Doctor Primrose and John Bulteel, according to
their commission, gave also to Sir John Cook Secretary, a note and number of
the sorraigne Churches and of the Communicants, with the two foresaid papers
and writings, that the world might perceive its error, and being otherwise
informed might be reformed in it.

The list of the number of the foreign Churches which are ten, and the number
of the Communicants was in this order.

French and Walloons of London 1400 Dutch of London 840 Walloons of Canterbury
900 Dutch of Colchester 700 Walloons of Norwich 396 Dutch of Norwich 363 Dutch
of Maidston 50 Dutch of Sandwich 500 Dutch of Yarmouth 18 Walloons of
Southampton 36 Summa 5213

This is the total number of the Communicants of men, women and children,
menservants and maidservants, both strangers and nativeborne, in the ten
foreign Churches of this Kingdom, nothing so many as they were presupposed
to be.

Nay, there were some Earls, Lords and others who would not believe at first
that there were so few strangers Protestants in England till it was told them,
and this list showed to them by J. B. Nay, they thought there were many more in
London, then that number in the list, but the two soragin Churches in London
had no more then 2240 Comunicants as above. True it is, that the royal Exchange
seems to (...) with them. but they are not all French and Dutch, there are
Spaniards, Italians, Portugals, and others, and a great number of such Papists
live in the (...) and skirts of the City; and therefore John Bulteel told my
Lord of Canterbury (who spoke often of the great number of strangers in (...)
especially) that there were five French (...) to one French (...) ((...) meant
not Walloons protestants,) and my Lord (...) the said party in a kind of anger,
where so many were; answered (...) they might be found at Sommerset house, and
at the French (...) house, and at Court and elsewhere; all the world as well as
himself could not but take notice of the great confluence of French papists in
London, and in part because of the Queens Court.

All this while there was no answer nor reference made by the King to the
petition, although he was informed by Secretary (...): and that the Duke of
Soubise was with the King in behalf of the said Churches, who told him, they
desired his Majesty that they might have a hearing, and he seemed to condescend
to it by some words he let fall.

But whatsoever the matter was whether it was the business of London Derry in
Ireland, between the Kings Majesty and the City of London, which employed the
Lords of the honorable Privy. Counsel so many days in the Star chamber,
being a matter of great importance and much pressed by the Kings Attorney
general, and so were hindered and had no leisure to hear the Churches case
and cause; or that the Archbishop who was powerful with the King, was the
Remora and hindered it, and that it was his Majesty's pleasure to put it off,
nay, not to have that matter so public, nor to have it debated in his presence
at the Counsell-Board, we know not.

The Churches seeing the time passed away and hearing of no answer, and
perceiving that the time of the execution of the injunctions approached. found
it necessary, that not all the Deputies of the Churches but the Deputies of the
three Churches only (...) Kent should tender a second petition to his Majesty,
for the respiting and deferring of the execution until their cause might be
heard. And although there were some of the company that thought it fitting the
petition should be given to his Majesty by the Deputies themselves, and that
some short speech should be made by mouth; yet it was thought fitter by the
most votes, that the Duke of Soubise who had tendered the first petition,
should be requested to tender this second petition to his Majesty, who without
doubt would bring an answer; whereas if the Deputies gave it, they might he as
long without an answer as they had been before; but if the Duke of Soubise
found it not fitting to do it, then to entreat one or two of the Gentlemen of
the Kings Bed chamber to tender it and if they refused to do it, as it may be
they (...) not tender it, least they should incur the Lord Archbishop's
indignation; then the Deputies themselves were to present it to the King, the
petition to be tendered, and the short speech to be made by J. B. The Deputies
went to Duke Soubise and beseeched him that he would continue his good
affection toward their Churches and those good offices he had begun, and that
he would be pleased to tender unto the Kings Majesty their second petition, and
if possible to have an answer, knowing that none of the Kings Subjects no not
any Nobleman would venture to do it, though some of them were familiar with
the King and gracious in his eyes, and affected the foreign Churches and
(...) them well, and told to some of the Deputies, that if their cause came to
a hearing before the King at the Counsell-board, they would speak their minds,
and do some good offices to the Churches, but durst not oppose the Archbishop
under board in that business, least they should incur the Kings indignation
for his sake, who was so potent and gracious with the King: The Duke of Soubise
Nobleman of a courteous disposition, who took to heart the cause of the
Churches, and pitied their case, was very willing to accept of that charge and
go to the King, and present him the petion; the Deputies offered to go with
him to the Court, if he thought good, according to the charge given them by the
Company, and wait on him, yea, and speak to the King if need were; but the Duke
found it not convenient they should go with him for some reasons, but went
himself even that day to the King, as having access unto him at any time,
waited in the chamber of presence the Kings return from dinner, and delivered
this petition unto him in writing.

The second petition of the three foreign Churches of Kent delivered to the
Duke of Soubise, beseeching his Highness that he would be pleased to present
it to the Kings Majesty.

To the KINGS most excellent Majesty.

The humble Petition of the foreign Churches of Canterbury, Sandwich and
Maidston:

Humbly showing to your sacred Majesty, that the time limited by the most
reverend Father in God the Lord Arch bishop of Canterbury his grace, concerning
the injuctions on Sunday next expireth, and your Majesty as yet has not
signified your pleasure upon their petition delivered about fifteen days past,
your sacred Majesty is most humbly prayed to give order that the execution of
the said Injunctions be respited and deferred until their cause may be heard,
as in all humility they desired: And as in duty bound, they will daily pray for
your Majesty's long and prosperous reign.

My Lord Soubise delivered this Petition unto the King, and desired his Majesty
to read it, which he did: the King answered him, Je ne puis fair cela; and
when the Duke said si vostre Majeste ne le fait point l'execution seta rude and
dure aux Eglises: his Majesty replied, l'execution ne seta pas si rude qu'ils
craignent, and many other words that passed in French between the King and the
Duke. So having taken his leave of the King, he told the Deputies what had
passed, who related it to the Synod.

The Company seeing the King gave no answer at all, or at least not dearly to
the Petition of prorogation of time, until his Majesty had leisure to hear
them; and that the time approached, and that there was no appearance to have
any other answer from the King, thought it convenient to send some of the
Company to my Lord of Canterbury (who seemed over-swayed the King) to know the
Kings mind and pleasure and his own (which was also the opinion of a
Counselor of State:) the Deputies therefore of the three foreign Churches
in Kent, whom it concerned primarily, by the advice and votes of the Sinod,
went to Sir Nathaniel Brent Vicar general, and told him that my Lord of
Canterbury gave them permission to go to the King, which they had done and now
came to him to know the Kings pleasure and answer; they told him besides that
they had studied the case better since they were with my Lord (for they had
kept the principal arguments in the rear) and desired to speak to him
again, and to show him some reasons which he had not seen as yet; they told
him also, that the time of the execution of the Injunction was near, to wit,
the first of March; that they could not return to their Churches at the
appointed time, because they had not as yet the Kings answer, and hoped that
their Churches might continue their accustomed order. Sir Nathaniel told them
that he would speak to my Lord about it, who was not so straight (...) for a
week or two. He went to my Lord on some occasion and returned, told them they
should do well to go to my Lord either at Whitehall or Lambeth to know his
pleasure concerning the time he would appoint to hear them. The Deputies went
to Lambeth and expected his coming from the Council somewhat late, for there
was a cry in the Hall, Hats off and lights, for my Lords grace is at hand:
where in the Hall they met my Lord, I.B. told him that his Vicar general had
told them that his grace was content to hear them again, and therefore they
came to know his pleasure, desiring a time when they might be heard. He told
them their motions did not please him, because they were not according to his
judgment; that he was full of business, and knew not when he should be at
leisure; but that Sir Nathaniel might pitch upon a probable time he might be at
leisure, and so dismissed them.

It might have been returned to him, his judgment did not please them,
because it was not according to their motion; but he held his peace. So when
the Archbishop said here above mentioned, that their Discipline and Bishops
were jure (...); they might have answered him, that though Bishops are indeed
jure divino; that is to say, Ministers who are Bishops are jure divino; yet
there is but one Archbishop jure divino, who is Christ, 1 Pet. 5.4. named there
the chief Shepherd; but though that was true, yet they did not use such
terms, because they had no order, and durst not go beyond the commission.
The Deputies sent word to the Vicar general my Lords mind; who esteemed
Saturday in the afternoon the fittest day. Doctor Primrose and I. B. went to
the Duke of (...) that day and there dined, where they had much discourse
together about that business; and the said Lord thought it were better not to
go at all there, had not the promise bin made to go there. So I. B. went from
thence by water to Lambeth, where he found the other Deputyes, and went
together to my Lord of (...) house, where was Sir Nathaniel Brent, according to
his promise; and where had been a religious Gentleman, who told my Lord many
things concerning his proceeding, and gave him wholesome counsel, and
mollified him in some measure.

My Lord received the Deputies courteously, and spoke to them kindly; but
before he would enter into the business, he told them he had something to say
to them; to wit, that he had heard say, that they had reported, that he had
said they had no ministry among them; and secondly, that he was very harsh and
would give them no hearing as indeed Doctor Primrose and J. B. had told to
diverse Lords, how harsh and discourtious he showed himself to the Deputies,
who came in the name of their Congregations. J. B. who was the foreman told my
Lord, that for the first they never heard from my Lords mouth those words
directly: and for the second, the words he used might be heard publicly, for
there was but a curtain drawn between them and the people that were there;
but my Lord said he would not insist thereupon, they presented unto him the two
papers containing the fundamentalls and reasons which he read, and said, as for
the Orders made by the Counsel they might be changed, and all was to continue
so long only as the King was pleased; and those reasons of State might be
presented to the Counsel. Many things passed to and (...) between my Lord and
the (...) they had told him heretofore which is there omitted in part, that in
case the Injunctions were observed there would be a persecution in France, for
they had heard that the Cardinal Richelieu should have said if a King, who is
a Protestant would not permit two disciplines in his kingdom, why should a
King of France a Papist permit two religions; besides they had told him there
were diverse hundred Papists converted by their Ministry, at least 600. Papists
that came from the Archdukes Country, that had been converted by their
Ministry in Canterbury, and renounced popery in the space of ten years, they
might have said a thousand in less then twenty years; that in the french
Church in London there were at one time 47. Papists that abjured popery; that
their Congregations were beneficial to the Engish, especially poor; that the
Congregation of the Dutch in Colchester who were 700. Communicants in number,
did employ 17000. English at work in and about Colchester, and that they of
Canterbury and Sandwich did set a great number of English at work: My Lord kept
the Fundamentals and reasons and took out of his pocket the two Injunctons, and
read them, and said, he never commanded the second Injunction about the
receiving the English Liturgy (translated into French) in their Churches; nay,
he said it was impossible it could be done at that time appointed, namely, the
first of March, especially in regard of the Dutch translation, he never minded
to tie the strangers to it, nor had given such order, but that the strangers
should hold their own Liturgy; and said, God forbid he should take away their
Liturgy or change their discipline, telling his Vicar-generall that he was
mistaken, and therefore changed the words of the Injunction, as we shall see
anon; notwithstanding Sir Nathaniel Brent could have showed my Lords hand to
both the Injunctions, and the Order above mentioned commanding the two
Injunctions to be observed. But my Lord said, as for the other Injunction he
would have it observed, namely, that the Natives Subjects to the Kings Majesty
should be members of the Parishes, and resort to them; he would not have them
to be mungrels (which was a harsh and (...) term, who knows what the word
Mungrell signifies, so that most Princes of Europe and their issue might be
taxed by that phrase.) It was told him that many went to the Parishes, heard
Sermons, which might suffice, and that if there were a command, they desired
that it might be a command without prohibition: he said, he would not change
his Injunction, and that would not hinder but that they might go sometimes to
the foreign Churches; and Sir Nathaniel Brent spoke to my Lord in their
behalf, and asked him if it would not suffice that the Natives went now and
then to the Communion, as once or twice a year: but my Lord would not permit
that, for he should find an inconvenience in that kind, as of those that put
on the Surplice once or twice a year.

A proposition was made unto him by Master Miller, about the Ministers of those
foreign Churches that were English borne, Whether they might continue in
their charge. He answered, he would not disturb those that were already in the
Ministry, but hereafter none should be admitted to be Ministers in their
Congregations but those that were strangers etc.

At last, the Deputies requested two things of my Lord: the one, that he would
conceive a good opinion of them: the other, that he would be a mediator
between them and the King (it was the advice of the Synod, for he had said. It
was the Kings will and command.) He said, that he had a very good opinion of
them, that they were honest and good men. And as for the second, he could not
be an intercessour for them, because he was the man that had set this business
on foot; but if they would make a Petition to him, he would tender it to his
Majesty. In fine, ready to dismiss them, he desired an uniformity in the
Church, asked the names of the Ministers, wished the Deputies as much good as
the greatest friends they had; prayed God to bless their Ministry and
endeavors; took his leave of them, and said, he would go to Service and
serve God.

The Deputies had occasion to thank God, being glad that the principal
Injunction was taken off, so were thofe of the Synod and the Duke of Soubise,
and my Lord Ambassador, and some Noble men of the Court of the honorable
Privy Council. As for the Deputies, they had occasion to rejoice for their
Churches good, that the Kalends of March were past (which Julius Casar did not
pass) and they and the Churches rejoiced, that the principal or moitie of the
Injunctions was taken away; Dimidium facti qui been caepit habet, and dimidium
plus toto: for the observation of that Injunction would have given a deadly
wound to the Churches, and made a shipracke of them. Qui venit hinc fluctus,
fluctus supereminet omnes, Posterior Nono est undecimoque prior. So that a
great number of the Strangers would have been endangered to have suffered
shipracke, and compelled to save themselves on boords like to Saint Paul at
Malta among the Barbarians.

As the Assembly rejoiced that one of the Injunctions was taken away, so were
they sorry that the other remained; which being observed: would in time
undermine the Churches and blow them up. And concerning a Petition mentioned by
my Lord about one degree, it was not thought fit to do it, as being very
prejudicial to the Churches, a thing that the Deputies could not do, not
knowing the resolution of their Churches, and whether they would submit and
subject themselves and their posterity. So the Deputies went to Sir Nathaniel
Brent, told him, they had been long absent from their Churches, and intended
by Gods grace to return to them, thanking him for all his favors showed
toward them, praying him to continue them.

In the mean time the Synod thought it fit to send some of their company to
thank diverse persons for their good affections toward them, and pains taken
for them: the Deputy were Doctor Primrese President, John Bulteel, and Master
Timotheus with two Elders, Master Lucie, and Master L'Amj, who went to the Duke
of Soubise and thanked his Highness for the pains he had taken for them, as
being the prime man under God who had labored the most, and most obtained for
the Churches, and desired him at his first occasion to thank the Kings Majesty
for his royal bounty and favor toward their Churches; he took it very
kindly, and promised them his help as much as lay in his power, and to go to
the King and thank him, and to pray him to continue his royal favor toward
the said Churches, especially touching the execution of that part of the
injunction, about the natives borne of the strangers and their children, that
they might not be liable to the observation thereof: They went also to my Lord
Joachimi Ambassador of the Estates of the united Provinces (with whom they
dined) and thanked him for his good counsel and advices; he told them his
affection was good, offered unto the Churches all kind of good offices and
services according to his power: They went to Secretary Cook and thanked his
Honor for all the good offices he had done in their behalf; who answered, Je
n'ay rien fait que mon debuoir vous troumtez le Roy fort gracious: They also
thanked Master Weckerlin in the name of the three foreign Churches of Kent,
and John Bulteel in especial in his Churches name, for his love and pains
taken for them; they were to thank others who were absent from Court, as my
Lord Chamberlain, and Sir William St. Ravi: the Deputies of the Churches of
London did undertake and promise to thank them at the return of my Lord
Chamberlain and St. Ravi, in the name of the Churches of Kent, and their own:
They met Sir Theodore Mayerne Knight, and the Kings prime Physician at Court,
and thanked him in like manner, etc. And J. B. thanked Master Burlamacht for
his pains taken in the behalf of their Churches.

Mean while Sir Nathaniel Brent sent to the Deputies of Kent to speak to them,
who went to him; he told them my Lord was not satisfied with their answer, they
were booted and ready to return for Kent, but he told them, they should do
well to speak to my Lord at Court, where they met Sir Nathaniel, who went to
my Lord with whom he was not long, because he went to the Chapel to hear the
Sermon; so he came to them as they were in the Court, and told them my Lord had
no leisure to speak to them any more, but gave him a command to enjoyne them
the observation of the Injunction touching natives on the first day of April,
which he told them openly in the Courtyard, in the presence of his own
Secretary, and of my Lord's general Aparitor, (whom he called as a witness
thereof) so seeing there was no means to have further audience of my Lord,
business creeping on him by the death of the Lord Treasurer that morning, they
took their leave of him, and returned to London, where they related to the
Synod what had passed; who counseled them that in no manner they should
publish the Injunction in their Churches, namely, that the natives should
resort unto the parishes where they dwell as absolute members of the
Congregations in the said parishes, because it tends to the destruction of
the said Churches, which they are bound to edisie; telling them also that if
the execution of the said Injunction were harshly prosecuted, that they should
certify the Coetus thereof, and they would speak to the Duke of Soubise, who
would go to the King and tell his Majesty of it, that he might remedy it
according to his royal promise, connselled them to go home with expedition
and follow their charges, March 13. 14. days So after thanksgiving to Almighty
God and mutual imbracings of one another in taking their leaves, the Synod
brake up, and the Deputies of Kent returned to their houses, Churches and
charges, to the comfort of their Churches and Families, and preached on the
Lord's day to their Congregation, with thanksgiving to God, to the edification
and joy of their flocks.

The Churches of Kent continued their ordinary course until the month of
April, and there was an intercourse of letters between some honorable friends
at London and the Ministers of Canterbury, who hoped matters would go well at
last, and the Injunction would dye of it self. But the Vicar-generall having
been at Norwich, and given an Injunction from my Lord to the two foreign
Churches, Dutch and French, concerning the natives, that they were to resort to
their parish Churches; the Ministers and Elders of the foreign Churches of
Canterbury and Sandwich were cited to appear before my Lords Commissioners in
his Consistory at Canterbury on April 13. where they appeared; where J. B. said
that it was the first time that ever they were in that place, namely, in the
Consistory in that manner, the Deane asked him whether he refused Episcopal
jurisdiction, whereunto he answered he desired him not to press that question,
they had appeared before my Lord heretofore; the Deane told them that the
Injunction was to be published in their Churches the next Sabbath day by the
Ministers; they desired to be excused, as being not their office to disperse or
dissipate their stocks, but rather to unite and preserve them; then the
Commissioners said, it might be done by the Elders; it was answered, that they
answered in their names, they could not do it, neither for the reason before
alleged, neither was there any such circumstance in the Injunction, that it
should be published by Ministers or Elders; then the Deane said, it might be
published by Master Somner or his son in the said Churches, whereunto the
Deputies answered, that they desired not that also, although they could not
hinder it; the Commissioners gave a charge to Master Somner to certify the
Ministers of the parishes, that they might receive all those that would come to
their parishes, being natives, and so departed.

Master Sumner gave to the two Elders of the two Churches, the declaration of
the Injunction in this form.

Decimo tertio die Aprilis 1635. coram venerabilibus viris Dominis Isaaco
Bargrave sacrae Theo'ogiae professore Decano Ecclesiae Ca hedralis and
Metropolicae Christi Cantuar. and Thoma Jackson sacrae Theologiae professore
(inter alios) Commissarijs reverendissimi in Christo (...) ac Domini Domini
Gulielmi providentia divina Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi and in visitatione sua
Metropolitica constitutis and loco Consistorij in Ecclesia praedicta
judicialiter and pro tribunali sedentibus; venerabilibus viris Dominis
Willielmo (...) sacrae Theologiae professore (...) (...). and Joanae Jeffrey
sacro etiam professore Theologiae, eis tune and ibidem assistentibus and
assidentibus present me Willielmo Somner (...) publico, etc.

Quibus die ac (...) dicti venerabiles viri cemmissarij tradidcrunt mihi
notario public (...) Injunctiones (...) reverendissimi Cantuariensis
Archiepiscopi praedicti Ecclesias Gallicas and Belgicas (anglice the Dutch or
Walloon Congregations) concernentes in praesentijs Magistrorum Joannis Bulteel
and Philppi Delme. Ecclesiae Gallica sive Wallonensis infra civitatem
Cantuariensem existentis, and Magistr: Gaspari, van Nierne Ecclesiae Belgicae
(...) Sandwicum constitutae (...) sive Ministrorum; (...) non in (...) (...) de
Bever and Quintin Galmar seniorum (uti (...)) Ecclesiae (...) apud
Cantuarienses, ac in (...) Petri (...) and (...) Rickeseys (...) (uti vocantur)
Ecclesiae Belgicae (...) (...): In quorum omnium praesentijs (...) public
dictis (...), per me notarium publicum ante dictum de mandato dictorum
Commissariorum (quarum quidem tenor sequitur and est talis. The two Injunctions
of William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning the Dutch and Walloon
Churches within his Diocese Anno 1635. That all the Natives of the Dutch and
Walloon Congregations in his Graces Diocessa, are to resort to their several
parish Churches of those parishes wherein they inhabit, to hear divine service
and Sermons, and perform all duties as parishoners required in that behalf:
2. That the Ministers and all others of the Dutch or Walloon Congregations
which are not Natives, and borne Subjects to the Kings Majesty, or any other
strangers that shall come over to them, while they remain strangers, may have
and use their own discipline as formerly they have done; yet it is thought fit
that the English Liturgy should be translated into French and Dutch for the
better fitting of their children to the English government. Dicti comissarij
peremptory and solemniter Monuerunt dictos Ministros sive Presbiterios ac
seniores dictarum respective Ecclesiarum ad conformand. se and congregationes
respective suas, quantum in eis est Injunctionibus praedictis, and ne oblivioni
tradatur vel errors sit abnoxium, decreverunt copias Injunctionum Praedictarum
eis respective tradendas, and eodem die tradiderunt ac etiam decteverunt
intimandum fore Ministris omnibus and singulis respective Ecclesiarum
parochalium infra civitatem Cantuar. and Sandwich pro receptione, dictorum
nativorum in Ecclesijs suis tanquam parochianorum, etc. praesentibus tunc and
ibidim praeter me notarium publicum antedictum venerabili viro Domino
Edwar-Master Milite, Willielmo Hammon generoso Willielmo Somner Juniore, and
multis alsis, etc.

Concordat cum actis Curiae facta examinatione per me Willielmum Somner
notarium publicum.

Presently after some of the English Ministers were very busy to publish in
their Churches the Injunction touching the Natives with threatenings by some of
the Churchwardens; that they would present those that did absent themselves
from the Parishes, going from house to house to admonish the Natives, yea to
command them, and which is more to threaten them which was above their
commission and more then was enjoined them to do by the act of the
Commissionors, who charged them only to receive those that would come to their
parishes. This kind of proceeding made the Church of Canterbury to write to
the Caetus or two (...) Churches of London; who returned an answer, that they
should do well to send Deputies to London to confer with them; whereupon the
Church of Canterbury intended to send but one Minister and an Elder (whereas
before they had sent both the Ministers) because they would not leave their
Church unfurnished of the Ministry and Preaching. So they chose John (...)
Minister, and an Elder. Mean while the two Ministers and others of the Church
of Canterbury went to the Major, who (...) some of the Aldermen were requested
to make a Petition in their behalf to my Lord of Canterbury, showing unto them
the inconveniences would (...) unto their Town and Corporation, by the
observation of the Injunction, especially in regard of the poor Natives, by
whom they would be very much charged. The Major and the Aldermen were very much
sensible of their case and of their own, embraced it with (...) and promised
to do what lay in their power in their behalf; and Petition my Lord not at
the strangers request, but as a thing which concerned themselves; and not by
Petition in writing only, but by some person gracious in my Lords eyes whom
they would employ in that business.

Whilst these things were a doing, above all expectation and hope Master
Somner came unto J. B at his house, told him he had a Letter from my Lords
Secretary, which he showed him; wherein he certified him that my Lord had
respited the observation of the Injunction to the first of July, whereof he was
glad; for although quod differtur non (...), yet there was some hope that
matters would go better. This was related to the French Congregation and the
Deputies did put off the voyage if not for altogether, yet at least for a time,
hopeing that cloud would pass over, as Ahanasius said of the persecution of
Julian the apostate Emperor, and the Churches might be at quiet. In the mean
time, it was thought fit, and now the time and opportunity seemed to be, that
the City should make a Petition to my Lord in the Churches behalf according to
their proffer and promise. So some of them went to the Major pressing him to
win time, and that in the opinion of some my Lord did as it were expect some
such thing; who promised to do it with as great speed as possibly he could,
and had confered with the Major of Sandwich who promised to concur with him
in a Petition to my Lord in that matter and manner, and to that end, and certes
vis unita fortior.

The Major of Canterbury sent the Petition to my Lord in these terms.

To the most reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
grace. The most humble Petition of the Major, and Comminalty of CANTERBVRY.

Tendering first all dutiful respect and thanks to your grace for at favors
(...) received, and in particular for your most (...) encouragement, that upon
all future just occasions, we should find your grace as formerly willing to
procure the good of our City. We are now (...) most humbly to entreat your
grace to be advertized of these following inconveniences, which will (...) fall
upon our poor city and upon the strangers themselves, by remitting them to
our Parish churches. First, a great number of Poor will fall upon our Parishes
keeping, who are now (...) without any burden to our Parishes, to the great
charges of the (...) both weekly and (...) for the clothing of them before
(...); which charge will fall especially upon those (...) where there are all
ready most poor and fewest men of ability to relieve them. Nerher shall the
poor strangers borne receive the usual help the remaining strangers being not
able without the contribution of the Natives to (...) them as usually; whereby
they likewise will prove chargeable to the English. And (...) of the poor
strangers shall be forced to (...) prove dangerous, the English poor being
(...) already to quarrel with them. And further, the restraint of the Natives
freed by these Injunctions from the orders of the congregation, by the church
and politic government from many disorders will fail, and many
inconveniences will (...), even in their way of trading, which we cannot
prevent and so the government of those trades by rules of the congregation will
have no force, to (...) of the overthrowing of diverse trades, in which no
English man in our (...) has ever had knowledge or interest: and the
congregation so (...) will not be able to contribute to the poor cities (...),
as (...) in good measure they have usually done, in all such things as concern
his Majesty's (...). Moreover, which is not the least many poor (...) women
boys, and girls shall not be employed as they are now in (...), winding,
drawing and other works, whereby to their great (...) relief they are now
daily exercised. We are informed that their yearly expenses about their (...)
their poor, is more (...) one (...) and three pounds, which (...) we are not
possibly able to raise (...) being already greatly oppressed with the (...) of
our poor. All which most humble manner we represent to your gracious
consideration, as a matter of as great importance to this city, as has fallen
out within the (...) of man. Most earnestly entreating your grace, that by your
most gracious mediation, his Majesty may be pleased to suffer as well the
Natives as the Aliens to (...) within the government of their own
congregation; wherein your grace (...) forever obleidge your graces servants
and petitioners, always to pray for your temporal and (...) happiness.

This Petition was sent by the Major to one who was in favor with my Lord and
gave it him; who said he would consider it and do according as he found it
fitting; and a while after sent an Answer to the Major of Canterburies Petition
who showed it to the Ministers of the French Church, and at their request gave
them permission to take a Copy thereof which they did and returned him the
Original. The superscription of the Letter was in this form.

To my very loving Friends, the Major and the rest of his Brethren of the Citic
or Canterbury these.

These were the Contents.

S. in Christo. After my hearty Commendations etc.
I Lately received a Petition from your self and your brethren, on the behalf
of the city of Canterbury, concerning the Dutch and the Walloon churches
there. And first I must let you know, that there is not one particular thing
mentioned in (...) your Letter or Petition, on the behalf of these Strangers,
which the Ministers af those congregations (when they were with me) did not
formerly (...); and I doubt not but you have known from them, what answer they
received from me, and that by order from the Kings (...) and the State: And
therefore you cannot expect but that to the same thing you must receive again
the same answer; yet because you should see I proceed not in this business,
but no on warrantable (...), and that I am ready to do you and the city as
much respect as I promised; I have again in open counsel (...) his Majesty
and the Lords with that which you have written, and how far it concerns the
city in general, as well as the strangers congregations and (...) commanded to
return you this Answer.

First, the Injunctions which I have made, concerning the strangers repairing
to their several parishes (I mean such as are natives, and with such
interpretation as I made to them when they were last with me) must stand in
force and be obeyed: As for the (...) which you desire may be taken into
consideration, you are to receive this Answer to them.

The first is, your fear that their poor will be cast upon you whereat you
have too many of your own: To this you must know, that the command of the
State expressly is, that though they do (...) themselves to the english
parishes, yet they shall contribute to their poor as they did before, and look
as well to them in all respects at least so long a till some other sitting
order can be taken; and they must not look being come in strangers hither, to
receive so much peace, and benefit by the State as they do, and not conform
themselves in those things which are required of them, as all strangers do in
all other parts of (...).

For the second that diverse of their trades will fule which are now unheld by
the rules of their congregations: That is grounded upon no reason at all for I
hope the congregation does not set rules to their several (...) while they are
at Church, nor make it any part of that service; and for any other meetings to
set rules to their trades or to do any thing else about them, there is no
Injunction that restraynes them from; neither need their resorting to their
several parishes any way hinder that: And whereas you add that no English,
man in your City has ever had knowledge or interest in those trades, the Lords
like that worse then any thing else and have reason so to do, for why should
strangers come here and enjoy the peace of the Kingdom, and eat the fat of the
land, and not (...) to teach such English as are apt and willing to learn the
(...) which they (...) and practice.

As for that which follows, namely that many poor English mome; boys and
girls shall not be employed as now they are in spinning winding; drawing, and
other work whereon to their great benefit and (...) they are now daily
exercised: There Is as little reason for that as for the former, for since
nothing in my Injunctions need out any the least (...) to their several (...),
all those women and children both may and must be (...) by them, as they
formerly were, for their trade cannot go on without such to work under them.

And last of all, you say, If the congregation be (...), they will not be abe
to contibute to the Cities charge, as heretofore they have usually done, and in
good measure upon all such occasions as concern his (...) service: there is no
more reason for that then for any of the rest, for so long as they live in the
City and (...) their trades, both Native and Alien must ratably serve the King
and the State; and I hope the repairing of the Natives to the English (...)
cannot take off any of (...) duty, and to the City it is all one so the
several (...) be paid, whether they be paid in a lump from the whole
congregation, or part from the particular men which are (...), and partly from
the congregation which remains yet as Aliens.

In all these respects, though I have at your (...) made known to his Majesty
and the Lords, all that you have suggested in your Petition; yet a Mediator for
you (...) cannot be in these particulars, which are so dis serviceble both to
Church and State; neither would I ever have made my Injunctions if I had not
formerly weighed them well, and found them sit to be put in practice.

(...) are therefore to let (...) know that my Injunctions must be (...), and
that I shall go (...) on with them, and therefore do hereby pray and require
you, the (...) and Governors of that city to second all these things in all
fair and due proceedings, for the (...) of uniforme government, as well
concerning those (...)-(...) as any other; and to let them to know, that this
is the resolution of the Lords as well as of my self; and I doubt not but that
the strangers themselves may live they and their posterity to (...) the State
for this care taken of them: so I leave you all to the grace of God, and rest

Lambeth. May 25. 1635. Your very loving Friend W. Cant.


This Answer was communicated to the French Congregation by their Ministers,
and in May the Deputies presented themselves before the Commissioners in the
Consistory, who were the Deane and Doctor (...), who told the Deputies, namely,
the Ministers of the three sorraigne Churches. (...), Sandwich and Maidston, of
the respit my Lord did give till the first of July if they desired it; who
answered they desired it and a longer respit too if it might be obtained; who
(...) they wished it might be in their power to do it, and so dismissed them.
The Deputies wrote to the Coetus in London how matters passed and thought it
sitting to send some to London; the Coetus returned their answer that they were
sorry to hear of my Lord's resolution (...) the (...) of the Churches in the
sending of their (...) and would be (...) to give them their best counsel and
help: The Deputies of Canterbury, Sandwich and Maidston went up to London, and
so much the (...), because the time would be quickly expired; the first day of
July was at hand; the King would go shortly his progress, and my Lord of
Canterbury would after the Term go to his House of Croydon; so they went to
the Assembly of the French and Dutch Ministers and Elders of London assembled
together in Coetus, and made a Narration of what had passed; the (...) couched
an (...) these terms: Master (...) ^ in the name of the French (...) of
Canterbury, that the Major of the said town had presented a Petition unto my
Lord (...) of Canterbury in favor of the said Church, unto the which he had
received no favorable answer. On this relation advice has been demanded of
this company what order they shall take and how they shall proceed to (...) the
churches under covert of the tempest, that threatens them; whereupon it (...)
been found good, to communicate all that which is past in ^ Lord the Duke of
(...) and to the Lord (...) Knight, Ambassador of the States of the united
(...) of the Low (...) and to entreat them to give their advice how they are to
govern themselves in these extremities; and to ask the said advice have been
named Mr. (...) Mr Gasparus Mr. Primrose Pastors, and Master Host and Master
(...) (...) Elders: Who went to the said Duke and Lord, and they advised the
Deputies of Kent to address themselves unto the King, and the said Lord Duke
offered himself to represent unto the King whatsoever they found good and
fitting: This relation being made to the (...) by the Deputies, it was thought
fit that they should go first to my Lord of Canterbury to give him a clear
interpretation concerning some (...) of the petition which was presented unto
him by the Major of Canterbury and to use such complements toward him as they
shall judge fit, using in the mean time such general terms without saying
any thing to the prejudice of their Churches.

On the 17. of June, the Deputies of Kent were with my Lord, there were diverse
waited to speak to him about business, J. (...). observed his time seeing my
Lord in a merry humor stepped to him accompanied with the Deputies my Lord said
he might well perceive he had much (...) and he would hold him long; who
returned to my Lord this answer that he would not hold him long, and contracted
his intended speech in these (...).

Most Reverend Father in God; We come to your grace tothank you most humbly for
the favor you have showed to our Churches, in giving them (...); we (...) your
Grace to be (...) to continue it, and permit them to enjoy those privileges
and (...) which they have had hitherto under our most gracious Sovereign;
(...) the which the families will be divided, the poor no, maintained, and the
Churches ruined.

But he interrupted him in the midst of his (...), and said, he would not call
back that which he had begun bat would go forwards with it, that he would not
put an heavier burden on them, then on the rest; and that he would go through
all England if he lived but of necessity must begin with them. Now because J.
R. saw that he might not be long with my Lord, he did contract his speech as
brlesly as possible he could, and told him that in the Petition which the Major
of Canterbury had made to his Grace there were two mistakings; the one touching
the trade amongst them as if no English man had knowledge or interrest in them;
whereas it was well known that they refused none to teach them the trades and
that many had learned the trade and French tongue among them: The other mistake
was the sum of (...) l. which notwitstanding was (...) l. which the Church
had expended on the poor of their Congregation that year, and that sometimes
they had spent 50 l. a month yea and more.

Concerning the ponre, it was told him, it was (...) they could be maintained
if the the Natives went to their (...); because, besides the seizing, there
were voluntary contributions the one at the Church do e at every meeting of
the Assembly to hear the Sermons, whether on the Lord's day or on the week
days; the other, extraodinary collections when the Churches were in arrerages:
He answered that the Scripture made not mention of any contribution at the
door of the Church and that there would and might be found another way
(whereas notwithstanding Saint Paul. 1 for. 16. 1 (...). speaks of collections
for the Saints upon the first day of the week and Christ, Mark 12.41. Luke
(...). 1, 2. fate over against the creafury, and beheld how people cast money
into the creafury, it was cast in a chest, such a one as (...) the Priest
caused to be made and lec as one comes into the house of the Lord where the
money was put in though to another end, 2 Kin. 12. 9. and a cartaine lame man
lay daily at the gate of the Temple which is called beautiful to ask alms of
them that entered into the Temple (...) 3. 2. for none was to appear before the
Lord empty, Exodus 23. 15. these things might have been told my Lord by them but
they found it no (...) to dispute. The Deputies told my Lord that the
Injunction would hinder the conversion of Papists strangers, who would not come
to their Churches, seeing that baptism would be wanting in the Church; he
said, they might come as well as before, but they should not be (...) for,
there were English men enough; if they came they should be conformable and as
or baptism that was all (...).

Master (...) Minister of the Dutch Church of (...) told him, that there were
many that went to the English Church and Communion; he said, he would see what
they would (...), and (...) they would do so or no.

Many passages were between my Lord and the Deputies; he said (...) was not
made of sower leaven nor did he this (...) envy or (...), but upon good
consideration and grounds.

He told the Deputies he had given them respit till the (...) of July of his
free will and would not have them to (...) he (...) in the business, for he
did mean to go through (...) with it; (...) he did it because they shauld not
think they had not time enough given them, he would go a fair way with them
if they did as they should: And because there had been some mistakings, and
they might know his (...) and have the (...) he would commit the business to
no (...) but leave it to his Vicar-generals (...).

John Belteel told him the first day of July did approach; he told him for
fear of mistakes, he would have nothing done till Sir (...) Brent's return,
were it till the last of August: after some discourse he spoke to my Lord
concerning the first of July again and again, who answered, he was not so
(...) for a day, if Sir Nathaniel came not (...) the last of September it
should not go forwards; he replied that that was not (...), for if Master
Somner had no present order from him, he would put the Injunction in execution,
and durst not do otherwise; and therefore he desired his Grace to commend
Master Dell his Secretary, to write a Letter to Master Somner about that
business and respit; my Lord commanded his Secretary to do it; so the
Deputies taking their leaves of him, he said God bless you. The Deputies
related unto the (...) whereupon the Company thought it fit that the Deputies
should return to their (...), and there (...) for the return of (...)
Nathaniel Brent; the Deputies made a relation of all the passages hereto fore
mentioned unto my Lord the Duke of Soubise and my Lord Ambassidour, and some
other Lords, (...) and Gentlemen and so departed.

Our purpose is not to speak of the other foreign Churches in England (...)
of (...), the Bishop of the (...) speaking (...) to the (...), saying it were
(...) their Congregations should be (...) then the Church of England should
(...) its glory, and for the poor, who sent for them; nor to speak of the
Congregations of London or others, but only of the three foreign of Kent,
which my Lord primarily and principally did question and assault; and who were
like David's three Worthies, who endured the greatest (...), stood in the gap,
were in the front, received the blows and bare the reproaches, and did what
they could to save and deliver the Churches from the (...) and thraldom
whereunto my Lord intended to subject them: whereas the other Churches were but
in the rear, who although they were honorable worthies and mighty, and came
to the (...) yet (...) attained not unto the first three, 2 Samuel 23 8 19.23 But
to (...) to the point, the Deputies of Kent took leave of the (...) and
returned home every one to his Church and house. About that time J. (...)
received diverse letters from diverse learned men from beyond the seas, as from
Master de Moulin, Master Polyander, Master Festus Hommius, Master Bugnet, and
others in French and in Latin: Wherein one deplores the condition of the
foreign Churches, and (...) the rigor wherewith they were troubled, and
prayed God to remedy it by his holy (...), another, that God would dispose the
heart of my Lord Archbishop to follow the ways of wildness; a third, that
men's (...) are in God's hand who turns them as the rivers of waters, where
and when he will; Balaam goes with an intention to curse, but God turns his
words into blessings; Saint Paul goes to Damas with bloody designs but God
changes him, and and of a persecutor makes him an Apostle a Paster, and of a
Wolf becomes a Lamb: Another writes thus, (...) vestrarum nove edicto non
tantum pacem (...), (...) and statum (...) ex animo dolemus; Coe erum an nulla
affulget spes tanti (...): Nos quidem sperare jubet (...) clementia, and (...)
as vestra qua non desinet, omnem movere lapidem, ut ^ Deus optimus (...) buic
vestro (...) clementer benedicat: others (...) God that (...) the tempestuous
winds and dangerous tempest to cause a shipwreck; even he who has appeased in
some sort this tempest, will if he please let you enjoy an assured calm, and
will chide the winds that have raised this (...) me; and such like things, and
to the said purpose and end. So that the persecution was divulged in many parts
of Europe, and the foreign Churches had the good wishes and prayers of many
beyond the seas for a good and happy issue; (...), and of many godly Ministers
and others zealous persons in England; the Deputies telling diverse of them that
they did what they could, not only for the good of their own Churches, but
for the good of the English Churches also, theirs being a leading case, for if
their Churches were blown up, the English would in time sink, and their
Pastors persecuted, if (...) do (...) things in a green tree, what shall be
done in the dry? if such things be done to the foreign Churches who have
patent privileges and (...) and promises from such great Princes for
themselves and their posterity, in regard of their Discipline, exempted from
the subjection of (...) bishops and Bishops; what can the English Churches
expect subjected to the power and authority of Prelates? nay what can they not
expect but multiplication of Ceremonies innovation in rites introduction of
Popery, Socinianisme, Arminianisme, profanation of the Lords day, new Canons
and oaths; persecution, banishment and branding suspension imprisonment and
fining of those godly Pastors that will not submit their necks to that slavish
yoke of Babylon, and drink of the cup of abominations of that purple whore of
Rome, and enchantments of Jezabel.

A while after the (...) of (...) found it fitting to think of a fit time of a
fast and press it; the occasions thereof being many, the afflictions of
Germany, Hannaw being besiedged matters not going very well in the Low
Countries, Skinsken-skonce taken by the (...) a place of great importance and
as it were the Key to come into Holland; the neighbor Churches in France, as
(...) and Mark (...) very much diminished if not dissipared; and other
occasions both in (...) of others and especially of themselves in the fear,
apprehension and appearance of the dissipation and dispersion, if not of the
ruin of their Churches. In particular there was an act made in the last Synod
at London in these terms; It is lift to the discretion of the (...) of the
foreign Churches of London to write between this and October to the
particular Churches, what they think concerning the indiction of a Fast, and
upon the (...) of the said (...) the (...) shall indict the said Fast according
to the plurality of Votes gathered out of the Letters of the said churches.

My (...) Vicar-generall returning to Canterbury caused the Governors of the
stranger Churches of Canterbury and Sandwich to be cited to appear on the
Saturday next in the Consistory. Some of them went to him, and desired they
might not appear in the Consistory; who told them that it was a thing that was
to be done in public, and that the Commissioners knew my Lords resolution, so
they went to the Cathedral at the appointed time. They found the Commissioners
descending down the Consistory the Vicar-generall telling them he was content
to declare unto them the charge he had from my Lord not in the Consistory but
in the Church where assembled diverse persons about (...), and heard what was
said unto them; where he told them the sum of the charge, showed them the
publication of (...) Iniunction of those of Norwich (who had caused or
permitted it already to be read in their Churches, with more hafte then good
speed) that they might take a copy of it and cause such a one or the like to be
published in their Churches. Among other things Master Sumner thought that it
was to be published is it was at Norwich and that was said to have been done
by the Ministers. (...) the Ministers answered, that they desired as (...) to
be excused in that point, as being a thing contrary to their Office; for the
duty of Ministers is to endeavor the union, edification, and increase of their
flocks; and not to publish that which would tend to their discipation or
(...): they added another reason that seeing the two Ministers of Canterbury
were of the first degree of Natives, there was no reason they should publish a
thing against reason, yea nature; (...) declare their children were to go to
(...) Parish-churches, and not to the French Church to hear their Fathers
(...). Afterward the Deputies of (...) came to Canterbury and they with the
(...) of Canterbury went to Sir (...) and told him, that seeing a Declaration
was of (...) to be published they intended to have it done, they of Sandwich by
their (...), and (...) of Canterbury by Master Anthony (...) and Scribe to the
Politic (...), seeing it could not be done (...) some (...) of the Spiritual
Court; and that not on the next Sabbath day being a Comman on day but on the
Lords day after: wherewith he was contented. Then they desired of him, that
they might not be more (...) nor (...) the Officers in his absence, then the
English were; and that none should be molested before he had notice of it: he
consented to it, and gave charge to Master Sumner to (...) to it, who promised
to observe that order.

They requested also Sir Na haniel to continue his favor toward them: He told
them he had done what was in his (...) for them and had spoken so much for them
that my Lord was awondered and in a manner (...), that he was more for the
foreign (...) then for his (...) and (...): he had told his grace, that the
Ministers were his (...) friends religious and peaceable men, and there were
diverse (...) and Gentlemen his honorable friends had spoken to him in their
(...) and he could do no less; his grace might do what he pleased; so they
thanked him again and took their leaves of him.

Immediately after Master Sumner sent them this Injunction in these terms.

Vicesimo sexto Septembris 1635. coram venerabili (...) Domino (...) Brent
milite, legum Doctore, E. Registro curiae com. Archiepiscopaliscantuar. Extract.
reverendissimi in Christo patris ac Domini Domini Guilielmi providentia divina
Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, etc. vicario in (...) generali and coeteris ejus
(...) in Ecclesia Christi (...). hora (...) convenientibus praesente Willielmo
Somner Notario Publico, etc.

QVibus die and loco Ministris and (...) tam Ecclesia gallica five (...) apud
Cantuariam nosiram, quam Ecclesie (...) apud (...) vicos constitut. coram (...)
antedictis personarum (...). Reverendissimi Cantuariensis (...) ulteriorem
voluntatem in hoc negotio dictus vicarius (...) generalis sequentia a Domino
Archiepiscope ante dicto nuper (...) eisdem ministris and senioribus (...) and
in mandatis dedit, viz. Quod omnes and singuli alienigenae Congregationum
respective suarum, and ab eis infra primum gradum descendentes, ordires (...)
disciplinam, cateraque privilegia antehac Congregationibus, respective (...)
authoritate regia impertita and concessa licite retineant. (...) omnes (...)
Congregationum suarum ab eisdem Congregationibus discedant Ecclesiis
parochialibus and capellis paraeciarum, quas respective incolant sese
conserentes liturgiae disciplina totique Ecclesie Anglicanae politiae (quatenus
se concernant) cum cateris Domini nostri Regis subditis in omnibus (...) and
conformantes. Ita tamen quod sustentationi, ministrorum and egenorum dictarum
suarum Congregationum nihilominus remaneant (...): Quibus fic declaratis dictus
vicarius generalis (...), quod eadem omnia Congregationibus respective suis cum
ea quae (...) poterit matura celeritate publicent seu publicars faciant, sei
sos etiam eisdem submittant ac populum dictarum suarum Congregationum quoad
possunt consimilem (...) praestare suadeant, and Revendissimum Dominum (...)
praedictum inde certificent seu certificari curent. Praemissa omnia and singula
Ministro and (...) Belgicae apud Maidston (...) in similibus (vel fama test)
communieant, intimantes ut (...) in dicta ecclesia fiat, Et sic intimatur eis
cura and studio (...) Domini (...) pro little tuto (...) and quieto progressu in
occupationibus suis (...) eis per protectionem regiam (si (...) fuerit)
obtinendam, firmando (...) Commissarij eosdem ministros and seniores cum seria
and (...) ad obedientiam suam in hac part alacriter exhibendam decedere
permiserunt and dimiserunt. (...) tunc and ibidem (praeter not arium publicum
antedictum) Henrico Jenken. Willielmo Somner juniore, and Thoma Wilcoxon
notarys publicis, and multis alijs testibus literatis, etc.

Concordat cum Originali Willielmus Somner Registrarius.

But what reason had the Archbishop to make a division in many families and a
divorce between the parents and children in the public exercises of Religion?
and what equity and justice was there to enjoin yea compel them to contribute
to the Churches whereof they might be no members, to cause them to be of the
English parishes, and contribute to foreign Churches, let the world judge?

After Sir Nathaniel's departure from Canterbury, the Company (...) the
Declaration in French, according as they found it fitting omitting some things
that were in the Norwich Declaration; it was published by Master Anthony the
Notary on the Lords day October. 11. in the afternoon after Sermon and prayer
before the Psalm sung in the French Church, which is thus translated into
English.

Beloved in the Lord,

(...) are a (...) that the worshipful Commissary, Sir Nathaniel (...) with
other Commissioners of my Lord of Canterbury his Grace, has commanded in the
name of the said Lord Archbishop, with approbation of his Majesty and of his
most honorable Privy-Counsell to signify unto you.

That it is not his Majesty's intent, nor of the Counsel of State to dissolve
our congregations.

And to that end his Majesty is content to permit that the Natives of the first
degree to continue members of our congregation as before; but the Natives in
this church after the first descent, are enjoined to obey my Lord Archbishops
Iniunction, which is to conform themselves to the english discipline and
(...), every one in his parish; without inhibitting them not (...), but that
they may resort sometimes to our Assemblies.

My Lord Arch bishop of (...) Grace, means notwithstanding that the (...)
Natives shall continue to contribute to the maintenance of the (...) and of
the poor of the church for the subsisting thereof; and (...) to obtain an
(...) from the (...) if (...) be, and they require it (...) them (...) their
manufactures against those that would trouble them by informations.

All which is notified unto you, that none may pretend ignorance and thereby
fall into inconveniences.

Now although the Archbishop would make the world believe that what he did was
by command of the King and State, yet it might easily appear that he was the
(...) and primum mobile or all the designs. J. B. wrote a word or two to Master
Gasparus, minister of the Duth Church of Sandwich about some particular
business, and gave him a touch what they had done about the Declaration,
deuring him to certify him what they had done, and to send him their
Declaration, else they should be feign to give theirs alone to Master Sumner,
and translated into (...) according to his desire: who answered, that they had
done at Sandwich as had been done at Canterbury on the same day and the same
manner, adding nothing nor taken any thing away, nor changed a word; (...)
translated the Declaration that was sent them into Franch for a (...) or model
into Dutch; thinking it was not needful to write, having promised to publish
it. So the Declaration of the Injunction was delivered in English to Master
Sumner by two French Elders, in the name of both the Churches.

Some two months after, the Churches subsisting in peace a small time, there
were some (...) either ignorant or malictous, no great good wishers to the
stranger Churches, desirons to curry favor with my Lord, or otherwise who
might perhaps have a charge to learn whether the Injunction was obeyed; for
Doctor (...) on one of the Commissioners, read a letter to the Ministers from
the Vicar general, (...) he wrote that my Lord was infolmed that his
Injunction was not obeyed and therefore commandeo some of the Dutch Church of
Sandwich and of the French of Canterbury to be cited to appear in a (...)
manner in his Consistory at Canterbury and to have the Deane and some Prebends
there present; and if the Relation were (...) that the Injunction was not
observed nei her at Sandwich, and much (...) at Canterbury that the Minis ers
should be (...) and the Church (...) shut up, etc. The two Ministers of the
French Church told him that they were sorry that my Lord was so (...) in (...),
and that he used such threa nings, as if they were (...) or (...) of any such
consure, or that my Lord had any such power and authority to do any such thing
to them, who had (...) them (...) that he would not (...) with theirChurches
but only with those that were Natives and the Kings Subjects, and there was no
more reason that they the Ministers should be silenced or the Elders (...), if
those that were Natives came to their Church, no more then (...) Ministers
should be silenced (...) church, wardens censured, or the doors of churches
shut up (which was never seen nor executed) because some of other (...) came to
their churches; that the publication had been made openly in the (...) on the
Lords day in the audience of the congregation, that the Ministers were not
guilty of their (...), who as sheep desired to hear the voice of their old
Pastors, understanding better the French then the English tongue, diverse of
them besides living in parishes where were no Sermons at all, the Ministers
whereof some could not preach at all, some would not or very rarely, and they
might come as well to the French church as to any other parish that was not
their own, that it was not for them to present those that did not obey but the
church wardens of the parishes where they dwelt were to do it: that Sir
Nathaniel Brent had been entreated not to treat theirs worse then the English,
that he had promised none should he presented before he had notice of it, that
this informing of my Lord by such malicious (...), who did it to ingratiate
themselves with my Lord, and my Lord's facile credit to such rumors and his
menaces with (...) and ands were a great deal more then a presentment, and
many other things that were said at that time with much eagerness: the Doctor
told them he was sorry that matters went so, he was but a commissioner and
servant to my Lord, told them some passages that had happened between my Lord
and their Cathedrallchurch. About the same time J. B. visited the Major of the
City, who had been at Landon and at Lombeth with my Lord, and enquired of him
if my Lord had made any (...) of their church, who answered, that by occasion
he spoke of them, saving his patience was abused, which was conceived by the
Major to be said in regard of the Injunction, and was thought by him that my
Lord had an a king tooth against them. In the mean time J. B. wrote to one of
the court, relating what had happened, who speaking to S. C. about it, said he
knew not what to say of it as for himself he (...) the worst but hoped the
best; and in his letters a while after wrote that (...) he nor others had heard
any thing of the affairs, so that he hoped the churches should have a calm
and serene Air after some storms and cloudy days past, or at least should
gain time (...) ^.

In the month of (...) (...). Sir (...) Brent came to Canterbury where he sent
for the (...) of the several (...) of the City (...) of them if the Injunction
was observed and obeyed by the (...) English that were of the second descent;
telling them that my Lord had been informed that it was not kept as it ought
to be: most of them or all returned their answer, that it was obeyed as far
as they could perceive, that they that were of their Parishes came to their
Churches: He asked one of the Ministers if he would set his hand to that; he
said he would sign such a writing, if he required it, but it was not pressed.
The French Ministers were somewhat moved to see that there were so many
misinformations, and that my Lord should so easily believe every false rumor;
for except there were some Promoters or pick-thankes in every Church, who could
know it? one man could not be at one time in all the Parishes to see; and which
is more, to know every stranger native; to know the number in every Parish, and
to know whether they were there or no; none could better inform my Lord or Sir
Nathaniel Brent, then the Ministers and Churchwardens of the Parishes and
complained to Sir Nathaniel Brent of it, who went to London, where he caused
the stranger Churches of London, French, Dutch, and others, to appear before
him at Bow Church; but of that Visitation we intend not to write.

About the same time the Congregation of Sandwich was troubled by one of the
Ministers, who went to diverse that were in his Parish that were strangers by
descent, but borne in England, and that of the first dedegree; and told them,
about a fortnight before Easter, that they were to come to his Communion
according to my Lords order and pleasure; but Master Gasparus the Minister and
the Elders of the Dutch Congregation sent, and part of them went to their
houses, told them (...) they were not bound to do it, that there was no such
order given bv my Lord, that those that were of the first degree were to go to
the Dutch Church and to the Communion, and not commanded to go (...) English
Church and Communion, and need not fear his threatenings.

A while after there were some supercilious and (...) Ministers and
churchwardens in Canterbury that dealt (...) with some of the Natives beyond
the Order and commission and did (...) Natives in their Parishes by menaces and
threatenings; among others the churchwardens of one of the parishes, in an
imperious and threatening style sent a note to the (...) Householders and
Masters of families of their Parish.

1 We hereby signify, that we have (...) you of the French and Walloon
Congregation, and that are strangers inhabiting in our Parish, whether lately
come over, or of the first and second descent; for this time to pay for the
(...) and adorning of our Church, and necessary (...) thereunto belonging the
sum of five pounds ten shillings (...), which we desire you to (...) among your
selves, because you best know your own estates, and say to us the
churchwardens before next Saturday (...) at six of the clock. And if this you
neglect to do, then we give you notice to appear in the north chancell of our
church next Lords day, immediately after evening prayer, to see your selves
sessed according to our discretions.

2 On saturday night next we desire the names of all married persons in your
congregation of the second descent, that are inhabitants in our Parish, that we
may take order for decent seats for them, as they shall signify their estates
and qualities to be.

3 Then we also entreat the names and ages of those unmarried in our parishes
of the second descent, and whose children and servants they he; to the end, we
may take care of their due resort to our hurch, being (...) and communicating
there according as their several age require.

4 That those of sixteen years and upwards, that have not this Easter time
already communicated, prepare themselves to receive the blessed Sacrament in
our Church next Lords day, and so thrice in the year afterward, as the Canons
of our church require, as they will avoid (...) to their ordinary for their
neglect therein.

5 We admonish friendly and entreat you that are Parents and Masters of
Families of the first and second descent, henceforth duly on the Lord's day,
half an hour before evening prayer, to send your men, children and (...),
under sixteen, to be catechized according to the order of our Church, as you
your selves upon presentiments will answer for their absences.

April the 15. 1639.

But what the reason was that the first Churchwarden, or both, were more
forward and strict then the rest of the Town, is not known, whether their
blind zeal to uphold the ceremony of the English Church or knew water would
come to their Mill by presentiments, or would curry favor with my Lord or were
set on it by some of his followers, or show their power and authority
(Magistratus indicat virum) and to make the parish know what they should expect
of them in their office; yet vana sine (...) ira, it is good a cursed Cow has
short horns; for a few days after there was an election of new Churchwardens,
the one of them hoped to continue in his office but whether the parish
perceived he would be a busy body and intended to do some fine design, he was
outed of his place, and another chosen in his stead; so (...) strangers of that
parish, though threatened were not pressed to it nor presented, but had their
(...) est, and the other strangers also for the time. For the Archbishop who
had many Irons in the fire, did not only trouble the three foreign Churches
of Kent, and the other foreign Churches in (...), but did vex the English
Churches, advancing superstitious Ceremonies and innovasions, by secret (...)
and open violent persecutions having a design to do the like in the English
Churches and Regiments in the united Provinces of the States General. He had
an intention to introduce it in Ireland where he was (...) totum (even when he
was Bishop of London) having the Lord Deputy, Counsel, Bishops and Clergy at
his own devotion: And as soon as he was Archbishop, he began to put on his
Masterpiece (...) Scotland, in imposing upon them a popish Service book, the
Hellena of Greece, and cause of all these controversies and fuel of this fire,
who supposed his authority not surely settled, nor fully confirmed until
Scotland were conformed; but God raised the (...) of that Nation to oppose it
with zeal, indignation and courage; a woman Dux foemina (...), leading the
dance: Whereupon they proclaimed them Rebels and Traitors and an Army speedily
raised to enforce them to obedience (the (...) popish Clergy and Papists,
instigating the King to this war, and contributing very largely, so that it
might be called bellum Episcopale and Papale.)

This caused the religious and valiant Scots to raise an Army in their own
defense, and when the two Armies were ready for a bloody encounter, God who is
the Lord of Hosts and God of peace the Stickler and Umpire of both Armies, did
cast down his Warder; whereupon a friendly pacification ensued to the joy
(...) both Nations. But the Archbishop of (...), did mightily (...) against it
as a dishonorable disgraceful and dis-advantagious peace to King and Kingdom,
caused the King to break his promise and to renew the war imitating Julian
the Cardinal, who (...) Ladislaus King of Hungary to break the (...) with
Amurath the Turkish Ottaman, fought a battle with that Emperor, and lost his
Army and life, for both the (...) King and that Popish Legate Jnlian were
slain. The King called a Parliament to have supplies toward the maintenance
of that war, which by the jealousies and fears of the Archbishop and such
(...), was dissolved to the amazement and grief of the Subjects: but God who
turns all to the good of his children, turned that dissolution to the benefit
and safety of the Kingdom, so that England might say with Themistocles, My
children, we had been undone if we had not (...) undone: For had that
Parliament continued, it had in all appearance afforded twelve Subsidies which
would have fomented that unnatural war, and in (...) would have made a (...)
quarrel, though otherwise then the Parliament did intend: And that Parliament
in all likelihood would have been contented with a superficial reformation of
the Service Book of prayers, of the Civil and Commission Court, of the
exorbitancy of Bishops, of the irregularity of the Star Chamber etc. as Luther
at the beginning intended only to cry down the base sale of indulgences and
(...) of pardons and go noe farther.

Now the Scots seeing the precedent Parliament (...), the Kings ear stopped,
he could, he would not hear any Petition, from them; entered this Kingdom with
a strong Army as far as Newcastle, not with a sword and trowall, but with a
sword and a Petition; not pressing on the Army, though having opportunity and
advantage, publishing their Declaration, and sending their Petition to his
Majesty for justice in their innocent cause against their violent enemies: The
King, whose heart was in the hand of God as the Rivers of water, to turn it
which way he pleased, embraces and entertaineth good counsel at York, where a
Treaty was agreed and a cessation of arms, and a (...) called, which may be
named a healing Parliament, a Parliament which works wonders.

In this Parliament the Archbishop of Canterbury was impeached of high Treason,
and sent to the Tower; to whom might be said that which was spoken to Stephen
Gardener Bishop of Winchester coopt up in the Tower in King Edward the sixth
his days, by the religious Duchess of Suffocke; It is merry with Lambs when
the Wolf is shut (...). The Archbishop had a long time to repent, had his
grace had the grace to do it; he was not like Sir Thomas Palmer who on the
(...) on Tower Hill (where he suffered in Queen Mary's days) thanked God that
he had caused him to learn more in one little dark corner of that Tower, then
ever he learned by any travel. The Archbishop did not confess his sin as
Achan (who troubled all Israel) did to (...) and gave glory to God: he was
according to his (...) beheaded the axe making a divorce between his head and
body (...), and by the just judgment of God who has occasioned a divoce
between the King the head and his faithful Subjects the body.

A young Martyr at the stake (...), and said, (...) of God shine upon me; and
immediately it shone out of a dark cloud, at the (...) of this young (...),
that the (...) was constrained to look another way: but here, immediately
after the (...) of the (...) and death of this old Impostor and Traitor the
(...) did shine, the curtain of the clouds drawn open and the Son of God
the Savior of the world seemed to be pleased with that act of justice, but
God's justice on offenders goes nor always in the (...) path nor the same
pace; sometimes the Guest in the Inn goes quietly to bed, before the reckoning
for his supper is brought to him to discharge, others pay it before they go to
bed. (...) who dyed exemplary a strange death, his pains, says Austin,
increases in hell, according as his (...) increased on earth, sed nolo (...)
esse, we will not enter into Gods private Closet, (...) or dive into his Privy.
Counsel: Lackeys that hold their Masten horses before the Palace of justice,
are not to dispute of the causes and sentences of judgment.

Austin says, Misericordia Dei inter pontem and (...): My friend judge not me,
I judge not thee; betwixt the stirrup and the ground, (...) I asked, (...) I
found. So might the Archbishop find (...) the Axe and the Block. Howsoever, he
a tumbling and a stumbling block is taken out of the way, and removed from
troubling the State and the Church: and we leave him to his Lord, Master and
Judge, before whom he stands or falls.

April 15. 1645. Imprimatur JAMES CRANFORD.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 6 line 9 (...) read (...). l. 16 (...) r. (...) p. 11 l. 13 Major
Bourmouth r. Major and Bourmouth. p. 15 l. 27 (...) r. (...). p. 29 l. 1 (...)
(...) Majesty. p. 29 l. 23 (...) r. (...) p. 32l. 15 (...) r. (...). p. 36 l.
38 (...). r. (...) p. 39 l. 21 seizing r. (...). p. 40 l. 27. (...) r. (...).


