AN ESSAY UPON POETRY.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh at the Black-Bull in (...) near the Royal
Exchange, 1682

AN ESSAY UPON POETRY.
OF Things in which Mankind does most excel,
Nature's chief Masterpiece is writing well;
And of all sorts of Writing none there are
That can the least with Poetry compare;
No kind of work requires so nice a touch,
And if well done, there is nothing shines so much,
But Heaven forbid we should be so profane,
To grace the vulgar with that sacred name;
It Is not a Flash of Fancy which sometimes
Dasling our Minds, sets off the slightest Rimes;
Bright as a blaze, but in a moment done;
True Wit is everlasting, like the Sun;
Which though sometimes beneath a cloud retired,
Breaks out again and is by all admired.
Number, and Rhyme, and that harmonious sound,
Which never does the Ear with harshness wound,
Are necessary, yet but vulgar Arts,
For all in vain these superficial parts
Contribute to the structure of the whole
Without a Genius too, for that is the Soul;
A Spirit which inspires the work throughout,
As that of Nature moves this World about;
A heat that glows in every word that is writ,
That Is something of Divine, and more than Wit;
It self unseen, yet all things by it shown,
Describing all men, but described by none;
Where do thou dwell? what caverns of the Brain
Can such a vast and mighty thing contain?
When I at idle hours in vain thy absence mourn,
O where do thou retire? and why do thou return,
Sometimes with powerful charms to hurry me away
From pleasures of the night, and business of the day?
Even now too far transported I am fain
To check thy course, and use the needful rein;
As all is dullness, when the Fancy's bad,
So without Judgment, Fancy is but mad;
And Judgment has a boundless influence;
Not upon words alone, or only sense,
But on the world, of manners, and of men,
Fancy is but the Feather of the Pen;
Reason is that substantial useful part,
Which gains the Head, while the other wins the Heart
Here I should all the differing kinds rehearse
Of Poetry with various sorts of Verse;
But who that task can after Horace do?
That mighty Master and Example too?
Echoes at best; all we can say is vain,
Dull the design, and fruitless were the pain;
It Is true, the Ancients we may rob with ease,
But who with that sad shift himself can please,
Without an Actor's pride? a Players Art
Is more than his who writes the borrowed part.
Yet modern Laws are made for later Faults,
And new Absurdities inspire new thoughts;
What need has Satyr then to live on theft,
When so much fresh occasion still is left?
Folly abounds, nay flourishes at Court,
Where on its sphere it finds a kind support;
But hold, White Hall has nothing now to fear,
It Is Wit and Sense that is the Subject here.
Defects of witty Men deserve a Cure,
And those who are so, will the worst endure.
First then of Songs, that now so much abound,
Without his Song no Fop is to be found,
A most offensive Weapon which he draws,
On all he meets, against Apollo's Laws:
Though nothing seems more easy, yet no part
Of Poetry requires a nicer Art;
For as in rows of richest Pearl there lies
Many a blemish that escapes our Eyes,
The least of which Defects is plainly shown
In some small Ring, and brings the value down;
So Songs should be to just perfection wrought,
Yet where can we see one without a fault;
Exact propriety of words and thought?
The expression easy, and the fancy high,
Yet that not seem to creep, nor this to fly;
No words transposed, but in such just cadance,
As, though hard wrought, may seem the effect of chance;
Here, as in all things else, is most unfit
Bawdry barefaced, that poor pretense to Wit;
Such nauseous Songs as the late Convert made,
Which justly call this censure on his Shade;
Not that warm thoughts of the transporting joy,
Can shock the Chastest, or the Nicest cloy;
But obscene words, too gross to move desire,
Like heaps of Fuel do but choke the Fire.
That Author's Name has undeserved praise,
Who palled the appetite he meant to raise.
Next, Elegy, of sweet but solemn voice,
And of a Subject grave, exacts the choice,
The Praise of Beauty, Valor, Wit contains,
And there too often despairing Love complains.
In vain alas, for who by Wit is moved?
That Phoenix she deserves to be beloved.
But Noisy Nonsense, and such Fops as vex
Mankind, take most with that fantastic Sex.
This to the praise of those who better know,
The many raise the value of the few.
But here, as I too often alas have tried,
Women have drawn my wandering thoughts aside.
Their greatest fault, who in this kind have writ,
Is neither want of words, nor dearth of wit;
But though this Muse harmonious numbers yield,
And every Couplet be with fancy filled;
If yet a just coherence be not made
Between each thought, and the whole model laid
So right, that every step may higher rise,
As in a Ladder, till it reach the Skies;
Trifles like these perhaps of late have past,
And may be liked awhile, but never last;
It Is Epigram, it is Point, it is what you will,
But not an Elegy, nor writ with skill,
No Wallers
Panegyric, nor a Coopers-Hill.
A higher flight and of a happier force
Are Odes, the Muses most unruly Horse;
That bounds so fierce, the Rider has no rest,
But foams at mouth, and speaks like one possessed.
The Poet here must be indeed Inspired,
And not with fancy, but with fury fired.
Cowley might boast to have performed this part,
Had he with Nature joined the rules of Art:
But ill expression gives too great Allay
To that rich Fancy, which can never decay.
Though all appears in heat and fury done,
The Language still must soft and easy run.
These Laws may seem a little too severe,
But Judgment yields, and Fancy governs there;
Which, though extravagant, this Muse allows,
And makes the work much easier than it shows.
Of all the ways that Wisest Men could find
To mend the Age, and mortify Mankind,
Satyr well writ has most successful proved,
And cures, because the remedy is loved.
It Is hard to write on such a Subject more,
Without repeating things said often before.
Some vulgar Errors only Lets remove
That stain this Beauty, which we chiefly love.
Of well-chose words some take not care enough,
And think they may be as the Subject rough.
This great work must be more exactly made,
And sharpest thoughts in smoothest words conveyed:
Some think if sharp enough, they cannot fail,
As if their only business was to rail;
But it is men's Foibles nicely to unfold,
Which makes a Satyr differ from a Scold.
Rage you must hide, and prejudice lay down,
A Satyr's Smile is sharper than his Frown.
So while you seem to scorn some Rival Youth,
Malice it self may pass sometimes for Truth.
The Laureat here may justly claim our praise,
Crowned by Mac-Fleckno with immortal Bays;
Though praised and punished for another's Rimes,
His own deserve that glorious fate sometimes;
Were he not forced to carry now dead weight,
Rid by some Lumpish Minister of State.
Here rest my Muse, suspend thy cares awhile,
A greater Enterprise attends thy toil;
And as some Eagle that intends to fly
A long and tedious Journey through the Sky,
Considers first the perils of her case,
Over what Lands and Seas she is to pass;
Doubts her own strength so far, and justly fears
That lofty Road of Airy Travelers;
But yet incited by some great design,
That does her hopes beyond her fears incline,
Prunes every feather, views her self with care,
Then on a sudden flounces in the Air.
Away she flies so strong, so high, so fast,
She lessens to us, and is lost at last.
So greater things my Muse prepares to sing,
Things that will Malice, and may Envy bring;
Yet why should Truth offend, when only told
TO inform the Ignorant, and warn the Bold?
On then my Muse, adventrously engage
To give Instructions that concern the Stage.
The Unites of Action, Time, and Place,
Which, if observed, give Plays so great a grace,
Are, though but little practiced, too well known
To be taught here, where we pretend alone
From nicer faults to purge the present Age,
Less obvious Errors of the English Stage.
First then, Solilopues had need be few,
Extremely short, and spoke in passion too.
Our Lovers talking to themselves, for want
Of others, make the Pit their Confidant;
Nor is the matter mended much, if thus
They trust a friend only to tell it us.
The occasion should as naturally fall,
As when Bellario confesses all.
Figures of Speech, which Poets think so fine,
Art's needless Varnish to make Nature shine,
Are all but Paint upon a beauteous Face,
And in Descriptions only claim a place.
But to make Rage declame, and Grief discourse,
From Lovers in despair fine things to force,
Must needs succeed, for who can choose but pity
To see poor Hero's miserably witty?
But O the Dialogues, where jest and mock
Is held up like a rest at Shittle-cock!
Or else like Bells eternally they Chime,
Men dye in Simile, and live in Rhyme.
What things are these, who would be Poets thought,
By Nature not inspired, nor Learning taught?
Some Wit they have, and therefore may deserve
A better way than this by which they starve:
But to write Plays? why it is a bold pretense,
To Language, Breeding, Fancy and good Sense;
Nay more, for they must look within to find
Those secret turns of Nature in the mind.
Without this part in vain would be the whole,
And but a Body all without a Soul:
All this together yet is but a part
Of Dialogue, that great and powerful Art,
Now almost lost, which the old Grecians knew,
From whence the Romans fainter Copies drew,
Scarce comprehended since but by a few.
Plato and Lucian are the best Remains
Of all the wonders which this art contains;
Yet to our selves we Justice must allow,
Shakespeare and Fletcher are the wonders now
Consider them, and read them over and over,
Go see them played, then read them as before.
For though in many things they grossly fail,
Over our Passions still they so prevail,
That our own grief by theirs is rockt asleep,
The dull are forced to feel, the wise to weep.
Their Beauties Imitate, avoid their faults;
First on a Plot employ thy careful thoughts,
Turn it with time a thousand several ways,
This often alone has given success to Plays;
Reject that vulgar error which appears
So fair, of making perfect characters,
There Is no such thing in Nature, and you will draw
A faultless Monster which the world never saw.
Some faults must be, that his misfortunes drew,
But such as may deserve compassion too.
Besides the main Design composed with Art,
Each moving Scene must be a Plot a part,
Contrive each little turn, mark every place,
As Painters first chalk out the future face,
Yet be not fondly your own slave for this,
But change hereafter what appears amiss.
Think not so much where shining thoughts to place,
As what a man would say in such a case.
Neither in Comedy will this suffice,
The Actor too must be before your eyes,
And though it is Drudgery to stoop so low,
To him you must your utmost meaning show.
Expose no single Fop, but lay the load
More equally, and spread the Folly broad;
The other way's too common, often we see
A fool derided by as bad as he;
Hawks fly at nobler game, but in his way,
A very Owl may prove a Bird of prey;
Some Poets so will one poor Fop devour;
But to Collect, like Bees from every flower,
Ingredients to compose that precious juice,
Which serves the world for pleasure and for use,
In spite of faction this will favor get,
But Falstaff seems unimitable yet.
Another fault which often does befall,
Is when the wit of some great Poet shall
So overflow, that is, be none at all,
That all his Fools speak sense, as if possessed,
And each by Inspiration breaks his jest;
If once the Justness of each part be lost,
Well we may laugh, but at the Poets cost:
That silly thing men call sheer Wit avoid,
With which our Age so nauseously is cloyed,
Humor is all, and it is the top of wit,
TO express agreeably a thing that is fit.
But since the Poets we of late have known,
Shine in no dress so well as in their own,
The better by example to convince,
Lets cast a view on this wrong side of sense.
First a Solloquie is calmly made,
Where every reason is most nicely weighed,
At the end of which most opportunely comes
Some Hero frighted at the noise of Drums
For her dear sake, whom at first sight he loves,
And all in Metaphor his passion proves;
But some sad accident, that is yet unknown,
Parting this pair, to leave the man alone,
He Is Jealous presently, we know not why,
Then, to oblige his Rival needs must die;
But first he makes a Speech, wherein he tells
The absent Nymph how much his flame excells,
And yet bequeaths her generously now
To that dear Rival whom he does not know,
Who coming in, sent sure by Fate's command,
Too late alas withholds his hasty hand,
Which now has given that most lamented stroke,
At which this very Stranger's heart is broke;
Who more to his new friend than Mistress kind,
Mourns the sad Fate of being left behind,
Most naturally prefers those dying Charms
To Love, and living in his Ladies Arms.
How shameful, and what monstrous things are these?
And then they rail at the Age they cannot please,
Conclude us only partial for the dead,
And grudge the Sign of old Ben. Iohnson's head.
When the Intrinsic value of the Stage
Can scarce be judged, but by the following Age;
For Dances, Flutes, Italian Songs, and rhyme
May keep up sinking Nonsense for a time,
But that will fail, which now so much over rules,
And sense no longer will submit to fools.
By painful steps we are at last got up
Pernussus hill, upon whose Airy top
The Epick Poets so divinely show,
And with just pride behold the rest below.
Heroic Poems have a just pretense
To be the chief effort of humane sense,
work of such inestimable worth,
There are but two the world has yet brougth forth,
Homer and Virgil: with what awful sound
Each of those names the trembling Air does wound?
Just as a Changeling seems below the rest
Of men, or rather is a two legged beast,
So those Gigantick souls amazed we find
As much above the rest of humane kind.
Nature's whole strength united; endless fame,
And universal shouts attend their name.
Read Homer once, and you can read no more,
For all things else will seem so dull and poor,
You Will wished unread; but often upon him look,
And you will hardly need another book;
Had Bossu never writ, the world had still
Like Indians viewed this wondrous piece of Skill,
As something of Divine the work admired,
Hoped not to be Instructed, but Inspired;
Till he disclosing sacred Mysteries,
Has shown where all the mighty Magic lies,
Described the Seeds, and in what order sown,
That have to such a vast proportion grown.
Sure from some Angel he the secret knew,
Who through this Labyrinth has given the clue.
But what alas avails it poor Mankind
To see this promised Land, yet stay behind?
The way is shown, but who has strength to go?
Who can all Sciences exactly know?
Whose fancy flies beyond weak reason's sight,
And yet has Judgment to direct it right?
Whose nice distinction, Virgil-like, is such,
Never to say too little nor too much?
Let such a man begin without delay,
But he must do much more than I can say,
Must above Cowley, nay and Milton too prevail,
Succeed where great Torquato, and our greater Spencer fail.
FINIS.

