SALUS POPULI OR A NATIONS HAPPINESS, A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES holden
at WINCHESTER July 22. 1658.

BY EDWARD BUCKLER Minister of the Gospel at Calbourn in the Isle of Wight.

Psalm 11. 3. If the foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do? Lex
justa ministros habeat innocents. Aug. in Psalm. 51. 3. Faelix respub. in qua,
qui imperat, timet Deum -- Justin. LONDON, Printed for John Rothwel, at the
Fountain and Bare in Goldsmiths Row in Cheapside.

TO THE HONORABLE THE JUDGES For the last Western Circuit, Judge Nicholes one
of the Barons of his Higbnes Exchequer, and Judge Fountain, with Sir Henry
Worsley Baronet, High Sheriff of the County of Southamptoh.
Honorable Sirs,
IF the publication of this Sermon shall be supposed to contribute nothing,
that may advance the Interest of Christ and his People; but to prove rather an
unnecessary addition to that Nause^us disease of Pamphlets, which the stomach
of the Nation is already sick of: your selves are my witnesses, how many
Honorable persons are bound to divide the inconvenience (or guilt) of it
amongst them.

This yet, I confoss, is a supposition, which I expect no entertainment for but
with that part of the Nation, which is at enmity with the Happiness of the
whole. And even into these, how untooth some sov^r i^ prove, ^et who cantel but
tra^^ wholesome? God, I am sure is able to persuade them by as mean a
mo^^agelas (...), that it is by no means advieable to lay a mine under those
founaatons, when they must perish to the ruins o^; nor to fly in their faces
that would prevent the springing of it.

The rest, when they look upon it coming to them (as all Sermons do, or
should) in the name of Almighty God, will, I hope, believe, and ccmply with all
that is of God in it, for the sendes sake.

Such as are conversant enough with that invaluable pair of blessings which is
the subject of this discourse, to see the Nations Happiness, and their own
wrapped up in it, will find a Remember aneer, Such as wish well to the Land of
their Nativity, and would contribute to the Happiness of it, if they knew which
way, will find and In^^^^er, as of their (...) and interest.

For your selves, although I shall perhaps have more (...) at my obedince (...)
which has troubled the Press with this Paper, then I had to suffer the
continued repetition of it: I have yet this relief, that I shall hereby (...)
one evidence of your great affections to the Happiness of the Nation, your
unwillingness that any expedient (though the mea^est of a thousand) to remember
them wherein it does consist, and how it is to be provided for, should fall to
the ground.

When you so earnestly desire the world should know, that you look upon it as
your duty to promote Religion and Righteousness: it is an offer of very
considerable security, that you constantly do and will practice it. You
received not your many Talents for any purpose that is l^wer then this: nor can
you employ them to any advantage that is higher. Your Master is not like, by
any other improvement, to receive his own with so much usury. Whose Honor and
Interest, that you and all of your Quality, Parts, Power, Trusts, Places, and
Employments, may in all your designs and acting^, sincerely aim at, is in the
daily Prayers of

Your Honors most humble Servant, in the things of Christ, EDW. BUCKLER.

A SERMON Preached before the Judges at WINCHESTER ASSIZES July the 22th. 1658.
Psalm. 122. 4, 5. whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord; unto the
testimony of Israel: to give thanks unto the name of the Lord. For there are
set Thrones of judgment, the Thrones of the house of David.
UPon David's bringing the Ark to Jerusalem, he pens this Psalm; his grateful
apprehension of the happiness of that Church and Kingdom, under the present
dispensations of a gracious God, discovers it self.

1. In the Title, it is a Song of Degrees, which (to omit other nations about
it) lunius translates, canticum excellentissimum, a most excellent song: The
notes of any other being by no means high enough to celebrate blessings of such
a Character, as are here mentioned.

2. In the Psalm it self three ways, viz. In 1. A rapture of joy. 2. A
description of the happiness he lay under the contemplation of. 3. An
exhortation to Prayer for the continuing of it.


The Text is within the compass of the second of these, the matter of that
peoples happiness, described in three great enjoyments, viz. 1. Union, verse. 3.
2. Religion verse. 4. 3. Righteousness, verse. 5.


I have pitched upon the two latter, Religion and Righteousness.

1. Religion, a full provision for the free enjoyment, holy solemnity, and due
administration of the Ordinances of God. You will see it in considering the
fourth verse, in these five particulars, viz. 1. The place. 2. The persons. 3.
Their actions. 4. Their ground. 5. Their end.


1. The place, whither. Relating to Jerusalem mentioned in the third verse,
where the Ark of God was placed, Exodus 25. 22. Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
which was a testimony of his presence with them; where that was, God was,
there he promised to meet his people, and to commune with them, and there he
commanded his people to meet him, hither the Tribes came up. Had they gone one
Tribe to Dan, another to Bethel, a third to Jerusalem, it had not been a
Religion good enough to make a blessing of.

2. The Persons, the Tribes. Not here and there a man, but a multitude, and not
a multitude of men condemnable as so many Formalists, poor ignorant souls,
under low administrations and in the dark, for their punctual attendance upon
Ordinances; they were the Tribes of the Lord, all owned as his by a standing in
his Church, very many by a place in his heart; he that doubts this, did never
consider how many thousands of every Tribe were sealed for the servants of God
in their foreheads, (Revel. 7. 4, etc. Religion in any Nation, looks best like
a Mercy, that is, like it self, when it binds up the people of it together by
multitudes.

3. Their Actions, the Tribes go up, rather indeed their freedom and liberty,
there was no Lion in the way, the Law sent them, and the Magistrate kept them
company: He went with the multitude to the house of God, Psalm. 42. 4. Religion
is then a pure, an unmixed mercy, when a people can enjoy it, discharged of all
encombrances, and never thrives into a greater blessing, then when it sucks the
breasts of Kings Isa. 60. 16.

4. Their Ground, to the testimony of Israel.

I know these words are diversely expounded, I incline to their interpretation,
who read them for a testimony, and do mean a testimony of that peoples
conformity to Gods commands: it was his ordinance that hither the Tribes should
come, and this was witness enough to Israel, that there was a jus divinum in
that solemnity. That Religion, or that part of religion, will never be able to
contribute to a peoples happiness, that is not able to show its Pedigree, that
it came down from Heaven; you may by no means set it down amongst a nations
privileges, if God can say, I commanded it not, neither came it into my heart,
Ier. 7. 31.

5. Their End, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord. A part of Gods worship
and service put for the whole. when a Religion is set up for any, except
merely for religious ends, they much mistake, that look upon it as any part of
a peoples glory. That Is the first ingredient to that peoples happiness,
Religion.

2. Righteousness. There are set thrones of Judgment, the thrones of the house
of David. A full provision for the administration of Justice, and the happiness
of that state and kingdom thankfully acknowledged. In the 1. Enjoyment of it
for the present, there are set thrones of Judgment. 2. Settlement of it for
the future, the thrones of the house of David.


1. The enjoyment of it for the present, there are set thrones of Judgment, a
very amiable and pleasant prospect, where we see:

1. Judgment, that is, recta judicatio justi atque injusti. it has, its true,
in Scripture many acceptations, but is here made up of hearing and determining,
whether the cause depending be criminal or civil, as it is also in Lev. 19. 15.
and to expound it (as we must do) into a blessing, (For the judgment is not
yours, but Gods.) We are necessitated to interpret it, Of a Hearing.

1. With understanding, both matters of fact, and matter of Law. The persons
that sat here, were wise men and under standing, in Deuteronomy. 1. 13. and this was
it that qualified them for their Commission. Those people are possessed of a
very desirable privilege, whose administrators of Law and Justice, are under
characters of Gods own prescribing, and have not the hearing of causes in the
dark.

2. With Patience. It is hardly Judgment, if it want deliberation, which is
well worth the laying out upon all concernments, where we can mistake but once.
The reason why the Lacedaemonians dwelt so long upon causes that were Capital;
Si in capitis discrimine erraverint, non est corrigendi consilii potestas. Loss
of life is among those damages that are not capable of reparation. And even in
lower cases, temeritas judicis may be, calamitas innocentis; hasty sentences
may throw misery upon the guiltless; which David, you may be sure, would never
put upon the account of a peoples happiness.

3. With both Ears. There be, you know, cases in which there may be nothing but
Justice in the decision, and not a jot in the desider. And we must understand
it. Of a Determining.

1. By Law. No Judgment has any other foundation. You have nothing to discover
offenders by, but this glass; nothing to restrain them with, but this bridle;
nothing to smite them withal, but this sword. If Judgment flow from any other
spring, Amos 5. 7.
how easily is it turned into wormwood? and how directly destructive is it to
the very end that laws were made for? (cum jus ab uno viro homines non
consequerentur, inventae sunt leges. Cic. 2. offic.
The judgment of God is according to Law; else would he punish where there is
no transgression: so is Judgment in the Text, what else does it make amongst
that peoples privileges?

2. By Law, quietly suffered to speak its own meaning; which in States and
Kingdoms (as David's was) professing Religion, can never be expounded into an
opposition to the law of God. Legislation, its true, is the highest act of the
highest Powers on earth; yet as it is our interest to know they have no power,
so its our duty to believe they have no intent, to cross in any one Iota, the
will of Heaven; if they do, such Laws and Judgments must not take it amiss, if
we be not able to reckon them amongst the materials of our happiness. For sin
is a reproach to any people, Pro. 14. 34. this is judgment.

2. Thrones of judgment. The administration of Laws has from the beginning
been allowed its Ensigns of State and Majesty; Christ himself, when he is
described as a Judge, is represented sitting upon a Throne, and a glorious
train waiting upon him, Mat. 25. 31. and all Nations have seen cause to
distinguish their magistrates, especially when in the exercise of their Office,
by some or other mark of state and dignity, from other men; that Rods, Axes,
Lictors, Gowns, Maces, Swords, Trumpets and the like, might bespeak that fear
and reverence of the people, which all authority must endeavor to beget, and
nourish in that great and many-headed body, or resolve to be trampled upon.
When Delinquency shall be allowed its gallantry, and justice shall sneak up and
down in a despised posture, and a vulgar Equipage; it may perhaps bespeak a
people thrifty, but by no means happy. Here ^are thrones of judgment: and these

3. Are set. The margin tells us that the Original is of the active voice,
there do fit thrones of judgment. The like expression you have in Dan. 7. 26.
The judgment shall sit. Aug. in. loc.
And yet it is not the judgment that does sit, but the Judges. Mirum aenigma,
says Augustine, it is a strange, a wonderful riddle. Be it so, yet it is
doubtless a duty to expound it the duty,

1. Of the Judges. Judgment is mentioned, and Judges are meant. Is it not to
remember them, that Justice and judgment should not be accounted amongst their
accidents, which may be present or absent, without the destruction of their
subjects; but should be looked upon as their very form, bestowing upon them
both their essence and denomination?... the duty

2. Of the judgment. To sit is a posture of composedness. When judgments are
not calm, deliberate, digested, this part of the Text may (for all them) be a
riddle still.

But let us suppose the Active to be put for the Passive, and that Thrones are
set; yet this does David look upon as a happiness, that the Kingdom was in a
posture of executing judgment: 'twas so protempore, and even that is a mercy
fit to be acknowledged. Blessings from hand to mouth are blessings, and
obligations to thankfulness. But here is withal,

2. The Settlement of it for the future, the thrones of the house of David.
Thrones of judgment there were before; but by the injury of the times often
interrupted, always changeable: but God had built David a sure house, (1. Reg.
11. 38.) Settled him the supreme magistrate over that people; they might now
know upon what to bottom, and where to seek for the administration of justice.
Civil government is a Nations blessing; the settlement of it is the addition of
another, or a very merciful augmentation of the former. As such God does
promise it, (1. Reg. 17. 14.) as such (in the Text) does David acknowledge it;
and so will every body else that believes Solomon, Prove. 28. 2. For the
transgression of a Land many are the princes thereof.

And so you have a short view of the particulars in the Text, the matter of
David's joy, and his peoples happiness; a full provision for Religion, verse. 4.
and for the administration of Judgment and Righteousness, verse. 5, And because
I may not attempt to prosecute them in all their branches, I must deal in
gross, and wrap up as much of both verses as I can, in this proposition or
point of Doctrine.

The condition of a people is then happy, (...) fit object of a good man's joy,
when Religion and Righteousness, are jointly provided for, and carried on
together.

Which I shall endeavor to make out, from 1. Scripture, and 2. Reason.

The Scriptures I shall reduce to these -- 4 Ranks.. viz.

1. These two, religion and righteousness, are promised as a peoples Happiness,
that God will set his Tabernacle among them Lev. 26. 11. and his Sanctuary in
the midst of them, Ezekiel. 37. 26. All necessaries to the exercise of religion.
That he will restore their Judges as at the first, and their Counselors as at
the beginning, Isa. 1. 26. reduce them to their primitive institution; of the
same Character they first were, when they came out of Gods own hand, all
necessaries for the administration of Justice. That he will make their Officers
peace, and their Exactors righteousness. Esa. 60. 17. When the troubles of a
People shall become their Peace, and Publicans and Sinners shall be no longer
Synonyma's, but Two names of the same persons, its no ordinary blessing.

2. When God would deal with a people in his Wrath, He Iudicially provides
against their enjoyment of these Two. Upon this account He forsook the
Tabernacle of Shiloh, the ten^ which he placed a^ongst men. Psalm. 78. 60. and
gave that people Statutes that were nor good, and Judgments whereby they
should not live. Ezekiel. 20. 25. That by Statutes and Judgments, are meant Laws
and Rules of Government, in one kind or other, is too plain to be stood upon.
Of the Moral, or Judicial Laws of God, none (I think) will adventure to
expound them. Of the Ceremonial, some have, and to make the Epithet here given
them, suitable, do distinguish between Bonum, non bonum, and Malum. But the
Ceremonies were given in Expiationem peccati. These Statutes and Judgments In
(...) peccati, Those in Mercy, and were a part of that peoples Glory (Deu. 4.
8. to. 9. 4.) these in wrath as A great Contribution to their Shame and Misery,
and so must be Statues and judgments, i. e. the Laws, Government, Rites, and
Customs of men, whom God set over them, or delivered them in his wrath. So
there will be no question, why these Statutes are said not to be good, and but
a little why these judgments, such whereby they should not live; after we have
considered, how often in Scripture, To live is put to signify, not simply
life, but the convenient accommodations of it, amongst which provision for our
religious and civil Concernments, is of the first magnitude. This the Lord in
this sad dispensation; stripped them of, by giving them A Government that cared
for none of these things.

3. The Happiness of a people is described by these Two. What Nation is there
so great that has statutes and judgments so righteous, as all that Law which I
set before you this day? Deuteronomy. 4. 8. It is an Appeal to the people of Israel,
whether God had dealt out happiness to any other Nation, at the Rate that he
had to them? and the instance is in their Statutes and judgments, the
provision they had for Religion and righteousness, Statutes being Laws for a
people under a sacred consideration, and judgments under a Civil. Ainsw. in
Deuteronomy. 4. 1.
See to the same purpose, Psalm. 147. 19. 20.

4. Ruin is threatened unto a people upon the neglect of these. If it be
Religion, that Nation and Kingdom that will not serve her and her children
shall perish; yea, those Nations shall utterly perish, Esa. 60. 12. If it be
Righteousness, Gods Soul shall be avenged on such a Nation. Jer. 5. 29.

Reasons.
1. From the influence that these two, Religion and Righteousness, have upon a
peoples Happiness. An influence, if I may so express it, both 1. Moral, and
2. Physical.


1. Religion and Righteousness have a Moral influence upon a peoples
Happiness; De Civit dei l. 5. c. 25. uni. es in l. 5. c. 21.
The Lord loading^ A Nation with Blessings or Curses, according to their care
or neglect of these. Of this you have a full account in Jer. 22. from the first
to the seventeenth Verse, to which I must but refer you.

Augustine observes of Constantine, that God bestowed more blessings upon him
and his people, then others did dare to wish for; and the contrary of Julian,
who yet was a man of a great spirit, and as fit for Empire, as the world
afforded. That States and Kingdoms have naturally their Ortus and Interitus,
their rise, groath, declination, and ruin, I think is but a fancy. it is the
blessing of God, entailed (as it were) upon the godliness and honesty of a
State and Nation that makes them prosperous. And it is the curse of God that
pursues a wicked people to destruction. If Religion be provided for, from this
day, (says God, will I bless you, Hagg. 2. 18. 19. If Religion be neglected,
you may date from that very point of time, a peoples misery; and write down
every blessing they have left them, spoiled with a curse, Mal. 2. 2.

If Righteousness be provided for, the mountains and hills shall bring such a
people peace. Psalm 72. 2, 3. No place so barren, that shall not yield a
complication of blessings. If Righteousness be neglected, what will such a
people do in the day of visitation? Isaiah 10. 3.

2. Religion and Righteousness, have a Physical influence into, they have a
natural tendency to a peoples welfare. Religion will guide them to, and the due
administration of Justice will keep them in the nearest way to all the
blessings of the life that now is, as well as of that which is to come. Do you
but observe that sobriety, temperance, chastity, that patience, humbleness of
mind, readiness to forgive, studiousness to be quiet: that industry, care,
frugality, laboriousness: that unanimity, love, public spiritedness,
fortitude, prudence, that eye and hand of Justice upon delinquencies as to any
of these, which the Scripture requires; and if health, and peace, and riches,
and honor, and safety, and every outward blessing, fall not soon^r into your
bosoms, then from your strictest observation of all the rules that ever any
other book, or discourse in the world, has laid down to these purposes;
either there is a wisdom above Gods, or he delights not in the prosperity of
his servants.

Xenophon looking upon the flourishing condition of the Lacedaemonians, and
considering their inconsiderable beginning, it became the matter of his wonder;
but when he saw the provision they had made for the administration of Justice
and Righteousness, Admirari pro^^^is desinebat, his wonder ceased.

2. These Two keep God with a people, and do settle them with a people under
his protection; and these neglected, do cause him to depart, and to leave them
naked. The Lord is with you while ye be with him, but if ye forsake him he will
forsake you. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. if we keep the word of his patience, he will also
keep us from the hour of tempta^ion, Rev. 3. 10. the happiness of a people is
in the presence of God, their misery in his departure from them. When he gives
quietness, who can make trouble? and when he hides his face, who can behold
him. whether it be done against a nation or against a man only? Job. 34. 29. I
do not think the practice or that Bishop, so great a solecis^ne in politics,
as some others may, who when the enemy was coming upon them, instead of
mustering his people, fell a reforming them. Ego (says he) curabo ecclesiam,
Deus pro me pugnabit. I will take care of my Church and God will fight for me.
Though I doubt not, it was his duty to have done it sooner -- I might add

3. That these two are the Pillars, the foundation of a State. Other things
about a building may be neglected, and it scarce be damnified. Rafters or
Tile-stones may be out of order, and the house stand; but if the foundation
^aulter, down comes the whole about our ears, -- and

4. That these make up a full provision for a peoples happiness; and secure
every one of their interests as men, and as Christians. But I would reserve a
little time for Application. Two uses only I shall make of this point, viz. of
1. Information. 2. Exhortation.


1. Use, by way of information, in four particulars, viz.

1. That though principles of Religion and Righteousness in this or that
private person, may be very far influential upon a whole Kingdom for good; God
blessing others for their sakes: yet it is the provision for, and the practice of
these by the Rulers of a Nation, that does advance them into a national
blessing. T^eir provision for these two, is not in order to t^emselves alone,
but to set them before all that are under t^em: and their practice of them is a
conveyance of good to a whole countr^y. It being an ordinary way with God to
concern a people, in the sins and judgments, in the duties and blessings of
their superiors. The King sins, and the people suffer, Ier. 15. 4. the King
does his duty, and the people prosper, 1 Reg. 4. 25. Those that would deliver
the Magistrate from the care of either of these, have a mind to deliver the
Nation from a fundamental blessing.

2. That these two, must be jointly provided for, and carried on together: For

First, what is his name, or what his sons name, if thou can tell, that ever
settled one of these in a Nation without the other? which of them is it that a
people can possibly enjoy alone?

1. Is it Religion without Righteousness? Who will adventure to give that
religion a definition, which shall excommunicate one of those Two great
Commandments on weich do hang all the Law and the Prophets? or undertake for
any people under Heaven, that they shall enjoy, profess, own, practice: not
corrupt, revile, despise, forsake the Truths, ways, worship, and Ordinances
of men shall have nothing to do with them? if any will engage for Religion upon
these Terms, it must be one that has not seriously considered, That a House
full of Idols, an Ephod for the Worship of God, and Teraphim for the Worship
of the devil, and the running of the people a whoaring after these
abominations, by whole Tribes, was the effect of No King in Israel, Judge. 17.
5. and 18. 30.

2. Is it Righteousness without Religion? then must Tertullian, Cyprian,
Lactantius, Augustine, etc. Recant all that they have written to the contrary.
However,

Secondly, If these Two, for any thing that is in their Natures, had
independency enough to stand each by it self, it were yet worth a wise man's
enquiry, whether God will suffer either this or that to stand so, as a peoples
Happiness, if the other be set aid.

1. Set religion aside, and suppose a people regardlesse of their duty toward
God, and he will quickly take a course that they shall have little cause to
boast of their Justice and righteousness from men. He will take away the Judge
and the Prudent, and the Ancient, and the Honorable, and the Counselor; and
give Children to be their Princes, and Babes to rule over them. Esa. 3. 2, 3,
4. They shall be oppressed and spoiled, and none shall save them, Deuteronomy. 28. 29.

2. Set righteousness aside, and suppose A people careless of their duties of
Equity, if they do not thoroughly execute judgment between a man and his
Neighbor; God will do to such a people as he did to Shiloh Jer. 7. 5, 14.
what was that? He removed his ordinances, Psalm 78. 60, 61. If a Nation will
needs show you Solomon's melancholy prospect, The place of judgment that
wickedness is there, (Eccle. 3. 16. 'T will not be long ere God will show you
another of the same complexion. The ways of Sion mourning, her places of
assembly destroyed, her solemn feasts and Sabbaths forgotton. (Lam. 2.) that
superstitious fable of Castor and Pollux, is a real truth of religion and
righteousness, not that they live and die by turns, but that Solitariae graves,
salutares geminae. They are never auspicious to a state and kingdom, but in
conjunction.

3. That to promote a Government against religion, or a A religion against
Government, is to contrive the burial of both in a Nations ruin. A Government
that shall feign a Commission from Heaven, to root out all that is,
Antichristian from the face of the Earth; and a religion that shall be
abund^ntly able to judge Antichristianisme enough to qualify them for
destruction, not only in Ministers and Magistrates, and Lawyers, but in a
Ministry, Magistracy, Laws and Government it self: and in every thing and
person else, whose institution, or reason, or Conscience, shall forbid them a
Communion in the same principles; if such Notions once become practicable,
whither (^ beseech you) shall the tribes go up? or if we knew where to set
Thrones of Judgment, who shall sit upon them?

4. That antimagistraticall spirits, principles, and practices, have nothing in
them of good will to a peoples Happiness; which is no were enjoyable but under
the shadow of Government. Neither Godliness nor Honesty will be able to find,
any where else, 1 Timothy, 2. ^2.
so much as a toleration. To design Disorder, Anarchy, and Confusion, in the
stead of it, is to study the removal of whatever is desirable, and to provide
for the inlet of what will render us most ridiculous and miserable. You will the
more easily believe after you have considered

1. The Necessity of that Hedge which these Pioneeres would break down. If a
Kindome indeed were peopled with Angels, or men that never lost their first
Estate, they might be Laws unto themselves; but as long as sons and daughters
of fallen Adam, are the materials, he is a wise man that can tell what to do,
without better security then Anarchy can aford him. The best men have
peevishness enough to call for a huc usque; and what shall limit them if the
Laws do not? and for the other sort, Lions, Bears, Woolves, Dogs, Swine, Mad
men, if there be no Heir of restraint to chain up and muzzle these, who can
live? Twill be good news, if you can tell where the honestest man in a Nation
shall have innocence enough to save him harmless. If these Horses and Mules
have no Bitts and Bridles, they will fall upon us, upon our persons, estates,
consciences, liberties, religion, everything; neither will anything in the
world but Order and Government be able to relieve us. Our strength and our
riches will be vain things to save us, they must let it alone for ever. The
riches of a Nation will quickly be quartered and plundered into a morsel of
bread, and the strength of it employed to selfe-destruction. A potent people,
if a lawless one, have only this to brag of, that they need no Foreign
Contribution to their Overthrow.

Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit. Rome it self in such a case had only weight
enough to press her self to death. And when her Laws were asleep, her
Watchmen waked but in ^aine.

N^x una suis non credita Muris. She durst not trust ^er self one night within
her own walls. Tyranny is by all men looked upon as a monstrous beast, but if it
stood with Anarchy in competition for a wisemans vote, It would doubtless
carry it. and (though the c^oice be hard) rather then to have none deputed in a
State to hear us, Absalom himself were better be Master of his wish, Oh that I
were made Judge in the Land. 1. Sa. 15. 4.
Those Tonatick spirits that have pretended it to be their duty, to destroy all
Magistracy and Order, have yet found it to be their Interest, to set up
something in the stead of it, and rather to make a King of John of Leyden, then
to continue headless.

2. How monstrous this would make a people, and all their Concernments, what a
(...) of parts, gifts, persons into one another places, and employments it
would bring for^^^ let me draw you a Picture of it.

1. In the Greater world, if the Earth should be enameled with Stars, and
fruits and flowers should grow in the Firmament of Heaven; if the lesser lights
should rule the day, and dispose the greater to the Government of the night; If
the Sun should be plucked down to walk upon, and a piece of dirt stuck up to
shine in the place of it; if men should be necessitated to carry burdens upon
the Pismire, and to learn wisdom of the Ass:

In chaos antiquum confundimu^, with how ugly a face would Nature look!

2. In the lesser world, man, if the Head should be degraded to be trod upon,
and the Heels claim supremacy over the whole; if the eyes should be transposed
into the Elbowes, and the shoulders take upon them to give lig^t unto the body,
etc. you have the blessings of Anarchy, and the issue of their design, who
blasp^eme Government, and fall down and worship disorder and confusion; out of
which, he that shall undertake to extract Religion or Righteousness, will have
a hard task of it.

2. Use of Exhortation 1. To All, whom it calls to our 1. Gratitude. 2.
Prayers. 3. Care.


1. To our Gratitude, for that degree of this Happiness, in provisions for
Religion and Righteousness, which God has given us the possession of, I shall
have no need to tell you. How much that is, you are not an Auditory that are
strangers in England. Some things I shall mention. What apprehensions some of
you may have of them, In sensu composito, upon the account of their
Neighborhood to other things, I am not to enquire. In sens^ diviso, if you
consider them alone, I am very sure of your acknowledgments, that they are
worthy of thanks. Ex gr. -- That your Lawmakers shall be persons fearing God,
and of good conversation; That no man that is an Anti-Scripturist, a denyer of
Ordinances, A common reviler of Religion, or of a^y person for professing it, a
Sabbath-breaker, Swearer, Curser, Drunkard, Tavern, or Alehouse haunter, shall
have any thing to do in that great affair; -- That the chief Officers of
State, and Judges will be such as these will bestow their approbation upon;
That both as to Legislation and execution, the persons chiefly interressed, are
under the most sacred Obligation that is imaginable, To uphold and maintain
the true reformed Protestant Christian Religion in the purity thereof, as is
contained in the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and to encourage
the profession and professors of the same, and all this, to the uttermost of
their power and to discharge their respective trusts in order to the
preservation of the Rights and Liberties of the people, and the good
Government, peace, and welfare of these Nations. Now much we, (...) suppose a
considerable number of persons of the choicest Character, and of the highest
pretenses to Religion, and Righteousness, biasable to the production of what
this Constitution can by no means be interpreted into? or must acknowledge our
share in the Blessings of the Text, ta call for thankfulness? Perhaps a
comparative glance upon other Nations, may the sooner persuade us that it is our
duty to pay it.

In some of which, Johnson Geography, p. 165. 207. 236. 475.
you may see in the Marketplace on the Lords day, as great an Assembly in the
Afternoon, as you were able to see at Church in the morning. In some, the
Chief Magistrates Tap-house in every great Town, inviting the people to be
drunk, Cum privilegio, to increase the public Revenue. In some Offices of all
sorts, bought and sold at as dear a rate, as Land in England, at 20. years
purchase: where the common people, how industrious soever, dare hardly own them
an ability to provide themselves clothes, or victuals. In some intolerable
burdens imposed at discretion, to the final desolation of diverse Families.
And I could tell you more of this, were not this enough. Now whatever the
Blessing be; if, God has not dealt so with other Nations, may be found in the
premises, our Hallelujahs must be the Conclusion, Psalm 147. Ult.

If any say, many things desirable are yet wanting, I have nothing to reply but
this; that a principle that is able to suspend our t^ankfullnesse upon any such
account, will not give us leave to bl^sse God for any thing till we come to
Heaven. -- It calls us,

2. To our Prayers, for a continuation of what we have, and a supply of what we
yet want. T^a^ these National blessings are of Gods disposing, we cannot doubt
without the hazard of our C^ristianity, nor that the dispenses them as
Blessings, in a way of Prayer. The Heathens could say.

Dij, Quibus Imperium hoc steterat. That Empires had their foundations above;
hence was Jupiter called Salutaris, and Stator, as their supposed Author of
Stability and Safety, If Christians believe so much of God, they will send him
their petitions.

3. To our Care. Of what? of every thing whereby Religion and Righteousness
may thrive amongst us; especially of maintaining the Nurse of both, Peace.
Peace with God, that we make not one bridge of our Sins, Peace amongst our
selves, that we make not another of our Folly, for their passage from us. Pray
consider what it is that hedgeth in the blessings of the Text, before and
behind; It Is Peace, Peace before, at the 3 verse, A city compact together, not
divided and subdivided into more Parties and factions, then they knew where to
have names for; but (as another Translation reads it) at unity in it self. and
then, Thither the Tribes go up; and Thrones of Judgment are settled. Peace
behind at the 6 verse, at least, Rogate pacem. A prayer sent to Heaven for it,
that these mercies might continue. This to All*

2. To those that are by Office, to attend the business of this day; as you
would contribute to the Nations Happiness, afford your respective
contributions toward the advancement of Religion and Righteousness, by
suffering no breach upon either of them, to escape that just recompense of
reward, which the Laws have provided for it.

First, For you may Lords, the Judges, God forbid you should be supposed
without serious apprehensions upon your Spirits.

1. That God sits with you, Psalm 82. 1. and is present for more purposes then
one, -as Testis, to see all you do, and with eyes that cannot look upon
iniquity.-as Iudex, to pass his Sentence upon all yours, and what a holy care
should be taken that the Bench be not divided, nor any occasion given for
Luthers Deo gratias, aliter hic conclusum est, aliter in caelo. And as vindex,
to make good if there be cause, the title you find him clothed withal, in
Psalm. 94. 1. A God of revenges.

2. That you cannot be too zealous against the obstructions of a peoples
Happiness, the Happi^^ss^ of all the people in t^r^e great Nations, (...) so
many thousand souls con^^r^ed in (...) religion and righteousness, which you
are enga^ed to take care of. That if a destructive, a mis^^eivous rape by
restless, and incorrigible spirits, be made upon their blessings, Optimum
misericordiae genus est occidere.

3. That as much as in you lies, you provide for the Honor of God, of the
supreme Magistrate, of your selves, of the N^^ion, in providing for the
safeguard of religion, and righteousness.

1. Of God, for the blaspheming of whose name, if occasion be given by a
peoples wickedness, it is doubtless by their impunity.

2. Of the supreme Magistrate. When Iovinian was voted Emperor by the Army, he
told them he was a Chirstian, and would not be a Leader of Pagans. The more
conformity can be wrought upon a people, the more of glory will be cast upon
their Governors. `Tis not the lowest title of Jesus Christ himself that he is
King of Saints.

3. Of your selves. God will honor those that honor him. 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Aristides for his care of Iu^^ice, was called Graecorum faelicitas. How much
more shall you be celebrated as our bl^ssings, whilst you care for that, and
religion too!

4. Of the Nation, w^ose Statutes, how righteous soever, will ^ot leave upon
them an impr^ssion of glory, unless their judgments be of the sam^
Character.*and

4. Lastly. That you have no way else to answer the end of your institution, to
be the Ministers of God to us for good, To. 13. 4.

Secondly. For you that are to present misdemeanors against the blessings of
the Text; you will, I hope, so discharge your oaths and trusts, that neither
Religion nor Righteousness shall have any cause to complain. But I shall crave
leave to tell you,

1. That Religion will, if you know any of her Ordinances lost, or profanely
misapplyed, her duties disturbed, her solemnities rayled at, her great glory
and ornament; The late Act for the better observation of the Lords day,
despised, or neglected; or find her suffering in any of her concernments that
the Law has taken notice of, and say nothing, she will complain. And

2. So will Justice and Righteousness, if you conceal any one Delinquency
against it; especially their male-administrations, who have taken an oath, and
a Commission, to dispense it, and I t^ink'twere better you stood charged by all
the Bills of Indictment, that will be exhibited this Assizes; then that the cry
of these against you should enter into the ears of the Lord of Saboth.

Interest has been a great word amongst us for diverse years, and it is so
still; and a national interest is sometimes talked of. The great interest of any
Nation is to keep God with them. I shall conclude with a repetition of that
exhortation, which the Doctrine we have been considering presses you with;
viz. that you would, all of you contribute toward the entertainment of God
with us, by contributing to the safety of Religion and Righteous^ess. If these
fail, God must be gon^; and ask the Prophet what a woe, he will leave behind
him. Hos^a 9. 12. If Religion fail, where shall God walk? For his way is in the
Sanctuary. Psalm 77. 13. And if Righteousness fail, with whom shall he
converse? To be sure, the Throne of iniquity shall have no communion with him,
Psalm. 94. 20.

To provide as much as in you lies against these, the failing I mean, of
Religion and Righteousness, is both your duty and your interest: that the
Nation may be happy in the blessings of the Text, the Lord delighting to dwell
amongst us, and to be in the midst of us. less then this we cannot have, and
more we need not, to make us happy.

FINIS.

