To the most Reverend the Archbishops, and the Right Reverend Bishops, Humbly
Presented.
My LORDS,
SINCE it has pleased God of his great Mercy to convince me of my former
Errors, it has pleased him to incline my Mind to meditate upon, and to study
the Holy Scriptures; and the more I have been intent hereupon, the more my
Judgment has been confirmed in the Truths of the Christian Religion, professed
by the Church of England; and thereupon I have thought it my Duty to Discover
and Oppose destructive Errors, which tend to overthrow the Christian Faith, as
well as to vindicate (according to my small Talent) my Mother Church from those
Calumnies undeservedly cast upon her by unsound Schismatics, and I am afraid I
may say self-condemned Heretics, since my Reason tells me they must needs
persist wilfully. But notwithstanding all this, and what else may be said on
this Foot; I do nor pretend to an extraordinary Call, but a^count my sel^ under
your Lordships Command, believing that as in the State, so in the Church their
must be Government, and consequently Governors, to whom we ought in point of
Duty to submit; so that if your Lordships shall command my Silence, I shall (as
in Duty bound) readily obey; and so on the contrary, if my Labor herein shall
be thought useful, in opposing the Errors of this Domineering Sect, I shall,
with all Faithfulness, continue it, with due regard attending continually upon
this very thing, having Respect to the necessary Circumstances such a Work
require in this depraved Age; and thereupon, least this Book of mine now
presented should not have met with that Reception, which I thank God it has,
both your Lordships and the Clergy in general might safely have said you knew
nothing of it; to that end also I mentioned the Bounty received of the Gentry,
the Justices and Protestant Dissenters, to take off Occasion from them that
seek Occasion; for as to the last they never gave me above 50 s. and the Gentry
and Justices not 5 l. but my Support I thankfully acknowledge has principally
been the Bounty of your Lordships, the Universities, and particular Clergymen,
for which I bless God on your Behalf, praying for your Health and Prosperity
every way.

And having been exercised herein, I humbly beg Leave to give your Lordships an
Account of what I have done since December School. And as I have never let mortal
Eye see the last Letter to your Lordships, so I hope I shall be so cautious in
this, as will preserve all in its due place; for I have a Printer I can confide
in.

First, As to the Conference at West-Dereham, the Quakers were the Aggressors,
they being before that very troublesome to the Clergy in that Country, by
frequent Challenges. Upon which, both Mr. Park and Mr. Meriton wrote to me to
come to their Assistance; we had a Meeting at my House, where was also Mr.
Archer, our Minister, and Mr. Erasmas Warren, and my Advice was, that I might
challenge them, and stand the Brunt, least any thing should happen that might
reflect upon the Church; to which all agreed; I did so, and it was accepted:
But on second Thoughts the Quakers threw off me, and turned the Challenge upon
the Clergy; yea, to any of their Cloth to give them a Charge, and to appoint
Time and Place, and they would give them a Public Trial: They did so; but then
their London Leaders fearing the Consequence thereof, shuffled and evaded the
same. Upon which a Petition was prepared, and sent up; but not being thought
meet to be presented, they grew bold, and since then, have wrote diverse Books;
an Account of them that have come to my View are as follow, with the Numbers,
which I think in Probability might be Printed.

2000 a. 30000 b. 5000 c. 1000 d. 4000 e. 5000 f. 5000 g. 52000

I. An Apology for the People called Quakers, and an Appeal to the Inhabitants
of Norfolk and Suffolk, etc. I suppose in number 2000 a.

II. A Letter to the Clergy of the Diocese of Norfolk and Suffolk, under the
Sham-Name of a Member of the Church of Enggland: Which was so universally
spread in all the great Cities, Towns and Villages in England and Wales; not
only in their ordinary Way of sending two to each Meeting throughout their
Territories; but in Norwich I was told they were carried in Wheel-Barrows by
whole Reams, (for it was but one Sheet) for that one County, and left in many
Places with their Agents; nay, even with common Tapsters and Hostlers, to be
dispersed Gratis; that I cannot think the Number Printed less than 30000 b.

III. A Defense of the People called Quakers; being a Reply to the Priests in
Norfolk, etc. Not fewer, I think, than 5000 c.

IV. An Apostate Conscience exposed; which also in some Places, though not about
our Town, for there they would not receive them. However I do suppose 1000 d.

V. A Defense of the Apology for the People called Quakers in Norfolk, etc. I
guess in number 4000 e.

VI. Truth and Innocence vindicated, etc. I do think not so few in number as
5000 f.

VII. Anguis Flagillatus, etc. which contain 548 Pages in a large Octavo,
beside the Preface. 500 of them well bound, were dispatched away to Members of
Parliament to prepare them against this Session; 500 of them in one Ship sent
to Pensilvania, besides those given to Judges, Lawyers, Justices, and indeed to
Men of all Ranks; besides their ordinary way, Two to each Meeting, selling them
in Shops in London, and by their Agents in the Country; and furnishing Ireland,
Scotland, and other Plantations. I cannot think they printed less than 6 or
8000, but I will say but 5000. g. For they are a Rich and United Confederacy,
and will compass Sea and Land, to make a Proselite.

And now, my Lords, as I have given but a probable Guess of their Number,
which, as I account, is 52000, it may be less or more; and in regard I see no
Answer to any of them come out, I thought it my Duty to return some short
Answer to them; and to disperse them as far as I could; some to Oxford,
Cambridge, and other Towns; many I gave away at home, and at Turners-Hall, to
the Parliament, and where I judged it needful, and this by the Assistance I
have had, and my Credit raised thereby, which is as follows, viz.

1500 a. 4000 b. 2000 c. 0500 d. 2000 e. 1500 f. 11500

I. In answer to their first I wrote a Postscript to the Norfolk Clergy's Book,
A Brief Discovery, etc. and at their Charge, number 1500 a.

II. A Broad Sheet, with Reasons for their Examination, 4000 b.

III. In answer to their Third Book I wrote mine, entitled, Quakerism exposed
to P^blick Censure, etc. in number 2000 c.

IV. In answer to their Fourth Book I wrote mine, i. e. Jezebel Withstood, and
her Daughter Anne Docwra Publicly Reproved, etc. in number 0500 d. to
disperse, besides that half part of it at the end of Quakerism Exposed, etc.

V. In answer to their Letter to the Clergy, which I was loath to undertake,
knowing they could tar better do it themselves; but whether it was that they do
not think them considerable, or least once engaging should lay a Foundation for
a chargeable Continuance; or whether they thought enough wrote already, I
cannot tell; but at length, when I see it so universally spread, and read in
their Meetings, I wrote a small Tract against it, styled The Ministry of the
Church of England Vindicated and Distinguished from that of Quakerism, etc. In
number 2000 e.

VI. In Answer to their Defense of their Apology, by John Field, and their
Truth and Innocence, by George Whitehead, I wrote my Modest Defense, etc. of
which I presented between 5 and 600 to the High Court of Parliament, etc. in
number 1500 f. which in all make 11500.

VII. I have still something preparing for a Brief Answer to some material
Falacies in their Anguis Flagillatus, which I do intend, unless I meet with
Advice to the contrary from my Superiors, to let go, as a Forerunner to a more
complete Answer, which I do understand is preparing: But in regard I know, that
although the Reverend Author of The Snake in the Grass can, and I believe will do
it so well, as mine will scarce deserve to be called more than the Shadow of
it, yet, my Lords, it may be this Twelve Months er^e his come out; and to have
them Triumph till then, I cannot think it proper; and my Reason is, because
most of the late Converts (of which there is Six of their Teachers, and I think
above an Hundred of their Hearers) are very well disposed to the Church of
England, and I do think there is a great Work going on (I pray God prosper it)
and that makes them rage, and thus bestir themselves; I have, since I came to
London, had diverse Letters from several Quakers in the Country, which are come
off, giving me Thanks for my plain Dealing, some encouraging me never to leave
till I have stripped this young Harlot: But, my Lords, I know they are in their
hot Zeal; and as your Lordships shall advise me by the Reverend Dr. Stanly, or
Mr. Altham, or any other, or otherwise, as to your Wisdom shall seem meet, so
shall I proceed; and if nothing be said to the contrary by any Body, I shall
take it for granted, that I may go on.

And now, my Lords, I have but one thing more to mention, which is, That if my
Endeavors and Labors do find Acceptance at your Lordships Hands, that you
would please to let me have a present Assistance to pay what I owe for Paper,
Printing and Binding, which is near 40 l. And if what I have done be not so
well done as you could wish, I still beg your Favor to accept the Will for the
Deed; or if it be but part of it, so as to give them Content; I desire nothing
but to live: And as your Lordships have been charitably inclined, and very
Bountiful toward my Support, so do I hope I shall never minister Occasion for
the contrary, who am, my Lords,

Your Lordships most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, Fran. Bugg.
Feb. the 16th. 1699.

