A BVLL FROM ROME, CONSISTING OF 15. PARDONS for Delinquents in these
KINGDOMS. With a Declaration of the POPES Election in the Chair at Rome,
where the Cardinals (with their stript-up arms) do use to feel (before his
consecration) whether he be a Man or Woman. Whereunto is occasionally related
by them, the original cause of women's vailes and of their wicked tongues.
According to the Coppie Printed at ROME.

LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by Henry Walker, 1641.

A BVL from Rome. Consisting of 15. Pardons for Delinquents in these Kingdoms.
All you that burdened are with money,
Draw near, and buy sweet Milk and Honey.
Have amongst you with mine Holy Water-pitcher.
HE that has Ears to hear, let him hear: for lo, I grant most powerful
Pardons to all sort of Nations, Religions, and Callings: Protestants, or
Papists, Puritanes or Atheists, all shall be accepted for ready money. And to
show that I am not minded to poison any of you; therefore, here I shall I take
a large taste my self of such purgatory stuff, as I am to deliver unto every
one of you: and so (in conceit) swallow over mine own pardon, which I brought
with me in a box from Rome. To wit, although I begui^ed the Pope, and brought
with me to Rome a Rake, instead of a shovell: yet my pardon is granted, in hope
of the benefit which they (doubtsomly) deem to reap by me hereafter. Now
come apace, both papist, puritan, and Atheist, young and old, whatsoever, come
with courage, for I refuse no sort of money: and you shall understand, that
these my pardons are not altogether popish: for the Pope grants pardons to
none except the money be presently laid down: but as for my self, I will trust
any one a pardon as long time as he will grant to hold his finger in the fire.
Yea, I will be kinder yet: whosoever has no money to buy his pardon I will
freely give it him for his coat.

1. I must of force grant pardons unto all those men who have wicked wives,
yea, without rehearsing their faults whatsoever. And more then that, suppose I
should never look the Pope in the face again, yet I absolutely absolve the
aforesaid persons from any other purgatory than that which they suffer here in
the company of an ill wife.

2. Let Demas also come, and receive his pardon for two pence; for although he
thought to win a world of Goods by preaching the Gospel, and when he saw that
riches followed not, then he left off: yet I had rather have his two pence in
this world, than hereafter to want both man and money also.

3. Although Godfridus, Emperor of Rome when he had most manfully fought the
battle of the Romans, against the Arabians, would not suffer the Romans to
set a single Crown of gold upon his head: saying, That Christ, his Savior had
worn an ignominious, and sharp Crown of Thorns; therefore he would never
wear a glorious and easy Crown on Earth: Yet I dare and do take upon me, to
pardon the Pope himself, who wears, at his pleasure, a threefo^d Crown:
signifying the three heads of Cerberus, the Dog of Hell.

4. Our Scottish and English Captains of war shall be nevertheless pardoned
for money, although some of them have made 8. days in the week, to their
soldiers yea, and other some 9. whereas God himself has ordained only 7.
days in the week, of the which we are not only allowed, but also commanded,
to work and travel 6. and to rest on the 7. day, because the Lord has so
sanctified it unto Himself.

5. I grant a Pardon un^o a certain Printer, who printed Cakolicks for
Catholics; for we that are pennilesse poets in England, are now and then
beholden to the Printers, by reason of our Dedications, says Mr. Green.

6. As for our women now adaye; who cover themselves, both head and face as
well in Church, as in Market, with their Countries kind of vailes, with great
reason I grant them pardons, and shall here in few words, tell you my reason
why; and together, confute, confound, and put to silence, all such as hitherto
have dared to rail against them in that behalf. A Popish Relation.
When Christ walked on earth with his Disciples, Peter, John, James, and the
rest they passing by a little Village (say they) they heard two women, as they
thought, scolding together at the speed, with many fair Curses, Malisons and
vengeances. So that Christ said to Peter, Go thou to yonder couple, while I
tarry here, and exhort them in my name, to leave flyting, banning, and swearing.

Now mine Author says, that it was the Devil and a woman fliting together, to
exercise themselves, even because she had hired him to teach her to out-scold
all her Neighbors. But when Peter came and preached unto them, they defied him,
and spat upon him: so that Peter being wrathful, drew his sword, and cut off
both their heads, and went and told his Master what had happened. Whereat Christ
being offended, said unto Peter, thou have done wickedly to slay those poor
Creatures in their sins: therefore go thou back unto them, and I will give
thee power and commandment, to set their heads on again, that they may
repent, and be saved.

Then Peter running in his hasty anger, took up the woman's head and set it
upon the Devil, and set the Devils head upon the woman: and, as I think,
there it remains yet; for surely it must needs be a Devils head, which has
such an evil tongue within it, as surpasses the Stings of Asps and Adders:
yea, curses all her kindred, and banisheth her husband the Country. Then with
what reason can you blame our women to cover such heads as those? You know,
that who so has but the least blemish or Scar of a Wen, Mole, or Wart, will
strive to hide it. And think ye it then unlalwfull for a woman to hide that
ugly Blemish, even Satan's head, standing upon the shoulders of our dainty
Dames, as well as upon our gross Kichin-stuffe, and upon tripping minsing
Mistress, as well as upon Meg with the Mealie mouth? I deny not indeed, but
that it was a custom in the Old Testament, for the Whores to cover themselves
with Vailes, sitting by the Highways, that thereby they might be known to be
of that light Occupation. But this was far from any custom of honest Women,
howsoever both Ginny and my Lady are now alike muzzeled about their snouts, so
that even honesty it self cries, Fie for shame, upon them. Yet, I say they
shall be pardoned for the causes before mentioned. And because it is said, that
this whorish sort of covered heads and faces, is most usual in our Brittanian
North, therefore I begin first to prepare your Pardons, wishing you also to
prepare money, for indeed yours is a cold Soil, and who dare forbid you
therefore to be covered? A certain Englishman says, that Pope Ioanna had
certainly the Devils head on her shoulders, and that all the Popes ever since
have bin of her brood, even because (says he) they were all womanly and
divellish.



7. Panlickers are those who are Flatterers, of Kings, Princes, and other great
Personages: and Pen-lickers are those whom we call Scribes (forsooth) and
notorious, both these shall be pardoned.

8. It is reported unto me, that a certain Lords bastard son, begot a
bastard with another Ladies bastard daughter: surely this must needs in time
bring forth a bastardly Generation. Not the less, I pardon them all for money
and beseech them not only to read, but also earnestly to weigh these few words
of the spirit, those children which are begotten in whoredom, shall be the
very witnesses of the wickedness of their parents. The 4. Chap. of the Books
of Wisdom; ver. 6.

9. The Corn-mongers, and Fore-stallers of the Markets, must not here be
neglected: but yet I bid them take heed, that they follow not the example of
their Forefathers too much: whereof some have hanged themselves, some drowned
themselves, and other some cut their own throats. Amongst whom, I must needs
here tell you of one, who having abundance of Corn and Meal, even in the time
of extreme Dearth, yea, and of Famine says mine Author, yet still and still
kept up his victuals, in hope that the prices would grow higher, and higher
yet. But, as God would, the prices came down, and the Corn grew so cheap, that
this jolly Merchant went to buy a roap to hang himfelfe: but coming to the
Roapers shop, his greedy stomach would but serve him to give a groat for a
Roape, whereas the Roaper would not sell it under 6 pence: so that he thought
in himself, that in a short time the prices of roaps would come down, as the
corn had done, so that he hoped to buy a sixpeny rope for twopence, and then
to hang himself good cheap.

10 Let the point-makers, and Button-makers, then draw near, and receive their
conjunct pardon, not each for two pence, but the one for as many points, as
will go round about the knees of my breeches in pomp, and the other as many
buttons; for though I need them not now, yet J know not how soon.

11. And of force I must also pardon the pretty Pin-maker, and that for a paper
of pins to my wife: always, I pray thee beware, that they be good indeed with
fair heads, and fast set on: or else; I assure thee, she will not stick to
curse both thee, who made them, and me who brought her them.

12. The Needle-makers may boldly come for their pardons, because they are not
only profitable for our wellbeloved Tailors, but also for good huswifes, at
home, soldiers abroad, and Beggars every where.

13. Bu^ with the best will of all, I freely allow my best Pardons upon those
of the Gentle Craft, and all others also who are any ways appendicles, or
subordinaries to that Calling: to wit, all those that make Awles,
Pantoffle-heeles, thread of Hemp, pegs of Wood, Lasts for shoes and boots,
and all other such ingenious instruments, for so high a Science.

And therefore I charge, and command even in the name, and full authority of
the Pope himself, and that under the pain of his Holiness high displeasure,
and to be holden as an heretieke, and sent to purgatory for five thousand
years; that neither Printer nor Poet, after the date hereof dare to take in
hand to speak any ways inv^ctively against them, either in their Books,
Ball^ts, or other Libels: no, not so much as once to name them by the name of
Souter, nor yet to dare rehearse those fearful Battles fought in Hell,
betwixt the Tailors and them, striving who should be greatest there; except
indeed the Printer or Poet, first bring the Devils handwriting, in true
Tes^^fication that the Souters have the victory: and then let them procced in
thetr due praise, to the name of all Romish Tailors.

14. Here now I grant a pardon to a loving woman, who gave a discreet answer,
when she was asked if her husband was hanged, saying:

He was hanged once, but now he is not:
In spite of his Foes, his Friends did ease that.
For my dearest Love had not hung hours twain,
But I got his pardon, and cut him down again.
15. Now at the last, I must also give a pardon to an holy Priest, who was
clowting of his shoes when his Neighbors called upon him, to go quickly
(before another came) and win money, to bring a dead Corpse to the grave: and he
being in such haste, could not find his knife to cut away the Lingell, but let
it traile after him to the church, and sung this holy Quire-song the space of a
mile, betwixt the house and the grave, with many repetitions, as follows:

Ye that follow me behind,
Tread not on my Lingels end,
A Tale of the Popes Consecration.
MOST of all to be accounted, is that holy and miraculous Stool at Rome, says
one, wherewith they choose the Pope, and prove him to be a Man, not a Woman; for
he that is chosen to be Pope, on the day of election, is set in this stool,
and a Cardinal standing on either side, they strip up their sleeves, and with
their naked hands and arms, feel from under the stool, whether it be a Man
or a Woman, and so give Declaration unto the whole rabble there conveened,

And this has bin their Custom ever since the English-woman beguiled them,
who was their Pope, about the space of 3 years, even Successor to Leo the 4.
Anno 852.

FINIS.

