New Rome Unmasked, AND Her Foundation Shaken; BY A farther Discovery of the
Grand Errors, Deep Hypocrisies, Popish Practices, and Pernicious Principles of
the Teachers and Leaders of the People, called, QUAKERS; Containing also, A
Brief Answer to three Books, wrote by G. Whitehead, one of her chief Cardinals
in Nine Months time, against Fran. Bugg. The 1. Entitled, Innocence against
Envy, etc. The 2. The contentious Apostate, and his Blow, etc. The 3. The
Contentious Apostate Recharged, etc. As also, a brief Narrative of the
Conference between the said G. Whitehead and Fran. Bugg; whereby his notorious
Lies are manifest, his Errors and deceitful practices confuted and detected.

All which is plainly demonstrated to the Capacity of every Impartial and
Intelligible Reader, by one who was more than 25 Years a Member of their
Society, being carried away with their Dissimulation.

By FRANCIS BUGG.

Her Foundations are fallen, her Walls are thrown down; for it is the Vengeance
of the LORD, to take vengeance upon her, As she has done, do unto her. Jer.
50.15.

Raze it, Raze it, even to the Foundations thereof, Psalm 137.7.

Licensed, May 4. 1692.

London, Printed for the Author, 1692. And are to be sold by John Gwillin,
Bookseller in Bishopsgate-street, over against the Royal-James, and John
Dunton, at the Raven, in the Poultry, and Sam Manshi^ (...)

To the Honorable Sir H. N. Barronet.
Honored Sir,
THE Apostle Paul, being Accused by the Malicious Jews, and many grievous
Complaints laid against him, saying, he was a Pestilent Fellow, a Mover of
Sedition [or Contention] And that before Felix, the Governor, and Agrippa the
King; yet in this the Apostle comforted himself, and thought himself happy in,
that those Noble Persons gave him leave to speak for himself, and to make his
Christian Defense. And in like manner do I think my self happy, (Honored Sir)
in that I have the Benefit of my Pen, and the Press, to make my defense against
the loud out-crys, and heavy Clamours of this People; who have in Print exposed
me under as odious Names, as their Tongue can invent: And although my defense
against their causless Accusations may not hold parallel with what that great
Apostle made for himself, and his Christian Profession, which the Jews
accounted Heresy: Yet have I adventured to spend some leisurable hours, to set
forth to the World some reasons, why it is no Apostasy from the Christian
Faith, to separate from the Quakers.

Be pleased therefore, That under your Name and Patronage they may appear, as a
Covert to vail their Imperfections, for Defective they must needs be in many
respects: First, For that I am not endued with that Spirit the Apostles had:
Secondly, I am not Accomplished with Parts and Learning, sufficient to graple
with such Scholars as are some of the Chieftains of the Quakers: Thirdly, My
Trade and other Business, which I have upon me, are great Impediments, and
Hindrances from that study, which is requisite to such a work. And Fourthly, My
distance from the Press occasions many Omitions and Mistakes. Yet forasmuch as
when I first appeared public against their Errors in Anno 1682. I presumed to
Dedicate the same to your self, in hopes of your favorable sensure; and
meeting then with no reproof, gives me ground to presume this once more, to
present you with what follows, in hopes still to obtain your favorable
Construction; of whose Goodness, Moderation, and Impartial Justice; I have had
more than Twenty Years experience, as well as your bearing with, and forbearing
me, in some scruples I have had; whether by reason of my long time of Education
among that People, or other Infirmity, I cannot tell; God knows; yet, such
has been your Christian Condiscention to me therein, as well as to others; that
should I enlarge upon it, it might rather diminish than add to you: In the Eyes
of some who are not that way inclined: and therefore it does sufficiently
suffice that I have reaped the benefit of it; which as it ever did, so it ever
will Oblige me to your Service, with all Respect, and Grateful Acknowledgments
of your Especial Favors.

I am, Sir, Your Devoted, And most Humble Servant, FRAN. BUGG.
Milden-Hall, September the 3d. 1692.
To the Noble Bereans of this Age.
Christian Friends,
SInce there are none Recorded in holy Scripture, on whom the Holy Ghost
conferred so Honorable a Character, as the Bereans of that Age; [In that they
searched after truth Impartially, and when they found it, Embraced it readily;
and for which they were justly accounted Noble:] Therefore it is, that to you
the Progeny of that worthy Stock, and Noble Bereans of this Age, that I choose
to Dedicate the ensuing Discourse; and therefore I beg of you not to degenerate
from the Example of your Progenitors; if you do, you are no longer true
Bereans: And to such I do not Design this work; if you do not, I may assure my
self of the justice of a fair Inquiry, and an equal Judgment.

I remember the Athenians, June the 14th. 1692. by their Tenth Question,
demanded of the Quakers where to find their Creed, or an Account of their
Religion: Will you [said they] Subscribe to any of the three Creeds, Nicean;
Athanasian, or Apostolical? If not, Will you give us one of your own, that the
World may know what to make of you.

To this, I find Geo. Whitehead, and others, in their Answer, styled, The
Doting Athenians, etc. saying, Come and see, come into the true Light and see,
and you may find our Creed, etc.

Now, lest the way to find out their crooked Creed, which lies dispersedly in
their Pamphlets, should prove too hard a Task for the searching Bereans, I
thought it needful to lend them my hand; and that it may the more plainly
appear, not to relate either to the Nicean, Athanasian, or Apostolical Creeds;
I think it necessary to recite the sum of the Apostolical Creed, which includes
the substance of the other two; and which is believed by all Christians,
whether called Episcopalians, Presbyterians Independants, and Baptists; for
when contraries meet, their disagreement does the more manifestly appear. viz.

The Christian Creed.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, And in Jesus Christ his only Son; who
was born of the Virgin Mary; who suffered under Pilate; was Crucified, Dead,
and Buried; Rose again the third Day from the Dead, And Ascended into Heaven,
and sits on the Right Hand of God in Majesty on High; As an Advocate, making
Intercession for us: And I believe that from thence he shall come to judge both
the Quick and the Dead: I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of
Life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the
Son together is Worshipped and Glorified, who spoke by the Prophets; And I
believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church: I acknowledge one Baptism for the
Remission of Sins; I look for the Resurrection of the Dead, And the Life of the
World to come, Amen.

To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be Glory, Honor, Power, Might,
Majesty, and Dominion for evermore, Amen.

Now Noble Berean, whether Christian or Quaker, for some such I hope their are
in every Society: If thou doubt or question the soundness of this recited
Creed, pray examine, and read these following Scriptures for thy Information
and Satisfaction, Luke 2.10.11. Acts 5.30, 31, 32. and 10.39. to 40. Acts 1.9.
Micah 5.2. Psalm. 2.7. and 16.10. Zeck. 9.9. and 11, 12, 13. Mark 1.10. Acts
2.22. to 32. Numb. 24.17.19. Duet. 18.15. Isa. 9.6, 7. Luke 24.4.51. John
20.12. Matt. 28.2. Acts 3.13. to 32. and 4.10, 11, 12. Heb. 7.25. and 9.24.
John 17.20, 21. 1 John 2.1, 2. And here thou will find that he that was born of
the Virgin, the Glorious Angels called Christ, the Lord: And you will find that
the holy Apostles said, him that you slew, and hanged on a Tree; him has God
exalted to be both a Prince, and a Savior; yea, and Christ the Lord, whose
Body was not of a Perishing Nature, for it saw no Corruption: And that all the
Prophets gave witness to this Jesus Christ the Savior of the World. Now, if on
the contrary you find in the Quakers Creed, that they believe, and say, that
they cannot call him Christ, who thus was born of the Virgin, who was by wicked
Men slain, and hanged on a Tree; if you find them to say his Body was of a
perishing Nature; and if you find, as you may perceive p. 78, 79. of this
Treatise, that the Quakers Prophets give witness to G. Fox, instead of this
Christ; that they call him G. Fox, the Branch, the Star, the Son of
Righteousness; and put the North of England for the Town of Bethlehem; then
may thou have cause to think that their Notions invert the Faith, and seek to
overturn the Christian Religion: Read, Try, and Judge.

The Quakers Creed, I.
A Question to the Professors, p. 33.
NOW the Scriptures do expressly distinguish, between Christ and the Garment
which he wore, between him and the Body, in which he came; between the
Substance which was veiled, and the Vail which veiled it: Lo I come, a Body
have thou prepared me, there is plainly he, and the Body in which he came.
There was the outward Vessel, and the inward Life; this we certainly know, and
can never call the Bodily Garment Christ; But that [Heavenly Treasure] which
appeared, and dwelt in the Body.

Remark.
Come into the Light, and see if this Creed of theirs be not contrary to the
Testimony of the Blessed and Glorious Angels, Holy Apostles, Blessed Martyrs,
and true Confessors for these 1600 Years; here you may see, if you will but
come into the Light, (I mean to the holy Apostles Writings) wherein they differ
from all Christians; they cannot call his Body Christ, only a Garment, a Vail,
a Vessel. What! Did the Prophets foretell that a Virgin should conceive, and
bring forth a Garment? Is this their Scripture Language, they so often call
for, in Opposition to the Trinity and Sacraments? Oh horrible Blasphemy! But to
this agrees John Whitehead's Doctrine, in their Book, The Quakers Refuge fixed,
etc. p. 37, 38. viz. Nothing which was Mortal was called Christ.

The Quakers Creed. II.
A Quest. etc. p. 22.
IF I, or any one else, have felt the saving Arm of the Lord revealed in us: If
we have felt a measure of the same Life, Power, and Anointing, revealed in our
Vessels, as was revealed in his; Is it not of the same Nature? Is it not the
same thing? Is not Christ the Seed? And is not this Seed sown in the Heart? Now
if this Seed spring, and grow up in me, into a Spiritual shape and form: Is not
Christ then formed in me? If I be ingrafted into, and grow up in it; Am not I
ingrafted into Christ? And do I not grow up in him? And is not this the same
Christ that took upon him the Body of Flesh, and offered it without the Gates
of Jerusalem? Is there any more than one? Or is there any other than he? Is
Christ divided? is there one Christ within, and another without?

Remark.
Come and see, thou searching Berean, and behold the Quakers Creed: They cannot
as in the first Branch of their Creed, call him that was born of the Virgin,
Christ; him that by wicked Hands was slain, and hanged on a Tree, Christ. And
no marvel, if the same Christ that offered up that Body, or Garment, or Vail,
or Figure, (as they frame it) be in them, as they say it is, even the very same
that suffered Death at Jerusalem. Oh horrible Blasphemy!

The Quakers Creed, III.
A Quest. p. 20.
TO whom do the Names and Titles of Jesus and Christ, chiefly, and in the first
place belong? Do they belong to the Body, which was took by him, or to him who
took the Body? -- For that which he took upon him was our Garment, even the
Flesh and Blood of our Nature, which is of an Earthly perishing Nature. And p.
27. Is not the Substance, the Life, the Anointing, called Christ, wherever it
is found, does not the Name belong to the whole Body, and every Member in the
Body, as well as to the Head, so that the Name is not given to the Vessel, but
to the Nature, to the Heavenly Treasure, to that which is of Him in the Vessel.

Remark.
From the Premises, pray observe, though they propose this Branch of their
Creed, by way of Query; yet do but turn it, and you shall observe the true and
natural consequences of it is: 1. That the Name Jesus and Christ do not so
properly belong to the Body, as to the Treasure in the Body; here they separate
that which GOD has for ever joined together; See their Book, viz. The malice
of the Independent Agent, p. 23. Confusion,
and whereas they say that His Body was of an Earthly perishing Nature, read
Acts 2.27. and 13.35. and their Error soon appears. And the Name Christ (say
they) belongs to the whole Body, as well as to the Head; yea, and to every
Member of the Body, so that they having the Light, the Treasure, the Life of
Christ in them; even the same that suffered Death at Jerusalem, to be in them:
And the Name Christ, not properly belonging to that Body, which suffered Death
at Jerusalem, as aforesaid, etc. The Name by their Logic, belongs to every
believing Quaker; so that there is as many Christ's, by their Doctrine, as there
is believing Quakers. Oh horrible Blasphemy! Read Matt. 24.24.

The Quakers Creed. IV.
G. F.'s News coming up out of the North, p. 14. 15. 34.
A Word to all you Deceivers, who deceive the People, and Blasphemers, who utter
forth your Blasphemies, and Hypocrisies; that tell People of a Sacrament, and
tell them it is the ordinance of God. Blush, blush and tremble -- you who live
in the Witchery, and bewitch People. Page 14. So Dust is the Serpents Meat;
their original is but Dust, which is but the Letter, which is Death; their
Church is Dust, and their Gospel is Dust; which is Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John; which is the Letter, p. first, Written from the Mouth of the Lord, from
one who is Naked; and stands Naked before the Lord, Clothed with
Righteousness, G. W. Behold your Creed, and view your Book, Antichrist in
Flesh, etc. p. 24. and blush for ever; for take away your new word Holy, and
your needless word but, and your Change is answered fully.
whose Name is not known in the World, risen up out of the North, which was
Prophesied of, but now it is fulfilled; the Army is coming up out of the North,
p. 15. I am the same Door that ever was, the same Christ to day, yesterday, and
for ever.

Remark.
Come and see the Quakers sensorious Creed, their uncharitable Creed, their
Blasphemous Creed, First, they believe the Public Ministers are Deceivers,
Blasphemers, Hypocrites and Witches; and why so? because they tell People of a
Sacrament, and that Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, is the Gospel of Christ; away
with it all, say they, it is Dust, your Sacrament is Dust, your Ordinance is
Dust, which is the Serpents Meat, your Church is Dust, your Gospel is Dust,
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John is Dust; which is the Serpents Meat, which is
Death, etc. But Secondly, who is this that says so? See Antichrist in Flesh,
etc. p. 24.
Why, it is Geo. Fox, who says he unites from the Mouth of the Lord; who stands
Naked, who is clothed with Righteousness, as with a Mantle: Yea, invisible
George, for if you will believe him, his Name is not known in the World: Oh
horrible Lie! there was not ten Men's Names in England known better. Well, But
this is not all, he is risen out of the North, which was Prophesied of, and is
now fulfilled: O notably done! And let me for once make Proclamation; O yes, O
yes, Can George Whitehead, William Penn, or any Man else tell me what Prophet
it was from Genesis to the Revelation, that Prophesied of Geo. Fox's rising out
of the North; and that he should be such an Imposter, as to call the holy
Scripture Dust, which is the Serpents Meat; and be the Head Sectmaster of such
a compound of Heresies, as has almost filled the World. If they can, let them
come to me, and I will give them Content for their searching; for I profess I
cannot find one Verse, unless you will accept of Mat. 24.24. and by what
follows, it should be that very Scripture; for p. 15. viz. the last recital of
this fourth Branch of their Creed, G. Fox writes thus of himself, I am the Door
that ever was; the same Christ yesterday, to day, and for ever, etc. Here is
Christ's words fufilled, who said, There shall arise false Christ's, and false
Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch, that if it were
possible, they shall deceive the very Elect, etc. And this Prophecy is
fulfilled in this our Day, and happy are all who escape their Delusions: And
that G. Fox, upon his own, and the Quakers Principles, can mean no other but
the Christ in him, viz. In proper Language, he himself is the Christ he there
speaks of; first, because he does not say, I am the Door, says Christ; no, he
takes it wholly and solely upon himself, and therein he was the more like
himself: See his Book, styled, Readiness Errand to Damascus, etc. p. 7. The old
Man cannot endure to here the new Man speak, which is Christ; And Christ is the
way: And if Christ be in you, must he not say, I am the way, the Truth and the
Life, etc. I think this very place may serve as a Key to unlock their Misterium
Magnum; Christ in them, which in their sense, See the second Branch of your
Creed.
is in the same manner that he was in him that suffered: And to put all out of
doubt, that they do so mean, see their Book, styled, The Watcher, etc. p. 37.
To the end of all Disputes and Arguments I am come; for before they was, I am,
etc. Says James Parnell, now who would think but that James herein told a
notorious Lie; in saying he was come to the end of all Disputes and Arguments,
when Geo. Whitehead, and my self also, are two Witnesses, that they are not yet
ended, though James has been dead more than Twenty Years; Again, that he
should say, before all Disputes and Arguments was. I am, when Disputes and
Arguments was thousands of years before J. Parnell was born, even in Moses's
time: and yet J. Parnell upon the Quakers Creed, and Blasphemous Principles
told no Lie; for ye must Interpret the I am to be Christ in him: As in the days
of Christ, when the Jews told him, John 8.57. Thou art not yet Fifty Years old,
and have thou seen Abraham? Christ answered him, ver. 58. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, before Abraham was, I am. Now upon our Christian Creed, this was true
in Christ, but Abominably false, and Blasphemous Lie, in Parnell: O dreadful, I
tremble to behold these unheard of Blasphemies. See also Josiah Coal's
Testimony, for E. Buroughs, printed in his Works in Folio, viz. He (E. B.) was
a Man, endued with the Almighty Power of God, which lived and reigned in him,
and the Treasury of pure divine Wisdom was opened in him, etc. This is the most
they will allow to be in him; they will grant that in him that suffered upon
the Cross, there was the Heavenly Treasure, the Substance, the Life, the
Anointing, the Power: but I do not remember that ever they granted the Almighty
Power to be in Christ; I am sure not more Eminently than in themselves. But
that it may yet further appear, that our dear Saviors Prophecy, as above, is
fulfilling, which says, There shall false Christ's, and false Prophets arise,
etc See Soll. Eccles Lying wonder, and false Prophecy, of the Death of John
Story, Very like that of G. Whiteheads to S. B.
viz.

O John Story! What have thou done against the Lord, and thy own Soul! thou
have divided the Herritage of the Lord, and the good Ordinances which Christ
Jesus has set up in his Church, (i. e.) Women's Preaching, and Women's Meetings;
The Christ in them ordained these Ordinances: but Christ that was born of the
Virgin, ordained Baptism and the Lord's Supper; now choose which Christ ye will
follow and obey.
therefore will the Lord throw Contempt upon thee, and if thou do not repent
speedily, miserable will be thy end. -- If ever thou find Mercy with the
Lord, go home to the North with speed, and break up the divided Meetings, which
thou and John Wilkinson have been Instrumental to divide from the Body of our
Lord Jesus Christ: Mark the Christ in G. Fox, for he is the first Founder of
the Women's Meetings, which Soll. Eccles calls the Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ. See de. chr. Liberate, etc. 2d. part, p. 33. to 70.
-- The Anger of the Lord is chiefly against thee: and thou art bound with two
Bonds; for the Church and Brethren have bound thee on Earth, and thou art
surely bound in Heaven: And this is the Testimony of Jesus to thee; neither
shall thou be able to get from under these Bonds, till thou art reconciled to
the Brethren: O haste to to the Work abovesaid, least the wrath of the Lord
overtake thee, before it be done, and be reconciled to Geo. Fox, who is Gods
Friend, and the Servant of the living God, and great Apostle of Jesus Christ,
haste away to the North, for thy time is short; and go quickly thou and thy
Brother, if possibly you may bring again to the Body of Jesus Christ, those ye
have scattered, least that their Blood be required at your hands: Arise
quickly, and be going, For this is the word of the Lord to thee, That this year
shall thou John Story dye, because thou have taught Rebellion against the
living God.

The first Day of the first Month, 1677. Soll. Eccles.
See the first part of Babels Builders unmasking themselves, by Thomas Crisp,
p, 15.




Oh the Impudence of this Imposture, and false Prophet of G. Fox: In that,

First, he avouched Women's Meetings to be the Good Ordinances of Jesus Christ,
which he had set up in his Church.

Secondly, In saying, that to the reconciled to the Body of the Quakers, which
he deemed to be the Body of Christ, was the only way to find Mercy.

Thirdly, In delivering that great Lie in the Name of the Lord. This year shall
thou John Story dye, who at that time was very ill, and not like to recover;
but it pleased God that he lived about four years after.

Fourthly, This was he, even he, that burnt his Fiddles on Tower Hill.

Fifthly, This was he, yea, even he, that went as a great sign, and notable
wonder, stark naked, with a Pan of Coals on his Head to Bartholomew-Fair,
enough to deceive the very Elect (as Christ said) if it were possible.

Sixthly, This is he, who in his Music Lector, etc. p. 22. said, viz. I do
affirm, that if John (the Apostle) had said he had been a Sinner, he had lied.

Seventhly, This is he; yea, even that false Prophet, who writ thus of G. Fox,
his Master, viz. A Prophet indeed, -- it was said of Christ, he was in the
World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not; So it may be
said of this true Prophet, G. Fox, whom John said; he was not. Quakers Chal. p.
6.

Now, Reader, Upon our Christian Creed, this is downright Blasphemy: But
according to the Quakers Principles, it harmonizes with their Creed, which is
doubtless the very reason why they never to this day condemned it by public
Censure; mark the fifth Branch of their Creed, which is as follows.

The Quakers Creed, V.
THE Light, Christ, The Great Mist. etc. by G. Fox, p. 254.
by which all things were made and created, glorified with the Father before
the World began, which the Scripture testifies of, is above the Scripture,
before the Scripture was; they that be not in this Christ, are Reprobates, in
which the Scripture end, and testify of; and so is Christ, the same yesterday,
to day, and for ever; that the Saints came to witness within them, not another
Christ, nor many Christ's, etc.

Remark.
Now who can blame Soll. Eccles upon the Quakers Creed, for saying, first, That
G. Fox was in the World; secondly, that the World was made by him; thirdly,
that the World knew him not; as to the first, my self and Thousands more can
bear him witness; as to the second, according to their Creed last recited, the
same Christ, by which all things were made and Created, is in them; which, if
true, then that proves sufficiently what Eccles says; and as to the third, see
p. 1. of G. Fox his own Book, called, News coming out of the North, etc. which
says, viz. Writ from the Mouth of the Lord, Clothed with Righteousness, whose
Name is not known in the World, risen up out of the North; which, if true, who
can blame Sollomon: For though he was not a wise Man, he was a Prophet, I mean,
one of Geo. Fox's Prophets. According to the old Proverb, as was the Master, so
was the Man, viz. Both false Prophets, false Pretenders, and great Impostors:
Indeed, G. Whitehead in his Vindication of Solomon, in his Book, Serious
Search, p. 58. does a little complain, in a little failer in Syntax; but to
amend it, (and to help Sollomon Eccles, John Blackling, and other Idolaters in
the right wording the Matter) he says Judgment fixed, etc. p. 19. For I affirm,
G. Fox does deny the same in reference to himself, as a particular Man or
Person, whose Days and Years are limited, only the truth of the Immortal Seed,
Christ in him, he stands to maintain against all Opposers and Persecuting
Gainsayers and Apostates: See also his Innocence against Envy, etc. p. 18. to
the same purpose; so that had Solomon said, the Light in G. Fox was in the
World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not; he had then
acted according to their innate Principle, and suitable to their Creed, which
had been, I say, equally Idolatrous and Blasphemous.

The Quakers Creed, VI.
A brief Discovery of a Threefold Estate of Antichrist, p. 15.
ALL teaching which is given forth by Jesus Christ, is to bring up the hearers
to Perfection, even to the Measure, Stature, and Fullness of Christ; this the
Scripture witnesses, and I witness the Scripture, fulfilled in me, G. Fox.

See your Book, Entitled, A New England Firebrand quenched; being an Answer to
a Book, put forth by Mr. Roger Williams, entitled, Geo. Fox dug out of his
Burrow, etc. in two parts, containing 488 pages in Quarto; one thing is worthy
of observation, that where the said Firebrand takes notice of G. Fox's great
Mystery; Yea, and may well also be ashamed of the said Firebrand, which is as
full of Errors almost as Leafs, and yet G. Whitehead in the second part, p,
236, assists G. Fox what he can with a Marginal Note, etc. of which, perhaps
more hereafter.
It is no horrible Blasphemy, to say the Soul is a part of God, etc.

G. Fox's Answer to the Westminster. Pet. p. 33.
If ever you own the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles Writings, you will own
our Writings which are given forth by the same Spirit and Power.

Truths Defense, etc. p. 21 to 24.
You might as well have condemned the Scriptures to the Fire, as our Queries for
our giving forth Papers o^ Printed Books; it is from the immediate Eternal
Spirit of God, p. 92. we are elected to Salvation, we have the Witness within
us, Praises be to the Glorious Lord God for ever, who has elected and chosen
us before the Foundation of the World: But thou (meaning the Querist:) art
ordained of old for Condemnation and Perdition among the ungodly ones, and art
a Reprobate, one that hates Christ, and art blind.

Readiness Errand, etc. p. 8.
He that has the same Spirit that raised up Jesus Christ from the Dead, is
equal with God: See also G. F.'s great Mystery, p. 78, 127. 283. where their
being equal with God, is not denied, Readiness Errand, p. 14.
but strongly employed; Christ is the substance of all Figures, and his Flesh is
a Figure.

All that do study to raise a living thing out of a Dead, to raise the Spirit
out of the Letter, are Conjurers, and draw Points and Reasons, and so speak a
Divination of their own Brain, they are Conjurers and Diviners, and their
Teaching is from Conjuration, which is not spoken from the Mouth of the Lord,
the Letter of the Scripture is carnal, and the Letter is Death, and kills. p.
7.

And as for any being moved of the Lord, to take away your Hourglass from you,
G. Fox's great Mystery, p. 77.
by the Eternal Power it is owned.

The Priests of the World are, 1. Conjurers, 2. A brief Discovery, etc. p.
7.8.9.10.
Thieves and Robbers, 3. Antichrists, 4. Witches, 5. Devils, 6. Liars, 7 A
Viperous and Serpentine Generation, 8. Blasphemers, 9. Scarlet colored Beasts,
10. Babylon's Merchants, 11. Whited Walls, and painted Sepulchers, 12. Ravening
Wolves, 13. Greedy dumb Dogs, 14. Eminent and Ambitious Pharisees.

Remark.
Come and see once more this dark dismal Antichristian and Uncharitable Creed
of these deluded Souls; the Contents of this sixth Branch thereof follows,
viz 1. They, like the Pharisees, hold a sinless Perfection; yea, G. F. said he
witnessed being come up to the Measure and Stature, and Fullness of Christ: 2.
If ever we own Christ or his Apostles, we must necessarily own them, yea, and
their Writings too, they being equivalent with the Apostles Writings: 3. They
affirm, that as Quakers, they are elected and chosen before the Foundation of
the World. And contrariwise, they Sentence and Condemn their Opposer the
Querist; being of a contrary Opinion, and as such, without showing any other
Cause; to be a Reprobate, ordained of old for Condemnation and Perdition, one
that is Blind, and a Hater of Christ: 4 They do assert such as have the eternal
Spirit, to be equal with God; which Spirit they say, they themselves have, and
by it they give forth their Papers and Printed Books: 5. They assert the Flesh,
or Body of Christ, to be but a Figure, which elsewhere, they called a Garment,
and say, they cannot call him Christ: 6. They say the holy Scipture is Carnal,
Dust, Death, and Kills, and that studying therein, is Conjuring: 7. They
Justify Felony, under a pretense of being moved by the Spirit of God: 8. Its
lamentable to behold their Incharity, in calling the public Ministry without
exception, restriction, or distinction, Conjurers, Thieves, Robbers,
Antichrists, Witches, Devils, Serpents, Vipers, Blasphemers, Wolves, Beasts,
Dogs, etc. Surely it is needless to enlarge; especially in an Epistle, (since
their erroneous Creed is manifest, and that by this time the Athenians; and all
wise Men, who are not wilfully blind, may know what to make of them; for the
Tree is known by the Fruit) least I make the Porch bigger than the House.

Thus (Courteous Reader) I have, as it were, led thee by the Hand through the
crooked Paths; and by ways of the Quakers intrioate Wilderness, and be wildred,
wild, and unheard of extravagant Notions, dangerous Errors, and pernicious
Principles: Not to have thee in Love with them; no, that it is not my design,
but to beware of being Insured by them, as I once was. And thus much, touching
the Quakers Creed, which is neither Nicean, Athanasian, nor Apostolical; but I
affirm it to he Antichristian, Blasphemous, Idolatrous, if not a Compound of
all Heresies: For, If as they write, they do believe indeed,
Then I affirm, this is their Creed:
Who can with safety them believe?
Who Write and Print, the Simple to deceive?


Object. But some may say, its true, their Creed is very well set forth from
the words of their own printed Principles, and you give them a fair opportunity
to meet you, to make their exceptions against what you charge upon them, and
their Principles; yet this Method, I presume they will not take, but rather
choose to use their old Method of Printing; thinking by their false glossing,
and Juggling tricks to cast a Mist over the Minds of the Simple, as in their
Answer to the Quak. unmasked, etc. They think they have done; and therefore I
desire to know what Method is best to use, when I come into their Company.

Answ. What you say is very true; they can write fair and plausable, holding
forth one thing to their People, and another thing to the World. See p. 78. to
the end, and by the Authority of their Yearly Meeting, impose these
Controversial Books upon their Country Friends; I was the last Month at
Melton-Mowbery, (The Quaker's Bookseller in George-yard.)
in Leichestershire, where one Thomas Earl, a Quaker, dwells; and he told me
that Thomas Northcot sent him some Books, wrote against me, but he sent them
back; Tho. Northcot sends them to him again; tells him, his Commission, viz,
that the Yearly Meetings, Order was, that two of a sort should be sent to every
Meeting: He returned them again, and would not be imposed upon; for which he is
to be commended, and all such manly Men. However, by this we may observe, that
their own People begin to be weary of their Books, and that the Press begins to
be Burdensome, notwithstanding their public Purse, etc. Well, but to the
Method,

I know of no better Method to advise to: And to use my self, than what William
Penn did once excellently; chaulk out; in his Book, styled, A Caveat against
Popery, etc. which is, first, to show the Papists their Errors, as I have done
the Quakers; next, to show their double dealing, viz. one thing to the World,
and are indeed another to themselves, and their under Graduits; all which I
have set forth as the practice of the Quakers, and lastly, call them to recant,
and condemn them to their errors, before he will either take their words, for
what they say, or trouble himself more with them, whose Methods I purpose to
take; pray here W. Penn to (his late Friends,) the Papists, p, 5. Though to argue
against a Tribe of Men, who esteem all reason carnal, and Scripture imperfect,
might rightly be judged a mere beating the Air. -- Yet, to prevent those who
may be deceived, and if possibly to reclaim such as are; and lastly, to clear
my own conscience, most of all in my Eye, etc.

Now, how far my old Friends, the Quakers, resemhle Will. Penn's late Friends,
the Papists, in accounting both Scripture and Reason, both Carnal and
imperfect, I leave to the Judgment of all Christians, who shall read their
Creed, and other passages in this Treatise, which I have fairly quoted, and
kept to the sense of what they write. Again, p. 3. of his Caveat, etc. They are
grown so complisant, as none seem more exasperated at Persecution, than
themselves [whilest the very Fathers of it] decrying the fierceness of some
Countries, [whose Incendiaries they were, and still are.] Nay for all their
venerable esteem of the Pope's Infallability, they have not stuck to censure
his roaring Bulls [though procured by their own means:] That many unacquainted
with their practices, are ready to believe them what they say themselves to be;
whose Morral is, to have two strings to their Bow, to be Ambo dexter, and
furnished with meanings, to suit the compass of all occasions.

Now, As this was a most grand piece of Hypocrisy in W. Penn's, (now Friends,)
the Papists, so it is the same in my old Friends, the Quakers, of which for
these three Instances of his: I could give Thirty, had I room to enlarge. See
p. 78. to the end of this Treatise, to avoid repetition: Next for his method, a
Caveat, etc. p. 35. To conclude, If we would not receive a Thief until he has
Repented; let the Papists ( yea, and Quakers too) first recant his volumnious
Errors, not known in Scriptures; nor ever heard of for 300 (nay, respecting the
Quakers, we may say 1600) Years together after Christ, etc.

And although I do not approve of all W. Penn has writ (who sometimes have writ
against Popery so warmly, as no Man did exceed him; yet when 'twas like to be
Rampant here, his Applause thereof was too apparent) yet in this case, I like
his method, and do intend to abide by it.

Object. But some may say, if their Tenants be thus bad, as their own Books
sets forth; would it not be a proper Method to go to their Meetings, and there
to make it manifest to, and before their young Disciples.

Answ. I sent a Letter to them, sometime in July last, of the same Import; and
though I have a Propriety in their Meeting House, as set forth, p. 51. yet they
not only refused to grant, that I might freely come; but in that they have
their Religion, as they call it; established by Law, as they Dream; they gave
me threatening words, etc. An Abstract of the Letter, they sent me, is as
follows, viz.

FRAN. BUGG.
Thine received, I conceive, that neither thy Twenty Pounds in the House, nor
the Covenant with our Friends, dated, 1688. will justify thee for taking up
the time, (by us set apart to worship God:) In controversy; either as a
Subject under the present Government, or as a Christian: For dare thou say,
that the Settlement by Law of an undisturbed worship to all Dissenters, is not
good and commendable, and that a penalty upon the Violators thereof is not
just. Francis, beware of such consequences, and disturb our Meetings no more,
least such thy pretended Vindication, proves thy great disadvantage, both as a
Man, and as a Christian, etc.


To which, I returned this Answer.
Joshua Bangs,
I dare not say, but that a Settlement by Law of Gods worship, is good and
commendable. And I am glad you so deem it, and begin to own your Establishment
by Law; though I must tell you, that yours is rather indulged, than established,
and you stand upon your good behavior: And as to your second Proposition, (i.
e.) That a Penalty upon the Violators of it just: I agree with you also; but
withal, I must tell you, that neither that Law, that thus settle and establish
you (of which you make a great boast) nor yet your License either does, or can
take away my Right in the Meeting House, etc. But if you, according to your new
Opinion, did always account it commendable to have God's Worship established by
Law, and a Penalty upon Violaters of it is just; do not you therein condemn
your Brethren, whose ancient practice was frequently to disturb the established
Worship of God: And do you not therein justify the practice of such as Whipped,
Stockt, Imprisoned, and Fined your Brethren for violating and disturbing such a
Worship, so established by Law: Yea, you acquit them of the Sin of Persecution,
with which you formerly charged them: but now you begin to threaten me to
beware of the consequences which may fall on me, both as a Man, and a
Christian, etc.

By which Letter from Josh. Bangs, it is plain what they would be at, had they
Power; which, God grant they never may: But if they had, so long as my property
in the House remains, so long God permitting me Life and Health, I shall at
times visit them, in order to show them their Errors, still resuming my
frequent Challenge: That if they will give me a Months notice, I will meet any
four, six, or ten of their ablest Preachers, in Milden-Hall, and prove them
guilty of the Errors in this Book, laid to their Charge.

Thus (Noble Bereans) have I finished my Epistle to you, in which I have truly
and fairly stated the Quakers Creed, showed the way how to deal with them; and
by their recited Letter, what they would be a^, had they Power; so that unless
they publicly recant of their Errors; and under the Hand of six, or more, of
their Chieftains, condemn their pernicious Principles, have nothing to do with
them; beware of their gilded Pills, and remember Ireneus 's saying, Whilst
Heretics speak like the Faithful; they not only mean otherwise than they say,
but clean contrary; and by their Tenants full of Blasphemy; they destroy the
Souls of those, who with their fair words, suck in the Poison of their foul
Opinions: See his third Book against Heresies, etc. and now shall conclude with
these words I writ in 1668. viz.

To write no more, I long since did intend,
But none but God knows now when I shall end:
For still I find, when I think all is done,
As much to write, as when I first begun.
Sept. the 7th. 1692. Francis Bugg.


The Contents of this Book.
IN the Epistle to the Bereans; the Christian Creed, the Quakers Creed: Remarks
upon them, and a Method prescribed to deal with the Quakers.

In the Introduction, the Quakers against the Quakers; Martin Luther's
Resolutitn, and Dr. Barns his Example pursued; desiring to read both sides.

THE Quakers Proposition to dispute. page 2 Twelve Errors charged on the
Quakers Doctrine. p. 3 Separation from the Quakers no Apostasy. p. 8
Archbishop Cranmor once mistaken in the Papists. p. 12 Hugh Latimer once
mistaken in the Papists. p. 14 Martin Luther's Humility manifested. p. 14 The
Quakers deny Christ. p. 16 Dr. Barns, Martin Luther, and John Bradford's
Confession of Sin. p. 18. 19. The Name Christ, the Quakers attribute to
themselves. p. 20 The Quakers make their Writings Equivolent to the Scripture.
p. 21 The Quakers render the Scripture uncertain and fallible. p. 23 The
Quakers and Papists agree in not reading Scripture in their Worship. p. 24 The
Quakers not Addressing, nor Praying for King William, and Queen Mary. p. 27 The
Conference between F. B. and G. Whithead. p. 33 A large Quotation of Dr. Barns
against Imposition. p. 37 G. Whitehead's Narrative confuted. p. 50 F. Bugg's
property in their Meeting House maintained. p. 51 Sam. Carter's Sufferings: a
Sham and Trick. p. 55 A Challenge proposed, about Wives against Husband. p. 57
The Quak. common Bankers, or Purs-mongers. p. 61 Thom. Ellwood's Confession,
that their Ministers take Money. p. 64 The Quak. preach for Money, Hirelings
amongst them. p. 62 The Christian Quak. Creed differ from the Foxonians. p. 69
Mr. Archer's Query, which Silensed G. Whitehead. p. 74 As the true Prophets
bear witness to Christ, Acts 10. 39. to 43. so do the false Prophets, with one
Mouth, bear witness to G. F. p. 78
An ERRATA.
Redar, My distance from the Press, and other Accidents, have occasioned some
Errors in this Treatise, both in points, Letters in spelling, and Words, the
most material whereof are here noted, which thou art desired, both to Excuse
and Correct.

The Introduction.
Page 1. line 18. for lote, read late, p. 1. l. 25. for thus, r. the. p. 2. l.
10. for Rolick, r. Pollitick. p. 2. l. 14. for surely, r. sorely. p. 2. l. 23.
for Cuter, r. Cater. p. 3. l. 24. for stroke r. strike. p. 4. l. 27. for bids
Commmand, r. Bids or Command. p. 4. l. 35. for this r. his. p. 4. l. 36, for as
craved, r. and craved. p. 6. l. 40. for Qua Volumne, r. Quae Unmasked. p. 5. l.
33. for pole, r. pale. p. 6. l. 44. for Ludam, r. Ludum. p. 8. l. 24. for
first, r. false. p. 9. l. 13. for be noe. r. be more. p. 9. l. 14. for the, r.
by the. p. 10. l. 10. for matter, r. Martyr. p. 12. l. 6. so a Rinn, r. Rind.

The Book.
Page 2. line 6. for at every, read at any, p. 2. l. 23. for race, r. foot, p.
2. l. 28. for discorded, r. discovered, p. 3. l. 31. for Raiment, r. Garment,
p. 6. l. 5. for Quak. Chal. p. 6, r. p. 3. p. 8. l. 28. for either, r. either
by. p. 10. l. 32. for omnis, r. omnes. p. 18. l. 36. for stratched, r.
stretched, p. 22. l. 34. for rine, r. Rind. p. 23. l. 8. for Imposture, r.
Imposter. p. 25. l. 13. for proclaim, r. practice. p. 25. l. 18. for Advice of,
r. A device of. p. 26. l. 2. for Pologitico, r. Pologetico. p. 26. l. 20. for
Apostate, r. Apostasy. p. 40. l. 13. for different, r. indifferent. p. 42. l.
36. for mundam. r. in mundum. p. 43. l. 14. for Audland, r. outland. p. 45. l.
13. for S. B. r. F. B. p. 45. l. 15. for make, r. made. p. 45. l. 27. for
transcribe, r. subscribe. p. 45. l. 34. for freely, r. fairly. p. 50. l. 10.
for as, r. at. p. 51. l. 18. for the forth r. near the fourth. p. 53. l. 32.
for Defame, r. Defamer. p. 53. l. 32. for Dornham, r. Downham. p. 66. l. 18.
for the primer, r. A primer. p. 73. l. 9. for And mere, r. And that for mere.
in l. 10. for And the, r. And taught.

Advertisement. Several Books, wrote by the same Author, and Sold by Mr.
Gwillim, in Bishopsgate-street, against the Great James, Bookseller, in
London, viz.
The I. Entitled, De Christiana Liberate, etc. The II. The Painted Harlot
both stripped and whipped, etc. The III. Reason against Railing, etc, The IV. The
Quakers detected, etc. The V. Innocence vindicated, etc. The VI. Battering
Rams, against New Rome, etc. The VII. One Blow more at New Rome, etc. The VIII.
New Rome unmaskt; and her Foundation Shaken, etc.
THE INTRODUCTION.
Friendly Reader,
HAving already wrote several Books against the Errors and evil Practices of
the People called Quakers, and finding their Answers so Evasive and Remote from
the Point in Question; so filled with Railing and Abusing Language,
Equivocations, Pervertions and Forgeries; That were it not to make a further
Discovery of their dangerous Principles which are very Pernicious to the
Christian Religion, I should rather chose to be Silent; and bear all their
Reproaches, Slanders, and Scandalous Defamations, with which their Books are
filled: Then to trouble my self or my Reader, with any Reply to their
Contentious Pamphlets, For though G.W. charges me to be Contentious, yet he
has Wrote Three Books against me to my one, against them viz. in nine Months
time.
especially Considering that by several Books already Extant, they are very
much unmasked: And their Vizard in a great measure is taken off; particularly
by that Excellent Book Entitled, The Quakers Unmasked, their Double Dealing
and Falshartedness Discoverd, etc. in Quarto, Printed Anno 1691, which does
Amply set forth their Temporizing: As well as their Writing and Printing
against the Presbyterians and Independants for being engaged in the Lote Wars
in the most Revengful and Aggravating Terms their Pen could Express:
Notwithstanding they themselves were equally concerned with them in the same
Cause and Quarrel, Exhorting, and Encouraging Oliver his Army and Officers: Not
to leave off till they had set up their Standard at the Gates of Rome; let your
Soldiers go forth said they, with a free and willing Heart, that you may Rock
Nations as a Cradle Bat. Rams p. 5. and the Qua. Unmasked, p. 5, 6, 7.
.

Thus next Book I refer to, is that Entitled, A looking Glass for the Quakers
in two Columns: which sets forth their two fast Practice in writing against the
Papists when under, and on their behalf when uppermost, viz. in the Reign of
the Late King James, etc. both which Books are Sold by Mr. Gwillim Bookseller
in Bishopsgatestreet, and stands unshaken by their Answers: And remain firm
Testimonies against their Temporizing, their turning with the Times, their Base
Insinuations against others more Righteous then themselves, etc.

The next Book I Refer too, is that of mine Entitled, Battering Rams against
New Rome, etc. And that Entitled, The Painted Harlot both Stripped and Whipped,
etc. The first reciting Ten Instances of their deep Hypocrisy; which they have
not been able to confute. The Second discovers the Imperiousness of their
Ministers, and the mischief of their Impositions, who in the Year 1675 made an
Un-Scriptural Law, or Ordinance, at their Yearly Meeting, that their hearers
should constantly meet: And Neither forsake nor Remove, nor Decline their
Meeting, like Worldly, Fearful, and Rollitick Professors. And they themselves
Refused to stand in a like suffering Capacity with them: By telling their Names
and Habitation, See Paint Harlot p, 5.
insomuch as that in the loss of 13550 lib. Odd money their Ministers never
lost 50 lib. But this Book did surely vex these Mediantes, for it touched their
tender part; as Erasmus once said of the other Monks; and to be Revenged on me
they Printed and Exposed me to be an Informer; though at the same time they
knew me to be no such manner of Person: But so far from it, as that they knew
me to be one of the greatest sufferers by Informers in all these Parts; yet
such was their Implacable malice that they therein followed the Example of the
Jesuits whose Moral is, That it is no Sin to destroy a Man's Reputation, etc,
See Jesuits Moral P. 347. with many other. gross Lies and Slanders, And this at
such a time when the Name of an Informer was so odious, that it was in danger
of a Man's Life to be known to be an Informer in some places, etc.
upon which I went Sept. 83. to S. Cutor and G. Smith, who both refused to own
what they had Write: I also offered on the Forefeiture of a 100 l. to prove
them Liars in diverse Cases; so when they would neither own their Books nor
accept of my said Proposition; I then went to their Public Meeting at
Mildenhall the 21st. of October 1683; and there complained of their Ministers
unchristian proceeding, and desired a Certificat under their hands, who had
known me many Years; which they gave me very readily, as follows, viz.
Whereas there is a Book put forth by Samuel Cator and others: Wherein our
Ancient Friend Fran. Bugg is called and often Termed Informer, and we knowing
what an Informer is: According to common Acceptance, and that he is clear of
their Practices; and not only so, but one of the greatest Sufferers by
Informers in all these parts; and also in Remembrance of his Labor of Love,
and great Exercises for the Truths sake, we can do no less then signify our
dislike thereunto; and Testify against the said Treatment, as not being of
Christian Tendency Then it is of an Antichristian Tendency to be sure.
. With much more to the same purpose too large here to Insert.

The Quakers Testimony against the practice of their Ministers, etc,
Here follows the Names of the Quakers who gave me the said Certificate, and
set their hands to it publicly, which gave the Design of Jos. Bangs and his
Confederates such a Stab; as that Amb. Friend, Tho. Brewster, and a few others
of G. F. party turned Pale being troubled, not only at the Certificat, but also
at the Verbal Testimony they gave against their Antichristian practice, viz.

Tho. Bird. Jos. Ellington John Thrift Will. Rolf Will. Belsham John Poell Will
Tailor John Kittson John Harvy Robert Suckerman Will. Howkins Jos. Mason Ja.
Mason Fra. Suckerman Sarah Bird Margaret Belsham Fra. Folks Sarah Holton Eliz.
Root Eliz. Thrift Eliz. Rolf Rachel Ellington Margaret Hattly Darcus Abbot
Katherine Handslip Anne Hibble Sarah Bird jun.
And for more of this see my Book Entitled, Reason against Railing, and Truth
against Falsehood; Being a Conclusive Poscript to my Book The Painted Harlot,
etc. Wrote 1683, which is this day, as hardy as they are, they have not
Answered. I say, these with diverse other Books wrote by my self, Thomas Crisp.
W. Rogers, and others, by which their Errors are displayed, and their
Hypocrysies unmasked, I refer the Reader too: By which, together with what
follows, they may be seen in their proper Colors; and manifested to be as
great Dissemblers, Deceivers and Deluders, of the People as any Age, since
Noah's Flood ever produced.

And therefore, Good Reader, if thou will Examine our Doings, I beseech thee,
To search and prove what has been wrote on both sides, and judge uprightly,
and do not suffer thy self by shows and shifts to be beguiled; for what man
will seem to deal so plainly as a Juggler; he will stroke up his Sleeves, and
make bare his Arms, and open his Hands and Fingers, and lay all things before
thee, and bid thee behold, and then thou will think him to be a good plain Man,
and marvel thou should possibly be Deceived, and yet indeed his whole Skill
and Design is nothing else, but to deceive thee and the more simply and plainly
he would seem to deal, so much the sooner he will deceive thee; otherwise he
were no Jugglar: Thou shall think thou see all, and yet see nothing: then
thou shall think thou feel it sensibly with thy fingers; that thou hold
it fast, and can not loose it; and yet shall open thy hands and find notheng,
so easy a thing it is to enveagle thy senses.

Tell Geo. Whitehead, that it is a piece of Hypocrysie to pretend, that it is
not Lawful to fight, and to make his Disciples believe so, and yet at the same
time encourage O. Cromwell his Army, and Officers to Fight, saying, Oh, Oliver
Cromwell! Thou should have Invited all Nations upon Earth that are against
Popery. to come in and join with thee against Popery, Let thy Soldiers go forth
with a free willing Heart, that thou may Rock Nations as a Cradle. Thus says
the Lord, I have chosen thee, O Cromwell amongst the Thousands of the Nations
to Execute my Wrath upon my Enemies, See Bat. Rams p. 3.
and give them to thy Sword, with which I fought for the Zeal of my Name: Oh
Oliver! had thou been faithful and thundered down deceit, the Hollanders had
been thy Subjects and Tributaries, and Germany had given up to have done thy
will, See Qua. Unmasked p. 6, 7, 8. the great Column.
and the Spaniard had Quivered like a dry Leaf; thou should not have stood
Trifling about small things, Sober men and True Hearts took part with thee, Oh
take heed and do not slight such least thou weaken thy self: And do not disown
such as the LORD has owned, thy Dread is not yet all gone, This is in the
present Tence and of the Imparative Mood, which Bids and Commands,
nor thy Amasement; Arise and come forth, for had thou been Faithful thou
should have Crombled Nations to dust, etc. With much more to the same
purpose, Encouragement enough to Fight.

I say, Is not this Great Hypocrisy to make their People believe that Fighting
is unlawful for Christians, and yet at the same time to Exhort, Excite, and
Encourage Oliver, his Army and Officers to Fight, and not to leave off till
they had set up their Standard at the Gates af Rome.

And yet to Salve this; and to make his Deciples believe ( Jugglar like) that
there is no such Mateer See his Book Imronecy Against Envy. p. 9.
, he says, the words have Incited and have Chosen: relate former simes, he
shows his Schollarship in that, the Word have is the sign of the Preter,
Perfect, Tence, which denotes the time past, but this Cuning shift will not do,
for their words, Arise and come forth are in the present Tence, and of the
Imparative Mood, which bids command, yet thus much we may Learn from hence,
that in the same Book p. 7. In his Answer to my charge, that they neither make
Confession of their Sins to GOD, nor ask Pardon for Christ's sake, he has this
passage for Answer; viz. We have done it unfeignedly, viz. the Word have must
have its true Gramatical sense, and then he means he did make Confession of
Sin, and ask Pardon for Christ's sake, when he was a Boy of Eleven Years of Age,
when he learned his Christian Catechism for the word have in G. Ws. sense, and
construction does signify the time perfectly past, but in this next let him
acknowledge hat he has made such Confession as craved such Pardon If he should
say, he did, or that it is their practice, his People would witness against him
as a Liar; for upon their principles of Perfection, and Infallibility, it is
impossible for him or them to make such a Confession and ask such Pardon.
, since the year 1654, when he came forth in the Ministry, as he pretends, and
then he says something.

Again, When the Author of the Book, The Qua. Volumn, etc. recits part of
their own Declaration, viz. We have chosen the Son of God to be our King, and
he has chosen us to be his People, and he might command Thousands, and Ten
Thousand of his Servants at this day to Fight in his Cause He might lead them
forth and bring them in, and give them Victory over all their Enemies, and turn
His Hand upon their Persecutors, neither can we yet believe that He will make
use of us in that way: Tho it be his only Right to Rule in all Nations, and our
Heirship to Possess the utmost parts of the Earth, but for the present we are
given up to bear and suffer all things for His Name sake.

Which is a plain Demonstration, that when they gave forth that Declaration,
they did not know but God would make use of them in that way, though they did
not as yet believe he would, but that for the Present they were given up to
suffer, etc. Oh, but says, G. W. this Particle Yet is not rightly Construed,
they have put ad huc for tamen, when it is as plain as Possibly it can, that
according to our usual Dialect, and according to the Grammatical sense too,
that the word yet, relates to time, and ought not to be rendered tamen; viz.
Nevertheless as is more evidently made appear, in a Printed Letter to E. S.
Esquire; Styled Some Remarks, etc. p. 4. to which I refer the Reader.

Well might Christ say, Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees, and Hypocrites,
which strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camiel: Mat. 23.
For they have taught their People to be so stiff and Stout I once was one of
them, but I thank God I am escaped their Snar, and perceive their Juggles; and
do now abhor their deep Hypocrisy, etc.
, as that they will not pay their Assestments to the Trained Soldiers, and that
under a pretense that it is not lawful to use, nor yet to contribute toward
the use of a Carnal Weapon: And yet at the same time they have, and can pay to
the Royal Aid, Tax, and that of carrying on the War against the Dutch, and
carrying on the War against the French: As if it was not as great an evil, to
pay toward an actual Offensive War, as to pay toward the sending out our
Trained Solders for the Defense of our Nation.

Not granting either to be an evil when there is just cause for it. But I
mention this to show how our Pharisees Strains at a Gnat and Swallows a Camiel.
For of the Two an Offensive War is not so necessary as a Defensive War.

Good Reader, These are the People that exalt themselves above all other
Professors whatever, reckoning all save themselves to be of the World, out of
the Truth, Heathens, Apostates, and without the Poale of the Church, and
themselves the only People of God; and that they, and they only are in the
Truth, and for distinguishing themselves from others, they have taken up some
singular Observations; as, saying thou not you to a single Person, calling no
Man Mr. but John, Thomas, William, etc. and the like, not that I thank you for
any kindness, but I receive thy Love; not carrying the Feet but the Head
foremost of their Dead; they condemn the Courtesy of putting of the Hatt, to
any others, though of their Apprentices they exact it to themselves This Piece
of Hypocrisy, I testified against more then 16 Years since (which was before
S. Cater, and I did differ about his fine) by Letter to their then Yearly
Meetings.
. In short, they affected singularity in most things that are Customary in
England; how Innocent soever, now I would ask my Reader, what of real Virtue or
singular Goodness is in these things; suppose the whole world did observe them,
would they be at all the better for it? However by these things they have cut
off all others, how Religious and Sincere soever. Read the Quakers Unmasked,
etc. p. 26. And there you shall see, that their great Prophet G. Fox, believed
himself to be in a State beyond the First Adam that fell, and in the State of
the Second Adam that never fell; that his very Marriage was above the State of
the First Adam in his Innocence: In the State of the Second Adam that never
fell, and that he never fell nor changed. That he had Power to bind and loose
whom he pleased, and much to the same purpose.

The next thing I shall observe to the Reader is, whereas they have often
Called, Printed, and Exposed me, a Contentious Apostate, a Self condemned
Apostate, etc. That I have endeavored to avoid Contention, and that I am not
what they represent me, I must devide these Two charges, viz. Contentions, from
a Self condemned Person, which last I Reserve to speak more fully to in the
body of the Book, since it is only a finer and softer word for a Heretic; and
therefore though at present they have not power to do much mischief, yet they
have Malice, they have Envy, they have False Glossings, they have the Art of
Forgery; they can Invert, Pervert, Wrest, Amuse, and Abuse their Reader: And
by keeping behind the Curtain they can mislead wise Men, for they have their
Evasions; their Equivocations, their Mental Reservations, viz. Only let forth
so much at a time, as that the unwary Reader would take them to be plain,
simple and well meaning; and that they had no Skill in the Art of Juggling. But
if you mark well what I say, you shall find that they can pretend to meet to
Dispute their Opposers, Priests or Professors; and for that Reason too, that
Truth may be manifest, and Error denied; disowned and rejected; But behold they
mean no such thing, it is far from their Intention, as anon will appear they
can call all the Doctors and Scholars in Europe out of their Holes, Dens, etc.
As if they themselves were ready to come forth into the Field with their Slings
and Stones and Bags; but alas, it is but like the Jugglers striking up his
Sleeves, and making bare his Arms. And the like I say, it is what they never
mean, for it is impossible to get them out of their Holes, Dens, and Lurking
places, where they lie Skulking to deceive the People: Thus Reader, you see
they have got the Papists Tools, and Implements, I know of nothing wanting but
the Law on their Side; and therefore, I am concerned to Vindicate my Christian
Reputation from their Malicious Charge of Self condemned Apostate, and with Dr.
Martin Luther say, See M. Luther Commentary upon Gall. p. 51.
viz. Wherefore GOD Assisting me my forehead shall be more hard than all Men's
Foreheads; here I take upon me this Title according to the Proverb, Cedo nulli,
I give place to none; Yea, I am glad with all my heart to be called Rebellious
[Contentious] and Obstinate; and here I confess, I am, and ever will be Stout
and Stern, and will not one Inch give place to any creature; Charity gives
place, for it suffers all things, believes all things, hops all things,
but Faith gives no place; yea, it can suffer nothing, according to this
Ancient Verse Non patitur Ludam fama sides occulus, that is Man's good Name, his
Faith, his Eye, will not be dallyed withal; wherefore a Christian as touching
his Faith, can never be too stout, neither must be Relent or give Place, no not
the breadth of an hair.

Thus Reader, you see Martin Luthers opinion that a Man's good Name is not to be
dallyed with all, as well as his Faith, nor yet his Faith no more than his
Name; And as it ever was the Papists practice to fix some ill Name upon the
Martyrs, and to Cloth them (as the Heathens of old) with Bears Skins, that
their Dogs might fall upon them and worry them, the more fiercly; so has it
been the practice of New Rome, witness the Names that G. W. and his Brethren
have given my self, and others De Chr, Lib. p 15:
, but as Luther was tender of his Name and Ready to Vindicate his Faith and
Christian Profession from the Infamy of the Papists slanderous Tongue, so I
hope to follow his stepts therein, and also to show that I am not Contentious
in the sense G. W. Represents me, as may appear by a Letter I sent him an
Abstract thereof is as follows, viz.

To George Whitehead these.
GEorge, I have seen your Book, The Contentious Apostate and one Blow, etc.
wherein I find you so false and unworthy, as that your Brother Rudyard does not
exceed you, Oh George, did I once think (when I visited you in Norwich Goal,
Anno 1660) to find such Fruit from you, I tell you nay, I had then better
thoughts of you. George are you not ashamed to pertend that God the Righteous
Judge knows the Integrity of your Soul, viz. That you have sought Peace in the
way of Peace, and for a quiet Composer of Differences See his Book, Judgment
Fixed, etc. p. 356
. (And do you not blush to tell God in this your Printed Prayer, that you are
endowed with a Spirit of Righteous Judgment, etc. And yet in the same Book
justify your Brother Rudyard (Samuel Caters Lawyer) in a most abominable Lie;
And in this book The Contentious Apostate, you tell the World that I, and my
Company, were in the Gallery, where your Ministers usually sit when you came
in; Although there was not one Man of my Company with me in the Gallery as
Hundreds can testify, (with many other Gross Lies, etc.) with what Conscience
can ye then appear in Print so wretchedly false, and thus Appeal to God the
searcher of the hearts; well Notwithstanding this, and all your former
Provocations, Lies and Slanders, yet if S. Cater, G. Smith, Jos. Bangs and your
self will meet me at a convenient place, and Retract what you have Printed that
is false, and which you cannot make appear to be true Mark the Condition and
the Equallity of this Proposition.
I do promise to cease all further Prosecution, whether by Print or otherways,
and that not for your sake, who (as you have said in Print) neither Consult
Events, nor Fear Effects See his Introd. to Judgment fixed, etc.
; but for the sake of the well meaning (tho misled People) Amongst you, for
you, like Abner have raised the War, and have been the chief Instrument of the
Young Men's thrusting each other through, but will not with him say, shall the
Sword devour for ever? Nor yet seek Peace in the way of Peace, according to
your pretenses and that to Almighty God, but through your Cunning and Malicious
Craft, thinks to wound Asahell, but he pursues you more warily, and desires no
weaker Adversary notwithstanding all your weapons of War. And your boasting,
Goliath like, Thus I leave this proposition to you, and give you Fourteen days
to consider of it, to prove whether you mean as you say, viz. to seek Peace in
the way of Peace.

Fra. Bugg.
Sept. 13. 1691.

BUt instead of Answering this Equal Proposition; about a Month after I saw his
Third Book in Print, Stilled, The Conten. Apost. Recharged, etc. which after I
had read and considered, I drew up certain Principles of theirs, This is the
Third Book G. W. wrote against me in Nine Months time, which renders him the
Contentious Makebate.
Collected out of their own Books, as at large in the First Chapter following,
which upon the 22 day of November last, I carried to their Meeting and their
told them, that I had Received another book of G. Ws. against me which I could
prove first in diverse parts: yet if G. W. or any four of their Preachers would
appear in Vindication thereof, I with the the like number would meet them, and
prove them: First Errors, and very pernicious to the Christian Religion. And
Secondly, That it is no Apostasy from the Christian Faith to separate from a
People who are Erred so manifestly from the Faith once delivered to the Saints:
and that they might be prevailed with all to come out of their Holes, Dens, and
Lurking places, to dispute according to their own Proposition, in the Epistle
of Edw. Burrous in the Front of his works in Folio, where to any man's thinking
they seem ready to Dispute, they striki up their Sleeves, they make bare their
Arms, they open their Hands and Fingers, and life up their Voice, and say, come
Priest, come Professor See the first Chapter following.
We would gladly be made manifest to all the Worlds, that we may freely give as
many of the Wisest and Ablest of the Priests and Professors, a meeting, for to
Dispute at any place in England; and upon this we will engage with them, and
with any of our Enemies of what Sect and Profession soever, to the Intent only
that Truth may be Manifest and Embraced, and Deceit and Error discovered, and
denied, let them appoint time and place, and profer terms at their own
pleasure, etc.

Now Reader, what could be said more, what could be said plainer, and to ones
thinking, we have them fast enough, but behold all this is to deceive, and
Inveagle thee into a belief of their Simplicity, Plainness, and Integrity, when
alas, they mean nothing so! they design no such Plainness, it is but a Sham, a
Trick to dazzle thy Eyes and to deceive thee; and this I shall prove to their
shames, viz. I took certain of their Principles in Print, out of their Books.
And upon the 22th. of November 1691 carried them with an Abstract of the
recited Epistle, to their Public Meeting; and there Read the Charge, Read my
Challange In the words of their own Proposition, to the intent that if they
would have answered my Challange and Dispute the Points according to their said
Proposition in their Epistle, the world should never have seen them; by all
which it is plain that I have not been Contentious in the sense G. W. would
represent me; as also it may appear the recited Letter to G. W. Dated September
13th. 1691. But if contending for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, and
against the Errors of the Times be a Crime, I will say with David, I am
resolved to be no more Criminal; and thereing follow the Example of the
Christian Raco, and that it is so, would farther appear, if all my Charges,
Challenges, Querry's, Protestations, Allegations, Impeachments, Appeals,
Propositions, Remonstrances, Speeches, Passages and Letters, which from time to
time, I have wrote upon this foot against their Illegal, Arbitrary, and
Tyranical Usurpations, Erroneous Principles, and Dangerous Tennets: I say, as
it would show with what great Cost, Labor and Travel, I have herein Discharged
my Duty; so if they were made Public, they would declare to all the world,
that I have not been vainly Contentious, as George Whitehead in his three last
Pamphlets would represent me.

I Remember that when their Predecessors the Papists charged Dr. Barns the
Martyr with Apostasy, Blasphemy, and many other Crimes, he offered the Popish
Bishops this fair Proposal, viz. Dr. Barns Works P. 216, 217, 218.
As for me I do promise them by this present writing, and by the Faith I ow to
Christ Jesus; and by that fidelity I owe to my Prince: That if they will be
bound to our Noble Prince after the manner of his Laws, and after good
Conscience, and Right, that they shall do me no Violence, nor VVrong; but
Discuss and Dispute these Articles and all other that I have written -- Then
will I present my self to our most Noble Prince, there offering my self to his
Grace: And I will either prove these things by Gods Word, against you all, or
else I will suffer at his pleasure, whom the Father of Heaven preserve in
Honor, Amen. And if you refuse this Condition, then say, that you are neither
good nor charitable, for I dare say, you can desire no more of a Christian Man.

Thus this Good Man who was Hampered and Perplexed with this Popish Crew, who
would Accuse but not Prove, who would Bragg and Boast of their Skill, of their
Learning, of their Religion, and of whatever they held, let it be never so
Erroneous, but let this Good Man offer what Terms he would, though never so just,
never so reasonable; it is all one: He could never get them out of their Holes
and Dens, and Lurking places: And how agreeable to the method of these
Protestants, See my Books in print, viz. de chr. Lib. etc. and the Painted
Harlot, etc. and Reason against Railing, etc.
has my Propositions from time to time been, I leave all to judge, who shall
read what I have from time to time wrote; which to incert here, would be too
tedious: And how like the Papists my Adversaries have showed themselves to be
in all their shiftings and evadings, declining and rejecting all my offers,
though in their own way, and in the words of their own Proposals, etc.

Well, hear this Matter once more on this foot, and how he supplicated the
Kings Grace, That he would be pleased to hear the Matter disputed between the
Popish Bishops and him; for he desired nothing, but that truth might be
manifested and embraced, viz. Most Gracious and Mighty Prince, God has set
your Grace in the same Honor and Dignity, that you by God's Ordinance ought to
defend those Men that are oppressed wrongfully; wherefore humbly and meekly,
and in all lowliness and reverence, I beseech your Grace to minister unto me
Gracious Justice, and let me be heard Indifferently, But this the Papists, and
this New Rome, could never abide.
whether that I justify my cause, with Learning or not; if I cannot justify
it, your Grace is a Minister of Justice, I will refuse no manner of pain that
shall be due for my Transgression. Wherefore once again, with all meekness and
lowliness, in the way of Charity, and in Christ's Name, and for his sweet Blood
sake, How this poor Martyr pleaded, to have his cause openly and publicly
heard betwixt him and his Adversaries.
that he shed for your Grace; yea, and also by virtue of your Authority, that
God has given to you; I do desire and require of your Grace, Audience and
Justice: I and my Parents be your natural Subjects born: -- Wherefore in my
Name, and in all our Names (for all they are rebuked in me) with all Meekness
and Reverence I beseech your Grace of Gracious Audience, and favorable
Justice: this thing, I trust your Grace, will not deny me, nor yet take any
displeasure against me, your poor Subject, for thus requiring, for I have none
other Prince, nor Lord to seek unto here on Earth, but unto your Grace only:
Nor can I come to any charitable and, with my Adversaries; wherefore I am
compelled by extreme violence, thus to complain unto your Grace; for my Name
and Fame, and Estimation, and all things that belong to an honest poor man in
this world, It is, and ever was the practice of the Papists, and this New Rome,
to detract and take away the Name, Fame, and Estimation, which their Opposers
had, thinking thereby to uphold their own Cause.
is taken wrongfully from me hereby, and have been by the space of Nine or ten
years, which is no small time, compelled to live in misery, and obloquy (or
Scorn) etc.

Thus, Reader, you see how importunately this innocent Martyr pleaded to be
heard; in defense of his cause, with respect to his Religion, which the Papists
reckoned heresy, which is a self-condemned Apostasy, or falling knowingly and
wilfully from the Doctrine of the Christian Faith, as Julian did: To this
Julian did they compare me in diverse Letters, sent to me without any Name to
them, but I have reason to think. Step. Crisp, the Author.
when alas he kept the Faith, and only separated from such as had erred
concerning the Faith: But however, all his Endeavors proved fruitless, for he
could not get Audience, he could not get them out of their Holes and Dens,
though he pleaded never so much; first, for Christ's Name sake, for his sweet
Blood sake, that was shed upon the Cross: And secondly, for his own sake, for
his Kindred and Family sake, whom he found slandered in him; by them who took
away his Name, Fame, and his Estimation. And why did he thus Humbly and
Reverently plead, and beg of his Prince this favor? you see it was that the
Truth and Equity of his cause, might appear; that his Name and Fame, his
Estimation and Reputation in this World, both as a Man and Christian, might not
be blasted by the slanderous Tongues and Pens, of the malicious Papists, who
then (as their offspring now) studied how they might blast the Name, Fame, and
Reputation of such as opposed them, and himself to live no longer in Obloquy or
Scorn under the Name of Heretic, or a self-condemned Apostate, as he had for
Nine or Ten years together; In whom also he found his Family and Kindred
rebuked, and under some reproach for his sake; and he no way able to clear
himself, unless his Prince would grant him Audience.

And as this was his case; so have I found something of the same Nature from
Geo. Whitehead, Sam. Cater, and the rest of that Tribe, who in most things, so
far as their power reaches, follow the Track of the Papists: And for proof of
what I here lay down, I must refer the Reader to my Book, Entitled, The
Painted Harlot Whipped and Stripped, etc. and other Books of my Writing; where I
have defended my self from the venom of their poisoned Arrows: For, first they
printed me an Informer; as hateful a Name as was then in being: And when I
obtained the Certificate before recited, and that they saw that would not do,
then they call me in print, Beast, Dog, Woolf, Enemy of all Righteousness,
Child of the Devil, Devil Incarnate, Fool, Novice, and what other ill-bred
Language, their Tongues could invent. Then in my Book, The Quakers Detected,
etc. I made them also ashamed of such Billingsgate-Language. And now the Crime
they would fix upon me, is, An Apostate, A self-condemned Apostate, An Apparent
Apostate, which are the worst of Names; and had they power to their Wills, I
might justly fear the Fate which others met with from their Predecessors, the
envious Papists. But as it has pleased God to enable me to graple with the
Lion, viz. Their Term Informer.
and the Bear, That it is their railing Language, as Devil, Beast, Dog, Woolf,
and the like.
so I trust he will enable me to overturn this great Philistine, I mean this
Bullwark of theirs, raised against my Name and Reputation, I mean the charge of
a self condemned Apostate.

I have read of M. Luther's Resolution, Zeal, and Christian Courage against the
Pope and his pretended Infalibility, and other holy Cheats, (says the
Historian) He charged the Pope not with Life, but with Learning; not with his
Doings, but with his Doctrine; not picking at the Rine, but plucking at the
Root; not seeking the man, but shaking the Kingdom; yea, and charging him with
plain Heresy. -- And still urging and reducing things to the Foundation and
Touchstone of the Scriptures, See Fox's Acts and Monuments, p. 402, to 417.
opened the Eyes of many, etc.

How far my weak endeavors may be said to bear the same Complexion with
Respect to this People, I will not determine; but this I am sensible of, there
is as much need now to unmask their Leaders, and to let their Hearers see their
crafty Jugglings, whereby they mislead them, as there was in the days of
Luther; and under a sense thereof, I am willing to lay out my Talent, assuredly
believing, that though what I now write, may not prevail with their present
Infatuated Disciples, yet both in this Age, and Ages to come; It will be a
means to prevail upon the examining Bereans, even such as will search the
Scriptures, whether what they hold and teach be according to them, yea or nay.

Obj. But it is objected by G. Whitehead in his Third Charge in his Book,
styled, The Conten. Apostate recharged, etc. p. 5, 6. That Francis Bugg is
neither Conscienciously a Religious nor Ingenuous in his writing, etc. for that
he makes no conscience of writing malicious Lies, notorious odious Forgeries
and Slanders to villifie and defame others, etc.

And for particular instances to evince his charge, he cites sometimes four
words in a line, then skips to another part of a line; taking a bit here, and a
bit there, without the least demonstration or Convincing Argument.

Thus he jumpeth and leapeth this way and that way, floating as a Ship without
either Helm or Anchor, still showing himself like the Papists great Champion.

Mr. Harding against Bishop Jewel, as you may read in the Preface to the
Defense of the Apology of the Church of England, etc. where Mr. Harding says:
Mr. Jewel is the open Enemy of the Church; Mr. Jewel is worse than Ananias,
that condemned St. Paul; Mr. Jewel plays the part of Antichrist, Mr. Jewel
is proud; Mr. Jewel is Lucifer, and serves the Devil; Mr. Jewel is a Forger,
Mr. Jewel is a Liar, an Impudent Liar: Mr. Jewel most falsely corrupts, etc.

But as I believe, Mr. Jewel was clear of the Papists foul Charges; So have I
been very careful not to mis-represent these People, or their Principles, much
less to forge a Lie, (a thing I abhor) for truth is plain, and has no need of
such wicked acts to uphold it; and therefore good Christian Reader, peruse what
is writ on both sides, endeavor to know the cause thorowl^ and then judge
uprightly.

And if after a through Examination, thou do not find that they pretend to
have a Spirit beyond the Forefathers, and thereby know who are Saints, who are
Devils, and who are Apostates, and that none need to give them discerning, or
Judgment, but that by virtue of this extraordinary Spirit, they pretend that on
all occasions, and at all times they are sufficiently furnished, etc. Then I
have wronged them, and mis represented them which would indeed be both
disingenuous, and unconscionable. But if they do thus pretend, and set these
things out as their principles in print, (and thereby deceive the simple, and
by virtue thereof, and of the like prodigious errors) then I think it my duty,
publicly to Reprove them, when all private means will not reclaim them.

Again, If after a through Examination, thou find that they deny the second
person of the Trinity; that they do not own Him that was born of the Virgin
Mary, that sat upon Jacob's Well, that was spit upon, smote with the Palms of
their Hands, thrust a Spear into his Side; hanged on the Tree, wrapped in the
Linen Cloths, Died, was Buried, and rose again the third day, to be the Christ
of God: Then will thou see it high time for a Testimony to be born against such
false and erroneous Doctrine, and dangerous Principles, which are Pernicious to
the very Foundation of the Christian Religion.

Again, If upon a through Examination thou shall find that they set it forth in
print as their principle; that the Name Christ belongs to every Believer as
well as to him, that was born of the Virgin, as aforesaid. Then will thou find
Christ's words fulfilled, who said, Mat. 24.5. Many shall come in my Name,
saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many, etc. I say when thou see this
their erroneous Princiciple, and considers that they reckon none Believers but
themselves, thou will begin to see a necessity for a Testimony to be born
against them, though they rail and rave, because thereof, like their Predecessor
Mr. Harding: I say, when these erroneous Principles, and the Consequences of
them come to thy view, thou may then consider, whether I have been vainly
contentious, yea or nay.

I know, if thou will observe G. Whitehead, and his Brethrens Advice, they
would (like their Elder Sister) have thee Read but one side, burn and consume
such Books as rip up their Errors, for Error loves obscurity; they would have
you believe as the Church, viz. as they believe, without any farther
Examination, and to pin your Faith on their Sleeves: But if you obey, then
know, that you are upon the Borders of Rome; let their pretenses for their
direction, and yours for your blind Obedience be never so fairly gilded, and
curiously painted.

And therefore, I beseech thee, and that for thy Souls sake; search thou the
Scriptures, as Christ bids thee: Learn to know the Will of God, as St. Paul
himself advises thee; have pleasure in God's holy Word, as the Prophet David
warns thee, and thou shall never be deceived: But be able to try all things,
and inclined to hold fast that which is good: Which, that we may all do, is the
Desire and Prayer of thy Faithful Monitor.

MILDEN-HALL, January 12. 1691. Fran. Bugg.

New Rome UNMASKED, AND HER Foundation Shaken, etc.
CHAP. I. Showing that the forsaking the Quakers, is no error from the
Articles of the Christian Faith.
AS a Preface to what I have set forth from their own Writings, to be their
Principles, I think it needful to incert the Terms upon which I offered to
dispute with them, in order to prove them erroneous; and the rather, because I
took them out of Edward Burough's Epistle, in the Front of his Works, which
they printed in Folio; and in the Works of G. Fox, his Great Mist: etc. which I
also left with the Quakers, at their public Meeting in Milden-Hall, November
22. 1691. referring them to Book and Page, out of which I collected their said
Principles, giving them a Months time to appear in their defense; that so,
neither for want of time, nor yet the knowledge of the Books, they might plead
a surprise, or that they had not fair dealing, etc. I also then did signify to
them, that if they did not appear in their Vindication, I should print them:
All this, like a fair Antagonist, I have done, leaving them without Excuse.

And so gladly would we be made manifest to all the World, Deceit; for if so,
you would have met, and not declined a dispute.
that we may freely and cheerfully, 4, 10, 20, 30, more or fewer of us give as
many of the wisest and ablest of the Priests and Professors: A Meeting for
dispute A very sham, your declining the dispute has discovered you.
at every place in England, If so, why then at Milden-hall?
at what time, and for what continuance, as they shall ascribe and consent unto.

And to dispute and controvert between us and them any such thing, and every
such particular, Are not the following particulars of Moment for you to make
out, if you can work a Miracle.
as shall be objected. That by such dispute, and opening of such causes,
objected Full and Real, and total satisfaction may be given to the whole
Nation, and every particular Member therein, If you indeed meant as you make
show of in your boasting; why did you not appear and answer my challenge,
defend your selves, your Tenants and Principles.
otherwise let the Priests and Professors, or any of them: Object what they can
against us in our Principle, Faith, Practice, and our whole Religion. That Is a
grand lie, spoken in deep Hypocrisy; for your guilty Conscisciences will not
suffer you to meet.
And they shall have free liberty to give Proof and Reason for what they affirm
and allege, and upon this race will engage with them, and with any of our
Enemies, Another lie, spoken in Hypocrisy.
or what Sect and Profession soever, to the intent only that Truth may be
manifest, What a plain Evasion is this? I know not what mental Reservation they
had, or could have.
and embraced, and Deceit and Error discorded and denied. And let such,
whether them or us, that cannot prove our selves to be the true Church of
Christ, nor of the true worship, and true Religion; but it is found to be in the
error, and out of the Truth, let such deny their Religion and Church, and
Renounce their Faith, and confess to all the World under their hands; that they
are and have been deceived, and freely upon these Issues and Conditions, we
will join Trial with them; let them appoint Time and Place, What are you not
ashamed? Did I not appoint time and place according to your own Conditions and
Proposals, this is as Hypocritical as G. Whitehead's seinged Prayer in his
Book, Judgment fixed, p. 356, 357.
and profer Terms at their own pleasure, etc.

These Proposals of theirs having a fair countenance, I carried them, read
them, and the Principles, as I have observed, which were as follows.

And because they shall have no occasion to complain of any wrong, I shall in
this Column set down their own words verbatim out of their own Books, quoting
Book and Page. In this Column I set forth their Principles, unmasked in their
Native Complexion, that they (as in a glass) may behold their own Tenets; and
others beholding them, may be cautioned to be aware of them. 1. The Quakers
Books.

1. Geo. Fox (his great Mist, p. 89. etc.) being charged that they pretended to
a high pitch of discerning, of Knowing who are Saints, Devils, etc. made
Answer: Here thou have showed that the Quakers have a Spirit given to them
beyond all the Forefathers (which we do witness) since the days of the
Apostles in the Apostasy: And they can discern who are Saints, who are Devils,
and who are Apostates, without speaking ever a Word.

1. The Quakers Principles.

1. We have a Spirit given to us beyond all the Forefathers since the Apostles
days: And we know and can discern who are Saints, who are Apostates, and who
are Devils, without speaking ever a Word.

2. The Quakers Books.

2. Judas and the Jews, p. 58. We need none to give us discerning or Judgment,
Christ has furnished us already, and does in all occasions.

2. The Quakers Principles.

2. We need none to give us discerning or Judgment, Christ has furnished us
already, and does in all occasions.

3. The Quakers Books.

3. A Question to the Professors, p. 33. viz. Now the Scriptures do expressly
distinguish between Christ and the raiment which He wore, between Him that
came, and the Body in which He came, between the substance which was veiled,
and the Vail which veiled it, Lo I come, a Body have thou prepared me. There
is plainly He, and the Body in which He came. There was the outward vessel and
the inward Life. This we certainly know, and can never call the bodily Garment
Christ. And his flesh is a figure, etc. says G. F. Readiness Errand, p. 14.

3. The Quakers Principles.

3. He that was born of the Virgin Mary, He that sat upon Jacob's Well, He that
wept when Lazarus was raised, He that hungered after he had fasted forty days
in the Wilderness, He that was peirsed with a Spear, crowned with Thorns, Spit
upon, smote with the palms of their hands, crucified, dyed, and was buried, is
not the Christ, the Savior of the World, but they say, a Figure, a Garment, a
Vail, etc. Oh horrid Blasphemy!

4. The Quakers Books.

4. A Question to the Professors, per Is. Penington, p. 27. Is not the
Substance, the Life, the Anointing called Christ wherever it is found? does
not the Name belong to the whole Body, and every Member in the Body, as well as
to the Head? and are they not all of one? yea, all one in the Anointing, and in
( Readiness Errand, etc. p. 8.) G. F. says, He that has the same Spirit that
raised up Jesus from the dead, is equal with GOD. What an Abominable Assertion
is this!

4. The Quakers Principles.

4. The Name Christ belongs to the whole Body, as well as to the Head: And to
every Member of the Body; the Name is not given to the Vessel, but to the
Nature, to the heavenly Treasure; to that which is of Him in the Vessel: And he
that has the same Spirit which raised up Jesus from the dead, is equal with
God. In short, all the Members of Christ's body deserve the Name of Christ, as
well, and as authentickly as He that suffered without the Gates of Jerusalem:
and as certain that every such an one that has the same Spirit that raised Him
from the dead, every such an one is equal with GOD. O horrid!

5. The Quakers Books.

5. Edward Burrong's Works, p. 47. That is no Command from God to me, what he
Commands to another; neither did any of the Saints which we read of in
Scripture act by the Command which was given to another, not having the Command
to themselves.

5. The Quakers Principles.

5. That is no Command to me, which was a Command to another, neither did any
of the Saints act by a Command that was given to another.

6. The Quakers Books.

6. Serious Apology, by Geo. Whitehead, p. 49. verbatim; also Truths Defense,
by G. F. and R. H. p. 90. 94. 269.

6. The Quakers Principles.

6. That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great
Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater, etc. The Letter of
the Scripture is carnal, is death, and kills; Serpent like, thou feedest upon
Dust, which is the Letter.

7. The Quakers Books.

7. Truths Defense, etc. p. 104. For our giving forth Papers or printed Books,
it is from the immediate Eternal Spirit of God. -- p. 2. You might as well have
condemned the Scriptures to the fire, as our Queries.

7 The Quakers Principles.

7. We say, you may as well condemn the Scriptures to the fire, as our Papers
and Queries; our giving forth Papers or printed Books, it is from the immediate
Eternal Spirit of God.

8. The Quakers Books.

8. Now he that is not infallible in his Judgment, Counsel and Advice, is not
he in error? And are not the Ministers of Christ the Ministers of the Spirit?
And is not that out of the error which is infallible in Counsel and Judgment?
This I say, None be Ministers of the Spirit, nor none be in the Spirit, nor
none have the Spirit of Christ, nor the Holy Ghost, nor the Spirit of the
Father speaking in them, but who have that which is infallible. -- And thou
say, That the holiest man is not able to give an infallible Character of
another man, have not thou in this discovered thy self to be no Minister of
Christ, or of the Spirit, who cannot give an infallible Character of another
man's state, how can thou minister to his Condition? Geo. Fox his Great
Mystery, etc. p. 33. 82. 107.

8. The Quakers Principles.

8. None are Ministers of Christ, but such as are infallible; none are
Ministers of Christ, but such as can give an infallible Character of another
man's state; none are Ministers of Christ, but such as are infallible in their
Counsel, Judgment, and Advice.

9. The Quakers Books.

9. The Quakers Challenge, p. 6. Edward Buroughs Epistle to the Camp of the
Lord in England, etc. p. 16. Truths Defense, etc. p. 81. 92. Be astonished, Oh
Reader, when thou read these blasphemous Assertions! And what good things G.
Fox assigns without Condition or Terms, but absolute for themselves: And what
misery, woe and horror for others without any Terms or Repenting, or Mercy of
God; Oh dreadful! And yet these are but little of what might be collected: But
the consequences of this Luciferian Pride is abominable, and pernicious to the
Christian Religion.

9. The Quakers Principles.

9. The Quakers are in the Truth, and none but they; -- Above all the Families
of the Earth, the Tabernacle of God is with you, and his dwelling Place is
among you; and only among you is God known. We are elected to Salvation, we
have the Witness within us, Praises be to the glorious Lord God for ever, who
has elected and chosen us before the foundation of the World. But thou art
ordained (meaning the Minister) of old for Condemnation, and for Perdition,
among the ungodly ones; and art a Reprobate. Thou Enemy of God, and man of Sin,
for Destruction thou art ordained to go therein, thy fear of it does begin, and
the Lake that burns, and the Pit thou art for to be turned into Eternally, G.
Fox.

10. The Quakers Books.

Josiah Cole's Letter to G. F. from Barbados 21. 12. Month, 1658.
Dear Geo. Fox,
Who art the Father of many Nations, whose Life has reached through us thy
Children, even to the Isles a far off, to the begetting many again to a lively
hope, for which Generations to come shall call thee Blessed, whose Being and
Habitations is in the Power of th Highest, in which thou rules and governs in
Righteousness: and thy Kingdom is established in Peace, and the Increase
thereof is without end; This is vindicated by W. Pen. See Judas and the Jews,
etc. p. 44. and in Innocence against Envy, p. 18. excused by Geo. Whitehead.




10. The Quakers Principles.

Idolatrous and Blasphemous.

11. The Quakers Books.

11. Good Advice to the Church of England, Romans Cath. and Protestant
Dissenters, by W. P. p. 39. Edw. VI. succeeded, a Prince that promised Virtues
that might more than balance the Excesses of his Father; and yet by Archbishop
Cranmar was compelled to sign a Warrant to burn poor Joan of, Kent, a famous
Woman; but counted an Enthusiast. -- Thus even the Protestants began with blood
for mere Religion, and taught the Romanists in succeeding times how to deal
with them. See also Judgment fixed, p. 259. by Geo. Whitehead; more of this
hereafter, etc.

11. The Quakers Principles.

11. That the Martyrs were Persecutors, and asserted corrupt Doctrine.

12. The Quakers Books.

12. The Apostate Incendiary, by Geo. Whitehead, p. 16. In Answer to William
Mucklow 's Liberty of Conscience Asserted, etc.

12. The Quakers Principles.

12. I affirm that the true Church is in the true Faith, that is in God; and we
must either believe this, as the true Church believes, or else it were but both
a folly and Hypocrisy, to profess our selves Members thereof, G. VV. Apostate
Incendiary, p. 16.



CHAP. II. Showing that the forsaking the Quakers is no Apostasy from the
Articles of the Christian Faith.
BEfore I proceed to show the dangerous Consequences which these erroneous
Principles produce, as in the first Chapter set forth, I may speak something to
their uncharitable sensure of me, calling me an Apostate; but had they left off
there, I could have born it, because it is not equal with Heresy; and something
must be born by any body that has to do with them; but when I see by their
last two Books, that they expose me to the World, a self condemned Apostate, an
apparent Apostate, a contentious Apostate, etc. with all the aggravating
Circumstances which they could possibly invent, and all this public; besides
several private Letters sent me by Post, both in Verse and Prose, as full of
cursing Language as Muggleton could have filled them withal, calling me Julian
the Apostate, Which are said to be Stephen Crisp^'s, but had no Name to them,
for which there deserves another Hue and Cry.
which all put together, gives me just cause to vindicate my self, since my
Name, Credit, Estimation, and all that is dear to me, and my Relations are
under a very severe sensure: For a self condemned Apostate in plainer English
is an Heretic; and if so, had they the power that the Papists had in King
Henry the VIIIth's time, I might rationally expect the same fate which Doctor
Robert Barns, and others met withal: But thanks be to GOD, as it is no Apostasy
from the Christian Faith to separate from them, neither have they now a Popish
King to animate and encourage them; neither do I fear what they can do; and
therefore am bold to call them out of their holes, and challenge them into the
Field; and bid defiance to all their Weapons of War, and all their Malice they
can invent, either public Print, or private Letters. Well, however to justify
my self from this their sensure of Heresy, or self condemned Apostate, I would
premise to the Reader, that according to the Judgment of St. Augustine, every
Error does not make a Man an Heretic, or a self condemned Apostate, for says
he, errare possum hereticus, esse non possum: in an error I may be, but a
Heretic I cannot be, for their is (says he) three things necessary for just
proof of Heresy.

First, That it be an Error that I hold.

Secondly, That it be an Error against the Truth of God's word; for otherwise
every Error makes not a man an Heretic.

Thirdly, And that it be stoutly and wilfully maintained, otherwise an Error
against the Truth of God's Word, without wilful maintenance, is no Heresy.

Object. But G. W. objects by his Book, The content. Apost. recharged, p. 1.
viz. The charge is evident by his own Confession, to the Principles,
Foundation, Doctrine, Ministry, Faith, Love, spiritual Testimony of the said
People, as in the beginning, being that Church whereof Christ Jesus was the
Head, and Lawgiver, etc. And consequently that the said People called Quakers,
were once a true Church, the People of God, in the true Faith; and bore a true
Testimony, according to Fra. Bugg's ample and solemn Confession, in the second
part of his Book de Chr. lib. etc. printed 82. etc. and seconded in his Book,
The Quakers detected, etc.

Answ. Having taken in enough out of Geo. VVhiteheads Book to show what my Mind
and persuasion was once of them; and for that Reason G. VV. no doubt quoted
them. I do still say, whatever were my Thoughts of them in the beginning, they
were not so of them at the time when I wrote them Books as the ample Testimony
against their walking, and acting, contrary to what in the beginning they
pretended too, as will sufficiently appear out of the same Book, quoted by G.
VV. see Part of my Book, The Qua. detected, etc. is recited.
Qua. detect. an abstract whereof follows, viz. And having thus mounted the
seat of Government, rich and poor, high and low, bond and free, must submit to
their Church Government. And it became a vain thing to plead the sufficiency of
the Light of Christ, to lead, direct, or guide us; thus have they by their late
Doctrine and Example, rendered their Ancient Doctrine and Example a mere Decoy,
to catch simple Souls by; and being once caught, it is altogether in vain to
pretend the Sufficiency of the Light of Christ, to Lead, Teach, and Guide; no,
no, the Church now has given forth Rules, Laws, and outward Directory; and by
Virtue of her Apostolical Authority (as she pretends) she imposes them on her
Members, whether they believe, that what she imposes be a Duty incumbent on
them to practice, yea or nay: And your Edicts must be obeyed, whether motion or
no motion, nay, tho a motion against the observation of it, or else they cannot
be looked upon in the Unity. These Commands of yours are binding and obligatory
upon all, though the Scripture commands to one, See their 5th Principle.
you say are not binding to another. Thus do you make the Commands of GOD of
none effect, throw your Traditions. What shall I say unto you, Oh ye Leaders of
this People? Who would impose your unscriptural Practices upon your Brethren,
and record such out of your Unity, that are not conformable thereunto; for I
have surveyed your Old and New Doctrine; and measured your past and present
Practices, and I have compared your fair pretenses, with your foul Hypocrisies,
and when I have done all this; I want words to set forth your deep Hypocrisies,
Deceit, and Self-contradictions, who sometimes are against giving Respect to
your Superiors, but by and by your own Servants and Apprentices in your own
Houses and Shops must stand bare-headed before you; This piece of Hypocrisy I
testified against near 18 years since, which was before S. Cater's difference;
for as I saw Errors arise amongst us, so I withstood them, and testified
against them.
sometimes you are for Preaching freely, and Teaching and Instructing people
freely, and for Suffering and Recording Marriages freely, but now they can take
Three Pounds at a time for Preaching, Ten Pounds at a time for Suffering, Sam.
Cater took Ten Pound for his Suffering a Fine, and though his Goods was
Distrained, yet not a Penny worth sold, and he kept this Ten Pound and never
returned it; and yet this is not all, but in their Quarterly Book it was not
long since Recorded as a Suffering: Such Cheats there are amongst them.
and Thirty Pounds at a time for Writing five or six Sheets of Paper, Fifty
Pound per Annum for Clarks Wages; as standing yearly Sallery, and Twelve Pence
for Writing a Marriage Certificate of Ten or Twelve Lines; sometimes your
people might publish their Intentions of Marriage at the Market-Cross, or
before a Magistrate, if they were free; so that here is Ambo-dexter indeed,
sometimes Liberty, and by and by its taken away again by these Infallible
Legislators; so that when all comes to all, its no Body knows what; but the
Leading Quakers are all in all; tot quot and omnis.

" Thus the Quakers Priests who talk for self
" Is fangling talk against it self;
" Against Truth a prate, a pitious preachment
" That cannot make good its own Impeachment.
" As Penn 's and Whitehead 's Doctrine do,
" Who heeds not well which way they go.
"Fox and Sam. Cater dances round
" And round again in the self same ground.
It staggers to and fro, and reels,
Skips up and down, and runs on wheels,
Starts aside, like some broken Bow,
Crosses Christ, like Cris-cross in the row.
Who so can feel in it, may feel,
As 'twere, a wheel within a wheel.
A net, gin, trap, a snare's in it,
A whirlpool, gulf, a bottomless pit.
Wind, dusk, husk, chaff, no stable steeple,
A tale that takes unstable people.
A toy, a cloud, mist, smoke, a fog,
Right Quakerism, yea, a quavering bog.
A quick sand, a quagmire that sucks,
Who Is in it, his feet out-seldom plucks
Himself; who is in, get seldom out,
It Is self's more seldom in than out.
It flutters like some night-blind batt,
Now here, now there, this way, now that.
Now it is one thing, then another,
And now and then, nor the one, nor the other.
Sometimes it is this, sometimes it is that,
Sometimes it is this, and this, and that.
Sometimes it is either this, or that,
Sometimes it is neither this, nor that.
Now this, not the other, anon it is either,
Then, by-and-by both, both and neither.
One while it looks like so, not no;
Another while like no, not so.
One way it seems, or so, or no,
Another way, nor no, nor so.
Some way it shows both so, and no,
So it is a mere endless no, and so.
Postscript.
To write no more I long since did intend,
But none but God knows now when I shall end;
For still I find, when I think all is done,
As much to write as when I first begun.
Jan. 1. 1686. Fra. Bugg.

Reader, I have transcribed the more of this former Book of mine, Entitled,
The Quakers detected, and their Errors confuted, etc. by reason George
Whitehead, in his Book, styled, The Contentious Apostate, etc. recites the
first Point then under Consideration, which was, How I came to be a Member of
their Society? But the second Point under Consideration, which was, How I came
to see and perceive their Apostasy, and leave them? And the third Point under
Consideration, which was, How, and by what means I came to have satisfaction in
going to the Public? I say, these two last Points G. W. takes no notice of:
For I having in the first Point acknowledged what I then apprehended, he
represents it, as if I was of the same Judgment when I went to the Public; for
if that be not his intent, he speaks in the Air, and to no purpose: Now if I at
the time of my going to Church, was in the belief that the Quakers were in the
true Faith, true Worship, spiritual Testimony attended with that Simplicity,
etc. which I in 86. thought them to be in, as I did in 1660, etc.

Then I grant I had gone self-condemned, because I had acted contrary to my
belief: But to answer that, so long as I had those thoughts, I kept to them;
nay longer: But when I went to the public, that part of my Book now recited,
shows my mind sufficiently, and my judgment concerning them; to which I refer
the Reader.

Obj. Well, but still George seems to object, that I did once own them to have
been the true Church, and therefore to leave them is SELF-CONDEMNED APOSTASY.

Answ. I marvel G. W. should think that to be Apostasy; for if that be sound
Arguing, then I will prove most of the Ancient Quakers self condemned
Apostates; since they have separated from the Church of England, or some other
Protestant Churches, which they once owned to be a true Church: And to confirm
this my opinion and judgment, I will produce a good Author in my Esteem
(whatever he be in G. W.'s) and that is Archbishop Cranmer, that Innocent
Martyr whose life is worthy to be had in Imitation by all English Protestants,
for he was the principal Instrument under GOD and the King, that threw off the
Popes yoke of Supremacy, etc. Foxes Acts and Mon. p. 1488.
Well, let us hear what he says, In the beginning the Church of Rome taught a
pure and sound Doctrine -- But after the Church of Rome fell into a new
Doctrine of Transubstantiation -- I marvel that any man would allow it; if they
knew what it is: But whatsoever they bear the people in hand, that which they
write in their Books have neither truth nor comfort. Now George, was this
Martyr a self-condemned Apostate? let me have your opinion in your next; He
said as much in commendation of the Roman Church, as I ever said of yours; and
by the way, I believe upon better grounds: For I must tell you, I am not of the
same mind I was in, in 1686. concerning you in the beginning, since I have of
late examined your ancient Errors, and observed the consequences of them; but
of that more anon: I say was this Archbishop an Apostate, for that he owns she
was once a true Church? And yet he separated from her, and says there is
neither truth nor comfort in their Books: though perhaps she pretended, like
her youngest Daughter, See your 6 principle.
that she gave forth her Papers and Printed Books, from the eternal, and
immediate Spirit of GOD; and that they were of greater Authority than the
Scriptures: yet you hear Dr. Cranmers opinion, that there is neither truth nor
comfort in their Books: And I am of the same opinion concerning most of yours;
and do as much marvel that the people will allow your Books, many of them at
least, which you pretend to be of such Authority, so immediately given forth by
GOD's holy Spirit; when they are filled much with nonsense, lies, forgeries,
false doctrine, blasphemies; yea, I do as much wonder at your People, Defense
of the Apology of the Church of England, p. 460, 461.
as this good Man did at the Papists, your Ancestors, since the Papists could
not be worse: And if you will see the 460 and 461 Pages in the Defense of the
Apology of the Church of England, you will find Bishop Jewel of Archbishop
Cranmer's Judgment, etc.

Obj. But G. W. in his Book, styled, The Contentious Apostate, etc. p. 17.
argues a little learnedly, viz. But Francis Bugg is fallen, back-sliden, and
apostaliz'd from his Testimony which he bore amongst the said People, THEREFORE
HE is the APOSTATE, and not WE: So that he cannot be right now, if he was right
then: But if he says he is now of another judgment, then this is to condemn F.
B's own testimony to the truth of our Doctrine and Conversation which he has
given since he turned to the Clergy and Church of England. -- And I could not
find that either F. B. or his Minister, could clear him of this Dilemma, if
ever he was in the truth while he was among the People called Quakers, or in
society with them, he must be in the error now, in his turning back to the
Priests and Church of England.

Answ. Come, George, I think it is easy to clear my self from this Dilemma,
and to escape your Snare; for tho I thought well of you in the beginning, yet
you abuse your Reader, to make him believe and think I thought so well of you
in 86; No, far was such a thing from me, Viz. The Quakers Detected, etc.
as may very well be seen by what I have herein incerted of THAT Book which you
boast so much of for my Testimony of you. INDEED, I must say, I had in 86.
better thoughts of you, with respect to your beginning, than I now have; and if
by reason of them good thoughts I had of you, I was in an Error, as if it will
do you any good, I will tell you I was; yet this does not render me an
Apostate, for if so, you will make all the Martyrs and Protestants that had
ever any good thnughts of the Romish Church APOSTATES, then you will be Rome
indeed, and she ought to give you the right hand of Fellowship. But I would
hope you are not gotten so far as yet, tho I think you are marching on apace;
for she accounts all Apostates and Heretics that are not of her Faith.

And truly you do little less, in that you charge me to be A SELF-CONDEMNED
APOSTATE: for that I gave my charitable opinion of you in the beginning. If you
were not what you then pretended to be, as I now believe you were not, I was
then the more mistaken, and in the greater Error, all this I grant. But who was
in the fault, you or I? I am sure you ought to have been sincere, humble and
meek, as I took you to be; and the fault was yours, if you were not so; and the
more you make People believe you to be what in reality you are not, the more
you will have to answer for. And if I was in an Error in taking you to be what
you were not, even so was Martin Luther, who was a zealous Friar, who said
Foxes Acts and Monum. p. 410.
, If the Lord refused not to have Testimony given against his Doctrine, how
much more I, that am but vile Corruption, and can do nothing but err, etc. Here
you see that if I was in an Error, a better Man than either G. W. or F. B. does
not think himself too good to own he was in an Error. And that it may still
appear that good Men have been mistaken, in and by the cunning crafty Papists,
as much as I was in your fair Pretenses, and smooth DEMURE Carriage, as if you
could not hurt a Worm, when the poison of Asps was under your Tongue. I will
produce one Instance more, and then proceed to show more Reasons why the
forsaking you, is no Apostasy from the Christian Faith.

I am (said Hugh Latimer, that laborious Preacher, and blessed Martyr) Ignorant
of things which I trust hereafter to know as I do now know things: Foxes Acts
and Monum. p. 1325. Humility indeed.
In which I have been Ignorant heretofore; Ever learn, and ever to be learned;
to profit with learning. I thought in times past that the Pope was Christ's
Vicar, had been Lord of all the World, as Christ is; so that if he should have
deprived the King of his Crown it had been enough, for he could do no wrong --
Now I think otherwise, and I thought in time past, that, and if I had been a
Friar in a Coul, I could not have been damned, nor afraid of Death; and by
occasion of the same, I have been minded many times to have been a Friar.
Namely, when I was sore sick and diseased, and now I abhor my superstitious
Foolishness -- It were too long to tell you what blindness I have been in, and
how long it were e're I could forsake such Folly, and thus far, Humble
Latimer;.

Come G. W. What do you think, was Hugh Latimer right, when he was amongst the
Papists, or right when he gave this plain Testimony against them? You will say,
he could not be right then, if right now; but if right now, he could not be
right then. Now I will not say, but he was in an error in being so zealous for
the Popish way; but yet thus far I will venture to go on the Martyr's side,
that he was right in his intention, and in Sincerity, when he was thus deluded
by the crafty Frier's carriage; but they being so subtle and crafty, that we
see this worthy-learned Preacher was carried away, viz. with the ^eaven of the
Pharisees; for possibly they said THEE and THOU, possibly they did not wear
LACE, possibly they pretended to preach FREELY, nnd pretended many fair things;
but when Hugh Latimer once saw their Craft and Subtilty, and that there was
nothing but Self Ends, and Self-Righteousness in the bottom, then he soon left
them: But for his pains, they called him Heretic, and Self condemned Apostate,
Contentious Apostate. And had this young Harlot power, I have reason to expect
the same Fate.

Come G. W. and the rest of your infallible Tribe, who pretend you have a
Spirit given to you beyond all the Forefathers; indeed if you had said contrary
to all the Forefathers, you had spoken truth to purpose; for here you may see
the blessed Martyrs, Men of Parts, of Learning, of Sincerity, Integrity, and
such Christian Courage, as the flames of Fire, nor all the Taunts, Reproaches,
and Slanders of your Predecessors were able to cast or inflict upon them, could
not daunt nor discourage them; yet such was their Humility, that they
acknowledged themselves ignorant of some things which in time they did hope and
trust to know, and modestly said they did (they trust) know some things which
formerly they were altogether ignorant of; yea, that they once had as erroneous
opinion of the Pope, as John Blackling, Josiah Coal, Solomon Eccles, John
Audland, and their Brethren, had of George Fox. But you see their humble
acknowledgment of their superstitious opinion, and that it was a long time ere
they could forsake such Folly. But tho Josiah Coals, etc. Letters to G. Fox, be
not only Superstitious, but Blasphemous, and Idolatrous, yet you excuse,
justify, and say well done to such Abominations. See their 10th Principle.
You may also see, that tho these blessed Martyrs confessed that the Papists
once taught sound and pure Doctrine, and doubtless did then commend their
Practice, Conversation and Deportment, and accounted such Doctrine so taught, a
dispensation of the love of GOD to Mankind; yet when they saw that they
Apostatized from these things, and began to impose Transubstation, and other
Novelties, as GOD's Ordinances, you see they then forsook them, left them. And
not only so, but did hear a full and ample Testimony against their Pride, their
Haughtiness, their infallible Pretentions, their grand Errors, and deep
Hypocrisies; not always picking at the Rine, but striking at the Root, until at
last, what by disputing, what by writing, what by printing, and with GOD's
blessing upon their endeavors, the Pope's Authority in England quite expired.
But oh what sad Bawling the Pope and his Cardinals, Priests and Friars, Jesuits
and Nuns, and all your Kindred made against Luther, Barns, Jerome of Prague,
John Huss, Philip Melancthon, and the rest of that noble, blessed, and for ever
renowned Army, calling them Apostates, Self condemned Apostates, apparent
Apostates, manifest Apostates, contentious Apostates, etc. And having then the
Law of their side, (which I thank GOD you have not) burnt many of them. Thus I
hope you may see a lively Figure of your selves, and also that as I have
acquitted my self of that Dilemma which you dreamed you had cast me into, I
have left you with your Kindred in that Dilemma, which nothing but Repentance
and Amendment will deliver you from which GOD of his mercy grant you may.

CHAP. III. Shows a third Reason, why forsaking the Quakers, is no Apostasy
from the Christian Faith.
FOR it is plain, That they deny Christ Jesus, who was born of the Virgin Mary,
who suffered without the gates of Jerusalem, and rose again, and ascended up
into Heaven, and there sits at the Right Hand of GOD, From their 3d Principle.
making Intercession for us. And since they err in this fundamental Article of
the Christian Faith, Search these Scriptures, viz. Mat. 13.16, 17. Luke 10.23,
24. cap. 1.42, 45, 68, 69, 70. cap. 2.20, to 39. Mat. 2.1, to 12. Mat. 21.5, to
17. Mat. 11.1. to 18. Luke 19.29. Psalm. 72.15, 17. Zach. 9.9.
and that against the Testimony of Men and Angels, Holy Scripture, and the
concurrent Testimony of the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs and Confessors, from
the beginning; I, upon that foot, and upon that bottom, account it no Apostasy
to forsake such a People who themselves have so apparently erred from the
Faith. Search these Scriptures, and abundance more to confirm this.
And that they have so erred, see their 3d Principle, and that it is against
Scripture, and the Angel's Testimony, Luke 2.10, 11, 16, 20. Mat. 2.25. Acts
18.5. Romans 14.9. 1 Cor. 15.3. John 11.35.
read Luke 2.10, 11, 16, 20. Then the Angel said unto them be not afraid, for
behold I bring you tidings of great joy, that shall be to all the people; that
is, that unto you is born this day in the city of David a SAVIOVR, which is
CHRIST the LORD. Now as HE was GOD from all Eternity, HE was not born of the
Virgin, did not hunger, was not cold, did not dye, was not spit upon, was not
smote with the palms of their hands: But as he was God-Man, the Man Christ
Jesus, who was born of the Virgin, according to that heavenly Testimony of the
blessed Angels, Luke 2. he was the SAVIOVR, CHRIST, THE LORD; which, you say,
was but a Garment, a Vail, a Vessel, WHICH YOU CAN NEVER CALL CHRIST Question
to the Professors, p. 33.
. Nay, it is said in plain words by George Fox, viz. Christ is the substance of
all Figures, and his FLESH is a FIGVRE Readiness Errand, etc. p. 14.
. This is, I confess, an uncouth Saying, but I will unriddle their meaning,
viz. CHRIST, as HE is the Light, they own HIM; but as to HIS Flesh, that is
only a Figure, a Garment, something or other which People do love, and speak
well of; but as for George Fox, and the Heads that know what they say, the
Flesh is of little value; and to confirm this my opinion, see Isaac Peningtons
one of their most learned, and knowing Writers (whose works they have taken
care to reprint in Folio) who says thus, A Question to the Professors, p. 33.
viz.

Now the Scriptures does expressly distinguish between CHRIST and the GARMENT he
wore; between HIM that CAME, and the BODY in which he CAME; between the
SVBSTANCE which was VEILED and the VAIL which VEILED it -- There is plainly HE,
and the' Body in which HE came; there was the outward Vessel, and the inward
Life. This we, certainly know, and can never call the bodily Garment Christ. So
that it is plain, The Quakers who are certain and infallible in this, are of a
contrary Spirit to all the Forefathers, Prophets, Apostles, and Christian
Professors to this day, See Luke 2.10, 11. Zach. 9.9.10. and 11 Cap. v. 12, 13.
Math. 2.6. Micah. 5.2. Psalm. 2.7. and 16.10. Acts 2.22, 23, 36. and 3.13. and
4.10. and 10.43.
according to this their Doctrine, the Angels message was only of a Garment
that was born; it is true, it is allowed to be a bodily Garment, a Vail, a
Figure, etc. which they can never call Christ; and if they can never call him
that was born of the Virgin Mary Christ, the consequence unavoidably follows,
that they can never own him to be Christ, the Savior of the World. And to
confirm this my sense of their principle, to all the People called Quakers, I
will yet add two Reasons more, viz.

First, In that they never in their public meetings, for worship of God, nor
yet in their Families, make confession of their sins to God; asking pardon for
Christ Jesus sake. This is one reason to confirm their Disciples that their
Leaders deny Christ Jesus, who was born of the Virgin, to be both Lord and
Christ.

Secondly, In all their books you never yet found, that ever they confessed
their Sins, and asked Pardon for Christ's sake; whereby it is manifest, that as
thereby they deny Christ as aforesaid, so they render themselves of a singular
Spirit to all the Prophets, Apostles, Saints, Martyrs, and Confessors since the
world stood; as may be seen by the Scriptures in the Margin beginning, with
Moses Psalm. 90. to the very Martyrs. Yea, Psalm. 51.2, 3. Psalm. 90. Job 7.20.
Lam. 3.41, 42. Isa. 64.6. Dan. 4.9. to the end. 1 John 1.8. 1 Timothy 1.15. Romans 7.
so singular that without the breach of Charity I may conclude; that instead of
having a Spirit given to them beyond all the Forefathers, so as to know who are
Saints, who are Devils, and who are Apostates; as they have vainly boasted.
They have a Spirit contrary to the Prophets, contrary to the Apostles, contrary
to the Ancient Fathers, and contrary to the Spirit, Faith and Principle of the
blessed Martyrs; but such has been the art of these Deluders, that as they
have undervalued Christ, calling him a Garment, a Vail, a Figure, etc. So have
they undervalued the Holy Scriptures, by calling them Carnal, Death, Dust, the
Serpents Food, and the like Antichristian names, as anon I shall show; so that
it will be hard to persuade their Disciples to read the Scriptures cited: And
if they do, yet not to yield them that Authority, which G.W. gives to their
speaking by the Spirit who says That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth
in any, is of as great Aurity as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater,
etc. Ser Apoll. p. 49.

Oh the consequence of this monstrous opinion! if HE that was born, etc. be not
the Christ, but a Garment, a Vail, a Figure, etc. Then why did not the Prophets
foretell, that a Virgin should conceive, and bring forth a Garment. That a
Virgin should conceive, and bring forth a Vail, a Figure, etc. Oh monstrous! So
that its no marvel that you do not pray in the Name of Christ, beg pardon in
the Name of Christ since you own Him only as a Garment which waxes old, or as
a Figure, etc.

Object. But perhaps some of your own People may say, is it indeed such a
Christian duty to make Confession of our Sins to God, and to beg Pardon for
Jesus Christ's sake. If we indeed believed it a duty, we would (notwithstanding
the practice of our Teachers, who we know does not) practice the same, etc.

Answer. I hope then there is some such Bereans still left (how thin soever
they be) amongst you; and for their sakes, in my book, The Quakers detected,
and their Errors confuted, etc. I laid down many precepts, to which I refer
you, as also to the Scriptures in the Margin; and if you read the Scriptures,
you shall not read one book from Genesis to the Revelations, but you shall find
some precept which may strengthen you in this your duty.

And that I may not leave this point without warrantable proof, I will add to
the Testimony of the Prophets, and Practice of the Apostles, and the Precept of
Christ, who has taught his Disciples (and in them all that follow them, in the
same Faith) to say, Forgive us our Sins, etc. The Practice and Judgment of the
blessed Martyrs; who unanimously, as a Cloud of Witnesses, concur with the
Judgment, and Practice of the primitive Chistians; And against the singular
opinion, and singular practice of your Ministers: who though they pretend, and
make you believe, they have a Spirit beyond all the Forefathers, it is indeed,
being rightly interpreted, a Spirit contrary to all the Forefathers of the
Christian Race.

First then, hear Dr. Robert Barnes, viz. The whole Church prays, LORD
forgive us our Sins; See his works, p. 254.
wherefore she has spots and wrincles: But by acknowledging them (through the
Merits of Christ) her wrincles be scratched out, etc.

Next hear what Martin Luther says, touching this particular duty, viz. But
thou will say the Church is Holy, the Fathers are Holy; it is true
notwithstanding, See his Commentary upon Gall. p. 36.
albeit the Church is Holy, yet, is she compelled to pray, Forgive us our
Trespasses; so tho the Fathers are Holy, yet are they saved through the
Forgiveness of sins.

These two have given joint Testimony, that it is the Churches Duty; nay, she is
compelled to confess, and beg pardon of her Sins.

I come next to holy Bradfords practice, that humble and constant Martyr of
Jesus Christ, in his Epistle to his London Friends, which for the excellency of
it I could willingly have recited the whole, but brevity forces only an
Abridgment, viz. To all that profess the Gospel, Fox's Acts and Monuments, p.
1176, 1177.
and true Doctrine, of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in the City of
London, John Bradford an unworthy Servant of the LORD -- But with THEE is
Mercifulness that thou mighst be worshipped. Oh then be mercyful unto us, that
we might truly worship THEE; help us for the Glory of thy Name, be merciful
unto our Sins for they are great: Oh heal us, and help us for thine Hoaour: let
not the wicked people say, where is their GOD? On this sort, my right dearly
beloved, let us heartily bewail our Sins, repent us of our former evil Life,
and heartily and earnestly purpose to amend our Lives in all things;
continually watch in Prayer, diligently and reverently attend, hear, and read
the Holy Scriptures.

By which you may perceive, Firrst, This holy man's humility acknowledges
himself unworthy, and. Secondly, The like is not to be found in any of the
Quakers former books.
His acknowledging his Sins. Thirdly, That he begged pardon for His Mercy sake.
Fourthly, His holy Resolution, and heavenly Exhortation.

And now to finish this Chapter, I shall conclude in the words of Dr. Barnes,
whose Faith in Christ does as much differ from the Faith of, and Principles of
the Quakers, as Light from Darkness. See their 3d. and 4th. Principle in the
first Chapter.
For in Him which they call a bodily Garment, and which they say they can never
own to be Christ, did this blessed Martyr at the Flames confess to be his LORD
and Savior; also his practice of asking Pardon of Sin, is directly contrary to
their practice, pray hear him.

Dr. R. Barnes his protestation which he made at the Stake, concerning his
Faith in Christ Jesus.

I am (said he) come hither to be burned as an Heretic, and you shall hear my
Belief, Acts and Monuments. p. 610.
whereby you shall perceive what erroneous opinions I hold; and now hearken to
my Faith, I believe in the Holy and Blessed Trinity, I have often marvelled why
the Quaker would not own the word Trinity, but now I do not, since they deny
the 2d. Person.
that created and made all the world. I believe that without man's will or power
Christ Jesus was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and took Flesh of the Blessed
Virgin Mary. That he suffered Thirst, Hunger, Cold, Which he could not do as he
was God, but as he was man, viz. the man Christ Jesus.
and other Passions of our bodies, Sin excepted; according to the saying of St.
Peter. I belive that this his Death and Passion was the sufficient Ransom for
the Sins of all the world. Then surely he was more than a Garment, or Vail, or
Figure; and the Quakers saying, they can never own this bodily Garment to be
Christ (as their phrase is) it is as much as if they had said, they do not own
the Christ of GOD.
And I believe that through his Death he overcame Sin, Death, and Hell: And that
there is no other satisfaction unto the Father, but His Death and Passion only.
Mind this ye Pharisees, who think to be saved by your own deservings, as all
do, who do not own Christ to be their Savior.
And that no works of man did deserve any thing of GOD, but only Christ's
Passion touching our Justification. For I know (said this Humble Martyr) that
the best works that ever I did is impure and unperfect. Read your books,
observe your Ministers, see if their Spirit be not contrary to all the
Forefathers.
And with this he cast abroad his Hands, and prayed to GOD for Christ's sake to
forgive him his Sins, as says the Historian.

Thus gentle Reader have I showed that the Doctrine, Principles, Faith, and
Practice of the Quakers, is contrary to the Doctrine, Principles, Faith, and
Practice of the Apostles, Primitive Christians, Saints, Martyrs, and Holy
Confessors of the Catholic Faith from Moses to this day; both concerning the
Humanity of Christ, and praying and confessing our Sins to God, and begging
Pardon for Christ's sake, which is another reason, and a good one too, why the
forsaking the Quakers is no Apostasy from the Christian Faith, etc.

CHAP. IV. Shows that the forsaking the Quakers, is no Apostasy from the
Articles of the Christian Faith.
I Am now come to show what they mean, when they talk of Christ being in them,
as by their books are manifest; and if they will not own their books, which
they have said are given forth by the immediate and eternal Spirit of GOD, then
let them first condemn the books of Geo. Fox, Is. Pennington, and most of their
eminent Writers; and declare themselves fully that they are of another mind,
and that they own Christ according to the Angels Testimony, and the Apostles
and Martyrs Testimony; or else we shall conclude they are as erroneous as their
books set forth, etc.

Pray hear Is. Penington, in his book styled, Quest. to the Professors, etc. p.
27. viz. The Name Christ belongs to the whole Body, as well as to the HEAD, and
to every Member of the Body: The Name is not given to the VESSEL, but to the
NATVRE to the Heavenly TREASVRE to that which is of Him in the Vessel, etc.

Now Reader mark what the consequence of this blasphemous Doctrine is, which
says, that the Name CHRIST belongs to every Believer, as well and as amply as
to CHRIST the Head, who is GOD blessed for evermore.

Here you see the Consequence, first of their not owning HIM that was born of
the Virgin Mary, to be the Christ, (for if they cannot call HIM so, they cannot
own HIM to be so, See your 2d and 3d Principle in the first Chapter of this
Treatise, etc.
etc.) but only a Figure, a Vail, a Vessel, a Garment, etc. see p. 33. And
2dly, in assuming to themselves the Name, in that Christ the heavenly Nature is
in them. Thus have they magnified themselves equal with Christ; and I will
prove that they thus mean, by the very words of their great Apostle G. Fox, in
their Book, Entitled, Saul's Errand to Damascus, etc. p. 8. Readiness Errand, p. 8.
viz. HE THAT HAS THE SAME SPIRIT WHICH RAISED UP JESUS CHRIST, IS EQUAL WITH
GOD.

Now then if it be so? as so they do believe it to be; for first they say, they
have the eternal, infallible Spirit of GOD in them, from which they speak,
write, act, give forth their Orders for Women's Meetings See my Book de Chr.
Lib. etc. from p. 36. to 72. where your whole Authority for your Women's Meeting
is set down, and their Original, and all from G. Fox, and your yearly Meetings
sole Authority, and not one verse of Scripture brought, to strengthen their
Rise, Foundation, and setting up, etc.

Indeed John Fiddyman (a Quaker) did deny to have any other Spirit than what
Christians own in common; and, to give him his due, refused to own G. Fox's
Books, and I hope more will follow, as they come to see their Errors, etc.


, etc. Then I do demand what hinders them from deserving the Name Christ, as
well as HE that was born of the Virgin, that suffered cold hunger, was smote
with the palms of their hands, etc. since they cannot call him Christ? I say,
if they have the same Spirit, the same Treasure in them, which raised up Jesus
Christ, and are thereby equal with GOD, as they say they are. What hinders, but
that we may have as many Christ's, as Quakers? at least, as many as the Quakers
have Preachers: For some of their Hearers, I do believe, are more modest, than
to entertain these Luciferian thoughts, though indeed they do not know how far
they are Baptized into this erroneous and pernicious Principle, etc.

And as I have by the 2d Chapter proved, That they deny Christ, and undervalue
his Death and Suffering, so have I in the beginning of this Chapter proved,
That they account the Name Christ does belong to every believing Quaker; then
by magnifying themselves, under pretense of Christ being in them in that degree
they pretend to, that they claim Equality with -- Oh Dreadful!

In the next place I am come to show how they extol their own Writings, and how
they have thrown Contempt upon the Scriptures, and that also out of their own
Books, which is a Consequence of the forementioned Errors.

First, They say they have a Spirit given to them beyond all the Forefathers
and they know who are Saints, who are Devils, and who are Apostates, See their
first Principle the Mother of the rest, etc.
without speaking ever a word, etc. (which none but GOD, and such as are equal
to HIM, can do, etc.)

Secondly, None need to give them Discerning or Judgment, they being by Christ
always, and at all times, and on all occasions, therewith infallibly furnished.

Thirdly, Readiness Errand, page 8.
He that has the same Spirit which raised up Jesus CHRIST, is equal with GOD.

Fourthly, The G: Fox to the King and Parliament, page 18.
Quakers knew their Election before the World began.

Fifthly, We (say the Quakers) are elected to Salvation; we have the Witness in
us, Praises be to the glorious LORD GOD for ever, Truth's Defense, p. 92.
who has elected and chosen us before the foundation of the World.

Quakers Challenge, p. 3.
The Quakers are in the Truth, and none but they.

You might as well have condemned the Scriptures to the Fire, Truth's Defense,
page 2, 104.
as our Books and Queries; for our giving forth Papers and printed Books, it is
from the immediate eternal Spirit of GOD.

A brief Discovery of the threefold Estate of Antichrist, p. 15.
All teaching by Christ, is to bring to perfection even to the measure, stature,
and fullness of Christ; this the Scripture witnesses, and I witness this
Scripture fulfilled in me G. F.

The aforesaid Assertions, Positions and Tenants, being so erroneous,
blasphemous, and pernicious to the Christian Religion, I think them so obvious,
that they need not any further Remark at present.

I come next to show, what Slight and Contempt they have cast on the
Scriptures, in order to invalidate their Certainty and Authority, and therein
to show G. W. how they value their unwrit Traditions above the Scriptures, both
in words as well as in practice, as I shall show anon; for I am not picking at
the Rine now, but plucking at the Root: And tho I must confess they are sturdy
Oaks, yet the Ax that is laid will level them, unless they repent, which I pray
GOD they may, if it be his Will, Amen.

First, That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great
Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater. Serious Apology,
page 49.
By G. Whitehead in his Serious Apology, p. 49.

G. Whitehead's Ishmael, p. 10.
Secondly, That which is written is the Letter, which is Death, and kills.

Way to the Kingdom, p. 8.
Thirdly, The Scriptures are a declaration of the Word, the Husk.

Fourthly, The Letter of the Scripture is carnal, Readiness Errand to Damascus p.
7.
and the Letter is Death, and kills.

In one of their Books The Quakers Refuge fixed on the Rock of Ages, p. 17.
they thus query, viz. Whether the first Penman of the Scriptures was Moses, or
Hermes? Or whether both these, or not one? Or whether there are not many words
contained in the Scriptures which were not spoken by Inspiration of the Holy
Spirit? Whether some words were not spoken by the grand Imposture, some by
wicked Men, some by wise Men ill applied, some by good Men ill expressed, some
by false Prophets, and yet true; some by true Prophets, and yet false?

Now, Reader, setting aside the Contempt George Fox, George Whitehead, and
others, anciently threw upon the Scriptures, as Carnal, Dust, the Serpent's
Meat, Husk; not of that Authority with what is said to be spoken from the
Spirit of Truth, and the like. I say, setting aside, THAT what can be the
natural Tendency of these Queries, but to prejudice the weak Readers against
the Authority of the Scriptures; especially such who take Examples of them, in
that they never read a Chapter in their Meetings for the Worship of GOD. If
what the true Prophets spoke, be FALSE? If what good Men spoke, be ILL
EXPRESSED? If what wise Men spoke, be ILL APPLIED? Then what is there left,
besides what was spoken by true Prophets, good Men, and wise Men? If there be
any, as you seem to suggest, that it is spoken by the grand Impostor, and by
wicked Men, and false Prophets, etc. And if there be some little left that was
spoken by true Prophets, and is true; some by good Men well expressed, some by
wise Men rightly applied: Yet you not having made any distinction, who shall
know what is true, from that which is false; that which is well expressed, and
rightly applied, from the contrary, since you have left these three wretched
Questions unresolved, and the Scriptures doubtful, ambiguous, and uncertain,
robbing them of that Authority which GOD's People from Age to Age have justly
attributed to them. As for the five Books of Moses, who wrote them, Moses, or
Hermes, is now put into the world as a Question? Yea, whether either or neither
be the Author of those Books? Yea, these very Writings of Moses, which I never
heard questioned before, are now proposed, whether Moses or Hermes be the
Author of them? Now if Moses and Hermes be all one, then why is the Query put,
unless you would have Moses to be Hermes, and not Hermes to be Moses? And so
Moses being lost, and Hermes only a Philosopher in Egypt being found, the Books
going under the Name of Moses's, shall be lost also. If this was not your mind,
why do you fill the world with such Atheistical Queries, etc? Christ himself
often quoted the Writings of Moses See Mark 12.16. Luke 16.29. Luke 24.27. Acts
3. Luke 26.27, 44.
, and so did the Apostles. I never, till now, took so much notice of this your
wretched Design, to bring the Scriptures into Contempt, that so you might exalt
your own unwritten Traditions; and therefore there is Reason enough in this to
show, that forsaking the Quakers, is no Apostasy from the Christian Faith.

CHAP. V. Shows that the Forsaking the Quakers, is no Apostasy from the
Articles of the Christian Faith.
IN my Book, One Blow more at NEW ROME, etc. I gave six Reasons why I compared
the Quakers to New Rome, Rome's Sister, etc. Amongst which one was, That they
value their unwritten Traditions above the Scriptures, five of those six G. W.
never touches: But that of their valuing their unwrit Traditions above the
Scriptures, he says, is a Lie, without giving any one Demonstration, etc.

And therefore to justify my Charge, That you value your unwrit Traditions
above the Scriptures, I prove thus: First, it never was from first to last your
practice to read any one Chapter of the Bible, nor any one Epistle of Paul,
Peter, or any of the Apostles in your Meetings for Worship of GOD; when as you
have read the Epistles of Robert Sandyland, Samuel Cater, William Penn, George
Whitehead, and Stephen Crisp, with as much Attention and Devotion as the
Papists do their Legends; and this, with what is writ in Chap. IV. is
sufficient to prove the Point: for I take all which is written in opposition
to, or in competition with the Scriptures, to be unwritten Traditions.

Now if I can make it first appear, that it is a principle of the Papists not
to read the Scriptures in their Churches. And secondly, That it was, and is the
practice of Protestants, to read the Scriptures in their Churches and
Assemblies, for the Worship of GOD; then I hope Geo. Whitehead will not blame
me for calling them New Rome, who in almost every point follows their Example:
And also I hope it will be a caution to many of the Quakers, to look about
them, who shall find themselves, led by their Teachers, into the very Road and
High way to Rome, before ever they so much as thought of it, nay, that they are
in her very Borders and Territories, when they thought all had been well, and
that they had been as their Teachers tell them, and would make them believe;
even in the Heights of Sion; in the Truth, and none but THEY; and that amongst
them ONLY is God known, elected before the world began; and the like.

First, Then to show that it was against the principles of the Papists, to read
the Scriptures in their Churches.

Mr. HARDING against JEWEL.
By the Instinct of Satan, Defense of the Apol. of Chapter of England, p. 580.
ye have brought the People from Devotion, to careless Idleness; from speaking
to God with Hearts and Lips, to a spiritual Dumbness; from Prayers, to
Chapters; from holy Think, (or silent meeting) to unprofitable Hearing.

Thus much from one of the ablest, the Pope had to defend his Errors by; which
the Reader may observe, that the Papists do account it a spiritual Dumbness,
and a Device of Satan, and unprofitable to read the Chapters of the Bible in
their Churches, and that it prevents their holy thinking; or, to speak in their
Younger Sisters Language, prevent their silent Meetings; the Parallel holds
good.

Now let us hear what the Protestants, and ancient Fathers opinion were in that
case; and the rather too, because I am joined to a Church, which proclaim the
reading the Scriptures, and perhaps, it may be one of their reasons, and none
of the least neither, why they call me an Apostate; which is the second thing I
promised to speak to, in order to show, that the Quakers follow the steps of
the Papists, but will not once cast an Eye upon the Protestant Path in this
particular. For though they will not in plain words, call the reading the
Scriptures, for worship of God, Advice of Satan, a spiritual Dumbness,
unprofitable Hearing; and the like. Yet they not reading one Chapter in 20 or
30 years together, in their Religious Assemblies (if so I may call them) their
Practice says Amen to the principles of the Papists in that point; as well as
bespeak their aversness to the Way, Practice, and Manner of the ancient
Fathers, Martyrs and Protestants, to this day. Now hear their sayings, etc.

Secondly, Origin says, Origin in Josua Homil. 15.
The Books of (the old Testament which are called) the stories of the Jews,
were delivered by the Apostles, to be read in Churches.

Justinus Martyr says, Upon the Sunday the Christian People, Justinus Mart.
Apolog. 2.
that dwell in Town or Country, meet together in one place; there the Epistles
of the Apostles, or the Prophets Writings are pronounced unto us; afterward he
that is the Chief, or Minister, warns and exhorts all the rest, that they
will follow those good things that they have heard read; THAT DONE, we rise up
all, and pray together.

St. Cyprian says, Cyprian lib 2. Epist. 5.
The Reader finds out the high and heavenly words, he reads out the Gospel
of Christ, he is seen of the Brethren, he is heard with Joy of all the
Brotherhood.

In the Council of Laodicea, it is written thus. Laodice council Can. 16.
Upon the Sabbath day it is convenient that the Gospels, and other Scriptures
be read.

St. Augustine says, Ye heard when the Gospel was read, August. in 50 Homil.
if ye give ear to the reading, dearly beloved we have heard in the Lesson that
has been read, etc.

Tertullian Apologitico lib. 2.
Tertullian says, We come together to the reading the Holy Scriptures, we feed
our Faith with those Heavenly Voices, we raise up our Affiance, we fasten our
Hope. -- Where is the feeding of Faith that comes by the open pronouncing, and
reading of the Scriptures.

St. Chrysostom says. The Minister, and common Minister stands up, Crysostom
in Acta Hom. 19.
and cries out with a loud voice, saying, keep silence, and give ear: After
that the Reader begins the Prophesy of Isaiah, etc.

Isidorus says. The Lesson (in the Church) brings great profit to the
Hearers; Isidor. de Eccles. offic. l. 1 c. 10.
Therefore when singing is, let all sing together, when prayer is, let all pray
together; and when the Lesson or Chapter is read, let silence be made, and let
all hear together.

Now George, I think I have made a full Reply, and set you in your proper
places; and if you had meddled with my other five reasons, why I call you New
Rome, you might have heard more from me: But since you thought it not for your
Interest, as indeed it was not; unless Reason and Scripture backed with the
Authority of Antiquity might prevail upon you, then I should think no Labor
too much; as much as you account me your Adversary. However by this time I hope
you are satisfied, that forsaking the Quaker is no Apostate from the Christian
Faith.

CHAP. VI. Shows that the forsaking the Quakers, is no Apostasy from the
Articles of the Christian Faith.
GGorge Whitehead, in his Cont. Apostate, etc. p. 27. says. But where are all
required by Christ or his Apostles, to pray for (Kings and Queens) by Names, or
charged as Offenders, for not naming Persons in our Prayers; The cont.
Apostate, etc. p. 27.
may we not pray acceptably unless we tell GOD the Name of those we pray for,
etc.

Answ. I only admonish you to pray for King William and Queen Mary, as heartily
and zealously as you did for the late King James; but did not, mention your
addressing your selves too, Genesis 20. Genesis 47.7, 10. Exodus 1.6. to the end. Cap.
2.23, 24, 25. Cap. 3.7, 8, 9, 10. Acts 7.18 to 35, Psalm. 90.1. Josephus Ant. l.
6. cap. 5.67. 1 Samuel 8 22. cap. 9.16, 17. cap. 15.1.9. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. 1 Chronicles.
28.4. onwards. 1. Kings 18.25. Jer. 33.20.21. Psalm. 132.11, 12, 13.14. 2 Samuel
7.25. Psalm. 72, 1, 2. 2 Samuel 16.16. 2 Chr, 29.18. on, Ezra 6.3. to 14. Josephus
Antiq. l. 11 c. 4. Exodus 22.26. 1 Pet. 2.13.14, Ezekiel. 19.10.
and praying publicly for him whilst he was seated on the Throne, as an evil,
or irreligious practice as such. For it is my Judgment that we ought to pray
for ALL KINGS which GOD in his Providence sets over us, without disputing their
Titles; whether they be Pagan, or Christian; bad, or good; Hetrodox, or
Orthodox; Persecutor, or Protector; if you deny it, I am able to make it appear
from the practice of many of Gods faithful Saints and Servants from Abraham
downwards to this day, see the Scriptures in the Margin. But if you do not deny
it, then I ask why do you not as public, and heartily pray for King William,
and Queen Mary, by Name; as you did for King James by Name; that in short is
the Question? For you are a considerable People for number, and it is requisite
you should be plain hearted, and declare your selves what you can do, or what
you can not do in this point. That you did publicly pray for, and address your
selves to King James, I shall make appear by part of two of your Addresses (and
the remainining four, for there were six Addresses presented to him, during his
short Reign, etc. are of the same Nature,) viz.

The Humble Address of the People called QVAKERS to King JAMES II.
WE cannot but with grateful hearts both admire, and acknowledge the Providence
of God, that made the Kings Retiring into our Native Country (i. e. Scotland in
1679) give a happy Turn to his Affairs; to the defeating and disappointing the
designs of his Enemies. We do justly conceive OUR selves obliged, by a special
Tie, Looking-glass, p. 11.
to praise God for his Goodness, in carrying the King through, and over, all
his Troubles; since by the same Providence, and at the same time by which the
LORD began, in that more observable manner, to evidence his, care of him: He
made him the happy Instrument to deliver us from our troubles; so that the
Prosperity of his Affairs, and our peaceable Fruition of the Exercise of our
Consciences, bears the same Date.

Dated, June, 1637.

Thus Reader you see that from England to Scotland, and from Scotland to
England, they sounded his Fame, in the Highest strain of words, praying GOD for
his Preservation; and praising GOD for defeating his Enemies.

But alas! Has King William been without Enemies? Has their been no Plotting
against him? (I will not say by some of themselves) No Contrivance, nor no
Conspiracies against his Royal Person? Yea, against the Kingdom, that they
cannot afford one Prayer for his long Life; one Praise to God for his
Deliverance. Has not he granted all they can reasonably desire of him? I know
they will be angry at me, for reminding them of these things; but why should
they be hid, that never hid any body? Why should not they be discovered, and
known to be really what they are; that for 30 years have made it their
business, or a great part of it at least, to render all sorts of People as
odious as they could, and what they really were not; and their end could be
nothing but to exalt their own Horn, etc. But Providence has so ordered it,
that the same Pit they dug for others, they are justly fallen into
themselves; and are left, as Mr. Baxter says, in his Penitential Confession, p.
63. 1691. viz. A disgraced broken Sect, as the Quakers be amongst us now, etc.

A broken Sect indeed, divided wholly in many places: One sort shut up the
Meeting House against the other, divided in Cities and Towns; yea almost in
every Village: The Foxonian Government is in many places quite thrown off, See
J. Hogs book.
and in others weakening every day. Well but to return, see another of their
Addresses. viz.

The Humble Address of the People called QVAKERS, to K. James II. from their
Yearly meeting in London. The 6th Day of June, 1688.
WE the Kings loving and peaceable Subjects, from diverse parts of his Domimions
being met together in this City, after our usual manner, to Rather in^ect.
inspect the Affairs of our Christian Society THROVGHOVT THE WORLD, think it
our Duty humbly to represent to him, the blessed Effects the Liberty he has
graciously granted his People, to worship God (according to their Consciences)
has had, both on our Persons and Estates. For as formerly we had ever long and
sorrowful Lists brought to us, from almost all parts of his Territories, of
Prisoners, and the spoil of Goods, by violent and ill men upon account of
Conscience. We bless God, and thank the King, the Goals are every where clear,
except in cases of Tithes, and the repair of Parish Churches; and some few
about Oaths. And we do in all Humility lay it before the King, to consider the
hardships our Friends are yet under, for Conscience sake; being in the one
chiefly exposed to the present anger of the Offended Oh! They knew how taking
this would be, cunning Foxes.
Clergy, who have therefore lately imprisoned some of them, till Death: And in
the other they are rendered very unprofitable to the public and themselves;
both in reference to Freedoms in They thought this a good motive, that so their
Voices, etc.
Corporations, Probates of Wills, and Testaments, and Administrations; Answers
in Chancery, and Exchequer; Trials of our just Titles, and Debts; Proceeding in
our Trade, at the Custom house; serving the Office of Constable, etc. they are
disabled, and great Advantages taken against them, unless the King's favor do
interpose: As we humbly hope he may relieve, so we confidently assure our
selves, he will ease us what he can.

Now since it has pleased thee, O King, to renew to all thy Subjects, by thy
last Declaration, thy gracious Assurance to pursue the Establishment of this
Christian Liberty and Property, upon an UNALTERABLE Foundation; And in order to
it, to hold a Parliament, in November next at furthest; we think our selves
deeply engaged to renew our Assurances of Fidelity and Affection, and with Gods
help intend to do our parts To Vote, etc.
, for the effecting so blessed and glorious a work; that so it may be out of
the power of any one Party to hurt another upon the account of Conscience: And
as we firmly believe that God will never desert this Just and Righteous cause
of Liberty, NOR THE KING in maintaining of it; so we hope, by God's Grace, to
let the World see, we can honestly and heartily appear for LIBERTY of
CONSCIENCE And yet at the same time, great Oppressors of it in your dissenting
Friends, but Hypocrisy will have its reward.
, and be inviolable true to our own Religion, whatever the Folly or Madness on
that account may suggest to the contrary.


Thus Reader you see here is nothing wanting, but bended Knees; Here is in ALL
Humility, in ALL Fidelity, with ALL Affection, yea, ALL, ALL, ALL: All Prayers
for him, for long Life, for prosperous Reign; Laud and Praise in the highest,
for his deliverance, for the defeating his enemies; yea, it would be too long
to enumerate them, besides Book after Book, in favor of the Government, and
one Epistle after another, and printed Letters, first, second and third,
sounding his fame throughout the World.

But since King William and Queen Mary came to the Crown (as in the Letter to
the Quakers was well observed) NO Salutation, NO Message, NO Prayer for nor NO
Address to K. W. and Q. M. made Public, NO Book writ in favor of him, NO In
all Humility, NO In all Fidelity, NO In all Affection, NO Public Prayers for
his long and prosperous Reign, NO Laud and Praise that his enemies are
defeated; here is all NO, NO, NO, NO: Tho, thanks be to GOD, he is now settled
peaceably in his three Kingdoms: COME what can you say for your selves? Are you
like those 1 Samuel 10.27. The children of Belial, who said, How shall this man
save us? And they despised him, See your 12th principle.
and brought him no presents, (no Prayers, no Addresses.) I know you have too
much espoused the Romish principles, some of which are, 1. We must believe as
the Church (i. e. your Church) believes. 2. That the (your) Church cannot err.
3. That she has power to bind and loose. 4. And that it is abominable Pride
not to submit to her (i. e. your) Judgment. You may remember you have had many
Favors by Their Majesty's, particularly, Liberty of Conscience established by
Law, which is one, and not the least; and yet having had three Annual Meetings
in London, not one Address, etc.

Nay, worse than so. And as an aggravation of your Ingratitude, you made an
ORDER for the calling in the Widow Whitrow's Books, (she being formerly of your
Society) which was writ but in favor of this Government, what Scripture had
you for that? You say, that Christ and his Apostles did not require you to pray
for Kings by Name; I say so too: But since you prayed for, and addressed your
selves to King James by Name, why can you not as well pray for Their Majesty's
by Name? Well, but since you can bring the Scriptures to cover and excuse your
not addressing, or praying for them by Name, where do you find any Text for
calling in, and hindering the Sale of the Widow Whitro'ws Book aforesaid? That
is the Question, which in your next you are desired to answer. And tho I hope
you did not order it to be burned, as I am told, (and that by one of your own
People too) that George Whitehead ordered my Books to be burnt throughout all
his Dominion, I am sure therein he followed Rome exactly. The way is, first
condemn the Man, then condemn his Books; but first burn the Man, then his
Books. And sometimes, when she cannot help it, she does otherwise, and so do
you; you have first condemned me as a Self-condemned Apostate; next, my Books
you have ordered to be burnt. But I have not as yet heard, that you have
ordered a Stake to be prepared for me, I do thank GOD you cannot; it is an old
saying, It Is good that cursed Cows have short Horns. You that burn my Books if
you had power, which GOD grant you never may, I would not trust you to burn me.
I tell you, what thoughts soever I had of you in 1686, I have worse thoughts of
you now: And G. W. is one principal Man that has raised these thoughts. First,
By his defaming me, endeavoring to destroy my Reputation, according to the
Jesuits Morals, and the Papists Practices to the Martyrs all along. Secondly,
By charging me in diverse things as a great Criminal, where his Conscience tells
him I am clear Particularly his second Charge in his last, where he finds no
Cause.
. And Thirdly, That instead of seeking Peace in the way of Peace, he acts as
contrary thereto, as light is to darkness. And tho he writes three Books
against me in nine Months time, yet he exposes me the Contentious Person And
thus he goes on, and says, He neither consults Events, nor fears Effects. And
the People, his Disciples, love to have it so; if they did not, they would not
suffer such a Makebate, such a peevish, waspish Man, to sit and scrible one
Book after another, and yet will not come forth to prove his Accusation, nor
defend his Charge wherewith he and his Brethren stand charged. And now, by this
my Book, I do hereby challenge four or six of their ablest Preachers to come
forth, in the vindication of their Twelve Principles in the first Chapter if
they can, giving me a months notice; and I will, GOD permitting, meet them in
Milden-Hall, and prove them erroneous, and pernicious to the Christian
Religion. As also accept of the Three Charges exhibited by George Whitehead
against me in his last Pamphlet, styled, The Contentious Apostate recharged,
etc. And this will be better, than everlastingly to print. And tho in 1682, you
would take no notice of what is said de Christiana Liberate, p. 213. nor in
the Painted Harlot, etc. p. 70, 71. Yet if you look therein, you may perceive
my then Resolution, in case you proceeded in that base and unworthy way in
which S. Cater began, (tho indeed I always took G. W. to have a hand in that
Book.) I say I was resolved to spare no Arrow which might light on the skirts
of this well-favour'd Harlot, tho I can say I have been slow; and if I could
any way have prevailed with them in the least to have acknowledged their Faults
wherein they had done amiss, it would have abated the edge of my Pen, which has
been severe upon G. W. as his just Demerit, for his great Injustice, and base
way of writing.

Thus, at present, I only refer him to his Grandfather's practice Pope Leo X.*.
and others, see Fox's Acts and Monuments, Fox's Acts and Mon. p. 238, 416, 417,
483.
p. 238, 416, 417, 483. But to return, I remember George Fox put forth 2434
Queries to all the Scholars and Doctors in Europe to answer, and bid them come
out of their Holes, Dens, and lurking places, into the Fields; we shall see (
said George) whether you can draw your weapons, etc. The said Questions consist
chiefly in these and the like words, viz.

Quest. What is a Genetive Case? What is a Dative Case? What is a Participle?
What is a Dipthong? What is a Noun? Why are these Declined? And why is the word
called Declined? Who was the first Author of it? And by whom it came? And why
is the word called Adverb? And what is an Adverb? the word itself, and where
was its rise, etc? See for more of them in Battering Rams, etc. p. 18. This
Book G. F. entitled, A Primer for all the Doctors and Scholars in Europe,
printed 1659. And now what if I, for once, thrust in a Query amongst these, or
at the end of them, (as I found it, the other day, in an untoward Book,
entitled, The Jacobites Catechism, p. 5.) to George Whitehead He and three
more, delivered this Address at Windsor to King Charles the Second, wherein
they showed what they were for.
, who (about the time of the Execution of the Lord Russell) presented to King
Charles the Second an Address, crying out extremely against all HELLISH PLOTS,
AND TRAYTEROVS CONSPIRACIES. The meaning was against the Lord RVSSELL, the Lord
Essex, Sidney, Cornish, Bateman, etc. The knotty Query is this that follows,
etc.

Query. What made the Quakers no more concerned for the loss of those brave
Patriots of your Country, Essex and Russell, etc. who lost their Lives in
defense of your Country, and its Liberties, etc?

Come, George, this is (as I said) a knotty Question, it will be difficult for
you and W. P. to answer for all your subtilty and cunning, tho many observe you
are much filled therewith as most of the Jesuitical Race. Well, I will not
insist too much on this Point, lest you say I expose you. But why should you
talk of Exposing, I only tell you your Duty? And are you so proud, having had
the Rein, to propose Questions to Bishops, Ministers, Presbyterians,
Anabaptists, and all sorts, caling them Witches, See Edw. B's Works, p. 54, 55.

A just Rebuke to 21 Divines, etc.

The Way cast up, etc.

Readiness Errand, etc.

Truth's Defense, etc.

Plain and peaceable Advice, etc. Rusticus, etc.


Devils, Sots, Conjurers, Beasts, Tinkers, Molls, Lizards, Fiery Fighters, such
as can defend their Religion with the Sword, to be turned into the Pit
eternally, Blood-thirsty, Tyranical Projects, etc. Now if I should call you so,
then you might say I expose you; but I only tell you of your Duty, and remind
you of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy.

CHAP. VII. Shows that forsaking the Quakers, is no Apostasy from the Articles
of the Christian Faith.
I AM now come to the Conference I had with George Whitehead, at the House of
Joshua Bangs in Milden-Hall the 24th of August 1691, touching a certain Charge
which I formerly exhibited against him at a Public Meeting As in my Book, One
Blow, etc. p. 2, 3.
at Milden-Hall, which he then declined to accept of, and to defend himself
from, as well as to own himself Author of his Book, Judgment Fixed, etc.

My said Threefold Charge was this: First, That George Whitehead is a Deceiver
of the People. 2dly, That he is a false Accuser of the Martyrs, charging their
Doctrine to be corrupt, tending to practical Ranterism, sordid Ranterism, etc.
3dly, That he is a Favourer or an Excuser of such Principles and Practices as
border upon Blasphemy and Idolatry.


This was the Charge: The Spectators present, who heard what passed, were
these, whose Names hereafter follow, viz.

PROTESTANTS, QUAKERS, Mr. ROBERT RVSSELL, SIMON BIRGIS, Mr. THOMAS BRADBVRY,
JAMES BIRGIS, Mr. SAMVEL' KNOWLES, JOS. BANGS, Mr. JOHN WALTER, AMBROSE FRIEND,
JOHN PAPWORTH, EDWARD DEEKES, PHILIP CRANNISS, and others. BENJAMIN ANTROBVS;
and others.

THE FIRST CHARGE, THAT G. WHITEHEAD IS A DECEIVER OF THE PEOPLE.
G. W. Come Francis, I come of the Defensive part, thou art the Plaintiff, I
expect proof of what thou chargest me with.


F. B. Here is a Book, styled, Judgment Fixed: Do thou own it George?


G. W. That is not material, thy Charge is general, without any such Condition.


F. B. I grant all that: But did not I send you a Letter to meet you in London,
to prove my Charge upon you, on Condition that you would own your Books; and
since you have now sent for me, I expect you should perform the Condition
proposed.


G. W. I did not send for thee; I only told thy Wife I was here, if thou had
any thing to say, thou might come to me.

I [ Jos. Bangs, or some others of his Friends.]
heard G. Whitehead say so, and that thy coming was at thy own choice.

[Jo. Walter.]
But by your leave, Gentlemen, your so sending to him, was an intimation of your
desire of his coming, or to what purpose did you send to him?


OBSERVATION.
Note, Reader, that I was surprised, not knowing that G. W. was in Town till
Ten a Clock over Night, for I had sent G. W. a Letter to be in London the 22d
of August, and had sent away my Books, in order to prove my Charge against him
there. But he wrote me an Answer, that he could not wait upon me, but had a
Journey appointed, but did not let me know it was to Milden-Hall where I dwelt,
but came to Town the 23d day, when he might expect my being at London. But that
day at Ten a Clock at Night I was told of his being there, so that I do believe
it is as G. W. said, he did not send for me. My coming was not pleasant to him:
And I have reason to think, that he would not have come there then, had he not
thought I had been at London, according to my Letter. And so I had, only I
remembered his Letter in Answer, which told me he had a Journey to go, so then I
stayed for some Neighbors.

G. W. Well, I do own that Book Judgment Fixed, etc. The Errors of Press
excepted.


F. B. Then from thence, I thus prove you a Deceiver of the People; for whereas
in the Introduction to that Book, you pretend that GOD laid a necessity upon
you to write that Book, and that you was moved of GOD to write the same; and
there you neither consult Events, nor fear Effects, etc. And yet in the same
Book you vindicate your Brother Thomas Rudyard, Samuel Cater's Lawyer, see p.
219. [And in the said Book, p. 19, 20. you justify Blasphemous and Idolatrous
Titles given to G. Fox, as anon will appear.] in a grand Lie; who, in
vindication of his Client Samuel Cater, wrote, that I paid my Money
voluntarily, before Distress was made of my Goods, when distrained for Samuel
Cater's Fine, which was a Lie. Now this being a Lie, and you justifying him in
this Lie, this GOD never laid a necessity upon you to write, this GOD never did
move you to write: For, says the Scripture, he that condemns the Innocent,
and acquitteth thee Guilty, ar both an abomination to the LORD. And you
pretending that GOD moved you to this, [and many other Lies in the said Book]
and the People believing you that you are thus moved, and that you cannot err,
and that what you [who pretend your selves infallible] speak or write, is of as
great Authority as the SCRIPTURES, herein you deceive the People.


OBSERVATION.
That I did not pay my Money voluntarily before Distress, see a Certificate
under the hands of Mr. Maxey and his Wife, who then lived at the Sign of the
White Heart, to which Inn my Goods was carried, etc. viz.

MEmorandum, That we who subscribe our Names, do testify, that the Goods of
Francis Bugg, which was Distrain'd for the Fine of 15 l. 10 s. by virtue of a
Warrant from Thomas Shelly Esquire; [a Justice of Peace since deceased, etc.] was
carried to the White Heart after Distrained, where I then dwelt, and was
Constable: And afterward the said Francis Bugg came and paid down the Money,
and teok home his Goods again. This my Wife and I can testify, witness our
hands this 6th of September, 1691.

Peter and Judith Maxey.


G. W. I do not affirm that thou paid down thy 15 l. voluntarily: See Painted
Harlot, etc. p. 8, 9, 10, 47, 48, 49.
But I showed Thomas Rudyard what thou said, and reckoned a voluntary Payment,
and thereupon I vindicated him against thee, he being at that time in better
Repute with us: so it is no Position of mine, but a Supposition that I went upon.


F. B. Well, George, that will not hold, you have justified an arrant Lie, in
favor of Samuel Cater, which was much to my damage. And the People believing
you, and that in regard of your Pretense of being moved by the eternal Spirit
of GOD, you in that Case, as well as in many others that I could mention, have
deceived them; and unless you can clear your self, the Charge stands over your
head, and you are found guilty thereof, etc.


G. W. I do still say, that as to the Body of the Controversy, God did lay a
Necessity upon me to write that Book: But as to particular matters of Fact, I
write as a Man, according to my discretion.


F. B. So then, here is George Whitehead as a Man, and G. W. more than a Man;
G. W. infallible, and cannot err, and G. W. fallible, and subject to err, and
be mistaken. This is a twofold George, standing in two Capacities.


OBSERVATION.
Note that G. W. herein resembles the Pope: For, says Dr. Cole, I hold herein
rather with Gerson, that the Council is above the Pope. The Pope, in one
respect, as he is a Man in his own single person, may happen to err; but in
another respect, as he is head Pastor, and chief Bishop, and is placed in
Peter's Chair, he cannot err, etc.

Thus does the Pope and G. W. stand in a double Capacity, upon which Bishop
Jewel made this Observation, which I think may not be amiss to be incerted,
viz. And thus as the Heathens in old times imagined their Centaurus to be half
a Man, and half a Horse; the one behind, and the other before: or their Janus,
to have two Faces, the one behind, and the other before. EVEN SO have you
imagined two Popes in one Body, the one going backward, the other forward; the
one bearing light, the other darkness; the one deceived, the other not
deceived; the one speaking truth, the other falsehood, and yet both these Popes
[or G. Whiteheads] incorporate together in one Person. Give us leave therefore
Mr. Harding, to say now as the whole University of Paris once said, not long
since, unto Pope Leo, viz. We appeal from our Lord the Pope that has so
shamefully erred, unto the Pope that cannot err. The Defense of the Apology,
etc. p. 635, 493, 581.

THE SECOND CHARGE, viz. THAT G. WHITEHEAD IS A FALSE ACCVSER OF THE MARTYRS,
CHARGING THEIR DOCTRINE WITH RANTERISM, SORDID RANTERISM, etc.
Reader, this being charged upon G. W. he in his Book, styled, The Contentious
Apostate, and his one Blow, etc. p. 13. says, What Doctrine held by the Martyrs
did G. W. accuse, but only F. B's misapplication of the words, which, he says,
were Doctor Barnes, viz. THAT ALL OVTWARD WORKS BE THINGS INDIFFERENT, AND MAY
BE USED, AND ALSO LEFT. When my Quotation of the Martyr's words run thus: THAT
ALL THESE, WITH ALL OTHER OVTWARD WORKS, BE THINGS INDIFFERENT, AND MAY BE
USED, AND ALSO LEFT. Now the word OTHER, which stands in opposition to things
commanded or prohibited in Scripture, G. W. has left out, on purpose to
pervert my words, viz. OTHER than what is commanded, OTHER than what GOD has
prohibited, etc. as the Doctor's words set forth. And as to the MISAPPLICATION
of them, which was all the Fault he finds in that Book, that is left to the
Reader to judge: For I brought the said Martyr's words as a Testimony against
their imposing the Observations of their Women's distinct Meetings, as set up by
George Fox See my Book de Christiana Liberate, p. 30. to 70. where their
Original is set forth, and G. F. the Founder, and their yearly Meetings Grant
and Confirmation, Anno 1675.
, which I judged as indifferent as the eating Flesh or Fish, observing this or
that day; yea, or as shaven Crowns, long Beards, or the Collar of a Fryer's
Coat; and this is clear from the Coherency of the place alleged.

But G. W. in his Book, The Contentious Apostate recharged, etc. p. 2.
Recharges me with accusing the Martyrs, which is such a piece of Art, as none
but a Man void of Conscience, Honesty and Reason, would be so Foolhardy to do.
His Charge runs thus, viz.

That F. B. is a false Accuser of the blessed Martyrs, in charging that to be
their Doctrine, which is none of theirs; but a gross Perversion, Forgery, and
Abuse of his own, both against them [the Martyrs] and us called Quakers.

Now from the Premises, what indifferent Reader would imagine otherwise, but
that First F. B. had falsely accused the Martyrs, or their Doctrine, or at least
accused them. Secondly, That F. B. had wrote a Story of his own, or some other
Man's, and said it to be the Martyrs, when it was none of theirs. Thirdly, That
F. B. forged this Quotation both against the Martyrs and Quakers, etc. Oh the
Impudence of this Jugler! For I never did either of these. And that it may
appear so, I shall first recite at large my Quotation which I took out of Dr.
Barnes's Works, p. 298. entitled, Men's Constitutions not grounded on
Scripture, bind not the Conscience, etc. And as set forth in my Book, de
Christiana Liberate, etc. 2d Part, p. 122, 123. And then let the Christian
Reader judge whether I have not faithfully quoted the Doctor, and rightly
applied his Doctrine, viz. as a Testimony against imposing indifferent things
as things necessary, and to be indispensibly obeyed, as was the Case of their
Women's Meetings, when I wrote that Book; wherein I vindicated Christian
Liberty, which the Foxonian Quakers did then as much withstand, as ever the
Papists did. And as such, G. Whitehead charged the Martyrs Doctrine with
Ranterism, sordid Ranterism, as will more largely appear from what he says in
the 259, 260 pages of his Book, Judgment fixed, etc.

But first see the words of Dr. Barns, which are as follow, viz. Mark that all
TRADITIONS of Men which are against (or not according) to GOD's Law, must be
destroyed: Therefore let every man take heed, for it belongs to their Charge;
for both the blind Guides, and they also which be led, shall fall in the Ditch.
It shall be no excuse for him that is led, to say his Guide was blind, but let
them hear the Word of GOD by his holy Prophets. WALK NOT in the Precepts of
your Fathers, NOR KEEP THEIR JUDGMENTS, but WALK in MY PRECEPTS, and keep MY
JUDGMENTS. The OTHER manner of Statutes be, when CERTAIN THINGS that be called
INDIFFERENT, be commanded as things to be done of NECESSITY. As for Example: To
eat Flesh or Fish this or that day, is indifferent and free -- These, with all
OTHER The word Other, George has left out in the 13th page of his Contentious
Apostate, and One Blow. And page 2, 3, of his Contentious Apostate Re-chargd'd.
And yet blames me for leaving out the word Such, which word Other I suppose my
Compositor thought a distinguishing word sufficient.
outward works, be things INDIFFERENT, and may be used, and also left. Now if
the Bishops (or Ministers) will make Laws or Statutes, that these (indifferent)
things shall be determinately used, so that it shall not be lawful to leave
them undone, but that we must do them, and not the contrary, under the pain of
deadly Sin, here they must be WITHSTOOD, and in no wise obeyed; for in this is
hurt our Faith and Liberty in Christ, whereby we are free in all things, and
unto all Men at all times, and in all manners, EXCEPT it be in SUCH a Case,
whereas brotherly Charity, or the common Peace should be offended. Therefore in
all these Cases we be free, and we must withstand them that will take this
[Christian] Liberty from us, with this Text of Scripture, We are bought with
the price of Christ's blood, we will not be the servants of Men, etc.

Thus have I quoted Dr. Robert Barnes, that innocent Martyr faithfully, without
any Forgery, or wronging his Words. And it still stands a good Witness and firm
Testimony against the Quakers Impositions, and forcing Obedience to their Laws
and Orders, for the observation of their Women's distinct Meetings. And that
they do so impose, and have such Orders, I may recite one as it stands Recorded
in their Quarterly Book in Hadenlam in the Isle of Ely, viz.

It is ordered and agreed upon at this Quarterly Meeting, that no Friends for
time to come, may permit or suffer Marriages, without the Consent of Friends,
at two Men's and Women's Meetings; and the Man and Woman to come both to the said
Meetings, to receive the Answer of Friends, etc. as more at large in my Book de
Christ. Libert. p. 60, etc.

And it was against this and the like Orders, which they imposed upon their
Brethren as terms of Communion, which had no Authority from Scriptures, nor yet
a President from any Christian Church, (the Papists only excepted) that I
brought this Testimony, not to accuse the Martyr; no surely, but approving of
his Doctrine. I quoted him in vindication of Christian Liberty, For if the
leaving out the word SUCH, being but an oversight, be so ill, what art Thou,
that in thy Books leave out the word OTHER, which is the distinguishing word,
etc. and that knowingly?
and as such G. W. opposed the same, and called the said Quotation Ranterism,
Looseness. And for which I charged him as an Enemy to the Doctrine of the
Martyrs, which maintain Christian Liberty against Implicit Faith, and Blind
Obedience, which they, like the Papists, endeavored to introduce, tending to
enslave the People. See a Recital out of G. W's Book, Judgment Fixed, etc. p.
259, 260. viz. I must tell thee, Francis, that this Position makes void all
Christian Discipline, Good Order, and Church Government, leaving all loose and
uncertain, and we are sure thou have here asserted corrupt Doctrine, tending to
practical Ranterism itself. -- See now if this be not sordid Ranterism, this
loose gain saying Spirit leads thee into?

Come G. W. is it not plain, That thou have accused the Martyrs recited
Doctrine to be loose, to be sordid Ranterism, to be practical Ranterism. Thus
have I Re-charged thee, and leave it upon thy head, until thou do retract the
same.

Object. But some may say, That though the Quotation of Dr. Barnes is sound and
Orthodox in itself, fairly quoted, and rightly applied, the recited ORDERS of
the Quakers considered, and their Imposing them, and Recording, or
Excommunicating such as do not conform to them, etc See my Book de Christ.
Libert. p. 36. to p. 70. where the said Orders, and the Authority given them at
a yearly Meeting 1675, is at large recited, etc.
. And that G. W's terming it Ranterism, as by the last Recital is manifest, and
thereby have accused the said Martyr according to my Charge, etc. yet possibly
G. W. passed this Sentence on the said Martyr and his Doctrine, as a Man in his
own single capacity?

Answ. No, that he did not, though possibly he upon occasion may so pretend; for
it came forth in Print, in his Book styled, Judgment Fixed, etc. which was
printed as their Books generally are, viz. by the Authority and Approbation of
the 2d second days Meeting, viz. by their Church Authority. And to confirm that
they in this their Doctrine, of imposing the Observation of, and exacting
Conformity to their Orders, whether their People believe it a Duty incumbent
upon them yea or nay, agree with the Papists. See a Book put forth by W. Penn,
Entitled, A brief Examination and state of Liberty spiritual It might rather
have been styled, An Antidote against his former Book, Entitled, An Address to
Protestants: For it is as much contrary to that, as Popery is against
Protestantism, or Imposition to Christian Liberty, etc.
, etc. where he says, p. 3. It is a dangerous Principle, and pernicious to true
Religion; and which is worse, it is the Root of Ranterism, to assert, that
nothing is a Duty incumbent upon thee, but what thou art persuaded is thy Duty,
etc. The Papists say, viz. We tell you that you ought to eat Fish and Flesh on
those days the Church appoints, on pain of deadly Sin. You ought to have shaven
Crowns, long Beards, etc. And the Quakers now say, Women's distinct Meetings as
set forth by their Church, that the rise, practice, setting up and establishing
of Women's distinct Meetings, is according to the Council of God, and done by
the leading and ordering of his eternal Spirit See de Christ. Libert. etc. p.
36, 43, 44. to p. 70.
. And this, though we produce not one Verse of Scripture to confirm it, you ought
to believe; for we ( viz. the Quakers and Papists) agree in this fundamental
Point, (i. e.) THAT YOU OUGHT TO BELIEVE AS THE Sea your 12th Principle in
Chap. 1. but more largely amplified in the first Part of the Christian Quaker
distinguished, etc. p. 9, 10, 11, 12.
CHVRCH BELIEVES. And if you refuse Conformity, on pretense you are not
persuaded that it is your Duty to obey the Church, and shall dislike our
Position, That Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion. And shall tell us, That
Conformity ought not to precede or go before Conviction, nor Force before
Persuasion. We now tell you, that it is a dangerous Principle, and very
pernicious to our Design, and therefore, and for that very Reason we will, and
have given it out, That it is Ranterism, sordid Ranterism, tending to lay waste
our LAWS and GOOD ORDINANCES, as our Brother Solomon Eccles called Women's
Meetings.

Thus Reader thou may perceive my Charge made good upon and against G. W.
First, by the Quotation I brought of the Martyrs words against their
Impositions. 2dly, that the said Quotation, as it is sound in itself, so it is
fairly done, against which he brings his heavy Charge, and grim Sentence, OF
CORRVPT DOCTRINE, TENDING TO PRACTICAL RANTERISM, YEA, SORDID RANTERISM, etc.
3dly, that it is rightly applied against their unscriptural Traditions, and
then imposing the observation See The Quakers Detected, etc. p. 5.
of their Women's Meetings, which, as John Hogg (in his excellent Book,
Entitled, An Answer to several material Passages in a Book published by W.
Penn, called, A brief Examination of Liberty Spiritual, etc. p. 12. says, MAY
NOT WE SAY THIS BEARS FOR ROME, etc. Yea surely, and the very Complexion of
Rome too in many Parts, Principles and Practices; to which excellent Book
(which overturns all their Popish Subterfuges, and unlocks all their secret
Mysteries, and close Juggles, relating to their Impositions, and displays their
Errors to every Capacity) I refer the Reader This J. Hogg is a Minister amongst
the separate Quakers, a Man of good Parts, and of good Repute.
. Its true, G. Whitehead makes a noise at the word SUCH being left out by my
Printer or Compositor, as a distinguishing word; but then G. W. is more to
blame, in leaving out the word OTHER, as I have said, which word OTHER, with
the foregoing and subsequent words, did sufficiently distinguish and set forth,
that I only intended them as a Protestant proof against their Romish imposing
different things as necessary, and as terms of Communion. And might not G. W.
as well carp at the Apostle Paul's words, 1 Cor. 6.12. where he said, All
things are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient. All things are
lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any. Might not G.
W. say, How now Paul, what are all things lawful to thee? what is this, that,
and the other thing lawful? for I find no distinguishing word in the whole
Verse. But in the next Verse, G. W. may see the Apostle only meant indifferent
things, which some differed about, and which he left them to their liberty in,
as meats, etc. for some eat herbs, and others strong meats, viz. ver. 13. Meats
for the belly, and the belly for meats; but God shall destroy both it and them,
etc. So that eating Flesh, Fish, Herbs, or other things, this, that, or the
other day; the publishing Marriage before, or not before the Women's Meetings,
are things in their own Nature indifferent and free, and, according to the
Apostles and Martyrs words, we ought to be left free in the use of them.

THE THIRD CHARGE, THAT GEORGE WHITEHEAD IS A FAVOVRER, OR AN EXCVSER OF SVCH
PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES AS BORDER UPON BLASPHEMY AND IDOLATRY.
For the Proof of this Charge, I shall, before I proceed to the matter of the
Conference, recite a Parallel between the Practices of the Papists, giving
Divine Attributes to their Saint Thomas Becket, and diverse Popes, which by all
Protestants are accounted Idolatrous and Blasphemous. And the Quakers giving
and attributing to G. Fox (in his Lifetime) Divine Attributes, and Eternal
Honor, which is equally Idolatrous and Blasphemous; and at his Funeral,
preached him to be the great Apostle, Prophet, and Jacob of the Age, that so it
may still appear how nigh of Kin they are, giving also a hint of the Beginning,
Rise and Advancement of both the said Thomas Becket and G. Fox, in two Columns,
for the help of the Reader, viz.

IT is written of Thomas Becket, Guilielmus Neubregensis, lib. 2. cap. 16.
that his Father was a Brewer in London, and a Jew; and that from his House
began a Fire in the days of King Stephen, that consumed all the one side of
London from the Bridge where he dwelt unto Temple Bar. And that King Henry II.
took this Thomas Becket into his Favor, and from being Archdeacon of
Canterbury, made him Lord Chancellor of England, and after that made him
Archbishop of Canterbury; who, after that, treacherously and ungratefully, as
well as secretly, resigned his Bishopric to the Pope See the Defense of the
Apology of the Chapter of England, etc. p. 349, 350, 665, etc.
, and of the Pope received it again; and thereby betraying his Princes Right,
which was the cause of much trouble in England. But for this, and the like holy
Cheats, he was Sainted; and now you shall hear how the poor infatuated Papists
give Divine Attributes unto him, Oh Christ make us to ascend unto Heaven,
whither Thomas is ascended; even by the blood of Thomas, which is shed for thy
sake. But Dr. Rainolds See the Conference between Dr. Rainolds and Heart about
the Pope's Supremacy, p. 411.
has it thus, viz.

By the Blood of Thomas,
Which he for thee did spend,
Make us O Christ to clime
Whither he did ascend.
Thus, Reader, you see that first Bishop Jewel, and next Dr. Rainolds set
forth, and that in the words of the Papists themselves, quoting Book and Page,
that the poor misled Papists gave such Titles to this their Saint, as was due
only to Christ himself, attributing to Thomas Becket the Title not only of
Intercessor, but Savior. Again, Oh Thomas reach thy help to us,
Stay them that stand, help them that lie,
Correct our manners, deeds and life,
Guide us unto the way of peace.
All Hail! Oh Thomas, the rod of right,
The Worlds light, the Churches strength,
The Peoples love, the Clergies joy.
All Hail! brave Patron of the Flock,
Save them who on thy Honor glee.


And yet to excuse these Idolatrous Attributes, and Blasphemous Appellations,
Mr. Harding said thus: viz. Christ is used in this Prayer as the only Mediator
of Salvation, and St. Thomas as a Mediator of Intercession to Christ, etc. As
Mr. Jewel in his Defense, p. 349. And Dr. Rainolds in his Conference with Mr.
Heart, etc. p. 411. both evidently set forth.

Next I come to show what Names and Divine Attributes the Papists have given to
their Popes, as may be seen in the Defense of the Apology of the Church of
England, etc. viz. Papa lux venit mundam, the Pope is that light that is come
into the world. p. 570. Our Lord God the Pope. And p. 750. to the same purpose,
and p. 562. In the Pope is all manner of Power, p. 438. A Divine Power in the
Pope, p. 571. A certain Divine Power in the Pope, beyond the natural state of
men, p. 493. Mr. Harding said of the Pope, Thou art the Chief of all Bishops,
Thou art the Heir of the Apostles: For Primacy, thou art Abel; for Government,
Noah; for Patriarchship, Abraham; for Holy Order, Melchisedech; for Dignity,
Aaron; for Authority, Moses; for Judgment, Samuel; for Power, Peter; for thy
Anointing, Christ, etc. Thus have the Papists not only Idolized their Popes,
but called them Christ; and whatever Name was excellent in Scripture, that they
gave to their Popes; and why? it is Scripture language, at least to be found in
Scripture, and therefore as they dreamt, due of Right to the Pope, etc.

Thus much touching the Papists giving and attributing Divine Honor to their
Popes, which was both Blasphemous and Idolatrous.

IT is written that George Fox came of poor Parentage, See the 5th Part of the
Christian Quaker disting. etc. p. 48, 49.
and was only a Journey-man-Shoemaker, and wrought Journey-work with George Gee
of Manchester: But afterward, when he was a Preacher amongst the Quakers, he
became Famous, and greatly Rich; and did not deny (being therewith charged) but
that he had 12 or 1300 l. etc. But whether in his Advancement he may be most
fitly compared to Thomas Becket, or Simon the Sorcerer, made mention of in the
Acts of the Apostles, cap. 8. ver. 9, 10. viz. There was in the City a certain
Man called Simon, saying, that he himself was some great Man. To whom they gave
HEED from the LEAST to the GREATEST, saying, THIS MAN IS THE GREAT POWER OF
GOD. I say whether G. Fox was most like this great Man Simon, or Thomas Becket,
I leave to the Reader to judge, when he has heard how G. Fox gave out, and
that in Print, that he was some GREAT MAN, even such an one, as knew who was a
Saint, who a Devil, and who an Apostate, etc. pray hear what he said of himself.

1st, That he had a Spirit beyond all the Forefathers, and thereby knew who
were Saints, who were Devils, and who were Apostates, without speaking ever a
word See their first Principle, etc.


2dly, That he was elected before the World began Fourth Part of the Christian
Quaker distinguished, etc. p. 84.
.

3dly, That he had power to bind and to loose The Quakers unmasked, etc. p. 27.
.

4thly, That his Marriage was above the state of the first Adam in his
Innocence, and that he never fell nor changed. See the same page.

5thly, If ever you own the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, (said G. Fox)
you will own our Writings, which are given forth by the same Spirit and Power
G. F's Answer to the Westmorland Petition, p. 30.
.

6thly, You may as well condemn the Scriptures to the Fire, as our Queries. Our
giving forth Papers and printed Books, it is from the immediate eternal Spirit
of God.

You are now answered from the mouth of the Lord Truth's Defense, G. F. and R.
H. p 2. 89, 104.
.

7thly, He that has the same Spirit that raised up Jesus from the dead, is
equal with God, G. Fox Readiness Errand, etc. p. 8.
.

Thus, Friendly Reader, I have herein, as well as in diverse places in this
Treatise, manifested that G. F. gave out himself to be some GREAT MAN, to whom
the Quakers, for many Years, (my self for one) gave heed almost from the least
to the greatest, and I think that neither Simon nor Becket could give out more
to show themselves GREAT MEN. Next follows, what diverse of their Preachers and
People attributed to him; and tho such Letters were in his Lifetime frequently
sent to him, yet I never heard that he ever rejected them, nor yet reproved the
Authors of them. See Fourth Part of the Christian Quaker distinguished, etc. p.
83, 84. See first Josiah Coal in Letter of his from Barbados, recorded in
their Book of Audland's Letters.

Dear G. Fox, who art the Father of many Nations, whose Life has reached
through us thy Children, even to the Isles afar off, to the begetting many
again to a lively hope, for which Generations to come shall call thee Blessed,
whose Being and Habitation is in the power of the Highest, in which thou rulest
and governs in Righteousness, and THY KINGDOM IS ESTABLISHED IN PEACE, AND THE
INCREASE THEREOF IS WITHOUT END.

Next that of Solomon Eccles. who writ of G. Fox these words, which were not
fit to be said of any Mortal, viz.

A Prophet indeed -- It was said of Christ, that he was in the world, and the
world was made by HIM, and the world knew him not: SO it may be said of this
true Prophet whom John said he was not, but thou shall feel this Prophet one
day as heavy as a Millstone upon thee; and though the world knows him not, yet
he is known, etc. Quakers Challenge, p. 6.

Next that of John Audlands, in a Letter of his to G. Fox, from the West of
England, viz. See the 5th Part of Babel's Builders, p. 7.

Dear and precious, one in whom my life is bound up, and my strength in thee
stands. By thy breathings I am nourished, by thee my strength is renewed,
Blessed art thou for evermore, and Blessed are all that enjoy thee, life and
strength comes from thee, Holy One. -- Daily do I find thy presence with me,
which does exceedingly preserve me; for I cannot reign but in thy presence and
power. Pray for me, that I may stand in thy Dread for evermore. -- I am thine
begotten, and nourished by thee, and in thy power am I preserved. Glory unto
thee, Holy one, for ever.


See also part of a Certificate that John Blaikling gave forth on the behalf of
George Fox, Fifth Part of the Christian Quaker distinguished, etc. p. 77.
against William Rogers.

That G. Fox is blessed with Honor above many Brethren, and that thousands
will stand by him in a HEAVENLY Record unto the integrity of his Soul to truth
that still lives with him. That his LIFE REIGNS, and is spotless, innocent, and
still retains his Integrity, whose ETERNAL HONOR and BLESSED RENOWN shall
remain; yea, his presence, and the dropping of his tender words in the Lord's
love, was my Soul's nourishment, etc. Yea, (so sacred or so dreadful was G. F's
Name to the People beyond Seas, that they printed and published it to the
World) viz. That mentioning the Name George Fox, did prick them to the heart.
See their Book, A true Account, p. 42.

This is enough to show, that Josiah Coal, Solomon Eccles, John Audland, and
John Blaikling, (and others, too many here to enumerate) together with those
Preachers who preached at his Funeral, where they styled him the great Apostle,
a Prophet, the Jacob of the Age, etc. I say it is enough to show that they walk
hand in hand with the Papists in this matter, as well as in almost every thing
else.

G. W. I question whether they be their Letters, as cited?


F. B. But if they be proved theirs, will you stand by them, or retract them?


G. W. If they be theirs, might there not be a more favorable Construction put
upon them, than Idolatry and Blasphemy? May not a Man write a Letter to his
Friend to pray for him, is there any hurt in that?


F. B. What! did they pray to G. Fox, to solicit the Virgin Mary to pray, etc?


G. W. No, I do not say to a Saint departed, but to a living Saint. --


[Mr. R. Russell.] Indeed Mr. Whitehead, I do not understand those Sayings in
those Letters, to be any other than Blasphemy.


G. W. I do not approve of those Letters; so that whether theirs, or not
theirs, I do not own them.


OBSERVATION.
Note, That John Blaikling's Certificate on the behalf of G. Fox, I did not
read at the Conference: For though I had seen it before, yet being surprised, and
not knowing of G. W's being in Town till late over Night, I could not find it;
but being one in Nature with the other three, I thought it meet to incert it in
the recited Parallel in two Columns, etc.

F. B. Well George, then be plain; if you do not own them, deny them in writing
under your hand, etc.


G. W. I do not care to write, I will not trouble my self to write.


F. B. Then I will write for you, if you please.


G. W. So thou may, if thou will.


F. B. As for those three Letters said to be wrote by Sol. Eccles, Josiah Coal,
and John Audland, I am apt to believe they are none of theirs as cited; but if
they be I do disown them. George, do thou like this? Is this thy Sense? If
so, subscribe it.


G. W. I do say before all these People, that whether they be, or be not of
their Writing, I disown them.


F. B. Well George, then subscribe what your Sense is, that we may be at a
Certainty.


F. W. I will not write after thee, thou shall not be a Dictator to me.


S. B. George, I only write your sense, and when I missed you gave me apt words
to put in and make it your sense, thereby making it yours; Let it be noted that
G. W. was in a great strait, like his Predecessors the Pharisees, Luke 20.6.
for if he had justified these Idolatrous Letters, the People would have seen
him to be an Idolater, if he had subscribed, he then should have condemned his
own. See. Crisp, and W. Penns Works, and they be all infallible, I mean
infallibly erroneous.
and therefore I would have you to be plain, for you have already excused those
Letters in print, and now since you have disowned them, you can not fairly deny
subscribing.


G. W. I will not write, here is enough to bear witness that I disown them.


Jos. Bangs. Yea, Francis, we will all bear witness that George Whitehead has
disowned them whoever wrote them.


F. B. Without his Subscription I am not satisfied that he is plain, and means
as he says; having already justified them in print: And if he now refuse to
transcribe with his Hand, what he confesses with his Mouth, I take no notice of
it, and therefore the Charge stands over your Head, and you are found Guilty
thereof.


OBSERVATION.
G. W. was extremely pinched, as my Neighbors took special notice of, who
said, it was a Jesuits trick to confess and not subscribe; to make a fair show,
and yet keep reserved: For as I have already observed, none pretend to deal
more freely than a Jugler, he will strike up his Sleeves, make bare his Arms,
open his Hands and Fingers, confess in a Corner, and tell you a find tale, but
all this is only to beguile you, and to deceive you he is but still so much the
more a Jugler; for if he had meant as he said, why should he refuse to
subscribe, and to give the best satisfaction he could, to the Auditors, that he
meant simply and plainly without Guile, Fraud, or Deceit.

And this puts me in mind of Hungate the Jesuit, who disputing with Dr.
Bramhall, once Archbishop of Armagh in Ireland, who hastily subscribed (a
thing they seldom do) but soon repented; which being pertinent to my occasion I
shall recite, viz. One of the subjects of the disputation betwixt the said
Bishop and the Jesuit was the Article of Transubstantiation, whence they easily
slided into that other of the half Communion; where he shamefully baffled their
Doctrine of Concomitancy; and drove the Jesuit up to so narrow a corner, that
he affirmed Eating was Drinking, and Drinking was Eating, in a material or
bodily sense. Mr. Bramhall looked upon this as so Elegant Solecism; and that he
needed no greater Trophy, if he could get it under his Hand, what he declared
with his Tongue; which being desired, was by the other, in his heat and shame
to seem to retract, as readily-granted; but upon cooler thoughts, finding that
he could not quench his thirst with a piece of Bread, he reflected so sadly on
the dishonor he had suffered, that not being able to digest it, in ten days
time he dyed. See the Life of Bp. Bramhall in his Works printed in Folio, where
you may read the story more at large. And truly for my part I should have
thought it worth my while if I could have got G. W. to subscribe with his Hand,
what he acknowledged, to one's thinking, with his Tongue; for I knew that both
he, Stephen Crisp, and W. Penn had justified the same in Print: So that if I
could have gotten him to subscribe, their Infallibility would have had a sore
blow; for it was yet never known that they recanted under their hands any error
be it never so monstrous and gross, yet W. Penn says in their Judas and the
Jews, p. 8. viz. It has never been my practice to palliate that which cannot be
justified, etc. By which Expression he should think no practice so erroneous
and monstrous but he can justify it, or else he would never have gone about to
justify Josiah Coal's Letter to G. Fox, with those Idolatrous expressions, as
he did in the said Book, p. 44.

But how willing soever I was to have had G. W. subscribe, he had wit enough to
beware of his Brother Hungate's fate, and for proof that Stephen Crisp, Geo.
Whitehead and W. Penn justified the idolatrous and blasphemous Attributes given
to G. Fox in his Lifetime, those recited Letters, read these places Judas and
the Jews, etc. p. 44, 45. Innocence against Envy, etc. p. 18. Judgment fixed,
etc. p. 19, 20.

But G. W. having pretended to disown what in reallity he owns (and is the very
Marrow of his Religion) as was sufficiently manifested in that he refused to
subscribe; for there is no man of Sense and Honesty that will refuse to
subscribe what is his real Judgment. But G. W. being pinched and driven up to a
narrow Corner, he was fain to say something to gratify standers by; I say a few
of his words are these, Innocence against Envy, p. 18. viz. And how knows he
that they gave and intended those Titles to the Person of G. Fox; and not to
the Life of Christ in him, whereof he was a Partaker.

Answ. Come, George, I see you are willing to excuse these idolatrous practices
how much soever you pretended to disown them, Aug. 24. 91 at the Conference.

By the Name they give him, viz. Dear George Fox, who art the Father of many
Nations, by this I know they gave their Attributes and Titles of divine Honor
to the Person of G. Fox, for I do not read that the Life of Christ is in
Scripture called George Fox: And since G. W. will not pray for King William by
name unless the Scripture did command it, no more will I believe that they gave
those divine Attributes to the life of Christ, since I no where read that the
life of Christ is called in Scripture Geo. Fox: Therefore when they offer
divine honor to Geo. Fox by name, I cannot think they intend it to the life of
Christ, etc.

Again, I find G. W. in answer to such as were jealous that G. Fox looked upon
himself to be that Prophet which Moses prophesied of, See 5th part of Christian
Quak. disting. etc. p. 82 where it is manifest enough.
that GOD would raise up like unto him, etc. suitable also to Sol. Eccles his
Lettter in one of the Colomns recited; and which G. W. vindicated formerly in
his Book SERIOVS SEARCH, etc. p. 58. I say in answer to such as had this
Jealousy, he says thus: Judgment fixed, etc. p. 19, 20. viz. This is a
presumptuous Imagination, for I affirm G. Fox does deny the same in reference
to himself, as a particular Man whose days and years are limited, etc. Only the
Truth, the Immortal Seed, Christ in him, he stands to maintain against all
Opposers and Apostates, etc. Now here still is the Juggle, which I am willing
to unfold, this Prophet that Moses prophesied of: G. W. would not have the
world believe it is the Person of G. Fox, but THE LIFE OF CHRIST IN HIM; and
this G. W. is willing should be termed, and looked upon as that Prophet, whom
Moses prophesied of AGAINST ALL OPPOSERS AND APOSTATES, etc.

I confess G. W. is very critical, G. W. is spliting a Hair.
as if he were splitting a Hair, but it will not hold; stis still great
Blasphemy to count the Life of Geo. Fox, that Prophet.

Yet in this it is manifest, they attribute as much to G. Fox, as they did to HIM
that was born of the Virgin Mary; for they say they cannot own the Person of G.
Fox to be that Prophet of whom Moses prophesied, GOD would raise up of their
Brethren like unto him, etc. No more can they call that Body, or bodily Garment
who was born of the Virgin, CHRIST, but the Treasure in him; and they can
herein allow the Life of Christ, in G. Fox, to be that Prophet, etc. See their
3d and 4th principle in the first Chap. of this Treatise.
Pray hear also what G. Fox says of himself, being charged to attribute to
himself the Honor to be that Prophet that Moses prophesied of, etc. See a
Letter of his to William Rogers, thus Fourth part of the Quak. disting. p. 83,
84.
. And thou William Rogers says, that there is a Spirit risen at this day, that
gives many occasion to be jealous, that thou G. Fox art looked upon to be that
Prophet, which Moses testified of, that GOD would raise up, etc.

To this G. Fox thus answers.

Then is not this Prophet to be in man, to give forth his Laws, which comes
after. Moses; but I cannot deny that Prophet which Moses spoke of to be raised
up; for I know that it is HE that is opposed, and his Law too Because G. Foxes
Laws were spoken against.
, by many Talkers of him and the Light of his glorious Gospel, and the Order of
it. And what I am, I am by the Grace and Love of GOD, and will not deny the
Prophet that came after Moses, nor the Election before the World began, tho all
turn into jealousies; -- for I believe few of them which do oppose, knows this
Prophet that comes after Moses, tho they may speak of him in words: of which
Prophet I am not ashamed of.

By all which the Reader may take notice that all this while G. Fox never
denied himself to be that Prophet; which confirmed the jealousies then risen;
and will more every day. So that what by his Writings (some of which are here
incerted) and what by his tacit Confession, and what by G. W.'s dark and
obscure vindications of his Words, Works and Writings, thousands will still be
confirmed that the Quakers did too much Idolize and Adore, if not Deifie him,
and that he did too much bear the countenance of Simon spoken of in the Acts of
the Apostles.

Well, let us hear G. W. once more in favor of J. Blacklings Letter, being the
last in one of the Columns; and against W. R. viz. See Judgment fixed. p. 20.
As for John Blackling ascribing Eternal I am glad he does, I am of his
Judgment.
Honor to Geo. Fox his Life, or to him, or his Soul as joined to the spotless
Life, etc. Thus G. W. excuses, and justifies Eternal Honor to be given and
attributed to G. Fox's life, or to G. Fox as joined to the Life, and in the 20
and 21 p. he queries, Had not Eternal Salvation, and Eternal Redemption a
Beginning, as to the Creature YET ETERNAL? And yet W. Rogers says Eternal
Honor is due to none but God, etc. Thus G. W. queries, thus and thus he jumps
and leaps up and down, saying, Eternal Honor may be given to G. Fox his Life.
2. Next to G. Fox as joined to the Life. 3. Then back again to the beginning,
in that Salvation as to the Creature had a beginning, and yet it is called
Eternal Salvation; and from thence infer John Blackling might safely ascribe
Eternal Honor to G. Fox; for though his person had a beginning, yet his Life
is eternal, viz. the Life of Christ in him, for we must not mistake him; and
yet it would puzzle a Divine to understand him, and yet this is the man that
pretended to disown those Idolatrous Letters. Oh horrible Impudence!

Good Christian Reader whatever it cost thee, get the Books I quote against his
next come forth; for as he has all along, so I question not, but he will again
come forth in print, for I am persuaded he will never come forth to dispute,
according to the Terms in the 1st Chapter, for if he will upon a Months notice
I am ready for him. No? But I am ready to think he will once more come forth in
Print, Jugler-like, etc. and appear smooth and plain; calling out good Brother
Ellwood, come and help, good Brother Penn, come and help; I am now surrounded,
I am now in a Dilemma, I am taken and snared; I pretended to disown my
Brethrens Letters, being in a great strait; but F. B. One of Luthers stock, and
of Jewels Race, the greatest Enemies that ever our Elder Sister had, have found
me out in all my Turnings and Windings, Jumpings and Leapings, this way and
that way; sometimes defending G. F. sometimes his Life, sometimes G. F. joined
to the spotless Life; sometimes I have vindicated Sol. Eccles, and sometimes
Jo. Blackling, and sometimes Jos. Coal; and sometime upon occasion, when I
could not help it, I have denied all their Letters, and bid people bear witness
of it. But because I refused to subscribe, thinking I was able to defend any
Error, and make a Novice of F. B. (as I once told him) but he has now found me
out in every Corner; and is resolute: If I should bid him be quiet, and not
expose me, he would bid me remember how we served the Presbyterians,
Independents and Baptists, and all that ever opposed us; whom we call Thieves,
Robbers, Witches, Devils, Vipers, Serpents, Wolves, Dogs, Tinkers,
Wheelbarrows, Gimcracks, blind Night Bats, Ragged and torn Tatterdemallions,
told them they were to be turned into the Pit eternally; called them Conjurers,
See One Blow p. 9, 10, 11.
Enemies of all Righteousness, Children of the Devil, yea, Devils Incarnate,
etc. And therefore, good Brethren in Iniquity, come forth and help me, and not
let me lie here panting and rolling, tossing and tumbling, like a mad Bull in a
Net: For this I find, That as we have taken no pity, nor have had any regard to
others in the day of our prosperity, Remember John Story, and John Wilkinson,
your Cruelty toward those meek men, and true Christian Quakers.
even so F. B. takes no pity upon us; and therefore let us go out and appear
smooth, cunning, crafty, and deceive the simple as we have done; and remember
that as we called out all the Doctors and Scholars in Europe, so are we called
into the Field, and that in the words of our own proposals; and yet dare not
venture to meet this F. B. nor W. Rogers See W. R 's Scourge for G. Whitehead,
etc. p. 12.
, notwithstanding they have both challenged us thereto.

Thus, Reader, have I in brief ripped up the Craft of this G. W. and yet there
is so much still to be said concerning his Cruelty, his Subtilty, his Baseness,
his Unconscionable Dealing; that were I to follow him into every By-hole and
Corner, it would require a great deal more time, pains and expense, than I am
willing to bestow upon him; however I hope I have said enough to show that its
no Apostasy, to forsake the Quakers.

CHAP. VIII. Shows that the Forsaking the Quakers, is no Apostasy from the
Articles of the Christian Faith.
I Am now come to consider two particular passages in G. W's. Book, The
Contentious Apostate, and his Blow, etc. p. 3. viz. Fra. Bugg and his Company
being got to the Meeting before G. W. AND INTO THE Gallery, WHERE our
Ministering Friends used to be, etc. 2. F. Bugg premising his property as
Feoffee in Trust for the Meeting House, etc.

These two passages (with many other) being false, renders his Narrative a
false and partial Narration: And if in their former Narratives, as their Trials
at Assizes and Sessions, they have dealt so falsely, it is no marvel that the
Magistrates were brought into such Contempt, as unjust Judges, illegal
Proceedings, arbitrary and the like; for there is a 100 ready to testify that
there was not with me, in the Gallery, one man of my Company, when G. Whitehead
came into the Meeting; and yet to render me turbulent, sets forth to the world,
that I and my Company were in the Gallery when he came into the Meeting House,
which is as false as false can be: Yea, so ashamed, their own People were of
that downright lie, that they blotted it out of the Books they dispersed
hereaway; but that it might go in other places for an Infallible Truth, they
did not so much as put it in the Errata. I do believe that he has left out, in
p. 5, 6, 7. not only words, but half lines, and whole passages to make it look
like something; and when all is done none but a few of his own Proselites, and
infatuated Disciples will give credit to it; nay some of them have, in my
hearing, declared themselves so out of love with it, as that they will not read
it; so false and scandalous are most of his books, that they begin to be
burdensome.

Secondly, Whereas he says, as above observed, That I premised my property as a
Feoffee, that is altogether false too. Upon these and several other notorious
Lies asserted, and many material passages spoken by my self, Mr. Archer and
others being left out, I wrote to G. Whitehead, reminding him of his partial
Narrative, Forgeries, Lies, and apparent Pervertions, and wilful Omissions, and
in his answer touching the word Feoffee he thus writes, viz.

If thou did not openly mention the word Feoffee, I, and others, are
mistaken, which yet I am not convinced of, for I was then something concerned,
that thou should be so much interested in the Meeting House. But I am glad
thou say now thou art no Feoffee, wherein then stands thy property, legally,
as Owner of the Meeting House? If so, our Friends are much beholden to thee; if
not, is it not as one entrust for them, and the use intended? Or is it upon thy
free and charitable Contributions to the House? If THAT was the intention, IT
will ADMIT of other CONSEQUENCES than a claim to such a property in the
Meeting House.

Now being willing to clear all passages of any weight, and considering that
this may come out in his next, I shall speak fully to it; and grant, first,
That I am no Feoffee; secondly, I am not owner of the Meeting House; nor
thirdly, As one in trust for them and the use intended: But fourthly, As a free
Contributer to the house I own my self to have a property. Well, G. W. but this
thou say will admit of other Consequences than a claim, etc. Yes George I was
not unsensible of it: And that though Mr. Pennyman and others have had
properties, by being Contributers to the purchasing, building and repaiting of
Meeting Houses; yet, when they have opposed your errors, then you have denied
them the use they formerly had: And therefore I knowing your Injustice in this
point, notwithstanding your seeming Innocence, I took care in time to prevent
the other CONSEQVENCES you mention, viz. to be turned out of all right,
privilege and advantage, tho I was at the fourth part of the charge of the
House and Burying-ground; for I having the Original Deeds in my hands, the
Feoffees upon a time desired me to deliver up the said Deeds to them; but I
answered, No; I have a property in the house, and until you secure that to me
and my Heirs, I will deliver no Deeds So then it rested a while, and soon after
I had a Letter from their Lawyer, an Abstract whereof follows.

Mr Bugg,
Here has been with me one Sam. Waldingfeild, This S. W. is one of their
Preachers.
a London Quaker talking about your withholding the evidences of the
Meeting House -- I promised him to write to you about it, and do earnestly
persuade and advise you to deliver the the deeds, for you cannot jmstify the
detaining them. And if the King K. James II.
should be petitioned about it, Mr. Penn has such an Interest as may occasion
you to be called to the Council Table.


Notwithstanding the threat of Mr. Penn's Interest at Court, I returned answer,
that I was very willing to appear at the Councel-table; for unless they would
some way secure to me my property, I would not deliver the Deeds, how great
soever their interest was at the Councel-table, unless by Law forced, etc.

Well, soon after the Feoffees were at me again for the DEEDS, I still told
them, that unless they would take some care to secure my interest in the house,
I would not deliver the Deeds, unless by Law forced. So then they asked me,
what, how, and after what manner would I require security? so then I did
propose an even Method and equal Terms, as I thought, viz. Either repay me my
twenty pounds again, which I had in it; or give me an Instrument under your
hands that I shall have, possess, and enjoy the same benefit I formerly had:
Now, said I to them, take your choice, for unless you perform one of these two
things, I will never deliver up the Deeds, unless by Law forced; I am not
afraid to appear at the Council Table Pray G. Whitehead, S. VValdingfield, let
us know the reason why VV. P. will not appear himself now?
, neither will I fear you, nor trust you in any point where Holy Church is
concerned; (remembering how you, like the Papists, will keep no Faith with such
as you account Heretics, or Self-condemned Apostates For I remember the
Agreement between S. Cater, and G. S. and I, which was so firmly done, and
recorded in their quarterly book, as in Painted Harlot, p. 60, 62, 63. Yet not
being under Hand and Seal, when I put forth my Book, De Chr. Lib. etc. They
wrote me word, that if I did not call in, and condemn that book, that they
would come out with their Narrative, etc. By which I saw the popish Maxim
fulfilled, viz. No Faith or Covenant to be kept with Heretics.
.) And when they saw me thus resolved not to trust their Promise, nor to take
their Words; they then chose rather to give me a Deed, to secure me, under the
Feoffees Hands and Seals, and Jos. Bangs and Philip Cranniss are witnesses to
it; which being large, I shall only recite a few words out of it, showing that
I have power to hold a Meeting, to appoint a Meeting, to speak in a Meeting, to
write in the Meeting; in a word, whatever in former days I did, my Power is the
same: So that I fear not G. W's other CONSEQVENCES. I am provided against their
Arbitrary Wresting my Property out of my Hands, as they have done to too many,
viz.

Memorandum, That on the 15th day of August, 1678. We who are Feoffees for the
Meeting House in Hallowel-Row, in Milden-Hall, in the County of Suffolk, do by
this our present Writing acknowledge, That Fra. Bugg of the same Town and
County, gave toward the purchasing the Burial Place, and building the said
Meeting House, with the out House appertaining to the same, the Sum of
twenty-Pounds and five Shillings. And thereby has as great an Interest in the
Meeting House as any of US, or any OTHER PERSON WHATSOEVER. What think you,
George, had not I as good a right as you, that never gave penny to it? viz: if
you will keep Covenant.


And we do by these presents, as well in Consideration of the said twenty
pounds, toward the Purchase aforesaid, as also for diverse other causes and
considerations according to the Power resting and residing in us; do Covenant,
grant and agree to and with the said Fra. Bugg, That he, the said Francis Bugg,
shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, have, possess and enjoy,
the same Ingress, Egress and Regress, Use and Possession, which he, the said
Francis Bugg, formerly enjoyed Mark that.
; without the Let, Hinderance, or Molestation, of the People called Quakers. Be
sure you keep Covenant, I shall tell you of it else.


Now, George, I think I am out of the reach of your other CONSEQVENCES; yea,
out of your power of thrusting me forth of your Meetings, as you have done
others, and then call them distracted, and the like: I will assure you they had
not need be distracted that deal with you, but have their wits about them, or
else they shall soon feel the effect of your other CONSEQVENCES; but I now am
past the fear of your Councel-Table, your Friend Penn's Interest, or Geo.
Whitehead's other Consequences.

Obj. Well but some may say, what, will they go to Law, or what other
Consequences can G. W. mean? We thought them to be great Sufferers, and not so
subject to go to Law.

Answ. That they will go to Law, and upon small Trifles too, I can show it
their Judgment: For Tho. Crisp in his books had but mentioned 2 of the Letters
of the Names of some of their Ministers that lived in some immoralities, and
Richard Richardson their then Clerk, to their second days meeting, who wrote
for the Church, viz. their Society, and on their behalf, sent him a Letter to
consult his interest, etc. The Abstract of which follows, etc.

Tho. Crisp, London the 31 (5) Mon. 1682.
Thy Book I have not read, others have them; only thy Letter remains by me,
wherein I find thee charging Friends with Whoredom, Theft, Cheating, Breaking,
and other Immoralities -- thou may consult thy own safety -- this is not
matter of Religious Controversy, but civil Moralities; the Church will require
no such satisfaction from thee: But they cannot restrain men in their civil
concerns, from seeking Justice in a legal way G. W. If that be your opinion,
that it is lawful to seek Justice in a legal way; what makes you so angry with
me, for getting a Justice Warrant for you, to the intent, that I might get you
to own your scandalous book Judgment fixed, etc. Did not I seek Justice against
a public Defame, in a legal way; which I have in part obtained? viz. Your
owning your Book, etc. which is in order to farther satisfaction. You seemed
very kind to the Justice in omitting his Name, but you have pointed at him,
saying, there he dwells, viz. at DORNHAM, IN SUFFOLK, which is all one to
telling his Name, which when he saw it, he saw through your Sophistry, and gave
a right Character of your temper in that Affair, etc.
etc.


And if so, that the very mentioning 2 Letters of a Name, put them in such a
Fret and Passion, I hope they will bear with others, if they seek a Remedy
against them for their slanderous Tongues and Pens, Neither did I think it
necessary to trust to their promise (whom I have found so false in so many
cases) for my security; if I had, I should soon have felt G W's other
CONSEQVENCES. And as to their being great Sufferers, I know that many of their
Hearers are, but it was ever the way of their Ministers to save themselves, as
my book the Painted Harlot, etc. sets forth. But yet I remember one thing which
will discover how they love to magnify their Sufferings, and account such great
Sufferings, which indeed are no Sufferings at all, as the next Chapter will
sufficiently make appear; so that it is no Apostasy from the Articles of the
Christian Faith, to separate from the Quakers and their Errors.

CHAP. IX. Shows that the forsaking the Quakers, is no Apostasy from the
Articles of the Christian Faith.
SAmuel Cater, one of their insignificant Preachers, had a Meeting at Phakenham
in Norfolk; which, as it stands in their Quarterly book, will tell after ages,
that Sam. Cater was fined 20 l. and distrained, See their Quarterly Book, at
Hadenham, in the Isle of Ely.
etc. and that for Preaching too: And this will look great and exalt his Name,
and crown his Memory, tho indeed he did not suffer one Shilling; however there
it stands as an honorable and valiant Suffering, unless it be lately cancelled
and blotted out, as it ought to be. The Passage (which I, having a providential
opportunity, took out of their Quarterly book) stands thus.

Samuel Cater for being at a Meeting, at Phakenham, in Norfolk, on the 4th day
of the 5th Month, called July, Anno 1670. preaching and publishing the Gospel
of Peace. One Ann Wats, a Woman Informer, told the Officers (who came with a
Warrant, and had him before one Christopher Colthorp a Justice, who fined him
Twenty Pounds; which Warrant and Conviction was sent to the Justices in the
Isle of Ely, namely John Laney, Henry Hitch, Tho. March, who in pursuance of
the Norfolk Justices Conviction, sent their Warrant to the Officers of
Little-port; who distrained as much Household Stuff and Timber, from the said
Samuel, as was worth more than Twenty pounds.

Now its true thus far, that there was a Conviction, as also a Distress; but
the Goods distrained were never sold, but returned to him again, and
consequently S. Cater no Sufferer, etc. Yet there being but the Color of a
Suffering, that he might not lose the Glory of it, he presently sends it to the
Quarterly Meeting there to be recorded, as a perpetual Testimony of his Valor,
and everlasting Renown. First, That Sam. Cater was a Minister, and a Publisher
of the Gospel. 2dly, That, as such, he was fined twenty Pounds in Norfolk, by
Sir Christopher Colthorp; and that for his Ministerial Function too. 3dly, That
the Magistrates in the Isle of Ely had a hand in this Tragedy and lamentable
Suffering, by joining with the Norfolk Justice in the execution of the Law.

Now, Reader, does not this look formidable; will not People that read this a
Hundred years hence, when this Holy Chronicle comes out, and none alive to
contradict it; look like a noble Suffering, a valiant Act, and deservedly
famous? When, Alas! as I have observed, it was no Suffering; but thus far
contrary to a Suffering, that though he was fined, though he was destrained,
etc. yet his Goods where all returned, Now whether Sam. Fulbig, Clem. Crab,
Tho. Hawks, James Peachy, John Lover, Henry Waddelow, Tho. Pain, Robert Crab,
(who had as many Cows, Horses, Mares, Pewter and Brass taken away, for being at
a Meeting in Little-port, the 9th of June 1670) had their Goods again, and each
of them 10 l. to boot? If not, are you not partial? does not your Ministry
stand in a better station than the Hearers,, whose Servants they ought to be?
and Sam. Cater had his own again; and, as an Encouragement, ten Pounds sent
him as a Reward, for this his noble Act, and valiant Undertaking etc.

O these horrible Religious Cheats! they are nautious to a Christian mind.

Obj. But some may say, what Benefit can the recording this pretended Suffering
of S. Cater be; since he, first, had his Goods again, and secondly 10 l. sent
him from London, as a Reward and Encouragement? etc.

Answ. Much every way. First, in that it raised his Name now, and will renown
it hereafter; besides his ten pound was sent him, which perhaps if it had not
been recorded, in Order to be Chronicled, they would not have given him that
Gift, which was carefully sent from their Treasury at London, by John Peacock,
Draper, late of St. Ives.

I remember in their book, Judas and the Jews, p. 41. there is this passage,
viz.

Our faithful Chronicles, of the bloody Tragedies, of that professing
Generation, Judas and the Jews, p. 41. W. P.
will tell FUTURE Ages, other things, etc. And why future Ages? Oh! the Reason
is plain; for if their Holy Cronicles of their Tragical Sufferings, which they
pretended to suffer under the Presbyterians and Independents, in the Protectors
time, be such Shams as THIS, of S. Caters, is, viz. To pretend they suffer
twenty Pounds, when instead thereof, they get ten pounds, into the Pocket,
clear gains. I say if it be so, and should bring this their Chronicle forth in
print, in the same Age, in which they were acted, whilst People are alive that
remember the Transactions: They would THEN from their Knowledge and Experience
of the grand Hypocrisy of their infallible Doctors, write an answer to their
Chronicle; convict them of their Holy Cheats, and they knowing this, for they
are a cunning People, yea and Prophets too Note, That Sol. Eccles. one of their
most seeing Prophets, prophesyed that JOHN Story should dye within one year
after his Prophesy, but he lived about 4 years after. See Babels Builders
unmasking themselves, etc. p. 15, 16. per Tho. Crisp.
: So that they can easily foresee the dangerous consequence their said
faithless Chronicle might, in all probability, meet with; and this I take to be
the main Reason (yea and a prudent one too) why it does not come forth. For in
October, about 72. I was at London, at a Meeting about Suffering is and it was
then talked of; and very earnest some were, I well remember, to have it come
forth. And William Penn, 1673. gives public notice of it in their Book, Judas
and the Jews, etc. p. 41. but still no Chronicle is come forth, and the reason
is plain; in that many of the Sufferings therein recorded, may be like this of
Sam. Caters. Sam. Caters Sufferings.
And then what a pack of Hypocrites would they evidently appear to all the As
in the Quakers unmasked in Quarto.
world.

Tho thus far he can still prove it for a need; he was fined and convicted,
this he can prove by the Clerk of the Sessions book; nay, he was distrained
too, this his Neighbors can testify; and as this is no Lie, so neither is
there any more recorded. But the CHEAT lies HERE, it is to make future Ages
believe that as S. Cater was a Preacher, so he preached once at Phakenham in
Norfolk, and was fined and distrained, and consequently lost twenty pounds;
which for him to lose, who formerly, before he got the Knack of Preaching, was
a poor Carpenter, and went with his Budget of Tools at his back to day labor,
etc. I say, as this Suffering if true, were something, (though indeed I do not
in all the Scriptures find the like. No, no, we read that many suffered the
loss of their Goods, etc. but never what Apostle, by what Justice, how many
Mares, Horses, Timber, Pewter, Brass, and the Man's Name that suffered. No, no,
this is also too much like the Papists, who take care that their deservings may
be Chronicled; and their pretended meritorious deeds preserved to Posterity.)
but being false, and a mere Sham, and the CONSEQVENCE not following the
PREMISES is a Cheat, and a Lie put upon future Ages: When Ann Wats, the Woman
Informer, is dead; when Sir Christopher Colthorp is dead, when Henry Hitch,
John Laney, Thomas March, Esquires, Justices of the Peace for the Isle of Ely,
are dead; his Neighbors, the Constables, Churchwardens, and Overseers are
dead; I say when all these are dead, who can from Experience reprove their
Hypocrisies, etc.

CHAP. X. Shows that the forsaking the Quakers, is no Apostasy from the
Articles of the Christian Faith.
IN G. W's Contentious Apostate, etc. p. 5. there is one Passage I cannot let
pass, without some Observation, viz. Francis Buggs's Wife stood up to clear her
Conscience -- In Testimony against her Husband's writing Books against Friends
She in her Zeal being one of them, was troubled to have them laid open.
, etc. Especially since he knows that I there solemnly disowned the thing. I
say this passage is such a base, unchristian Practice, as ought not to be
passed over with silence; yea, and such a thing as I do hereby challenge G. W.
to give me one Instance in all the Religious Controversies extant amongst all
that profess Christianity, (the Papists and Quakers only excepted) that ever a
Man's own Wives Testimony was brought against him publicly in Print.

That the Quakers do practice it I grant, when it is for Holy Church; or, as
they term it, for the Truth's sake: For let this be noted, where the Papists
say they act for the Church, and for Holy Church, etc. There the Quakers
frequently say for Truth's sake, for the Honor of Truth. And that if any own
them, they own Truth; if any write against them, they then are reputed or write
against Truth. And on this foot and bottom, what ever is said or done in favor
or against this People, it is construed to be done for or against Truth. And
upon this foot doubtless do they in their blind zeal follow the steps of the
Jesuits, whose great business is to divide Families, Kingdoms and Nations; to
set Wise against her Husband, and Husband against the Wife, etc. which in the
Passage before cited must be their design, or else they would never publish my
Wives Testimony in Print against me, for my writing against them, etc. which as
it is their Practice, so it harmonizes ONLY with the Practice of the Papists;
so on the other hand it is against express Scriptures, the Practice of the
Primitive Christians, and Blessed Martyrs, as anon I shall, GOD permitting,
make appear.

First, That it is their Practice, I prove from the Practice of John Field,
etc. who published Mr. Crisp's Wives Testimony against her Marriage with her
Husband, by a Public Minister according to Law, about 18 Years after they had
been so married. See the 5th Part of Babels Builders unmaskt, p. 9, 10, etc.

John Field One of the Preachers of the FOXONIAN PARTY.
goes on, ( says T. C.) Inquisitor like, and asks, Why did thy Wife condemn
your Marriage? But may not those that pretend to sell Pardons, and pray Souls
out of Purgatory, (your Brethren) say, That if their Prayers and Pardons be not
effectual, why have, and do, so many give so much money for them? If a Woman
gives all she has to have her Husband out of Purgatory, an effectual proof of
the worth of the Popes Pardons. But to answer this busy Inquisitor John Field
-- Take a View if your Brethren, all the wicked Crew of Confessors that belong
to your ELDER SISTER ROME, and see how many of them to whom Confession is made,
that will so many Years after divulge it in Print: For if any such Monsters be
amongst the Romish Priests, they be accounted very abominable. And so much
higher as your Pretentions be beyond theirs, the greater is the aggravation of
your baseness. And I fear the wicked ONE was so great with you, to instigate
you to the publication of this, in hopes thereby to make a DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
US, ( viz. my Wife and me) that so you might have your desires on us; some of
George Fox's Reformado's having said, None thrive or prosper that speak against
him: But, I bless GOD, I fear not G. Fox's whole Black Guard of Liars, J.
Field, R. Richardson, Chr. Tailor, etc.

Reader, here I have showed that it is their Practice: And this is enough
(together with my Case) to show, that they follow the steps of the Jesuits: T.
Crisps's Case is full and plain against them. I shall next proceed to show,
that this their Practice is contrary to the Scriptures, for it is said, Numb.
30.13. Numb. 30, 13, 14.
But if her Husband disallowed them the same day that he heard them, nothing
that proceeded out of her lips concerning her vows, or concerning her bonds,
shall stand in effect; for her Husband has disallowed them, and the Lord will
forgive her, See ver. 14. So every vow, and every oath or bond made to humble
the Soul, her Husband may establish it, or her Husband may break it, etc.

By which it is apparent, that GOD has placed the headship in Man, and given
him the Dominion over his Wife: And yet, contrary to Scripture For they know
that I did disallow of her Testimony the day I heard it.
, and contrary to the Practice of the Primitive Christians, and Protestant
Martyrs, you have exposed her Testimony against her Head and Husband; which
admits of no other Construction, but to make a difference between Man and Wife,
as Mr. Crisp well understood you in his Case.

Secondly, I shall show that it is against the Practice of the Protestant
Martyrs. See William Tindall's Book, entitled, The Obedience of a Christian
Man, p. 108. After that Eve was deceived of the Serpent, God said unto her,
Genesis 3. thy Appetite shall pertain unto thy Husband, and he shall rule thee, or
reign over thee. GOD which created the Woman, knows what is in that weak
Vessel, W. Tindall's Works, p. 108.
) as Peter calls her) and has therefore put her under the obedience of her
Husband, 1 Pet. 3. Wives to be in subjection to their Husbands.
he exhorts Wives to be in subjection unto their Husbands, after the Example
of Holy Women in old time which trusted in GOD: And as Sarah obeyed Abraham,
and called him Lord, which Sarah before she married was Abraham's Sister, and
equal with him; but as soon as she was married was in subjection, and became,
without comparison, inferior; for so is the Nature of Wedlock by the Ordinance
of God. Paul says, Ephesians. 5. Wives submit your selves unto your own Husbands,
as unto the LORD; for the Husband is the Wives Head, even as Christ is the HEAD
of the Congregation: therefore as the Congregation is in subjection to Christ,
likewise let the Wives be in subjection to their Husbands in all things; let
the Woman therefore fear her Husband, as Paul says in the said place, etc.

Thus I have showed both by Moses's Writings, and the Apostles Writings, and by
the Judgment of William Tindall that worthy Protestant Martyr, that as Women
should be in subjection, so are their Sayings concluded by the Authority which
GOD has given their Husbands over them. Now hear his Opinion of the Practice
and Principles of the Papists, and their Politics The Jesuits and Quakers
practice agree in one.
, who had laid by reading the Scriptures in their Churches, as the Quakers have
done; pretend to be infallible in their Councels, as the Quakers do: Pray hear
the Martyr what he says farther, viz.

On the other side I have ( says William Tindall Page 180.
) also uttered the Wickedness of the Spirituality, the Falseness of the
Bishops, and Juggling of the Pope; And how they have disguised themselves,
borrowing some of their Pomp of the Jews, and some of the Gentiles, and have
with subtle Wiles turned the obedience that should be given to God's Ordinance
(Marriage unto themselves So do the Quakers, who contrary to the Laws of God,
and his Ordinance of Marriage, print the Wives Testimony against her Husband.
. And how they have put out GOD's Testament, and GOD's Truth, and set up their
own Traditions That the Quakers have so done, see their Certificates for
Marriage, where they leave out the word Obey, or Obedient to their Husbands,
etc.
and Lies, in which they have taught the People to believe, and thereby sit in
their Consciences as GOD. -- Wonderful are the things that are thereby wrought,
the WIFE is FEARED and COMPELLED to utter not her own only, but also the
SECRETS of her HUSBAND Thus far are the Quakers and Papists of Kindred, and G.
W. in this practice may be said to be Brother to Bonner, and the rest of that
abominable Crew.
, and the Servant the SECRETS of his MASTER, etc.

And as George Whitehead has been an ill Instrument to set Man and Wise at
variance, so has he been as ill an Instrument in breaking the Match between S.
Bolton and Mary Penington, which (had I leave from S. Bolton) I could freely
publish his base and Jesuitical practice in that Affair. However, in that S. B.
on the 10th day of May 1691. in a Public Meeting in White-Hart Court in
Grace Church Street, London, did then charge him publicly to be A DECEITFUL
HYPOCRITE, proffering to refer the matter he had to accuse him of to Friends,
or other sober persons, indifferently chosen: But G. W. answered, The Business
was not Referable. To which S. Bolton replied, That G. Whitehead would have
referred the matter in difference between them, on condition that he the said
George might have had the Nomination of all the Persons. This being public, I
may take public Notice of it. I know great part of the business, but not
having leave from S. B. (who chooses rather to suffer under them, for the sake
of some honest People amongst them) I shall not open the matter, etc.

But thus much may be observed from what was obvious at the said Meeting, that
there is a Difference; that S. B. Christian-like, did offer to refer it, that
so G. W. if found guilty, might bear his blame. And that instead thereof, it is
also apparent that G W. refused it, unless he might choose all the Men, and
then, perhaps, he would have chosen Sam. Cater, G. Smith, Steph. Crisp, Ez. W.
Tho. Rudyard, and his Brother Robert Sandiland. And such a Tribe of Wretches
amongst them, as that S. B. must never have expected Justice. And unless S. B.
would admit that he might choose all the Men, he would not refer it; so that S.
B. had cause sufficient to call G. W. DECEITFVL HYPOCRITE, etc.

To confirm this, that as G. Whitehead, etc. in my Case, and Mr. Crisp's Case
The like betwixt Mr. William Mucklowe and his Wife. See G.W. [That] Apostate
Incendiary, p. 8.
, had a design to set Man and Wife at variance, and that therein they have
acted like the cunning Jesuits, whose business have been, and no doubt still
is, to make division in Families, Kingdoms, and Nations, as I before have
observed. So in the Case of Samuel Bolton, G. Whitehead has outdone the
boldest Jesuits that ever I read of. And that it may appear, that it has been
the Practice of the Preachers amongst them to break Matches, and that the
Consequence of any young Man or Maid of speaking a word against a Preacher, may
lose him a good Wife, or she a good Husband; or, indeed, any other Fortune or
Preferment, for all the Peoples Fortunes began to hang upon the pleasure of
their Ministers But let it be noted, That as Self-denying as their Ministers
pretend to be, yet none of their Hearers get richer Wives than they, which is
one convincing Argument, that they are not sincere.
; get their good Will never fear, but to obtain your desire; displease them, a
hundred to one if you obtain it. I know diverse Instances that I could produce
to confirm what I say, but shall rather choose to recite only part of a Letter
written by one formerly then, and still eminent amongst them, whose Name I
shall not mention; but can show the Letter, under the Parties own hand, if need
be, viz.

Dear Friend, etc.
I Understand that there is a new Controversy lately risen, about the Money
thou once told me was gathered amongst Friends, for the relief of I. C. --
Friends here are much concerned about it; knowing right well that all honest
Friends in that day gave it freely, according to Christ's command, expecting
nothing again -- some of them are dead; And I suppose they did not make the
Common BANKERS their Executors, therefore the Money demanded cannot in right
Reason be paid -- the Donors will must be fulfilled in all things, and not the
common PURSMONGERS. We desire a List of those that expect their Money again,
and the several Sums in order to the paying of it: Some Friends have a
Testimony against COMMON-BANKERS But G. Fox, G. Whitehead, Step. Crisp, and
their party, never liked those Friends.
at this day, that being contrary to true Religion, that takes thought for to
morrow. I have been examined by the Law professors, whether we had a common
Purse or Banck, I answered we had none. I told them, as I here tell thee, that
true Religion takes no thought for to morrow. This gave so much satisfaction,
that Friends in this Town have been quiet ever since. The Magistrates look upon
professing COMMON-BANCKERS, to be as bad as those that hoard up Arms and
Ammunition; and not without Reason, for Money answers all things. If Friends
would put away this DAGON, How should S. Cater, and such Preachers, then be
thus furnished and thus rewarded, and thus encouraged etc.
and take Money only for their present Necessities, things would soon be better
with them, God will not bless those that break his Commandments with hoarding
up COMMON BANKS; and quarrelling with those that do not bring in MONEY fast
enough You see W. R. was in the Right, and that it was of Necessity for T.
Elwood, or some other to Apologize. See Batt. Rams, etc. p. 13. 14.
to them: I have observed that it has been frequent with some to reckon those
that brought in MOST MONEY into their COMMON BANCK, te be the best Christians,
which has been the cause that some of us have given our Alms more secretly,
according to Christ's command, and have declined their Custom.

I have heard something concerning this Controversy now on foot, which I
perceive arises from a private and personal Quarrel about a Maid that was
choosing a Husband for herself; and also it is expected she should give up her
Concerns, in that business, to some of our Preachers; which was never practiced
until of late, AMONGST ANY THAT PROFESS TRUE RELIGION: It is that which has
made the JESUITS to be ABHORRED, amongst some of the wisest and honestest of
the Papists themselves; so that they would not let them come within their
Houses. They were the wiser, for they and their Offspring do more hurt than
good, commonly.
If the Maid be a wise Woman, and of Age to dispose of herself, she will not
let any of our Preachers meddle with her Concerns, of choosing a Husband for
her; that is none of their business That is very true, but they will have a
Hand in it, for the most part; and if they be not pleased, or any other self
Interest sway them, they will as certainly break it, and do mischief, as ever
the Jesuits did, this many are witnesses of; S. B. for one, and Jonathan
Lamball another, cum multis aliis.
. They should ONLY meddle with their own business, and let honest Friends make
their choice themselves; We have no Law nor Custom among us, for such as defame
or obstruct lawful Marriages; the Church of England is honester, upon that
account than we; they make such as obstruct, or defame Marriages, either to
make good their Charge, or to make sufficient Satisfaction to the Parties
wronged, etc.


Thus, Reader, you see that there has been Testimony after Testimony, both
public and private, against these PVRSMONGERS, and COMMON BANCKERS; their
DAGON, and great Idol; against their Reckoning such the best Christians, who
brought in most MONEY into their BANCK; against this private way of their
maintaining their Ministers, Their Cabinet counsel is disclosed.
whilst they exclaim against the public Ministry, as Hirelings, etc. as well
as against their Jesuitical practice of meddling with Marriages, wherewithal
they (as this Letter very well observes) have nothing to do, nor seldom do any
thing but mischief; as also against their Popish Practice, of publishing in
print, the Testimony of Wives against their Husbands, whom GOD has set Head
over them; and by whose Authority their sayings ought to be concluded. Thus do
they walk hand in hand with their Elder Sister, having received a Spirit
contrary to Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, Saints and
Martyrs; and by it are leed into these errors.

And that it may more evidently appear, that there has been Public Testimony
against their Common Banks and Private Pursemongers, their Dagon, as the Letter
rightly calls it: I may transcribe a few of W. Rogers his Lines, in his Poem
entitled, A second Scourge for G. Whitehead an Apostate Quaker, etc. viz.

-- Where Pride seems no Disgrace.
And yet when she ROME's Sister is but called,
She winches like touched Horses that are gaul'd.
Confusion her attends, next follows Woe;
For thus she whirls, but God knows where she will go.
Who when they wanted Money to proceed,
The Church, her Cash, then did supply her need.
And therefore when her Cash was emptied, she
Craved MONEY This Dagon will fall.
for to serve the MINISTRY.
At length her Papers, like to Briefs, did cry
For MONEY, MONEY; for the MINISTRY:
And when that Practice was disliked by some Viz. The Author of the recited
Letter, and some others who hated their Hypocrisy in crying out against others
as Hirelings, when they had their Banks and Pursemongers privately, etc.
,
She seemed like one, whose Downfall's near to come.
This Church will fall, her Load will be her Guile;
If you, oh Flock, keep Purse strings fast a while.
When that Spring fails, by her you will not be prized,
Usurpers then over you, you will see despised;
And Woes may long attend such Prating Preachers,
As for Preferment turned, deceitful Teachers.
Fox is termed Head, yet Whitehead steers the Course,
Till both was scorned, and they grew worse and worse.
Thus the Reader may perceive, how plainly these hypocritical practices have
been made appear; and how their Hypocrisy, has from time to time been
discovered, both privately by some of their own People, and still eminent
amongst them; only they abhor the Deceit and Falsehood amongst their Teachers
and Preachers; and some who are justly separated from them, upon a sight of
their grand Errors, and deep Hypocrisies; amongst which was W. Rogers, who has
wrote diverse books against them, entitled, The Christian Quaker distinguished,
from the Apostate and Innovator, etc. in 5 parts bound together, very eminent
and serviceable in the discovery of their Intreagues, to which I refer the
Reader, And surely I may as well as G. W. refers to Tho. Elwoods Antidote, etc.
And his Brother Robert Sandilands Pamphlet, and with a great deal of more
Reason. See his Judgment fix d, p. 260.
as well as to his 6th, 7th; and 8th parts of the Christ. Quaker disting. etc.
published singly; and also to his Poem styled, A second Scourge for G.
Whitehead, an Apostate Quaker, etc. Out of which I took the foregoing Verses,
which did so perplex this Well-Favoured Harlot, that G. W. being not able to
return an Answer to it, out came Thomas Elwood to his Relief, and to rescue his
Brother Whiteheads decaying Reputation, puts forth a Book styled, Rogero
Mastix, etc. by which instead of helping them, by hiding them, he told more
Truth (tho poor man he could not well help it, things are so plain) than forty
of them would do; See my book Bat. Rams. p. 13, 14, 15.
saying Amen to great part of what William Rogers charged them with. And
therefore, good Reader, mark well what this Tho. Elwood set forth in his book,
which is licensed, and came forth by the Consent and Approbation of their
Church, and is kept in their Library, viz.

But that Christ's Ministers should be supplied Here is a Confession that their
Ministers are supplied, then it seems they do not go at warefare at their own
Charge, as you have pretended.

With Necessaries, by the Church His Bride;
Is such a known and certain Truth as none,
Perhaps has e're opposed, but thou alone. Yes you have frequently denied that
Ministers should have Money to supply their Necessities, etc.

That it is the Church's duty to supply
The needful wants of all her Ministry;
And Truth it is, too plain to be denied,
Christ's Church should for Christ's Ministers provide:
What carps thou at, then (William) would thy Muse
Plead that St. Paul did not this Privilege use. No, St. Paul did use that
Privilege, it is you that pretend not to use it; nor that no such reward should
be found amongst you, for said you FREELY we have received, and FREELY we give.

That what was lacking, to him privately,
The Macedonian Brethren did supply.
Thus it appeared the Apostle did partake
Of that Provision which the Church did make;
Christ's Ministers to furnish, and their need
Supply, when they want MONEY to proceed. Then it seems you do supply them with
Money to proceed, then that is enough, there is no body charges you with taking
Tithe; if you have Money for preaching, is it not as good as Tyths? What Reason
is there then for you to exclaim against others, who do the same thing your
selves?

Pretend thou can not, that the Stock is given
To such as have no need thereof, No, What need was there to send Sam. Cater 10
l. which is a Rich man, and a great Trader.
but even.
Thy Flirt at Richardson, for taking pay,
For what! As Clerk he writes, does much bewray
Thy Folly and Injustice: Is It not fit,
Who works for others should be paid for it?
And that by them who him to work desire,
Now you confess to have Hirelings amongst your selves; Surely you will forbear
to call others Hirelings; for as you have pretended to preach, teach, and
suffer freely; so you pretended to record, and to write freely, as anon will
appear. Thus has T. E. disclosed your Secrets, and laid all open.
'The Labourer is worthy of his Hire.
By all which it is plain, that now they first acknowledge, that Christ's
Ministers should be supplied: But their Answer for this is, none are Ministers
of Christ but themselves, so none should be supplied but themselves.

2dly, That they acknowledge, that when their Ministers want MONEY to proceed,
that they then furnish them with Money. This they confess, and this they do by
their Brother Ellwood's Acknowledgment.

Object. But it is objected against by G. W. in his Book, Innocence against
Envy, etc. p. 14, viz. We deny his Charge of preaching for Money, or being so
burthensom as the Public Ministry, etc.

Now I grant, it is a hard matter to prove that they preach for money, viz.
that they tell People, if you will give me so much money, I will preach unto
you, this I never affirmed they did: But that they do take money for preaching,
I do still affirm; and at the Conference betwixt G. Whitehead and my self, at
Jos. Bangs's House, August 24. 1691. I proved it to his Face by a good Witness,
one of themselves, still eminent amongst them, namely, Edward Firth, viz. that
S. Cater took 3 l. for preaching; and at the Public Meeting I told S. Cater of
that 3 l. and of the 10 l. sent him at another time from London; and this he
did not deny, but said it was All: (Denying 40 s. I did then charge him
withal, which he received, as I was informed from another hand.) So here is 13
l. received by one of their rich Preachers, who have no need to take, but is
better able to give, than many that do give. But says George Innocence against
Envy, p. 14.
, Let us see his proof that we are more burthensom than the National Ministry,
etc. That we take 50 l. per Annum. Again The Contentious Apostate, and his one
Blow, p. 22.
, 30. l. for writing a Manuscript of five or six sheets of Paper. I say their
Ministers take money for preaching. Thus F. B.

To all which I answer; First, I speak my own Experience: Your Ministers have
cost me as much in three Months, as the Public Ministry has cost me in three
Years. You may put me to prove it if you will, but this is true: And I have
Reason to think it is so with many more, first from the recited Letter which
reproves your BANKERS, COMMON PVRSMONGERS, and your Dagon; and 2dly, from what
W. Roger charges you with, and as Thomas Ellwood confesses.

Secondly, Ellis Hooks, who wrote several Epistles to diverse of your Books; as
also Richard Richardson, each of them had 50 l. per Aunum. If you say not as
public Preachers, but as Clerks, I say still that is as contrary to your
Pretenses, as your taking money for Preaching, as I shall anon show; only you
think to amuse your Reader, by suggesting that they have not 50 l. per Annum as
a settled Maintenance. I do not say they have, nor never did; no, you are too
cunning for that, for if you should agree with them so, then before the Year
come out, they might possibly preach against your Orders; or, as your Brother
Sandyland, might preach one Month, and be greatly admired both as a Preacher,
and an Orthodox Writer, and his Book referred too See G. W's Judgment Fixed,
etc. p. 260.
, etc. and the next Monrh suspended, and then great part of his yearly Stipend
lost. No, I do not say that they have 50 l. per Annum settled Maintenance, though
I believe much more many of you have, besides a good Piece of Hair-Camlet now
and then, and a Silver Watch, a Bever Hat, and some other things, ask Stephen
Crisp, and he can tell you the same. And if you will let me see your
Church-Books, where is set down the Cash your Ministers receive, I doubt not
but to show the greatest Cheats that ever were discovered, viz. I mean so much
money given to such as pretend they take none, and are sent into the World to
banter all other Ministers, etc. Well, but I am still to prove the 30 l. for
writing five or six sheets of Paper, and that your taking money for writing
Church-business, is contrary to your Pretenses.

First, Ellis Hooks, and G. F. put forth the Primer, and for the Copy Andrew
Soul gave Ellis Hooks 30 l. I heard him say so formerly, and I can prove it
also. Not that Andrew Soul told it me with a design against you, no, he is so
wedded to you, that he refused to print my Books against your Errors, when it is
his Trade, and he ought to have the benefit of it; but yet, for your sakes, he
has refused of late to earn my money, I wish you make him amends, and let him
print, though against me; if you do not, I am sure you are ungrateful to him,
that to my knowledge has served you in the most dangerous times, and that to
his own loss. I speak this, to the intent you should take no Revenge on the
poor Man, who thought no hurt to you in his speaking of it: For I know you are
revengeful enough, I have found it so; for I can say, that though I suffered more
than three Years Imprisonment, and the loss of more than a 100 l. by Fines,
etc. and near 40 l. of it, for the Poverty of George Thorrowgood, and James
Webb, and others, yet I have suffered more by and under you, and this I leave
as a Testimony against your malicious Revenge. And taking money as Clerks, is
against the very Order of your great Prophet G. Fox, the giver forth of your
Laws. See his Order for Marriage, etc. styled, Concerning Marriage, how GOD
made them Male and Female in the Beginning, etc. viz. p. 6. And that NOTHING be
recorded for money in these things, but freely a free People, and in love serve
one another See Innocence vindicated, and Envy rebuked, p. 2, 3. by F. B. more
at large, etc.
. Now had G. Fox said, that AS YET let nothing be recorded for money in these
things See Painted Harlot, etc. p. 59. A timely Caution.
, but FOR THE PRESENT do things freely, etc. then you might have had a
Dispensation; for then I doubt not but you would have construed the words AS
YET, to relate to time, and ought not to be rendered tamen, viz. Nevertheless,
and that you was but to do things freely for the present, viz. until you could
get money for doing it; then Adhuc had been the Grammatical Sense of the words
As Yet, and not Tamen. And who knows but your minds may alter, when you see it
for your purpose. We see your Interest will lead you to change, and who knows
but W. P. in PENSILVANIA, may understand both the Latin and English Sense of
that your Declaration, which says, viz.

We have chosen the Son of GOD to be our King, and he has chosen us to be his
People; and he might command Thousands, and Ten Thousands of his Servants TO
FIGHT in his CAUSE -- But yet his Kingdom is not of this World -- Neither can
we YET believe that he will make use of us in that way -- But for the PRESENT
we are given up to bear and suffer, etc.

I say, if in G. Fox his Order, that nothing about Marriages and
Church-business should be done for money, he had said, That AS YET let nothing
be recorded for money, but FOR THE PRESENT do things FREELY; etc. Then you
might have lawfully taken 50 l. per Annum, according to G, F. his infallible
Law: But since there is no such words of Exception in the recited infallible
Order, you are found Transgressors thereof, and do take money, contrary to your
Pretenses. If you say the Business is more now; then there is more Persons to
do it: But if you can thus alter, then who knows but the word YET may in time
be rightly understood, especially in PENSILVANIA, as it is in your said
Declaration. G. Fox also said in his several Papers given forth about the Year
1658. Friends, you ARE to do the Nations Business freely, and that is the way
to get into the hearts of the People See Painted Harlot, etc. p. 47.
, etc. A notable Stratagem indeed, and as well improved; but says G. W. The
Contentious Apostate, and his One Blow, etc. p. 22.
We think this is not true, we know no such Order printed in that Year, if at
all. Here is another of his Equivocations; for though in my Book, One Blow, etc.
p. 6. it is said to be printed in 1650, which is an Error in the Press, and
corrected by an Errata in p. 14. viz. 1659. Thus he shuffles, and seeks ways to
evade the matter, which is certainly true, for I have the Book by me; and
still, contrary to his Pretensions, (for in Judgment Fixed, p. 365. he thus
says, For I examine the Errata's even of my Adversaries Books as they are
noted, before I answer the matter, etc. Now this is either true or false, (i.
e.) he either examins the Errata's, or he does not. If he does not, then he
proclaims himself a Liar to the whole World in Print. If he does, and yet takes
no Notice of the Correction of an Error, but publish the Error, as he has done
this of 1650, instead of 1659. then is he still the more like himself, A grand
Deceiver, one that pretends fair; yea, so fair, as that he pretends to examine
the Errata's even of his Adversaries Books, before he answer them. And yet,
behold, it is no such matter, thus deceitfully false do I find him in many
places, too large to recite; and therefore I do hereby resume my Charge, as in
Battering Rams, p. 11, 12. viz. In this you deceive your People, in that you
pretend to Teach, Preach, Suffer, and Record Marriages, and other Public
Offices freely, without Money, Gifts, or Rewards: And by reason of this fair
Pretense, you not only have deceived the Simple, but also taken occasion
thereby, to vilify and speak contemptuously of all other Public Preachers.
First, the National, for taking Tithes, and other Dues, as a settled Maintenance
by Law Established; which is not so burthensom as you are to many of your
Hearers, notwithstanding your smooth Pretenses to the contrary. And next the
Presbyterians and Independents, whom you bespatter about their Basin, etc.
wherein, perhaps, their Hearers put their free Contributions for their
Ministers Subsistence, and all this while VALVE your selves upon your FREE
PREACHING, FREE SVFFERING, FREE WRITING, etc. And at the same time you know
it is common for all these Church Officers amongst you to take money, etc. These
things discover your Hypocrisy, and you cannot abide to hear of them; but T.
Ellwood has confessed them, W. R. manifested them, the recited Letter suggests
them, and I do affirm them.

CHAP. XI. Shows that the Forsaking the Quakers, is no Apostasy from the
Articles of the Christian Faith.
BY this time it may be expected, That whereas in my former Books I have made
some distinction between the Foxonian Party, and the Storian Party, amongst the
People called Quakers; sometimes terming the one Christian Quakers, the other
Antichristian; the one Protestant, the other Popish, etc. And that if there be
a real difference in their Principles, I should and ought, in point of Justice,
to continue the distinction, and not to condemn the Innocent with the Guilty,
etc.

To all which I do say, there is great Reason so to do; and in order to it, as
I have set forth the Principles and Practices of the Foxonian Party, so now I
shall set forth what the Storian Party holds, and show it to be sound. And that
though they do dissent from the established Religion, yet they hold the true
Faith, at least for substance, as may be seen by the Articles of the Faith of
John Cox, (whilst he was a Minister amongst the Storian Party, which I call the
Christian Quakers) in a little Book printed Anno 1689. entitled, The Articles
of the Christian Faith believed, and written by me John Cox, etc. And I never
heard that any of his Hearers contradicted the said Book, or any part of it,
and therefore in Charity I am obliged to think they hold the same Faith.

First, in his Epistle to the Reader, he thus says? And to explain my self, I
agree in every Particular with those called the Apostles, Nicene, and
Athanasius Creeds, etc.

OF JESUS CHRIST. ARTICLE II.
P. 6. I believe in one Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the only begotten
eternal Son of God the Father, conceived by the Holy Ghost, manifested in the
Flesh, born of the Virgin Mary, and suffered and dyed for our Sins without the
Gates of Jerusalem, and rose again the third day for our Justification; And I
believe all else concerning him, according to the Holy Scriptures.

OBSERVATION.
The difference betwixt the recited Article in this fundamental Point, and
their Article set forth in their 2d and 3d Principle in the first Chapter is
obvious, I shall recite some few passages more, and so leave it, with some few
Observations, etc.

OF THE SACRED SCRIPTURES. ARTICLE IV.
P. 7. I believe the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, called the
Bible, were written by Inspiration of the Holy Ghost for our learning, and
answers to his own Testimony in all men's hearts, and are A RVLE TO WALK BY --
And renounce all other Rules contrary thereunto, or not one therewith what ever
they be, etc.

OF REPENTANCE AND REMISSION OF SIN. ARTICLE VI.
P. 8. I believe that Repentance and Remission of Sins are to be preached,
according to the Holy Scriptures, successively to every Generation, and to all
the World, ONLY in the Name and Authority of JESUS CHRIST, and only by his
Merits.

OBSERVATION.
Reader, here is the Scripture owned as a Rule to walk by, which the others,
viz. the Foxonian Party ever denied. Here is the Merits of Christ's Death and
Passion magnified, and Man's deservings so abased, as to have no share in our
Salvation, which are Sound and Protestant.

OF JUSTIFICATION. ARTICLE IX.
P. 9. I believe Justification only by the Merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and that all our Righteousnesses are Effects of his Mercy, Death and
Sufferings; and our Holiness we do conformable thereunto, is only our Duty, and
not Merit.

OBSERVATION.
Reader, as it is my Duty to discover erroneous Principles which are pernicious
and destructive to the very Being of Christianity, so I think my self obliged
to publish these sound Protestant Principles, in order to clear the Professors
of them from the Imputation of what may justly be laid to the Charge of the
Foxonian Party.

OF PERFECTION. ARTICLE XXVIII.
P. 17. I believe Perfection is to be pressed after, for without Holiness no
Man shall see GOD. But I believe the Saints Perfection in this life is but in
part; and when the Beginning and End meet in him, that is the Alpha and Omega,
then shall be COMPLETE PERFECTION.

OF THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY. ARTICLE XXXV.
P. 21. I believe the Resurrection of the Body, and that Christ, the
Resurrection and the Life, will change our vile Bodies, and make them like to
his glorious Body. And this I do believe according to the Holy Scriptures, and
in opposition to the Ranters Principles, (and all others) who deny this
fundamental Doctrine of Christianity.

OF RIGHTEOUSNESS AND JUDGMENT TO COME. ARTICLE XXXVII.
P. 23. I believe Righteousness, and Judgment to come. And Sheep and Goats
shall be at the last day separated. And the Grave and Sea give up the dead in
them. And the SOUL, which never dies, and BODY UNITE, to receive according to
the deeds done in the Body, whether they be good or evil. And Heaven perfectly
enjoyed by those that have suffered for Christ, and Hell fully comprehending
all those that have loved this present World, and the Vanities thereof, more
than GOD.

OBSERVATION.
Reader, who ever thou art, examine thy own heart, and try thy own Faith by the
Holy Scriptures; and if thou do not believe these few Articles, then question
thy Condition: And if thou be one called a Quaker of the FOXONIAN PARTY, and
of long standing, and shall say in thy heart, As for these People they are
separated from us, they are Apostates, they hold dangerous Opinions; and as for
these Principles I am wholly a stranger to them, having never heard such
Doctrine in all our Books: For they teach Perfection attainable in this life,
G. F. said he witnessed it. They teach that the Scripture is not a Rule to walk
by. They do not teach to believe Justification only and alone through the
merits of Christ's Death and Passion. They do not believe the Resurrection of
the Body as here set down. If any of them tell thee otherwise, and say they do,
believe them not, until they put forth a Book in Print signifying the same: For
they have given grounds of Suspicion that they have erred from the Faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore believe them not, until they give public
Satisfaction to the World of what they hold concerning the Faith once delivered
to the Saints, especially of these Points rehearsed, wherein they are thought
to be most defective, and that from the words of their own Principles.

And if thou art one of the Storian Party, which, for distinction sake, I so
term it: For I had an honorable Esteem of John Story, and believe he is at
Rest, and that he was a deep Sufferer by G. F. and his Party, and that he never
held the Errors which I have herein reproved; nay, not one of them that I ever
understood. Yet, I say, examine thy self, I refer thee to the aforesaid Book,
which, in the main, is very sound; and in the Close thereof, methinks I
perceive the very frame and temper of the Martyrs: And wherever I find that
low, meek, and self-abasing temper of mind, and frame of spirit, in what
Society of Christian people soever, I am affected therewith, and he is my
Brother, though in some Circumstances we may differ. See his conclusive words,
after a recital of hiS 37 Articles, viz.

This, in brief, is a Declaration of my Faith in these Particulars, and I
commit them to the Perusal of all Christians, asserting, That however I may be
censured allho' I may Err, yet I cannot be an Heretic.

I say, as the substance of his Matter is sound, so he does not conclude that
they are given forth by the eternal Spirit, and that therefore they are of
equal Authority with the Scriptures: But, contrariwise, submitting them to be
tried and proved by the Scriptute, concluding with St. Augustine, that ancient
and worthy Father, Errare possum, Hereticus esse non possum; in an Error I may
be, but an Heretic I cannot be.

The next thing I shall remind the Christian Quaker of (for such I believe
there is amongst them, though for want of following the example of the Bereans,
viz. to examine the Doctrine of their Teachers, may not be so clear in their
Notions, as otherwise they might be) is the reading, and duly considering the
charitable Doctrine held forth by J. Hogg, in his book styled, An Answer to
several material Passages. etc. where speaking of the Children of Abraham
coming from the East, West, North and South, etc. he thus says. Those
certainly was not of one external Form and Order, as to Ceremonial and Shadowy
things; yet we find they agree -- the true Church is here indeed, but not yet
referable to any Society, with respect to outward Rules, and therefore ought to
be waited for by all, etc.

Oh this Charity! I love it wherever I meet with it, here is no boasting that
THEY, and none BUT THEY are the People of GOD; and that the Tabernacle of GOD,
and the Knowledge of his Will his ONLY amongst these People, who, in diverse
Counties in England, are separated from the other; and they hold the Faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ, for substance, according to the Scriptures; yet the more
they know, and the clearer their Principles are, the humbler they are, and the
more Christian like: And as their separation from the others, are as
justifiable as the Protestants separation from Rome, and upon the same bottom
in many things; so will their Understandings increase in the Knowledge of our
LORD and Savior Jesus Christ, who is GOD over all, blessed for evermore, Amen.

The next books I refer to are Dr. Hammonds, and Bp. Sandersons, etc. which W.
Penn says, were of his mind, in his book, Good Advice to the Chapter of England,
Roman Catholic and Protestants; etc. p. 22, 23, 24. Where he highly commends
them for their Principles, when he was their most invetterate Enemy, and grand
Temporiser, as may be seen in the Looking-glass for the Quakers, etc. in two
Columns. Yea, and in that very Book of his p. 39. Charged Archbp. Cranmer with
compelling Edw. VI. to sign a Warrant, to burn Poor Joan of Kent a famous
Woman, for mere Religion. (which I do not believe, but charge it upon him, G.
W. and the rest of his Adherents, as a Lie, until they prove it by a Protestant
Author) ending his Paragraph thus, Thus even the Protestants began with Blood,
for mere Religion; and taught the Romanists, in succeeding times how to deal
with them.

Thus when he had flatteringly spoken well of the Protestant Principles, as
Christian-like; saying certainly those Gentlemen (as Dr. Hammond, and Bp.
Sanderson, etc.) were of my Mind; and yet a few Pages off, tells the World that
their Principles are so very wicked, and their Practices so abominably
Antichristian, as that they began with Blood, and mere Religion too; yea, and
the very Teachers and Instructers of the Papists, how to deal with them, and
how to exercise their bloody Projects. Oh shamefully wicked, and base Flattery,
which meets with a just Recompense: May it not justly be said, He sits in
the lurking places of the Villages -- he lies in wait secretly, as a Lion in
his Den, Psalm. 10. Well, notwithstanding this digression, I still refer to the
said worthy men's books, and to Bp. Brownrigg's, and other Divines of the Church
of England; who have so excellently set forth the Principles of the Church of
England: That should I put Pen to paper after them, upon the subjects they
treated on, it would be but like lighting of a Candle at Noonday, when the Sun
shines bright in its Luster. (And whatever may be suggested by G. W. etc. I
bless the day in which I went into Cripplegate Parish to hear Mr. Smythies) I
find their Principles to be more Christian than his, or his party; more
charitable, more humble, more self denying: Not having in 6 or 7 years, in
which I have frequented the Public, heard so much railing Language and hard
Speeches, in all the Sermons against the Quakers and Dissenters, as I have
heard in one Month; nay I may say, I think in one Sermon against the public
Ministry.

I Remember G. W. in his Content. Apostate, and one Blow, etc. p. 11. says
thus, viz. Now Isaac Archer thou having thus far appeared an Abettor and
Assister of F. B. -- and he being one of thy Flock, and Church, we may take it
for granted that he has secret Encouragement from thee to divulge his Books
against us.

Now, serious George, I perceive you are fallible, and need that some body give
yo^ discerning; and that you may have somebody to furnish you with discerning
and judgment; I do tell you that you have taken an absolute Lie, for a certain
Truth, and what a sad thing is this? You that pretend None need to give you
discerning or judgment, Christ has furnished you already, See Judas and the
Jews, p. 58.
and does on all Occasions. Here you see you are not furnished in this small
occasion, and for want thereof presumptuously take for granted, an arrant Lie,
for a certain infallible Truth; oh that you could measure your self by these
Delusions! And I would to GOD, that your Hearers would take these your
erroneous principles into their serious Considerations; and Berean like,
examine whether they have any likeness, and bear any Relation to the Writings
of the Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, Professors of any Christian Society of
Protestants whatever; and if like none, but contrary to all: And that
notwithstanding your pretense to Infallability, perfect discerning, etc. yet
you are fallible, and as subject to err as any; nay more subject, in that many
times (as in this instance) you, upon that principle of Infallibity, think you
know all things, when the truth is, you are ignorant. For I must tell you in
order, to let you see your mistake, and give you a clear discerning, that Mr.
Archer did never put me upon writing against you in all his Lifetime, nor
until this time, see a Sheet of my Writing against you in Manuscript, nor no
other Clergyman; and now he has not added, nor yet diminished two lines, that
I perceive; see now whence your discerning is?

Come, G. W. did you write this Book as a Man in your own single Capacity? And
as for the Position in the same Page which you say is Mr. Archers; he denies it
as laid down by you, and that what he said he is able to make good, and that by
the concurrent Testimony of the Scriptures, and the learned Fathers. But until
you have answered his Query, I have desired him to have nothing to do with such
a contentious person as you are, who writ three Books in nine Months time, and
yet charge your Opposer with your own Crime, as if you were such a peaceable
Man, and yet have been a contentious Scribler these 40 or 50 Years, against
almost every man, like Ishmael of old, and that the World may see Mr. Archer's
Query, and your pretended Answer, and how remote and evasive it is, I may
recite the substance of both, viz.

Mr. Whitehead, I challenge you to show me a Precedent for Women's distinct
Meetings apart from the Men, J. A's Query.
as by you set up since the days of the Apostles. Come G. W. this is the knotty
Question which Mr. Archer proposed to you in the public Meeting the 30th of
April, 1691. G. W. not able to answer Mr. Archer's Query.
which put you to silence, as not able to answer it, which you left out of your
Narrative, as you did much more spoken by him that day, as not for your
purpose. And when I reminded you of this, you had the face to deny it under
your hand; but Mr. Archer resumed the Question, and recharged you, as well as
let you know that he proposed the same in the Meeting, etc. And it stands over
your head unanswered, only thus much you tell him in page 8. of your last Book,
styled, The Contentious Apostate recharged, etc. That in the City of Blois
there was in the time of Martyrdom, nine Women met together with their
Daughters, and prayed with and for each other, etc. which is as remote, as if
you had told us of Queen Hester and her Maids, and the like, which no body ever
disputed; But had they a Clerk? Did they set up a Meeting in order to govern
the Church? Had they power to forbid the Banes of Marriage, or to confirm them?
Were they to meet, by their Patent, at Ten a Clock to raise a Bank or
Common-Purse, etc? Come G. W. pursue the Terms of the Question, and produce a
Precedent if you be able; if not, let your Silence be a token that Mr. Archer
has put you to a Nonplus ultra.

CHAP. XII. Shows that forsaking the Quakers, is no Apostasy from the Articles
of the Christian Faith.
HAving with as much Brevity as I may, answered the principal things contained
in G. Whitehead's three Books, I am now come to the Contentious Apostate
recharged, etc. page 5, 6, 7. containing a denial of several things by me at
diverse times charged on G. W. and his Brethren, in several of my Books formerly
writ against their Errors and Hypocrisies, charging them to be False, etc. And
to evince this Charge, he takes one line here, and two there; and sometimes
five words out of the middle of a line, as in p. 12. l. 10. in Battering Rams,
etc. not touching the matter either immediately before it, or after it, viz.
some 50 l. per Annum, etc. A notable way to confute an Adversary, and answer
his Book. Surely as this way of Confutation is singular, and by itself, without
Proof, Reason, Demonstration, or Precedent; so if he did not look upon his
Disciples strangely infatuated, and ready to believe what ever he writes,
whether True or False, Sense or Nonsense, I should think, (setting his
infallible Capacity aside) he should: Yet, his parts considered as a natural
Man, he might be ashamed to appear in Print again: hear this Criticiser, this
notable serious G. W. and behold his Answer in his 5th Instance, which runs
thus: Your way is, when Cash grows low, to issue out -- And then he gives a
Leap out of this Line, having took the middle of it, into the middle of the
next Line, and then takes a letter and two words, viz. A General Epistle. And
from thence he skips to the last three words of the next Line, (i. e.) Your own
Service. And now he hops to the next Line, and takes one word, viz. for, and
leaves the next word as, and then takes the next word money. And then gives a
good Leap into another Line, and gets a good pretty parcel of words, viz. It Is
a great Encouragement to your Preachers and Parasites; which being put
together, as we use to put Syllables when I was four or five years old, it runs
thus: viz.

Your way is, when your Cash grows low, to issue out -- A General Epistle --
Your own Service -- for money -- It Is a great Encouragement to your Preachers
and Parasites, etc.

And now, Reader, do you think G. W. was not sorely put to it to answer these
Charges? And is not his way and manner of charging his Adversary very singular,
who is forced to take this unheard of way, to take five words there, three
words here, and then the middle of a Sentence; and then because he would make
it look like something, he takes out of another line one word, and leaves a
word; then he is to it again, and takes another word; and then when he has
jumbled all this Hoch-poch together, and played all the Ledgerdemaine his
subtle Pen and profound Wit can invent, perverting the Sense, mincing the
Argument into small parcels, leaving out what was not for his turn, and which
was the Argument, and then cries, This is one of Francis Bugg 's Lies; F. B. is
Unconscionable; F. B. is disingenuous in writing; malicious in his divulging
Books, etc. making as great a Noise against me, as his Brother Harding did
against Mr. Jewel, as I have observed already See the Introduction.
. And thus, and after this manner, G. W. spent near three Pages of his said
Book, which in all is but eight Pages. And yet this is the Man that is against
curtailing, against mangling, and marring the Sense; nay, his 11th Charge in
this last recited Pamphlet, is only because my Printer, or Compositer, left out
in a Quotation I took out of the Works of Dr. R. Barns the Martyr, the word
SVCH; and for this, he there charges me to be a false Accuser of the blessed
Martyr, a Perverter, a Forger, and what not, that may make his poor credulous
Disciples believe that Francis Bugg is a very sad Man to leave out a word, when
yet it is his own practice: For at the same time, and in the same Page, wherein
he charges me with leaving out the word SVCH, he has left out the word OTHER,
as I have already observed; and now he leaves out not only a word, but half a
line, a whole line; takes one word, and leaves another; and then takes the
next, mangling and mincing into bits and scraps, curtailing, and perverting,
and thereby altering the Sense, by his unrighteous and nonsensical proceeding,
on purpose to abuse me, his Reader, and amuse the World. Indeed if I had
charged the Doctrine of the Martyrs to be corrupt, tending to Practical
Ranterism, as he has done. If I had charged the Martyrs to be the Authors of
Persecution, and to burn People merely for Religion, and thereby taught the
Papists the way how to proceed in their bloody and unheard of Cruelties, as his
Brother W. P. has done, that worthy Martyr, true Protestant, and brave English
Man, (who, under GOD and the King, was a chief Instrument in throwing off the
heavy Yoke of the Pope's Supremacy here in England) viz. Archbishop Cranmer;
and at the same time too, and in the same Book See Good Advice to the Church of
England, Romans Cat. and Pro. Disent. p. 39. per W. P.
, wherein he flatteringly seemed to magnify the Principles of the Church of
England, speaking well of her eminent Doctors, and grave Bishops. At the same
time, when with a Dagger in his hand, was wounding the Reputation of one of her
Noblest Martyrs, bloody Joab-like: I say, If I had done thus, or any thing of
this Nature, though not of so deep a Dye, you might have had some Color to have
exposed me a false Accuser of the blessed Martyrs, and a Sider with the
Papists, etc.

And thus, as I have said, having answered the most considerable Matters
contained in G. W's three last Pamphlets: And by what is said, showed the
Nature of his handling and prosecuting his 3d and last Charge, which is by
mincing, cutting, and mangling, my Arguments into Scraps and Bits, in order to
spoil the Sense, etc. I refer the Reader to what I have said in this Treatise,
wherein the most material Passages which he has curtailed and mangled, are
answered; and to make that appear, view my said Books by G. W. quoted.

And now, G. W. if you will be plain, and prove what you have said, or retract
what you cannot maintain, both with respect to your Principles which you hold,
and which I have fairly collected out of your printed Books, as in the first
Chapter, quoting Book and Page, etc. And with respect to what you have wrote
which is false, and which I charge upon you, and recharge you again, as in One
Blow, etc. according to the terms in the first Chapter taken out of Edward
Burroughs's Works, even the words of your own Propositions; then let me have
Notice of it a Month, and, GOD willing, I shall readily wait upon your motion.
And if you will be plain, and retract what is false and erroneous, and
vindicate only what is sound, I shall be glad of it; but if the contrary, I may
deal with you accordingly. Now if you still shall refuse to come out of your
Dens, and lurking places, and think it your most secure way to save your self,
by keeping your People in Ignorance, then my Advice to you is, that you answer
my Queries propounded in Battering Rams, etc. p. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. and
those referred too in the 9th Query, p. 21. and Mr. Archer's Query above
recited, and as yet unanswered; and the Jacobites Query in this Treatise, and
at the end of them this which follows, viz.

Query. Whether it is not possible to write against you who are called QUAKERS,
and not to write against Truth? And lastly, Whether it be not possible for a
Man to leave and forsake you, and write against you, but that the Consequence
of his so doing, renders himself a Self-condemned Apostate, which is only a
softer word for an Heretic?

Answer these things fairly, and you may hear more from me; but if not, you may
rail, forge, pervert, invert, lie, and slander, I shall rest satisfied, in that
I have thus far discharged my Duty to GOD and my Country at this time.

Milden-Hall, April 3. 1692. FRA: BVGG.

THE CONCLUSION.
SInce I writ the foregoing Treatise, I have seen George Whitehead's Book,
Antichrist in Flesh Unmasked, etc. in Answer to a Book, Antichrist in Spirit
Unmasked: Or, Quakerism a Great Delusion, etc. wherein G. W. seems to hold
forth the Principles of the Christian Religion. And had I a good ground to
believe what he therein sets forth, (in the Quakers Name) to be really so
indeed, I would stop the Publication of what I have at this time writ against
their Errors: But until they by some Public and General Act, first Renounce
and Condemn, under the Hands of some of their principal Leaders and Teachers,
their manifest Errors laid down in Print, and hitherto owned by them, a few
whereof I have herein related, I have no reason to believe that they mean as
they say; but, like deceitful Workers, they transform themselves into the
likeness of what they really are not; that is to say, into the likeness of the
Ministers of Christ, and true Professors of the ancient Faith; and thereby
deceive the simple with their feigned words and juggling tricks, who, like our
Enemies at Sea, either to defend themselves from our stroke, or to draw us into
their snare, will put up the English Flag: So these now make a show of their
owning the Scriptures to be Holy, (which formerly they frequently called CARNAL
LETTER West. Pet. Answ. p. 13, 23. News out of the North, p. 14, 35, 39. and
Truth's Defense, p. 28, 56, 60.
, EARTHLY LETTER Idem, p. 14.
, the HVSK Idem, p. 53. and Way to the Kingdom, p. 8.
, DVST Discovery of Antichrist, p. 9.
, and DEATH Idem, p. 9. and G. Whitehead's Ishmael, p. 10.
; but now tell us, they are Holy. What! Is that which is Carnal and Earthly,
Holy? Is the Husk, Dust and Death, Holy? This is Juggling with a Witness; but,
blessed be GOD, these Jugles and these Juglers are discovered daily, even so,
Amen.) They own the Humanity of Christ, his Death, Suffering, Resurrection, and
Ascension, and hoping for Salvation through the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, and meritorious Death and Passion See their Paper styled, The
Christianity of the People commonly called Quakers, etc.
: But when I look into their former printed Books, and especially their
Epistles, which they frequently sent to their Friends to be read in their
Church Assemblies, there is not a word of any such Confession; so that what G.
W. has now writ, is but like the French Men when they put up the English Flag,
merely a Trick and Sham, and ought not to be taken notice of any otherwise than
as such.

And therefore to make this evidently appear, I may first recite part of George
Whitehead's Book aforesaid; and secondly, two or three Passages out of one of
their Epistles wrote by two of the most eminent amongst them when living,
namely, Edward Buroughs, whose Works they Reprinted in Folio, of whom Josiah
Coal in his Testimony for him has this passage, viz. That he (Edward
Buroughs) was a Man endued with the ALMIGHTY Power of GOD, which lived and
reigned in him, etc. Yea, and that He was a Man in whom the FVLNESS dwelt of
Grace and Virtue See the Testimony of his Life, etc. put forth 1662. by G. Fox,
G. Whitehead, and Josiah Coal, etc. p. 24.
, etc. The other was Francis Howgil, whose Works they also Reprinted in Folio,
of whom great things are also spoken in the Testimonies writ in favor of him,
which by the Consent and Approbation of their Church, are prefixed to his
Works. These two Sons of Thunder and Consolation, as the Titles of their Books
do bespeak them, wrote from Ireland to the Camp of the Lord in England, called
Quakers, which they thus Entitled, viz.

THIS IS TO GO ONLY AMONGST FRIENDS.
By which the Reader will easily perceive, that what G. W. has lately wrote by
way of Confession, and in the Quakers Name, is only to amuse his Reader, and
delude the World: For in the whole Epistle, containing 23 pages in Quarto,
there is not a word which sets forth the Scripture to be profitable for
Doctrine; not a word by way of Confession of Sins to GOD, or asking Pardon for
Christ's sake; not a word about their owning or valuing the Incarnation of our
blessed Savior, his Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, or Ascension; not a word
of their hopes of being saved through the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
and Merits, (as G. W. would now insinuate) which sufficiently shows that they
are of a different Faith to what the Holy Apostles and blessed Martyrs were of.
And,

Thirdly, I shall make some Observations or Animadversions upon the said
Epistles, in order to show the Fallacy of the seeming serious Confession of G.
Whitehead, and how, Janus-like, they look two ways, viz. when they write to
their Friends certain Epistles to be read in their Church Assemblies, to
inculcate their Principles and wild Notions into their unsteady Heads and
unstable Souls, and another thing when they write to be seen of Men, and to be
viewed by the true Professors of Christianity. And now to the first, viz.

A Recital of part of G. W's words, in his Book styled, ANTICHRIST IN FLESH
UNMASKED, etc. p. 27, 28, 29, 30.
WE sincerely profess and declare, in the sight of God and Men, That we do
faithfully believe and profess, that the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament were given by Divine Inspiration; And that the three Divine Witnesses
in Heaven above, Heaven above is a new word with them; however this is not to
be credited, until they retract, and by some public Act condemn their old
avowed Principles, and ancient Errors, which are in Print contrary hereunto, as
anon will more evidently appear.
namely, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are one true and eternal God -- And
the Divinity and Humanity, or Manhood of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ the eternal Word of God. And that in the fullness of time he took flesh,
being miraculously conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary,
and suffered the cruel death of the Cross, as an universal Offering and
Sacrifice both in his Body and Blood shed thereon for the Sins of the whole
World. And was buried, and rose again the third day; was seen in his ascending,
and passed into Heaven and Glory. And that he ascended far above all Heavens,
that he might fill all things. And that by his Suffering and Sacrifice he has
obtained eternal Redemption for us -- That we are not pardoned, justified,
redeemed, or saved by our own Righteousness, Works, Merits, or Deservings; but
by the Righteousness, Merits, and Works of this our blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, being both imparted and imputed to us -- We sincerely believe
also, that the Man Christ Jesus is the only Mediator between GOD and Man, our
Intercessor and Advocate with the Father -- And the Resurrection of the Dead,
and eternal Judgment, etc.

ANIMADVERSION HEREUPON.
Now this, with much more, G. W. in the Quakers Name, seems with much
seriousness to avouch; so that had they first by some manifest Act under the
hand of six or more of their principal Leaders, condemned their former Errors,
which are laid down in Print, and as contrary to this Confession of G. W's, as
Light is to Darkness, I should have thought that there had been a great
Reformation in them, and should have been glad thereof: But until they first
condemn what they have given forth in Print as their Principles, and that as
they have said by the eternal Spirit of GOD, I, nor any Man else have any
ground to believe that G. W. is at all serious or conscientious in this his
Confession of Faith, but rather that he continues in his wonted course to carry
two Faces in a Hood. For Instance, once for all: If G. W. etc. did really
believe that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament were Holy, and given
by Divine Inspiration, and that they are profitable for Doctrine, why then do
they not read them in their Meetings for the Worship of GOD? But rather choose
to read the Epistles of Samuel Cater, Robert Sandiland, William Penn, George
Whitehead, and others of their Tribe, and therein give their own Writings the
pre-eminence, as that they have done, to my own knowledge, near 30 Years
together. For as it was our frequent practice to read the Epistles of G. Fox,
Steph. Crisp, etc. and that with great Devotion and Attention; so on the other
hand, did I never know a Chapter in either the Old or New Testament read
amongst us at any of our Meetings for the Worship of GOD, with what Face then
can G. W. thus appear, and not blush? And that it may further appear, that G.
W. is fallacious herein, I shall recite part of one of their Epistles so sent
and read, in which there is not a word about the Incarnation of Christ's Death,
Sufferings, Resurrection or Ascension, or any thing of that tendency though it be
large, viz. 23 pages in Quarto, two or three passages thereof I shall recite,
that so the Reader may perceive that they err in the object of their Faith. And
2dly, how they applaud their Hearers. And 3dly, what large Commission they give
to kill, cut, destroy, lay waste all the Heathen, Philistines, the Amalakites,
etc. affirming, That none know GOD but themselves: So that it was no marvel
they gave it such an obscure, dark-lanthorn Title, as, This is only to go
amongst Friends, etc. for indeed it was not able to abide the light, no more
than many others of their Epistles and Pamphlets are; Well to the matter:

THIS IS ONLY TO GO AMONGST FRIENDS.
P. 19. And thou, Oh North of England, who art counted as desolate and barren,
and reckoned the least of the Nations, yet out of THEE did the BRANCH spring,
and STAR arise, which gives Light to all the Regions round about: In THEE the
SON OF RIGHTEOUSNESS appeared, with wounding, and with healing: And out of THEE
the Terrors of the LORD proceeded, which makes the Earth to tremble, and be
removed; out of thee KINGS, Priests and Prophets did come forth, etc.

ANIMADVERSIONS HEREUPON.
Reader observe, that though what is here spoken, if well meant, and rightly
applied, respects Christ as prophesied of by Moses, and the Prophets; for said
Luke, Acts 10.43. To HIM gave all the Prophets witness, that through HIS NAME,
that whosoever believes in HIM, shall receive Remission of Sins, etc. For read
Numb. 24.17. and there Christ is called the Star of Jacob, viz. I shall see
HIM, but not now; I shall behold HIM, but not nigh; there shall come a STAR out
of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners
of Moab, etc. And ver. 19. out of Jacob shall come HE that shall have dominion,
etc. And Zech, 3.8. For behold I will bring forth my Servant the BRANCH. And
cap. 6. ver. 12. Behold the Man whose Name is the BRANCH. And HE shall grow up
out of HIS place. And HE shall build the Temple of the LORD, even HE shall
build the Temple of the LORD: And HE shall bear the Glory, and shall sit and
rule upon HIS Throne, and HE shall be a Priest upon HIS Throne, etc. Again,
read Malachi 4.2. But unto you that fear my Name, shall the Son of
Righteousness arise with healing under HIS wings, etc.

Thus, I say, if rightly applied, and well meant, these Sayings of theirs
relating to the STAR, the BRANCH, the SON of RIGHTEOUSNESS, etc. alludes to
Christ: but Christ they could not mean; for he did not come out of the North of
England. Neither can they prove, that in Scripture the North of England is
accounted desolate. Neither can they prove by Scripture, that the North of
England (out of which their great Prophet G. F. came) is called Barren. Neither
can they prove by Scripture, that the North of England is reckoned the least of
the Nations: So that they did not mean Christ, but their great Prophet George
Fox, as anon will more evidently appear; in the mean time let me prove to them,
If they did allude to Christ, that they were greatly mistaken; for Christ did
not come according to the Flesh, out of the North of England, but out of the
Town of Bethlehem, Micah 5.2. But thou, Bethlehem ephratah, though thou be
little amongst the thousands of Judah, yet out of THEE shall HE come forth unto
me, that is to be Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old,
from everlasting. And to this Testimony of the Prophet, St. Matthew the
Evangelist agrees, Matthew. 2.6. so that they mist in their Calculation, take
them in the best sense; and therefore not led by an infallible Spirit, that is
infallibly certain; for the Town of Bethlehem is not in the North of England.
And they say that this STAR, this BRANCH, this Son of Righteousness, which
gives Light to all the Regions round about, came out of that barren and
desolate place, which is reckoned the least of the Nations, [ i. e. the North
of England.] Well, but to confirm that they meant G. Fox. Hear G. F. himself in
his Book, News out of the North -- Written FROM THE MOUTH OF THE LORD, from ONE
-- (i. e. G. F.) whose Name is not known in the World; risen out of the NORTH,
which was prophesied of, and NOW is fulfilled G. F 's News out of the North,
etc. See Title Page printed 1655.
, etc. I say, they believing this, no marvel they were so deceived to write as
they did. And likewise others of their Preachers gave him such Divine
Attributes as belong only to Christ; (And so did he give himself, viz. THE SON
OF GOD Man of Sin, p. 3.
, and said He had power to BIND and to LOOSE Spirit of the Hat, p. 27.
, etc.) As,

Dear George Fox, who art the Father of many Nations, whose Life has reached
through us thy Children, even to the Isles afar off, to the begetting many
again to a lively hope, for which Generations to come shall call thee Blessed,
whose Being and Habitation is in the power of the Highest, in which thou rulest
and governs in Righteousness, and thy Kingdom is established in Peace, and the
increase thereof is without end, etc.

And all this Blasphemy justified by William Penn, Judas and the Jews Which
Book was put forth by their chief Leaders, and is particularly owned by G. W.
in his Apostate Incendiary, p. 24. so that it is plain he owned and justified
(as well as W. P.) these blasphemous passages. See also his Book, Serious
Search, p. 58, 59. touching S. Eccles Blasphemy, etc.
, etc. p. 44, 45, 46, 47. So that the Coherence of their Writings considered,
it is very probable they do account that G. Fox was that Star, that Branch, that
Sun of Righteousness which gives Light to all the Regions round about, even to
the Isles afar off; yea, and as justifiable too, as to say that his ( G. Fox's)
Kingdom is established in Peace, and that of the increase thereof there is no
end; for this I prove to be a Title and an Attribute due only to Christ, (who
is GOD over all, blessed for evermore) and that from Luke 1.32, 33. He shall be
great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest. And the LORD GOD shall give
unto HIM the Throne of his Father David. And he shall reign over the house of
Jacob for ever and ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, etc. Again,
to put it yet more out of doubt, if more can be, I will prove by the Prophet
Isaiah's words, (and now I hope they will come into force, at least with G. W.
(if not with his Brethren, since he has (whether at unawares I cannot tell)
confessed that the Holy Scriptures are given by Divine Inspiration.) that to
say G. Fox's Kingdom is established in Peace, and that the increase thereof is
without end, is both Idolatrous and Blasphemous, forasmuch as those Titles and
Divine Attributes are due only to Christ. See Isa. 9.6, 7. For unto us a Child
is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall be upon his
shoulders: and his name shall be called, Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty GOD,
The everlasting Father, The prince of peace. Of the increase of his government
and peace, there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his
kingdom, to order it, and to establish it, with judgment and with justice, from
henceforth even for ever: the zeal of the Lord of HOSTS will perform this.

Now, G. W. with what Face could thou appear in Print in the Name of the
Quakers, who robs Christ of his HONOR, and blasphemes HIS Holy Name, and not
first condemn these abominable and odious Tenants, and downright Blasphemies.
Oh! Blush, and be ashamed, and humble your selves, and publicly condemn these
and the like Errors, and pernicious Principles, and then let a Confession of
Faith be signed by as many as condemn your Errors, and then many will be glad
of such a happy Reformation; which that it may come to pass in the sight of the
Nation, is my hearty Prayer to GOD.

Again, THIS IS ONLY TO GO AMONGST FRIENDS.
P. 13. Come away, my beloved Ones, drink abundantly, and be refreshed, and
praise his Name for ever; eternally I am shed and spilt among you. Never so as
now, never to be separated out of the eternal Oneness; sound forth HIS praise,
declare HIS word. Let it go forth as Thunder, let the Heathen bow, let the
Princes of this world fall. -- O! Beloved Ones, who are the Children of my
eternal FATHER, who have eaten at HIS Table, and drunk of the new Wine of the
Kingdom of GOD, who are nourished and dandled upon the lap of everlasting love,
who suck at the breasts of everlasting consolation.

P. 14. Your beauty is comely, I am ravished; I am filled, I am filled with
love to you all, I am sick of love. Your beauty has ravished my heart, come
sit down my dear Lambs together in the Fold, where no Wolf can come, and let us
rejoice together, and sound forth HIS praise, who has washed us, and cleansed
us, and covered us, and made us worthy to enter into the Fold, the
Bride-chamber, to eat with HIM of the bread of Life for ever at the eternal
Table of life. The Bridegroom is come, Friends, of HIM I know you rejoice
greatly because of his voice. And now, ny dearly beloved Ones, follow HIM for
evermore in the eternal light and life, where we were bred, brought forth Viz.
In the North of England.

It Is well this high Applause of the Quakers was to go only amongst themselves,
surely never higher Applause was given to any Mortals, than they give to one
another, accounting all, besides themselves, ignorant of GOD, HEATHENS, the
WORLD, etc.


, and nourished, and are unknown to all the world, but me you know. And I know
you in One who is the condemnation of the world, and in HIM I meet you, and
leave you in HIS Arms. I lie down with you in the bosom of eternal Love, Life,
Peace, Joy, and Rest for ever, etc.

P. 16. Whom GOD has called and chosen to place HIS Name in, and to take up
HIS habitation among you, above all the Families of the earth. The Tabernacle
of GOD is with you, and HIS dwelling place is among you, AND ONLY AMONG YOU IS
GOD KNOWN, and HIS Name is great in your Assemblies.

ANIMADVERSIONS HEREUPON.
Reader, observe, Was there ever higher Applause given? Do not these Leaders
few Pillars with a witness? Read the Scriptures, and you will find no Harmony
between the Current thereof, and the Flattery of these Men. Here is no
Confession of Sins; here is no asking Pardon for Christ's sake; here is no
Humiliation manifested Contrary to GOD's People in all Ages. Read Luke 11.4. 1 John 1.8. and 5.9. cap. 2. ver. 1. Psalm. 38.18. and 51.1, 2, 3. Isa. 46.6. Lam.
3.41, 42. Job 7.20. Dan. 9.4, 5, 20. 1 Timothy 1.15.
. No, no, nor not a word of the Scripture being profitable for Doctrine; not a
word of Christ's Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension. No, no, This
was only to go amongst Friends; who seldom or never take notice of what CHRIST
did, what HE suffered, how HE dyed, what bitter Agonies HE went through, what
cruel Mockings, etc. Oh! poor People, that they would once lay aside these
flattering Epistles, which are sent to them ONLY, and say to their Teachers,
Away with these your soft Pillows, you are Watchmen of the Night, Physicians of
no value, you heal the Wound deceitfully. And if we put but into your mouths,
you will speak Peace to us; but we must tell you, whatever you say to the
contrary, That we are Sinners, and stand in need of a Savior, and therefore
away with your flattering Epistles which you send ONLY to us, and are ashamed,
as the Title thereof shows, that the World (as you call the true Professors of
the Christian Faith) should see them; and if you read any thing to us, read a
Chapter out of the Bible, that from thence we may learn our Duty to GOD and
Man. I say, oh! that they would once rouse up themselves, and not be thus
deluded and led by George Whitehead and his Brethren, the perfect Pharisees of
this Age; for amongst the Hearers there are many, I bear them Record, that have
a Zeal, though not according to knowledge.

THIS IS ONLY TO GO AMONGST FRIENDS.
P. 7. Lift up your Voices, blow the Trumpet, sound an Alarm out of the holy
Mountain, proclaim the acceptable Year, and the Day of Vengeance of our GOD.
Gird on your Sword on your Loins, put on the tried Armor, and follow him for
ever, who rides upon the white Horse -- Ride on, ride on, my beloved Brethren
and Fellow Soldiers, make all plain before you, thresh on with the new
threshing Instrument which has teeth; beat the Mountains to dust, and let the
breath of the LORD scatter it -- Make the Heathen tremble, and the
uncircumcised fall by the Sword. The LORD of HOSTS is with us, and goes before
us, spare none; neither Ox, nor Ass; neither Old, nor Young; kill, cut off,
destroy; bathe your Sword in the blood of Amalek, and all the Egyptians and
Philistines, and all the uncircumcised; and hew Agag to pieces Break the Rocks,
cut down the Cedars and strong Oaks; make the Devils subject; cast out the
unclean Spirits; raise the Dead; shut up in Prison; bring out of Prison; cast
in your Nets; lanch into the Deep; divide the Fish; gather the Good into
Vessels; cast the Bad away; bind the Tares in Bundles; cast them into the Fire;
the Angel of the everlasting Covenant is come; thrust in your Sickles; reap the
Earth. -- Silence all Disputers and Diviners for ever; trample upon all the
Chaff and Dung, and Mire for ever.

And p. 21, 22. thus: Put on your Armor, and gird on your Sword, and lay hold
on the Spear, and march into the Field, and prepare your selves to Battle; for
the Nations does defy our GOD, and says in their hearts, Who is the God of the
Quakers, that we should fear HIM, and obey his Voice? Arise, Arise, and sound
forth the everlasting Word of War and Judgment in the Ears of all the Nations
sound an Alarm, and make their Ears to tingle. Our Enemies are whole Nations
and Multitudes in number, of a rebellious People that will not come under OUR
LAW, which arises up against us. -- Stand upon your Feet, and appear in your
Terror, as an Army with Banners, and let the Nations know your Power, and the
stroke of your Hand. Cut down on the Right hand, and slay on the Left, and let
not your eye pity, nor your hand spare; but wound the Lofty, and tread down the
Honorable of the Earth. -- And let none of the Heathen Nations, nor their
Gods, escape out of your hands; nor their Images, nor Idols: but lay waste
fenced Cities, and tread down the high walls; for we have proclaimed open War
betwixt Michael our Prince and the Dragon. Your Captains are mighty Men, and
your Leaders It seems here is more Leaders and Captains than one, for they
understand the difference between Singular and Plural.
are skilled in handling the Sword, and they Still the Plural Number.
are riding on before you. -- And cursed be every one that rises not up to the
help of the Lord against the mighty, etc.

ANIMADVERSIONS HEREUPON.
Reader, I have here Transcribed the more of this their Epistle, (which was
designed, as by the Title thereof appears, to be read only amongst themselves)
that so thou may see and perceive how they can look, JANVS-like, two ways at
once, viz. For when they write what they design for the sight and view of the
Professors of the Faith of our LORD Jesus Christ, then they can, as by George
Whitehead's feigned Piece under consideration, Profess sincerely that they
believe, profess, and own the Scriptures to be given forth by Divine Authority,
and that they are profitable for Doctrine, etc. Yea, That they own the Humanity
of Christ, his Incarnation, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension; and
that they expect Salvation by the Merits of Christ, through the Imputation of
his Righteousness. Yea, they seem to own the Man Christ Jesus, the Resurrection
of the Body, and almost what ever you can desire to have them profess. Thus
they put up the Christian Flag, or false Representation of their erroneous
Principles Some of which I have mentioned in this Tract.
, which are pernicious and destructive to the very Foundation of the Christian
Religion. And in their Book, A Question to Professors, etc. P. 20. Quest. 6.
(They say) To whom do the Names and Titles JESUS and CHRIST chiefly, and in the
first place belong? Do they belong to the BODY which was took BY HIM, or TO HIM
who took the Body? The BODY has its Nature and Properties, and the eternal
WORD or SON of God By this Argument it is clear, that they deny the BODY which
suffered to be the Son of GOD: Oh horrible!
its Nature and Properties: Now the Query is, WHICH was the appointed Savior
of the Father? Which was the Anointed of the Father chiefly, and in the first
place? WHETHER the BODY prepared, or HE for whom the Body was prepared, etc?

By which it is plain that they deny (notwithstanding G. Whitehead's counterfeit
Confession) HIM that was born of the Virgin, HIM that was pierced, HIM that was
Crucified, and hanged on a Tree, and by wicked hands slain, to be the Son of
GOD, the Savior of the World, whereby they declare themselves not to be of the
Prophets and Apostles Creed, read these Scriptures, Zach. 9.9. and 11, 12, 13.
Micah 5.2. Acts 2.22, 23, 36. and 3.13. and 4.10. and 10.43. Luke 2.10, 11, 12,
13. Mat. 2.5, 6, 7. and you will perceive the Faith of the Apostles and
Evangelists, and the Testimony of the blessed and glorious Angels, to differ as
much and as clearly from this Faith and Testimony of the Quakers, as light from
utter darkness, etc.

But because G. W. in his recited Book makes such a serious Pretense to own the
Man Christ Jesus, his Death and Sufferings, etc. I may recite another Passage
out of their great Doctor Is. Penington's aforesaid Book, p. 20. Quest. 7. What
is Christ's Flesh and Blood which we are to partake of? -- Is it the Flesh and
Blood of the Body which was prepared for and taken for HIM, wherein HE
tabernacled and appeared? OR is it the Flesh and Blood of HIM who took,
tabernacled, and appeared in the Body? For that which HE took upon HIM was our
Garment, even the Flesh and Blood of our Nature, which is of a perishing
Nature, etc.

Now what is more plain, than that they deny the true Christ, his Humanity,
yea, his Merits, Death, and Sufferings; especially if you add what is in page
33. said by this their Champion, in defense of their Faith, which is as
follows, viz. Now the Scriptures do expressly distinguish between Christ and
the Garment which HE wore, between HIM that came, and the BODY in which HE
came; between the Substance which was veiled, and the Vail which veiled it,
there is plainly HE, and the BODY in which HE came, there was the outward
Vessel, and the inward Life: This we certainly know, and can never call the
bodily garment Christ Yes, we believe you are all of that mind, and shall,
until these and other of your pernicious Errors be publicly condemned,
notwithstanding G. W's Pretense to the contrary.
, etc.

But having before spoken largely to this Point, I shall at present pass it by,
desiring the Reader still to peruse the recited Epistle, and to consider of it;
for that being directed TO GO ONLY AMONGST THE QVAKERS, there you may see their
inside; for to them, their Leaders and Captains, as they style themselves,
unbosom themselves, telling the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth of what they believe, if there be that sincerity in them which they
pretend to. And then you shall hear a loud noise of strange Acts, great
Miracles, viz. the Prison doors opened, the Dead raised, unclean Spirits cast
out. Yea, a wonderful noise of War, of Leaders and Captains, and Commanders,
mighty hewing, cutting, killing, going into the Field to Battle, as if all the
World were now at an end, and that they would drive all before them And yet are
themselves got now so close into their Holes, Dens, and lurking places, where
they lie skulking to deceive the simple, as that it is impossible to get them
out into the Field, etc.
: But not a word, as I have observed, setting forth the Divine Authority of the
Holy Scriptures; not a word of the Humanity of Christ, not a word in all the 23
Pages of the Incarnation, Birth, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension
of our LORD and Savior Jesus Christ; not a word of their hopes of being saved
through the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. No: how should they, if they
would speak their minds truly? since they cannot call that BODY which suffered
at Jerusalem CHRIST; but a Garment, a Vail, a Figure. And therefore what ever
they pretend when they write publicly, since when they write privately they
write the contrary, they are not to be believed; for says Ireneus in his third
Book against Heresies, viz. Whilst that Heretics speak like the Faithful, they
not only mean otherwise than they say, but clean contrary; and by their Tenants
full of Blasphemies, they destroy the Souls of those who with their fair words
suck in the poison of their foul Opinions, etc.

I have diverse others of their Epistles by me, as particularly Robert
Sandilands One of George Whitehead's Select Friends.
, (by way of Vision and Revelation) Richard Huberthorn, Josiah Coal, both in
Print and Manuscript, which bears not the least Resemblance to what they now
seemingly set forth as their Faith and Belief: But the recited Epistle, with
their dark-lanthorn Title, viz. THIS IS ONLY TO GO AMONGST FRIENDS, is
sufficient to set forth how they applaud and speak smooth things to their own
People, like the false Prophets of old, who healed the Wound deceitfully, who
daubed with untempered Mortar; and surely never was Mortar worse tempered than
in this Epistle, wherein Darkness is put for Light, and Bitter for Sweet, viz.
the North of England for the Town of Bethlehem, George Fox for Christ; and
almost all the Prophesies and Sayings of the holy Penmen inverted, and turned
into an affected Rhetoric, and mystical Allegories, as well as in many of
their other Writings, which both amuse and puff up their Hearers. And, as I
have elsewhere herein observed, make them believe that they are got into the
Holy Land, even spiritual Canaan, when indeed they are but in the Borders of
Egypt, and posting to OLD ROME, think themselves rich, full, wanting nothing;
when they are poor, blind, miserable, and want all things, through their
mistaken Zeal, and following the Dictates of their blind Guides; who, instead
of setting forth the solid Principles of Religion, have so leavened them into
their Pharisaical lump, that they have erred concerning the Faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who was born of the Virgin, who suffered, was dead, and buried,
who rose again the third day, and ascended up into Heaven above This G. W.
begins to confess too; but when he says above, according to his and their own
Principles, he means beneath, viz. in their corrupt Bodies, let him deny it if
he can.
, at the Right Hand of GOD, where he sits in Majesty on High as our Advocate
and Intercessor, as the Second Person of the glorious Trinity: And who will
come in like manner as He was taken up, (which G. W. acknowledges was visibly
seen) to judge the Quick and Dead: And then the Graves shall give up their
Dead, and there shall be a general Resurrection of the Bodies out of the
Graves, both of the just and unjust. But alas! All this, and much more in this
recited Epistle of theirs, as well as diverse others of their Writings, is
wholly inverted, neither believed nor expected, I write it with sorrow of
heart, GOD knows it: For as they say Christ is within them, which, in a
Scripture sense may be allowed; so they hold his Crucifixion is within, his
Sufferings within, the Resurrection within Out of the Grave of Sin, this, I
think, is all the Resurrection they understand.
, Baptism and the Lord's Supper within, Miracles within; the Dead are raised
within See this your Epistle, p. 7. 17.
, they loose out of Prison within, cast in their Nets within, divide the Fish
within, thrust in the Sickle within; they bind the Tares in Bundles within.
Eternal Judgment within, Rewards and Punishment within; yea, Heaven and Hell
within; yea, All within. Thus have they torn the Scriptures in pieces, and
changed the solid Truths and fundamental Principles of the Gospel, into mere
Allegories and mystical Enthusiasms. And therefore until they retract and
condemn their ancient Errors laid down in their printed Books as their
Principles, and other their wild and extravagant Notions, Dreams and Whimsies,
they are not to be taken to be in good earnest, or to be sincere in what they
(for some ends best known to themselves) shall say in any new deceitful
Confession of Faith.

June 15th. 1692. Fra. Bugg.

POSTSCRIPT.
BUT if any shall think that I have wronged or perverted their Printed
Principles, then let them come forth, (into the Field, to use their own words)
according to my Printed Proposition in the first Chapter of this Treatise, and
give me a Months Notice thereof, any Four, Six, or Ten of their ablest
Captains, as they call themselves See the Epistle, To go only amongst Friends.
p. 22;
, and I will take the like Number of Men on my side: But if they refuse this,
as hitherto they have done, then it is my present purpose to trouble my self no
more after this manner, and so I shall conclude with a word of Use and
Application to New ROME.

ROME's SISTER.
ROme's Sister thou art rightly styled,
And with Her may compare,
The Innocent thou have beguiled
Under Pretenses fair.
Hypocrisy in thee is found,
Thy Leaven is not good;
Thy deep Deceit, thy Wit profound,
In which thy Confidence stood,
Is now come forth to open View,
That all may plainly see
Thy Art, thy Craft, and well perceive
Thy deep Hypocrisy.
How proud-like to the Pharisee
Thy Countenance appears,
And how like to the Romish See
Thou do thy Fabric rear.
Thy Errors which but few did see,
Are now become thy Crime,
And loaded therewith thou shall be,
And that from time to time.
A Crime from which Thou can not
With all thy Subtilty
Clear thy self, it is such a Blot
That on thy Face does lie,
As Rome thy Sister never had
At thy Age charged on Her:
Nor any Crimes half so bad
At twice thy Age upon Her.
Though She at length as Age grew on
Through her vile Impositions
Abhorred, became, and grew a Scorn
In every Christian Nation.
And do thou think for to escape
With thy Unwrit Traditions,
The Strokes which Protestants do make
Against thy Superstitions.
Against thy Error, and thy Pride;
Against thy Hypocrisies;
Against thy turning with the Tide,
And other Enormities.
No, No, I say, as thou art sound
Treading the Papists Path,
True Protestants will thy Pride wound,
As Luther and others has,
Thy elder Sister's Triple Crown,
Whose Pride does not exceed
The Pride of Thee which does abound,
Exceeding Hers indeed.
Wherefore ye skilful Archers bold
Come forth, and bend the Bow;
Let none escape as has been told
Of Babel high nor low.
But do to Her as She to others have,
As a just Recompense.
She has been proud against the Lord,
And used Violence.
THE END.

