A True Copy of a LETTER From the Right Honorable the Earl of Mulgrave, TO
Doctor TILLOTSON Dean of Canterbury.
SIR,
NOthing in this World is, or ought to be so dear to any Man, as his
Reputation; and consequently the Defense of it is the greatest Obligation that
one Man can lay on another: There are also some Circumstances, that render this
Obligation yet more Acceptable and Valuable; as when it is Conferred Generously,
without any Self-Interest, or the least Desire or Invitation from the Person so
Defended. All this happens to be my Case at this time; and therefore I hope you
will not be surpised to find I am not the most Ungrateful, and Insensible Man
living; which certainly I should be, if I did not acknowledge all your
Industrious Concern for me, about the Business of the Ecclesiastical
Commission, which now makes so much Noise in the World. You have, as I am told,
so Cordially pleaded my Cause, that it is almost become your own; and therefore,
as unwilling as I am to speak of my self, especially in a Business which I
cannot wholly Excuse; yet I think my self now a little Obliged to show my Part
in this matter; though Imprudent enough, yet is not altogether Unworthy of so
Just, and so Considerable an Advocate.

The less a Man says of himself, the better; and it is so well known already,
how I was kept out of all the Secret Councils, that I need not justify my
self, or trouble you as to those Matters; only I Appeal to the Unquestionable
Testimony of the Spanish Ambassador, if I did not zealously and constantly take
all Occasions to oppose the French Interest; because I knew it directly
Opposite both to the King and Kingdom's Good, which are indeed things
Inseparable, and ought to be so accounted, as a Fundamental Maxim in all
Councils of Princes.

This, I hope, will prepare the way a little for what I have to say concerning
my being one of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners; of which Error I am now as
sensible, as I was at first ignorant, being so unhappily conversant in the
midst of a perpetual Court-flattery, as never to have heard the least word of
any Illegality in that Commission, before I was unfortunately engaged in it.

For, tho my Lord of Canterbury had very prudently Refused to be of it, yet it
was talked at Court, it proceeded only from his Unwillingness to act at that
time, and not from any Illegality he suspected in the Commission; having
Excused himself from it the most respectful way, by the Infirmities he lay
under. Being thus ignorant of the Laws, and in such a Station at Court, I need
not desire a Man of your Judgment and Candor, to consider the hardness of my
Case, when I was commanded to serve in a Commission with a Lord Chancellor, a
Lord Chief Justice, and two Bishops, who had all of them already acted some
time there, without showing the least Diffidence of their Power, or any
Hesitation in the Execution of it. And perhaps a Man of more Discretion than I
can pretend to, might have been easily persuaded to act in such a Conjunction,
and to think he might do it safely, both in Law and Conscience. But I need not
say much to show my desire to have avoided, if possible, a troublesome
Employment, that had not the least temptation of Honor or Profit to Recommend
it; and which therefore I continued in upon no account in the World, but to
Serve both King and Clergy with the little Ability I had, in moderating those
Councils, which I thought might grow higher, if I left my Place to be filled by
any of those who waited for it greedily, in order to their ill Designs.

And I may expect the more Credit in this, when it is considered that the Two
Important Affairs which passed in that Ecclesiastical Court, being the Bishop
of London's Suspension, and the Incapacitating the Members of Magdalen
College; the first was done some Months before I was a Commissioner, and I
opposed the last, both in Voting and Speaking, and with all the Interest I was
able to make use of, which indeed was but little after that Opposition; in
which being Out-voted, I seldom Came, and never Acted in that Court after,
except to Restore the Bishop of London, tho sent for continually, by reason of
my Lodging so near it.

And since I have been forced to mention my Good Will at least, if not my
Service, to such Learned Men of the Clergy who I thought deserved it, it may be
allowed me to give this one Instance more of it; that although in Preferring Men
to all other Places of the Household, I ever used to ask Permission first, and
accordingly was often Refused, for the sake of Roman Catholics and others, who
were Recommended by Persons more in Favor than my self; yet I was so careful
of keeping that Considerable part of the Family unmixed with Mean or Unworthy
Chaplains, whom others I feared would have imposed on His Majesty, that I
constantly filled up those Vacancies without giving him the least Notice or
Trouble about it, and Supplied them with the ablest approved Divines, I could
possibly find, most commonly Recommended to me by the Bishops who were not of
the Court: Which I conceived the most proper course, in a Matter concerning
Clergymen, with a King of a different Persuasion from theirs, and intended for
his real Service, believing it had been better for Him, as well as the Kingdom,
if the Greater Ecclesiastical Dignities had been disposed of by others with as
much Caution.

And thus, Sir, I have endeavored to confirm you in your Favorable Opinion of
me, which must be acknowledged by everybody an Approbation of such weight,
that as I hope it may be an Example of Authority to many, so it is sufficient of
itself to Balance the Censoriousness of others. I am,

SIR, White Hall, Mar. 27. 1689. Your Obliged Humble Servant, MULGRAVE.

London: Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall.
1689.


