portrait of Francis Bugg THE EFFIGIS OF FRANCIS BUGG OF MILDENHALL THE 60th
YEAR OF HIS AGE 1700
I magnify mine Office, If by any means I may provoke to Emulation them which
are my Flesh, and might save some of them.

Romans XI: 13: 14: F. H. Van. Hove. Sculp:


THE Pilgrim's Progress, FROM Quakerism to Christianity: CONTAINING, A farther
Discovery of the Dangerous Growth of Quakerism, not only in Points of Doctrine,
but also in their Politics; respecting their Government within the Government,
and opposite to it; together with their Fund or Common Bank to support the
same: With a Remedy proposed for this Malady; and, The Cure of Quakerism. To
which is added an APPENDIX, DISCOVERING A most Damnable PLOT, contrived and
carrying on by NEW- ROME, by an United Confederacy, against the Reformed
Religion and Professors thereof; as will appear from the Design of their Silent
Meetings, their Monthly, Quarterly, Second-Day, Six-Week, and Yearly Meeting;
all which are particularly herein Treated on.

The Second Edition, Corrected and Enlarged.

By a Servant of the Church, Fr. Bugg.

By thee have I run through a troop, by my God have I leaped over a wall,

2 Samuel XXI. 30. LONDON: Printed by R. Janeway, Jun. for the Author; and sold
by J. Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard; and Chapter Brom, at
the Gun in Ludgate Street. 1700.

To the Right Worshipful, the Vice-Chancellors, and Heads of the Colleges of
both Universities, and to all other, the Reverend Clergy therein, of what Title
soever, the Ensuing Discourse is Humbly Dedicated, etc.
Honored and Reverend Gentlemen,
HAVING herein collected my Experience, both of the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Schism of Quakerism, showing the Tendency thereof, from Matter of Fact, I
thought it but my Reasonable Service to offer the same to your Judicious
Perusal, and Christian Consideration; that so, according to the Apprehension
you shall have, touching the Premises, you may put your helping Hand, not only
to a farther Confutation of the Quaker-Arguments, (which yet is needful enough)
but also for the regaining of such as (who through the Cunning Slights and
Plausible Pretensions of these Seducers) are misled, and carried away; and
thereby not only vindicate the Christian Religion, but defend the Church of
England from the most horrible Scandals, cast upon both, by the Quakers.

I need not acquaint you with the great Labor, and unwearied Pains, our
Protestant Divines have taken to Regain such, who have been seduced to Adhere
to the Romish Religion, and the vast number of Volumes, writ on that Account,
and not without Good and Great Success, as we see this Day, Thanks be to God:
But behold! Here is a NEW ROME arising, which Builds on the same Bottom, i. e.
INFALLIBILITY, etc, and whose Principles were first Hammered at that Forge, and
Coined at that Mint, and are carrying on by the same Craft and unsuspected
Policy; and as Dangerous to the Reformed Religion, which our Martyred Ancestors
suffered in the Flames for, as Rome Her Elder Sister. (And this you should see,
had they but Power; an Instance of which is their Proceedings in Pensilvania.)
But notwithstanding all this, how few are concerned hereat? How few lay it to
Heart? This is Cause of Lamentation and Astonishment; and yet, when I consider
how long I my self was deceived by them, I do the less marvel; especially,
considering what Equivocations and Reserve they make in their Arguments,
whether Verbal, or in Writing; how Industrious they are to hide themselves, and
their Tenets, expressing themselves in Dubious Terms, that want Explication;
pretending to Seriousness, Sincerity, Plainness, etc. when none so Insincere,
so Deceitful, and False in the World, as in a Thousand Things I could mention;
whereby it is manifest, that they are the false Prophets which Christ foretold
of, Matthew. 24.24. Aad therefore, if what I can contribute toward the Discovery
of this Painted, as well as Disguised Harlot, may be useful to the Church of
God, and the Ministers thereof, in bringing forth my known Experience, I shall
be glad, and rejoice therein.

I cannot but know, that herein you will meet with many Deficiences, for want
of Parts and Learning, requisite to such a Work: But since your Generosity is
so mixed with Christian Charity, as to accept the Will for the Deed, as in my
former Essays, I have at this time presumed to present this Rough Draught to
your Perusal, and as my Mite, to cast it into your Treasury; hoping, that until
the Quakers can justly charge me with a False Quotation, (which, as they never
yet could do, so I hope they never shall) this may pass under your Patronage,
as a Defense against the Quakers Invectives; and it may be, when I cannot speak
for my self; especially, when there is not a Man of you, but are Sharers with
me in the same Reproaches for the Gospel's sake. Thus, Reverend Sirs, begging
your Pardon for this my Presumption, I Humbly Subscribe my self,

Your most Humble, And Devoted Servant, Francis Bugg, Sen.
Milden-Hall, Aug. 10. School.
AN ADDRESS TO Private Gentlemen and Tradesmen.
Ingenious Reader,
AS I told you in my First Impression, I tell you now, that the Wicked plotteth
against the Righteous Ps. 37.12.
, as David well observes: This shows the Churches Calamity, and it is as
certain, that the Lord laughs at these Plotters, v. 13. this is the Churches
Remedy. Now whilst God Laughs at the Plots of the Wicked, his People have no
cause to Mourn; especially when he would have us to Rejoice with him, saying,
The Righteous shall see, and fear, and laugh at him Ps. 52.6.
. But do you think that we of the Laity ought to see this Plot carrying on by a
United Confederacy against the Church, and say nothing, nor be at all
concerned? I think not: For David said, They have consulted together with one
consent, they are confederate against thee Ps. 83.5.
. Do you think, that because God has promised in his Word, that Kings shall be
as Nursing-Fathers to his Church Isa. 49.23.
, or because he has commanded his Servants that wait at the Altar, to Cry
aloud, to give us Notice of these Seducers; that therefore we are wholly
excused, and unconcerned? I tell you nay; therefore up, let us be doing.

For Christ's Mystical Body, which is his Church, consists of many Members, but
all the Members have not the same Office; yet the Eye cannot say to the Foot, I
have no need of thee; so that there is some Use and Service for us all;
(provided we keep our Places,) in the Church Militant; if we be living Members,
and sensible of the Churches Calamity. And if so, as so it is, I beg leave to
remind you of what I conceive to be every private Christian's Duty; which is,
to use all Christian and Lawful Means to discover this Plot, and to manifest
the Contrivers thereof. We see now, as well as in the Days of Christ, how
zealous the Leaders of the Quakers are, they compass Sea and Land to make
Proselytes: They appear as the Magicians did in the time of Moses, with the
very likeness of things good in themselves, but all is but counterfeit, a bare
likeness; appear fair, like painted Sepulchers and whited Walls, but the inside
of their Doctrine is all Rottenness. How do they send up and down, to invite to
their Meetings? How do they disperse their Books, East, West, North and South,
see p. 144. as well as beyond Sea? How do they present them to the Parliament,
the Judges, the Justices, even to all Ranks and Degrees of Men? And shall we
sit still, and declare to the World, we have no Zeal for our Holy Religion,
which our Martyred Ancestors suffered in the Flames for?

Wherefore let us put on Courage, and excite one another's Zeal, lest God in
Judgment remove the Candlestick, and plant his Gospel amongst a People more
deserving: And therefore let us put Books into the Hands of our Magistrates, to
inform their Understandings in these Matters; that they may be capable to be
Eyewitnesses of this dismal Tragedy now upon the Stage: And into the Hands of
our Christian Neighbors, who at present may be unthinking, and not see the
Danger they are in; and also cautioned to beware of the Deceivers of our Times;
who come in Sheeps-cloathing, but inwardly they are Ravening Wolves: And into
the Hands of the Well-disposed amongst the Quakers, for the regaining of them:
And this will be a Means to discover and lay waste the Design and Confederacy
now on Foot.

And for your Comfort this I can tell you, that many are now coming off
Quakerism, embracing Christianity, and let us meet them, and with all Sweetness
invite them Home. There are about Six or Eight of their Writers and Teachers
come off, and Hundreds that were caught by their Snare; some of them that have
been Quakers these Forty Years, are now in Print against them: And since I have
been in London, I have had many of them come to Visit me, with Thanks in their
Mouths, to Me and Others, who have dealt plainly with them; bidding me keep on
my Pace, and not to spare Proud Babel: And from others I have had Letters of
the same Import: And in Hopes it will be good News to many of you, I will
recite a Passage or two out of W. Mather's his Book, Printed within this Month;
he lives in Bedfordshire, and has been a Quaker these Forty Years, and an Old
Acquaintance of mine 38 Years since, viz.

An Answer to the Switch, etc. by W. Mather, p. 1, 8. It is (says W. Mather)
impossible that the Pens now in Controversy against us Quakers should be put a
Stop to, before there is an Order given forth, ( from the Second-Days Meeting)
for the Reformation of our Preachers; and also a Book of Retractations of the
Errors of our Friends printed Books. -- A Man that does but tell you, G.
Whitehead, etc. of your Mistakes, that they might be amended, had need have the
Armor of Grace in his Heart, as little David had, when he encountered great
Goliath; yea, as bold as David 's Worthies were, who ventured their Lives to
fetch Water from the Philistines Camp; to be sure you will Scoff at him at a
high rate, Wound or Kill him; as you account that Crisp, Bugg, Keith, etc. are
Dead to the Life of Truth, for opposing your Errors; Wounded them (it is true)
you have, for which God will Judge you: For every one of them at first only
desired that you might bring your Deeds to the Light, to be Tried by the
Scriptures: But instead of Answering their Christian Desires for your Good, you
fall upon them, and wound them, and make them grieve.

Page 9. Consider this, you fierce Despisers of all those who desire your
Reformation in Doctrine and Practice. You know where this Cursed Thing is, that
causes all this Disturbance; you still hide it, but out it must come, and be
beaten to Powder.

Wherefore I beseech you to consider, First, what Damage has befaln our Church
by the False Doctrine couched under the fair Pretenses of the Quakers; next,
their Industry of spreading them, as in p. 1.44. but moreover, how they give
away that Fallacious Book, Anguis Flagellatus, etc. not only to Members of
Parliament, Judges, Justices, Lawyers, and indeed Men of all Ranks; but as I
have been told, send beyond Sea 500 together. And forasmuch as there are many
Excellent Books wrote by that Reverend Author of the Book entitled, The Snake
in the Grass, etc. that, and his Defense of it; his Book, Satan Disrobed, etc.
and that about Water Baptism; and also by that Learned Author Geo. Keith, and
diverse others, which discover the Horrible Fraud and Pernicious Principles of
the Quakers: I say, let us not let a Parliament Man, a Judge, Justice, or any
others, where we see a Service for the Church, be without a Book to inform
their Judgments, and rectify the Mistakes of others. Let us consider the many
Books wrote by our Pious Divines in Defense of our Holy Religion, against the
Attempts of the Church of Rome; and also the great Benefit thereof, and good
Effects they have had, both to Preserve our Members in Communion with us, and
to Regain many that were wavering, and some that were strayed away. And as a
further exciting our Zeal, let us be often Meditating on the Precepts of Divine
Writ, and Pray God to Illuminate our Understandings, and thereby make us able
to Read them to our Comfort.

I cannot but remember with what restless Zeal my self and others used to
Advance Quakerism in the beginning, and how we sent our Books the Nation over,
by Pack-Horses, and otherwise: I my self have given away Twenty Shillings worth
at a Meeting; and shall we be now less Zealous in Dispersing Books to detect
their Errors, than they have been to broach them, and are now to defend them?
God forbid. Oh let it not be said so of such as love God, and are Orthodox in
the Faith; that love the Scriptures, and have a true value for the Sacred
Ordinances instituted by our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ! Thus have I
imparted my Mind, and I hope without Offense, who am,

Your Humble Servant, Fr. Bugg.
Milden-Hall in Suffolk, March 1699/700.
THE CONTENTS.
OF the Author's Early Education Page 1 Of his turning Quaker 5 The Occasion
and Means thereof 6 Of the Quaker's Silent Meetings 8 Fox and Muggleton
compared 18 Of Muggleton's Doctrine 19 Quakers Laws to be obeyed 25
Scripture-Commands vacated 27 Christ disowned 28 The Quakers Synod 29 The
Quakers Creed 33 Scripture-Authority overturned 39 G. Fox the Second Moses 42
G. Fox's Self-Exaltations 45 The Quakers Adoration of G. Fox 47 Fox's Journal
preferred to the Bible 48 Distrust all they say; and Why? 53 Ann Docwra's
Letter 54 Christ's Blood undervalued 55 Every Quaker a Virgin Mary 57 Fox's
Miracles refuted 61 His Visions Diabolical 62 Who the Quakers own Poor 63 The
Quakers Malicious Attempts 65 Tho. Plumstead's Running away 66 G. W.'s
pretended Call, fallacious 67 Their Teachers mean Abstract 69 They Vindicate
the Socinians 71 Quaker-Teachers about Hospitality 73 They come like Mice and
Flies ibid. Hypocrisy their Mysterium Maximum 76 The Quakers Yearly Meeting 79
G. Keith like Luther at Worms 82 Ellwood about Tithes 84 Acts of Parliament
virtually Repealed 86 Letters to appoint Meetings 91 The Qua. against Liberty
of Conscience 97 Their Treasonable Practice 101 Their Teachers
Self-Preservation 103 Their Usurpation of Government 104 Their Excommunication
of Fr. Bugg 106 Their Excommunication of J. Barnard 110 John Ainsloe's
Condemnation 113 Their Black Book 114 Their Power to Bind and Loose 115 About
their Fund or Bank 118 W. Rogers's Scourge 120 Ann Docwra against their Fund
121 Tom Tell-Troth, Ellwood 125 Their Pretense to Write freely 126 Compared by
Ann Docwra to Jesuits 129 Ann Docwra's Verses on Fox 133 Their
Six-Week-Meetings Craft 136 VV. Mather's Discovery 137 A Petition of 7000
against Tithes 140 Their way to spread Books 143 A Minister's Zealous Letter
147 The Quakers Horrible Deceivers 150 Their Grand Cheat discovered 155 Against
Kingly Government 157 They Justify the Murder of K. Charles I. 163 Still
against all Kings 167 Their Fling at Dissenters 168 Their Popish Design therein
171 Their Inveighing against the Clergy 173 A Hunting of the Fox 174 Letters of
the Clergy 175 Of their not Praying for K. W. 178 And their Praying for the
late K. J. II. 179 Observation thereupon 182 Their Stopping Joan Whitrow's Book
183 A Proclamation against Penn 185 Observations thereupon 187 The Act of
Association 189 The Quakers Refusal to join 192 Their Grand Deceit therein 194
At large handled, to 205 Luther's Example very good 211 Fox's Ambition about
Learning 213 His Battledoor for our Clergy 215 His Liturgy for Churches 217 A
Sermon for G. Whitehead 222 A System of their dark Divinity 224 Read with
Patience to 248 A Cage of Unclean Birds 249 Their Rage against the Clergy 250
Their Idolatry set forth 253 The Cage full of Birds 254 G. Fox taken out, and
examined 256 How the other Birds Adore him 260 For their Bright and Morning
Star 262 Six of their Unclean Birds 265 Their Features and Feathers displayed
284 Names given me by these Birds 286 My Lord of Norwich his Certificate 292 A
Psalm of Praise 295 Mr. Meriton's Letter 299 A Proposition very Necessary 302 A
Certificate Signed by four Persons 305 A Word of Encouragement 307 The Parable
of the Gulf unfolded 308 Six Queries, proposed 1678, 302 Bold Whitehead boldly
Answered 313 A Pensilvanian Trumpet 316 Christ's Holy Example 320 An Appendix
323 G. Whitehead's Proposition answered 324 And that by a threefold Method 325
Another grand Fallacy of G. W.'s discerned 326 D. Leeds's Trumpet sounded 327
W. Penn's Challenge answered 329 Two Quaker-Traytors rebuked ibid. A Damnable
Plot discovered 332 The Quakers Suffering, above all 333 A Simile of Humility
335 A Cure proposed for Quakerism 336 A Word of Encouragement 343 Fr. Bugg's
Challenge continued 345 G. Whitehead not Triumphant 347 G. VV.'s Grand Fallacy
348
THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
SINCE December 1689, the Quakers have put forth many Books relating to the
West-Dereham Conference, and have as industriously spread them; under these
Titles, viz.

I. An Apology for the People called Quakers, and an Appeal to the Inhabitants
of Norfolk and Suffolk, etc. II. A Letter to the Clergy of the Diocese of
Suffolk and Norfolk, etc. III. A Defense of the People called Quakers; being a
Reply to the Priests in Norfolk, etc. IV. An Apostate Conscience Exposed, etc.
V. A Defense of the Apology for the People called Quakers, etc. VI. Truth and
Innocence Vindicated, etc.
And besides these, they have Printed a Book, Entitled, Anguis Flagellatus,
etc. the first Six I have answered, which Answers may be had at Mr. Janeway's a
Book-Binder, next Door to Child's Coffee-House, in St. Paul's Churchyard,
London; and the last I shall now take some Notice of; not that I shall enter
far into the Province of that Reverend Author of the Book Entitled, and that
excellently well too, The Snake in the Grass; or, Satan transformed into an
Angel of Light: Discovering the deep and unsuspected Subtilty, which is couched
under the pretended Simplicity of the Leaders of the Quakers, etc. And I hope
it may be called an Answer, according to the Pretenses of the Quakers. For,
says W. Penn, in his Serious Apology, etc. page 79. My designed Method is not
the Common Road of Printing my Adversary's Words at large, on all Occasions,
etc. no more is mine, especially at this time; though wherein I do take their
Words, I shall recite them so full, as to carry the Force of their Argument;
and if so, it will not only exceed their Practice, but hold pace with their
Pretense: For Josiah Coal, another of the Quakers* Prophets, in his Book, The
Whore Unvailed, etc. printed 1665, (and afterward reprinted by the Approbation
of their Second-Day-Meeting) who in Answer to a Book of A. S. a Roman
Catholic, Entitled, The Reconciler of Religions, etc. in his Preface thus
says; Although A. S. in his Reconciler of Religions seem to challenge an Answer
to all Particulars, according to the Number of his Chapters, yet I do not look
upon this Challenge to be obligatory, because there is an easier way to do the
Work as effectually: For when the Foundation of a Building is razed, the whole
will fall, even as effectually, as if a Man should begin at the top of a
Building, and pull it down Stone by Stone, etc.

And in order to which, I shall make some brief Remarks, which may serve not
only as a Forerunner to a more complete Answer, which I understand is
preparing; but may (together with what follows in the ensuing Discourse) pass
for a tolerable Answer, at least raze the Foundation of their Anguis
Flagellatus, etc. and that in these following Particulars.

I. Touching the Title.
Reader, you have as above seen the Title, The Snake in the Grass, or, Satan
transformed into an Angel of Light, etc. This Title was well given to that
Book, which made such a plain Discovery of the Quakers Juggles, etc. who as St.
Paul said, Ephesians. 4.14. lie in wait to deceive by their cunning Slights, and deep
Craft; as the Quakers, above all People, show by their double Meanings: For in
one Book they will pretend to own the Scriptures to be of Divine Authority, and
the best Book in the World; yet in their other sort of Books, they say, it is
Death, Dust, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware, a Rotten Foundation, etc. In one sort
of their Books they pretend to own a Scripture-Trinity, whilst in their other
sort of Books, they condemn the Three Persons to the Lake and the Pit; Ishmael
and his Mother cast out, p. 10. by G. Whitehead, etc.
as I elsewhere from their Books have proved: And this Two-fac'd Practice gave
occasion for that Title. Yet now have they given their Book under Consideration
the Title of Anguis Flagellatus, or, A Switch for the Snake; and by this
Slight, and piece of Cunning, think to avoid the Dint of his Arguments, and
turn it upon himself; though indeed they have thereby Lasht themselves. Besides,
they have perverted his Meaning; for they knew well enough, that Obscure
Quakerism was the Snake which that Reverend Author designed to discover: And
they ought in Point of Justice, either to have acquitted themselves thereof by
way of Argument, or else to have condemned one sort of their Books, which
rendered them guilty of his Charge. For when they wrote a Book against Mr.
Pennyman, Mr. Mucklow, and the Anabaptists, they Entitled it, Judas and the
Jews. Now Judas could not in strictness be attributed to the first; no, not
Figuratively, because they did not so much as betray the Truths of the Gospel
to the Enemies thereof: Nor could they with any color charge the latter to be
Jews, who own and profess Jesus of Nazareth to be their Savior: Whereas they
might rationally have returned those Names, Judas and the Jews, to the Quakers;
for they agree with them in Fundamentals See W. Penn's Serious Apol. p. 146.
Joh. 14.28. 19.27.
: The Quakers they deny the Person that suffered at Jerusalem to be the Son of
God: And the Jews said they had a Law, and by it they put him to Death, because
he said he was the Son of God. Thus much briefly for the Title: But Secondly,

II. About Splitting Sentences.
Now as to Splitting Sentences, mangling, curtailing, and dropping what is not
for their Turn, let us see whether the Quakers are not guilty of what they so
fearfully complain of, as a Fault in the Author of The Snake in the Grass, etc.
almost quite through their Anguis, etc. For this, see their Standard of the
Lord lifted up, etc. by Chr. Atkinson and Edw. Buroughs, where E. B. in his
Epistle said thus; I was moved to go see him, [John Gilpen] and his Will was at
Liberty, above the Judgment; though the Judgment was upon the Head of the Beast
in him, and a true Power working, which I did own; but his will not being kept
in Subjection, etc. Now the words, which I did own, the Quakers drop, as not
for their Turn: For it would have showed, that this E. Buroughs, the Quakers
Prophet, and Son of Thunder, did own this Gilpin in his Blasphemies and
Possessions of the Devil See the Snake, etc. Edit. 3. p. 288. and Anguis
Flagellat. p. 446.
. And a second Instance of their Curtailing is, the Author of the Snake in the
Grass has charged the Quakers with an Idolatrous Letter of Josiah Coale's to
G. Fox, as in p. 261. herein, and there you will see that the Quakers have
dropped these words, And thy Kingdom is established in Peace, and the Increase
thereof is without end See the Snake, etc. Edit. 3. p. 115. and Anguis, etc. p.
180.
. I say, these words were so manifestly blasphemously Idolatrous, that the
Quakers were forced to drop them, although the other part shows sufficiently the
Quakers Idolatry. But, thirdly, and that I may show my Reader that this is no
new thing, to find them curtailing, mincing and mangling Sentences, how much
soever they complain of others, I shall recite one Passage more to show it,
their old Craft, and cunning Slight, by which they lie in wait to Deceive; and
that from an old profound Practitioner in that Black Art, namely, Geo.
Whitehead, who in one of his Books, The Contentious Apostate Recharged, etc.
page 5, 6, 7. citing one Line here, one Line there, and sometimes five Words
out of the middle of a Line: As for Example, out of my Book, Battering Rams
against New-Rome, thus, p. 12. l. 10. in some 50 l. per Annum, not touching the
Matter either before or after: A notable nonsuch way to confute an Adversary,
and to dispatch Answers. Again, Your only way is, when Cash grows low, to issue
out; and then he gives a good Leap out of this Line, (having taken the middle
of it) into the middle of the next Line, and then takes out of it a Letter and
two Words, viz. A General Epistle; and from thence he skips to the last three
Words in the next Line, i. e. Your own Service; and now he hops to the next
Line, and takes one single Word, i. e. for, and leaves the next Word as, and
then catches up the next Word Money; and then gives a good stride into another
Line, and gets a good quantity of Words, i. e. It Is a good Encouragement to
your Preachers and Parasites; which being put together, as we use to join
Syllables when I was a Boy and went to School, it runs thus; Your way is, when
your Cash grows low, to issue out a General Epistle for your own Service, for
Money; it is a great Encouragement to your Preachers and Parasites. Now, Reader,
do thou not think Whitehead was sorely put to it to Answer that Book of mine?
But grant that; yet who would think that these Men should find fault with
others for splitting Sentences, for mincing and mangling into Bits and Scraps?
I say, who would imagine that these foul Perverters, these horrible Jugglers,
should have the Impudence to complain of others? And which is still worse,
without Cause? For of this I am sure, there is not a Man that Quotes fairer,
nor with more Caution than that Author has all along done. For though neither he,
nor Mr. Crisp, nor Mr. Keith, nor my self, do often quote from one another; and
all to avoid their causeless Cavils; yet I am confident no Men can be more
careful than we all are. I will not deny, but we all three lend that Author
Books, as we do one to another; and as I within a Month lent a Friend of his,
and for his Use, Forty of the Quakers old Books, Printed in 1653, 1654, 1655,
and 1656, most of which he never saw before; yet if we did Quote from one
another, I hope it would be of as good Authority, as for them to Quote one
another's Books, which yet they frequently do An Instance you have in their
Ang. Flagellat. p. 155. and diverse other places.
, and that oft-times falsely too, by splitting Sentences, and dropping what is
not for their Turn; as in the first and second Instances, and an hundred more
could I enlarge thereon. But this is but a Preface, and therefore I must be
brief; yet I shall raze their Foundation, which is Hypocrisy. But to proceed.

III. Their Sinless Perfection and Infallibility.
I am now come to their principal Pillar upon which their Building chiefly
stands. For a Question being put to them in these Words, Whether a Man can Sin,
while he follows this Light Snake, Edit. 3. p. 10.
? The Quakers Answer is in these Words; It may be safely answered, No See their
Anguis, p. 44.
. Now this Answer is according to their Ancient Testimony. For I have in this
Treatise, p. 40. showed, they own themselves Infallible; and from page 222, to
248. that they pretend they do not Sin, and upon that Pretense do not ask
Forgiveness of Sin. But then from p. 248, to p. 284, I have showed, that even
John Moon, one of their Preachers and Judges, mentioned p. 31. compared with
p. 270. did Sin: Nay G. Smith, for whose walking in, and following his Light,
G. Whitehead and S. Cater Avouch, yet he Sinned, as in p. 274, to p. 282.
Insomuch, that I have thereby razed their Foundation, and their whole Building
begins to totter, and will assuredly fall to the ground.

IV. Their Negatives to Popery.
The Author of the Snake in the Grass, etc. having charged the Quakers, in
these Words, See the Snake, etc. Edit. 3. p. 189.
That of all the Dissenters now in England, the Quakers have come nearest the
Church of Rome; they only have taken up the Popish Pretense of Infallibility;
unless they will bring in Lodowick Muggleton See their Anguis, etc. p. 286.
, etc. To which the Quakers reply in these Words: Neither any of the
Dissenters, nor the Church of England, do hold more Negatives in Doctrine to
Rome, than do the Quakers: For we ( say the Quakers) do not only hold all the
Negatives which any of them do hold, but also more, etc.

Now by way of Addition to the Arguments of the Reverend Author of the Snake,
etc. and in Confutation of the Quakers Defense, I shall offer these Instances
following, to prove that the Quakers come nearest in Doctrine to the Romish
Church; and that they do not hold a Negative Doctrine to the Romish Church, in
these Ten following Instances, viz.

1. In the Doctrine of Infallibility. 2. No Salvation out of their Church. 3.
The Quakers pretense to Miracles. 4. About the sole Judge of Controversies. 5.
In their Contempt of the Ministers. 6. In their Contempt of the Holy
Scriptures. 7. About their Unwritten Traditions. 8. Touching Idolatry. 9. The
Pope of Rome, and Pope Fox. 10. About the Quakers Church being the one only
Church of Christ.
Reader, this being the last of the Four Pillars upon which the whole Fabric
of Quakerism stands, [tho' there are some other Crutches, which stand as Shores
to prop it up] I shall be the longer upon it, in order to raze the very
Foundation of Quakerism; showing the Oneness of the Doctrine of New- Rome with
her Elder Sister. For when A. S. a Roman Catholic, wrote his Book, The
Reconciler of Religions, etc. J. Coal, an Eminent Quaker-Teacher, wrote a
Reply to it, Entitled, The Whore Unvailed, etc. by which, as with a Key, we
may unlock their Mystery, and see how near Quakerism is to Popery. And,

I. In the Doctrine of Infallibility.
The Whore unvailed, etc. p. 4. says Jos. Coal, A. S. his first Argument to
prove the Church of Rome to be the True Church, are as follows, viz. Visible,
Infallible, Inerrible, in which is the Power of Miracles, out of which none can
be Saved, etc. Now to begin with the first and principal Pillar of both Romish
and Quaker Church, namely, Infallibility, Jos. Coal in his Whore Unvailed,
etc. p. 12. thus, The Infallibility of the True Church, of which Christ as the
Head, I do not go about to deny; but that the Church of Rome is Infallible,
that I do deny. This then is a plain Confession, that they both agree in the
Doctrine of Infallibility, only they differ which of the twain is this True
Church, in which this Infallibility is See p. 40. in this Book.
.

II. None are Saved out of the True Church.
A. S. having laid it down as a Positive Doctrine, That none can be Saved out
of the True Church, which Church (says he) is the Roman Church: To which Jos.
Coal in his Whore, etc. page 18. thus replies, That thing I do not at all deny
And that is the true Reason why they will neither Marry nor Bury with us, nor
join with us in giving Thanks to God for Food, etc.
; but that none can be saved out of the Roman Church, that I do deny; for the
Church of Rome is not the true Church, but the Whore, etc. Herein it is also
confessed, that they both agree in this Point of Doctrine; so that the
Quaker-Church does not hold herein a Negative Doctrine to that of Rome, which
both the Church of England and the Protestant Dissenters do.

III. Of Miracles in the True Church.
A. S. having affirmed, p. 4. That in the True Church there is Power of working
Miracles; to which J. Coal replies, in the Whore, etc. p. 16. saving, And as
concerning Miracles in the True Church, I do confess and bear Witness, that
there are Miracles wrought in her daily, etc. Here then is a Third Point
wherein the Quaker-Church does not hold a Negative Doctrine to the Church of
Rome, which both the Church of England Protestant Dissenters do; both agreeing,
that the Papists Legend and Fox's Journal are Fabulous, and mere Shams.

IV. The Judge of all Controversies.
A. S. in Chap. 4. affirms, The Church is Judge in Matters of Faith; to which
J. Coal replies, in the Whore, etc. p. 28. saying, That the Judgment of the
true Church, of which Christ (i. e. the Light within them) is Head, I do not
deny See p. 30. Which shows the Harmony between the Popish and Quaker Church.
; for the Judgment thereof must of necessity be true, and ought to be submitted
to. But the Church of Rome not being the true Church, she is not Judge of
Controversies in Matters of Faith.

This then is the Fourth Point in which the Quakers do not hold a Negative
Doctrine to the Romish Church; the Difference only is, which of them twain is
the True Church, which of right ought to be Judge in all Matters of
Controversy; and the one gives as good Reason as the other.

V. Contempt of Ministers.
A. S. in Chap. 14. calls our Protestant Ministers, Intruders, Thieves,
Robbers, Hypocrites, Ravenous Wolves, Murderers, Sons of Belial, False
Prophets, and Priests of Baal, etc. Now to show that the Quakers do not hold a
Negative Doctrine herein, read p. 173, 174, 248, to 251.

VI. Contempt of the Holy Scriptures.
A. S. in Chap. 14. calls our Bible, A Brazenfac'd Book, an unjust, corrupt and
perverse Bible. Now that the Quakers do not hold a Negative Doctrine to the
Romish Church herein, is plain; First, because they call the Scriptures Death,
Dust, Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware, a Rotten Foundation, and the like
contemptuous Names, which are frequently quoted in the ensuing Discourse, and
others of my Books; but also in that they Reprinted this fourteenth Chapter of
A. S.'s, without any Rebuke for their Contempt of the Scriptures, as above
noted; and in plain Words tell us in p. 40. saying, I find the rest of his (i.
e. A. S.'s) Book, to consist of diverse Arguments, in which he controverts with
Sectaries, and their Bibles, and their Ministers, whose Cause (as aforesaid, p.
28.) I am not engaged in; therefore it does not concern me, (i. e. J. Coal) to
answer his Charges against them, but shall leave them to answer for themselves,
etc. Thus does the Harmony of the Quakers and Papists agree; and for
Confirmation, read page 222, to page 248. herein.

VII. About Unwritten Traditions.
That the Papists value their Unwritten Tradition above the Scriptures, has
been sufficiently proved by our English Divines; that the Quakers value their
own Epistles above the Holy Scriptures, is as plainly proved in p. 34, and 142,
to 149. And this is the Seventh Point, in which the Quakers do not hold a
Negative Doctrine to the Romish Church; which both the Clergy of England
Protestant Dissenters do.

VIII. Touching Idolatry.
If any doubt whether the Romish Church be guilty of Idolatry, let them read
Dr. Stillingfleet, late Bishop of Worcester, his Book, Entitled, A Discourse
concerning the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, etc. and many other Books wrote
by our English Divines, and they may meet with Satisfaction. And that the
Quakers do not hold a Negative Doctrine to the Church of Rome in this Point,
read p. 42, to p. 48. p. 206, to p. 266.

IX. Pope of Rome, and Pope Fox.
I have read what the Papists say in defense of their Popes In the Defense of
the Apol. of the Church of England.
, viz. Papa Lux venit in Mundum, The Pope is that Light that is come into the
World. -- Our Lord God the Pope. -- In the Pope is all manner of Power. -- A
Divine Power is in the Pope. -- A certain Divine Power in the Pope, beyond the
Natural State of Men. Mr. Harding said of the Pope, Thou art the chief of
Bishops, thou art the Heir of the Apostles; for Primacy thou art Abel, for
Government Noah, for Patriarchship Abraham, for Holy Order Melchisedek, for
Dignity Aaron, for Authority Moses, for Judgment Samuel, for Power Peter, and
for thy Anointing Christ, etc. Now to show that the Quakers do not hold a
Negative Doctrine to the Papists in this Point, read p. 42, to p. 48. p. 253,
to p. 267. And by way of Corroboration, let me add this; I am (said Fox) the
Light of the World, him by whom the World was made, and does enlighten every
one that comes into the World The Teachers of the World unvailed, etc. p. 27.
. See also his Book, News coming up out of the North, etc. p. 15, 41. which is
very large on this Head.

X. The Quakers the One Only Church.
A. S. having said the Roman Church is the One Only Church of Christ; Josiah
Coal denies it, saying, The Quakers are the One Only Church of Christ; and so
do not hold a Negative Doctrine to the Romish Church: And this I shall prove by
the same number of Instances, by which I have showed that they are One with the
Romish Church in the Affirmative. And,

1. The Whore unvailed, etc. p. 40. But for all that has been said, (says J.
Coal) some may say, the Grand Question propounded by A. S. in his second
Chapter is not yet answered, viz. Which is the True Church? I answer, (says
Josiah) that is the True Church (and no other) whose Fruit makes manifest, that
they are governed by the Invisible Head Christ, (i. e. their Light within,) but
the People called Quakers are such; Therefore the Quakers are the true Church
Pray read p. 266, to p. 284. and by their Fruit you shall know them.
.

2. P. 41. ibid. The People called Quakers continue in the Doctrine of Christ,
saying, Be ye perfect, etc. -- And the People called Quakers do Preach the
Doctrine of Perfection, as Thousands can bear Witness; Therefore they are the
True Church, etc. But, Reader, for the Disproof of what they boastingly say,
read as in the Margin; and see what manner of Perfection they are found in.

3. Again, p. 43. ibid. This Josiah Coal was a most Eminent Quaker, yet a
grand Idolater. See p. 261. therefore I put him into the Cage among his Fellows.
Which being considered, it appears, that Perfection, or Freedom from Sin, is
attainable, (in this Life) which by the Quakers is Preached: Therefore the
Quakers are the True Church.

4. Again, p. 44. ibid. The Ministers of Christ were ordained not of Man, nor
by Man, nor of the Letter, but of the Spirit; and so are the Ministers of the
Quakers: Therefore the Quakers are the True Church.

5. P. ibid. The true Church in the Primitive Times was taught by the Grace of
God, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, they should live soberly, etc.
And the Quakers being taught by the same Grace, do deny Ungodliness See the
Cage of Unclean Birds, p. 249, to 284. for a Proof of what they boast of.
: Therefore the Quakers are the True Church.

6. P. 41. ibid. Christ commanded, saying, Whatsoever ye would that Men should
do unto you, even so do ye unto them; which Command the Quakers observe, as
Thousands can bear them Witness: Therefore they are the True Church. For Proof
of the contrary, see the last Instances of this Preface, touching their
Breaking and Cheating.

7. The Apostate-Incendiary, etc. p. 3. It was for your sake and the Truth,
(says George Whitehead) that I was pressed in Spirit, in a Godly Zeal, thus to
appear against this deceitful Worker, (i. e. William Mucklow) and treacherous
Spirit, which at length has showed it self against the Truth, and Church of
Christ, and Elect People of God called Quakers.

8. The Anarchy of the Ranters, etc. That as the true and pure Principles of
the Gospel are Restored (by the Quakers) Testimony, so the Ancient Apostolical
Order in the Church of Christ is Re-established amongst them, and Settled upon
its Right Basis and Foundation For more of R. Barkley, see p. 40. all which
show, they do not hold in this a Negative Doctrine to Rome.
.

9. The Quakers Challenge, etc. p. 3. The Quakers are in the Truth, and none
but They; consequently the Quakers are the only True Church; for this is the
Testimony of one of their deceased Prophets, Sol. Eccles, That the Quakers are
in the Truth, and none but they See page 261. where this Bird Sol. Eccles lies
in the Cage for his Idolatry.
.

10. See Burroughs's Works, p. 64, 318. who writing to the Quakers, thus said;
The Tabernacle of God is with you, and his Dewlling Place amongst you, and only
amongst you is God known; all that ever own God and Salvation, shall own us See
page 261. where this Buroughs is the second Bird in the Cage for his gross
Idolatry.
.

Having by this time showed Ten Instances, that the Quakers do not hold a
Negative Doctrine to the Romish Church, in the most Fundamental Errors in that
Church; and yet agree with her in as many Instances, that she is the Only
Church, out of which there is no Salvation, as they say, I should have
proceeded to as many Instances of their Pretense to Spiritual Discerning; but I
shall mention but two, viz. George Fox, in his Great Mystery, etc. p. 89. viz.
The Quakers can discern who are Saints, who are Devils, and who are Apostates,
without speaking ever a Word.

Another Place like unto it, is in Judas and the Jews, etc. p. 58. thus; None
need to give us Discerning or Judgment, Christ has furnished us already, and
does on all Occasions.

But that I may do the Quakers Justice, let me give one Instance where I may
show, that the Quakers differ in Doctrine from the Romish Church, and if I
mistake not, from all other Christian Churches: And indeed, that is one main
Reason why I thus Unmask New- Rome: For as A. S. the Roman Catholic said, so
say I; as in his Reconciler of Religions, etc. p. 2. The true Church (Militant)
is composed of Good and Bad, of Wheat and Tares, etc. To this Josiah Coal, in
his Whore Unvailed, etc. p. 10. replies like himself, i. e. like a right
Quaker, saying, Which thing I do abominate to acknowledge, -- And it is
Blasphemy; the true Church is not composed of Wheat and Tares, of Good and Bad,
but of Good only See page 254, to page 284. whether their Church be all Wheat.
. Another of their Teachers, in his Book, A Rod to drive out the Wild Boars,
etc. says, There is no Hypocrite in the true Church; they that say there are
Hypocrites in the true Church, do err from the Spirit of Truth, etc. Read the
Fourteenth Chapter herein, and see whether the Quakers have not Erred; or
whether that Grain looks like Wheat, nay, not so good as Tares, but mere Darnel.

And as to their Fling at me about my Compounding, as in their Anguis
Flagellatus, etc. p. 432. I shall say little of it in this place, but referr to
Chap. 15. herein, page 295, to page 307. only thus much I may add, That there
was but about a Third Part of my Creditors that Compounded at 10 s. in the
Pound, the rest I have and must Pay the Whole: Nay some of those that did
Compound I have since Paid the Whole. And this Offer I now make, That if the
Quakers will Engage that those of their Profession shall Pay me, what they
Broke in my Debt, or that Died in my Debt, and have not paid me, I then will
promise to pay every Man to a Groat; and if so, the Quakers have no great cause
to boast. And yet I can in good Conscience say, that great part of my
difficulties have been by and through the great injustice and implacable malice
of my Adversaries the Quakers; who have yet no reason, since my labor have
been for their good, though against their Wills; and for which they have, by
all their endeavors, sought my Ruin: And their resolutions herein have been
very strong, and prosecuted with great vigor. For as on the one hand they have
used all possible means to render me unworthy of the Clergies notice; a hint
whereof you have in p. 299. so on the other hand, some of them have suggested
(by private insinuations) to my Creditors, that they need not to comply, for
that the Clergy would assist me; nay, one Quaker nearly Related to me by
Marriage, and for whom I have done diverse good offices; it may be, more than
any Man living, no nearer related than I was; yet he reported to a Kinsman of
his, in order to blast my Reputation, (when I had most need of his good word
and assistance) that I designed to Sell my Estate, and leave my Wife and
Children; which thing I call Heaven and Earth to witness, I never designed, nor
did it ever enter into my heart. And much more to this purpose could I relate,
which I shall not, but desire to pass by all their Unkindness and Ingratitude
in the Day of my Adversity; being truly thankful to God in the first place, and
to his Servants in the next, who have enabled me to continue to this Day, not
only to live free from want, but to maintain my Family with all things
necessary, even beyond what I could have expected; for in all Humane
probability, had not God raised me up Friends, I had been miserable enough, by
reason my Adversaries rage was so extensive; who thirsted after nothing more
than my utter Ruin, as I could show, were it needful, in many cases.

And thanks be to God, through my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in whose Cause
I have been engaged (though a weak and unworthy Instrument) and for whose Sake
nothing has been to dear too part withal, he has raised me Friends, and made me
able to say, as one of old did, That I have been able to run through a Troop,
and to leap over a Wall, which I once thought would have been too high for me;
so that I will not fear what Man can do unto me; for God will scatter mine
Enemies, and confound mine Adversaries, and raise me Friends in despite of the
Rage of Satan and all his Instruments. But since in their late Prints and
Appeals, the Quakers do so magnify their own honesty, I shall, as I have in
the Cage of Unclean Birds, p. 249. to p. 286. once more add to the number a
third sort, not at present thinking it needful to add the fruits of others that
lie snuge in the Cage, and which as yet have not seen it needful to show their
Feathers, since the hint already given have had some effect, and I hope may
have more, toward their Humiliation and Amendment: But that they may see (if
yet they do not see) that they are left like other Men, and overtaken with the
same Infirmities, I shall set forth not only Ten of their Teachers, of great
Note, but likewise Ten of their Hearers, (for I love to proceed by number and
weight) not that I shall this time put John Kilborn, and some others, into the
Cage to their fellow Birds; but, as I said, in regard they so often brag of
their honesty in meum and tuum, I shall therefore briefly observe to them, and
for their Humiliation, if by any means they may be wrought upon to be Humbled,
a few of their miscarriages on that Account, that their vain pretense to a
Sinless Perfection may be retracted, and at last come to make Confession of
their Sins, and Repent thereof, and Amend their ways.

1. The first I shall name of this sort is Gerald Roberts, who was the greatest
Entertainer of G. Fox in that Day; a great Preacher, and one who kept the
Public Stock; into whose custody was put a Rich Orphan, worth 4000 l. namely,
Abijah Trot; who, by the consent of G. Fox and Alex. Parker, got her Married to
his Son against the Executors consent, i. e. R. Cannam, and Fran. Camfield;
against which clandestine proceeding of Fox, Parker and Roberts, I have much to
say, which at present I forbear: But he broke.

2. Tho Roberts, his Son, who Married this Fortune, also broke and run away,
and left his Family like a Wilderness.

3. Sam. Newton, a great Preacher, and Merchant, having got into considerable
Debts, and cheated many, fled beyond Sea, and paid his Creditors nothing; yet
still continued a Preacher at Virginia and Maryland.

4. Will. Gosnel, another Preacher, broke and fled beyond Sea, and cheated many.

5. Benjamin Antrobus, another of their Infallible Preachers, about Twenty
Years together, He broke; against whom a Statute of Bankrupt was awarded,
imprisoned in Ludgate, paid 5 s. in the Pound; but whether his Journeyman,
Joseph Wyeth, got what he lost, I will not determine; however he is now set up,
and serves to be the Cat's Foot for the Quakers.

6. Likewise Rebecca Traverse, another of their Shee-Preachers, and an
Entertainer, as well as a great Adorer of G. Fox, yet the Fox was too many for
her, he grew Rich, and she a Poor Zealot, and could not pay her Debts.

7. Tho. Burr, another of their Infallible Guides and Chief Speakers, broke and
cheated many.

8. Edw. Billing, another of their great Writers and Infallible Doctors, broke
and cheated many.

9. George Archer, another of their great Preachers, cast into Prison for Debt;
who was guilty of several Crimes also.

10. I shall end their Teachers with Christopher Tailor, of whose cheating some
are still alive; Joseph Clark is by himself, and must go into the Cage for a
Sodomite.

Now as to their Hearers, 1. Brasy, a Goldsmith, broke for many Thousands,
against whom a Statute was awarded. 2. As also against James Boswell, by whom a
Brother-in-law of mine lost 100 l. and a Kinsman of mine, with his share in the
Charge of the Statute, 500 l. 3. One French. 4. Northcott, the Quakers great
Bookseller. 5. One Olive. 6. Robert Goodwin. 7. Henry Stone, who never yet paid
his Composition Money at 5 s. in the Pound. 8. Tho. Plumstead. 9. Cade of
Norwich. 10. And Edw. Firth, of Mildenhall, a great stickler for Quakerism, who
in his Lifetime cheated many by borrowing Money, and buying Goods, and died
not worth any thing; so that many of his Creditors, and that for great Sums
too, had not a Penny of their Debts. These were all Followers of their Darkness
within, which they call Light. And the Question being put, can any Sin, that
follow this Light? It may (says J. Wyeth) be safely Answered, No; by which they
seem to say, that these and the like practices are not Sinful: If they shall
answer me, no, these are Sins, I then ask, why they do not then ask forgiveness
for their Sins.

George Whitehead's Fallacy Reproved, In his ANSWER to My Pilgrim's Progress,
etc.
GEORGE,
I Have seen thy Book, A Rambling Pilgrim, etc. said to be an Answer to two
Books of mine, i. e. The Pilgrim's Progress, etc. A Modest Defense, etc. which
is so far from being an Answer, that it does not touch at the Tenth part of the
Books; and that little you spoke to, have (to them who will compare the Books)
rather confirms what I charge you withal, than otherwise. But that I may show
(for your Peoples sake,) how you wilfully mistake me, and the state of the
Charge, and then mislead your People, etc.

I find the first part of your Book is chiefly to insinuate that I said the
Sermon was Geo. Whitehead's, of his Forming, of his Preaching, and that in so
many Words; and thereupon you call it Forgery. Now, George, this is all
Fallacy: For thou know, George, in thy Conscience, that I never intended to
have it believed, that you at your Yearly Meeting Preached that very Sermon, in
so many Words; but that I did it to expose your Errors contained in your Books,
out of which that Sermon was by me formed; and in p. 108. and p. 222. of the
Second Edition, it is expressly said, A Sermon for George Whitehead to hold
Forth, etc. And the Chapter before gives several Reasons why I proceeded in
that unusual method: So that your way to have done your Cause good, and your
People good, had been to have confuted me; first, Touching your Doctrine, which
I alleged out of your Books. Secondly, That your Practice is otherwise than by
me represented. This had been your way to have confuted my Arguments, and to
have established your People. But for you thus to act against Light and
Knowledge, is such a self-condemned Practice, that as for your own sake, as
well as your People whom you mislead, I could be glad to see you leave it now
in your Old Age. Take one instance.

A Rambling Pilgrim, etc. p. 5. Francis Bugg makes Geor. Whitehead thus speak,
Friends, I am now come to the last thing proposed to speak to on this Solemn
Occasion; first, Respecting Confession of Sin; showing your Exaltation above
the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, etc. as at large in p. 221. of this Book;
so that I need not repeat it. Now what Answer, George, do thou make to this?
Do thou say, it is your Friends Practice to make Confession of Sin to God in
your Prayers? Not a word of it. Do thou prove in any one page of those
5555555 I there mention, that you ever recommended the practice of making
Confession of Sin to God, and begging his Pardon for Christ's sake? Not a word
of it. Do thou prove out of any of those Books, wrote by thy self, Fox,
Buroughs, etc. that ever you recommended the Practice of the Ten Commandments,
the Lord's Prayer, the Apostles Creed, either to be read in your Families, or
in your Religious Meetings practiced; or the reading the Scripture in your
Meetings? Not a word of it. No, here is no denial of Matter of Fact out of your
Books, nor the natural Consequences deduceable therefrom, or your practice
agreeable to the same: And that it may appear so, take your Answer in your own
words, viz. Thus Fran. Bugg. represents me Preaching such stuff as I never
preached in my Life, nor ever owned any such flattery or deceit, as to exalt
any Auditory above the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, etc. or to dissuade
any from making Confession of Sin, or asking Pardon for Christ's sake, who have
need of both, or who have not received forgiveness of their Sin.

First, It Is not what you did not dissuade from, that we are examining; but
what you persuade to: We want not Negatives, but Affirmatives; here you leave
your Reader in the Dark: Can you prove that in all those Books and Pages
recited, that you ever made Confession of Sin; that you ever asked Pardon for
Christ's sake; that you in your Religious Meetings, or in your Families,
practiced the Lord's Prayer, the Ten Commandments, the Apostles Creed; that you
ever read the Holy Scriptures in your Meetings; or further, that you ever in
all, or any one of your Books, recommended the practice thereof? If not, the
Charge lies still against you, and your Negative Answers rather confirm what is
said than otherwise.

As to your Certificate, p. 28. about your Cottage; you that can forge
Certificates, and set Men's Names to it, without their Privity, Knowledge or
Consent, as you did that from Huntington, in your Book, Judgment fixed, as Anne
Docwra, in her Letter to Mr. Crisp, March 25. 1684. says you did; what credit
is to be given to it? And besides, those three Certifiers conclude thus, On
credible Information, we verily Believe. Here then is but their belief on
Information; and I am credibly informed of what I wrote; so the Reader is left
to believe as he is persuaded. The like may be said of Will. Mead, touching his
saying to William Harris, that Fox's Journal is a better Book than the Bible;
this Will. Mead does not deny under his Hand; I have only Geor. Whitehead's
word for it; and he that can forge Certificates is not to be believed.

Again, p. 38. What Earnings did thou (F. B.) make in the late Discourse
before the Bishop of Norwich, and the four Members of Parliament, where I
discovered thy repeated Falsehoods, Forgery, Deceit and Wickedness in diverse
Matters? And how thou were counfounded when Matters were closely urged against
thee? etc.

Now, George, thou know in thy own Conscience that this is a Lie spoken in
Hypocrisy, on purpose to mislead thy Disciples; for thou did not prove one
false Quotation, Matter or Thing, against me: But I proved thee guilty of
contempt of the Scriptures, in exalting your sayings above them, as of greater
Authority; and for the truth of this, I submit my self to those Five Persons
present, one of them having often showed his Approbation of my management of
that Affair. These things, George, do not redound to thy Credit, and I can
truly say I am sorry for thee. George, we both grow Ancient, let us write for
the good of others, not for Victory; for my part, I do upon the word of a
Christian design it, and if I saw my self in an Error, I should willingly
submit. Again,

P. 46. Beside the false Printing and bad English (as Fr. B. has exposed my
Book Ishmael) there is another defect after the words [The Lake is thy Portion,
which is the Portion of Liars,] the words, [except thou speedily repent;] are
omitted there, and in some other places.

To which I Answer, let any body compare your Book, Ishmael and his Mother cast
out, etc. in the Original Impression in Quarto, and the Reprint in my Modest
Desence, etc. Part 2. and they shall find it, for English, Comma's, and Points,
and Words, the same. For in the Quarto Impression, p. 3. l. 15. there is we for
woe, as in Mod. Def. p. 7. l. 13. there is also we for woe; and so in all other
places where it was bad English, and false Spelled, and false Pointed, so it is
Reprinted: And as for the words [except thou speedily repent] being left out, I
do positively say it is a most horrid Lie; there is not a word in the whole Book
left out; so careful was I. And how then can thou pretend to be a
Conscientious Writer, when in the face of the Sun thou can thus Prevaricate,
Dissemble, and Lie, and that knowingly? What is become, George, of thy
seriousness, sincerity and plainness thou so often boasts of? Again,

P. 34. He ( F. B.) assumes the boldness to promote in Print an Abstract of two
Letters of two Clergymen; I pray God open the Eyes of our Governors, and cause
them to take into Consideration this too much, and too deplorable, unlimited
and unbounded Tolleration; especially as the Quakers both claim and use it,
etc. as in Pil. Prog. p. 175. was not this, (says George) a piece of insolent
confidence, to expose this in Print, and thus openly to oppose the Liberty
Granted, and legally Confirmed by King and Parliament, and thus to render our
Governors blinds? etc.

Now as I think this was a good Prayer, so do I think it no boldness to expose
it in Print: For, George, it was not the Liberty Granted, and by Law Confirmed,
which these Clergymen either called unlimited or unbounded, for the liberty
granted is both limited and bounded, as from diverse branches of the Laws
appear; and particularly by the very Act of Tolleration; see p. 86, 88, 101,
189, 339. No, the unbounded Liberty which the Quakers take, claim and use, is
what the Clergy is against, and which they Pray the Government would take into
their Consideration; and I am sure it is a base, bold and insolent thing,
George, in you to expose in Print, that the Clergy would represent the King and
Parliament blind: But I have not herein room to set forth your baseness in
calling all Kings Spiritual Egyptians; all that own any King, since the days of
Christ, Apostates; that Parliaments chosen by most Voices, are not like to Act
for God, or the Good of his People; that Parliaments are the Beast that carry
the Whore; Nay, in your Book, The West Answering to the North, etc. you
justify the Murder of King Charles I. saying, The cutting off his Head, was a
remarkable Record of the Righteous Judgment of God; and for a true sight of
these your Antimonarchical, as well as Antimagistratical Principles, see p.
157. to p. 175. hereafter. And, George, you tell us in Print, that your
Principles are now no other than they were in the beginning. And what they were
in the beginning, I in this Book, the Pilg. Prog. etc. have set forth: And I
think it is both bold and insolent Confidence in you to revive all these your
horrid Principles destructive to Government and Humane Society, by telling us
you are the same in Principles still; and I am afraid we may in this believe
you.

In the next place I shall show, even thee, George, what Liberty the Quakers
both use and claim; which not only those two Clergymen, but many Ten Thousands,
both of Laity and Clergy, are against.

First, Your sending into the Churches Challenges, as your Friends did at
West-Dereham.

Secondly, Your going from House to House, like the Popish Priests, to seduce
the People, inviting them to your Meetings, giving them Books which say the
Quakers are the one only Church of Christ, and that out of your Church there is
no Salvation.

Thirdly, That your Monthly, Quarterly, Six Week, Second Day, and Yearly
Meetings, where you revive your old Treasonable Principles; which Meetings are
expressly against the very Act of Tolleration, these, and the like, (as in the
ensuing Discourse) are the Meetings and the Practices both used and claimed by
you: Namely, to hold Convocations, which the Established Church, without
License from His Majesty, cannot legally do. These, and the like Practices of
yours, all good Christians, and the Laws of the Land, are against; and I still
pray God to give the Nation a sight and sense of it, before it be too late.

In Answer to your 48th Page, I query thus, Whether it be not as proper for me
to Address His Majesty, on the behalf of the Church of England, and other sound
Protestants, who hold the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, as it is for
G. Whitehead to Address himself, by Dedication, to the Clergy and Universities,
personating a Schism which professes such Doctrine as tends to overthrow the
Christian Faith? Come, George, Answer me this Question; how came you to be such
a Man? You know I could show Books of your Friends, Borough, Fisher, Fox, and
others, who though as great Imposters as any in the World ever knew, yet they
have Dedicated and Addressed, and not only so, but Dictated to Kings, Lords and
Commons. Come, G. what was your birth? Whence came your breeding? Were you not
Rambling Pilgrims, who (like Gypsies) lay in Barns, lived upon Alms, with your
Feet at other Men's Tables? See E. Burrough's Epist. to his works.
What, must none Address now but you? Must none apply themselves to the
Government but you? Surely, George, you are a Pegg too high.

Come, George, let us reason together, what power have you to summons all
Ecclesiastical Courts and Officers, more than I have to summon you? What Power
have you to Dialogue the Bishops, and the whole Church, more than I have to
Dialogue you? What Authority have you to Arraign, Try, Judge and Condemn all
the Clergy in a Kingdom, more than I have to Arraign you, and Try you by your
Fruit? I tell you, George, I cannot see you mount the Stage, and thus Insult,
Domineer and Exalt your selves, not only above the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Saints and Martyrs, and all Christians, with respect to your so much
boasted-of Sinless Perfection, but above all the King's Subjects, as if you,
and you only, had right to Address, Dedicate and Present Papers to the
Parliament; and that it were Treason to confront you: I tell you, as above
noted, that you are a pegg too high.

But, George, before you had Addressed your selves, and Dedicated your Books to
the King and Government, you ought to have condemned your Books mentioned p.
154, 157, 167. And before you had Dedicated this Book to the Clergy, you ought
in prudence to have retracted your Books mentioned p. 217, 249, 250. And as to
G. K's. Book, it was approved by the Quakers; and you ought to have retracted
the Doctrine of it, as G. K. has; and likewise W. Penn's and Alexander Skien's
mentioned in p. 168, 170. But your Temporizing is both seen, and discovered to
be seen by others: And now for your Dedication to the Clergy.

A Rambling Pilgrim, p. 3. An Epistle Dedicatory to those of the Clergy, and of
the two Universities, whose kindness Fran. Bugg boasts of. 30 th of the 4 th
Month, 1629. By George Whitehead.

Now George, to show you what a kind Reception your Dedication met with from my
Benefactors; I shall, though I have no order, present you with part of a Letter
which one of them sent me; which take as follows, viz.

March 11. 1699. Mr. Bugg,
I Cannot but thank you for the service you have done, especially among the
Common People, by your way of Writing; and for the plentiful materials you have
furnished out, to employ others, with respect both to the Principles and
Practices of the Quakers; and your laborious Attendance at Parliament, as a
Check to the Insolences of the Quakers in their presenting their deceivable
Papers, in which they have been too much neglected; wherefore be not
disheartened, but go on, and Charge the Quakers Party through and through with
their Blasphemies against the Blessed Trinity, their Doctrine of Infallibility
and Sinless Perfection, their denying the Fundamental Articles of our most Holy
Religion, viz. The Incarnation of Christ, the Resurrection of the Body, and the
Day of Judgment. For to talk of Lenitives, and Gentle Applications, is like the
old way of sowing Pillows under their Arm-holes; and you may as well give Opium
in a Lethargy, as to fancy to cure some Men into their Senses by your mild and
tender Remedies: And therefore to deal plainly is the best way to work their
Conversion, from the Infidelity of Quakerism, to the Faith of Christ Crucified;
which God of his Mercy grant them, if it be his Will.

It was a notable Confession of St. Paul, when he drew up an Indictment, and
Arraigned himself in the Murder of St. Stephen, for his standing by and
consenting unto his Death, and holding the Garment of them that slew him. I
wish the Quakers were Humble enough to follow his Example; whose malice I am
afraid is greater, and the dignity of the injured Person higher; for they have
Spirited away our Blessed Savior, and have left us nothing but a Notional and
Chimerical Christ; so that we may take up the Lamentation of Mary Magdalen,
They have taken away the Lord, and we know not where they have laid him.

That was well noted in the Spirit of the Hat: For I am persuaded there cannot
be an Instance made in any Society of Men of that bigness, that have gotten
more Bastards, and more unnaturally disposed of them, that have drank deeper
Draughts of stolen secret Intemperance, that have fed higher, and fared more
deliciously every Day, than have some of these Perfectionists in their shining
brazen disguises of Religion.

I am heartily sorry for the poor Quaker, I heard lately of, who hanged himself
viz. Will. Rust, a Preacher at Chaterice in the Isle of Ely, who opposed G. K.
with G. K's Narrative in his Pocket; and the more for the exact parallel I
must make between him and Judas, both in his Life, and in his Death. I pray God
give them Grace to lay it to Heart, and humbly to confess their Sins to God,
and to beg pardon by the Merits of Christ, that God may give them Repentance
unto Life.

SIR, Your most Faithful Friend to Serve you, etc.


It may be some may say, why did you not Print his Name to it? To which I
Answer, suppose I had a Friend in my Parlour, and knew that if I did open the
Door, that the Dogs would come in and worry him, can any think that if I loved
my Friend, I would not secure him from their Rage; yea, and with Just Lot,
rather venture my self out among the Sodomites, than suffer my Friend to be
torn in pieces? And besides that, I have Muzzled some, and put others of them
in a Cage, so that they can only Grin, Bark, and show their Teeth.

POSTSCRIPT
To the Sincere amongst the Quakers, whether they be Thousands, Hundreds,
Fifties, or peradventure but Ten, who are of the true Berean Race.
FRIENDS.
BEsides the forenoted Six Books of the Quakers, I have herein Examined and
Refuted Four more at least in their principal parts.

VII. Their Anguis Flagellatus; or, A Switch for the Snake. VIII. A Rambling
Pilgrim, etc. by George Whitehead. IX. A Just Censure of F. B 's Address to the
Parliament, etc. X. A Sober Reply, etc. in Answer to F. B 's Modest Defense.
To all which you will find in the foregoing and following, such an Examination
and Confutation, as will give you some light into the Controversy on foot, if
you be Impartial in your search, and will do your selves the justice to read
both sides, as you ought to do before you can be capable to pass a Judgment;
and this to do is highly requisite, since not only your Eternal Happiness
depends upon a true and lively Faith in God, and his Son Jesus Christ, but even
your Temporal Blessings also.

I remember well St. Paul's Doctrine, 1 Timothy 3.13. who said, Evil Men and
Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived; and
thereupon, like a Careful Watchman over the Church of God, over which the Holy
Ghost had made him an Overseer, he then, and by his Doctrine now, cautions all
Believers in the True God, and his Son Jesus Christ, That we be henceforth no
more Children tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine, whereby they lie
in wait to deceive. And writing to his Son Titus, Chap. 1. Ver. 12, 13. he
there does most Excellently describe the Cretians from a Testimony of one of
their own Prophets or Teachers, who, like your Teachers, were always Liars and
Dissemblers; and therefore he exhorted Titus to reprove them sharply; and
indeed it is the only way to work a Cure: And this is according to the Doctrine
of Tho. Ellwood, one of your own Prophets or Teachers, saying, The only way to
recover the deceived, is to discover the Deceivers. This Witness is true, as
St. Paul said of the Cretian Poet; and thereupon I have for many Years labored
to discover your Teachers; and if you will but search diligently, read and
judge impartially, you may see for your selves, whether these things be so or
no. It Is true, I have exposed some of the Immoralities of a few of your
Teachers, but it is for a good End, namely, that by your seeing them, and
considering their high Pretenses to Infallibility, and a Sinless Perfection,
you may be admonished to a Confession of your Sins to God, and beging Pardon
for Jesus Christ's Sake, that God may keep and bless and preserve you to his
Heavenly Kingdom, to Reign with Christ for Ever and Ever.

You may further observe, that G. W. in his Rambling. Pilgrim, etc. has not
denied one Quotation, yet by a Cunning of his, would represent me a Forger; but
that will soon vanish, when you consider that in all Dialogues the like liberty
is taken See S. Eccles Dialogue, Fox's and Smith's.
: And I can Appeal to God the Searcher of all Hearts, that my Chief End why I
so exposed them, was (after long forbearing) to let them see themselves, and
learn not to insult over others: And as it has had a good Effect upon some, so
I hope it will upon others: And so I conclude with my hearty Prayer to God,
that of his Infinite Goodness he would vouchsafe a Blessing upon my Labors, to
the Benefit of you and your Posterity, whose Information I have taken great
Pains in, that you might not continue in Ignorance, and be led by your Blind
Guides into the Ditch of Error and Heresy.

I rest your Faithful Friend and Humble Monitor, Fra. Bugg.
March 25. 1700.
A Just Rebuke to the Quakers Insolent Behavior, in their Two Books, i. e. A
Just Censure, etc. the other, A Sober Reply, etc. both presented to some
Members of Parliament. Also a Dialogue between a Civilian and a Quaker.
Christian Reader,
THE first of these Books is Entitled, A Just Censure of Francis Bugg 's
Address to the Parliament: This shows their Impudence, or want of good Manners
at least; had they Confuted my Arguments, or Convicted me of one False
Quotation, thereby to Misrepresent them, they, in Justice to themselves, might
have Confuted what was False, either in Fact or Argument: But, not being able
so to do, for them, in a Magisterial way, to Censure my Speech to the
Parliament, and Address to my Superiors, for which I have (as an Englishman) as
good Right as they, and every way equally Privileged with them, this was in
them both Bold and Presumptuous, as well as want of Wisdom, not to stay their
Censure until the Parliament had past theirs, whose Right it was, if they had
seen Cause, and to whom I ought to have submitted, as in Duty bound; but no
Symptoms of that did appear, but Pride (as it is written) goes before
Destruction, and a Haughty Mind before a Fall. And as it is impossible for a
Blackamoor to change his Skin, or a Leopard his Spots, so is it impossible for
the Quakers to cease their Insulting and Domineering Method; as if they may
present their Books and Papers Fifty Years together, and none may Confront them.

They begin with the Man; he has angered them, by discovering their Errors and
Blasphemies; they go on with Personal Reflections against him, which affects
not the Cause, and which he has long since repeatedly Answered in Print; but
still the Man, the Man, he is an Ill Man, say they; what! Worse than the Quaker
Teachers? No sure; for if he were, believe me, he were an Ill Man indeed; for I
think there is not worse than some of them are, and have been, even in Newgate,
notwithstanding their high pretense to a Sinless Perfection, and Infallibility
of Judgment; many of whom have been highly guilty of Cheating, Couzening, Lying
and Defrauding, of Drunkenness, Whoredom, Felony, and Treason, Condemned both
by the Law of God and Man; and some of them Hanged for their Just Merit; some
Instances you will find in the Preface to the Pilgrim's Progress, etc. p. 266,
to p. 284. p. 329. ibid. And as I find no Name to the Books, so I find no
denial of Matter of Fact to Mod. Def. Nihil dicit is Confessing of Judgment,
and I shall wait patiently to see the Execution, and thereupon I shall say the
less in Answer to it, since as it plainly appears, that the Quakers does not
deny Matter of Fact, because in truth they could not; so will their Silence be
taken for a tacit Confession of the Charge.

But say they, p. 40. For as we cannot quit any Point of our own [Books] so we
abhor every one of them as given by him, [Fran. Bugg]. The English of which is,
They cannot quit any one Error, any one Blasphemy, etc. in their own Books,
though they abhor them in my Books; that is, of my Reciting, of my Transcribing,
of my Reprinting; Oh! this they abhor with great detestation: And why? Because
I seldom do it without using some Arguments to discover their Hypocrisies;
this, yea, this enrages them; for this they are angry: And therefore I would
desire the Quakers to Reprint G. Whitehead's Book, Ishmael and his Mother cast
out, etc. where in p. 10. is this passage, viz. And here thy Antiquity, and thy
Reasons, and the Three Persons which thou Dreams of, which thou [i. e. Mr.
Townsend the Minister] would divide out of one like a Conjurer, are ALL denied,
and thou SHUT UP with THEM in PERPETUAL DARKNESS for the LAKE and the PIT, etc.
This indeed is their Ancient Principles, and they cannot quit them, or retract
them in their own Books, but tell us their Principles are now no other than
they were then, only they can word the Matter otherwise: I grant they hate,
abhor and detest these things of my reciting, etc. But as they lie snug in
their own Books, they read them in their own Meetings; they are sweet Morsels
of Quaker Consolation; read A Modest Defense, etc. Part II. p. 22. for more of
this, where I have Reprinted their whole Book Ishmael, etc. to avoid their
Cavils of Curtailing and Splitting Sentences, as well as to show Quakerism in
its Native Complexion.

In their Sober Reply, etc. p. 11, 14, 15. in Answer to the Norfolk and Suffolk
Petition, etc. they say, To the first we say, It is strange you should fear the
Christian Religion should be polluted by the Quakers, who, of all that go under
the Protestant Name, are generally acknowledged to be furthest removed from,
and most averse to Popish Superstition -- so we always offer our Doctrines and
Principles to be examined by the Scriptures. To the second we say, -- They
desire they may Enjoy their wisht-for Happiness of a peaceful Life; we envy it
them not; but God forbid they should swim into it through a Sea of Innocent
Blood, etc.

1. In Answer to the first, That the Quakers are furthest removed from Popish
Superstition than any that go under the Name Protestant, this I deny in their
Name, and have made it appear from their Doctrine in their Books, as in the
Preface to my Pilgrim's Progress, 2d Edit. etc. and that from these following
Instances, in which they do not hold Negative Doctrines from the Romish Church;
they only differ which of them twain is the true Church, to which these
Qualifications are duly attributed, etc.

I. That the Quakers are the One Only Church of Christ. II. They agree in the
Doctrine of Infallibility. III. And that none can be Saved out of the True
Church. IV. They both agree in the Doctrine of Miracles. V. Also about the
Judge of all Controversies in Matters of Faith. VI. They agree in their
Contempt of the Protestant Ministers. VII. They agree in their Contempt of the
Holy Scriptures. VIII. They agree in the Authority of their Unwritten
Traditions. IX. Also in the Pope of Rome, and Pope Fox. X. They agree in their
Idolatry to each Pope.
2. That they always desired their Doctrine and Principles might be examined by
the Scriptures; this is false in Fact, when they did in the Face of the World
deny it to the Norfolk Clergy at West-Dereham, to George Keith at Turners-Hall,
being thereunto Invited Four Years one after another; to my Self at
Milden-Hall. See New Rome Unmasked, etc. p. 1, to p. 9. as also at several
other times, notwithstanding their false and bold denial. A Just Censure, etc.
p. 7.

3. They desire they may Enjoy their wisht-for Happiness of a Peaceful Life. We
envy it them not, (say the Quakers) but God forbid they should swim into it
through a Sea of Innocent Blood.

If it be to swim through a Sea of Blood, only to desire that the Quakers
Errors and Blasphemous Principles, (which contemn the Scriptures, deny that
Jesus of Nazareth who suffered on the Cross to be the Son of God, and damn to
the Pit of Hell the Ever-blessed Trinity) should lie Censured and Condemned,
and their Books, that so teach, Burnt by the Common Hangman, then indeed they
are guilty: But if this be not Persecution, but agreeable to the Law of the
Land, the Votes of Parliament, His Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure declared
in his Proclamation, then they are not guilty of Persecution, nor of running
through a Sea of Innocent Blood in the Defense of Christianity, as the Quakers
would impose upon their Readers, to avoid the dint of an Examination,
notwithstanding their pretense. A Reply, etc. p. 11. We are ready to undertake
the Proof of every Doctrine we hold by and from the Scriptures.

I have read in St. Jude's Epistle, that as in ver. 3. he exhorts us to contend
earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, so, ver. 9.
That Michael the Archangel when contending with the Devil, he disputed about
the Body of Moses, durst not bring against him a Railing Accusation, but said,
The Lord rebuke thee. And now I am Disputing with the Quakers, his chiefest
Emissaries, and immediate Servants, I hope I shall not bring a Railing
Accusation: But as it is Natural for a Worm when trodden upon to turn again,
and for an Englishman to set the Saddle on the right Horse, so I hope I shall
as long as Life last, especially when St. Jude has so rightly described the
Men, as ver. 8. saying, Likewise also these filthy Dreamers defile the Flesh,
despise Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities, as I have showed in my Modest
Defense, etc. Part I. p. 10, 13, 14, 15.

But say they, A Just Censure, etc. p. 1, 2. The Man -- he and his Abetters are
ill Men. P. 11. It were greatly to be wished, that these Zealots would turn
their Spleen against Sin -- what fair Quarter all sorts of Enormities meet with
from some of them.

But that none allow fairer Quarter to Vice and Immorality than the Quakers,
and Leaders of the Quaker Church, is plain. See Pilgrim's Progress, etc. p.
244, to p. 284. And one Reason I take to be is their own Guilt, which would
make their Reproofs sound like the Kettle calling the Pot Black-A --; and
therefore it is the Inconsideration of their Hearers that supports the Credit of
such Vicious Hypocrites, who are upheld by their Character rather than their
Virtue, and are become much less loved than feared; for I demand an Instance of
any one Book wrote against their Vicious Teachers and Hearers, provided they
keep Fox's Commandments about the Hat, Thee, Thou, not Marrying or Burying with
us, and the like unwritten Traditions; but I can give you an Account of
Hundreds of Books wrote against such as dissent from them, and conform
themselves to the Church of England, calling them Apostates, Betraying
Judasses, Malicious Informers, Renegadoes, Beasts, Dogs, Wolves, Children of
the Devil, Enemies of all Righteousness, Devils Incarnate, and a Hundred other
Names. And they call the Public Ministry, for endeavoring their Conversion,
Witches, Devils, Thieves, Robbers, Antichrists, the Bane of Soul and Body,
threatening them with all direful Vengeance; and this, if rightly considered, is
not the least part of their Insolent Behavior to the Government.

Now whether your Just Censure, etc. was in Answer to my former Sheet, with a
Scheme of your Yearly Meeting; or to my Modest Reply, etc. or both, since it is
said to be a Just Censure of my Address to the Parliament, and I presented none
under that Title, I will not determine, since it seems to the first, though given
in since my last; yet I cannot but admire at your Impudence in your Reply, etc.
in Answer to my Modest Defense, where you say, p. 7. But sure we are, and
always ready to make it appear, that neither are our Books Blasphemous, nor our
Principles Pernicious. Again, p. 11. We are ready to undertake the Proof of
every Doctrine we hold by and from the Scriptures; this is False in Fact, and a
Notorious Lie in the Face of the Government. First, In that you knew I had
presented to the Parliament the Reprint of an entire Book of yours, styled,
Ishmael, etc. which is both pernicious to the Fundamentals of Christianity, and
horridly Blasphemous. Secondly, In refusing to prove any one Doctrine you held
at West Dereham. Thirdly, In refusing to meet Geo. Keith upon any of his
Invitations.

Again, p. 10. We sincerely own all that is written in the Scriptures
concerning Christ, respecting his Conception, Birth, Life, Miracles, Doctrines,
Death, Burial, Resurrection, Ascension, Mediation, and Future Coming to
Judgment, when in reality you own not one of those Articles rightly, nor as all
Orthodox Christians own them, as G. Keith's 4th Narrative, has from your Books
made evidently to appear.

Again, p. 6. ibid. That we assume Rules of Discipline in Church Matters, they
are for our selves only, Powers in Matters of Religion, for and among our
selves only. Nor (say they) do we see how those Acts could be truly called Acts
of Toleration to Dissenters, if they did not tolerate each sort of Dissenters,
to assume Rules of Discipline, Power in Matters of Religion, and Forms of
Church Government for and amongst themselves, etc. Again, p. 11. And if it
relate to Religious Performances, as it seems to do by the next words, i. e.
having their Monthly, Quarterly, and Yearly Meetings, etc. From whence it is
plain, that these Monthly, Quarterly, and Yearly Meetings, then when it suit
their turn they own to be Religious Meetings, and as such tolerated by the Act
of Toleration; and without allowing them, the Act could not be called An Act of
Toleration: Yet to show that Liars had need to have good Memories, they, in
Contradiction to themselves, when pinched from another Quarter for keeping
their Doors Locked, Barred, or Guarded, to prevent Inspection, they in their
Just Censure, etc. p. 26. confess, saying, These Meetings are not intended for
Worship; what then? What? For Government, and to assume Rules of Discipline,
and Forms of Church Government, which is more than the Established Church can
legally do without His Majesty's License, and therefore worse and more
dangerous, their Doors being kept Locked or Guarded; and expressly against the
very Act of Toleration, in which is this Clause, viz.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Assembly of Persons, Dissenting from the Church of England, shall be had in any
place for Religious Worship, [and such only the Act tolerates] with Doors
Locked, Barred, or Bolted, during any time of such meeting together, all and
every such Person or Persons, that shall come to, and be at, such Meeting,
shall not receive any Benefit from this Law, but be liable to all the Pains and
Penalties of all the aforesaid Laws recited in this Act, for such their
Meeting, notwithstanding his taking the Oaths, and his making and subscribing
the Declaration. And likewise, as the Learned in the Law say, Such Meetings
with Doors Locked, etc. to assume Rules of Discipline, and Forms of Church
Government, are expressly against the Rights of Parliaments, the King's
Prerogative, and Liberty of the Subject, and these Statutes following, viz. 28
H. 8. c. 19, 21. 27 H. 8. c. 15. 37 H. 8. c. 17. 3 Ed. 6. c. 10, 11. 1 Eliz. c.
12. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. 8 Eliz. c. 1. 1 K. W. and Q. M. Magna Charta
c. 29. Pet. Right. and that such as so meet, run themselves into a Praemunire:
But the Quakers being a united Confederacy, a Body Politic Incorporated, and
having a Fund or Common Bank to support and propagate their Principles, they
are too powerful for any single Person; and thereupon the Government is prayed
to take it into their Consideration: And that these Meetings are not within the
Act of Toleration, but obnoxious to the Laws, and of a dangerous Consequence, I
have more fully shown in my Pilgrim's Progress from Quakerism to Christianity,
etc. 2d Edit. in Octavo, wherein I have more largely set forth their Monthly,
Quarterly, Second-day, Six-week and Yearly Meetings, showing they are not only
for Government, as themselves now confess, but a Government Imperium in Imperio.

But one thing I cannot but observe in these Meek, Harmless Quakers, viz. in
their representing the Justices, Grand Juries, and Burgesses of Norfolk and
Suffolk, as a Bloody-minded sort of Tyrants, and that to the Right Honorable
and Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, then no wonder they treat me at that disdainful rate they do, and
the Reverend Clergy for my sake; but as hitherto, Thanks be to God, the
Protestant Magistrates, and the Episcopal Clergy, have been a Bulwark against
Popery, so I trust they will against the prevalency of Quakerism, and the
danger of them, which seems to threaten both them and the Nation. A just
Censure, etc. p. 12. And consider, (say they) whether it was decent in the
Aldermen and Burgesses of Bury, etc. thus to Impeach the Wisdom and Conduct of
the Government. P. 13. That all those high Charges in the Petition exhibited
against us, are grounded but upon their own groundless Jealousies; they (how
mannerly (say they) let others judge) offer the Parliament Hobson 's Choice, --
cut our Throats, or knock out our Brains. And would they have the Honorable
the House of Commons undertake this Inhumane piece of Butchery, to defile their
Hands in the Innocent Blood of so many Thousands of harmless People, to Enact
such a Barbarous Tragedy only to remove the groundless Fears of a few
Jealous-headed Aldermen, Justices, [Grand Juries, etc.] of Bury, etc. P. 15.
God forbid they should swim into it [i. e. a peaceful Life, and the Enjoyment
of their Religion] through a Sea of Innocent Blood, etc.

But why is all this? Why? It Is only that they prayed the House of Commons to
take these things into their Consideration; and that the Principles and
Practices of the Quakers might be Examined, and their Errors Censured and
Suppressed, [whether by obliging them to Retract their Errors, or if not, to
order their Books to be Burnt by the Common Hangman, or any other Method] as to
their great Wisdom shall appear to deserve, etc. and for this Noble Act, this
Generous and Christian Undertaking, with that Modesty which highly became them,
to be thus Censured by the Quakers, to Impeach the Wisdom of the Parliament, to
excite them to a Barbarous Tragedy, to cut their Throats, that they may swim
through a Sea of Blood, is not only a False, Pernicious, and Scandalous
Representation of the Petitioners, and their Right of Petitioning; but it is
Imperious in the Superlative degree, and will give them further ground to
believe, that when the Government have leisure to examine them, and that they
are willing to wait, it will let the Quakers see they have nothing to do with
Queen Elizabeth's Motto; Much suspected by me,
Nothing proved can be.
and that they will be forced to sing another Song, and to change their Motto;
viz. Many things are fairly moved,
And also as fully proved,


by me, Fra. Bugg.

Now follows a short Discourse by way of Dialogue, between Jacob the Wet
Quaker, and a Civilian, for diversion-sake, after a piece of hard Drudgery; viz.
Civilian. Oh! Friend Jacob, how do thou do? Come, let us have a Bottle of
Red, and half an Hours Chat.


Quaker. With all my Heart; pray what is the News?


Civ. News? I know but little; I meddle not with State Affairs: But to be free
with you, I was astonished at your Deportment the other Day at the Commons Lobby
toward Fra. Bugg, when he gave away his Book to the Members of Parliament, and
how Imperiously you Menaced him, whose gray Hairs might have commanded your
better Respect, and perhaps may be as good a Man as your self, if your Debts
were paid; bidding him put off his Hat to the Members, which with great respect
he did, and needed not your Doctrine, which had been fitter for your self to
have observed, and the morose Clowns your. Brethren, who neither respect your
Superiors, nor regard your Betters: Besides, you cannot but know how many of
your Teachers are, and have been, guilty of gross Immoralities, as Gerard
Roberts, and his Son Thomas, together with Newton, Gosnell, Billing, Antrobus,
Archer, Burr, Travers, Murford, Tailor, Clark, etc. besides your Hearers, as,
Bracy, Boswell, Plumstead, Northcott, French, Stone, Firth, Olive, Goodwin,
Cadey, etc. besides what he has put in the Cage of Unclean Birds, in his
Pilgrim's Progress, 2d Edit. p. 294.


Qua. Hold, Friend, thee seem to be in a Passion; thou saw as soon as I
perceived how the Members took his Books, and the People showed their dislike,
I came away.


Civ. I am not angry; but since in your Reply to his Modest Defense, etc. p. 8.
you seem to allow the liberty of Printing, why are you so angry with him, since
you have not power, as in Pensilvania, where you both Fined, Imprisoned, and
took away the Printer's Tools for so much as Printing an Appeal, since he does
no more than you practice, and seem now to allow?


Qua. Be not mistaken, we are an Innocent People, and vindicate Truth and
Innocence.


Civ. Again, p. 7. ibid. you say, You are ready to make it appear that your
Books are not Blasphemous. Again, p. 11. We are ready to undertake the proof of
every Doctrine we hold by and from the Scriptures.


Qua. We are ready, and dare undertake it.


Civ. To the first I answer, it is impossible; for in his Book to the Parliament
he has Reprinted one of your Books, in which is horrible Blasphemy, writ by G.
Whitehead, etc. to the second, I say Fra. Bugg has Challenged your Teachers
Fifty times, and G. Keith as many; yet you are not ready to vindicate either
your Doctrine, or the Books which contain them, and since that, Whitehead
seldom appeared at Parliament.


Qua. I grant that Book has put a sad damp on our Friends; but you must know,
that giving us G. Whitehead's Method in his Truth and Innocence, etc. viz. of
leaving out words, and adding words to, and transposing words, we dare meet
them. As for instance, in the last Recital adding two words, Never and Any, and
putting out Every, and it should run thus, We are Never ready to undertake the
proof of any Doctrine we hold.


Civ. This is brave Work indeed; any thing may do at this rate; pray what say
you to p. 11. ibid. where you grant, that were it not for the Act of
Toleration, your Monthly, Quarterly, and Yearly Meetings were illegal; but yet
they relating to Religion, are allowed by the Act, whilst in another Book,
where being charged with the Doors of their Meeting being Locked, Barred, or
bolted, A Just Censure, etc. p. 26. there you say these Meetings are not
designed for Worship; and it is plain none besides Religious Meetings are
tolerated by the Act; what say you to this?


Qua. I perceive thou do not know us, nor our way, which is to carry two
Faces under one Religious Hood; you must not measure us by our words, but by
our meaning, and that of our own giving too; and if thee wilt but be a Friend
to us, I will give thee as good a Hamper of Wine as ever thee did tip over
Tongue.


Civ. This is all downright Hypocrisy, for at this rate no Man can tell either
your Faith or Principles: And as to your Present I will not accept thereof; for
a Gift may pervert, and my Religion to me is more than all; nor am I so mean
spirited to betray my Conscience for all the Wine in thy Cellar. But, Friend,
there is another thing in which I would be satisfied, namely, your answering
Books, wherein you falsify the Text, drop Words, split Sentences, and mar the
Sense of your Opponant's Argument; I will give you but one Instance in a Sheet
presented to the Parliament by Fra. Bugg, with a Scheme of your Yearly Meeting,
etc. Col. 2. Reason 6. In one sort of their Books they pretend to Love, Own,
and Honor the King, yea, to Pray for all Men, for Kings, and all that are in
Authority; but in their contrary sort of Books they tell you, That all Kings
and Emperors sprung up in the Night since the Days of the Apostles, among the
Antichrists; that they own no King, but Jesus; nor no Government, but the
Government of the Lamb; that they are Traitors against Christ that desire an
Earthly King: Do you read (say the Quakers) that there were any Kings since the
Days of the Apostles, but among the Apostate Christians? That Kings are the
Spiritual Egyptians -- Oh what a Sincerity was once in the Nation! What a dirty
nasty thing it would have been to have heard talk of a House of Lords among
them? -- A Parliament chosen by most Voices are not like to act for God, and
the good of his People. -- It was through Ignorance that the People subjected
themselves to Hereditary Government, or to the Government standing in a single
Person successively; -- and our Nation have been under Bondage on this Account.
Now all that the Quakers in their Just Censure, etc. p. 18. recite, is as
follows, viz. In one sort of our Books we seem to Own, Love, and Honor the
King, yea, to Pray for all Men, for Kings, and all that are in Authority; but
in the other sort of our Books we tell People, that Kings and Emperors sprung
up in the Night, and among Apostate Christians; and that we are against the
English Government, etc. Now how short and defective they are herein, is
obvious by comparing each.


Qua. Friends Intentions are good, they mean well, and can now word their
Matter otherwise, and yet mean the same thing; for our Principles are now no
other than they were in the beginning: And by Reason thereof, and that we
cannot quit our Infallibility, some that went from us, throw in their Bombs
amongst us, which does fearfully annoy us, and have split our Mainmast of
Infallibility, and broken the Helm of our Sinless Perfection.


Civ. Now, Friend Jacob, it grows late, I cannot stay, I shall only sum up a
few Observations from the Premises, and then take my leave of you.

1. As to F. B. whether he has New Clothes, or not, what he had left when his
Horse, and Pocket-money for his Expedition, was discounted, make nothing to the
purpose; he has given as great a proof that he has not been Mercenary, in
writing 16 or 18 Years together against you without Money, as any Quaker can
give.

2. Your Leaders are very Saucy to meddle with the Bishops Certificate, as in
any thing you have attempted: Suppose he had been mistaken in the Man, he did
not say he gave it forth from the Eternal Infallible Spirit of God; he only
said he had known him some Years, this you do not disprove; That he appeared to
him to be an Honest, Sober, Industrious Man, this might be for ought you either
say or know; and if he had been mistaken, he does not pretend to know the
Heart, nor to discern who are Saints, who are Devils, and who are Apostates, as
the Quakers do; and if he had been mistaken, it had been no more than some of
your Teachers have been: That he had taken much Pains to Undeceive and Convert
the Quakers, by publishing useful Books, and not without Success, this he might
safely say, for it was true in Fact; for at that time Mr. Rands, his Wife, and
others that had left the Quakers, declared to some, that his Book, The Painted
Harlot Stripped and Whipped, etc. was instrumental therein; and since that, many
others are come off who have acknowledged as much. And that by the Hardness of
Times, Charge of Printing, he was reduced, etc. this was true in Fact;
wherefore (says he) I apprehend him a Real Object of Charity, and that he does
truly deserve the Bounty of well-disposed Persons, unto whom I recommend him;
what hurt is in all this? And what had your Friends to do with it? May you hold
a Yearly Meeting with Doors Locked, issue out your Epistles for Money to
relieve your Friends, as you say; and may not a Bishop of the Established
Church recommend one of their Members to well-disposed Persons of the same
Communion, without your Censure? Can you not be content to Censure the Acts of
Corporations, Grand Juries, and Justices, but must your Boldness extend to the
Exposing and Censuring the Bishops; I think you are a Peg too high.

3. Whereas they pretend to undertake the proof of every Doctrine they hold,
this appears to be a Lie told in Hypocrisy: Let them Confute the Six Articles
above exhibited, and Defend themselves from the Ten Instances wherein they are
Charged to be one in Doctrine with the Romish Church: Let them Answer F. B's
Seventy Queries, or else it will be taken pro Confesso, and that they are never
able to clear themselves from being guilty of Idolatry, Blasphemy, Contempt of
God's Word, and an Hundred other gross and vile Errors.

4. In Oliver's time then the Clergy put in Books into the Parliaments Hands,
and it was your Business to Answer, and but reasonable you should defend your
selves; and that the Government should hear both sides; this Privilege none
denied you: But now you put Books into their Hands not only in Sessions time,
but send them the Nation round to their Houses in the interval of Parliaments,
and F. Bugg Answers them, and presents them in Sessions time; this now you
cannot bear, this angers you, and you fall upon the Man; the Man is an Ill Man,
the Man is Contentious, the Man is Quarrelsom, the Man is an Apostate, a
Renegado; this I tell you is very Bold and Imperious in your Teachers, that
such as forsake your Heresy, and conform to the Established Religion, are by
you Censured Apostates and Renegadoes; this highly reflects upon the
Government, and by implication Charges the King and Parliaments Religion to be
Heathen: For it was always accounted that such as forsook the Heathen Worship,
and embraced the Christian Faith, were Converts; and that such as forsook the
Christian Religion, and embraced Heathen Idolatry, (as some did formerly as
well as now) were Apostates and Renegadoes; now by your Quakers Doctrine, the
Church of England is Heathen, and you Christian; how then have you the Face to
appear to such as humble Suitors, and with such Books too, as tell them, by
implication at least, that they are a Heathen Parliament, and that such as
forsake the Quakers, and go to Church with the Parliament, are Apostates,
Renegadoes? etc.

5. In their Just Censure, p. 40. they tell us, We are satisfied that it is no
other Attestation than he has Collected out of our old Adversaries Books, etc.
this F. B. denies, he took not a word of it out of their Adversaries Books.

6. Nor does he believe they are able to produce a Letter of the Late Lord
Archbishop's, to clear W. Penn from the general belief that he is a J -- t; but
if they could, it is not one Negative Evidence will do it, since some of the
very same Order has confirmed that Opinion.

7. If your Teachers be ready, as they boast, to prove every Doctrine they
hold, let them appoint Time and Place, and G. Keith and F. Bugg will not only
meet them, but prove the recited Charge upon them; if not, I will be one that
shall desire they may be set in the Pillory for Examples, on Condition the
Quakers will be obliged, if they do, that they will retract their Errors; this to
be sure is no Persecution, though the only thing they fear; and all in support of
their great Idol Infallibility, and Sinless Perfection.

8. But if they refuse this, it will appear that your Teachers, Friend Jacob,
are great Prevaricators, impudent Liars, horrible Deceivers, great Impostors,
wicked Blasphemers, and gross Idolaters, Subverters of Laws, Religion, and that
their Principles improved, are destructive to all Mankind.

9. And therefore, Friend Jacob, there is not only Bombs sent into your Camp,
but there is a whole Broadside given, which will shake your Strong Hold: That
is to say, by two Books, the one by Fra. Bugg, Entitled, The Pilgrim's
Progress, etc. which shows, that your Monthly, Quarterly, Secondday, and
Six-week Meetings are nor for Worship, as you now confess, but for Government,
and that that Government is contrary to all the Laws above recited; the other
by Geo. Keith, Entitled, The Fourth Narrative of Proceedings at Turners-Hall,
showing that your Principles are destructive to Christianity, and tend to
overthrow the Christian Religion.

10. And I am glad to see you thus pursued, and for your own good too, in hopes
that our Government will find a time to Examine these things, and prevent your
walking in Masquerade, as well as your deep Design to supplant Christianity.

11. And I am willing further to observe, that as the Proceedings of Francis
Bugg has been a Check upon you, so has he been useful in keeping on foot the
Petition till a Convenient Season; as also in Answering your Books, by which
you Banter the Grand Juries, the Corporations, and the Justices of Peace, which
will be no small Motive to the Prosecution now in hand.

12. Not that I believe or desire Persecution will ensue; no. I am not for
punishing the Swearers and Damners of the Age with Cutting their Throats, or a
Sea of Blood; but that as God permits them to Live, so the Nation suffers them,
though not tolerated by an Act of Indulgence; no more it is hoped will you in your
Blasphemous Errors and Pernicious Principles, unless you do heartily and
sincerely retract them, and thereby make some Atonement for the great Scandal
you have been to the Reformed Religion; and so Adieu.


ERRATA.
PReface, p. 1. line 4. for 1689, read School. p. 9. l. 18. f. as, r. is. p. 37.
l. 13. f. have to, r. to, have.

Page 28. line 2. Smith's Works, and Penington's Question. p. 35. l. 15. f.
1560. r. 1650. p. 52. l. 14. f. Country, r. Counterfeit. p. 61. l. 24. f. writ,
r. wrought. p. 78. l. 15. f. Reason, r. Harlot. p. 128. l. 4. r. till you have.
p. 172. l. 27. f. why, r. what. p. 250. l. 14. f. Reason, r. Religion. l. 17.
r. Boiling Vengeance. p. 227. f. every, r. ever. p. 303. l. 3. f. is, r. in. p.
305. l. 6. r. which to. p. 154. l. 8. r. the Lord.

THE Pilgrim's Progress, FROM QUAKERISM TO Christianity, etc.
CHAP. I.
Giving an Account of my Education in the Profession of the Christian Faith;
and how I came to Apostatize from it, and fall in with the Schism of Quakerism.

I Was Born at Milden-Hall, in the County of Suffolk, on the 10th Day of March,
Anno 1640. and Baptized into the Church of Christ, the 14th of the same Month;
promising then by my Sureties, to Fight manfully under Christ's Banner. My
Father's Name was Robert Bugg, second Son of Francis Bugg, (and Margaret his
Wife,) who was Chief Constable many Years; my Mother's Name was Joan, the
Fourth and Youngest Daughter of Thomas Holman, and Mary his Wife, (who was
Baptized the 16th Day of March, 1619.) living at Lakenheath-Hall* My Parents
were of a good Yeomen-Family, and lived in good Repute, and brought me up in
the Profession of the Church of England; and when I came to Years, capable of
Instruction, they Taught me the Lords Prayer, the Ten Commandments, and the
Apostles Creed; and very severe they were, in Teaching me the Rudiments of the
Christian Religion. I remember my Mother, who was a very good and pious Woman,
and religiously inclined, would not suffer me to Sleep, when I went to Bed,
e're I had said my Prayers, and sometimes, part of my Catechism: And on the
Lord's Day, she made me to frequent the Church, and at Home on that Day, as
well as most other Days, to read some Portion of the Holy Scriptures: They
brought me up to School Learning, until I attained to the Age of about Fifteen
Years, whereby I was capable to Write, and Read English very well; as also to
cast Account, few Lads went beyond me: As also the Grammar, wherein I was well
instructed in the Rules thereof, insomuch, that I began to make a Piece of
Latin; but my Father living in a great Farm at Undley-Hall, in the Parish of
Lakenheath, of 200 l. a Year; besides a Fen-Farm in his Hands, of 100 l. per.
Ann. more; he had, in the Summertime, great Occasion for my Assistance, and
thereby was prevented, of attaining to that Degree they once designed: And
afterward being an Apprentice, and so fell into Business, that I soon lost a
great part of that Learning, I once had attained.

I must also confess, I was in my Youth inclined to Company, especially to
Dancing and Music; yet I had in my early Years a Love to Religion, and
delighted much in Reading the Holy Scriptures, sometimes Eight or Ten Chapters
together, I also loved much to hear good Preachers. I very well remember, that
sometimes I went to Milden-Hall, (where we formerly lived,) on the Lord's Day,
on purpose to hear Mr. Watson, who was accounted a famous Preacher, being Four
Miles from my Dwelling. Thus much briefly touching my early Education.

Observations on the First Chapter.
REader, I am the more particular in these Remarks, for that the Quakers, [how
much soever I was in esteem, whilst with them] since I left them, have traduced
me, and laid all the Reproaches on me which Malice can invent, Non patitur
Ludum fama, Fides, Oculus, i. e. A Man's Good Name, his Faith, his Eye will not
be dally'd with, said Luther in his Comment. upon Gal. p. 51.
as shall be showed hereafter; as well as to show, how excellent a thing it is,
for Parents to bring up their Children in the Nurture and Fear of the Lord, to
instruct them in the Principles of Christianity; teach them the Lord's Prayer,
the Ten Commandments, the Apostles Creed, and the Church Catechism: These
Things, together with Reading and Hearing the Scriptures Expounded, being
instiled into them, in their young Years, they will scarcely forget it when
they are Old: But, if they should, yet at one time or other, the Remembrance of
them may so far be brought to mind, that they may thereby be brought to a Sense
of their Condition. And I speak what I know by Experience; for the first Sermon
I heard, which was Preached by Mr. Smithies, of Cripplegate, London, after I
was about 25 Years amongst the Quakers, and the very hearing of the Lord's
Prayer, the Ten Commandments, the Apostles Creed, and Confession of Sin, did so
strike me, and bring things to my Memory, that it shak'd all my
Self-Confidence, and brought me to the Consideration of Times past.

CHAP. II.
An Account of my Apostasy; and how I came to be carried away by the Quakers
Dissimulation.

ABout the Year of our Lord 1657, Thomas Symonds, of Norwich, came to
Lakenheath, and appointed Meetings; and many Quakers came from Thetford, and
other Places: And, though I went to Church on the Forenoon, yet I had itching
Ears to hear the Quakers; and my Mother being dead, and much of my Restraint
thereby taken off, I went to their Meetings in the Afternoon, and gave great
heed to what was spoken; whose chief Subject was, The Light within every Man,
and this Light to be Christ: And their great Argument was from Christ's telling
the Woman of Samaria her Thoughts, saying, Come, see a Man which told me all
things that ever I did; is not this the Christ? etc. John 4.29. Therefore, said
the Quakers, this Light within must needs be the Man Christ, and no other Man
Christ, do they now own to this Day, if they would speak their Thoughts:
However, their Writings prove it; and till they condemn them, all they allege
to the contrary is nothing worth.

Well, however, I and others were catched by these and the like fallacious
Arguments, not being well grounded in the Principles of the Christian Religion,
nor understanding the Wiles of Satan; and by their smooth and fair Carriage, by
their suffering patiently the Affronts they then met with. And I cannot but
still remember, how our Minister warned us of the Doctrine of the Quakers, and
told us, they were Deceivers and Antichrists; even those Deceivers which Christ
foretold us should arise, showing Signs and Wonders; insomuch, that if it were
possible, they should deceive the very Elect, Matthew. 24.24. Which I now also
believe.
But by this their pretended Patience in Suffering, by their so much insisting
on the Dictates of our Consciences, which prompts to Good, and checks for some
Evils; with other fair Words, and seeming, nay, real Truths, with which they
covered over their poisonous Pills of Schism and Heresy, many of us were
deceived.

Again, when I saw so much Plainness and seeming Sincerity in the Quakers, and
considered, how our Minister lived, it was another Motive to induce me to go
after the Quakers; for our Minister lived with my Father, I do think some
Years; my Father was the chief Man that got him into the Place: But, both then,
and afterward, he was such, not so exemplary as he ought to have been, and I
not being capable to judge of the Doctrinal Part, I was carried away in my
Affections; being more apt to be led by Example than Precept, which is not
always safe: However, I do believe it was the offensive Practice of our
Minister, which I beheld in diverse Particulars, which was one Cause of my
Stumbling, whereby I fell unhappily into that Schism. Not that I now judge the
Occasion by him given, was or is warrantable for a Separation from an
Established Church.

Observations on the Second Chapter.
NOW therefore, I entreat all concerned in the Ministerial Office, as Pastors,
That they beware they give no ill Example to their Flock, contrary to what
becomes their Sacred Function; but, when they Preach well, let them Practice
so, as believing what they say, so will their People believe them to be in
earnest. But, if they Preach never so Orthodoxly, and though their Sermons be
never so much Learned, yet if they do not live in some tolerable sort
answerably, their People will Question, Whether they believe what they teach;
and, as a Consequence thereof, will take that Liberty in Living, which is not
becoming Christians: Or else, if Seducers come, will be apt to separate
themselves, in Hopes to get under a purer Ministry; which, when they come
afterward to examine, they may find it to be only in Show. Notwithstanding
such is the Prevalency of Example.

CHAP. III.
Gives an Account of the Quakers Silent Meetings, and the Tendency of them: In
which, I shall speak sometimes in the Person of a Quaker, respecting the time I
was one.

HAving by this time fallen in with the Quakers; in a few Years, I became very
zealous that way, and to Silent Meetings I went; and sometimes we had a few
Words spoken, sometimes none; sometime an Epistle of George Whitehead's, George
Fox's, Sam. Cater's, or some others, read in our Meetings, and sometimes none:
But the chief of what we did hear, either from our inspired Infallible
Teachers, or from our Friends Epistles, in those private Silent Meetings, was,
To exhort us to wait in the Light, out of our Selves, out of our Thoughts, out
of our Willings and Runnings, in that which is invisible; and then we should
receive the hidden Manna, yea, Manna from Heaven, which the World knew not of;
and that we should feel Christ to come the second time to Judgment; and that
Judgment was to begin at the House of God, which House was our Bodies: And from
hence diverse of us fell often into a Trembling and Shaking. I have seen about
five or six together in a Meeting, shake like a Leaf in Winter, namely, Matthew
Beesly, Jonas Skrook, William Eyson, and others; yea, they have shaken the
Forms they sat on; and this, not once, nor twice, but frequently. I do very
well remember, that John Kilborn the Elder, did one Sunday in our Meeting, fold
his Arms, and stood upright, and by and by leaped and jumped about 18 Inches at
a time, until he jumped round the Room. I know, that some are alive still, that
know these things are true. But, let it be noted, not a Chapter in the Bible
was ever read amongst us, but all exhorted to adhere to the Light within, to
obey the Light within, and to follow the Teachings thereof, as a Guide
sufficient to lead us to Salvation; yea, above Scripture, above Fathers, above
Councils, and above Churches: Fran. Howgill's Works, p. 602, to 627. This I now
confess was a Paradox; not Orthodox, but absolutely Heterodox: For let the
Scripture command Subjects to be obedient to Magistrates, Children to obey
their Parents, Wives to reverence their Husbands, and live in Subjection to
them, Servants to obey their Masters, Christians to obey their Pastors, all
this signified little; the Light within (our Teachers taught us,) was Christ,
and Christ the Power of God, the higher Power, to which every Soul was to be
subject; yea, all Power in Heaven and in Earth was committed to the Light,
Perverting John 5.23,24. Acts 17, to 31. See Josiah Coal's Works, p. 93. And
that no Command in Scripture was any further binding, than as we were convinced
of the Lawfulness thereof, by the Light within us. Ed. Burrough's Works, p. 47.
So, that all our Obedience to God, and his Commands, were bottomed and founded
on our Conviction, by the Light within, that being the only Rule, Judge and
Guide, both superior to the Scriptures, Fathers and Councils. Quakerism a New
Nickname for Old Christianity, by W. Penn, p. 71. For, said they to us, That
what is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as the
Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater, Truth defending the Quakers, etc. p.
7.

By which, it is self-evident, That these Silent Meetings were designed to wean
us off from so much as the Remembrance of all External Religion, and also, to
prepare us to receive the false Notions of Quakerism; for, had they indeed
exhorted us, to have regard to our Light within, and the Dictates of our
Consciences, which prompts to Good, and checks for many Evils; in Obedience to
the Commands of Holy Scripture, this would have been safe, for I believe we
ought so to do, and it is the same the Ministers of the Church of England press
and exhort us to. Oh! but this would not do our Teachers Business; they must
bring us off from the Scripture Commands, as inferior to their Sayings and
Speakings; for the Book last quoted, is said to be given forth from the Spirit
of Truth, in George Whitehead, and George Fox the Younger, See Title Page. And
being questioned by a Minister, p. 7. Whether the Quakers Speaking was of as
great Authority as any Chapter in the Bible? George Whitehead replied, saying,
That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in ANY, is of as GREAT AUTHORITY
as the Scritures and Chapters are, and GREATER. So that the plain Consequence
of this Doctrine, is, That the Authority of this little Pamphlet of Whitehead's
and Fox's VVriting, is of Greater Authority than the Bible; and not only that,
but all their other Pamphlets which they give forth (as they pretend,) from the
Spirit of Truth, or Light within. The said Minister proposed another Question
to Whitehead, viz. Is the Moral Law, or Ten Commandments, a Rule to the
Christian's Life, or is it not? p. 18. To this G. Whitehead replied, saying,
Thou might as well ask, If the Moral Law be a Rule to Christ, for the
Christian's Life and Rule is Christ; meaning, their Light within: From whence
it is plain, that the Ten Commandments are not the Quakers Rule: No, no, not
unless they be convinced by their Light within, of the Reasonableness of their
Obedience, as Mr. Penn teaches, and Edward Buroughs, their great Prophet,
Quakerism a New Nickname, etc. p. 71. Burrough's Works, p. 47. And by these,
and the like Arguments, our Teachers brought us off, from believing the
Scriptures to be the Word of God: And as such, to have Authority over us, and
Binding to us, whether convinced, or not convinced; by these Means, they
brought us from the Practice of repeating the Lord's Prayer, the Ten
Commandments, and the Apostles Creed, in our Families: By these cunning
Slights, they by degrees brought us off the Ordinances of Christ, as Baptism
and the Lord's Supper, asking Forgiveness of Sin, and the like Christian
Duties, in which many of us had been Educated, and which the Scriptures command
and exhort to. And by reason of this, and the like Doctrine, together with not
reading the Holy Scriptures in our Meetings, but their Epistles only, as in my
former Books I have at large showed; we came to forget, and not regard, nor
have Faith in the Crucified Jesus, who died for our Sins, and rose again for
our Justification; and that in these Fundamental Points following; namely, 1.
That Faith in Christ, as he outwardly suffered at Jerusalem, was necessary to
our Salvation, provided we hearkened diligently to our Light within. 2. That
Justification and Sanctification, is by the Blood of Christ outwardly shed. 3.
That there shall be a Resurrection of the Body that dies. 4. That Christ shall
come without us in his Glorified Body, to Judge the Quick and the Dead, at the
last Day; even the same Jesus, that was Born of the Virgin, Died, Rose,
Ascended, and now Sits at the Right Hand of God in Heaven, making Intercession
for us: News out of the North, p. 14. As also that there was little need of
Preaching the Literal Knowledge of Christ's Death, Miracles, Resurrection and
Ascension, because they are generally believed by all sorts professing
Christianity: See Isaac Pennington's Book, The Flesh and Blood of Christ, etc.
p. 29. I say, by our Teachers thus slighting the Scriptures, as Death, Dust,
and Serpents Food, of which I have largely treated elsewhere; and by their
other Doctrine scattered up and down their Books, they brought us off from the
Belief and Expectation of these Things, as George Keith by his Third Narrative,
has clearly made to appear; and as a Pregnant Instance thereof, with respect to
my self, see my First Book I printed, De Chris. Lib. Part 2. which, although it
treat of the best part of Quakerism, and gave a mortal VVound to the
Jurisdiction of their Female Government, yet it set not forth any one of these
four Fundamental Points: For, as their Hypocrisy in pretending to be plain,
sincere, simple and innocent, was a means to attract and draw me after them;
so, the like Hypocrisy in pretending to gather to the Light, leave People to
their Light, as a sufficient Rule, Judge and Guide, Yet acting quite contrary,
as anon will appear.
etc. was one Reason why I left them. I do not look upon it so eminently my
Business, to set forth the admirable Advantage and Use of the Lord's Prayer,
the Ten Commandments, the Apostles Creed, Baptism, and the Lord's Supper; no,
every Bookseller's Shop is furnished with plenty of such Books, which are writ
by Men of great Learning and Skill; which, should I write after them, it would
be next to light a Candle at Noonday, when the Sun shines in its Brightness.
Though, if I lived in a Country where such Arguments were not, I thank God, I
could, through the Study of the Scriptures (and the Knowledge I have of the
Doctrinal part of Christianity thereby,) speak somewhat to the Point, and which
might be useful too: No, I take it to be my Business and Office, amongst
others, to unmask and discover the Errors and Pernicious Principles of the
Quakers; and therefore refer to Bishop Andrews upon the Commandments, Bishop
Pearson upon the Creed, Dr. Cumber upon the Lord's Prayer, and indeed, what
else the Church teach.

And to make it yet more evident, if more can be, that the very Design of these
Silent Meetings was to bring us off, and wean us from the Articles of the
Christian Faith, and the Principles of the Christian Religion; and thereby, to
mould us, and square us, as fit Tools for their Turn, to supplant and overthrow
it. And this I know, that the more we obeyed the Doctrine of our new Teachers,
the more we grew dead to all Instituted Religion.

For, as Universities, and other Schools of Learning, as well amongst the Jews
as Christians, had a tendency to prepare Men, and through God's Assisting Grace,
were a means, and a help to such as were to be Consecrated, and set apart for
the Work of the Ministry; so I do affirm, and that from an Experimental
Knowledge, That these Silent Universities tends only to empty the Mind of all
true and solid Notions of the Christian Religion, and only to prepare them for
the wild Notions of Quakerism, which has such a sandy Foundation, that to this
Day they have not been able to produce their Articles of that Faith they
pretend to; but are, as Mr. Baxter said Penitential Confession, p. 63. i. e.
The Quakers are amongst us a disgraced broken Sect, etc. notwithstanding their
pretense to Unity, Uniformity, and to be of one Mind, referring often to their
Beginning; when, alas! some will pay Tithes, some not; some shut up their Shops
on Fast-Days, some not; some for Thee and Thou still, but most of them not, but
are like other People; some wet Quakers, some not; some for this, some for
that; and some for neither this nor that; as in a Hundred Things I could show.

But, lest any should think me partial in stating the Case, and in showing the
Consequences of our Silent Meetings, or Schools of Ignorance, I shall now
proceed farther to prove my Reasons, and that from plain Matter of Fact; that
so it may appear, as well from our printed Books, as from our known Practice,
what a strange Effect these Silent Meetings had upon us; and, how we thereby
became not only levened into a Temper, to throw off all Instituted Religion,
but to a degree higher, even to throw Contempt both upon the Scriptures,
Ordinances and Ministers, and all things Sacred, crying down all Forms and
Constitutions, how ancient and profitable soever they were, and all under a
Pretense of a higher Dispensation, even the Light within, etc.

For says W. Penn, We [Quakers] being withdrawn from every Form and
Constitution, to wait [in Silence] for Life from God, and not from beggarly
Elements, and therefore made a Prey to all Parties; against whom every Hand
have been lifted up, and forsaken by all Civil Power, etc. The Guide Mistaken,
p. 32.

To this, let me add the Testimony of one of our greatest Prophets; his Words
are these; (i. e.) I dare not daub (says Solomon) with untempered Mortar; for
where they (i. e. Professors of Christianity) are, I was, viz. in Performances,
in Ordinances, in Family Duties, in Hearing, in Reading, in Prayers and
Fastings, in my own Will; and all this is Will Worship. But when that one thing
( the Light) came, which was needful, I then began (waiting in Silence) to
learn to be a Fool; insomuch, that I durst not give God thanks for the Victuals
that were set before me. A Music Lecture, p. 25.

Thus it is plain, that our Teachers led us into this Silent way of pretended
Worship, which never was known before since the World began. Indeed,
Consideration and Meditation are good, and ought often to be the Exercise of
Christians; but then they have an Object to Meditate upon; either the Works of
Creation and Providence, which affords much Comfort, and Cause to praise God
our great Creator; or else, on our Lord Jesus Christ his Death, and Sufferings,
and perfect Obedience, and the like. But, I say, to go on purpose to a Meeting,
and there sit starving in the Cold three or four Hours together, speaking never
a Word, nor as near as we can, think a Thought of our own; this is such a new
and non such way of Worship, as neither Prophets, Christ's Apostles, nor any
Christian Church to this Day, ever gave Countenance to, or President for; I
grant, That John Reeve and Lodowick Muggleton, who came forth with George Fox,
and their Books bear the like Face, viz. Though all visible Worship is now become
of no value in the Eyes of the Lord, yet it may be truly said, that Christ is
with his Apostles always to the end of the World, in all those that Worship him
in Spirit and Truth; I mean, those Sober Silent Saints, whose Language and
Practice speaks forth the Spirit and Power of the Scriptures in them; these
Silent Saints I speak of, from an unerring Spirit, -- from an infallible Light,
which I have received from the Divine Majesty, etc. Joyful News from Heaven, p.
61, 72.

Reader, I have by me Lodowick Muggleton's Journal, or Works, bound up in one
Volume, containing eleven distinct Books in Quarto, and above One Thousand
Pages; and so like to George Fox's, that I intend they shall stand together in
the Library of Christ's Church College in Oxford, with the Works of Buroughs,
Bailey, Smith, and others; that so any who are concerned with the Quakers
Errors, may be furnished, etc.

Thus, Reader, you see, that Muggleton and Fox stand on the same Bottom; Fox
was unerring, so was Muggleton; Fox was for an Infallible Light, so was
Muggleton; Fox was for Silent Saints, so was Muggleton, only Muggleton keeps
close to his Principles; for as he denies all Ordinances, so he does not
Preach, Pray, nor Baptize, nor Administer the Sacrament: But the Quakers, as in
the Instance of Solomon Eccles above-quoted, pretend to be against all
Ordinances, and yet own Preaching and Praying, and deny Baptism and the Supper,
etc. However, since I have no Author, nor never read of any but Lodowick
Muggleton, that justify the Quakers Silent Meetings, I will produce one
Passage more, i. e. That the Worship required by him from his Saints, was an
Inward Stilness, by which their Souls were made willing to hearken to the Voice
or Motion of bis most Holy Spirit, speaking in them. -- Thus from an unerring
Light, I have remonstrated to the Elect, what is the very true God, and his
Spiritual Worship accepted of him; it is not Outward Praying, Preaching, Fasting
or Thanksgiving, to be seen of Men; but it is an Inward, Spiritual, Silent
Praying and Praising, Fasting and Feasting, upon the Glorious Things of
Eternity, which is only seen by Divine Eyes, etc. p. 41, 43. Ibid.

Thus I have showed, that Lodowick Muggleton was a better Quaker of the two
than Solomon Eccles: But that it may appear, that as the Quakers have testified
against the Christians for owning the Authority of the Bible, so let them see
they have a Partner, namely Muggleton, who says, p. 49. Ibid. Again, in the
next place, I shall demonstrate the Vanity of the Ministry of the Baptists; I
need not tell you the Foundation upon which they build their Worship, because
it is founded on the Letter The Quakers Language to a Tee.
of the Scripture, and their own lying Reason, which is the Devil in them: All
true Christians are now under the Ministry of the Holy Spirit, and therefore
are no more bound in Conscience to Apostolic Worship; I say again, that above
this 1000 Years there has not been a Man sent to Preach or Prophesy, p. 50.
How then can thou possibly become a Minister of Divine Ordinances, by
Authority from another Man's Words or Writings, unless without their Letter,
thou were immediately moved to speak by the Holy Spirit, as they were?
Moreover, though the Scriptures in themselves are true, yet there is nothing but
Death in them to a Carnal Spirit: The Letter kills, but the Spirit gives
Life; and can a dead and killing Letter give the Power, to become a Spiritual
Minister of Christ's Ordinances to his Elect People? I trow not, etc.

Thus does Lodowick profess the same Infallibility of Judgment, the same way of
Silent Meetings, the same Perfection and unerring Light to Guide, moved thereby
immediately. Again, they join, like Samson's Foxes, against the Scripture, a
dead Letter, a killing Letter, a carnal Letter. I think I have said enough at
this time, of the Harmony betwixt Lodowick Muggleton, and the Quaker Teachers,
though I could bring many of the like Instances.

Some Inferences from the Third Chapter.
IS it so, that whereas it is written, John 5.23,27. For the Father judges no
Man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son, and has given him Authority
to execute Judgment also, because he is the Son of Man: Confirmed by the
Apostle, Acts 17.31. Because he has appointed a Day, in which he will judge
the World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has Ordained, whereof he has
given Assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised him from the Dead? I say,
Is it so? And have the Quakers perverted these Texts in St. John, and put on a
new Translation, saying, All Power in Heaven and Earth is committed to their
Light? Quoting John 5.23. Josiah Coal's Works, p. 93. This is a bold Attempt;
this is most Horrible, if not Blasphemy, thus to subvert the Gospel, to serve
their Corrupt Ends. How wary then had People need be of receiving the Quaker's
Doctrine? Is it so, that People being thus caught in a Snare, and brought over
to their Silent Meetings, and thereby weaned and drawn off from the Principles
and Practices of the Christian Churches in all Ages, as Baptism, the Lord's
Supper, the Lord's Prayer, Ten Commandments, the Apostles Creed, Confession of
Sin, and reading the Scriptures in their Meetings, in the Worship of God? Oh!
what Care ought to be taken, that these People should be shunned, and these
false Worshippers be rejected, as a contagious Disease? Is it so, that the
Quakers hold, that what is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of
greater Authority than the Holy Scriptures, which was ever since the Days of
Christ and his Apostles, brought as a Proof, to cast the Balance in all
Controversies? And do they indeed hold as their Books teach, That that is no
Command of God to me, what he commanded to another; and that no Command in the
Scripture is any further obliging upon any Man, than as he finds a Conviction
upon his Conscience, as W. Penn and their Prophet Buroughs teach? Burrough's
Works, p. 47. Quakerism a new Nickname, etc. p. 71. This surely is the Womb of
all Iniquity in the World; this opens the Floodgates to all Error, Atheism,
Deism, Socinianism, Arianism and what not. This therefore ought to precaution
all People, to beware how they receive the dangerous Pill of Quakerism, how
excellently soever it is covered with some plausible Pretensions and fair
Arguments. Is it so, that the Quakers have not, nor ever had, since the Days of
Simon Magus, none like them amongst the Christian Churches, who denied the
Ordinances of Baptism, Supper, and Confession of Sin, but John Reeve, and
Lodowick Muggleton? How then does it behove their Followers, to examine the
Doctrine and Practice of their Teachers, and to turn from them, and flee as for
their Lives?

CHAP. IV.
Shows that this Anarchy did not last long, but a Government was set up:
Sometimes a Single Person, as Pope over us; and sometimes the Light in the Body
of Friends, claimed a Power over the Light in the Particular.

FOR after we became dead to the Rudiments of the World, as we accounted those
Christian Duties, commanded by Christ and his Apostles, and practiced by
Christian Churches downwards, as Baptism, Supper, Confession of Sin, etc. and
became steadfast and fixed in the Notion of Quakerism; of which I gave only a
Hint as I passed through my Pilgrimage in that Particular; then our Teachers
began to bethink themselves of the Necessity of a Government in our Church, as
well as our Neighbors; and if a Government, then a Governor; and this
Government must be either Inward, or Outward: The Inward we had tried, and
found defective; for the Disciple pretended he was enlightened, as well as the
Apostle; and he thought he had as much Right to follow his Guide, i. e. his
Light within, as to follow and obey the Light in his Teacher, or the Light in
any Man.

Upon this, the Teachers met in Council at London, in the Month of May, 1666,
to settle this so necessary, as well as difficult Point; and many Arguments
passed between the Clergy and Laity, viz. between the Teachers and the
Deputies. At last it was decided, That the Body should govern, and the Light in
the particular should submit to the Light in the Body. But still this Body
being without a Head, seemed like a Monster; so that there was a Necessity to
find a Head to clap upon this Body. Well, this Head must either be visible, or
invisible; the latter it could not be, for then the least Hearer would plead
his Light, his Guide, his Judge, his Leader, as the Teachers told them in the
beginning, when they decoyed them over to them. So then it was resolved, it
must be George Fox; he being the first, must become our Great Apostle; who,
together with the Body, was to Govern from East to West, and from North to
South. Since which time, it was in vain for any single Person to plead the
Sufficiency of his Light, or the Authority of it, for to the Light in the Body
was all Power in Heaven and Earth committed. Jos. Coal's Works, p. 93.

And to support this Glorious Cause, Will. Penn wrote a Book, wherein he
affirmed, That it is a Dangerous Principle, and Pernicious to True Religion;
and which is worse, it is the Root of Ranterism, to assert, That nothing is a
Duly incumbent upon thee, but what thou art persuaded, [or convinced] is thy
Duty, etc. A Brief Examination and State, p. 3. This was Printed in 1681, and
and written by the same W. Penn, who in the Year 1673. wrote his Book, styled,
Quakerism a New Nick name for Old Christianity; where he then Judged it so far
from Ranterism, to act as they were persuaded, that, Page 71. he says, No
Command in the SCRIPTURE is any farther OBLIGING upon ANY Man, than as he finds
a CONVICTION upon his Conscience; otherwise, Men (said Mr. Penn) should be
engaged without, if not against Conviction; a thing unreasonable in a Man, etc.
Thus then it is plain, That with respect to the Commands of God recorded in the
Holy Scriptures, Men are to be at Liberty; they are to obey, if they be
convinced or persuaded it is their Duty so to do; if not, they may, by Mr.
Penn's Doctrine, be at Liberty. And so says E. Buroughs; for, (says he) That
is no Command from God to me, what he commands to another; neither did any of
the Saints, that we read of in Scripture, act by the Command which was to
another, not having the Command to themselves, etc. Burrough's Works, p. 47.
And if we read on in the same Page, we may find, that these Commands of God,
thus rejected by the Quakers, unless they have them anew, as the inspired
Apostles and Prophets had, were Baptism, and other Ordinances.

And now let me return, to see what things Will. Penn would have done and
obeyed, Conviction, or no Conviction; and this will give us some Light into
their Mystery of Iniquity; thus to reject the Commands of God, recorded in
Scriptures, and teach, that none need to obey them, unless convinced of the
Usefulness of them, as they have done these 40 Years. GO TEACH ALL NATIONS,
BAPTIZING, etc. DO THIS IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME, etc. When you Pray, say, FORGIVE
US OUR TRESPASSES, AS WE FORGIVE, etc. Matthew. 28.19,20. Luke. 22.19,20. Chap.
11.4. See also, The Picture of Quakerism, drawn to the Life, Part 1. Page 60,
to 70.

Well, I say, let us hear what the Commands of the Quakers are, That whoever
amongst them pleads for their Liberty, whether to obey, or not to obey, are
Ranters, Rebels, and what not. See his Brief Examination, etc. Page 11. And
this I affirm, from the Understanding I have received of God, not only that the
Enemy is at work to scatter the Minds of Friends by that loose Plea; What have
thou to do with me? Leave me to my Freedom, and to the Grace of God in my self,
and the like. But this Proposition and Expression, as now understood and
alleged, is a Deviation from, and a Perversion of the Ancient Principle of
Truth. For this is the plain Consequence of this Plea: If any one shall say, I
see no Evil in paying Tithes to Hireling Priests, in that they are not claimed
by Divine Right, but by the Civil Laws of the Land. I see no Evil (says
another) in marrying by the Priest, for he is but a Witness. I see no Evil
(says a third) in declining a Public Testimony in Suffering-Times, for I have
Christ 's and Paul 's Example. I see no Evil (says a fourth) in respecting the
Persons of Men; for whatever others do, I intend a sincere Notice, that I take
of those I know. I see no Evil (faith a fifth) in keeping my Shop shut, upon
the World's Holy Days, [Fast-Days,] for I would not willingly give Offense to
my Neighbors, etc.

Reader, I have been the larger on this Quotation, because it may evidently
appear, beyond all their Glossing, that like the Pharisees, their Forefathers,
they make void the Commands of God, by exalting their own Traditions above
them, saying, None are any further obliged to obey the Commands of God in the
Holy Scripture, than they are convinced or persuaded by their Light to obey;
but their own Commands, such as not paying Tithes, not marrying with a Priest,
not putting off the Hat, not shutting up their Shop-Windows on Holy Days, and
Fast-Days, this is highly Criminal; to plead their Liberty in these Things, is
Ranterism and Rebellion.

To confirm this, George Whitehead said, in Answer to a Minister's Question, i.
e. Is the Moral Law, or Ten Commandments, a Rule to the Christian's Life, or is
it not? Truth defending the Quakers, etc. p. 18.

I answer, (says G. W.) thou might as well ask, If the Moral Law be a Rule to
Christ? For the Christian's Life and Rule is Christ, etc. meaning the Light
within: Quest. to Professors, etc. p. 27. And this is much like Is. Pennington,
who said, That the Name JESUS and CHRIST belong to every Member, as WELL as to
the Head; and if so, Whitehead is in the right on it; they might as well indeed,
carry the Ten Commandments to Christ, as to the Quakers: For, on their own
Hypothesis, there is as much Reason for the Quakers Love to be equal with
Christ, if not above him. See p. 10. What is attributed to that Body, [meaning
the Son of Mary] we acknowledge, and give to that Body in its Place, according
as the Scripture attributes it, which is THROUHG and BECAUSE of THAT which
dwelt and acted IN IT; but that which sanctified and kept the Body pure, Mark
kept Christ's Body pure.
and made all acceptable in him, was the Life, Holiness, and Righteousness of
the Spirit; and the same THING which kept his Vessel pure, it is the same THING
that cleanses us; the Value which the Natural Flesh and Blood [of Christ] had,
was from THAT, in its coming from THAT, in its acting in THAT, in its suffering
through THAT, p. 33. Now the Scriptures does expressly distinguish between CHRIST
and the GARMENT which he wore; between HIM that came, and the BODY in which he
came; between the SUBSTANCE which was VEILED, and the VAIL which VEILED it;
there is plainly HE, and the BODY in which HE came; there was the OUTWARD
VESSEL, and the INWARD LIFE; This we certainly know, and can never call the
BODILY GARMENT CHRIST, Viz. They can never call the Son of Mary Christ.
but THAT which appeared and dwelt IN the BODY. Now if ye indeed know the
CHRIST of God, tell us plainly what THAT is which appeared in the Body, whether
THAT was not the Christ before IT took up the Body, after IT took up the Body,
and for ever?

I am the larger on this Head, to show, first, George Whitehead's Pride, in
saying, That the Commandments of God might as well be carried to Christ as the
Quakers; next, that the Christ which the Quakers own only, is the Light or
Spirit which was in Christ, and is in them; lastly, that they can never call
him that was born of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Christ, but a Vail or Garment, an
Outward Vessel, and the like: Compare the last Quotation to G. W.'s Sermon.
And for more of this Tendency, I refer to George Whitehead's Sermon hereafter
expressed, etc. Having by this time showed, That the Quakers have rejected the
Government and Guidance of the Light in the Particular to be sufficient, but
that the Light in the Particular must vail to the Light in the Body, or Church;
I am now come to set forth their Authority for it, which was the Sentence and
Judgment of their Synod, held at London, May 1666.

The Sentence of their London Synod 1666. Contracted.
First, We having a true discerning of the Working of that Spirit, which under
a Profession of Truth, leads into a Division from, or Exaltation above the BODY
of Friends, who never Revolted from their Principles, from the constant
Practice of good ancient Friends, who are sound in the Faith once delivered to
US It Is well they tacitly confess, it is not the Faith once delivered to the
Saints.
. We do unanimously declare and testify, That neither that Spirit, nor those
that are joined to it, ought to have any Dominion, Office, or Rule, in the
Church of God.

Secondly, We do declare and testify, That the Spirit, and those who are
joined to it, who stand not in Unity with the Ministry and Body of Friends,
have not any true Spiritual Right, nor Gospel Authority, to be Judges in the
Church, and of the Ministry, so as to condemn them or their Ministry; neither
ought their Judgment any more to be regarded by Friends, than the Judgment of
any other Opposers which are without; for of Right, the Elders and Members of
the Church, ought to judge Matters and Things which differ, and their Judgment
which is given, to stand good and valid amongst Friends. And we do further
declare and testify, That it is abominable Pride which goes before
Destruction, which so puffs up the Mind of any PARTICULAR, that he will not
admit of any Judgment to take place against him: FOR HE THAT IS NOT JUSTIFIED
BY THE WITNESS OF GOD IN FRIENDS, IS CONDEMNED BY IT IN HIMSELF. New- Rome
exactly.


Thirdly, If any Difference arise in the Church, or amongst them that profess
to be Members thereof, WE do declare and testify, That the Church, with the
Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, HAVE POWER, WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF SUCH WHO
DISSENT FROM THEIR DOCTRINE AND PRACTICE, TO HEAR AND DETERMINE THE SAME. All
Property is now lost, unless there be Conformity and Submission, like the
Star Chamber, and High Court of Justice, etc.
And if any pretend to be of us, and in Case of Controversy, will not admit to
be TRIED by the Church ( i. e. the Body) nor SUBMIT to the JUDGMENT given by
the Spirit of Truth in the Elders and Members of the same, but kick against
their Judgment, as only the Judgment of Man, WE testify in the Name of the
Lord, That if any Judgment so given be risen against, and denied by the Party
condemned, then He or She ought to be rejected, as having erred from the Truth;
and persisting therein presumptuously, are joined in ONE, with Heathens and
Infidels.

George Whitehead Josiah Coal Stephen Crisp John Moon Thomas Lo Thomas
Green John Whitehead Thomas Briggs James Park Alexander Parker Rich.
Farnsworth, etc.


Having by this time showed, First, How our Teachers, in order to bring us over
to them, and to decoy us, told us, the Light within was a sufficient Guide,
Teacher and Leader, even sufficient to lead to Salvation; yea, above
Scriptures, above Fathers, above Councils, and above Churches; I have in the
last Instance showed the Fallacy of their so early and smooth Pretenses; and
that from the beginning they have been a false, perfidious, and treacherous
Tribe of Deceivers, as ever the World produced. Well, now they appear plainly
to be a Body, and I having found who is the Head of this Body, namely, George
Fox, it will not be amiss to recite the Quakers Creed, and his Commandments;
which, whatever Quaker do not submit to, convinced or not convinced of the
Reasonableness of their Obedience, it is now plainly seen what will befall them.
I need not Comment upon the recited Canon, Creed, Fox's Commandments, nor their
Zeal to maintain them as their Ancient Principles, although God's Commandments by
Moses, the Apostles Creed, and all the Scripture, the Quakers slight and
reject, as not to be read in their Meetings, not to be taught their Children;
nay, so proud is G. Whitehead, that he tells you, as above, The Jews might as
well have carried them to Christ in the Days of his Flesh, Viz. the Ten
Commandments for him to learn, observe, and obey them, as for the Christians to
carry them to the Quakers to learn, observe, and obey them: Truth defending the
Quakers, etc. p. 18. For says he, What is spoken by the Spirit of Truth in
any, is of as great Authority as the Bible and Chapters are, and greater:
Buroughs Works, p. 47. This is the Tenure and Purport of his Doctrine; and I
do affirm, it is right Quakerism: For Edw. Buroughs said, That was no Command
from God to me, what he Commands to another: And W. Penn confirms the whole,
saying, No Command in Scriptures is any further obliging upon ANY Man, than as
he finds a Conviction upon his Conscience, otherwise Men should be engaged
without, if not against Conviction; a thing unreasonable in Man, etc. Quakerism
a New Nickname for old, etc. p. 71.

But for their poor infatuated Disciples to plead, whether to conform or not,
whether to obey or not, the Commands of G. Fox, i. e. not paying Tithes, not to
be Married with a Priest, not to put off the Hat, not to open their Shops on
Feasts or Fast-Days; I say, to plead to be left to their Freedom herein, and
the Grace of God in their Hearts; Oh! no: Says W. Penn, This is a dangerous
Principle, this is a pernicious Plea, this is perfect Ranterism. What! to have
Liberty, whether to obey the Commands of the Body given out by the Head
thereof? This is wicked indeed, as by their Yearly Epistle above-recited is
plain: However, I shall recite both the Quakers Creed, and the Commands of G.
Fox, Viz.

1. The Quakers Creed.
WE believe that the Light within us is the True and Eternal God, which Created
all things, and that by me the Light all things are upheld; and that there is
not another besides me that can save; and thereupon we believe we are endued
with the Almighty Power of God; and thereby have wrought Miracles; and
conclude, we are equal to God; and that our Speaking is of greater Authority
than the Bible.

We believe our Light within is Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Man Christ
Jesus to whom all Power in Heaven and Earth is committed, though we cannot
believe that this our Light within, to whom we direct our Disciples to expect
Salvation, by was ever crucified, by Nailing to a Cross; nor that he Died, or
was Buried; nor that he was Buffered, Spitted upon, Smote with the Palms of the
Hands of the Jews; for he never was seen with Carnal Eyes; nor that he Rose
from the Dead the Third Day; nor that he Ascended (in the Sight of the
Galileans) into Heaven, and there Sit at the Right Hand of God; but that all
Apostate Christians that so teach, are false Ministers; nor do we believe that
our Light within shall come at the last Day, to judge both Quick and Dead: For
the Light within us is the Judge; and the Book is opened within; the Sentence
of Death and Judgment is pronounced within; from the Mouth of our Light within
against every idle Word, and all the Deeds of the Body within; and Judgment is
executed within, and the flaming Sword within, which proceeds out of the
Mouth of the Lamb, i. e. our Light within, which will cast thee into Hell
within, where is weeping and wailing within, sealed down under the Wrath of
God's Eternal Judgment within.

We believe the Light within us is the Holy Ghost; and that these three are
one, and not distinguishable, and that such as talk of three Persons in the
Godhead, like Conjurers, are to be shut up (with their three Persons they dream
of, which they would divide out of one) in perpetual Darkness, in the Lake and
the Pit: That the Scripture which the Apostate Christians build their Faith
upon for this their Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, is a rotten Foundation;
yea, Dust, Death, and Serpents Meat; and therefore their Ministers that tell
their People the Scriptures are the Word of God, are Deceivers: For the Father,
Son, and Spirit, the World, and their Teachers, call three Persons; but they
speak they know not what, therefore believe them not.

We believe our selves the only Catholic Church, and Elect People of God, and
that none are in the Truth but we our selves.

We never did in any of our printed Books, or printed Prayers from 1560 to
1690, make any Confession of Sin, nor ask Pardon of God for Jesus Christ's
sake, who was Born of the Virgin; and why? We testify that the outward Person
that suffered at Jerusalem was not the Son of God, only a Vail, a Garment, or a
Vessel, in which the Son did inhabit, which now inhabit in us Believers, and
for which Reason the Names JESUS and CHRIST belong to us, as well as to him
that suffered. For says George Fox, our great Apostle and High Priest of our
Profession, the Jews had a Law, that if any one said he was the Son of God, he
was to die, and so the Law in the Will does persecute THE SON OF GOD NOW; where
HE is MADE MANIFEST, as the NORTH PART of this Nation does witness, who has
fulfilled that Law in Persecuting and Imprisoning THE SON OF GOD, where HE is
MADE MANIFEST; i e. within us; those who quaked at the Word of the Lord, was
ever hated and scorned, and in such THE SON OF MAN is manifest.

We believe an Inward Resurrection with the Light within, but deny the
Resurrection of the Body laid in the Grave.

Books of the Quakers, which prove these to be their Tenets, and a Hundred
times as much, are these;

Geo. Fox Jun.'s, Works, Edw. Burrough's Works; Readiness Errand; G. Fox's
Journal; Truth defending the Quakers, etc. A Lamentation by one of England's
Prophets, etc. Judgment fixed, etc. Jos. Coal's Works; The Quakers Refuge, etc.
W. Smith's Primmer, etc. A Discovery of Man's Return, by W. D. Ishmael and his
Mother cast out, by G. Whitehead, and three other chief Speakers; A Brief
Discovery of a threefold Estate of Antichrist, etc. News coming up out of the
North; Ste. Crisp's Primer, printed 1682. The Apostate Incendiary; W. Penn's
serious Apology; The Quakers Challenge; A Question to Professors, by Is.
Pennington; A Lamentation, by one of England's Prophets, etc. printed at York,
1653. A Dispute at Chesterfeild, 1655. See the Fifth Chapter following; upon
which I conclude thus.

If as they write, they do indeed believe,
Then I affirm, this their very Creed.
If not, who can, with Safety, them believe,
Who Write and Print, the Simple to deceive?
2. The Commandments of G. Fox, the Quakers second Moses, somewhat Abbreviated,
and taken out of several of his Books.
I. Thou shall not pay Tithes to the covetous Priests, nor to the Antichristian
Improprietors. II. Thou shall not Marry by, or with a Priest. III. Thou shall
not put off thy Hat in Respect to thy Superiors. IV. Thou shall not shut up thy
Shop on the World's Holy Days, Fast-Days, etc. at the Command of the VVorldly
Magistrates. V. Thou shall not pay toward the Repair of Parish Churches. VI.
Thou shall not pay toward the Trained Bands, nor carry Guns in thy Ship. VII.
Thou shall not wear Lace, nor Ribbons, nor Skimming-dish Hats, nor short
Aprons, nor Slits on your VVastecoats, nor long Scarfs like flying Colors, nor
unnecessary Buttons. VIII. You shall have a Woman's Meeting distinct from the
Men, once a Month at at the County-Town, about Ten a Clock, to get a little
Stock. IX. Thou shall call the Days of the Week First, Second, Third and
Fourth Day, etc. and the Months First, Second, and Third Month, etc. X. I
charge you all in the Presence of the Lord God, That you judge not one another,
i. e. those that be in the Unity of the Ministry, and Elders in the Church,
lest you fall into the Condemnation of the Monthly, Quarterly, Six VVeeks,
Second Day, or Yearly Meeting. Amen.
G. Fox 's Trial at Lancaster Assizes, p. 21. The thundering Voice answered, I
have glorified thee, and will glorify thee again; and I was so filled full of
Glory, that my Head and Ears was filled full of it, that when the Trumpets
sounded, and the Judges came up again, they all appeared as dead Men under me.

I think it now necessary to insert two Passages out of two of the Quakers most
learned Teachers Books; the one, to deter their Hearers from adhering to the
Commands of Moses; the other, to confirm them in the Belief of G. Fox's, viz.

Whether the first Penman of the Scriptures was Moses or Hermes? Or, Whether
both these, or not one? Or, Whether there are not many Words contained in the
Scriptures, which were not spoken by Inspiration of the Holy Spirit? Whether
some Words were not spoken by the Grand Imposture; some by wicked Men, some by
wise Men, ill applied; some by good Men, ill expressed; some by false Prophets,
and yet true; some by true Prophets, and yet false? The Quakers Refuge fixed,
etc. p. 17. This being suggested by Robert Ruckhill, an Eminent and Learned
Man; I cannot blame his Hearers, who believe that he wrote by the Eternal
Spirit; nor that they lay aside the Commands of God by Moses, and receive the
Commands of G. Fox; at least not so much as I blame their Teachers. For if I
did question whether Moses or Hermes were the first Penman of the Holy
Scriptures; or whether both of them had a Hand in it, or neither of both was
concerned in the writing thereof; if I questioned the Truth of what the true
Prophets of the Lord said, and believed, that what the false Prophet said, were
true; if I thought, that what good Men said was ill expressed, and so
insignificant, as hereby is suggested, truly I should give as little heed to
them as the Quakers do, and be ready with George Fox himself, to call them
Death, Dust, and Serpents Meat. See News coming up out of the North, p. 14. But
I thank God I have been better taught, even from my Childhood: For, though by the
Dissimulation of these Seducers, I was carried away into great Errors, yet the
Love of the Scriptures ever remained with me.

The next Passage shall be from their Learned Barclay: It is no ways
inconsistent with this sound and unerring Principle, to affirm, That the
Judgment of a certain Person or Persons, in certain Cases, is INFALLIBLE; or
for a certain Person, or Persons, to give a positive Judgment, and pronounce it
as Obligatory upon others, because the Foundations and Ground thereof IS; NOT
because they are infallible, but because in these things, and at that time,
they were led by the Infallible Spirit. The Anarchy of the Ranters, etc. p. 67.
For more of this Quaker-Popery, see The Picture of Quakerism drawn to the Life,
etc. p. 8, to 16.


By which it is plain, that as Ruckhill in the forecited Passage, render the
Scriptures Uncertain, Fallible, and of no Authority, so does Barclay render
Quakerism Infallible, Certain, and their Commands and Injunctions Obligatory
upon others: And why forsooth? Why, because at such times as the Quakers thus
Pronounce, thus Write, thus give out their Mandates, Commandments and Precepts,
they (says Barclay) are led thereunto by the Infallible Spirit.

Some Inferences from the Fourth Chapter.
IS it so then, that the Tendency of the Quakers Doctrine is to undervalue the
Holy Scriptures, to rob them of their Divine Authority, and thereby to exalt
their own Horn? Let this then be a Caution to their Hearers, to examine the
Quotations, which I bring to prove my Assertions; and if they find it so, (as
that they may; for I have ever been willing, and still am, to produce Book and
Page, to prove Matter of Fact,) then let them carry the said Books to their
Teachers, to condemn and censure, as Heretical, and tending to overturn the
Christian Religion; and if not, let them, if they be wise, turn their Backs
upon them, forsake their Errors, and embrace the Christian Faith; so shall the
end of all my Labor and Pains be Answered; but if they (after all the Pains my
self and others have taken) will still shut their Eyes, and stop their Ears, my
Reward will be with me, and they shall bear their own Burden in the Day of the
Lord.

CHAP. V.
Gives many Reasons, both Negative and Affirmative, That George Fox took
himself to be a Second Moses; and that the Heads of the Quakers attributed to
him Divine Honor, as Head of their Church, and Lawgiver to it.

TO come to a right Understanding of this, I shall first insert an Objection
raised by W. Rogers, The Christian Quaker distinguished, etc. Part I. p. 9.
[and by him taken out of a Manuscript, with Names to it,] next George Fox's
Answer; and then proceed to other particular Reasons and Demonstrations.

Object. It Is true, Friends in the beginning were turned to the Light in their
own Consciences, as their Guide; but when it pleased the Lord, to gather so
great a Number into the Knowledge and Belief of the Truth, then the Heavenly
Motion came upon George Fox, as the Lord's Anointed and Chosen, having the Care
of the Churches, as being the great Apostle of Christ Jesus; and as one, whom
the Lord had ordained to be in that place, amongst the Children of Light in
this our Day, as Moses was amongst the Children of Israel in his Day, to set
forth Methods and Forms of Church Government, and to establish Monthly and
Quarterly Meetings of Men, and Women distinct from the Men; and these Meetings
since are called the Church, whose Counsel, Advice and Judgment, is to be
submitted unto by every one, who profess himself a Member of Christ's Church;
and that we ought to believe as the Church believes, as G. Whitehead teaches,
viz. I affirm, That the true Church is in the true Faith that is in God, and we
must believe thus as the true Church believes, or else it were but both a Folly
and Hypocrisy to profess our selves Members thereof. G. Whitehead 's Book,
the Apostate Incendiary, etc. p. 16.

This Objection W. Rogers made from the Strength of diverse Arguments he found
in the Manuscript, from the Words and VVritings of diverse Persons, whose Names
he did forbear to mention; but for the clearing up this Point, Whether G. Fox
looked upon himself the Second Moses, the great Prophet and Apostle, see his
Answer to W. Rogers. The Christian Quaker distinguished from the Apostate and
Innovator, in Five Parts. See Part 4. p. 83.

George Fox's ANSWER.
William Rogers, thou say, There is a Spirit risen at this Day, that gives
many occasion to be jealous, that I am looked upon by some, as that Prophet
which Moses testified of, that God would raise up, Deuteronomy. 18.15. but who they
are thou have not mentioned. And thou say, Christ is that Prophet that is to
be heard, etc. and he is the only Lawgiver, and no Outward Man So W. Rogers
said; now mark his longsided Answer.
. Then is not this Prophet to be in Man, to give forth his Law, which comes
after Moses? But I cannot deny that Prophet which Moses spoke of, to be raised
up; for I know, that it is he that is opposed, and his Law too, by many Talkers
of him; and the Light of his Glorious Gospel, and the Order of it; and what I
am, I am by the Grace and Love of God; and will not deny Deny, no; there was no
Body desired that: But if he had not owned himself to be that Prophet, he ought
to have been plain, and denied himself to be that Prophet, as John did; I am
not the Christ, said John, Joh. 1.20.
the Prophet which came after Moses, nor the Election, before the World began,
though all turn into the Jealousies in which they were before they were
convinced; for I believe few of them that does oppose, knows this Prophet that
comes after Moses, though they may speak of him in Words; of which Prophet I am
not ashamed.

Reader, The Text and Context being duly considered, I mean W. Roger's
Objection, touching the common Jealousies which was amongst us at that Day,
besides the Letters in the said Manuscript, etc. I say, that duly considered on
the one Hand, and G. Fox's Answer on the other Hand, which was so far from
denying himself to be that Prophet which Moses prophesied of, Deuteronomy. 18.15. and
St. Stephen testified of, Acts 7.37. and St. Peter, Acts 3.23. and St. John the
Evangelist, John. 1.45. These, and many others, gave witness to the fulfilling
of the Prophecy of Moses, in sending the promised Messiah; I say, G. Fox's
Answer was so far from denying himself to be that Prophet which Moses
prophesied of, that it confirmed us in that Day; and since much more, that he
did not deny, but rather owned the Charge.

But to strengthen my Argument, I shall give some small Hints, (and but name
them, having been heretofore more large,) first, What he said of himself; next,
What his Followers said of him.

First, Written from the Mouth of the Lord, from one who is naked, and stands
naked before the Lord, clothed with Righteousness, whose NAME is NOT known in
the World, risen up out of the North; News coming up, p. 1. which was
Prophesied of This is News indeed; what Prophet prophesied of Fox's Rising in
the North?
.

Secondly, My Name is covered from the World, and the World knows not ME, nor
MY NAME; Several Petitions Answered, p. 30.

Thirdly, HE that HAS the same Spirit that raised Jesus from the Dead, is
EQUAL with God; Readiness Errand to Damascus, p. 8.

Fourthly, All Languages are to me no more than Dust, who was before Languages
were; The Battledoor, etc. Introd.

Fifthly, And the Thundering Voice Answered, I have Glorified thee, and will
Glorify thee again; and I was filled so full of Glory, that my Head and Ears
were filled full of it, etc. G. Fox's Trial at Lancaster, p. 21.

Reader, Here was Fullness of Glory, if his Head and Ears was so filled, etc.
However, it is plain it alludes to John 12.18, 16.14. and 17.1. For nothing
would please him, but to be equal, if not above Christ, as One Hundred
Instances might be given.

Next, I may just name some few of those High Titles and Divine Attributes,
which his Disciples and Followers (Men of greatest Note amongst them,) gave
him, which are only due to Christ, who was the Prophet Moses Prophesied of, and
not the subtle Fox, the doting Quakers so much admire and idolize.

First, George Fox, the Father of many Nations; whose Being and Habitation is
in the Power of the Highest, in which thou Rules and Governs in Righteousness,
and thy Kingdom is Established in Peace, and the Increase thereof is without
end. Judas and the Jews, p. 44.

Secondly, Dear and Precious one, in whom my Life is bound up, and my Strength
in thee stand; by thy Breathings I am nourished, by thee my Strength is
renewed; I cannot Reign but in thy Presence and Power; Glory unto thee Holy One
Holy George.
for ever. John Audland's Letter to George Fox.

Thirdly, George Fox (said John Blaikling) is blessed with Honor above many
Brethren, and Thousands will stand by him in a Heavenly Record; that his Life
Reigns, and is Spotless; whose Eternal Honor and Blessed Renown shall remain;
yea, his Presence; and the Dropping of his tender Words in the Lord's Love, was
my Soul's Nourishment. The Christian disting. Part 5. p. 77.

Fourthly, George Fox, a Prophet indeed; it was said of Christ, that he was in
the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not. SO it
may be said of this Prophet G. Fox. The Quak. Challenge, p. 6.

Fifthly, To confirm all this, William Mead now living, when he gave William
Harris one of George Fox's Journals, he said to him, Here W. Harris, I will
give thee one of Geo. Fox's Journals, it is a very good Book, yea, better than
the Bible.

Object. 1. But some may say, this is only W. Mead's Judgment; surely, the
Quakers do not hold, that either their Books, or Fox's Journal, is better, or
of greater Authority, than the Bible; for the Fathers and Councils all
submitted to the Test of Holy Scripture, as the Word of God.

Answ. To this I answer, That W. Mead is a knowing Man, I will not say a wise
Man, unless in that one Action of his, whereby he vigorously opposed W. Penn,
and endeavored to exclude him out of their Ministry, when he was proclaimed a
Traitor to his Country, for being charged to be in the Plot with the Lord
Preston, and others, and was therefore forced to hide many Years; [and for
which, his Preface to Fox's Journal was not admitted to be bound up with the
Journal, but waited upon it like a poor Lacquey with its Blue Livery;] I say,
this Action of his excepted, I will not say he was a wise Man; yet, as I said,
he is a knowing Man, and spoke the Heart of Quakerism, in saving, George Fox's
Journal is better than the Bible.

First, As you have heard, it is questioned by the Quakers, Whether Moses or
Hermes was the first Penman of the Scripture; indeed, Whether either or
neither of them. The Quakers Refuge fixed, etc. p. 17.

But as for what G. Fox and Friends write, it is from and by the Motion of
God's Eternal Spirit, and avouched so to be by a General Council of the Yearly
Meeting Held at London May 1695.
: And what any of our Friends speak from the Spirit of Truth, is of greater
Authority than the Bible and Chapters are. Truth defending the Quakers, etc. p.
7. Now who can blame W. Mead on the Quakers Principles? Is not a Certainty
better than an Uncertainty?

Secondly, The Scriptures lay many Obligations upon us; it teaches us the
Observation of the Ten Commandments, the Lord's Prayer, the Apostles Creed,
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, which the Journal does not at all teach, nor
enforce the Belief of; only to listen, adhere, and hearken to the Light within,
and to obey its Dictates: Therefore, as the Journal is most certain, so it is
most easy, and therefore the best Book, and of most Authority, and on the
Quakers Hypothesis, confirm all those Particulars above quoted.

Thirdly, The Scripture teaches to obey Magistrates as the higher Power, and
that we should submit our selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake,
Matthew. 22.21. Titus 3.1. Romans 13.1,2,3. 1 Pet. 2.13,14,17. See also Tindal's
Works, Obedience to a Christian Man, etc. p. 111.

But the Journal, p. 40, to 400. (and our Friends Books) teach both by Precept
and Example, That the Light in every Man is the higher Power, to whom all must
submit and obey; for to it, all Power in Heaven and Earth is committed, Jos.
Coale's Work, p. 93. and that this Light is one, in the Male, and in the
Female; but to a proud, heady, high-minded Man, there is no Honor due, though he
be in a place to Rule, Smith's Primer, p. 43. And if so, who can say, that W.
Mead spoke unadvisedly, in saying, The Journal of Fox is better than the
Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles? I think him a right Quaker, a knowing
Man, and one that loves a Certainty better than an Uncertainty.

Fourthly, The Scriptures teach, That Women should obey their Husbands; yea,
that they Reverence them, and live in Subjection to them as their Head, Genesis
3.16. Numb. 30, to the end. 1 Cor. 11.8. 1 Pet. 3.1. Tit. 2.5. Colos. 3.18.
Ephesians. 5.22. quoting Sarah as an Example.

But the Journal teaches, That the Light is the higher Power, that it is one in
the Male, and in the Female, and it is the Light in each that is to be obeyed;
for to that, all Power in Heaven and Earth is committed, Smith's Primer, p. 13.
The Journal, p. 50, to 450. and that there is to be no respect of Persons; and
if the Wife conceive her Husband to be gone from the Light, and the Guidance
of it, and she be moved to rebel against her Husband, betray his Secrets to his
Adversaries, yea, to give public Testimony against him, she does well, and
shall have Praise of the same, The Content. Apostate, etc. p. 5. And for this
Reason, the Quakers do not put in, or make the Woman promise by their Marriage
Certificate, to obey their Husbands; which, as it is contrary to the Tenure of
the whole Book of God, both the Old and New Testament, so it is agreeable to G.
Fox's Journal, and their Ancient Testimony. See their Marriage Certificate.

Fifthly, In a word, the Scriptures teach, That Children should obey their
Parents, and honor their Father and Mother; that Servants should obey their
Masters; that Subjects should submit to their Governors, and obey Magistrates;
that Christians should obey their Pastors, who are over them in the Lord, who
watch for their Souls, as those that must give an Account.

But the Journal, p. 20, to 320. teaches the contrary, both by Precept upon
Precept, as also by the Practice of their great Apostle G. Fox; who not only
broke the Laws, in disturbing the Ministers in their Churches, but taught so to
do; not only refused to pay Tithes, but taught so to do; not only slighted the
Magistrates Command, (who oftentimes commanded a strict Fast to be kept,) but
taught his Followers so to do: Nay, lately one Thomas Mash, an Ancient Quaker,
living at Newberry in Berkshire, was moved by his Light within, to open his
Shop-VVindows on the Lord's Day, as on Market Days, and set out his Goods to
Sale; this the Journal justifies, p. 200, to the end; this Whitehead justifies,
Truth defending the Quakers, p. 18. Fox's Great Mystery, etc. p. 77. Nay, Theft
by Fox is likewise justified, who said, And as for any being moved of the Lord,
[meaning their Light within] to take away your Hourglass from you, BY THE
ETERNAL POWER IT IS OWNED, etc. Nay, their idolized Apostle not only
disregarded the Magistrates and their Laws, but declared in plain and
significant Words, That he neither heeded nor valued a Cartload of their
Warrants, etc. Journal, p. 278.

Object. 2. But some Men will say, How then shall we reconcile the Doctrine of
W. Mead and G. Whitehead? Mr. Mead says, That G. Fox's Journal is a better
Book than the Bible; and G. Whitehead says, We prefer the Holy Scriptures
above all other Books extant in the World. The Country Convert, etc. p. 26.

To which I answer, Very well; for p. 72. G. Whitehead thus says, viz. I MAY
SEE CAUSE OTHERWISE TO WORD THE MATTER, AND YET OUR INTENTIONS BE THE SAME,
etc. p. 72. ibid. Very well; now to make it appear, that G. Whitehead means one
and the same thing that William Mead meaned, read his little Book, i. e. That
which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in ANY, is of as great AUTHORITY as
the SCRIPTURES and CHAPTERS are, and GREATER. Truth defending the Quakers, etc.
p. 7. And on the Title Page thus, viz. WRITTEN FROM THE SPIRIT OF TRUTH, in G.
Whitehead, and G. Fox the Younger. Now, if this little Pamphlet in Octavo of 70
Pages, be of greater Authority than the Scriptures and Chapters are, how much
more G. Fox's Journal in Folio of near 700 Pages? For that which is best is of
most Authority, generally-speaking; and that which is of most Authority, is the
best. Thus then is the Journal of Fox's better, in the Quakers Esteem, than the
Bible; and thus does Whitehead mean, even as Mr. Mead spoke.

Object. 3. But some will say, How then shall we know a Quaker, if not by the
Import of his Words?

I Answer, it is impossible to know them rightly, as it ever was for the
Protestants to know the Jesuits; and therefore you ought to do as the
Protestants did, TO DISTRUST EVERY THING THEY SAY: See the Book Entitled, The
Missionary's Arts, p. 32. printed 1688. For as the Quakers stand on the same
Bottom, and are found in the same Steps, with the same Equivocations, Reserves
and Double-meanings, and the same Pretenses to Miracles, Visions, Revelations,
Perfection and Infallibility; they ought to have the same Answer, viz. To
distrust them in all they say, until they Retract, Sentence, and Condemn one
sort of their Books; and this is highly reasonable on their part, if they would
be taken to be at all serious, sincere and honest: For many of their Hearers,
of the honest sort, begin to think G. Whitehead little better than a Jesuit
already, he has been so false in Fact; such a Glosser and Defender of every
Error the Quakers hold. Anne Docwra of Cambridge her Letter, dated 26th 12th
Mon. 1682.
I have a Letter by me, which my Cousin Anne Docwra, Widow of Cambridge, sent
me, dated 26th of 12th Month, 1682. viz.

G. Whitehead have sent one of his Books for me to read, and there is the old
Money Story in it, with I know not what besides: I was asked by an honest
Friend, if he was not a Jesuit? I answered, nay, it is not solid enough for
them to own, especially when they write to a solid People, there is pretty much
airy conceited Stuff in it.

ANNE DOCWRA.


Thus it appears, how long the honest sort of Quakers have take G. W. to be
little better than a Jesuit; and my Cousin Docwra was of the same Mind too,
else she would not have given me her honest Friend's Judgment; only indeed, she
is thus far of my Mind, That Book was not solid enough; the Jesuits are more
cunning than G. Whitehead then was, but he is come on finely fince; for of late
he is grown so expert, as he can Vindicate or Excuse any Blasphemy, Idolatry,
Contempt of the Scriptures, Contempt of the Magistrates, Contempt of the
Ministry, Contempt on the Person and Sufferings of Christ; yea, and Undervalue
his Precious Blood too: And how contrary soever their Sayings are to each
other, yet they mean all one thing, referring to their Beginning. I have in my
former Books showed, how their Books are of two sorts, their Meetings of two
sorts, their Doctrine of two sorts, carrying two Faces in all they do or say;
and yet Whitehead can tell you, they mean all one thing. One Example more I may
give, and so shall conclude this Chapter.

I find a Recital of a Letter, writ by Solomon Eccles to Robert Porter, in a
Book of William Burnet's, entitled, The Capital Principles of the Quakers, p.
41. printed 1668. viz. Robert Porter, take heed of Belying the Innocent; for I
hear thou have reported to a Friend of mine, that I should say, That the Blood
of Christ is no more than the Blood of another Man; I never spoke it, but do
very highly esteem of the Blood of Christ to be more Excellent, Living, Holy,
and Precious, than is able to be uttered by the Tongues of Men and Angels; I
MEAN, the Blood which was offered up in Perversion; its offered up, through the
Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14.
the Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.41. But the Blood that was forced out of him by the
Soldiers after he was dead, who before that, bowed his Head to the Father, and
gave up the Ghost; but thou say, that was the Blood of the New Covenant,
which was shed after he was dead, which I DO DENY. Yet I did say, That was NO
more THAN the BLOOD of another SAINT: These are my Words which thou art
wresting to thy own Destruction. I did [also] say, That the Baptists,
Independants, Presbyterians and Pope, are all of one Ground; and none of you
understand the Blood of Jesus Christ no more than a brute Beast: Therefore
repent, for God will soon overthrow your Faith, and your Imputative
Righteousness too, for the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness which he did at
Jerusalem, and without the Gates, the Pope, the Episcopal, the Presbyterian,
Independants and Baptists, shall fare all alike, and shall sit down in Sorrow,
short of the Eternal Rest: But the true Imputative Righteousness of Christ we
own, but it is hid from you all, till the Lord open an Eye WITHIN YOU, etc.

Now comes G. Whitehead with his usual Paint, to cover, palliate, and excuse
his Brother Eccles, saying, Now whereas Sol. Eccles, in p. 41. is accused of
little less than Blasphemy, about a Letter chiefly, of a Passage concerning the
Blood, in these Words, viz. The Blood that was forced out of him by the
Soldiers after he was dead, who before that bowed his Head to the Father, and
gave up the Ghost; I did say, THAT WAS NO MORE THAN THE BLOOD OF ANOTHER SAINT.
Now to these Words, NO MORE THAN THE BLOOD OF ANOTHER SAINT, his INTENT George,
Jesuit-like, is excellent at directing the Intention.
WAS, as to Papists, and you whose Minds are Carnal, who oppose the Light
within, and ALSO, SIMPLY as to the ESSENCE of the BLOOD, etc. See his Book, i.
e. the Light and Life of Christ within, etc. Printed 1668.

Thus much by way of G. Whitehead's Interpretation of Solomon's Words and
Meaning, which I take to be a fair Confession of the Charge of Blasphemy,
exhibited by Mr. Burnet: But to confirm the Reader, that the Quakers are
defective in the Faith of the Christians in general, I will show another
Passage of the same Kind; thereby showing the Quakers Harmony about the Body of
Christ, from another of their eminent Authors, viz. So, now this Christ was
before the World began, and was a Seed i. e. A Principle within.
before any Name was given to it, who in Process of time was Born of a Virgin;
but none knows him born, or ever shall, but of a Virgin; (he that has Ears,
let him hear,) be thou [Man] but the Virgin, the Power of the most High shall
overshadow thee; and that HOLY THING which shall be Born of Thee, shall be
called the Son of God? and says Christ, a [Body] have [thou] prepared for
[me;] mark the Distinction [thou] [me] and [a Body,] this me that spoke in the
Body, was the Christ. They [his Disciples] loved his Person for the sake of the
Frame and Quality of the Spirit that dwelt in Him; or else, what was his Person
to them, more than another Person? But for that that dwelt in him, they loved
him; let none mistake, I do not slight it, nor the Person of any of his
Brethren or Children, as they are prepared to do the Will of their Father, As
the Blood of Christ, so the Body of Christ has by their Doctrine no Preference
above the Body and Blood of another Saint.
etc. W. Bayly's Works, p. 291.

And hereupon, they do not only deny Christ, even the Lord that bought them, as
in my Book, Quakerism Withering, and Christianity Reviving, etc. I have showed
beyond all their Glossing; but also, how they thereby take occasion to magnify
THEMSELVES, their OWN Blood, their OWN Sufferings, as I shall yet briefly show:
For says Isaac Pennington, The Name Jesus and Christ belong to the whole Body,
and every Member in the Body, as well as to the Head, A Question to Professors,
etc. p. 20, 27. Again, says Josiah Coal, His (Edward Burroughs's) Blood will
be upon you as the Blood of a Thousand Men, Jos. Coale's Epistle to E.
Burroughs's Works, etc. Again, says Thomas Speed, Do not rashly draw your
Swords against those harmless ones, [i. e. Quakers] whom your bloody Teachers
cloth and represent to you in the ugly Garb of Blasphemers; remember, that the
Son of God, who suffered at Jerusalem, was not Crucified by the strict
Religious, as an innocent or just Man, but as a Blasphemer; be not [therefore]
prevailed with to release Barabbas, For the Name Jesus belonged to the
Believing Quakers, as well as to Christ the Head; and so the whole Paralle
holds good.
and give over Jesus to be Crucified, to gratify the Murtherous Appetite
either of the Priests or the Multitude, considering that though you may with
Pilate, wash your Hands, (and to those Eyes that are dazzled with Fury against
innocent Jesus;) [i. e. the Quakers] appear clear from his Blood; yet, before
the pure Eyes of the Lord, will the condemning Stain thereof be found upon YOU
so fresh, THAT YOU WILL BY NO MEANS BE THENCE CLEANSED, BUT BY THE SAME BLOOD
WHICH YOU SO CRUELLY SHED. See The Guilty covered Clergyman, etc. p. 16, 17.
Again, see Burroughs's Works, p. 273. The Suffering of the People of God
[call'd Quakers,] in this Age, is a GREATER Suffering, and MORE unjust than in
the Days of CHRIST, or of the APOSTLES, or in ANY time SINCE; what was done to
CHRIST and the APOSTLES, was CHIEFLY done by a LAW, and in a GREAT Part by the
DUE EXECUTION of a Law, etc.

Now to close up this Head, let us hear what Father Penn says; for none of them
all express themselves more full to the Point in Hand, viz. See The Christian
Quaker, and his Divine Testimony, etc. p. 107.

To conclude, We, though this general Victory was obtained, and Holy Privileges
therewith, and that the Holy Body was not instrumentally without a Share
thereof; yet, that the efficient and chiefest Cause was, the Light and Life,
Within.
p. 102. so that the Invisible Life was the Root and Fountain of all, which is
sometimes ascribed in the Scriptures to the Body, by that common Figure or Way
of speaking amongst Men, the thing containing, which is the Body, for the thing
contained, which is the Life, p. 209. Nevertheless, not to the Body, but to
that Holy Light and Life therein, As in the Quaker's Body. etc.
is chiefly ascribed the Salvation; and to the Body however excellent, but
instrumentally, p. 97, 98. The Serpent is a Spirit; now nothing can bruise the
Head of the Serpent, but something that is Spiritual; but if that BODY of
CHRIST were the SEED, Mark here, Christ the promised Seed, Genesis 3.14. the Son
of David, of Mary, is plainly denied to be the Christ of God.
then could he not Bruise the Serpent's Head in all, because the BODY of CHRIST
is not so much as in any one; Yes, by Faith. Read Acts 4.10,12. Luke 2.11.
and consequently, the Seed of the Promise is an Holy Principle of Light and
Life, that being received into the HEART, bruiseth the Serpent's Head; AND
BECAUSE THE SEED WHICH CANNOT BE THAT BODY, IS CHRIST; as testify the
Scripture: The Seed is one, and that Seed is Christ. They are false Ministers
that Preach Christ without, and bid People believe in him, as he is in Heaven
above: Smith's Primer, p. 8. But they that are Christ's Ministers, Preach
Christ within. Your imagined God beyond the Stars; and your Carnal Christ is
utterly denied; that this Christ is God and Man in one Person, is a Lie, etc.
The Sword of the Lord drawn, p. 5.

Reader, I have taken in enough, to show the Marrow of the Quaker's Divinity,
and the Harmony of their Ancient Testimonies: And they tell you, in a late
Print, That God is the same, Truth is the same, his People the same, their
Principles are the same, etc. The People called Quakers cleared, etc. p. 7. And
in another, Our Principles are now no other than what they were, when we were
first a People. Primitive Christianity, etc. p. 53. Printed School. So that there
needs no Comment; only for further Satisfaction, I refer to my former Books,
New Rome Unmasked, and her Foundation Shaken, etc. New Rome Arraigned, and out
of her own Mouth Condemned, etc. Quakerism Withering, and Christianity
Reviving, etc. The Snake in the Grass, etc. Satan Disrobed, etc. Primitive
Heresy, etc. and George Keith's Three Narratives, and Mr. Crisp's
Animadversions, etc. to avoid Repetition: Yet, least those Books may not come
into some Hands which this may, I thought it needful to give these brief Hints,
for Information.

Object. 4. But still some may urge, What! Has W. Mead no other Reason for his
saying, Fox's Journal was better than the Bible?

Answ. I do not grant, that he has any good Reason, that is far from me,
neither do I know of any better; I know of some other, which with him may go
far, which in brief are,

First, George Fox's Miracles, which he writ in his own Name, like those of
Simon Magus, Acts 8.9,10. cap. 19.13. and certain Vagabond Jews, Exorcists; but
these lying Wonders came too late; some 20, some 30 Years after they were said
to be done; no Body knows where, nor when, nor who were cured, nor no Witness
to attest the Truth thereof. Read Fox's Journal, p. 167, 170, 171, 103, 27, 28,
407, 258, 70, 370, 371, 373, 503.

2 dly, Because Fox pretended, that God sent a Trooper to him whilst Prisoner
in the House of Correction, as he sent Saul to Annanias, Journal, p. 45.

3 dly, Because he (Fox) pretended he had Visions, as had Ezekiel, p. 69.

4 thly, For that Fox pretended, that the Keeper of the House of Correction
came Trembling to him, as the Jailer did to Paul and Silas, p. 37.

5 thly, That he saw the Heavens open, as St. Stephen did, p. 47.

6 thly, That he spoke like an Angel in Beverly Church, the wonderful Things of
God, p. 55.

7 thly, That he was a Prophet like Isaiah, spoke the Word, and it came to
pass, p. 67, 78.

8 thly, That he saw a Pool of Blood, and and a Channel of Blood, in the Town
of Lichfield, p. 53. when there was not a drop of Blood, much less a Channel or
a Pool of Blood, etc. However, by these and the like lying Wonders, As more
large in the Picture of Quakerism, Part 2d.
the Quakers, like the deluded Samaritans of old, are made to believe with W.
Mead, That the Journal of Fox is a better Book than the Bible; and, that George
Fox, as well as Simon Magus, was some great Man, even the Power of God; (see
Journal, Third Index, under the Letter M.) and thereupon gave him Divine
Attributes, due only to Christ, which Whitehead their Drudge, to help them at a
dead lift, was forced to bring in his Innuendo's, to set forth the Intents of
Coal, Eccles, etc. Innocence against Envy, etc. p. 18.

CHAP. VI.
Shows George Whitehead, etc. their Hypocrisy. Answers an Objection, Do not
the Quakers maintain their own Poor? Their Vncharity thereby discovered.

Reader,
I Am now upon a fresh, yet a necessary Subject; for as the Quaker-Teachers
have cried down all Protestant Ministers, as Covetous, Lovers of filthy Lucre,
and thereby raised their own Fame, as the Prophets of the Lord, called forth
from their own Country, and from their Father's Houses; from both Riches,
Honors and Preferments, to come with their Lives in their Hands, for the Good
of Souls; this Noise I must confess went a great way with me in my young Years,
and I know it does with many: And therefore I think it needful to discover
their Deceit in this particular, as well as to show how far they maintain their
own Poor; and, what they mean by those Words, THEIR OWN POOR; for as their
Hypocrisy is Misterium Maximum, so it requires some Time and Skill to unfold
it; in order to which, I shall thus proceed:

Object. 1. But say some, G. Whitehead printed F. Bugg a conceited Fool, one
that cannot write true English, Judgment Fixed, etc. p. 233, 243. and also of
little Credit: Likewise, that the Author of The Snake in the Grass is a
Necessitous, Malicious, Expulsed Priest, one who writes for his Bread, a
Villain, a Venomous, Obnoxious, Sculking Vermin, etc. with abundance more of
the like nature; A Sober Expostulation, etc. p. 2. Primitive Christianity
continued, etc. and G. W. 's Letter to G. Keith, May 3. School.

Answ. First, As to my self, though I had not that Learning, which I am satisfied
my Parents once designed, yet I thank God and my Parents, for affording me both
a Competency of Learning and Judgment to deal with the Quakers, who are not
over-learned; no, not G. W. when he came first amongst us; witness his Book,
Jacob found in a Desert Land, etc. printed 1656. which I am sure is so foreign
from true School-Learning, that there is not in the whole Book one Page good
Grammar-English, as well as some part mere Nonsense: Yet I will not call him
Fool, nor yet nothing of a Scholar; for perhaps he might be then entered in his
Accidence: And I will also grant, that since that, (having leisure enough, and
lived with his Feet under other Men's Tables, whilst I was occupied in Trade
and Worldly Business,) he has acquired a greater degree of Learning; yet not so
much neither, as always to write true English, as in his Letter to Mr. Archer
is manifest; so that he might have passed by my want of Learning, etc.

2 dly, As to his Reflection on my Credit, when I came first amongst the
Quakers, I had sufficient to live upon, and to maintain my self in the rank I
was brought up in; yea, to give, and not receive: At 16 Years old I had by my
Grandfather an Annuity given me of 6 l. per Annum, until I was 21 Years old,
and then Thirty Pounds per Annum, besides what my Father gave me; and though I
have met with many Losses, and that in diverse Kinds, yet I thank God, who has
hitherto enabled me to maintain my Post, and to defend my Faith and Christian
Reputation against the Malicious Attempts of G. Whitehead, and his
Confederates; besides, G. Whitehead might have forborne, since most of my Losses
have been by the Quakers, having had Eight or Nine break in my Debt, some
paying nothing, some paying 5 s. in the Pound, some 2 s. 6 d. in the Pound.
Viz. Enoch Barwick about Two Years since, for 18 l. I had but 45 s.
I will mention one more, namely, Tho. Plumstead, [Brother to Francis
Plumstead, at the Cross-Saws in the Minories, London,] and still an Eminent
Quaker, living in Ireland, but no Conscience he makes of paying me; and that it
may appear true, I will recite the Note I have still under his Hand, viz.

May 12. 1676.
Reckoned with Francis Bugg of Milden-Hall, and all Accounts being then
cleared, there rests due to Francis Bugg Sixteen Pounds; Four Pounds whereof is
to be paid to him Six Months after the Date hereof, and the Twelve Pounds
remainder not exceeding Four Years.

Witness my Hand the Day abovesaid, Tho. Plumstead.

However, he never had the Honesty nor Conscience to pay one Penny of it, which
is now, Interest and Principle, between 30 and 40 l. and greater Sums than
this, and of as Eminent Quakers, I can mention, if need be: But I understand
the World so well, as not to make these things the Subject of my Discourse; nor
did I ever mention any such thing in Print, only G. W. gives now Occasion for
it.

3 dly, As to the Author of the Snake in the Grass, etc. I am sensible G. W.
does as much abuse him, (and indeed, what Opponent ever had G. W. that he did
not abuse?) However, he has been, and still is, a Gentleman, a Man of great
Learning and Piety, and clothed with Zeal as with a Garment, for the Christian
Religion, and well accomplished every way to display the Errors of the
Quakers; and is preparing an Answer to G. Whitehead, wherein he (I believe)
will trace him step by step, in all his crooked and by paths.

But G. Whitehead, I have not done with you yet; you tell us, in the History of
your Call to the Ministry, saying, The Lord has called me from my Native
Country, and from my Father's House, and from outward Riches, and the Honor of
the World, etc. Jacob found in a Desert Land, etc. p. 8. I do well remember,
that when I came first amongst you, this was a great part of your Cant; as if
you had been some Lords Sons, yea, Men of Breeding, Riches and Honor, and left
all for the sake of Souls; when alas! upon a strict Enquiry, (of which I have
not been wanting,) I find you in this, as well as in almost every thing else,
horrible Deceivers; for you left your poor Country for a Richer, and like
Yorkshire Hostlers, are observed seldom or never to return thither again. You
came from Penury to Plenty, from Labor and Toil to Ease and Pleasure; you came
from your Father's poor Cottage, which I have been told by them that saw it,
that it is not worth 50 s. to Houses worth 500 l. (a good Exchange, believe
me;) and you were so far from being possessed with outward Riches, that you
came a poor Boy on Foot, and lived upon Alms amongst us, sometimes a Month
here, Six Weeks there, more or less, as you could find Entertainment; the mean
time, improving that little Learning you had, as well as to instruct the
Children in the Family. But George, thou left thy Honor too, how came that to
pass? What Worldly Honor were thou endued with? Was it to carry a Letter to a
great Person sometimes for a piece of Victuals? Very well, I think that is as
much as ever [during thy Dwelling in thy own Country,] thou did arrive to;
and for this, in time, thou had the Honor to send thy Servant, and ride thy
self on Horseback, with a London Linnen-Draper riding before thee; Benjamin
Antrobus.
and John Kent, worth some Thousands, (for ought I know,) riding behind thee,
carrying thy Portmantle, and thy self, George, in the middle, like some Peer.
Thus, George, instead of leaving thy Riches, thy Honor, etc. thou left thy
Penury and Contempt; and by Deceit, like thy Brother Sam. Cater, who pretended
he suffered 20 l. when he suffered not a Groat, but by that Pretense got 10 l.
clear into Pocket: Picture of Quakerism drawn, etc. p. 106, to 111. at large.
But HARK, George, I find you so deceitful, that I fear thou have laid a
Foundation, in this thy Jacob found in a Desert Land, (and with Design too,) to
have thy Friends after thy Decease, when they collect thy Works, to magnify
thy Call to thy Ministry, out of thy Father's Country, for the sake of Souls;
when alas! it was for filthy Lucre-sake, in leaving thy outward Riches; when
alas! it was to get Riches and Honor.

Object. 2. But may some say, What, will the Quakers give such notorious
Accounts of their Call to their Ministry? And are they generally of such a mean
Abstract, and yet so advanced? Where is the Self-Denial they so often boast of?
And why do they debase the Clergy, as a Tribe of Covetous Worldly Teachers?
Since, if others be like Whitehead, none exceed the Quaker Teachers in
Worldly-mindedness.

Answ. First, Well; to Answer this Objection, take G. W. for one Instance.

2 dly, Sam. Cater, who was a poor Journeyman Carpenter, and when he led James
Naylor's Horse into Bristol, crying, Hosannah to the Son of David, and put in
Prison, he was well acquainted with Vermin, Rags and Penury; however, it is
believed he is worth now, besides Portioning out his Children, some Hundreds.

3 dly, John Kilborn, another Journeyman Carpenter, as poor as either Whitehead
or Cater, when they first set up for Speakers, now a Wealthy Man.

4 thly, William Bingley, a poor Tailor, wrought for 4 d. or 6 d. a Day in the
North, with Tho. Denison, or others, now a Rich Man.

4 thly, Samuel Wallingfeild, a Glazier formerly, but since a vast Rich Draper
in London.

6 thly, Tho. Green, a Mason, or Bricklayer, now a Man worth many Thousands.

7 thly, George Fox, a poor Journeyman Shoemaker, died worth Abundance, and
lived in as much Plenty as most Knights in England.

8 thly, Stephen Crisp, formerly a poor Weaver, but died very Rich.

I have known most of these Eight Persons near 30 Years, some longer; and
setting the Glazier and Mason aside, which possibly might make up jointly 100
l. if need were; but the other Six, I do verily believe, was not all worth 100
l. unless they had sold their Axes, Saws, Thimble and Needles, Beds, Stools,
Shuttle and Awl: But such is the Art of their Preaching, how much soever they
decry Gifts and Rewards in others; that put what Geo. Fox and Steph. Crisp died
worth, to what the other Six living [for ought I know,] together, and by the
most modest Account that I can get, together with my own Estimation, their
Estates thus got by Preaching, is not so little as Twenty Thousand Pounds, but
some think nearer Thirty Thousand Pounds. Now then I dare engage to produce 500
Clergymen, whose Fathers were Men of Estates, who brought them up at Schools
and Colleges with great Expense and Charge; and that since they came into the
World, have been frugal Men, and lived as many Years in their Office of
Preaching, and yet have not advanced their Fortunes to this degree: And yet to
behold how their Books are filled with reproachful Language, as well as their
Sermons, against the Clergy, as a Tribe of Mercenary Hirelings, Lovers of
filthy Lucre, Followers of Balaam for Reward; seeking their Gain from their
Quarters, Greedy Dogs, Babylon's Merchants, Covetous Devils, Thieves, Robbers:
A Brief Discovery of a threefold State, etc. p. 5, 7, 8, 9, 10. Yea, says W.
Penn, And whilst the Idle Gormondizing Priests of England, run away with above
150000 l. a Year, under Pretense of being God's Ministers; and that no sort of
People have been so universally through Ages, the very Bane of Soul and Body to
the Universe, as that abominable Tribe; for whom the Theater of God's most
dreadful Vengeance is reserved, to act their Eternal Tragedy upon, etc. The
Guide mistaken, p. 18. And in the same Page he tells us, that the false
Christians (meaning the Church-People) are more intolerable than Heathens,
Turks, and Jews; saying, The equal Conversation of those Infidels should make
both Priest and People blush. And why not Quakers too?


But Mr. Clapham the Minister, against whom W. Penn writ that Book, says, It Is
a foolish thing to flatter the Papists, Socinians and Quakers, with the Hopes
of Salvation, p. 31, 32, ib. Upon which, Mr. Penn in his wonted career, first
condemns the Clergy, then vindicates the Soeinians; his Words are these, If
[Pap. Socin. Quak.] be defective, they owe it to the Idle, Lying, Covetous,
Ignorant, and Murdering Spirit and Practice of the Priests, whose Interest it
has ever been to enslave and obscure the People's Understanding; -- it is not my
Business to Apologize for Papists: As for the Socinian, I know him to have Wit
and Learning enough; -- his Exemplary Life, and Grave Deportment, I must
acknowledge to be very singular; and if his Cause receive no greater Foil than
this Person's bare Reproaches, the discreet World will sooner acquiesce in the
stronger Arguments of Socinus, and his quaint Adherents, W. P. Vindicate the
Socinians.
.

Object. But may some object, If the Quaker Teachers be such thirfty Men, are
they also charitable Men? We have heard, the Quakers maintain their own Poor.

Answ. I do not know many of their Teachers now, having been so long from them;
but such of them as I do now know, and formerly have known, they were a sort of
mercenary poor Men at their first Rise, (some few excepted) but very
uncharitable in their Language; the World never produced the like since Noah's
Flood; and I know not, nor never did, that the Ministers of that People were
ever given to Hospitality; but what they got, commonly they held fast, and
beside, ungrateful to their Benefactors. I remember, I met one of them in
London, John Kilborn.
sometime since, and he was so Proud, being now grown Rich, that he would not
speak to me, although I have entertained him and his Horse, yea, and Companion
too, at my House diverse times, sometimes a Week together; yea, when he has been
thin and threadbare, I have taken him into my Shop, and at my own Charge have
clothed him: I will not say what I have done to others, both in Money and
Clothing; but thus much I will say, that it is the chargeablest Ministry this
Day in England to some Particulars: For, as Mr. Croese well observes, they
range all the Nation round, and come like Mice uncalled for, and like Flies
unsent for; and both for their Horses, Themselves, and their Companions, fall
upon their Provision, Oats, Hay, etc. insomuch that I can say, the Ministry of
the Quakers has cost me as much in Three Months time, nay, much more, than the
Public Ministry have cost me this Fifteen Years.

But as to their Hospitality and Charity, I never met with any of it: I
remember, about Twenty Years since, my Wife had a mind to see London, and I
went with her to visit Tho. Green, who as well as many others of them, made my
House his Home when in our Country, yet he never invited me and my Wife to a
Meal; Brothers and Sisters.
nay, his own Kindred that have come to Visit him out of Northamptonshire, have
scarce eat and drank at his House; but which is still worse, for I can now
spare none, where a Discovery may be made of this false Ministry and deluding
Teachers; I say worse, for his own Brother William Green, who once was a chief
Speaker amongst them; but, poor Man! he was a wet Quaker, and they put him by
Preaching; the Man married, grew Poor, and notwithstanding his Brother Thomas
Green was vastly Rich, It Is now judged he is worth 8000 l.
and Application made to him time after time, yet he held a deaf Ear so long,
until his Wife was forced to go to St. Gregory's Parish for Relief for him, or
else he might have starved, I have been told, that he will not allow his Horse
Litter, but lets him lie on the bare Flint-Stones.
for all his own Brother is worth many Thousands.

I shall give but one Instance more of this kind, and then tell you who are
their own Poor, and who they think themselves obliged to maintain, etc.

The Instance is, touching S. Cater, whose Father was a poor Man, went about to
sell Wings three for Two Pence, from Door to Door; but as you have heard, he by
being a Preaching Quaker is grown Rich: Well, he has a Kinsman that lives at
our Town, and takes Collection, a Sweep-Chimney; this poor Man, sometimes in
the Summertime, will go to Littleport, Where S. Cater dwells.
i. e. about Eight or Ten Miles, to visit his Rich Cousin, his Father's
Brother's Son; but when he comes there, I have heard him say, that they will
not so much as let him come in; I will not say, but sometimes he may have
gotten something, but very little; no, they have very little Charity to God's
Poor, but their own Poor, and such as they so esteem; and thereupon look upon
themselves obliged to maintain such as Merit their Charity, by Obeying their
Doctrine, in Transgressing the known Laws of the Land, viz. such as are Sued
and Imprisoned for Tithes, such as met in Defiance of the Statute, made 22 of
K. C. II. S. Cater's Instance for one.
Yea, if such could but make the Feoffees to the Fund at London, believe they
did suffer, whether true or false, such were supplied: But if any one of their
People happen to wear a 4 d. Lace on their Pinner, or pull off their Hat to a
Magistrate, or break and violate the Quakers Laws, such are turned to the
Parish: I know but one poor Quaker in our Town; Milden-Hall.
it may be she is not so starched a Quaker as the rest; it may be she may say
You instead of Thee and Thou, or some such small Defect: Well, though she be a
poor Widow, with several small Children, and very Necessitous, yet she must
starve, if our Parish did not sometimes relieve her; and for this Seven Years,
I believe, she has lived in a little House of mine, and the Town pays me her
Rent: No, they only take notice of their own Poor, viz. such as are made poor
through their Obedience to the Quakers unlawful Laws, or Laws against the Laws
of the Realm.

I do not question but I have made the Friends angry; yet if they take the
Boldness to stigmatize the Bishops, Magistrates and Clergy, and to reproach
them with what is not true, why may not I tell them of their Faults? G.
Whitehead wrote lately to G. Keith, i. e. G. W.'s Letter to G. Keith, May, 98.
I could further expose thee to thy Terror and Shame, They Will tell you, they
cannot seek Revenge.
than ever I have done; for I have been very sparing toward thee, in
comparison of thy many Abuses, Scorns and Injuries against me, etc. But, Canes
timidi vehementius latrant. An Account of the Children of Light, etc. p. 16.

I shall conclude this Head in the Words of W. Penn to the Clergy; and I shall
only turn the Scales, and apply it to the Quakers Teachers, and hope it may be
useful to their Hearers, as well as show Geo. Whitehead thereby, how Injurious,
Scornful, and Abusive, the Quakers have been to the Clergy, who never yet
exposed them to Terror; but I thank God, England is not Pensilvania, where the
Quakers, though they cannot Fine, Whip, Imprison, and Fight as Quakers, yet they
tell you they can as Magistrates. The Words are these, The Guide mistaken, etc.
p. 43. viz.

Though manifold are the Stratagems of Satan, that old Serpent, by which he does
surprise the Immortal Souls of Men, with most deplorable Woes, yet there is
none that proves so generally effectual as HYPOCRISY; it is his Misterium
Maximum, a Study and Employment fit for none below the Form of his Archangels;
such make his archest Emissaries, and most subtle Meanders, sublime Devils,
masqu'd with a Vizard of Sincerity, palliating themselves from what they really
are, by seeming what as really they are not; outsidewash'd Platters, Wolves in
Sheep's Clothing, inside rotten, but outside whited Sepulchers; in short, the
muddy Sensualist T. G. and others knew Crisp to be a great Sensualist, if not
an Atheist.
refined to a counterfeit Fidelity; and Imitation of the Form of Godliness, the
more unquestionable to Deceive; and securely to insinuate candid Apprehensions
of his Purpose, who is the most impudent Despiser of his God, Destroyer of
Souls, Contemner of Laws, Perverter of Truth, and Treacherous to the end;
against whom the Sharpest Woes are denounced, and Punishments reserved to
Eternity. Now how the Quakers W. P. apply it to the Clergy.
have rendered themselves obnoxious to the Corrector of a Hypocrite, has been my
Business in this Chapter, and will be in the ensuing Discourse, farther to
manifest, etc.

And thus have I, by answering these three Objections, showed the Quaker
Teachers their Specialis regula triplex, by which they are governed, viz.
Pride, Hypocrisy and Covetousness, in which they all agree, in Case, Gender,
and Number. I do grant, I have the Consent of some worthy Gentlemen in this my
Undertaking; I also grant, I have met with Discouragement from some others of
equal Worth and Merit, who are not so Apprehensive of the Danger of their
Errors, both respecting the Church and State; but no Man has been privy to, or
viewed what I have wrote; and so I take it wholly upon my self, as what I think
my self called to. And if G. Whitehead, or his Associates, should threaten me
with Terror, as they do G. Keith, for his Christian Testimony against their
Vile Errors, I first let them know, they cannot bring me much lower than they
have already done; next, that I am as willing to suffer Three Years and Four
Months Imprisonment under their Rage and Fury, if God and the Government permit
them to execute their Fury so far, as ever I was to suffer the like Term when
amongst them, in Ely and Wisbech Goal; and whatever I thought then, and what
Satisfaction I then had in my Sufferings, I have reason to believe, I have far
more solid Reason for the Cause I am now upon; and therefore I shall not spare
this painted Reason, but lay her bare to the View of her Lovers, let her Fret
and Fume, Rail and Rage never so much; for as she have dealt by others, Viz.
the Magistrates, Ministers, and People.
by false Accusations without Mercy, so shall I, by a true and faithful
Testimony from Matter of Fact, deal by her, without all Pity or Compassion: For
why should Jezebel be suffered to Seduce the Nation undiscovered? Why should
she Dialogue the Bishops, Contemn the Magistrates, Revile the Ministers of the
Gospel, at their own ungodly Rate, without Contradiction? No, let Gog and Magog
join together, yet shall there be War proclaimed against them for ever, as long
as the Sun and Moon endures.

CHAP. VII.
Shows the manner of the Quakers Yearly Meeting, or General Council; with the
Use of it, and the Consequences thereof.

Reader,
BY way of Introduction observe, that as I begin my Entrance into the Quakers
Church Government, with the manner of their ANNIVERSARY SYNOD, so I shall
complete the Discovery thereof in a distinct Chapter by it self, touching their
Yearly Meetings. For, as all Proceedings in our Courts of Judicature, in our
Assizes, General Quarter Sessions, Monthly Meetings of the Justices of Peace,
Commissioned by his Majesty, are Authorized, and derive their Power from Acts
of Parliament; so all the Proceedings of Monthly, Quarterly, Six Weeks, and
Second-day Meetings of the Quakers Government, (which is a Government within
the Government, and which is still worse, against the Government) derive their
Power and Authority from their Yearly Meeting, where their Acts are made, their
Orders are framed, and their Methods agreed upon, in a Parliamentary Way. And
these in their Order, I shall briefly go through, beginning with their YEARLY
MEETING, showing their way and manner, and that part of their Business, which I
still remember when I was a Member thereof, and what else occur to my Memory,
as well as by the best Information I can get; and ending with their YEARLY
MEETING, showing their Doctrine, by which they influence the Deputies sent from
all Parts of England and Wales, to agree in Council, to maintain their Ancient
Testimony, etc.

As to the manner of their House, and Meeting therein.
First, They are Men chosen and deputed by all the Quarterly Meetings of the
Quakers in England and Wales, and sent up to London, to sit in Council every
Penticost, or Whitsun-Week, Annually, as the Representatives of the Body of the
People called Quakers; to which, there is resort from Scotland, Ireland,
Holland, Pensilvania, East and West-Jersey, Maryland, Long Island, Road-Island,
Virginia, Carolina, Friezland, Antego, Mevis, Dantzick, Germany, Holstein, and
all other Places wherever they have got footing; London being the Quakers
Metropolis, as Rome is in Italy, where they hold their general Rendezvouze from
all Parts of the World, A notable way of Intelligence, and how to espy the
Weakness of every Country, as well as their own Strength.
to Negotiate their Affairs, Settle their Orders, Confirm as well as Make
Decrees, Erect Canons, Repeal, not verbally, yet virtually, so far as their
Power reaches, all Acts of Parliament which suit not with their Light within,
which is the Higher Power, to which, together with the Body, See the Fifth
Chap. the London Edict, 1666.
absolute Obedience is required, and Submission expected, nay, decreed; for to
the Light (say they) all Power in Heaven and Earth is committed, and from whose
Sentence there lies no Appeal. Jos. Coale's Works, p. 93. Smith's Primer, p. 13.

Secondly, As to their Convocation-House, it is situate, and being in
White-Heart-Court in Grace Church Street, London, where there is a very large
Room four square, with a very large Table, which is covered in Convocation time
with a curious Green Carpet; about which may fit Forty or Fifty of the
Principal Men; their President being their Light within, which is to speak
through some or other infallibly, and so to be taken, etc. and round about there
are Seats set one above another, like the House of Commons, where may convene
about Six Hundred; and their Speaker being below, they can all hear him, and he
them, with Ease and Delight.

Thirdly, When this is done, (the Doors being well secured, i. e. either locked
and barred, or else Two or Three lusty Fellows to keep Guard) then the Clerk
opens his Bags, and takes out his Books, opens the black Roll, and calls over
all the Quarterly Meetings in England and Wales, and the Names of the Deputies;
and is as careful to see that none be wanting, as Jehu was, who said, Call unto
me all the Prophets of Baal, let none be wanting, 2 Kings 10.19.

This done, they proceed to examine, first, the State of their own Affairs,
next, that of the Nation, which any way affects them.

First, As to their own Church Affairs; it is to see that none Preach contrary
to their Ancient Testimony; if they do, they Excommunicate them, and Expel them
out of their Unity, as in the Case of Geo. Keith; which, in regard it is made
so Public by several printed Books, particularly his Three Narratives, I think
I am the less concerned to be particular on that Head; as First, To show how
they Summoned him to appear before them Day after Day, I think 10 or 12 Days
together, where G. Keith as readily appeared, as Luther did at Worms; And
there was as much need for him; for New-Rome is as fatal, and as dangerous to
the Protestant Interest, as her Elder Sister.
and when they could not make him truckle, but that he manfully stood his Post,
they then cast him out as a Troubler of their Israel, and called him Apostate,
one separated from the Holy Fellowship of the Church of Christ, and one not fit
to Preach and Pray in their Meetings, in that unreconciled Estate, until by a
Public and Hearty Acknowledgment of his Offense, and Condemnation of himself
therefore, he return to Mother Church, etc. as by the Words of his
Excommunication, bearing Date May 17. 1695. may more fully appear. Thus then is
their Boldness manifest, First, In presuming to Summons the King's Subjects to
appear before them; and then to Interrogate them, Sentence and Condemn them;
yea, and that too, for holding no other Articles of the Christian Faith, than
what every Orthodox Church holds. Secondly, That he is an Apostate, whilst no
matter of evil Fact, or false Doctrine, they could lay to his Charge; I say,
this is bold in Fact.

I will not deny, but that Dissenters have sometimes admonished scandalous
Walkers; and if they have persisted therein, to the Scandal of their
Church-Society, rejected them, etc. But I deny that any, whether Presbyterians,
Independants, or Baptists, ever yet took upon them to call a General Council,
and then, and there assume an Authority to call before them the King's
Subjects, examine, try and judge them Apostates, for differing from them in
Matter of Faith and Doctrine, especially when G. Keith held no other Articles
of the Christian Faith, than all sound Protestants hold. This then is a Figure
of their Church Government, respecting the Doctrinal Part thereof.

Next, As to their Interfering with the Government, and their calling in
question Acts of Parliament, and absolving their Hearers from their Obedience
to them; if this can be made appear, I think it is worth noticing, the dangerous
Consequences thereof are so Many, and so Pernicious. And,

THEREFORE observe, what W. Rogers wrote, in Answer to an Objection, Whether it
were lawful or no to pay Tithes, if the Supreme Powers command it? etc. The
Christian Quaker distinguished from the Apostate, in five Parts. Part 2. page
43. Printed 1680.

Ans. We are so far from condemning all those who freely pay them, (and not by
Constraint) that we look upon it the Duty of all professing Christianity, to
contribute toward the outward Maintenance of such whom they usually hear, and
account to be the true Ministers of Christ, in case they have need; and if the
Charity of any should be such, as to bestow upon them one Fifth Part, instead
of a Tenth, far be it from us to condemn it, etc.

This Book did so startle the Foxonian Quakers, that Tho. Ellwood, one of their
best Tools, wrote an Answer to it; and fearfully complains of this extensive
Charity of W. Rogers, and the Dissenting Quakers, called Storians for
Distinction, etc. saying,

In this Answer (says Ellwood) you discover an Error of Judgment, otherwise
you would not be so far from Condemning all those who pay Tithes freely as you
say you are: FOR TRUTH ALLOWS NO PAYMENT OF TITHES AT ALL, UNDER THE NEW
COVENANT, BUT CONDEMNS IT: And so would you also, if your Hearts were right in
Truth: THEY who PAY TITHES do THEREIN uphold a legal Ceremony abrogated by
Christ, and THEREBY DENY CHRIST to be come in the Flesh, which IS a MARK of
ANTICHRIST, 1 John 4.3. This Proof of Tho. Ellwood's out of 1 John 4.3. is like
many of their Proofs; for there is not a word of Tithes, or that it is a mark
of Antichrist to pay Tithes.
However, whether you condemn or approve it, the faithful Followers of the Lamb
see and discern this Spirit, the Nature of it, and the End it tends to, which
is downright RANTERISM. An Antidote against the Infection of W. Rogers's Book,
p. 78.

Again, p. 139. poor T. Ellwood makes a sad Complaint, of some that had been
convinced Ten, nay, some Twenty Years, and yet can pay Tithes without any
Acknowledgment of Evil therein: See what a sad thing it is to break one of
Fox's Commandments.
Is it not savoury Language, (says Ellwood) for such to say, I must stay until
I be convinced? Can such as see not such manifest Evil, Possibly the poor Men
had not seen G. Fox's Commandments, or at least not well conn'd them.
be said to be faithful? etc.

Well, these Differences grew high, and very difficult to decide, but in time
the Matter came up to the Terms of W. Rogers's Objection, viz. the SUPREME
POWER, continued the Payment of Tithes, in that very Act of Parliament, by
which the Quakers claim their Toleration; and therefore it is worth the while,
to see how the Quakers take this very Act of Parliament, and bring it to their
Light, which is (say they) the Higher Power; all Power in Heaven and Earth
being committed to it; Smith's Primer, p. 13. Jos. Coal's Works, p. 93. and how
they null, make void, and repeal that Part of it relating to Tithes, Repairs of
Churches, etc. viz. so far as it concern the Quakers.

Anno Regni Gulielmi and Mariae Regis and Reginae, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae
and Hiberniae, primo May 24. School. this Act passed the Royal Assent.
No 308.
Provided always that nothing herein contained, shall be construed to exempt
any of the Persons aforesaid, from paying of Tithes, or other Parochial Duties,
or any other Duties to the Church or Minister, nor from any Prosecution in any
Ecclesiastical Court, or elsewhere, for the same.

Well, after much struggling between the Foxonian Quakers that hold it
Antichristian to pay Tithes, though voluntarily paid; yea, a complete Denial of
Christ to be come in the Flesh, quoting 1 John 4.3. yea, downright Ranterism on
the one Hand; and the Storian Quakers, who held it lawful to pay, if the
Supreme Power gave it them; nay, not only the Tenth Part, but even the Fifth
Part, if the Party thinks his Minister want it: I say, great Strugglings, and
Writings, and Disputings, were on both Parts, about this so nice a Point, and
so necessary to be decided: Wherefore at a Yearly Meeting held at London, June
1693. and by the Authority of the same, it was thus, amongst other things,
Enacted:

And therefore, that all due and godly Care be taken against the grand
Oppression and Antichristian Yoke of Tithes, that our Christian Testimony born,
Soft Words, and hard Names mixed.
and greatly suffered for, be faithfully maintained against them in all
Respects, and against Steeple-House-rates: -- That Friends at all their Monthly
and Quarterly Meetings, be reminded to call for the Record of the Sufferings of
Friends, to see that they be duly gathered, truly entered and kept, and
accordingly sent up (to London) as has been often advised, both of what
Tithes, etc. are pretended to be due, and for how long a time, and the time
when taken, and by, and for whom, and what Goods are taken, and the Value
thereof, as well those not exceeding, as those exceeding the Sums or Quantities
demanded, (it being a Suffering for both for Truth-sake;) they being in these
Particulars found defective and imperfect in diverse Counties, which is an
Obstruction to the general Record of Friend's Suffering: And THEREFORE, the
Monthly and Quarterly Meetings are advised to take more Care for the future,
that all Friends Safferings for Truth-sake, may be brought up (to London) as
FULL and COMPLETE in ALL Respects as POSSIBLE may be. Thus, Reader, you see,
That this Act of Parliament being brought to the Quakers Light, the Higher
Power, it is condemned as a GRAND Oppression, and an ANTICHRISTIAN YOKE of
Bondage, suitable to the Doctrine of Fox, Journal, p. 400, to 478. R. Pie, The
Ancient Test. p. 2. T. Ellwood and Barclay, The Anarchy of the Ranters, etc. p.
42. Ellwood 's Antidote, p. 78, 139.

But still there is another Clause in the said Act of Parliament above-recited,
which they take as little Notice of as that of Tithes, viz.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Assembly of Persons, dissenting from the Church of England, shall be had in any
Place for Religious Worship, with the Doors locked, barred, or bolted, during
any time of such Meeting together; all and every such Person or Persons that
shall come to, and be at such Meeting, shall not receive any Benefit from this
Law, but be liable to all the Pains and Penalties of all the aforesaid Laws
recited in this Act, for such their Meeting, notwithstanding his taking the
Oaths, and his making and subscribing the Declaration aforesaid. Another
Instance I may recite, to show the Presumption of the Quakers, in their Yearly
Convocations, viz.

In the xxii of K. Charles II. there was an Act of Parliament made, Entitled,
An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles: In which it was said,

Be it Enacted, etc. That if any Person of the Age of Sixteen Years, and
upward, being a Subject of this Realm, at any time after the Tenth Day of May
next, shall be present at any Assembly, Conventicle, or Meeting, under Color
and Pretense of any Exercise of Religion, in other manner than according to the
Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, etc. at which there shall be
Five Persons or more Assembled together, over and besides those of the same
Family, etc. shall suffer those and those respective Fines, etc. Now though it be
well known, that the Exercise of the Quakers Religion is not only otherwise
than according to the Liturgy, but directly contrary to it, yet all must be
Persecution that limit them: As first, the Liturgy teach the Practice of the
Ten Commandments, the Lord's Prayer, and Apostles Creed, which the Quakers have
not the least Shadow of, either in their Meetings, or in their Families; the
Church Liturgy teach the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Prayer, together
with Confession of Sin, which the Quakers reject as Idolatrous and
Superstitious. See the Picture of Quakerism, p. 94, to 100.

Well, no sooner did this Act take place, and some did forbear meeting in this
Riotous manner, but their Preachers came through the Nation, and gave out their
Epistles or Mandates, commanding, rather than exhorting the People, to meet in
great Numbers, in spite of Law and Lawmakers; I received many Letters to that
Purpose, one whereof I may recite, to show, how presumptuous they were, in
Summoning the King's Subjects to meet and transgress this Law, which allowed a
moderate Tolleration, considering how Retrograde their Religion runs to all
Instituted Religion. For there might Four meet, besides those of the same
Family; and it is probable, that many Families have 12 or 15 in a Family. Here
then might have been Satisfaction, to such as only mean to meet for their more
private Edifying, eitheir by Reading or Expounding some Portion of the Holy
Scriptures, and which is practiced by the users of the Church Liturgy; but
alas! this was too mean, too low and contemptible, for these proud Boasters to
submit to. The Letter is as follows, viz.

This for Joshua Bangs. Poor Joshua felt the weight of their Entertainment, as
well as Ben. Antrobus, and many others.

Dear Friend,
BY this thou may know, that God willing, Jonathan Johnson and I do intend
to be at Milden-Hall Meeting the next First Day, and shall be glad Friends
GENERALLY may know thereof, that we may have a good LARGE MEETING; I mean,
Friends that are afar off in the Country.

R. S.


The like I had from John Hubbard, and others, to appoint Meetings for Geo.
Whitehead, and others, though often therein precaution'd not to mention the Names
of the Speakers; no, they must go like di^guiz'd Ahabs, and the poor silly
Sheep must suffer for them, and their own Transgressions too; insomuch, as that
in the Loss of 13500 l. by Fines and Distresses, our Teachers never lost 50 l.
where they were Strangers, and they had more Wit than to Preach at home where
they were known. Well, but as these Letters, as well as their common Practice,
was bottomed upon an Edict made at a Yearly Meeting, which both repealed this
Law, respecting the Quakers, who adhered to them as the Higher Power, alienated
their Obedience from the Magistrates, and the Laws of the Land: Which Edict is
as follows, viz.

Concerning our open Testimony by Public Meetings, in Times of Sufferings.
That as it has been our Care and Practice from the Beginning, that an Open
Testimony for the Lord should be born; and a Public Standard High boasting
Words; but the Snake lay in the bottom, i. e. Disobedience to Authority, their
Light being the Higher Power.
for Truth and Righteousness upheld in the Power and Spirit of God, by our open
and known Meetings against the Spirit of Persecution, that in all Ages has
sought to lay waste God's Heritage; and that only through Faithfulness, Constancy
and Patience, Victory has been, and is obtained: SO IT IS OUR ADVICE and
JUDGMENT, That all Friends gathered in the Name of Jesus, Meaning their Light,
in opposition to the Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles, and all Christian
Churches, as well as against the Commands of Jesus of Nazareth: Go, teach all
Nations Baptizing, etc. Do this in Remembrance of me, etc. When you Pray, say,
Our Father, etc. Forgive us our Sins, for, etc.

Read Luke 11.14. Matthew. 28.19,20. Luke 22.19. John 1.8. Psalm. 38.18. 50.15.
51.1,2,3. Isa. 64.6. Lam. 3.20. Job 7.20. Prove. 20.9. Eccles. 7.20. Nehem. 1.6.
1 Timothy 1.15. Dan. 9.4,5,20,23.

See Pict. of Quak. p. 63, to 70.


keep up those Public Testimonies in their Respective Places, and not DECLINE,
FORSAKE or REMOVE their Public Assemblies, because of Times of Sufferings, as
WORLDLY, FEARFUL, and POLITIC Professors have done, because of Informers, and
the like Persecutors: For such Practices are not consistent with the Nobility
of the Truth, and therefore not to be owned in the Churches of Christ.

Subscribed by, G. Whitehead, W. Penn, Tho. Salthouse, Al. Parker, Jo.
Burnyeat, St. Crisp.

London, the 23d. of the Third Month, 1675.
Thus have I given two Instances, as particular Demonstrations, That as their
Books teach, so their Practice confirm it: That their Light is the Higher
Power, to which they require Obedience, contrary to the Practice of God's
Saints and Servants in all Ages, where nothing that is sinful (and so against
the written Word of God) is commanded. Read Mat. 22.21. 1 Pet. 2.13,14,17. Romans
13.1,2,3. Tit. 3.1. See Tindal's Works. i. e. The Obedience of a Christian Man,
etc, p. 111. and compare these Holy Sayings with their Practice, unless where
Idolatry or Things sinful are commanded, and then it is better to obey God than
Man; but this the Quakers could never produce: But as they thus slighted and
trampled upon the Government, so did their great Apostle glory in it, saying,
He did not heed a Cart load of Warrants. Journal, p. 278.

And now I shall briefly run through several of their other Methods and Ways at
their Yearly Meeting, reserving their Doctrinal Part, which support and
influence them, to a distinct Chapter by it self.

First, They often refer to their last Yearly Epistle, that the Contents of it be
seriously reminded in all Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, but not a Word of
Scripture referred to therein, as their Rule of Faith and Practice.

2 dly, Against that grand Oppression and Antichristian Yoke of Tithes; yea,
Antichristian in the Lawmakers, in the Payer, and in the Receiver.

3 dly, Against the paying of Churchwardens Rates, by which we have much
Trouble in the Country, otherwise things might be easy; but from this Fountain
spring their Antimagistratical Practices.

4 thly, That all their Sufferings may be brought up to London, in order for a
Martyrology, both full and complete, that nothing may be wanting, to reproach
the Magistrates, and extol their own Sufferings, which they are not already
ashamed to say, are Greater and more Unjust than in the Days of Christ's
Apostles, the Ten Persecutions, and all the Massacres, for the Name of Christ;
see Burrough's Works, p. 273. though many of them are mere Shams, as in the Case
of Sam. Cater, who pretended, and got it Recorded, that he suffered 20 l. for
Preaching at Phakenham in Norfolk, although he never did for that Meeting suffer
a Groat; yet for that Pretense had 10 l. sent him out of their London Exchequer
or Fund: And yet this is not the whole of this grand Cheat; but Nine Years
after he printed a Book, entitled, The Lamentable Cry of Oppression, etc. p.
14, 44. wherein he had the Impudence still to complain of Sir Christopher
Colthorp's Injustice and Persecution, concealing his having his Goods again,
and 10 l. to boot: And by this their Chronicles, they so much boast of, Yet no
Chronicle appears: What, are they ashamed of their Sham-Sufferings?
may be measured.

5 thly, Against their People using Guns in their Ships; which in 1693. When
this Advice was given, His Majesty had need of such as would Fight, etc. But
though the Quakers in Pensilvania can Fight as Magistrates, yet they cannot Fight
as Quakers; and it is not time yet to throw off their Coats of Quakerism, and
put on the Robes of Magistracy.

6 thly, To receive Applications, Epistles, and Embassies, from the Foreign
Parts beyond the Seas, mentioned in the former Part of this Chapter, and grant
them Orders, Edicts and Laws, for the governing themselves in Subjection to
their Light, the Higher Power, especially when met in a Body, as the Epistle,
Anno 1660. before recited show.

7 thly, To refer the Sufferings of their own Poor, i. e. such as by breaking
the Laws, lying in Goal for Non-payment of Tithes, etc. For otherwise, though
their own Brothers, they may starve e're they will take any charitable notice of
them; Nay, Fathers, as in the Case of T. Ellwood, who suffered his Father to go
from Door to Door, as John Rauce's Relation is.
or of a Woman that wears a Lace of a Groat on her Head, or a Man that puts off
his Hat; no, many of these are God's Poor, but the Quakers Poor are of another
sort; and they having merited the Quakers Kindness, by obeying their Laws:
These are plentifully rewarded; so that what they call their Unity, is rather a
Confederacy, which ought to be noticed.

8 thly, They take care, that all their Erroneous Books may be dispersed by all
their Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, for the spreading of Truth, but not a
word of dispersing the Bible; however, it may serve for a Motive to our Clergy,
for to take Care to Disperse such Books as discover the Quakers Errors and
Hypocrisies; the Neglect of it has been very hurtful.

9 thly, They every Year order a Committee to be chosen, to view the Accounts,
and to examine the State of their Cash, i. e. the Quakers Exchequer, which some
say now run over: They likewise nominate their Feoffees for the time being, who
by the Order of their Superiors, give out sometimes 5 l. sometimes 10 l.
sometimes 20 l. at a time to their Preachers; and such as have been ruined for
Non payment of Tithes, and the like; the Feostees for Anno 1693. were W.
Crouch, J. Staploe, W. Macket, W. Chandler, W. Beech, and Nath. Marks.

10 thly, They give their Deputies fresh Orders, to bring (or send) up the
Sum-Total of each County's Collection, for the Relief of their
Suffering-Friends, viz. such as have suffered against Tithes, etc. that such as
Preach up G. Fox's Commandments, Orders and Precepts, may not lose their Reward.

11 thly, George Fox had a Saying in their Yearly Meeting worth noting;
Pensilvania had Experience of it; and when they get Power, England may also;
viz. I do not like (said Fox) the Words LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE, for there is no
Liberty out of the Power: What! Liberty to the Episcopals; no. What! Liberty to
the Presbyter; no. What! Liberty to the Independent; no. What! Liberty to the
Baptist; no. No Liberty out of the Truth. Spirit of the Hat, p. 12. And for
further Evidence, that they are against Liberty of Conscience, R. Hubberthorn
and Ed. Buroughs, Men of Note amongst them, in an Answer to the Baptist's
Declaration, wherein they did declare themselves against an Universal
Toleration of all Miscarriages, whether in things Civil or Religious; nor are
we for tolerating Popery, nor such as speak contemptuously of our Lord Jesus
Christ, nor any that deny the Holy Scriptures to be the Word of God; and yet we
are not against tolerating Episcopacy, Presbytery, or any stinted Form, etc.
Now hear these two Eminent Doctors of the Quakers Answer. What Confusion is
here! you will not tolerate Popery, nor any that worship a false God, nor that
speak Contemptuously and Reproachfully of our Lord Jesus Christ, nor that deny
the Holy Scriptures to be the Word of God; and yet you are not against
tolerating Episcopacy, Presbytery, or any other stinted Form: Why will you not
tolerate Popery as well as Episcopacy? And why will you tolerate the Book of
Common Prayer amongst the Episcopals, and not the Mass Book amongst the
Papists, seeing the Mass was the Substance out of which the Common Prayer was
extracted? Here is nothing but Partiality, to tolerate one thing, and not
another of the same kind. etc. R. Hubberthorn 's Works, p. 228. Edw. Borough
's Works, p. 615. Thus then does it appear, what Friends the Quakers are to
Liberty of Conscience, and how kind they were to Episcopacy in 1659. and they
are the same still; they tell you they are not changed; and you may believe
them, since they have given such a plain Demonstration thereof in Pensilvania,
where they have both Fined, Whipped, or Imprisoned George Keith and others, for
holding the same Faith, and Preaching the same Faith that the Episcopalians
hold and teach.

12 thly and lastly, And what I have heard with my Ears, That George Fox has
exhorted this Meeting, that when they return to their respective Habitations,
that such in each County, as had most Interest, and thereby the most Influence
on the Members of the House of Commons, should resort to them, and work upon
them, etc. And when at the House, they still, by all the Interest they have,
make fresh Suits, they have their Emissaries wait continually, to see what
comes out; they are quick at their Answers; and a Fund or Common Bank to
maintain all; none like them but the Jesuits.
And I do say, that the whole twelve Instances I have named, are not more
Political than this one; for ten to one if some Quaker be not himself, or some
of his Kindred, some way related, either to the Members of Parliament to serve
for that County or Borough, or to some of his Friends; or ten to one if some
Quakers do not deal with him, or some near him, or is Tenant to him, or some of
his Friends; if then some one, or any of these, or all concur, then there is
Application made to him time after time; and most English Gentlemen are apt to
be kind, and they not knowing the Craft and Subtilty, besides the Design of
this People, are apt to tell them, Well, if I can do you any Good, consistent
with a National Good, I shall not be against it: And if they meet one that is
resolute, and from a Knowledge of their Erroneous Principles, and how that they
are Enemies, and implacable ones too, to all Instituted Religion; then they
will fawn upon him, and flatter him, (as they did Coll. Goldwell,) and desire
him to stand Neuter, etc. but thanks be to God, the Parliament and whole Nation
begin to see them, and grow every Day more sensible of the Tendency of their
Pernicious Principles.

Some Inferences from the Seventh Chapter.
IS it so, that the Quakers hold their Anniversary Synods, and General
Councils, thus Publicly in the View of the Nation, without the King's Letters
of License, or Inspection, or Patent, which is more than the Bishops of the
Established Church have Power to do? How then does it concern the Legislative
Power, to take notice of it, that in time they may prevent the Danger of it? Is
it so, that their Light is the Higher Power, to which every Soul is to be
subject, and all Laws vail? Romans 13.1,2,3. 1 Pet. 2.13. Tit. 3.1. Let us then
begin to remember, how zealous our Kings and Parliaments have been, ever since
the Reformation, against such as adhered to a Power superior to the King, Lords
and Commons, which our Protestant Divines have held to be the Higher Powers,
and which we are commanded, (by the Apostles) to submit our selves. Now any
People that adhere to a Foreign Power to be Supreme in England, besides and
above that of KING, LORDS, and COMMONS, (who, under God, are the Higher
Powers,) are to be suspected to undermine the Government, whether they mean the
POPE of ROME, or the QUAKER LIGHT in their BODY Assembled in COUNCIL, (the
latter being the most dangerous, because not so obvious;) and thereupon ought
to be prevented from holding such Councils, with Doors locked, barred, or by a
Guard of Men secured, that none can go in to observe their Transactions: Again,
is it so, that the Quakers are against Liberty of Conscience, and that they
would as freely tolerate Popery as Episcopacy? Yea, see their Ancient Testimony
in R. Hubberthorn's Works, p. 229. Anno 1659.
etc. What Reason is there then for the Quakers to expect, much less to
presume, to take the Liberty, (under an Episcopal Government) to hold these
Convocations without License, which no other Dissenters either ask, desire, or
pretend to; nay, what the Bishops themselves, of themselves, without the King's
License, can do?

Yet to the Quakers own Confutation, see their Book, The West answering to the
North, etc. p. 80. viz. Any Party of Men, under a Government, to make Laws, not
being lawfully Authorized so to do, for the binding of others, and thereunto to
require Obedience, is a setting up of themselves above the Law, and treading it
under their Feet, and rendering them whom they so bind, Slaves and Vassals; and
so is TREASON, etc.

Thus then is it apparent, that what is in others Treason, they themselves
practice in the Face of the Government.

For nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest; neither any thing hid,
that shall not be made known, and come abroad, Luke 8.17.


CHAP. VIII.
Shows the Executive Part of the Quakers Laws and Government, in their Monthly
and Quarterly Meetings.

I Join the Use and Service of their Monthly and Quarterly Meetings together,
for Brevity-sake; as also, because they are much the same in all Respects, only
the Monthly is inferior to the Quarterly; because in one County there may be
three or four Monthly Meetings, much like Justices Monthly Meetings, where the
Party offending need not be Concluded, but entering his Recognizance to appear
at the Quarter Sessions, he may have a more full Hearing; so it is with the
Quakers, he may Appeal from the Monthly to the Quarterly Meeting: This I know
very well, not barely because I was Clerk in these Meetings many Years, but
also during my Controversy with Sam. Cater, I Summoned him first to the
Monthly Meeting; and when I found no Justice, I Appealed from that to the
Quarterly, and indeed from the Quarterly to the Yearly; and so twice or thrice
round, as I remember: For it was the greatest Trial that ever was amongst them,
in regard it struck at the Ministry, viz. WHETHER THEY OUGHT NOT TO TELL THEIR
NAMES AND HABITATIONS, AND THEREBY SET THE MSELVES IN A LIKE SUFFERING CAPACITY
WITH THE HEARERS, At large in my Book, The Painted Harlot both Stripped and
Whipped, etc. And the Postscript, styled, Reason against Railing, etc.
etc. since they advised us to be valiant, and give up all? etc.

But to the Matter:

When we came together, which is commonly 9 or 10 a Clock, then we sat awhile
together Silent, unless we have a Teacher with us, and then it may be we may
have a short Exhortation to keep to our Ancient Testimony; i. e. George Fox's
Commandments, and some other things, which in the next Chapter you will hear of.
so then the Doors being secured, they proceed after this manner: The Clerk
calling over the Meeting, I mean the particular Meetings of every Town, which
possibly may be Forty Towns, more or less, viz.

Clerk. Come Friends, How is it as to your Town of Littleport?


A. and B. [For there is to be two appear from every Town,] Things are pretty
well with us, only D. E. is married with a Priest.


Meeting. Aye, How came that to pass? Did you not perceive his Relapse from the
Truth, and the Order of it, till he made such a Revolt as to become an Apostate?


A. B. Truly we found he declined; and some Friends in our Town spoke to him,
and warned him of the Danger of it, but all would not do.


Meeting. Well, let some Body be ordered to go to him, and admonish him; if he
Repent, and acknowledge his Fault, and confess to Truth, i. e. To them; for if
he confess his Fault to them, they Absolve him, and all is well again.
.


Clerk. How is it at your Town of Milden-Hall?


A. B. Things are pretty well with us; but Francis Bugg still continues his
Writing against Friends: And he being examined by Samuel Fulbig, whether he
owns W. Rogers's wicked Book? (Which admits of Liberty of Conscience to pay
Tithes, or not; to marry with a Public Minister, or not;) and he owns it: And
therefore we must take Care about him, for he does much hurt to Truth, and lays
Stumbling Blocks in the way of others.


Meeting. Course; we know not well what Course to take with him; he will
neither lead Into blind Conformity.
nor drive Into an Implicit Faith.
: Indeed we have suffered him too long Clerk in this Meeting; but he may thank
R. S. J. A. E. L. and some of you his Friends, or else he had been excluded
long since, for his very owning W. Roger's Book, which admits of a voluntary
Payment of Tithes; which, as our dear Brother Ellwood says, is a Mark of
Antichrist, a Denial of Christ come in the Flesh, yea, downright Ranterism,
Antidote, p. 78. 139. But notwithstanding, through such Arguments as W. Rogers
use, we have by woeful Experience seen, that some have been convinced Ten, some
Twenty Years, and yet can pay Tithes without any Acknowledgment of Evil
therein, Christ. Quaker disting. Part 2. p. 42. And although we grant, says our
Brother Ellwood, in his Antidote, p. 109. That our great Apostle G. Fox did
say, in his Several Papers, given forth for spreading Truth: Friends, to you
all this is the Word of the Lord; See, Fox's Papers are the Word of the Lord,
whilst they say, it is Blasphemy to call the Letter, i. e. Scripture, the Word.
Take heed of judging one another; judge not one another, I command you, in the
Presence of the Lord; See his Book, entitled, The Way to the Kingdom of God,
page 4.
and judge not one another behind one another's Backs, Yet they passed Sentence
on me behind my Back, I not being there that Day, i. e. 4th of June, 1682.
I command you in the Presence of the Lord; this is the Word of the Lord unto
you: Neither lay open one another's Nakedness and Weakness behind one another
Backs, for thou that do, art one of Ham 's Family, which is under the Curse,
etc. This indeed (continues our Beloved rother) is a Warning to Friends, not to
judge one another: No, let their Immoralities be gross, do but keep in the
Unity of the Corrupt Body.
But it is not a Warning to Friends, not to judge those that oppose Friends,
being gone out of the Unity of Friends themselves, and endeavoring to draw
others out also, and to divide and rend the Church; so that you have mist your
Aim, and lost your Blow, etc. Thus, Friends, you have the Judgment of the
Church; and Francis Bugg has not only owned that Pernicious Book, but has
written two Books against Friends, as Pernicious as that of W. Rogers,
Entitled, De Christiana Liberate, etc. and The Painted Harlot both Stripped and
Whipped, etc. Nay, not only so, but has wrote diverse Letters, Remonstrances and
Queries, to particular Friends, to the Second-day Meetings. And therefore it is
time to take some Course with him, etc.


Meeting. Content; therefore let us draw up a Paper against him, and when we
have viewed it, let us Record it, etc.


This was done, a Copy whereof is as follows, viz.

At a Quarterly Meeting in Hadenham, 7th Day of the 4th Month, 1682.
Whereas this Day there was inferred Notable Scholars, INFERRED.
into our Meeting, several Papers subscribed by Francis Bugg, wherein he has
Unrighteously and Ungodlily reflected upon Ancient Friends, and greatly abused
Faithful Ministers of the Gospel They can call other Ministers, Witches,
Devils, Thieves, Robbers, Antichrists, Jesuits, Bloodhounds, Sodomites, and
what not? But none must touch the Hem of their Garment. O Proud Hypocrites!
; and also amongst the said Papers, was one subscribed by twelve Persons,
directed to the Second-Day Meeting in London, wherein Friends are
misrepresented, and greatly abused; which said Paper, we believe the said
Francis Bugg promoted. Now we being greatly grieved in our Spirits, and truly
sensible of his herein going from Truth, do testify, We have no Unity with
him, nor can have, whilst he is thus Acted.

OBSERVE, First, I was judged and condemned behind my Back, without a Hearing:
Secondly, The Papers subscribed by Twelve Persons, they only supposed to be of
my promoting. Now if John Lilborn's Judges had been thus implicit in their
Faith, at his Trial at Guild Hall, in October 1649. he must have been Hanged
for writing The Naked Truth in Oliver Cromwell's time, etc.

The next Instance I shall recite, and which I think is to the Purpose, is, to
show the Quakers implacable Malice, against not only W. Rogers, but his Book
too; and no Passage in his whole Book came under the like sad Sentence, as that
of his admitting a Voluntary Payment of Tithes, if the Supreme Powers bestowed
it on a National Ministry, etc. His Words are, We are so far from condemning
all those who freely pay them, [i. e. Tithes,] and not by Constraint, that we
look upon it to be the Duty of all professing Christianity, to contribute
toward the outward Maintenance of such, whom they usually hear, and account
to be true Ministers of Christ, in case they have need: And if the Charity of
any should be such, as to bestow upon them one Fifth Part, instead of a Tenth,
far be it from us to condemn it, etc. The Christian Quaker distinguished, etc.
Part 2. p. 43. But this was such a horrible Tenet, and so much of Liberty of
Conscience in it, that as you have heard, First, It was an Error of Judgment.
2 dly, It came from an unsound Mind. 3 dly, That Truth, [i. e. the Quakers
Light,] allows no Payment of Tithes at all, under the New Covenant. 4 thly,
They who do pay Tithes, though Voluntarily, do therein uphold a legal Ceremony
abrogated by Christ. 5 thly, And thereby deny Christ to be come in the Flesh,
quoting 1 John 4.3. which speaks not one Syllable of Tithes. 6 thly, That it is
downright Ranterism, etc. Ellwood's Antidote, p. 78. 139.

Well, but W. Rogers was so modest, as not to put this Book into the
Bookseller's Hands to Sell, lest thereby he might widen the Difference, which
both he, and my self, at that time, thought might have been composed, For I did
not then understand their Fundamental Errors; but Thanks be to God, that as
their fair and smooth Pretenses proved a Snare to catch me, so their gross
Dissimulations proved a Means to see them.
that he put it into the Hands of John Barnard, a Merchant, (being one of the
separate Quakers) for him to dispose of, and to disperse as he in Wisdom should
see meet; and some Hundreds of them he did disperse. Well, he was Summoned time
after time, to the Monthly Meeting in Devonshire-House, London, to Answer for
his Fault; and, I think, he as often appeared: But being of too Masculine a
Temper to submit to their Arbitrary Authority, and Usurped Dominion, he still
continued selling and disposing of this so sad and so lamentable a Book; of
which you have heard the greatest Crime, namely, for admitting a Voluntary
Payment of Tithes, etc. And to say true so it was; for there is nothing upon
Earth that the Quakers thirst more after, than the utter Ruin of the
Priesthood, and the Abolishing the Maintenance thereof: This is the Vein that
runs fluently through all their Books and Sermons; nay, rather than the Priests
should have it, and that it might be a Means to starve them, they are willing
to pay Tithes to Secular Use: For ( says G. Whitehead) if the King and Great
Council of the Nation were pleased The Case of the Quakers concerning Oaths
defended, etc. p. 50. per G. Whitehead.
to repeal those Old Laws, enforcing the Payment of Tithes, and to convert them
into some necessary civil Use, as for the Poor, [ Oh Judas!] or some National
Service and Benefit, Oh smooth George! Here is the Face of a Lamb, but the
rough Paw of a Bear, and the Claws of a Leopard.
it would appear, whether we should not pay our Parts; and whether the Royal
Exchequer would not be conveniently supplied without the Tenths from the
Priests, etc. Thus they could pay Tithes into the Exchequer, to maintain a War,
which they equally Disclaim: Oh but do what you will with the Tithes, so the
Priests do but starve, and their Ministry fall, and their Religion overturned;
then HEY BOYS UP GO WE: But (blessed be God) the Fear of that is past.

Well, but let us hear what became of this honest John Barnard: Why, in short,
he was Excommunicated ipso facto. A Copy of it here follows Verbatim.

From the Monthly Meeting at Devonshire-House, the Fourth of the Eleventh
Month, 1681.
Whereas there has been some unruly Spirits gone out from Truth, and the Unity
of the blessed Power of God, which has gathered us to be a People, Writing,
Printing, and Publishing Things Hurtful and Prejudicial to Truth, by corrupting
of People's Minds, tending also to draw them into Disesteem of many of the
Lord's Servants, A Preservative for their Teachers decaying Reputation.
whose Faithfulness has manifestly appeared amongst us, with whom our Unity
stands, to our mutual Satisfaction and Refreshment.

Upon Consideration of these Things, we find our selves conscientiously
concerned, Oh! Deep Hypocrisy.
to take notice of something of this Kind, befaln John Barnard, Merchant,
formerly a Member of this Meeting; who having dispersed into several Parts of
this Nation diverse of those Pernicious Books, wrote by William Rogers, called,
The Christian Quaker distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator, in Five
Parts, etc. which has manifestly been proved in many material Passages,
Erroneous and False, both in the Historical and Doctrinal Part of it, was
privately and publicly reproved for that unrighteous Action, by several
Friends at diverse times, according to Gospel Order, as they found it on their
Spirits from the Lord, Never was God's Name more profaned by a People
professing Religion.
as also admonished against it; yet after all the Labor and Travel Friends
have had on his Behalf, being desirous, if possible, to reclaim him out of the
Enemies Snare, into which he is fallen; he has from time to time resisted
their Advice and Counsel; so that now, we being wholly clear, having used our
utmost Endeavors in the good Will of God, to reclaim him, as aforesaid, do not
only testify against that Spirit which has led him into that disorderly
Practice, but also against him, whilst joined thereunto; Both the Man and his
Spirit condemned.
nor can we have Spiritual Communion or Fellowship with him, until unfeignedly
he shall return unto the Truth, by Condemnation of that Work and Spirit, which
in the Love of God we exhort him to, and desire, that for him a Place of
Repentance may be found.

Reader, What Person living, who is a Stranger to the Quakers deep-dyed
Hypocrisy, but that would think this John Barnard had committed some more than
ordinary Immorality; nay, some almost unpardonable Crime? Here is such
Endeavors said to be used, such Gospel Order exercised, such Stiff-neckedness
on his Part wilfully persisted in; but behold, all Center in a most profound
Piece of Hypocrisy, as I shall show, and that from diverse Reasons: And,

FIRST, In that Benjamin Clark their Bookseller, a great Quaker in their Unity
I should have said Confederacy.
, sold at the same time Play-Books, Popish-Books, Gypsie-Books, yea,
Baudy-Books, such as I never saw before; and yet never Reproved, never
Admonished, according to Gospel Order; never Sentenced and Condemned, neither
he nor his Spirit: By which it may appear, how zealous they are for preserving
their own good Name and Esteem amongst their Proselytes, and their own Law and
Commandments, from being brought into Disrepute; and yet all these their
Proceedings they father upon the Lord, who hates Iniquity, and whose Laws
condemn such wicked Books, as their own beloved Brother sold and vended every
Day. Thus do they, Pharisee-like, make void the Law of God by their Traditions.

For as soon as this Excommunication came to my Hand, I (as a Country Man) went
to the said Ben. Clark's, and asked for some pretty Play-Books for Children,
and he produced me a Parcel of all sorts, ut supra! of which I bought Eighteen
Pennyworth, and noticed it in my next Book, Entitled, De Chr. Lib. Part 2. p.
207, which they never did deny, nor did they ever sentence him as above.

SECONDLY, In all the Records of Condemnation, that ever I made, or ever saw
made, during the 16 or 18 Years I was their Clerk, I never knew of, or saw any
Record of Condemnation against any Quaker, for the Breach of any Scripture
Commands; but either for writing against their Teachers, As my self.
or for paying Tithes, or for dispersing and selling such Books, as allowed of
the Payment of Tithes, As W. Rogers.
or for not Marrying according to their Orders, or for the Breach of some one
or more of G. Fox's Commandments. An Instance of the last follows.

Hadenham Quarterly Meeting, the Fourth of the Seventh Month, 1678.
We at this Quarterly Meeting having the Business of John Ainslo's taking his
Wife, contrary to the Order of Friends, brought BEFORE US; and Friends having
several times spoke to him about it, and he not giving Friends Satisfaction, WE
do testify, That WE have no UNION with him in this his so doing, etc.

THIRDLY, I never knew any Book wrote against any of their Teachers in the
Unity, though guilty of notorious Immoralities; As in the opening of the Cage, I
shall show.
no, here was no Conscientious Concern manifested, no Gospel Order exercised,
no Public Condemnation sent out against them, but against my self, George
Keith, Tho. Crisp, and others, for discovering their Errors: Here they pretend
a great Case of Conscience; and having showed who they account Scandalous
Walkers, and who they frequently Record out of the Unity, and who they write
their Books against, I shall conclude this Chapter with one of their Yearly
Canons; and if any desire to see more of them, I refer to my former Books, De
Chris. Lib. etc. Part 2. p. 40, to 52. the Fifth and Seventh Chapter of this
Treatise.

London, the 27th of the 3d Month, 1675.
Concerning Recording the Church's Testimony, and the Party's Condemnation.
That the Church's The Light and the Body joined.
Testimony and Judgment against Disorderly and Scandalous Walkers, also the
Repentance and Condemnation of the Party's Restored, be Recorded in a distinct
Book, in the respective Monthly and Quarterly Meeting, for the clearing Truths
Friends, and our Holy Profession, to be produced and published for that End and
Purpose, so far only as in God's pure Heavenly Wisdom they shall be needful:
And it is our Advice in the Love of God, That after any Friend's Repentance and
Restoration, he abiding faithful in the Truth, that condemns the Evil, none
among you so remember his Transgression, as to cast it at him, or upbraid him
with it; for that is not according to the Mercy of God.

Thus, Reader, you see, First, Who are the Scandalous Walkers they Record out
of their Unity. 2 dly, You see here is an Order from the Yearly Meeting, to get
a Book distinct for that Use. 3 dly, You see also, that here is a Door open,
that if any repent of Writing against them, of Paying Tithes, of Marrying
contrary to their Infallible Order, they may be restored to their former
Dignity; for they have Power to bind, and to loose, Yea, whom they please. See
Judas and the Jews, p. 85. Jos. Coale's Works, p. 243.
to condemn, and to acquit; and that it may evidently appear so, I shall recite
one of their final Sentences, passed upon one of their Adversaries Irrevocably,
viz.

In the Name of that God, that spanneth the Heavens with a Span, and measures
the Waters in the Hollow of his Hand, I bind thee here on Earth, and thou art
surely bound in Heaven, and in the Chain under Darkness, to the Judgment of the
Great Day thou shall be reserved. Was there ever the like Insolency.


Josiah Coal.

Some Inferences from the Eighth Chapter.
IS it so then, that these Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, who derive their
Power and Authority from the Yearly Meetings, assume to themselves this great
Boldness, to Arraign, Sentence, and Condemn Persons, for disregarding their
illegal Laws, and for the Breach of their Unscriptural Commands No, nor one
Scripture Proof was ever produced, to strengthen their Laws, or condemn Actions.
? What need is there then to suppress these Meetings, that thus alienate His
Majesty's Subjects from their Obedience to their lawful Sovereign, and his
Laws, and to limit this Arbitrary Government thus exercised in these new
Spiritual Courts, whilst it may be; lest the time come, wherein they may
capitulate with the Supreme Magistrate, and tell him with a Carnal Weapon in
their Hand, that the Light is the Higher Power, and all Powers and Dominions
ought to cast their Crowns down at its Feet in the Saints? However, I have
given warning, by pointing at the Danger, and hope to prescribe a Remedy; and
let not THE POOR MAN'S COUNSEL be rejected, lest the time come, wherein it may
be said, Eccles. 19.14,15.
It is too late, for the Gibeonites has deceived us with their Wiles. Pray
read the Ninth Chapter of Joshua at your leisure, Joshua the 9 th. read and
ponder, I beseech all wise Men.
and think it not a strange thing to be deceived by the Quakers fair Shows, and
innocent Pretenses, when you see that good Joshua, the Servant of the Lord, and
Successor of Moses, he, and his Wise Men and Counselors, were all deceived;
the best of Men mean well, and thinking others do so too, are oft-times the
soonest deceived. A Word to the Wise (as the Proverb is) should be sufficient.

CHAP. IX.
Shows the Quakers Fund, Exchequer, or Common Bank; and the Use and ill
Consequences of it.

I Have considered, that as Blood is to the Veins, which by a frequent
Circulation through the Body of Man, both refresh the Heart, and support the
Head; and that, as the Sinews to the Joints both unite the Members, and
strengthen the Body, so does the Quakers Exchequer strengthen and support them
in the carrying on their whole Design: For as Money is said to be the Sinews of
War, so it may be called the Nerves of Heresy; for Money answers all things.
And to show it to be so, with respect to the Quakers, I shall briefly show,
first, Their Way and Manner of raising their Bank; next, Their Way of
Distribution: In both which it cannot be expected that I should be exact in
their very Words, having forgot great part of their Cant; nor the Particulars
to whom they dispose of their Money; that is a Secret kept under Lock and Key:
It suffices then, that I give some sure Marks of both, and which, I hope, I
shall so infallibly do, as never an Infallible Quaker shall be able to deny.

FIRST THEN, I remember, when I was Quaker, we now and then had an Epistle sent
to our Quarterly Meetings in the Country, from the Second-Day Meeting in
London, for a General Collection for the Service of Truth: This Epistle thus
sent, I have copied out, and have read it in our Meeting at Milden-Hall; I have
both given to it, and took what our Meeting contributed, and have carried it to
the Quarterly Meeting, where I have taken all the Collections gathered quite
through the Isle of Ely, if not the County of Cambridge, Which I do think, I also
had to return to London.
to return to London for the Public Use: All this I know, and, if need were,
would depose it. I do not say, but the Yearly Meeting, as in Chap. 7. sometimes
do the like; as also examine the Accounts, constitute and appoint Feoffees, and
the like; and to which, the Second-Day Meeting is accountable: But, during the
Intervals of their Yearly Convocation, the Second-Day Meeting has both Power
to receive and to dispose, as I shall show hereafter.

Now whereas for many Years together, the Quaker Teachers banter'd all other
Ministers for taking Money for their Subsistence; the National, for the Tithes,
and other Dues; the Dissenters, for taking the voluntary Gift of their Hearers;
whilst the Quakers pretended to Teach freely, yea, to Write freely, and to do
the Lord's Business freely; when alas! this was all a Cheat, as in the Story of
Bell and the Dragon: For they had not only their Charges for themselves and
Horses free, Clothes, Hats, Linen and Woollen oft-times free, but now and then
a good Watch free also; besides, out of the Bank they had their frequent
Sallaries and Stipends, 10, Witness S. Cater and John Songhurst, of whom I have
a pretty Story. When W. Mead was Purser, i. e. Songhurst pretending want of
Money, G. Fox sent him to W. M. W. Mead deposited 12 l. and entered it in his
Book. This did not please Songhurst; he goes to G. Fox, and acquaints him with
it. Fox told him, that was W. Mead's way. Well, Songhurst did not like to stand
on Record a Taker of Money, who had so many Years pretended to Preach freely;
away goes he to W. M. with his Money in his Sack's Mouth; W. Mead takes it, and
enters it on the contrary Page, Received of Songhurst 12 l. This made it worse;
for, now he had not the Money, yet still stands Recorded, etc.
20, and 30 l. at a time; yea, I have been told, That T. G. had once 100 l. at
a time; and J. Park 20 l. per An. Yet, when told of this Hypocrisy, they have
answered, They did not Preach for Money, though their Teachers did take Money:
And might not all other Ministers say so too, That Money was not the end for
which they Preached, but the Good of Souls; only what they had, was to maintain
them in that Station to which they were called and set apart?

But W. Rogers wrote a Scourge for Geo. Whitehead, Anno 1685. where he has
these Words.

See a few Words out of W. Roger's Second Scourge. For Geo. Whitehead an
Apostate Quaker, in a Poem, Printed 1685.

But, blessed be God, Rome's Sister has a Wound,
And it is not Whitehead's Craft can heal it sound;
The Church, her Practice, which he often defends,
Is most like Rome's, so far as Power attends:
And yet when She Rome's Sister is but called,
She winces like touched Horses that are galled.
Confusion Her attends, next follows WOE,
For thus She whirls, but God knows where She Will go:
When Fox had framed in the Church a Government,
Preachers approved by Man Beyond-Seas went;
Who, when they wanted Moneys to proceed,
The Church Her Cash then did supply their Need:
And therefore when her Cash was empti'd, SHE
Craved Money for to serve the MINISTRY.
At length her Papers, like to Briefs, did cry
For MONEY, MONEY for the MINISTRY This Scourge smarted, and made poor Ellwood
confess all, as you will hear anon.
:
And when that Practice was disliked by some,
She frowned like one, whose Downfal's near to come;
Else, why must each one with his Key appear
Where Cash is kept, to show what Money's there?
This Church will fall, Her Load will be Her Guile,
If you, O Flock! keep Purse-strings fast awhile;
And Woes may long attend such prating Preachers,
As for Preferment turn deceitful Teachers.
Some wonder (Whitehead) keeps so long in Favor,
Since Fox is more despised through Whitehead's Labor;
Fox is termed Head, yet Whitehead stear'd the Course,
Till both were scorned, and they grew worse and worse.
Thus, Reader, I have given you W. Roger's Sense, first, That Rome's Sister got
a Wound, yea, almost a deadly Wound; that the Quakers Church are the most like
Rome; and this is true in Fact: Next, Their Preachers take Money for Preaching,
and for Preferment turn deceitful Teachers; a certain Truth. Next, That they
have a Fund, which is most dangerous: Next, That their Papers and Epistles for
Money did fly amongst us like so many Briefs, craving Money, Money for the
Ministry; Money, Money to assist us in our Confederacy, or we are not able to
supplant Christianity. I will next give you a Recital of a Letter sent me,
written about John Clemence, etc. bearing Date 26th of the Eleventh Month,
1684. from Anne Docwra, An ancient Quaker, who then testified against the
Quakers Fund or Bank, as well as their Preachers meddling with Marriages like
the Jesuits, viz.

Dear Friends, etc.
I understand, that there is a new Controversy lately risen, about the Money
thou once told me was gathered amongst Friends, for the Relief of J. C. --
Friends here At Cambridge.
are much concerned about it, knowing right well, that all honest Friends in
that Day, gave it freely, expecting nothing again; some are dead; I suppose
they did not make the Common Bankers their Executors; the Donor's Will must be
fulfilled in all things, and not the Common Purse-Mongers, But Fox, Whitehead,
etc. never liked those Friends.
at this Day; that being contrary to true Religion, to take Thought for to
Morrow. I have been examined by the Law Professors, Whether we had a Common
Purse or Bank? I answered, we had None A great Lie, and with a Design to
Deceive, next to Perjury.
. This gave so much Satisfaction, that Friends in this Town Cambridge.
have been quiet Ever since Thus have the well-meaning Magistrates been all
along deceived by the Quakers Lies; for all may see, she knew as well of their
Common Bank, their Common Purse, their Dagon, as I did; only to blind the
Magistrates, and get Liberty, she thus deceived 'em.
. The Magistrates look upon Common Bankers to be as bad as those that board up
Arms and Ammunition; and not [said She,] without Reason; for Money answers all
things. If Friends would put away this Dagon, and take Money only for their
present Necessities, things would soon be better with them; God will not bless
those that break his Commands, with Hoarding up Common Banks, and Quarrelling
with those that will not bring in Money fast enough to them: I have observed,
it has been frequent with some, to reckon those that brought in most Money
into their Common Bank, to be the best Christians, A sign she cannot plead
Ignorance of their Fund, if she had so long made that Observation; and
therefore her Lie looks the more designed; Quaker-like, who stick at nothing
that may advance the New Catholic Cause.
etc.

Anne Docwra.


Thus, Reader, I have showed by a Recital of Mrs. Docwra's Letter, what Sense
she had of their Common Fund, i. e. that it was as bad as Hoarding up Arms and
Ammunition; and she is so far in the right on it. You see also, what Testimonies
has been given out, both Public and Private, against these private
Purse-mongers, and their raising Common Banks, as that which is so pernicious
to the Civil Government, that it is as bad as Arms and Ammunition; for Money
asnwers all things: For, having this private Fund, they can pay their
Ministers, and enable them to range the World over, pretending to Teach freely,
to forsake their Father's Country, Riches and Honors, (as you have heard) and
all to come and spend themselves, their Strength and Years, for the Good of
Souls; and all this freely, without Money, and without Price: And you see, your
Teachers, they must have their Tithes, their Gleabe-Lands, their
Easter-Reckonings, and their Midsummer-Dues; by which you may see, they are
Followers of Balaam, the Son of Bozer, who loved the Wages of Unrighteousness:
Now by our Fruit, and the Fruit of the World's Teachers, you may try us, and
prove us. Thus poor Hearts, the very same People that give to these
Collections, I mean innocent middle sort, who are not admitted into the
Knowledge of these things.
know nothing of their Teachers taking Money; nay, many of them will dispute
strenuously against you, on their Teachers Behalf, That they take no Money,
that they Teach freely, as above told. And thus are these silly Sheep carried
away with the Wiles of their Teachers, and follow them as the Israelites did
Rebellious Absalom, in the Simplicity of their Hearts, 2 Samuel 15.11.

But, Reader, this Scourge did so torment this well-favour'd Harlot, it did so
sting and nettle her, that poor Whitehead's dull Pen was not able to bear up:
Then came in Tho. Ellwood; and though he wrote as much to the Point as his Craft
could invent, yet W. Rogers's Strokes entered so deep, and made such a Wound,
as that he, i. e. Ellwood, was forced, poor Man, (full ill against his Will) to
confess their Ministers did take Money, and their Clerks were paid out of their
Fund; which they had not only for Forty Years pretended to the contrary, but by
Ten Thousand Sermons solemnly declared, that they neither take Silver, Gold nor
Apparel, but freely they had received, and freely delivered to the People. O
the horrible Deceit of this People! However, let it suffice, that W. Rogers
have whipped them into a better Temper, who now confess the Fact, and plead the
Apostles. But I deny, that ever the Apostles Practice pretended to take neither
Silver, Gold nor Apparel; and yet, contrary to his Pretension, took all he
could lay his Hands on: No; this is the Practice only of the Quakers; no Man
questioning the lawfulness of the Ministers Maintenance, save the Quakers
only, who yet take with both Hands; their Fruit has made them manifest. Well,
let us hear T. Ellwood, viz.

Regero Mastix, p. 18.
But that Christ's Ministers should be supplied
With Necessaries, by the Church his Bride,
Is such a known and certain Truth, as none
Perhaps has ever opposed, but thou alone:
That it is the Church's Duty to supply
The needful Wants of all her Ministry;
And Truth it is, too plain to be denied,
Christ's Church should for Christ's Ministers provide.
What carps thou at then, William? Would thy Muse
Plead, that St. Paul did not this Privilege use No, Thomas, it is Quakers
Plea, though for selfends they now plead it.
?
That what was lacking to him privately,
The Macedonian Brethren did supply.
Thus it appears, the Apostle did partake
Of that Provision which the Church did make;
Pretend thou can not, that the Stock is given
To such as have no need thereof; but even
Thy Flirt at Richardson Their Clerk, who had 50 l. per An. as much contrary to
their Pretenses, as for their Teachers to take Money; but now both confessed.
for taking Pay;
For what? As Clerk, he writes; does much bewray
Thy Folly and Injustice. Is It not fit,
Who works for others, should be paid for it,
And that by them who him to Work desire?
The Labourer is worthy of his Hire It Is confessed you have Hirelings in your
Herd.
.
Observe, Reader, the Charge is confessed: First, That they have a Stock, by
which they supply the Wants of their Teachers, i. e. pay them; yea, and well
too: Witness their Increase of Wealth. 2 dly, That their Clerks take Money for
writing, and that they are Hirelings; this I and others knew well enough, but
Whitehead had so denied the same, that there was Thousands of Quakers would not
believe a word of it: But now W. Rogers's Scourge has so lashed this painted
Harlot, that she by her dear Son Ellwood, has confessed it, and spoke more
Truth in this matter, than Whitehead, and Twenty more of their Apostate Scribes
have been ever made to do; and I am willing to do him Right herein; for
according to the Proverb, I am willing to give the Devil his due. I need not
quote Book and Page, to prove their Preachers Pretenses to Preach freely,
without Money, etc. their Books are full of Proof, and their Sermons from Dan
to Beersheba: But I have said, they pretended to write freely; and this I ought
to prove; which I shall do from their Great Apostle and Second Moses, namely,
G. Fox; see their Book, styled, Concerning Marriages, etc. p. 4, 5, 6. printed
1659. G. Fox, viz.

If any Friends go together in the Power of the Lord, or find a Necessity
thereunto, that after the thing has been made known between themselves, before
any thing be concluded, it be declared to Friends, who are able Viz. Their
Teachers, which practice came afterward to be abhorred.
to see and feel into it; and if they see the thing in the Light and Power to
stand, it may be declared to Friends in the Meeting, as they are moved; or, as
they are moved, they may declare it in the mid-time of the Market, on the
Market Day, in the next Market Town, as they are moved, or they may not, as
their Freedom is: Then, after a convenient time, and the thing be seen and
felt, and had Unity with, then an Assembly of about 12 Friends met together,
they may speak their Testimony as they are moved, how the Lord has joined them
together in Marriage; and then a Certificate by Friends then present, may be
given, of the Day, Month and Year, that it may be Recorded; and as they are
moved, they may declare it to the Magistrate, and they will, G. Fox was
Infallible, Sense or Nonsense, tot quot and omnes.
or they may not; And that nothing may be Recorded for Money in these things,
but freely, a free People, and in Love serve one another; and that is it, that
you should feel the Thing in the Power, etc.

George Fox.

Now let me subjoin a Second Testimony of George Fox's, against taking of
Money, etc.

Friends, you are to do the Nations Business freely, and that is the way to get
into the Hearts of People, etc. Several Papers given forth per G. Fox, An. 1659.

I remember there is in one of the Quakers Declarations a Reserve left for
Fighting afterward: We Yet, (say they) cannot believe he will make use of the
Sword by us, but for the Present, we are given to Bear and Suffer, etc. So had
G. Fox said, that as Yet let nothing be Recorded for Money, but for the
Present, i. e. till you a fair Opportunity, do things freely, etc. then there
had been a fair Plea As there is now for Whipping, Fining, Imprisoning, and
Fighting, etc.
then As Yet, might by George Whitehead, have been rendered Adhuc, and not
Tamen; for it is manifest, that their early pretense to Teach, Preach, write
Certificates, etc. freely, was but to get into the Affections of the People,
until a more fair Opportunity; and then Experientia docet, they can take 50 l.
per Annum for writing Certificates, etc. 30 l. for writing Five or Six Sheets
called a Primmer, to teach Children; 10 l. at a time for Preaching, etc. See
New Rome Unmasked, etc. p. 58, to 63. where I have enlarged hereon from the
Quakers Books.
But G. W. by his Book, styled, The Contentious Apostate, etc. p. 22. he seems
to deny G. Fox's Order for Marriage, where it is said, nothing is to be Recorded
for Money, etc. as above cited: But G. W. I have it, and you may soon see it in
the Library of Christ's Church College in Oxford, where that and many others of
your Books, which you would be glad were extinct, will remain for Ages to see,
and be able thereby to detect your Falacies. And now follows part of the
recited Declaration, viz.

We have chosen the Son of God to be our King, and he has chosen us to be his
People; and he might command Thousands, and Ten Thousands of his Servants at
this Day, to Fight in his Cause; he might lead them forth, and bring them in,
and give them Victory over all their Enemies, and turn his Hand upon their
Persecutors; but yet his Kingdom is not of this World, neither is his Warfare
of Carnal Weapons, neither has he chosen us for that end, neither can we Yet
believe No, stay a little longer.
that he will make use of us in that way, though it be his only Right to Rule in
Nations, and our Heirship to Possess the utmost Parts of the Earth; but for the
Present Ay, be patient a little longer.
we are given to bear and suffer all things for his Namessake, etc. To the
present distracted Nation of England, etc. Printed 1659. p. 8.

But, Reader, if you look back to Fox's Order for Marriage, you may observe,
that he points to have the Matter laid before their Ministers; and thereupon I
shall show you a brief Testimony of one of their Female Preachers, a Woman of
Note amongst them, in a Letter I have by me; part of that against their
Hoarding up Money, which is as bad as Hoarding up of Arms and Ammunition, viz.

-- Anne Docwra's Letter, dated Feb. 26. 1684.
I have heard something concerning this Controversy now on foot, which I
perceive arises from a Personal Quarrel, about a Maid that was choosing a
Husband for her self; and also it is expected she should give up her Concern in
that Business to some of our Preachers, which was never practiced until of late
Not since Popery, till Quakerism came in its Room.
, amongst any that professed true Religion; it is that which has made the
Jesuits to be Abhorred amongst some of the wisest and honestest of the Papists
themselves; so that they would not let them come within their Houses. If the
Maid be a wise Woman, and of Age to dispose of her self, she will not let any
of our Preachers meddle with her Concerns Why, G. Fox advised to it, look back.
of choosing a Husband for her; they should only meddle with their own Business,
and let honest Friends make their Choice themselves, etc.

Anne Docwra.


Reader, The main thing I recite part of this Letter, is, to show the Sense
some still amongst them have of their own Teacher's Jesuitical Practice, either
in making or breaking of Matches, according as they are pleased or displeased:
I could write a Book by it self, only to show the Baseness of their Teachers
Practice, not only in making Matches, but in making Mischief in Families, in
setting Men and their Wives at Variance.

And more particularly, G. W. my old Antagonist, as may be seen in the Book
quoted, viz. The Conten. Apostate, p. 5. The Apost. Incend. p. 8. Judgment
fixed, etc. p. 289. both relating to my self, W. Muclow, Tho. Crisp, etc.
setting aside John Field, and others of his Stamp, that I believe the very
boldest of the Jesuits never exceeded them. But having in my Book, New Rome
Unmasked, etc. p. 57, to 64. showed the evil Tendency of this their Doctrine
and Practice, I refer to that; but since that G. W. in his Sober Expostulation,
p. 108. is driving on the same Trade: Of which possibly more hereafter.

But come Thomas, the chiefest Business in this Chapter is to prove, That the
Quakers have a Common Purse; that they have a Common Fund or Bank; that your
Teachers are supplied thereout; that you Clerks (as Hirelings) are paid their
Yearly Salaries and Stipends, etc. This and more you have confessed, which
Hundreds of your Teachers have denied, and sometimes gained the Goodwill of
Magistrates, and their own Quiet thereby. Witness Anne Docwra, who telling the
Magistrates they had none, they were quiet after, etc.
But I would not have the World so mistaken of thee neither, as to call thee
TOM TELL-TROTH; no, this I presume was done in a Passion, even whilst the Smart
and Anguish of W. Rogers's Scourge was upon thee; for I dare to say, TOM
TELL-TROTH would be a nickname for any Quaker-Teacher; and when I view thy
Poem, p. 26, to 29. I hope thou may find in this Book an Answer to it, where
thou call upon W. Rogers to name the Men, I have done it, if that will
please thee; where thou pretendest to forbear John Story, (yet like Joab, smite
at his Name, which when living, was precious to many, and now dead, is not
forgotten;) I am well satisfied, that he was a Man of a tender Spirit, and had
more Christianity and Charity than all the Mercenary Sixty-six Judges. I
remember, that at the Bull and Mouth Meeting, Anno 1677. W. Penn came past
Eight or Ten Persons, sitting on the same Bench with me, to ask me to set my
Hand to their Epistle of Condemnation. But glad am I, that I was made sensible
of their evil Intent; for, Thomas, there was thy self, John Moon, Ezekiel
VVolley, Sam. Cater, and many of you concerned in that Paper, as wicked a
Generation of Men, as void of Charity, or any thing that is truly Christian, as
the Newgate-Birds. And what a sad thing is it, that such dissembling
Hypocrites, and wicked Impostors, should claim to themselves the Name of the
one only true Church of Christ? And so I shall adjourn this Head, until I come
to the Chapter where the Cage is, where I shall make good my Charge, and name
Particulars, as thou have desired; only as a Word of Use and Application, I
shall recite a few Verses, wrote by Anne Docwra, Anno 1684. which, as I printed
at the end of VV. Rogers's Scourge, the Original Manuscript is still by me,
except a Word or two, which in the Correcting the Press for her I might alter
to make her Verses run smooth, viz.

After so many strange Mishaps,
In Pursuit of John Story, with all thy Traps,
I pity most thy G. Fox.
last Relapse.
Thy Weakness shows thy Day is done,
The Night o'erspreads thy Setting Sun.
Cabalistick Art is out of Date,
Thy Mysterious Allegories came too late;
To say the Truth, it is thy Fate.
None can avoid what God decrees,
You Are like a Drone amongst the Bees.
Thy Strength declines, thy Power decay,
And thou lie hid this Trying Day;
To save thy self is no new way.
Remember now the time that is past,
And how thou'st lost thy Crown at last.
Thou did escape thy Enemies Pains,
With States-men's Arts, and Preachers Gains,
But Dalilah's Wiles has cracked thy Brains.
A Female Power surpised thy Strength,
Thy Honor's laid in the Dust at length.
Such Women as did Associate,
To help to Govern thy new State,
Whose Ambient Acts time will relate.
These Women they did claim a Right,
To wash the Ethiopian white.
To keep things sweet and clean, say they:
But foul things came so in their way,
They worked in vain both Night and Day.
Profession wipes off no such Blots,
The Leopard does not change his Spots.
To compass Sea and Land thou went,
To Proselite thy Will was bent,
So raised Storms of Discontent.
Thus God does blast what Man devise,
To infatuate the Worldly-wise.
This Stubble thou have built upon,
Is for the Fire; the time comes on
To try the Work that thou have done.
The secret Hand of Providence
Protecteth only Innocence.
These Verses she wrote concerning G. Fox; and though she (being but a Woman) is
turned to her old Vomit, i. e. Foxonian Quakers, yet I hope, when W. Rogers,
John Raunce, and others, who had a Hand in W. Rogers's Poem, do see, and behold
the base Abuse of Tho. Ellwood, etc. in his Rogero Mastix, etc. will see Cause
to keep at an equal distance from such a deceitful Tribe, who were as cruel to
that meek Man, John Story, as Doeg the Edomite was to the Priests of the Lord,
of whom David said, Psalm. 140.2,3. Which imagine Mischiefs in their Heart;
continually are they gathered together for War; they have sharpened their
Tongues like a Serpent; Adders Poison is under their Lips.

CHAP. X.
Treats of the Quakers Six-Week Meeting in London, and the Pernicious
Consequences thereof.

First, THIS Six-Week Meeting of theirs is chiefly to consult about, and defend
their own Members throughout the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales,
from the Penalties of certain Laws, which they foreknow that they shall
Transgress, or that hereafter they may Transgress, through their being faithful
to the Laws and Commands of G. Fox, and the Government of the Quaker-Church.

Secondly, This Meeting of theirs is one of their most Ancient Meetings for
Government, and is made up of chosen Men amongst them, expert in the Laws and
Customs of the Nation, well skilled in the Courts of London and Westminster,
and other His Majesty's Courts of Record, and such as understand the way and
manner of Soliciting the Parliament; and to support them in all these things,
they have the Common Bank to assist them; which, as I have observed, is like
Blood to their Veins, and Sinews to their Bones.

Thirdly, That I may not seem to impose my single Judgment, that there is such
a Meeting; that the Quakers thereto belonging, are thus Exercised, as well as
Authorized, see their Anniversary Epistle.

This Meeting being acquainted, that Endeavors have been used for Relief of
Friends, in relation to Oaths, pursuant to the last Yearly Meeting's Advice in
that Case; and being sensible of the great Care of the [Six Week] Meeting for
Sufferings, still leave it to the said Meeting for Sufferings, to continue
their Care and Endeavors in that Case, etc. And also it is agreed, That each
Quarterly Meeting take Care to advise the Correspondents for the Counties; and
any others concerned, to write only to your Correspondents in London, about
their Sufferings, and not to other Persons, lest their Suffering-Case be
delayed, etc. The Epistle to the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings of Friends in
England and Wales, p. 3. Printed 1693.

From whence it is plain, First, That they are a Meeting constituted to take
Care of the Quakers Sufferings: And 2 dly, That this Meeting hold
Correspondency with all the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings of the Quakers in
England and Wales. 3 dly, That the Soliciting the Parliament on the Quakers
Behalf is their Business. 4 thly, And that they have a Fund for the Service of
their Truth, is undeniable from Matter of Fact in the last Chapter, as well as
from the recited Epistle, which say, Friends appointed to view Accounts,
report, That they find they are truly stated, and rightly kept, etc. Epist. Ib.
p. 3.

Fourthly, And therefore to point at the Quakers Practical Part herein, it is
thus: If a Country Quaker be Sued at the Exchequer, or other Courts, for the
Nonpayment of Tithes, or for any other Act of Obedience to the Quakers
Commandments, laid down by their Second Moses, if he can but obtain a
Certificate from the Quarterly Meeting to which he belong; he then sends up the
said Certificate, with his Suffering Case, to the Correspondents belonging to
that Quarterly Meeting, and his Business is effectually taken Care of to all
Intents and Purposes; and this Six-Week Meeting so manage the Matter, as either
to baffle the Plaintiff, be he Priest or Impropriator; [as I still remember --
Smith, Brother to Robert Smith of Whitle-seacoats, did Counselor Holeman of
Chaterice in the Isle of Ely, i. e. the Impropriator] or else to preserve their
Friends, (they having a Salve for ever Sore) as that he shall be a better Man
when he ends his Contest than when he began.

To which let me add a second Instance out of VV. Mathers his Manuscript sent
to be printed, viz. They ( says W. M.) have condemned many Quakers, as of
Antichrist, that do pay Tithes as others do: And Joseph Clark, a Preacher,
professed to me, That God moved him to refuse to deliver his Tithes to the
Priest; the Priest Sued him, he answered the Priest by Advice of John Field,
who had promised the said Joseph to secure his Goods from the Priest; which he
(John Field) failing to do, Joseph the Day before the Asize at Bedford got a
Person to agree with the Priest for him; and since that has said to me, that
he could now pay his Tithes as well as other Taxes, etc.

For by the Management of this Confederacy, by such undue Methods, to prevent
the Execution of the Law, as it carries off the Transgressor with flying
Colors, so it tends to encourage every Litigious Quaker to stand it out with
his Lawful Minister, and bid him do his worst, etc. So also has it been of very
evil Consequence to the Ministers, who many of them have great Charges to
maintain, and small Livings; and great part of that wrongfully detained, by
means of the said Confederacy: I say, this has been, and in other Cases will
be, very Pernicious to the Public Peace, and Possession of Liberty and
Property, if it be not prevented.

Fifthly, The like may be said touching the Statute of 22 of C. II. For if in
the Execution of that Act of Parliament, [or any other] the Justices or
Constables made a wrong Step, if any Quaker got a Certificate from their
Quarterly Meeting, signifying his Faithfulness to their Church Canon, in that
Case made and provided, viz. That he neither have FORSAKEN, DECLINED, or
REMOVED his Meeting, like the Worldly, Fearful, and Politic Professors, he
shall either have his Cause so managed, as to ride Triumphant, or with Sam.
Cater, be plentifully Rewarded; who pretending he suffered 20 l. for Preaching
at Phakenham, in Norfolk, had 10 l. sent him out of the Common Bank, or London
Fund, by John Peacock, late of St. Ives, Woollen-Draper: Though after all, when
Cater's Business came to be examined, he did not suffer a Groat: Yet such is
the Freeness of this London Fountain, that Sam. did but pretend he suffered 20
l. and he had 10 l. sent him, as an Encouragement to go on.

Sixthly, Those Quakers which solicit the Parliament are Members of this
Meetings, who derive their Authority and License so to do from the Yearly
Meeting, as above observed; who when the Clergymen are at home, minding their
Cure, thinking themselves safe in their Callings, being by Law established,
then are the Quakers working like Moles under Ground; and soliciting sometimes
against Tithes, sometimes against Colleges; yea, against the very Bells, as I
shall show from their Ancient Testimony, to which they often refer, and exhort
others to keep up to it in all its Parts; I say, that I may show a Branch of
their Ancient Testimony, I shall recite part of the Quakers Petition against
the Clergy, and their Maintenance, subscribed by above 7000 Persons, and
delivered to the Parliament of England the 20th of July, 1659. entitled,
Several Papers sent to the Parliament, etc. Printed 1695. and all their
Petitions since to this Day, have some Tincture of the Leaven of this Petition,
viz.

We whose Hands are here underwritten, do testify and declare against the
Oppression of Tithes: The false Christians have set up a Law and Commandment to
take Tithes; and so the Commands of Men must be disannulled that take Tithes,
and not to be obeyed by them that live in the Covenant of God Mark, their
Ancient Testimony.
: And the unjust Power that held them up, and Priests, and Impropriators, and
the Law, and Command, and the Author of it, not to be of God, nor of Christ. --
We warn you, which to you is the Word of the Lord God, That all forced
Maintenance of the Priests be taken away; for while such a thing is set up, it
will spoil many idle Men, that will not thresh, nor plant, nor dig, nor make
Vineyards, plow nor sow, etc. P. 58. WE WOULD HAVE YOU TO READ THESE THINGS,
AND DO JUSTLY AS IT SPEAKS The Priests to Thresh, Dig, etc. and the Quakers to
Ride on good Horses, this would please wondrous well.

.

Let the Impropriators who bought or rent their Tithes of the Colleges, turn
them up to the Colleges again, and let the Colleges be taken away that make
Ministers. P. 59. And you may sell all the Glebe-Lands, Kings-Rents, and his
Houses, and the Bells, to pay the Impropriators; who have bought the Tithes of
Kings, let their Rents and Parks be sold to pay them again: And they that have
bought them of Colleges, let the Glebe-Lands be sold to pay them. P. 63. If
you do not take off Oppression, how should the Lord stand by you, or the People
of the Lord either? If you query, how you should do with Impropriators?

Answ. Sell all the Glebe-Lands, and the Bells, except one in a Town, or two in
a City, to give Notice of a Fire: And all the late King's Parks, and his Rents,
that had Tenths, and sold the Tithes; so let them, i. e. the King's Parks and
Rents be sold, and the Colleges sold, and all the Tithes that belong to them
thrown down. P. 65. You who are the Parliament of this Nation, you should have
thrown down Tithes, which Abundance of the sober People of the Nation has
petitioned you What Impudence is this! Pretend to petition and beg, yet teach
the Parliament, and tell them what they should do.
to have taken them away; which you voting them up, has voted your selves out
of the sober People's Affection of the Nation, among the Brutes; you should
have sold all the Glebe-Lands, and sold all the Bells, saving one in a Town;
and Colleges, and their Lands, and given them all to the Poor of the Nation.
P. 68. And the Priests cry to you Magistrates for Tithes, the Pope's Alms, and
lie begging with their Petitions at your Doors: It was highly necessary then,
as well as ^s now, for some to oppose Quakeri^.
And we would have you maintain these begging Priests some other way, than by
the Pope's Alms. P. 69. AND EXCEPT YOU TAKE COUNSEL OF THE JUST, YOU SHALL NOT
SIT
.

Reader, I have recited enough of the Quakers Petition against the Clergy, to
show the Nature of their Ancient Testimony, and pointed with a Finger to two
Sayings, which, with the rest, are full of Impudence: And when against the
Clergy, I think I may take their Word; their whole Carriage and Deportment,
both by Word and Writing, do confirm it: But when for themselves they have any
Favor to obtain, DISTRUST THEM IN ALL THEY SAY, for they II stick at no
Promise; as in the Case of their Indulgence; witness their Acknowledging the
Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given forth by Divine
Inspiration. That it is the Rules of Faith and Practice, etc. whilst they
believe not one Word of what they themselves say; and as a Demonstration
thereof, I shall recite one of their Epistles, sent to the Monthly and
Quarterly Meetings, showing their Care of their own Books: Nay, them very Books
which teach, that the Scriptures are Death, Dust, Beastly Ware, Serpents Food,
etc. Therefore,

From the Meeting of Sufferings in London. Renewed Advice to the Monthly and
Quarterly Meetings in England and Wales, for preserving and sp^eading F^iend's
Bo^ks for Tr^th's Ser^ice, Pri^ted 16^9.

Dear Friends,
With our dear Love in the Truth unto you all, these are to let you understand,
that our Friends have at several YEARLY MEETINGS, had under their serious
Consideration, how all those Books that are printed for the Service of Truth,
and in the Unity of Friends, might MOST EFFECTUALLY be SPREAD for a general
Service to Truth; and at the last YEARLY MEETING it was left unto this Meeting,
who accordingly have taken Care and Pains therein, and settled as follows.

That those that print Friends Books, shall the first Opportunity after
printed, within one Month at most, send to one of the Correspondents in the
Counties, viz.

For your County, two Books of a sort for each Monthly Meeting in your County,
if under Six Pence, and but one of a sort, if above Six Pence per Book, for
these Reasons.

1 st, For Friends to have general Notice what Book is printed.

2 dly, That they may send for what other Quantities they see a Service for.
And,

3 dly, That the Printer may be encouraged in Printing for Friends.

4 thly, For a Quaker Library.
That one Book at least of a sort that shall be printed, may be kept in each
Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, for the Service of Truth and Friends, as there
shall be occasion, for the future: And as 'twas agreed at the last YEARLY
MEETING, 1692. in the Printed Epistle.

5 thly, It is agreed, that for Encouragement, the Printer will allow 2 d. in
the Shilling for all such Books.

6 thly, It Is agreed, that some here shall be appointed, that two or three
Weeks before each Quarter Day, to examine the Printer, to see that they send no
Books but what are approved by Friends, and no more than two of a sort, as
aforesaid, except the Friends in the Country shall write for more, which it is
hoped they will not fail in I have heard that they begin to fail, and send but
slowly.
, as they see a Service for them.

7 thly, It Is agreed or advised, that the Printer's Accounts be fully cleared
once a Year at least, by those Friends the Country shall send up to the Yearly
Meeting.

8 thly. It Is agreed, that the Name of the Printer, employed by Friends, should
be sent with Directions how to write to him.

And Dear Friends and Brethren,
It Is Tenderly, and in Brotherly Love, advised and recommended unto you, that
ye be careful and diligent in the Spreading of All such Books that are printed
for the Service of Truth and are either written in Defense of it, or Christian
Doctrine, or Holy Profession, or by way of Epistle, Warning, Caution,
Exhortation, or Prophecy; Not a Word of the Bible.
that so we may not be any way, or in any wise, Remiss or Negligent in
promoting that Holy and Eternal Truth it has pleased Almighty God to bless us
with the Knowledge of, and has raised us up to stand Witnesses for in our Age
and Generation; nor nothing may be wanting on our parts, to promote it, and the
spreading of it.

Signed on the Behalf of the Meeting for Sufferings in London, 18. 6. Mo. 1693.
By Benj. Bealing.
Postscript.
And this Agreement and Account herein sent, we think it needful you should
record it in your Quarterly Book; and sometimes read it for Remembrance, and
general Notice.



Observations from hence.
Reader, From what has been said, you may observe, First, That there is such a
Meeting as I have set forth; both from their Yearly, and the recited Six-Week
Meeting, in case the Quakers deny it. Secondly, That their Business principally
is to take Care of the Sufferings of their own Friends, and that how
plentifully they reward such as are faithful to their Church-Canons; as in the
Instance of Sam. Cater, who for pretending to suffer 20 l. though he suffered not
a Groat, yet had 10 l. sent him, as a Reward for meeting boldly, contrary to
the Law in that Case made and provided. Thirdly, That they have a Fund, or
Common Bank, and that the Accounts are examined by a Committee chosen out of
the Yearly Meeting for that Purpose. Fourthly, That such as suffer for
Non-payment of Tithes, are to send to the Quarterly Meetings Correspondents,
left their Sufferings be delayed. Fifthly, You may also perceive, what a
Confederacy is held by the Quakers, and how they are enabled by their
Exchequer, to hold Suit with both Priest and Impropriator As in the Instance of
Mr. Holeman, who was a Justice of the Peace, a Counselor at Law, yet tired.
. Sixthly, You also may see, how the Quakers solicit the Parliament for
Favors; as also, how they Petition against the Clergy, the Churches, the
Colleges, and Bells too: Yea, this is according to their Ancient Testimony,
and they are not changed, they tell you so, as I have herein before observed.
Seventhly, And as a Pregnant Instance of the dangerous Consequence of this
their Six-Week Meeting, and their common Stock or Fund, observe that of Joseph
Clark, one of their Preachers before noticed; who, though he pretended he was
moved of God, (their usual Pretense for their Villainies) yet when J. Field and
their Fund failed him, he presently pays his Tithes, professing also, that he
then could pay them as well as other Taxes; which is a clear Demonstration,
that such as stand it out, and will rather spend 20 l. then pay 13 s. is,
because they are supported by this Illegal Fund, etc. And, Lastly, You may by
this recited Epistle, observe the Confederacy of their Yearly Meeting, and
Six-Week Meeting, to spread their venomous Books, to infect both Youth and
Aged, Male and Female, Old and Young, and all under the fine Notion of the
Service of Truth, [meaning Quakerism:] For, if they meant the Truth of the
Christian Doctrine, they would at one time or other read a Chapter in their
Meetings; at one time or other recommend to their Monthly and Quarterly
Meetings, the reading of some Portion of the Holy Scriptures: But not a Word of
this in their Epistles, not a Chapter read in their Meetings for Forty Years
together; but their own Epistles, their own Prophesies, their own printed
Exhortations: These they not only read in their private Meetings in their
Families, but they must Record (you see) this recited Epistle in their
Quarterly-Book, and sometimes read it: Oh! it is a precious Epistle.

And now, Christian Reader, I cannot but think my self unable to give a full
and complete Caution, against the spreading of the Gangrene of Quakerism; and
therefore give me leave in the Words of Mr. Ralph Farmer, a Minister formerly
of Bristol, to rehearse part of his Exhortation in his Book, i. e. The Mist. of
Ungodliness, etc. viz.

Now beloved, if thou be a Christian, what say thou? Is not here a
Mystery of Ungodliness to the Purpose? Where was it hatched, think thou?
Could any less than all the Devils in Hell, keep a Conventicle, to Contrive and
Plot this Black and Hellish Treason against the Majesty of God, Jesus Christ,
and the Holy Scriptures? Oh! ye Christian Magistrates, who rule for Christ, and
to whom you shall one Day give an Account of your Government, how you have
ruled for him, and how tender you have been of his Honor, what is become of
your Zeal for Christ, and his Glory? Good Sirs! if these wretched Souls have
such Liberty of Conscience, to think thus contemptuously of our Blessed Lord
Jesus Christ, and the Holy Gospel, let them not (upon Pretense of Liberty of
Conscience) be so audaciously Blasphemous, to write and speak thus: And, O ye
Servants of the Lord, my Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry of our Dear and
Ever-blessed Jesus, you that are the Pastors of the Lord's Flock, and the
Watchmen for the Sheep of his Pasture, lift up your Voices, and spare not; cry
aloud to all your Congregations, and forewarn them, that they be not a Prey to
Satan's Devices; let the Wolves know, that you are not Dumb Dogs, and cannot
bark; and Idol Shepherds, that can neither hear, nor see, nor understand any
thing; and that at a time of Need can say nothing; certainly, certainly, such
as these may ill look for their Gain; from their Quarters they deserve it not;
who, so they may be fed, care not (nor care to discover) what devouring Beast
comes to destroy the Flock of Christ: But you, my dear Brethren, who are set
over the Lord's Folds, and who watch for their Souls, as those that must give
an Account, and that have a Desire to do it with Joy, and for the Profit of
your People; read and practice what St. Paul gives in charge to the Pastors of
the Church at Ephesus, Acts 20.28,29,30,31. and let me give it thee here in his
own Words, what he gave forth to his Son Timothy: I charge thee before God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the Quick and the Dead, at his Appearing
and Kingdom, preach the Word, be instant in Season, out of Season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all Long suffering and Doctrine; for the time will come
[and it is now] when they shall not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own
Lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears; and they
shall turn away their Ears from the Truth, and shall be turned unto Fables; but
watch thou in all things; endure Afflictions; do the Work of an Evangelist, (or
Gospel Preacher; make full Proof of thy Ministry, etc.

CHAP. XI.
Shows the Quakers Second-Day Meetings, and Hypocrisy thereof; with its ill
Consequences, in order to Deceive.

Reader,
I Am now come to their Second-Day Meeting, even to that Meeting where Satan
dwells, and where he employs his Archest Emissaries; I shall not wrong them, as
believing I must one Day give an Account for my Actions, before the Man Christ
Jesus, who shall Judge both the Quick and Dead at the Great Day, where (I hope)
I shall not be afraid to meet G. Whitehead with this Testimony in my Hand; so
on the other Hand, I shall not spare them, hide nor cover them, who have by
their Wiles, by their Books of two sorts, deceived the Nations, deceived many
of the Magistrates, many of the Clergy, nay, my self; for I could not have
wrote thus Fifteen Years ago No, if I had not seen their deceitful Practices,
and measured them by the Scriptures, I could not have known them rightly.
: I took them then, at least some Years before, to be Prophets, at least
sincere, and to meet there for the approving of what was Right, Sound and
Orthodox, and for condemning the contrary: But behold I have found the
contrary, and that by sad Experience; yea, I have found that their whole
Business is to deceive, and carry on a Design; yea, a Confederacy, under the
fine Notion of Unity and Concord: I have labored many Years under great
Difficulties, I have spent my Estate, I have spent my Strength, I grow into
Years, I have a Conscience to Discharge, I think I cannot do it, unless I
complete that Discovery which I have began: Though I find it prejudicial to my
Health, and other Business, I find my self conscientiously concerned in this
weighty Affair: I do know, that the Reverend Author of the Book, entitled, The
Snake in the Grass, To whose Works I refer the Reader.
etc. have done exceeding well; he has done beyond what I am able to do; it is
a Learned Piece, and becomes a Learned Reader: But I am directing the greatest
part of what I say to the more unlearned; i. e. The common People, who are not
so well School-Learn'd.
; to such (whether Quakers or others) as sometimes must spell as they read, and
read over and over, before they can understand; this makes me sometimes write
over and over the same thing, to inculcate (if possible) the Matter I am upon
into their Heads, that at last they may understand, as well as to lay a
Foundation for abler Pens. This then I thought fit to premise by way of
Introduction, etc.

This Meeting of the Quakers is held every Second Day of the Week (which we
call Monday) throughout the Year in London; the Members of it are the Teachers
of the Quakers, residing in and about London; where of G. Fox For he seldom
lived with his Wife, but kept at London.
(in his Lifetime) was the Principal, and G. Whitehead now, as I am given to
understand. The Meeting formerly was kept in Ellis Hook's Chamber in
Lombard Street, now I presume in Grace Church Street. This Meeting does much
resemble His Majesty's Privy Council: For the King, by and with the Advice of
His Privy Council, can do many things; he can by Proclamation put the Laws in
Execution; I think, he can proclaim War, and make Peace: So can this Meeting;
they can quicken the coming in of Money, granted by the Yearly Meeting; they
can issue out their Proclamation for a War against the Ministers of any
Society; they can alter and change any Message, stop any Prophecy, stifle any
Revelation, silence the Voice uttered by the Spirit of the Lord, through their
most eminent Prophets, in what respect they please, and make it speak louder,
and more shrill, where they think there is most Service, or may be more
conducive to their Design; they are like the Helm to the Ship, which turn it
which way the Pilate please; they are the Wheel within the Wheel, which move
all the whole Work, yet so invisibly, as few shall know how, and fewer know
who; for they are Persons uncertain and accidental, and cannot be chargeable
(by Name) for any Error, though guilty of every Error in their Books, so far as
Consent, Approbation and Recommendation can make them: For all Books Printed
and Reprinted, pass through the fiery Trial of their Infallible Examination; they
Govern, they Rule, they Steer the Vessel, but all Invisibly; they pay their
Ministers, but their own People (many of them) that give to their Collections
and Contributions, do not know it; nor, if you tell them of it, will they
believe it: For none can tell, who pays, nor who receives, but now and then by
chance, what some or other, as Ellwood blabb'd it out at unawares: But their
Principal Work is, to Approve and License their Books, Printed for the Service
of the Truth, as they phrase it: But the last being their most principal Verb,
I shall the more infist upon it, to show their most horrible Deceit and
Hypocrisy: And I bless God, and am thankful to his Servants, who have enabled
me not only to Print, but to Reprint this Book, to which they neither have
returned an Answer, nor can they. But to proceed, suppose one of their People
pretend he is moved of the Lord, by his Eternal Spirit, to write a Message or
Warning to the Inhabitants of Bristol, with this Title; This is the Word of the
Lord to thee, O Bristol! Well, this Book is sent up to their Second-Day
Meeting, and there they take it into Consideration; then they will Alter and
Change Words and Sentences; put in, and leave out, what they conceive suit best
with the Times; and yet let it go as The Word of the Lord. Thus do they sit in
the Judgment Seat, and like the Old Prophet, deceive; not only the Nations, but
the poor young Prophet, that thought he had wrote from the Infallible Motion;
when alas! it is now so altered, so added to, and diminished from what it was,
that it is merely Calculated to the Design of the Cabal, and yet shall go with
the same Title, i. e. This is the Word of the Lord to thee, O Bristol! Of this
most horrible Deceit I could give a Hundred Instances, and find Matter enough
for to write a Book by it self, but I must consult Brevity, lest my Pen outrun
my Penny; and therefore shall single out one Instance, which I hope will give
some Satisfaction; it shall be out of a Book, wrote by Edward Borough,
entitled, A Trumpet of the Lord sounded out of Sion, sounding forth the
Controversy of the Lord of Hosts, etc. Printed in Quarto, 1656.

But before I go to the chief Matter intended, I shall recite the pretended
Commission of this bold Prophet, and then it will appear, whether the
Second-Day Meeting did well, in altering his Prophecy, by adding to, and
taking from the same; for either they did believe him to be a Prophet, that the
Word of the did come to him as expressly as to Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and
the rest of the Prophets, or they did not; if they did, how then dare they add,
and diminish, and leave out, in the Reprint of his Works, what had gone for the
Word of the Lord, from 1656 to 1672? If they did not believe him to be a
Prophet divinely inspired, but an Impostor, why did they suffer the said Book
to go as The Word of the Lord, from 1656 to 1672? So take it which way they
will, and it will appear, that G. Whitehead, (whose Epistle of Recommendation
is prefixed, and Printed to Edw. Burrough's Works) and others of this
Second-Day Meeting, are most horrible Cheats, and grand Deceivers: And
therefore, now to the Commission which Edw. Buroughs received; which, to G. W.
and others, that believed it, was both Authentic and Substantial, viz.

By Order and Authority given unto me by the Spirit of the Living God, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, the 31st. Day of the Tenth Month, 1655. about the
4th. Hour in the Morning, when my Meditations was of my God, upon my Bed, in
Kilkenny City, in the Nation of Ireland; at that time The Word of the Lord came
unto me, saying, Write my Controversy with all the Inhabitants of the Earth,
unto all sorts of People; as I will show thee by this same Authority and
Commission declared: This I send unto you the Tribes of the Earth, and this
upon your Heads shall stand for ever, to be witnessed by the Light of Christ
Jesus ^n all your Consciences, in the dreadful Day of Vengeance, which upon
you, O Inhabitants of the Earth! is coming. Prepare, prepare to meet the Lord.
O Nations, Tongues and People! unto you all hereby a Warning is come; and a
Visitation from the Presence of the Living God, which you are straightly required
to put in Practice, as at the terrible Day of dreadful Vengeance you will
answer the contrary.

Given under my Hand, and Sealed by the Spirit of the Eternal God, who lives
for ever, through a Servant of the Lord, Edw. Borough.

Thus, Reader, you see the Commission which Edw. Borough received; (whether
counterfeit or not, is not my present Business) which was forthwith Printed in
Quarto, and sent up and down the Nation, as The Word of the Lord, and as such
received by Thousands of us, and to be sure, approved of by the Second-Day
Meeting; yet when the Times changed, and the Second-Day Meeting came to Reprint
the several Prophecies and Revelations of this remarkable Prophet Ed. Borough,
amongst the rest you will find this Book, you styled, The Trumpet of the Lord
sounded, etc. Reprinted in the Works of Ed. Borough, p. 97. And,

First, To thee Oliver Cromwell, and his Council.

2 dly, To all Judges and Lawyers, and their Train.

3 dly, To all Astrologers, Magicians, etc.

4 thly, To all Generals, Colonels, Commanders, etc.

To all these four sorts, the Reprint has it with some little Variation; indeed
enough to spoil the Predictions; which, had they been true, ought not to have
been added to, or taken from. And the Second-Day Meeting in 1672. pretended to
believe them to be true, by their Title in the Index, viz. A Trumpet of the
Lord sounded forth of Sion, which contains a Testimony from the Word of the
Lord. But behold, and be astonished at the Deceit of these Jugglers, i. e. the
Second-Day Meeters; for the Fifth Prophecy directed thus, To all you who are,
and have been always Enemies to the very Appearance of Righteousness, who are
called Delinquents and Cavaliers; I say, this whole Fifth Prophecy is left out
in the Reprint, though as positively Avowed to be the Word of the Lord as the
other, as certainly Sealed by the Spirit of the Eternal God as the other, and
every way Authorized by as ample a Commission from the Spirit of the Living
God, yea, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, as the other; and yet all left
out in the Reprint. And to make it appear so beyond all their Glossing, I shall
recite it Verbatim, as it follows the preceding Title and Direction.

To the Delinquents and Cavaliers.
Page 9. in the Quarto Impression, printed 1656.
Thus says the Lord, my Controversy is against you, even my Hand in Judgment
is upon you already; and you are become cursed in all your Hatchings and
Endeavors, and from time to time my Hand has been against you in Battle; and
you have been, and are given up to be a Prey to your Enemies; for the Purpose
and Intents of your Hearts have been known always to be against the Form of
Truth, and much more against my powerful Truth it self: And because you
attempted to take my Throne, (Conscience) therefore I rose in my Fury against
you, and will have War with all your Followers herein for ever, who shall
attempt to take my Throne, (Conscience;) and tho my Hand has been evidently
against you, yet to this Day you remain in Rebellion in your Minds, in hatching
Murder and Cruelty in your wicked Hearts: Note, All this to the Delinquents is
left out in the Reprint, 1672.
And though your Kings and Princes have been cut off in Wrath, and your cruel
desperate Inventions, and Plots of Wickedness (conceived in your cursed Womb)
have been broken, and you cut short in your Desires, yet you repent not, nor
will not see, how you are given up to be a Curse, and a Desolation, and a Prey,
in Houses and Lands, and Persons, to them whom I raised against you, and gave
Power over you, yet you are hardened, and your Cruelty in Persecution against my
Servants cannot be measured; where you have any Power, you smite with the Fist
of Wickedness, and count it your Glory to despise my Name: In the Valleys of
vain Hopes do you feed, and on the Mountains of foolish Expectations; and
conceive in your Cruel Womb of Tyranny, the Overthrow of the Nations; but in
the bringing forth your selves are overthrown: And it is not for well-doing
that you suffer, but my Hand is against you, and my Judgments are upon you;
and, except you Repent Then some Hopes left: Why then should not this have been
continued for their Good?
, shall continue upon Earth with you, and follow you, and pursue you to the
Lake of Destruction, where there is no Repentance; and you, and your Kings, and
Lordly Power, (by which you have thought to exercise Lordship over my Heritage)
shall be enslaved by the Devil, in the Pit of Darkness, in everlasting Bondage,
where he [the Devil] shall Reign your King and Lord for evermore, etc.

Note, That all this whole Chapter concerning K. C. II. and his Friends, and
Royal Family, is left out in the Reprint of his Works, Anno 1672.

From whence it is evident, That though this Prophecy was said to be as true as
any Chapter in the Bible; yea, that the Word of the Lord came to Borough the
31 st. of December, 1655, at the Fourth Hour in the Morning, and Sealed by the
Spirit of the Eternal God; yet this Second-Day Meeting has, or claim to have a
Power superior, and by Virtue thereof, can silence the Prophet, stifle his
Prophecy, cancel his Revelation, and null and make void his Commission; for,
as I said, they either believed his Commission to be Real, or Counterfeit; It
must be Real or Counterfeit.
if Real, as so they always pretended, then is it not great Wickedness that it
should be thus smothered up, and stifled, and left out of his Works, since though
the Delinquents and Cavaliers were very wicked, yet upon Repentance there seems
to be some Hopes, which now this Prophecy cannot be instrumental in, since the
Second-Day Meeting has buried it in Oblivion, in that they did not Reprint it
with the rest of the same Book, in his Works in Folio, Printed 1672? If
Counterfeit, What wicked Wretches were these Members of the Second-Day Meeting
in 1656. to Print it in Quarto as the Word of the Lord, and Sealed by the
Spirit of the Eternal God, and thereupon, and as such, sent it up and down to
us, to deceive us, by recommending a Counterfeit Commission for a Real? Thus
let them take it which way they will, and it is wicked in the Superlative
Degree.

But this is not all; it showed their Cowardice and Temporizing; for this was
wrote in O. Cromwell's time, designed, I perceive, to curry Favor with him,
and to show that himself, and his Brethren the Quakers, were Enemies to
Monarchy: But when it was Reprinted, it was done in K. Charles the Second's
time, and then they wheeled about, and complained of O. Cromwell, and flattered
the King, Cavaliers, and Court-Party; and then this Prophecy, Sealed never so
strong, Revealed never so clear, the very Day, Month and Year specified, nay,
the very Hour in the Morning, yet (as I have said) it not suiting with the
Design on foot, namely, To root out Christianity, and introduce Quakerism, it
must be suspended, stifled and buried. Thus then it appears, how wickedly
deceitful are these Second-Day Meeters, who can thus prevaricate and dissemble
with God and Man; of which, I could give many Instances, but rather refer to
The Snake in the Grass, etc. which does most amply set forth their turning with
the Times, and their facing about with every Wind that might seem to blow a
prosperous Gale for the Advance of Quakerism, etc.

But to conclude, or rather confirm this Head, and to show what Temporizers
these Quakers have been, as well as knowingly Wicked, these Second-Day Meeters
ever (from first to last) were, let me add one Citation more, as it lies
dispersed in a Book of Ed. Burrough's, Printed in Quarto 1659. containing
several Letters written, and said to be delivered to O. Cromwell, Anno 1657.
and some Letters said to be delivered to R. Cromwell, Anno 1658. then
Protector: But I distrust all they say So cannot believe they did deliver them
as Printed, since after Printed can thus alter them.
; for having compared this Quarto Book, I find many places which mentions the
King, or the Kingly Government, left out in his Works in Folio; which Words so
left out you will find them in Capital Letters; which, as it shows their
Temporizing, so it discovers their Wickedness to stifle Prophesies, if they
believed them such to be; if not, still as wicked to let this Borough in his
Works still go for a Prophet, and by Whitehead, Coal, Howgill and Fox, etc.
recommended as such; I do say, it is such a Depth of Hypocrisy, that I want
Words to set it forth sufficiently.

P. 15. And these things are not right in the Sight of the Lord, that such who
have been for many Years faithful in the Service, and in their Trust, and
hazarded Life and Liberty for Conscience Sake, which they cannot now possess,
because of thee, [ Dear Oliver,] but are cast out for the Exercise of their
pure Conscience; consider of it, for this makes the Nation more unhappy, and
less blessed, when such who delight in true Justice and Judgment, are cast out
of their Places Oh! how the Quakers did flatter O. Cromwell, to get into
Offices, yea, Justices forsooth.
, and so deprived of giving their Judgment amongst Men; and absolutely this
will make thy Army less prosperous, when such who fear the Lord, against whom
thou can not justly charge no Evil, are cast out, and despised, and this in
time thou may see to thy Sorrow; and as thy Friend, I lay this before thee,
and do in Plainness tell thee, If thou thus utterly deny the People of God in
the Day of thy Prosperity, and thou thus wholly cast them out of thy Service,
they cannot stand by thee, nor own thee in the Day of thy Trouble Oliver did
not much value his new Saints, i. e. Quakers.
; P. 16. When as such who fears the Lord, are cast out of Judicatories in thy
Government, and out of Defense in thy Armies: What! Is this the end of that
long Travel in Wars, and of so many Promises of Liberty of Conscience, that
just Men should thus be dealt withal, as one without Bowels of Compassion, unto
such who have truly served with thee in a faithful Service for the
Commonwealth, who many of them now are grievous Sufferers under thee? P. 17.
Many Enemies thou have, which watch over thee, (O. C.) for Evil, and not for
Good: -- First, There is a People scattered through all these Nations, who is
full of Wrath toward thee, EVEN OF THOSE KNOWN BY NAME MALIGNANTS Oh! how
careful the Quakers were of their dear Friend O. C.
, in whose Hearts, to this Day, there is continual Hatred against thee, and all
thy Offspring; -- Daily Advantage they seek against thee, by secret Plottings
of Maliciousness in their EVIL Hearts, seeking by all Means, if it be possible,
how to be avenged, and to revenge themselves, and THE CAUSE OF THEIR KING, with
no better Purpose, than to destroy thee; -- Such is the Cruelty and
Desperateness of some of them, their own Lives are not dear unto them, to take
away thine; I have felt the Strength of their Rage against thee, which carries
them above Sense or Fear, to undergo any Danger, that they may see their
desired End of thee; their Malice toward thee is so seated in their wrathful
Hearts, that it cannot easily be quenched: I know the Lord has CURSED them and
their Endeavors to this Day, and thou have had Dominion and Power given thee
of God, to break them in Pieces; AND WHAT THOU HAVE DONE TO THEIR KING SHOULD
NOT BE RECKONED AGAINST THEE BY THE LORD, Murder acquitted, if O. C. would but
stand by the Quakers.
IF NOW THOU ART FAITHFUL TO WHAT HE REQUIRES OF THEE. P. 20. Though we the
People of God does not envy thy Person nor Government, -- yet, Friend, the Want
of our Prayers to God for thee is worse to thee than the secret Plotting of all
wicked Men: And how can we mention thee in our Prayers to God for thee, except
it be to be delivered from thee? Good Counsel and Advice rejected, Printed in
Quarto 1656. Reprinted in Folio 1672.

To this agrees that Saying of G. Fox to Mr. Camelfeild, a Minister, in his
Book, i. e. Truth's Defense, etc. p. 15. No Prayers can we send to thee, but
for thy Destruction, thou Man of Sin, and Enemy of Christ, etc. No, neither to
Oliver their Governor, nor to the Priests; no, they cannot pray for their
Enemies, unless they do Kindness for them, i. e. make them Justices or
Commanders; no, no Penny, (or what is Equivolent) no Pater Noster from the
Quakers. See the Margin Is that the Reason they will not pray for King William
III?
.

P. 21. And this I have written to thee, out of perfect Love in the Fear of
God: -- And if thou could own them, ( i. e. Quakers) they would own thee in
the Face of all thy Enemies.

P. 35. To Richard. AS CONCERNING THY WAR, AND ARMIES ABROAD IN SPAIN,
SOMETHING THERE IS IN Something; yea, who knows not that, this is like a
Gypsie-Prophesie.
IT KNOWN TO THE LORD: -- MAKE NO COVENANT WITH IDOLATERS, BUT TREAD DOWN THEIR
IDOL GODS, WHICH THEY HAVE SET UP, AND HEW DOWN THEIR MOUNTAINS, IN WHICH THEIR
CONFIDENCE STAND, AND PLOW UP THEIR GROUND, THAT THE SEED MAY BE SOWN AFTER
THEE; IT IS HONOR ENOUGH TO BE THE LORD'S PLOWMAN. P. 44. And if thou walk with
the Lord, and preserve his People, ( i. e. Quakers) that fear him, then shall
thou prosper, and thy Name shall be greater than was thy Father's, and the
numberless Number of this now distressed People will be unto thee a Strength,
and stand by thee in thy Day of Trouble, and defend thee and thy Just
Government Then R. Cromwell's Government was Just in the Quakers Account.
, and their Hearts shall cleave unto thee, and thou shall prosper for their
sakes, and none of thy Enemies shall have Power over thee. P. 53. And as for
thy Father, the late Protector, great things did the Lord do for him, in
raising him up, and casting out his Enemies before him, and giving him Victory,
Renown and Power O brave Oliver! the Quakers Champion.
through Nations; and we know the Lord showed Favor to him, and gave him
Strength, Wisdom and Valor, and a right Spirit; and he was called of God into
that great Work, to subdue the grievous Tyrannies, once ruling over tender
Consciences, and to break down the great Oppressions which had caused the Just
to Groan; and the Lord was with him in Victory, and preserved him from great
Dangers.

Observations on the recited Quotation.
Reader, please to observe, First, That the Words in Capital Letters were
Printed in the Quarto Book, 1659. and left out in the Reprint in Folio, 1672.
which shows their Temporizing; and like Butter-flies, how they hide themselves,
whilst the Danger of the Storms are past. 2 dly, Their Wickedness in leaving
out such Prophesies, if real; if counterfeit, then as bad to suffer them to go
abroad so long, to deceive others. 3 dly, How they pleaded their being in the
Army, and their Faithfulness to their Trust therein, as meritorious of their
Continuance in the Army for the Defense of the Nation, as well as their Desire
of being in Offices in the Administration of Justice Oh! they would gladly be
Justices of the Peace.
. But hold! Oliver, as he did not believe their Prophesies, so he would not
trust them in either Military or Civil Affairs. 4 thly, You may see how they
did cling to O. Cromwell, and next to Richard, justifying their Usurpation. 5
thly, How they acquitted O. Cromwell in that horrible Murder of K. Charles I.
saying, That if he would but stand by, cherish and support Quakerism, WHAT HE
DID TO THE LATE KING SHOULD NOT BE LAID TO HIS CHARGE BY THE LORD. 6 thly, And
that if he would not do so, they could not pray for him, and that should be
worse to him than all the Plottings of the Wicked: And I take this to be the
Reason why they refuse to pray for K. William III. for I have gone into several
of their Meetings, and I have enquired of others that have done the like; I
have likewise read diverse of their Prayers in Print, as Stephen Crisp's, and
others, yet I could never hear, see, nor learn, that they ever prayed for K.
William III. no, no more than for the Priests, or than for Oliver: But for this
Omission Whitehead has a Salvo ready, The Content. Apost. etc. p. 27. viz. But
where are all required by Christ or his Apostles, to pray for them (i. e.
Kings, and all that are in Authority) by Name, or charged as Offenders for not
naming of Persons in our Prayers? May we not pray acceptably And may you not?
Who knows but you may mean another than the Rightful and Lawful King,
, unless we tell God the Names of those we pray for? etc.

But, Reader, let me trace this Snake in the Grass, and hunt this Fox to his
Burrow; and do not think it hard dealing: I know there can be nothing said of
them that grates, but they presently cry out of Persecution, of Malice, while
they take the Liberty to expose all sorts of People, how innocent soever, as at
large I have set forth in the Picture of Quakerism, etc. Part 2. p. 44, to 175.
and shall show one Instance more, before I enter upon my Chase.

Viz. G. Fox's Judgment of Kingly Government, taken out of a Paper of his,
written to the Presbyterians, etc. a little before the Restoration.
To all you that desire an Earthly King in England, -- who profess your selves
to be Christians, whether Presbyterians, or others, -- Do not the Priests,
Presbyterians, and many of the Rulers, cry for an Earthly King? -- And is not
this the same Nature the Jews were in? And do they not in this Crucify Jesus?
-- And are not all these Elders Christians, that will dote so much of an
Earthly King, Traitors against Christ? -- Now Elders, if you say, Peter said,
Honor the King, -- this does not hold forth, that Peter bid them set up an
Earthly King over them; neither do you read, -- that there were any Earthly
Kings since the Days of the Apostles, but among the Apostate Christians, etc.
See Quakerism Unmasked, etc. p. 1. for much more of this.

But no sooner did the King come in Anno 1660. but within a Month, G. Fox and
others put forth a Declaration, saying, p. 4. We do therefore declare, to take
off all Jealousies, Fears and Suspicions of our Truth and Fidelity to the King,
and these present Governors, That our Intentions and Endeavors are, and shall
be good, true, honest and peaceable toward them, and that we do love, own, and
honor the King, and the present Governors, etc. Yea, let their Words be never
so contrary, they are not to be measured by their Words.
It would require a Volume to set forth their Temporizing, and horrid Practices
in this kind; but I shall only give a Taste, referring to The Snake in the
Grass, etc. But it is Comical to see this their early Turning with the Times:
First, None more vigorous against Monarchy; and yet none did sooner, nor yet
more flatter, fawn, and creep to the same Government, than did the Quakers: But
that which is most provoking, and for which I chiefly mention this, that upon
every Occasion, to ingratiate themselves into the Favor of the Government,
they frequently charged the same Presbyterians, etc. with their being against
the Government, of fighting Principles, yea, a People who would promote their
Religion by the Power of the Sword. See W. Penn's Just Rebuke to 21 Divines,
etc. printed 1674. p. 25. viz. How did the Presbyterians excite the Parliament
in these very Terms: Elijah opposed Idolatry and Oppression, so do ye; down
with Baal's Priests, which is (says Penn) as much as to say, Away with your
Archbishops and Bishops, the whole Ministry, and Worship of the Church of
England.

Come, smooth George, I have seen another of your Books, Entitled, The Way
cast up, etc. p. 52, 53. where you say, p. 52. Some of the Presbyterian
Nonconformists Preachers, are fled Beyond Sea; others lurk in Corners here and
there, and keep private Conventicles, where many times they preach Sedition
against their Lawful Prince, by Instigation of whom, that Insurrection happened
in 1666. Again, p. 53. And some of them have printed Books in Defense of the
Lawfulness of making War against the Supreme Magistrates, etc. Again, p. 23.
And how many Garments were rouled in Blood, by the Instigation of the
Presbyterian Teachers, the whole Nation was a Witness; so that many Thousands
were made Widows and Fatherless, by that War they stirred up the People unto.
P. 54. And in very Truth, the Presbyterian Church will never be able to purge
her self of the Iniquity of killing many Thousands in the Three Nations, by the
Occasion of a most bloody War, raised up through the Instigation of the
Presbyterian Teachers, etc. And thus they continued bloody Enemies to the
Presbyterians, notwithstanding George Fox did so condemn them as Traitors,
Antichrists, and Crucifiers of Jesus, for endeavoring the Restoration of King
Charles II. and that no People then on Earth did more stir up, instigate, and
encourage a bloody War against the King and Church of England, than the Quakers
did: Witness their Trumpet sounded, etc. See their Trumpet sounded, etc. in the
Eleventh Chapter.

But notwithstanding all this, and a Hundred times as much, which might be
showed out of their Books, yet they continued villifying the Presbyterians,
saying; Knowing that ye look on it as a Duty, to fight by Military Weapons, in
Defense of your Principle; yea, to promote Your Cause by the Power of the
Sword, in which you are Confirmed by some of Your Preachers, who are Always
laboring to persuade you to this, as one Evidence of your Zeal for God, and
not to spare to hazard your Lives, Liberties and Estates, in such a Glorious
Cause, as you call it. -- It were worth your serious Consideration, That if
these (Presbyterian) Preachers continue to Stir you Up to Rise in Arms No, nor
nothing of it, but to stifle the Popish Plot, and throw it upon the Protestants.
, they have not much of Self-Interest in their Eye, they being now secluded
from their Places, and that Power and Authority they and their Brethren had
taken from them; Whether therefore they seek not to Embroil the Nations in New
Wars, rather than still to be thus deprived? etc. A plain and peaceable Advice
to those called Presbyterians in Scotland, etc. Printed Anno 1681. p. 1, 7.

Thus then it appears, that the Quakers to curry Favor with O. Cromwell, they
complained fearfully of the Presbyterians as Traitors, for joining with the
Church of England, in the Happy Restoration of King Charles II. So now from
1660 to 1681, they all use the Craft and Policy imaginable, to bring the Odium
of that Reign upon the Presbyterians, and thereby to make way for the Papists,
and to stifle all their wicked Plots and Conspiracies: And that it is not my
single Judgment, I shall publish a Letter sent me.

SIR,
It being notoriously known, That since the Discovery of the Popish Plot in
England, many Courses and Endeavors has been used by the Papists and their
Abettors, to stifle and hinder the Discovery and Punishment thereof.

And particularly, by pretending a Presbyterian Plot against the King and his
Government in England; and in order thereto, it is evident what Falsities,
Scandals and Invectives against the Protestants in general, under the Name of
Presbyterians, have Weekly been Published in those Libels, Entitled,
Heraclitus, the Observator, and others.

And whereas there has been lately Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard,
Lombard Street, London The Quakers Bookseller.
, this present Year 1681. a certain Book, Entitled, Advice to the
Presbyterians in Scotland, which appears to have been written Two Years since;
which Book does very much reflect upon some Principles of the Scotch
Presbyterians; whether rightly suggested or not, is not the Intent of this
Paper to examine; but Twenty Years Experience of the Presbyterians in England,
have proved their Practices in England, far different from the mentioned
Reflections: Therefore sundry well-meaning Protestants, of different
Persuasions from the Presbyterians, for several Reasons, have thought the
Publication of the said Book in England Of Alex. Skene, a Quaker-Teacher.
, at this juncture of Time, to be injurious to the Protestant Interest in
general: And some of the said Protestants being informed, that Mr. Pennyman did
intend to make a public Protestation against the said Book this Day upon the
Exchange, did think it their Duty to dissuade Mr. Pennyman from the doing
thereof, as being probable to be the Occasion of the greater Publication of the
said Book, unto which he has consented: And the same Persons do likewise
desire and require you, as much as in you lies, to hinder thereof, lest by your
Neglect you strengthen the Hands of the Enemies of the Protestants, and
Protestant Religion in general Copy of this was sent to the Quakers.
.

28. July, 1681.

Thus then does it undeniably appear, how enviously Malicious, and of what a
Persecuting Spirit the Quakers are; yet, poor Hearts, this in them is all
Innocence, Meekness, and the Lamb's Spirit; but in others, so much as to tell
them of it, it is Persecution. Pray why was it in G. Fox and others, to call the
Clergy Witches, Devils, Blasphemers, false Prophets, Jesuits, Conjurers,
Antichrists, and what not, that might render them odious to the People? Smith's
Works, p. 175. A Brief Discovery of a Threefold Estate, etc. p. 7, 8.
Burrough's Works, p. 30. This is no Persecution in the Quakers; no, they are
innocent Souls, and as far from Persecution, as the Meat of an Oyster is from
the Shell, when living in the Sea; for they for the present are given up to
suffer. Come, G. Whitehead, what think you of your Brother Smith, who calls the
Bishops Monsters, the Church of England a corrupted Womb, and by him ripped up?
What do you think of his saying the Common Prayer Book receives its Strength
from the Pope's Good God! was ever the like Impudence known?
Loins, and that the Pope gives Life to it? Oh that ye could but see your
selves, and repent of your Wickedness! For if the Government should believe
you, that the Clergy are false Prophets, what remains but Death, and that
according to the Law of God? But I challenge the Quakers to produce one single
Clergyman that have prophesied of a thing to come to pass, and it did not; as
Sol. Eccles, a Quaker-Prophet, did, who prophesied, That John Story should die
within a Year, who lived Four Years after, as I elsewhere have showed.

Again, If the Government believed the Quakers, whose Books affirm, that the
Clergy are Witches and Devils, they ought not to suffer them to live, but
presently say, There goes a Witch, knock him on the Head, Exodus 22.18. Again,
There goes a Blasphemer, stone him to Death, Lev. 24.16. Again, There goes a
false Prophet, let him die, Deuteronomy. 18.20. Yea, ( says W. Penn) Whilst the Idle
Gormandizing Priests of England run away with above 150000 l. a Year, under
Pretense of being God's Ministers, -- and that no sort of People have been so
Universally, through Ages, the very Bane of Soul and Body, to the Universe, as
that Abominable Tribe; for whom the Theater of God's most dreadful Vengeance is
reserved, to act their Eternal Tragedy upon Observe the Quakers Goliath of Gath,
W. P.
, etc. The Guide Mistaken, etc. p. 18.

Thus, Reader, I have given thee a Relish of the Quakers Meekness, and
Lamb-like Nature; and therefore give me leave to hunt this Fox; did I say, give
me leave? Nay, I am resolved, that if thou will not give me leave, I shall take
it: What! shall these Rabsheka's be perpetually Railing and Domineering over
the Gospel Ministers without Control? Shall these uncircumcised Philistines
appear in Triumph Forty Years together, and their Goliath vaunting himself,
boasting of his Parts, Learning, and Interest at -- as the other did of his
Strength? and Stature, whose Staff of his Spear was like a Weaver's Beam; and
who glorying therein, defied the Armies of Israel, 1 Samuel 17. as the Quakers do
the Church of England, her Bishops and Clergy? And as a fresh Motive to this my
Chase, I saw Two Letters from Two worthy Clergymen to their Acquaintance in the
City, which complained of the Quakers Insolency. An Abstract thereof is as
follows, viz.

I supply the Cure of -- I have with the Blessing of God upon my Pains,
preserved the People in our Communion (except some few) till now. But at this
time, through the extraordinary Devices, Craft and Subtilty of the Quakers, that
Parish, and two or three more thereabouts, are in great Danger of falling from
the Church to Quakerism; several of their New Converts go about to Houses,
importuning Men and Women to go to hear their Speakers: They are so troublesome
in this Nature, as that I am persuaded some have turned, and others must turn
for a quiet Life. I have observed them to be much more hot and eager in making
Proselytes since the Peace, than ever they were in the time of the War. They
challenge us to meet them, and Dispute with them; but if we should accept their
Challenge without our Bishop's Leave, I do not know how he would resent it;
besides, I am not hasty, lest the best Cause in the World should suffer through
my Weakness: -- And the Advantage they would bring to their Cause hereby, is,
to have it universally believed, that their Religion is so good, and so much
favored by the Government, as that it neither can, nor dare be opposed by us.
-- I believe the Intent of the King and Parliament, in granting them an
Indulgence, was not that they should disturb the Professors of the Established
Religion by Law; but rather, that these Legal Professors should not be capable
of disturbing or molesting them: I pray God open the Eyes of our Governors,
and cause them to take into Consideration this too much, and too deplorable,
unlimited and unbounded Toleration, (especially as the Quakers both claim and
use it;) which, notwithstanding all the Care, and indefatigable Labor and
Pains of the Watchmen of Israel, will certainly (if not timely prevented,) be
the Overthrow of our Church, and Christianity it self, etc.

And to my own Knowledge, they boast of having the Royal Ear, and such Friends
at Court as give them great Boldness, especially in Country Towns and Villages,
where they ride Lord and Master, and begin to think themselves interested in
the Comprehension discoursed of: But if so, without first a general
Retractation of the Errors by them broached, and of their scandalous
Defamations of our Kings, our Parliaments, Bishops, Clergy, and Protestants in
general, it will be no other than breeding a Viper in the Bowels of the
Christian Churches, which God of his Mercy divert. Thus begging my Reader's
Pardon for this long Digression, I shall now take Leave to renew my Chase in
Hunting the Fox; not so much to single out a single Person, (for that (God
knows) of every Society there has been some Particulars under mistaken Notions,
pursuing wrong Designs;) as to show, that the Governing Party of the Quakers,
who sit at their Helm, have been utterly against this present Government: For,
as I told them Publicly, in my Printed Letter to the Quakers, Printed 1690. p.
2. i. e. This Government and the Protestant Interest are so linked together,
that those which are not true to the one, cannot be true to the other, whatever
they may pretend, etc. I say not so much to single out of their Herd one
particular Person, as to show, that the Quakers in general, (who think
themselves thus highly honored, as the Merit of their Innocence) have all
along been averse to the Government, that so when they (like the Peacock)
behold their dark Parts, they may let fall their Plumes, and be humbled, and
brought to a Confession, both of their Sins of Omission and Commission against
God and Man: For,

I having observed the Discourse of the Quakers touching the late Happy
Revolution, found how their Pulse beat; and in the general, perceived a great
Lukewarmness in them to the present Government: I also went sometimes to their
Meetings, as I did to other Dissenters, to observe whether they all prayed for
Their Majesty's; and to do the Dissenters Right, both Presbyterians,
Independants and Baptists, prayed heartily for Their Majesty's, King William
and Queen Mary; but not a Word of such a Prayer amongst the Quakers: By which I
soon perceived, that their Peoples Averseness to the Government proceeded from
the Doctrine and Example of their Teachers; upon which I Printed against this
their Omission, in a Letter to the Quakers, 1690. p. 2. saying, Why do you not
Pray for, and Address your selves to King William and Queen Mary, as publicly
and as heartily as you did to and for the late King James II. viz. as a brave
King? God and Caesar ( said Penn) are both of a Mind; pray God bless the King
and his Royal Family. These, and many more, were published through the Nations,
(and from your Yearly Meetings too;) but no Salutation, no Message, no Prayer
for, nor Address to King William and Queen Mary, as if you were struck mute at
the Loss of your brave Popish King. I do not charge this as an Evil in it self,
whilst our King; but to show the Quakers Zeal to that, and Coldness to his
present Majesty, whom God preserve.
What can you say for your selves? Are you like those, 1 Samuel 10.27. viz. The
Children of Beliel, who said, How shall this Man save us? And they despised
him, and brought him no Presents, ( no Prayers, no Addresses;) but the King
held his Peace? O ye unworthy and ungrateful Persons! Has not King William
granted you the Liberty of your Consciences? What! Have you nothing to say for
King William? Nay, you are so far from that, that you have acted quite
contrary; for when King William appointed a Fast for the Prosperity of his
Arms, then you not only Preached against the Fast, but also to weaken the
Hearts and Hands of his Friends, you vehemently cried down all Wars and
Fighting Mark this, with the Juncture of Time and Occasion.
, and the like. Is you Zeal for the Protestant Cause quite gone, or is it gone
to Rome? etc.

This Letter, I grant, put them into a Fume and Fret; but they soon found a
Salvo, viz. Where ( said G. Whitehead) are all required by Christ, or his
Apostles, to pray for them, (i. e. Kings, and all that are in Authority) by
Name, etc. The Content. Apostate, etc. p. 17. as before observed.

But I soon Printed a Reply to G. Whitehead's Evasive Answer, entitled, New
Rome Unmasked, p. 26, to 30. where I gave Instances of their Prayers and
Addresses to the late King James II. as in the following Addresses is manifest,
but not one Anniversary Address to King William III. to August 1699. viz.

The Humble Address of the People called Quakers, to K. James II. June 1687.
We cannot but with grateful Hearts, both admire and acknowledge the Providence
of God, that made the King's retiring into our Native Country [ i. e. Scotland,
in 1679.] give a Happy Turn to his Affairs, to the defeating and disappointing
the Designs of his Enemies: We do justly conceive Oar selves obliged by a
special Tie, to praise God for his Goodness, in carrying the King through and
over all his Troubles; since by the same Providence, and at the same time, by
which the Lord began in that more observable manner, to evidence his Care of
him, he made him the happy Instrument to deliver us from our Troubles; so that
the Prosperity of his Affairs, and our peaceable Fruition of the Exercise of
our Consciences, bears the same Date, etc.

The Humble Address of the People called Quakers to K. James II. from our
Yearly Meeting, 1688.
We the King's loving and peaceable Subjects, from diverse Parts of his
Dominions, being met together in this City, to inspect the Affairs of our
Christian Society Which by Interpretation is Infect.
, Throughout the World, think it our Duty humbly to represent, etc. -- Now
since it has pleased thee, O King! to renew to all thy Subjects, by thy last
Declaration, thy Gracious Assurance, to pursue the Establishment of this
Christian Liberty, etc. We think our selves deeply engaged, to renew Our
Assurances of Fidelity and Affection: -- And as we firmly believe, that God
will never desert this just and righteous Cause of Liberty, Nor the King in
maintaining of it; so we hope, etc.

Thus, Reader, you see here is nothing wanting but bended Knees; here is in All
Humility, in All Fidelity, with All Affection; yea, All, All, All, all Prayers
for him, for a long Life, for a prosperous Reign; Laud and Praise in the
highest, for His Deliverance, for the defeating his Enemies, [ i. e.
Protestants;] besides, by a modest Computation, Ten Thousand Books spread up
and down the Nation, in favor of his Government. See my Sober Expostulation
with the Hearers of the Quakers, etc. p. 13.

But, since King William came to the Crown, No Salutation, No Message, No
Prayers for, No Address to him from their Yearly Meeting Unless this in School.
now the War is ended, and no Hopes left them.
, No in all Humility, No in all Fidelity, No with all Affection, No Public
Prayers for his long Life, for his prosperous Reign, No Laud and Praise that
his Enemies are defeated. Here is all No, No, No; nor one Book wrote in Favor
of the Government, during this Reign.

But that my Reader may rightly understand which side of the Hedge the Quakers
have to this Day hid themselves, I will recite one Query to them anew, as in
that Book of mine I did, New Rome Unmasked, etc. p. 31. as I took it out of a
Jacobite Catechism, p, 5. For as I would not write one Sheet which has not a
Tendency to show either their Errors, Hypocrisy, Covetousness, or Treachery
to the Nation, so shall I take in all that concur thereto, though it be Twenty
Sheets. The Query is;

Query. What made the Quakers no more concerned for the Loss of those brave
Patriots of our Country, Essex, Russel, (Sidney, Cornish, Bateman? etc.) I
could never get an Answer to this Query.


This was such an untoward, knotty Question, that all the Quakers were not able
to answer it, that ever I understood: No, no, instead of being sorry, G.
Whitehead, Fran. Camfeild, Gilbert Layty, and Alex. Parker, delivered an
Address to King Charles II. at Windsor, about the time of the Execution of my
Lord Russel, This was the first Address they ever made to Authority.
crying out extremely against all Hellish Plots, and all Traiterous
Conspiracies, and that they had nothing but Love and Good Will to him, and his
Brother the Duke of York.

But to return to the Observation I have made on the Quakers Public Prayers
for, and their Yearly Meetings Address to the late King James II. and their
contrary Practice to King William III No; for what they do at their Yearly
Meeting is is done by the Body.
. I have something more to offer, as an Aggravation of their Ingratitude, for
they made an Order for the calling in the Widow Whitrow's Books, (she being
formerly of their Society, and by her plain Dress some take her to be so
still;) which was in Favor of this Government. Now G. Whitehead, what
Scripture had you for that? Or, by what Authority did you presume to give out
this Order?

Now I shall transcribe the Widow Whitrow's Paper, concerning the Quakers Order
for calling in her Books; which is as follows, viz.

December 1689. The Widow Whitrow ordered Andrew Soul to Print a Book for her,
entitled, The Widow Whitrow's Humble Address to King William III. And in
December 1690. ordered him to Print another Book, entitled, For Queen Mary,
the Humble Salutation and Faithful Greeting of the Widow Whitrow The very
Titles of these Books were sufficient for the Ruling Quakers to Censure the
Books.
, etc. Both which were well accepted; and which Andr. Soul Soul was the
Quakers Printer and Bookseller.
sent into the Country to his Friends the Quakers, and many of the said People
did buy them, and liked them well This perplexed the Foxonian Quakers.
, and sent for more: But the chief Quakers in London, at their Monthly Meeting
at Devonshire-House, the 7 th of January following, made an Order to have all
those Books called in, and appointed John Ethridge and William Ingram to go to
the Printer, and acquaint him with the said Order, which accordingly they did:
Too true, Sons of the Foxonian Quaker-Church.
At which the Printers seemed troubled, saying, They thought Friends would not
have been against them. (i. e. such Books) seeing they were mostly writ against
the Pride and Wickedness of the Times: And asked, What it was they had against
the Books? They answered, They Meaning their Monthly Meeting.
had little against them, Only that they were writ in Favor of This
Government, and reflected upon the former i. e. Their brave King James II.
; and that Friends had Resolved not to Meddle with the Government, etc. It is
to be observed, That the first Book, called, The Address, etc. was Printed
above a Year before, and sold by their Booksellers, and not any Stop put to
them, till some Viz. The Lord Preston, W. P. etc.
were endeavoring the Overthrow of this Government; so that it is easily to be
understood what the Meaning was of such an Order, at such a Time and Season,
etc.

This Account is still ready to be attested, if denied; and which I signified
something of formerly, but now I thought fit to recite it at large. See New
Rome Arraigned, etc. p. 30.

Well, this Order was made, where G. Fox, and the Chief Governing Quakers in
London, were present, in January; but in February following came out a
Proclamation against one of their chief Men; who upon the News of it, and as a
tacit Confession of great Guilt, run up a Cock-loft, at least a Chamber Four
Story high, to hide himself. Let now the Quakers remember their Book, where
they say, Some of the Presbyterian Nonconforming-Preachers are fled Beyond Sea,
others lurk in Corners here and there, and keep private Conventicles, where
many times they preach Sedition against their Lawful Prince, etc. as I before
observed; and let Mr. Penn remember, and be humbled, and thankful for the
Favors he has received, and the Forgiveness he has met with: And let him look
upon his Preface, viz. To the Christian Quaker, and his Divine Test. The
PRIESTS, like FOXES, seeing their KENNEL. -- TUMULTUOUS, BLOOD-THIRSTY,
COVENANT BREAKING, GOVERNMENT-DESTROYING ANABAPTISTS, -- keep their old Haunt,
of creeping into GARRETS, Cheese-lofts, Coal-boles, and suchlike Mice-Walls
Now W. Penn himself was forced to hide, and upon a far worse Occasion than
those he mentions; as may be seen by Their Majesty's Proclamation.
, etc.

By the King and Queen a Proclamation, for Discovering and Apprehending William
Penn, and James Grahme.
MARIE R.

Whereas Their Majesty's have received Information, That William Penn, Esquire; and
James Grahme, Esquire; with other Ill-affected Persons, have Designed and
Endeavored to Depose Their Majesty's, and Subvert the Government of this
Kingdom, by Procuring an Invasion of the same by the French, and other
Treasonable Practices, and have to that End held Correspondence, and Conspired
with diverse Enemies and Traitors, and particularly with Sir Richard Grahme,
Baronet, (Viscount Preston, in the Kingdom of Scotland,) and John Ashton, Gent.
lately Attainted of High Treason; For which Cause several Warrants for
High Treason have been issued out against them, but they have withdrawn
themselves from their usual Places of Abode, and are fled from Justice: Their
Majesty's therefore have thought fit, by and with the Advice of their Privy
Council, to Issue this Their Royal Proclamation; And Their Majesty's do hereby
Command and Require all their Loving Subjects to Discover, Take and Apprehend
the said William Penn and James Grahme, wherever they may be found, and to
carry them before the next Justice of the Peace, or Chief Magistrate, who is
hereby Required to Commit them to the next Goal, there to remain until they be
thence Delivered by due Course of Law; And Their Majesty's do hereby Require
the said Justice or other Magistrate, immediately to give Notice thereof to
Them, or Their Privy Council, And Their Majesty's do hereby Publish and Declare
to all Persons that shall Conceal the Persons abovenamed, or any of them, or
be Aiding or Assisting in the Concealing of them, or Furthering their Escape,
that they shall be proceeded against for such their Offense with the utmost
Severity, according to Law.

Given at Our Court at White Hall the Fifth Day of February, 1690/1. in the
Second Year of Our Reign.
Whereupon (as I was credibly informed) one Mr. Pennyman on the 22d. of that
instant -February, 1690/1. in Abhorrence of this Traitorous Conspiracy, uttered
these Words in their Meeting in White-Hart-Court in Grace Church Street,
London, Viz.

He that is a Traitor, or he that in the least goes about to betray this his
Native Country, he is a Traitor to the Living God; and he that is a Traitor to
his Maker, is not, nor cannot be a Disciple of Jesus, that Holy and Just One;
and he that is guilty of such cursed hellish Practices, must bear his Judgment,
whoever he be.

But as an Aggravation of this their Crime, they did not only make that Order
for the suppressing the said Address to the King, which was writ (I believe) in
Love and Good Will to him, etc. but suffered their Printer, Andrew Soul, a
Quaker, to print several Odious and Scandalous Books and Papers of Mr.
Stafford's against the Government: and though they were friendly and privately
acquainted with it, with Desire that those Scandalous Books, etc. might not be
dispersed, yet they could not be prevailed withal to have them stopped. However,
to do the Quakers all just Right, we must acknowledge some of them (and indeed
but some, and that of their Hearers too) were for the Government; who, to give
them their due, drew up a Paper against W. Penn, for being concerned in that
horrible Plot with the Lord Preston, etc. For they having seen his Letters
(that he had writ on that Occasion) in Aaron Smith's Custody, and were assured
that they were of his own Handwriting: This Paper was signed by W. Mead, and a
few more, who would have had it made Public; but the contrary Party being
powerful, prevented it: Only when W. Penn (after his Sculking some Years)
appeared, (by our merciful King's Favor) and preached as formerly in the
Quakers Meetings; then W. Mead and some others took him to task, telling him,
That though the King had passed by his Offense, yet they knowing him Guilty, (as
by the said Letters under his own Hand was manifest,) they ought to have
Satisfaction, as they were a Religious Society, before he preached in their
Assemblies: But he having the Teachers on his side, and the Generality of the
Hearers, he went on nolens volens; and if there had not been a Peace, it is to
be still feared, that W. Penn and his Confederates (for some of 'em held it out
to the very last, asserting it for a Truth, that there would be no Peace,
unless, etc.) would have pursued their Design, which might have proved fatal to
this Nation.

But still to show, that the Quakers have rather merited the Displeasure of the
Government, than the Favor and Countenance thereof, and of which they so often
boast, viz. of their being Recognized Protestants, of their being Freeborn
Englishmen, and thereby of their Rights and Privileges as such, I shall recite
an Abstract of another Act of Parliament, and show their Non-submission and
Aversion thereunto; entitled, Anno Septimo and Octavo Gulielmi III Regis.

An Act for the better Security of His Majesty's Royal Person and Government.
No 551, 552.
Whereas the Welfare and Safety of this Kingdom, and the Reformed Religion, do,
next under God, entirely depend upon the Preservation of Your Majesty's Royal
Person and Government; which, by the merciful Providence of God, of late, have
been delivered from the Bloody and Barbarous Attempts of Traitors, and other
Your Majesty's Enemies; who, there is just Reason to believe, have been in
great Measure Encouraged to Undertake and Prosecute such their wicked Designs;
partly by Your Majesty's Great and Undeserved Clemency W. Penn, is not this
true?
toward them; and partly, by the want of a sufficient Provision in the Law,
for the securing Offices, and Places of Trust, to such as are well-affected to
Your Majesty's Government, and for the Repressing and Punishing such as are
known to be Disaffected to the same. Be it Enacted, etc. No. 554. Whereas there
has been a Horrid and Detestable Conspiracy, formed and carried on by Papists,
and other Wicked and Traiterous Persons, for Assassinating His Majesty's Royal
Person, in order to encourage an Invasion from France, to Subvert our Religion,
Laws, and Liberty; We whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, do heartily,
sincerely, and solemnly profess, testify, and declare, That His present
Majesty King William, is Rightful and Lawful This was a bitter Pill to the
Quakers Second-Day Meeting.
King of these Realms: And we do mutually promise and engage, to stand by, and
assist each other, to the utmost of our Power, in the Support and Defense of
His Majesty's most Sacred Person and Government, against the late King James,
and all his Adherents Oh! this grated on our new Saints.
: And in case His Majesty come to any violent or untimely Death, (which God
forbid,) We do further, freely, and unanimously oblige our selves, to Unite,
Associate, and Stand by each other, in revenging the same upon his Enemies, and
their Adherents, and in Supporting and Defending the Succession of the Crown,
etc.

This Act of Parliament put the Quakers to a great Consternation; and what to
do they could not tell, they having at the same time spent much Money, Time and
Pains, in procuring an Act of Parliament, that their Affirmation should be
taken, instead of an Oath; and it had gone through the House of Commons, and was
under Consideration of the House of Lords: For, think they, if we do nothing,
our Act will not pass.

Well, at their Second-Day Meeting, Mar. 23d. 1695/6. their Teachers Assembled
together; and no doubt, great Consultings there were, and particularly about
those Words, Lawful and Rightful King For the French King had not yet owned him
King Of Great Britain.
; also, whether they should join ^ith the Protestants, in their Uniting, and
Associating to stand by each other in revenging his Blood, in case he had come
to a violent or untimely Death, etc. Well, these two Points were largely
debated, and possibly might hold many Hours: However, it passed in the
Negative; but yet, lest their Bill (for their Affirmation to be taken in Lieu
of an Oath) should not pass, they agreed thus far, namely, to get a Paper
printed; not mentioning what Meeting it was framed at, not Signed with any of
their Names to it, nor the Name of King William once mentioned; and if this
Paper [think they] will but pass, it will not do us much Hurt, in case our Old
Friend come again; for none of our Names are to the Paper, nor at what Meeting
it was contrived; nay, nor so much as the Name of what King we mean; and in
regard we have obtained the Repute of an innocent well-meaning People, it may
do well enough: So away they went trudging to the House of Lords, and presented
diverse of them. A Copy thereof is as follows, viz.

The Ancient Testimony and Principle of the People called Quakers renewed, with
Respect to the King and Government, and touching the present Association.
We the said People do solemnly and sincerely declare, That it has been our
Judgment and Principle, from the first Day We were called to profess the Light
of Christ Jesus manifested in our Consciences, unto this Day, That the setting
Up and putting Down Kings and Governments, is God's peculiar Prerogative, for
Causes best known to himself; and that it is not our Work or Business to have
any Hand or Contrivance therein, nor to be Busy bodies in Matters above our
Station, much less to Plot and Contrive the Ruin or Overturn of any of them,
but to Pray for the King, and for the Safety of our Nation, and Good of all
Men, that we may live a Peaceable and Quiet Life in all Godliness and Honesty,
under the Government which God is pleased to set over us: And according to this
Our Ancient and Innocent Principle, we often have given forth our Testimony,
and now do, against all Plotting Conspiracies, and Contriving Insurrections,
against the King or the Government, and against all Treacherous, Barbarous, and
Murtherous Designs whatsoever, as Works of the Devil and Darkness: And we
sincerely bless God, and are heartily thankful to the King and Government, for
the Liberty and Privileges we enjoy under them by Law, esteeming it our Duty
to be True and Faithful to them.

And whereas we the said People are required to Sign the said Association. We
sincerely declare, That our refusing so to do is not out of any Disaffection to
the King or Government, nor in Opposition to his being declared Rightful and
Lawful King of these Realms; but purely, because we cannot for Conscience Sake
Fight, Kill or Revenge, either for our selves, or any Man else.

And We believe that the timely Discovery and Prevention of the late Barbarous
Design, and Mischievous Plot against the King and Government; and the sad
Effects it might have had, is an Eminent Mercy from Almighty God; for which, we
and the whole Nation have great Cause to be humbly thankful to him, and to pray
for the Continuance of his Mercies to Them and Us.

From a Meeting of the said People in London, the 23d. of the First Month,
called March, 1695/6.
Thus ends their March Ancient Testimony, 1696.

Thus, Reader, I have given you a Copy verbatim of the Quakers Paper, presented
to the House of Peers; and I being then in London, wrote a Reply thereunto,
March 27. 1696. and presented it to the Lord's House, who immediately rejected
the Quakers Paper, notwithstanding all its fine and innocent Words, telling the
Quakers they must be plain, and tell them what King they mean: Secondly,
Whether they believed he was both Rightful and Lawful King: Thirdly, That they
must Sign their Paper. Now these three things grated sorely on their tender
Consciences; for they went home sadly angry with Francis Bugg, for being
instrumental in the Discovery of their deep Hypocrisy; for had that Paper
passed that no Body Signed, no King's Name to it; if the late King had
returned, they had been Fish whole still, and as Loyal Subjects as ever they
were before.

Thus, Reader, to prevent their Cavil, that I take but a Piece of their
Sentences, and wrong the Sense, I have recited their whole Testimony Verbatim:
But before I proceed to give you their April Ancient Testimony, let me give the
Reason, at least one probable Reason, why it was rejected, and would not pass
the House of Lords, so as to effect their Design; as also, what Communication I
guess they had about it, etc. For I being at London the 24th. of the same
Month, I went to the House of Lords, where I had one of the recited Testimonies
given me, I went to my Lodging, and perceiving their Prevailing, through their
Pretenses of seeming Sincerity and Innocence, etc. I wrote a Paper by way of
Reply, and the 27th of March I gave away about an Hundred to the Lords, who
accepted of them; and presently one of the Peers came out, and called Geo.
Whitehead, and told him, That their Paper would not do; for they had not so
much as mentioned what King they mean'd, nor yet declared him Rightful and
Lawful King of these Realms, nor yet Signed their Paper: And therefore they
must go home, and get another more Authentic, or their Bill for their
Affirmation to pass in lieu of an Oath would be rejected. Well, away they went
very sorrowful, and I conceive might have amongst themselves a Discourse of
this Nature, viz. G. Whitehead, Friends, our Paper is rejected, for yonder was
our old Antagonist, Francis Bugg, and he has delivered to the Peers a Paper,
suggesting, that we Prevaricate; he has also delivered about an Hundred of his
Books to the Lords, entitled, The Quakers set in their True Light, etc. and
therefore we must get another Ancient Testimony, more full to the Matter, lest
we lose the Advantage of our Bill; but let us stay awhile, for if we go
presently, who knows but that Apostate may reply to our next Paper; for he is
so Eagle-ey'd, that if he espy any thing that is defective, he may be
instrumental in throwing out our Bill: You cannot but remember, that we were
fair for the same Bill to pass in Anno 1693. but he then Printed a Sheet, and
delivered it to the House of Commons, and in Three Hours time our Bill was
thrown out of the House. Indeed we Printed a Sheet, styled, The Quakers
Vindication, etc. but he having printed a Thousand of those Sheets, and gave to
the House about 500, and sent to all the Coffee-Houses from Westminster to
Bishopsgate about 400 more, he prevailed against us: Nay, this is not all, but
presently wrote a Book, entitled, Quakerism Withering, and Christianity
Reviving, etc. and delivered about Two or Three Hundred of them to the House of
Commons: We saw our selves so baffled, that we thought it not meet to revive
our Bill that Sessions of Parliament; and therefore let us be wise, let us stay
until we think he is out of Town; for he has been here Two or Three Weeks
already; and what with his Charge in Printing the Papers he gave to the Lords,
and the Charge of giving in so many of The Quakers set, etc. together with his
Charges of staying, one way or other, it will cost him not so little as 6 or 7
l. and he having no Public Fund to go to, it will make him weary, etc. I say,
after this, they got another Paper, and presented to the House of Lords; a Copy
thereof is as follows.

The Ancient Testimony and Principle of the People called Quakers renewed, with
Respect to the King and Government, presented to King William III.
We the said People do solemnly and sincerely declare, That it has been our
Judgment and Principle, from the first Day we were called to profess the Light
of Christ Jesus, manifested in our Consciences unto this Day, That the setting
Up and putting Down Kings and Governments, is God's peculiar Prerogative; and
that it is not our Work or Business to have any Hand, or Contrivance therein,
nor to be Busiebodies above our Station, much less to Plot or Contrive the Ruin
or Overturn of any of them, but to Pray for the King, and Safety of the Nation,
and Good of all Men No; hold, not for the Priests nor Governors, unless they
please you.
, that we may live a Peaceable and Quiet Life, in all Godliness and Honesty,
under the Government which God is pleased to set over Us: And according to Our
Ancient and Innocent Principle, We often have given forth Our Testimony, and
now freely and sincerely do the same, against all Plotting Conspiracies, and
Contriving Insurrections, and against all Treacherous, Barbarous, and Murderous
Designs whatsoever, against the King or the Government, as being Works of the
Devil and Darkness.

And We believe, that the timely Discovery and Prevention of the late Barbarous
Design, and Mischievous Plot against King William A forced put. First time.
and the Government, and the sad Effects it might have had, is an eminent Mercy
from Almighty God; for which, We, and the whole Nation, have great Cause to be
humbly thankful to Him, and to pray for the Continuance of His Mercies to Them
and Us: And We sincerely bless God, and are heartily thankful to King William O
brave! This is the second time.
and the Government, for the Liberty and Privileges We enjoy under them by
Law. And further, We are really satisfied, that God by His Special Providence
did bring in, and set up King William This is News indeed! Third time.
over these Realms, and do own Him Rightful and Lawful King But George, why did
you not say so freely, without Whip or Spur?
; and are obliged in good Conscience to be True and Faithful to Him and the
Government, as becomes Obedient Followers of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

At a Meeting of the said People in London, the Third of April, 1696. Signed by
many of Us, on Behalf of our selves, and the rest of our Friends, and presented
to the King, Apr. 8. 1696.

Thus ends their April Ancient Testimony.

Reader, before I come to make Observations upon these two, March and April
Ancient Testimonies of the Quakers; there is one thing very remarkable, and
worth your noticing in the whole Conduct of Quakerism; and that in two
Respects; the first is past, the second's still to come, and ought to be
guarded against; and which makes me so long on this Head, and so plain with
them in this Matter; and briefly thus:

That although no one People in England did so flatter Oliver Cromwell, Richard
his Son, the Rump, and all the several Changes of Government during the
Usurpation, as the Quakers did, nor more oppose the Restoration of K. Charles
II. Nay, not only so, but justifying Oliver in his Murdering K. Charles I. and
in carrying on the War with all Vigor against the Cavaliers and Delinquents.
But when the Times turned, Oh! how they laid all the Blame of both the War and
Usurpation upon the Presbyterians, Independants and Baptists; as if they
themselves had all along been as Innocent as Newborn Babes. This puts me in
mind of a pleasant piece of News we had run through our whole Camp when I was a
Quaker, viz.

Anno 1674. W. Penn put forth a Book, styled, A Just Rebuke to Twenty-one
Divines, etc.

P. 25. Was it not a great Reason of the Wars that divided so many Families,
shed so much Blood, and exhausted so great a Treasure? Did it not lay
Episcopacy in the Dust, and excite the Parliament in these very Terms? Elijah
opposed Idolatry and Oppression, so do ye; down with Baal's Altars, down with
Baal's Priests; do not, I beseech you, consent unto a Toleration of Baal's
Worship in this Kingdom, which is as much as to say, [said Penn] away with
Archbishops, Bishops, and the whole Ministry and Worship of the Church of
England. Again, The Mouths of your Adversaries are opened against you; that so
many Delinquents, that is to say (said W. Penn) Royalists, are in Prison, and
yet but few of them brought to Trial: (Did he mean, said W. Penn, to release
them?) With much more of this nature, etc.

Now though I do think that diverse of these 21 Divines were as clear of what is
suggested as my self, if not all of them; yet because they appeared in Print
against the Errors of the Quakers, they, to ingratiate themselves into the
Favor of the then Government, exposed these Men as Enemies to the Delinquents,
i. e. Royalists. Well, the News we soon had amongst us was, that the King and
the Duke of York read this Book with great Delight and Pleasure; and no doubt,
but took the Quakers to be not only their Informers, but a Parcel of Innocent
Souls See what Friends the Quakers were to the Delinquents, etc.
: For it was soon observed, That the Dissenters Meetings was broken up, and the
Quakers Meetings connived at: A cunning Project.

2 dly, The second thing observable from hence, is, that in a little time (for
I see the Quakers begin to wheel about) no Man shall dare to appear in Print
against them, but they will fall to their old Trade of Domineerring and
Insulting over them, as Enemies to the Government, whilst none more eminently
against the present Government than themselves: For as then no People were more
vigorous in Print against the Restoration of K. Charles II. than the Quakers,
yet how did they complain of the Presbyterians, Independants and Baptists, as
diverse Instances are herein given, and more might be? Yet such is their cunning
and sly way of Insinuation against others, thereby to ingratiate themselves,
and to villifie and expose others, that it is hard to believe, and harder to
detect them therein: For in one of their late Books, writing against the
Reverend Author of The Snake in the Grass, etc. They call his Labors, Prim.
Chris. continued, etc. Pref. and p. 1, 11. The Black Attempts of a Necessitous,
Malicious Priest, an Expulsed Clergyman, makes a Trade for Bread, in part, to
repair his Losses which he charges the present Establishment to have brought
upon him A direct Lie; I never heard him speak one Word of that Tendency; though
as some others having taken a former Oath, cannot satisfy his Conscience.
, to divert his Cares and Fears, and to supply his Wants. Again, G. Whitehead,
in his Letter to G. Keith, lets forth his Fury against the said Author in these
Words Observe the Malice of this mercenary Whitehead.
: Especially, when the Injurious Circumstances of that Venomous and Obnoxious,
Creeping, Sculking Vermin, comes further to be exposed, etc. whilst no People
have both creeped up and down, sculked here and there and fled from Justice,
more than the Quakers: Witness their great Goliath for an Instance: Nor no one
People in England held out to the very last against the present Government more
than the Quakers. But their deep Hypocrisy is both seen, felt, heard, and
understood far and near; and therefore, as a further Demonstration of their
wheeling about, and late temporizing with their twofold Testimony; one
presented in the Month of March, the other (when that was rejected) presented
in the Month of April, as at large above-recited, I shall now examine.

The Ancient Testimony and Principle of the People called Quakers renewed, with
Respect to the King and Government.
Answ. First, This I deny to be your Ancient Testimony; but this which
follows is your Ancient Testimony, viz.

First, Dreadful News coming up out of the North, etc. p. 18, 19, 20. Printed
1655.
is the Lord, and Powerful, who is coming in his Power to execute true Judgment
upon all you Judges, and to change all your Laws; ye Kings, all you Rulers must
down, and all you Underling Officers, which has been as the Arms of this great
Tree, which the Fowls has lodged under all your Branches, must be cut down; so
you must be cut down with the same Power that cut down the King Meaning an
Usurper's Sword.
, who Reigned over the Nation, whose Family was a Nursery for Papists and
Bishops: Woe, woe is coming upon you all; the same Teachers are standing that
was in the time of the King, and the time of the Bishops, such as take Tithes;
you must both be tormented together, Beast and false Prophet Both Government
and Church.
. The Lord God will pour out his Plagues upon you, the Lord of Hosts has
spoken it; and except you Repent i. e. Of taking Tithes.
, ye shall all likewise perish, and be consumed, as the King was, and perish
with the same Power: Sing all ye Saints, and rejoice, clap your Hands, and be
glad, for the Lord Jehovah will Reign, and the Government shall be taken from
you, pretended Rulers, Judges and Justices, Lawyers and Constables; all this
Tree must be cut down, and Jesus Christ [in us] will Rule alone. Sound the
Trumpet, sound an Alarm, call up to the Battle, gather together for the
Destruction, draw the Sword, hew down all fruitless Trees This was since they
professed the Light.
which cumber the Ground, hew down all the Powers of the Earth, cleanse the
Land from all Filthiness, purge forth the Dross, the Filth and Corruption, slay
Baal; Balaam must be slain, all the Hirelings must be turned out of the
Kingdom, etc. This is their Ancient Testimony.

Counsel and Advice, etc. p. 26, 27. Oh Oliver! had thou been Faithful, and
thundered down Deceit, the Hollanders had been thy Subjects and Tributers, and
Germany had given up to have done thy Will, and the Spaniard had quivered like
a dry Leaf, -- the King of France should have bowed under thee his Neck, the
Pope should have withered as in Winter, the Turk in all his Fatness should have
smoked; thou should not have stood trifling about small things; Sober Men,
and True Hearts, took part with thee i. e. Quakers.
. Oh! take heed, and do not slight such, lest thou weaken thy self, and not
disown such as the Lord has owned; thy Dread is not all gone, nor thy
Amazement: Arise, and come out; for had thou been Faithful viz. Turned all
the Priests out of the Kingdom.
, thou should have crumbled Nations to Dust, for that had been thy Place: Now
is the Day of Trial, p. 26, 27. thou should have invited all the Christians
upon Earth, in all Nations, to thee, that are against Popery, to come in, and
join with thee This is their Ancient Testimony.
against Popery; for thou have had Authority; stand to it, lose it not, nor
abuse it; nor let any other take thy Crown, and do not stand cumbering thy self
about Dirty Priests. -- And thou have had Power over Nations, for Nations
begins to be on Heaps: and invite all them that profess against the Pope in all
Nations, to join with thee against him; and do not lose thy Dominion nor
Authority, nor the Wisdom of God, but with that thou may order all; and let
thy Soldiers go forth with a free-willing Heart, that thou may rock Nations
as a Cradle This is their Ancient Testimony.
; and keep thou in the Fear of the Lord, and all thy Soldiers, and them that
are under thee. This is a Charge to thee in the Presence of the Lord God.

I am a Lover of thy Soul, and Eternal Good, an Establisher of Righteousness,
G. FOX.

The Righteousness of G^d, etc. p. 11.
To thee, O Oliver Cromwell! thus says the Lord, I had chosen thee among the
Thousands in the Nations, to execute my Wrath upon my Enemies, and gave them to
thy Sword, with which I Fought for the Zeal of my own Name, and gave thee the
Enemies of my own Seed to be a Curse, and a Reproach for ever, and made thee an
Instrument against them. -- And many have I cut down by my Sword in thy Hand,
that my Wrath might be executed on them to the utmost.

G. Roffe.

These I affirm were your Ancient Testimonies in Print, which deserves to be
burnt on Tower Hill.
Secondly, I must acknowledge it is according to your Old Testimony, with
Respect to your Hypocrisy, viz. in pretending to pay your Acknowledgment to
the King for his Kindness, and yet never mention by Name what King you mean'd,
when two Kings laid Claim to the Crown; and for which your Paper was justly
rejected, as a Fruit of your Hypocrisy; of which your Second-Day Meeting is
full.

Thirdly, It was according to your Ancient Deceit, in not owning King William
to be your Rightful and Lawful King; and yet to tell the House of Lords; that
your refusing to Sign the Association, was not in Opposition to his being
declared Rightful and Lawful King of these Realms; which piece of Hypocrisy
the Lords soon perceived, and sent you packing with your Paper.

Fourthly, It was also according to your Ancient Testimony, in wheeling about,
and worshipping the Rising-Sun, to bring in your April Testimony, with the
King's Name three times over, and to own him your Rightful and Lawful King, and
YET to leave your Promise of Signing the Association.

Fifthly, It was according to your Old Testimony of Deceit and Hypocrisy, to
pretend in your said April Testimony, That you owned King William III. to be
Rightful and Lawful King; and yet in your March Testimony, to pretend your
Conscience would not allow you Liberty to Sign the Association, according to
the Act of Parliament in that Case made and provided, as above-recited, in
regard you could not avenge your selves: But being told by my Paper, (which I
presented to the Lord's House, which was in Reply to yours,) That you told R.
Cromwell, You would be a Strength to him and stand by him in the Day of his
Trouble, and Defend him, and his just Government, etc. Then in your next Paper,
to wit, your April Ancient Testimony, you left out your refusing to Sign the
Association, as well as the Cause why you could not Sign it O deep Deceit! It Is
well for you that the Lords did not perceive this.
; namely, because you pretended you cannot take Revenge: For alas! in that my
said Paper I had showed the Lords, That you had prosecuted a Man for killing a
Quaker, gave 50 l. for the Discovery of him, got him, and procured him to be
hanged in Chains, and yet could not avenge the Blood of your Prince They can
revenge the Blood of a priva^ (...), but (...) re^ge the B^d of their Prince.
H^peful Subjects! They deserve Protection apace.
. O tender Consciences! Thus you make Conscience your Stalking Horse in all
your Villainies besides, your Indicting my self and others, are Demonstrations
that you can seek Revenge for Personal Wrongs and Injuries; and (...) you
cannot for Conscience Sake stand by and defend King William as you promised you
would Richard Cromwell, in his JUST GOVERNMENT, etc.

Some Inferences from the Eleventh Chapter.
IS it so then, that this Second Days Meetings is as the Helm to the Ship, the
Wheel within the Wheel, which set all going, and that they can leave out of
their Reprints such Prophesies as suit not with the Times? This shows them
arrant Impostors. Is it so, that neither Second-Days Meetings, nor Yearly
Meetings, have ever yet given out one Public Address to King William III. nor
one Congratulatory Paper, to acknowledge Him their Right and Lawful For their
Ancient Testimony, April 3. 1696. and their late Paper presented to the King,
Feb. 7. 1697. were both drawn up of a Friday.
King, and that they refused to Sign the Association with the rest of His
Majesty's Subjects? What reason then have they, either grounded upon Reason or
Merit, to expect such singular Favors from the Government, as they would seem
to insinuate they have? And why boast they so much upon their Right of
Privileges, when they will comply with nothing, but what suits with their
Interest and Design? And where they are called to any Public Test, either for
their Fidelity to the Government, or to stand by and defend the King, they then
at every turn plead their Conscience in Excuse from their Duty? What! Has no
Body any Conscience but they? Is it so, that their Ancient Testimony is so
utterly against Monarchy, against Parliaments and Magistrates, as to say, We
stand Witnesses against Parliaments, Councils, Judges, Justices, who make or
execute Laws in their Wills over the Consciences of Men, or punish for
Conscience Sake; and to such Laws, Customs, Courts, or Arbitrary Usurped
Dominion, we cannot yield Obedience; -- that the Parliament is the Beast, and
the Church of England the Whore of Babylon; that no King is to Rule but Jesus?
etc. See Burrough's Works, p. 203, 501, 524. I have instanced three several
Acts they will not obey.
And thereupon they will obey no Act of Parliament which cross their Design. What
reason is there for their so boasting at every turn of their being Recognized
as Protestants, when their Principles are not only repugnant to all Christians,
but their Practice to all Protestants the World over; and till they repent
thereof, and retract their Errors, they are a Scandal to Christianity, and a
Reproach to the Name of Protestant? I have by me the Address of the Honorable
House of Commons, made in February, 1697. and His Majesty's Gracious Answer
thereto; I have also His Majesty's Gracious Proclamation, which consists
chiefly of Two Parts; the one against Vice, Immorality and Profaneness; the
other Part, against Writing, Printing, or Publishing Pernicious Books and
Pamphlets, containing impious Doctrines against the Holy Trinity, and other
Fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith, etc. I have also by me a Copy of
the Quakers Paper presented to His Majesty, dated the 7th. of February, 1697.
wherein they own him King, as the Jewish Captives did Belshazzar, Dan. 5.21.
and thereby themselves Captives; wherein they take some notice of the first
Particular, but not a Word of the latter: But this Chapter is extended beyond
what at first I intended, so shall not at present note the Quakers Hypocrisy
in this Point, nor show how far many of their Books (and which I take to be the
Reason of their Silence) are within the meaning of His Majesty's Royal
Proclamation, which are not only express against the Blessed Trinity, but other
Fundamentals of the Christian Religion. I pray God bless the King, and preserve
his Royal Person, and inspire Him with Holy Zeal to go on with His Royal
Resolution; and let all true Protestants and good Christians say Amen.

CHAP. XII.
By way of Introduction to the Thirteenth Chapter, wherein I shall show several
Reasons why I so proceed.

REader, let none marvel why I proceed thus with these Men; for they say of
themselves, Burrough's Works, p. 507.
They are Raised of the Lord, and Established by HIM, even contrary to all Men;
and they have given their Power only to God, and they cannot give their Power
to any Mortal Man, to stand or fall by any outward Authority, and to that they
cannot SEEK A grand Lie: Who seeks more?
, etc. Now as they confess they were raised up, contrary to all Men; so have
their Practice, Manners and Deportment, been contrary to all Men; and therefore
shall they be dealt with contrary to all Men. Bishop Jewel, and other
Reformers, wrote smartly against the Papists, and for the Peoples sake
displayed their Errors, unmasked their Leaders, and discovered their Pious
Frauds; yet protested they were in Charity, and desired nothing more, than that
they would have hearkened to them, and forsake their Errors: And I do solemnly
say, I know of no one thing which this World affords would please me better,
than to see this People condemn what is Erroneous amongst them, and persevere
in the Truth, and the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, true God, and perfect
Man: But whilst they will excuse, justify, commend, and recommend such vile
Errors, as no Protestant Society can endure, I shall proceed; and if I be
blamed, better Men than I am, (as Luther for one) was; who, when John Eccius,
Jacob Hochstrat, wrote to him, he quickly replied, saying, By how much the more
they rage, so much the more I go on; I leave former things, that they may bark
at them, and go on to further things, that they may have some things more to
bawl at. The Hist. of the Reform. etc. p. 34. Also consider the Prophet Elijah,
a Man both Sober, Serious, and Religious; yet when he beheld the Idolatry of
the Priests of Baal, which did not much exceed the Quakers, if at all, he could
not but mock at them, and have them in a Holy Derision, in order to the more
complete Discovery of them to the View of the Spectators: For it is written,
And it came to pass at Noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry aloud, for
he is a God; either he is Talking, or he is Pursuing, or he is in a Journey, or
peradventure he Sleeps, and must be awaked, etc. 1 King. 18.27.

Besides all this, here is more to be said; for as the Quakers were raised
contrary to all Men, as they confess themselves, so have they dealt by others,
as never any besides themselves ever did: And therefore give me leave to fill
the same Cup to them again, which they so plentifully have filled to others;
yea, good Measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over: Luke
6.38.
For G. Fox, their great Apostle, and High Priest of their Profession, who was
but a Journey-man Shoemaker, having heard some Body say. That Tu was Latin for
Thou, the Second Person of the Singular Number; and Vos was Latin for Ye, the
Second Person of the Plural Number; nothing would serve his Ambitious Brain,
but he must make for the two English Universities, the Magistrates, Judges,
Gentry, and Clergy of the Land, a BATTLEDOOR, to teach them the same, and that
in Thirty Languages, of which he was not Master of one: And the present
Quakers, in order to magnify their Great Apostle Fox, have printed him the
Author of the said BATTLEDOOR, (See the Third Index of Fox 's Journal) which is
as great a Cheat put upon the present Quakers, as Fox put upon us in the
Beginning, who made us believe he had 24 Languages given him by Divine
Inspiration in one Night, as my self and others (still living) did believe; for
in the Introduction he said, All Languages are to me no more than Dust, who was
before Languages were, and am come before Languages were, and am redeemed out
of Languages into the Power, etc. For though Fox was not the Author, yet his Name
is set to it nine or ten times, in order to confirm the Cheat; for John Stubbs
and Benjamin Furley had the chief Hand in it. See the Genesis Hist. of the
Quakers, etc. p. 165. But in those early Days the Government of the Fund, or
Common Bank, was wholly at the Dispose of Fox, who, like Simon Magus, having a
Desire to be esteemed some Great Man in Learning, he hired some Jews to his
Assistance, as I have been credibly informed by those which heard the Jews say
the same; yea, and since have printed it in these Words; Envy and Folly
detected, by way of Reply to Robert Bridgman, etc. p. 8. We, for our own parts,
went to the Jews, and spoke with the Jew that received Eighty Pounds in Milled
Money O th is Dagon of the Quakers! as Anne Docwra calls it: What will not
Money do?
, paid by Gerrard Roberts, besides the Dozen Bottles of Wine, given by M. F.
(Widow to Judge Fell, who afterward Married Fox) as he did affirm, for doing
the chief part of the BATTLEDOOR: And what a Cheat was this to the Ignorant, to
make them believe, as if it had been revealed to G. Fox, etc. And when R.
Bridgman, to cover Fox, said, He (George Fox) had some Knowledge in Hebrew; my
Author goes on, p. 20. viz. Some Body paid enough for his Understanding in the
Hebrew: Witness his 80 l. and Dozen Bottles of Wine, etc. Oh monstrous! Oh
horrible Cheat!

Now follows the Form and Figure of a Penny Horn-Book for Children to learn
their A, B, C, as placed in that Book, entitled, A BATTLEDOOR for Teachers and
Professors, to learn Singular and Plural, etc. as set at the beginning of most
of the Languages in that Book, with a like Inscription, Signed on the Handle of
the Horn-Book, as in this, Geo. Fox, which could have no other Tendency, but to
discover his great Presumption, to pretend to be Learned in Thirty Languages,
who was ignorant of his Mother Tongue; neither did this Artifice only discover
his Presumption, in pretending to be what he was not, i. e. a Learned Person;
but it showed also his Pride and Contempt thereby designed, and Domineering
over both Gentry and Clergy, as if they understood not the English of Tu and
Vos, set in the said BATTLEDOOR, and with this Inscription.

depiction of a battledore or horn-book A BATTLEDOOR FOR Teachers and
Professors, TO Learn Singular and Plural; Thou to One, You to Many; Tu Thou,
singular; Vos You, plural.
That now, why the Teachers of the World, Scholars and Schoolmasters, teach
People and Children, which will not have People nor Children to speak Thou to
One, and You to Many, is not Sense, nor good Latin, nor good English, nor good
Hebrew: To you that stumble at the Word Thou, to a particular, because we do
not say You, this is sent, etc.

GEO. FOX.


The next thing I have to present the World with, is an Abstract of an Epistle
of G. Fox's, sent to be read in Churches: London, Printed for Matthew. Simmons,
1657. Thus did the Pride, Arrogance, and Presumption of this People appear;
which, as they confess, showed, that they were raised contrary to all Men: As
their Practice in a Hundred Things was contrary to all Men, so am I made
willing to deal with them, as I would by no other Men: And since they have
ordered a Liturgy for the Churches giving forth an Epistle for them to read,
why may not I form a few Words out of their own Books, and so far as I can,
make G. Whitehead to hold them forth? And since the Quakers would make the
Churches read their Nonsense, why may not I draw some natural Inferences from
the Quakers Doctrine, since my End is nothing else but to display their
Errors, and make them appear in their Native Complexion, which by their
Teachers are more masked and obscured? If any say, That by drawing a Scheme of
their Meeting, and forming a Sermon for them to preach, is to do such a thing
as no Man ever did: Let them remember again, That no Man ever yet had the
Impudence to write a BATTLEDOOR for the Learned Gentry and Clergy of a
Protestant and Learned Nation, as England is; nor to form a Liturgy to be read
in Churches, and especially, by a poor Journeyman Shoemaker, and an almost
illiterate Man, that could neither write Sense, nor true English, and this may
probably balance the Wonder, especially considering, that it is more than 20
Years since I wrote first against them; and from first to last could never
prevail with them to retract one Error, nor to condemn one of their Books, in
which their vile and gross Errors are taught. An Abstract of their said
Epistle to be read in Churches, is as follows, viz.

To all the People who meet in Steeple Houses in England, and elsewhere.
-- So all you that have the Letter in England, -- therefore to you all this is
sent a Message from the Lord Jesus Christ in England, or elsewhere, into all
the Steeple Houses, to be read; for God is a Spirit; and they that Worship Him,
must Worship Him in Spirit, and in Truth; and such were drove out of the
Synagogues, drove out of the Idol's Temple, and drove together; and so an
Epistle was written to them; and God is the same; He is a Spirit, and His
Spirit is drawing from all Steeple Houses: -- And these are them that witness,
Oxford and Cambridge, the two Mothers of Divinity, which now the Lord's Hand is
against, and His Sword is drawn against; -- they are in their Witchcraft and
Whoredom; -- this is the Cage of unclean Birds, the professed Ministers: -- And
therefore all People that are here, Christ is not in the Letter, nor the Life
is not in the Letter, nor the Word is not in the Letter; this mediate Stuff
has Reigned long in the Cage Fox's Journal, p. 227.
of unclean Birds, this Babylon: -- And the Serpent and Dragon which has
deceived the Nation, -- you get the Letter for the Light, a Steeple-house for a
Church, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, for the Gospel This is their Ancient
Testimony. See News coming up, etc. and his Several Papers spread, etc. All
harp on this string, that Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, are so far from being
the Gospel, that they are Dust and Serpents Food.
: The mighty Day of the Lord is coming, and is to be cried in all the
Steeple Houses in England, to be read, and cried; -- and it is that which you
call your Church, the High Places of Idolatry; it takes away your Life, to cry
against your Church, to take away your High Place of Idolatry there; -- and
this is to go abroad in all Steeple Houses in the Nation, and their High
Places, and through the World, that they may come to God from them.

G. FOX.

Now, Reader, I will challenge a Parallel to the Impudence of the Quakers.
Amongst all the Heretics that ever rose up since the Days of Christ, in
England, Scotland, Ireland, Holland, or any Protestant Nation under the whole
Heavens, to find me a Man unlearned, a poor Mechanic, to put forth a Book,
entitled, A BATTLEDOOR for all Teachers, Scholars and Schoolmasters, to learn
them the English of Tu and Vos, with the Form and Figure of a Child's Penny
Horn-book, thereby to render them Ridiculous and Contemptible in the Eyes of
the People, and with such horrid Cheats attending all the Circumstances, i. e.
to pretend to Divine Inspiration, That he (Fox) was before all Languages, and
consequently before the Building of Babel, where the Languages were divided;
and that he was, whilst living, come to the end of Languages, which remain now
he is dead and gone. No, no, G. Fox was not the Author; it was John Stubbs and
Ben. Furley did the Learned Part, yet set their Hands only to the Title Page;
but G. Fox's Hand is set to the Latin BATTLEDOOR, the Italian BATTLEDOOR, the
Greek BATTLEDOOR, the Hebrew BATTLEDOOR, the Chaldee BATTLEDOOR; the Syriack
BATTLEDOOR; (besides, in Three or Four Places more) and yet wholly ignorant in
all those Languages, which the Jews For what Ben. Furley and John Stubbs could
not do.
for Money out of the Common-Bank did for him. O horrid! O monstrous! Next, I
make the like Challenge to parallel the Quakers Impudence; not only to go into
Churches to disturb the Ministers, according to their Ancient Testimony, and
which they cannot deny, since it is Recorded plentifully in their Second Moses,
their great Exemplar's Journal; but I mean, to send an Epistle to be read in
the Churches, calling them at their Will and Pleasure, Steeple Houses, High
Places of Idolatry, where the Christians exercise their Witchcraft and
Whoredom; yea, a Cage of unclean Birds, Serpents and Dragons, that take the
Letter, i. e: the Scripture for the Light, and Matthew, Mark, Luke and John for
the Gospel. Oh horrible! What Impudence is this! What Luciferian Pride is here,
for a Dissenter, nay, worse, for an Inpostor thus to impose his Imposture upon
a Christian Nation! Which being compared with what else in other Books I have
observed out of the Quakers Writings, as that the Bishops and Clergy are
Witches, Devils, Conjurers, Sodomites, Bloodhounds, Antichrists, the Sir.
Symons of the Age, Jesuits, etc. yea, Monsters, and what not; and then let G.
Whitehead tell me first, What he thinks of the Quakers Meekness and Humility;
and next, Whether this Epistle, BATTLEDOOR, and great part of their Writings,
be not Seditious, in the nature of them; and such intolerable Scandals, as had
they not had more Patience than the Quakers, notwithstanding the loud Noise
they make of Patience, Humility and Meekness, etc. they would never have lain
under such Public Scandals: And therefore when in the next Chapter I come to
touch their tender Part, as Erasmus once said to a Monk, I shall see how
patient they will be, when they are paid in their own Coin; nay, I hope far
better, at least to a better Purpose.

CHAP. XIII.
The Quakers Convocation: George Whitehead's Sermon, explaining their Ancient
Testimony.

Reader,
THink not the following Sermon a Romance, or Fiction; for the Design of it is
good, and intended for their Conviction: Read the Books in the Margin, and
you will find it fully proved to be the Sum and Marrow of their Ancient
Testimony; which, by their Contempt of the Scriptures, shows their
Antichristian Principles, and how their Doctrine carries all Iniquity in the
Womb of it, and opens the Floodgates to all Atheism, Deism, Socinianism,
Arianism, and all other vile Errors: And therefore in hopes that this
following Illustration of their Principles, may be of use to their Hearers, I
proceed in this unusual Method. But with my Lord Bishop of Lincoln, in his
Advice to his Clergy, Second Edit. p. 25. I will say, ' Not that this can be
expected from the Leaders of that Party; they have Ends to serve in the Conduct
of that deluded People, that will engage them, notwithstanding Confutation and
Conviction too.

depiction of the Quaker's synod [fragment] QUAKE^ SYNOD


A SERMON for George Whitehead to hold forth at their Convocation, or Yearly
Meeting.
Friends,
I Beg your Attention to what shall be spoken this Day, upon this Solemn
Occasion, being met to inspect the Affairs of our Society throughout the
World: The chief Subject upon which I shall treat is our Ancient Testimony, as
you will find it written in our Gospel, viz. God is the same, Truth is the
same, his People the same, and their Principles the same: For our Principles
are now no other than what they were when we were first a People; The Quakers
cleared, etc. p. 7. so we cannot but recommend unto you the holding up the Holy
Testimony of Truth, which had made us to be a People, -- Prim. Christ.
continued, p. 6. and that in all the Parts of it; for Truth is one, and changes
not, amp;c. Their Yearly Epistle, Printed 1696.

Beloved, in the opening the Words of my Text I am to tell you,

First, That as God is the same, so are his People the same, and according to
our Ancient Testimony, as unchangeable.

Secondly, That our Principles are now no other than they were in the
Beginning, in all the parts of our Ancient Testimony, whether relating to
Monarchy, Magistracy, the National Ministry, and all Points of Doctrine, News
coming up, p. 18, 19, 20.

Thus having opened the Words of my Text, I shall now let you know the
Doctrinal Parts I intend to discourse of, and then proceed:

FIRST, The Scriptures, which the Christians profess to be their Rule; showing
their great Mistake therein, and the Uncertainty thereof.

SECONDLY, The Authority, Certainty, and Infallibility of our Friend's Books
and Sayings, and both Affirmatively.

THIRDLY and Lastly, I shall apply the same by way of Use, and for your
Consolation, Negatively; and these in their Order.

First then, As to the Christian's Mistake about the Scriptures, look into the
Epistle General of our Great Apostle Geo. Fox, viz. And therefore all People
that are here, Christ is not in the Letter, nor the Life is not in the Letter,
nor the Word is not in the Letter: This mediate Stuff has reigned long in the
Cage of unclean Birds; you get the Letter for the Light, a Steeple-House for
the Church, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, for the Gospel, etc. To all the
People who meet in Steeple Houses, etc. p. 4, 5. Printed 1657. Thus, Beloved,
you see what great Mistakes are happened to this People of England, who by
following the Doctrine of their blind Guides, have taken Matthew, Mark, Luke
and John, for the Gospel; that is, Glad-Tidings: No, no, it is Beastly VVare,
yea, Dust and Serpents Meat; and this I can prove by Two Books, wrote by our
Apostle Geo. Fox, the one styled, News coming up, etc. p. 14. the other,
Several Papers given forth for the spreading of Truth, etc. p. 3, 4, 44, 45,
46, viz. So Dust is the Serpents Meat; their Original is but Dust, which is
Death; so these Serpents feed upon Dust; and their Gospel is Dust, Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, which is the Letter, etc. Thus, Friends, have I showed you
the great Ignorance of the World's Teachers, who first take Matthew, Mark,
Luke and John, for the Gospel; and now see what they have got for their Rule:
Who would think they should hear such a Teacher, as hold a Bible in his Hand,
and tell People it is the Word of God, and bid them hear it, and obey the
Doctrine of it at their Peril; for it is the Law (say they) by which you shall
be judged another Day: When, alas! my dearly Beloved, as I have more than once
in Print affirmed, saying, That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any
(meaning our selves) is of as great Authority as the Scriptures, or Chapters
are and greater, etc. And I still affirm the same, and do tell you, that it is
according to our Ancient Testimony; and you know, we cannot change, nor alter,
being as unchangeable as our Light within. See G. W. Truth defending the
Quakers, etc. p. 7. Printed 1657. A Ser. Apology, p. 49. Moreover, the
Scriptures are so uncertain, that it is questionable who was the first Penman
thereof, whether Moses or Hermes, yea, either or neither: How then can any Man
depend upon them, as a Rule to walk by? Thus you see how the Christians are
mistaken; for have not I my self told you, as well as my dear Brother
Christopher Atkinson, That Friends do not call Matthew, Mark, Luke and John,
the Gospel and New Testament, as the Ignorant Priests do? David 's Enemies
discovered, etc. p. 7. And is it not written in the Gospel of my said Brother
Christ. Atkinson, That for any to say that Christ is God and Man in one Person,
is a Lie? The Sword of the Lord drawn, etc. p. 5. What Ground then has any
Body to hold a Trinity of Persons? Nay, my Brother Penn and I have jointly said
in our Apology, Dedicated to the King's Lieutenant General of Ireland, That we
deny the Terms of three distinct Persons in the Godhead, whereby we do
positively deny the Creeds, called the Apostle's, Athanasian and Nicene Creed.
A Ser. Apol. p. 20. If any Object, Why we refuse to acknowledge them in Words,
not altogether of, though agreeing with the Scriptures, seeing we our selves use
many Words not Scriptural; as those of calling the Scriptures Death, Dust,
Beastly Ware, Serpents Meat, etc. those of our calling the Clergy Monsters,
Bloodbounds, Grinning Dogs, Sodomites, Witches, Devils, etc. those of calling
Christ A Garment, A Vessel? The Sandy Foundation shaken, p. 5, to 65. I Answer,
The reason why we call them so, and Translate the Words of Christ, John
5.22,27. from the Son of Man, to the Light within us The Quakers Reason for
denying the Blessed Trinity.
, Is, because we believe there is no other Son of Man than the Light within us,
which was in the Jews, Gentiles, etc. before his Incarnation, according to my
Gospel, and the Gospel of my Brother Jeffrey Bullock, where we say, Therefore
the Man Christ Jesus was before He came in the Body, or Flesh. Judgment fixed,
etc. p. 316, 356. For to be plain with you, according to our Ancient Testimony,
we own no other Trinity, nor God, than is within us; for the Light is God, the
Light is the Son of Man, the Light is the Holy Ghost; and we having obtained
the Repute to be a well-meaning People; and tell the Priests, in Answer to
their Demand, Do you own the Trinity? Do you own the Sacraments? etc. We tell
them, we deny their Unscriptural Terms: Where is the Words Trinity and
Sacrament in the Scriptures? Though we are not such Fools, but we know the Word
Trinity came from the Latin Word Trinitas, and Sacrament from Sacra or
Sacramentum, a Holy Institution or Sacrament; yet to hide our selves from the
Dint of their Arguments, we tell them, They are not Scripture Terms: Nay, even
this Sessions of Parliament, when the House of Commons were preparing a Bill
against such as denied the Trinity, we soon perceived what might follow, and we
gave in a Paper, entitled, Some Considerations upon the Bill, for the more
effectual Suppressing of Blasphemy and Profaneness, Humbly offered; saying,
Whereas the Bill enacts, That if any Person or Persons, etc. shall deny any of
the Persons in the Holy Trinity to be God, and make it punishable by the same
Bill, were it not more safe and plain, to put it in Scripture Terms, as instead
of, Deny any one of the Persons to be God, to insert, If any one shall deny any
of the Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, or the Holy
Ghost to be God, 1 John 5.7. Now if we can keep the Parliament to these Words,
we shall hide our selves, and retain our Ancient Testimony unshaken.

Again, If any of you should yet Object, that notwithstanding we (according to
our Ancient Testimony) call the Scriptures Death, Dust, Beastly Ware, Serpents
Meat, etc. News coming up out of the North, etc. p. 14. A Brief Discovery of a
threefold State, etc. p. 9. and say, That whoever Preach out of them are
Conjurers, etc. Readiness Errand to Damascus, etc. p. 7. Yet notwithstanding all
this, we profess, to prefer the Holy Scriptures above all other Books extant in
the World. The Counterfeit Convert, etc. p. 26, 27. To this I Answer, That you
must observe the Context, as well as the Text, and then you shall see we do not
interfere; for in the same Book, p. 72. viz. I may see Cause otherwise to word
the Matter, and yet our Intentions be the same.

Besides, Beloved, I would have none mistake me; for though I am the Man that did
say, we prefer the Scriptures above all other Books extant in the World, which
in one Sense is true, yet not in another; The Count. Conv. etc. p. 26. First, I
hope you do not understand it of its Intrinsic Value, of its Real Authority,
so as to be a Rule of Faith and Practice; and that the Commands therein are
Obligatory upon Us; if you do, you are greatly mistaken, and that for these
Reasons following: And,

First, That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great
Authority as the Scriptures or Chapters are, and greater, Truth defending the
Quakers, etc. p. 7.

Secondly, That is no Command from God to me, what he commands to another:
Neither did any of the Saints which we read of in Scriptures, act by the
Command which was to another, not having the Command to themselves, etc.
Burrough's Works, p. 47.

Thirdly, No Command in the Scriptures is any further obliging upon any Man,
than as he finds a Conviction upon his Conscience; otherwise Men should be
engaged without, if not against Conviction; a thing unreasonable in a Man.
Quakerism a New Nickname, etc. p. 71.

Fourthly, To this triple treble Cord, which I think is not easily broken, let
me add our constant Practice ever since we have been a People, and it will not
only confirm these Proofs, but show our Sincerity to our Ancient Testimony; I
say, as a Proof that we do not prefer the Scriptures above our own Books; let
it suffice, That this Forty-eight Years, never an Apostate that ever went from
us can prove, nay, not once say, if they will do us justice George, what you say
is true; I am a Witness to thy Sincerity herein.
, that ever we read any one Chapter in the Bible, or any one Epistle of the
Apostles in our Meetings, whilst it has been our frequent Practice to read our
own Epistles: And surely, if we deemed the Scriptures best, most certain, and
more edifying for us, respecting our Ancient Testimony, you may depend on it,
that we would read the Scriptures in our Meetings; nay, we challenge all our
Adversaries to show us one Book of our Friends in the Unity, that ever so much
as recommended the reading any one Chapter, or any one Epistle of the Apostles
in our Meetings. Thus much in Answer to one part of the Objection, with respect
to the Truth, Certainty, Value and Worth of the Scriptures: But still I say
they are occasionally good, and in one Sense I do prefer the Scriptures above
our own Books, and then you may lay your Lives on it above all Books in the
World; for sometimes the Scriptures, as the Case may stand, are like the
Philosopher's Stone; what they touch, they turn into Gold: And in that Sense
our Confession to the Parliament, with the Consequences, are a Demonstration,
viz. I believe with my Heart, and confess with my Mouth, the Sacred Sacred, an
unscriptural Word; yet it now will down with these new Saints to serve a turn,
etc.
Scriptures to be Divine, left us by Men inspired of God, as an exact Rule of
our Faith and Behavior; and I profess to believe in One Only God, who is the
Father, and in Jesus Christ his Eternal Son, very God, and very Man, and in the
Holy Spirit, one and the same God with the Father and Son, Blessed for
evermore. The Genesis Hist. of the Quakers, p. 112.

Now, my Friends, though this Confession be as contrary to our Ancient Testimony,
as Light is contrary to Darkness, as by our Books quoted you may see, yet we
kept our Meaning to our selves; we mean'd at the same time, The Scriptures to
be Dust, Death, and Serpents Meat. News coming up, etc. p. 14. That to say
Christ is God and Man in one Person, is a Lie: The Sword of the Lord drawn,
etc. p. 5. But, as I said, We may (sometimes) see cause, (yea, and great cause
too) otherwise to word the Matter; (yea, contrary to our Ancient Testimony) and
yet mean the same thing, etc. The Counterfeit Convert, etc. p. 72. that is to
say, mean not a word we say: And now to the Consequence, and for which we
prefer the Bible.

For, Friends, we no sooner Signed this Confession, but we had our Liberty; and
we no sooner had our Liberty, but all our London Preachers spread themselves
like Locusts all over England and Wales Like Mice uncalled for, and like Flies
unsent for, and fall upon their Provision.
; some went East, some West, yea, North and South; and being generally
Tradesmen, We not only got our Quarters free, our Horses free, and well
maintained in our Travels; a Silver Watch here, a Beaver there, a piece of
Hair-Camblet, and sometimes other Gifts: Moreover, by our Liberty obtained, by
the recited Confession, we got into great Trades; and by spreading our selves
in the Country, into great Acquaintance, and thereby received Orders (of the
best of the Country Tradesmen) for Parcels, whilst the Protestant Tradesmen in
London Londoners, look about you, for none like the Quakers but Jews and
Jesuits; as time will farther show,
, who had not this Advantage, stood still, and in their Shops had little to do,
whilst we filled our Coffers. Witness Tho. Green for one Instance, whose Wife
would scarce suffer him at home, she being willing (according to the Proverb)
to make Hay whilst the Sun shines; insomuch that in a little time he raised his
small Beginning to many Thousands. Since I printed this Tho. Green is dead,
and died worth, as is said, Six or Eight Thousand Pounds, who was a poor Mason
when he set up for a Preaching Quaker. All which show, that the Scriptures are
accidentally good, etc. And this leads me to the second Proposition; namely,

The Authority of our Friends Books and Sayings, etc.
First, I shall show you, that as it is Blasphemy to call the Scriptures the
Word of God, To all that would know the Way to the Kingdom, etc. p. 4. Mean
Tekel, etc. p. 22. so I shall show you, that our Scriptures (for as I told you
in my Serious Apol. p. 48. Writings signify Scripture) are the Word of God,
and this you will find written in the Epistle of our Second Moses, in these
Words, Friends, to you all, this is the Word of the Lord, take heed of judging
one another; this is the Word of the Lord unto you: I charge you in the
Presence of the Lord God, to send this (Epistle) among all Friends and
Brethren, every where to be read in all Meetings, to you all, This is the Word
of God. Several Papers given forth, for spreading Truth, etc. p. 60, 61, 62.
Again, that I may corroborate and strengthen your Faith in the Exercise of our
Ancient Testimony G. W. keeps to his Text.
: Read in the Gospel of our Great Apostle and High Priest of our Profession,
Geo. Fox, where you will find these Words, viz. You may (said G. F. to the
Priests) as well condemn the Scriptures to the Fire as our Writings; for our
giving forth Papers and Printed Books, it is from the IMMEDIATE ETERNAL SPIRIT
of God; Truths Defense, etc. p. 2, 102. upon which, our Dear Brother Thomas
Ellwood says, That none can squirt any Filth on the Epistles of Friends, but
it will tend to be spatter the Apostles: An Antidote against, etc. p. 1, 44,
57, 125. And in Confidence thereof, our Brother Robert Barclay has these
Words, That as the true Principles of the Gospel, by their (i. e. Quakers)
Testimony are restored; so is also the ANCIENT Apostolic Order of the Church
of Christ re-established amongst them, (i. e. Quakers) and settled upon its
right Basis and Foundation; -- that as through our Faithful Testimony in the Hand
of the Lord, that Antichristian and Apostatized Generation, the National
Ministry, has received a deadly Blow, by our discovering and witnessing
against their Forced Maintenance and Tithes; so that their Kingdom, in the
Hearts of Thousands, begin to Totter, and lose its Strength, and shall
assuredly Fall to the Ground: So on the other Hand we do weaken the Strength of
their Kingdom, who judge for Reward. The Nation shall come to be disburdened of
that deceitful Tribe of Lawyers, as well as Priests Let all Lawyers, Tradesmen,
Clergy, and Magistrates, guard against the Prevalency of Quakerism, for they
are all highly concerned.
. I never knew any that left us prove steady to those to whom they go. I find
other Professors make but small Boasts of any Proselytes they get out from us;
I hear little of their proving Champions, for the Principles of others against
us. The Anarchy, etc. p. 1, 16, 42.

Thus, Friends, you see, that upon Confidence of the Truth of our elder
Brother, Geo. Fox's Ancient Testimony, viz. That it was Blasphemy to call the
Scriptures the Word of God, (and yet laudable to call his Papers, sent up and
down to be read in Meetings, The Word of God, the Word of the Lord God;) I say,
you see how stoutly our Brother Ellwood avouched, that none could squirt any
Filth on the Epistles of Friends, but it must inevitably fall upon the Epistles
of St. Paul; and he was in the right on it G. W. is no Changling, he keeps to
his Text.
, and likewise R. Barclay, in confidence of the Truth of G Fox's Testimony,
viz. That to call the Scriptures The Word of God was no less than Blasphemy,
whilst his own Writings sent up and down to spread Truth, and in order to it,
to be read in Meetings, was The Word of the Lord; and as such to be read, and
as such to be received: You may see, I say, how he built his Hopes of our
Restoration, and the Downfall both of the Clergy and Lawyers, insomuch, that he
did not once think any should ever go from us, to prove Champions for the
Principles of others against us: And therefore I exhort you this Day to stand
Faithful to your Ancient Testimony, which is, to throw down the Scriptures, and
exalt our own Books; and so will the Work of your Light prosper in your Hands.

Besides, for your Encouragement, (and that you may see my Sincerity and
Seriousness, which is the sign of my writing in every of my Epistles) look into
one of my Gospels, and you shall find these Words: That which is spoken from
the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as the Scriptures and
Chapters are, and greater, etc. Truth defending the Quakers, etc. p. 7.

Wherefore, ye dear Lambs, be ye encouraged, and go on boldly; and if any
Apostate write against us, besure you warn all our Friends in the Country not
to read a Page thereof, but to tell them all are Lies, all is Malice, etc. and
they are bound to believe you True; for never were a People held more Captive,
but the Blind lead the Blind.
, according to my Doctrine, in these Words: It was for your sakes, and the
Truth's, that I was pressed in Spirit, thus to appear against this deceitful
Worker, William Mucklow, which has shown his Enmity against the Truth, and Us
the Church of Christ, and Elect People of God, called Quakers. And p. 16. I
affirm, That the true Church (as above described) is in the true Faith, that is
in God: And we must believe thus, as the true Church believes; or else it were
but both a Folly and Hypocrisy, to profess our selves Members thereof, etc.
The Apost. Incendiary, etc. p. 3, 16.

So that, my tender Lambs, you see, first, That we are the true Church of
Christ; next, That you are to believe as the Church believes; and there lies G.
Fox's Journal on the Table, which you have in all Quarterly Meetings, and ought
to have it in all Schools They have got it in some Schools already, where their
Youth read a Portion of it every Day, etc.
, yea, in private Families; for as our Brother Mead has well expressed
himself, it is the best Book in the World, for our keeping up our Ancient
Testimony, yea, better than the Bible, said he. And now to conclude this Head,
look into the Book of Canons Look into the Book of Church-Canons, made Anno
1675.
, which lies before you on the Table, and turn to those Church Canons, which
were made Anno 1675, at a Yearly Meeting, or a Convocation; where (in order to
corroborate all that has been said on this Head,) it is thus written:

It is the Sense, Advice, Admonition and Judgment, in the Fear of God, and the
Authority of his Power and Spirit to Friends and Brethren, in their several
Meetings, That no such slight and contemptible Names and Expressions, as
calling Men's and Women's Meetings, Courts, Sessions or Synods; that they are
Popish Impositions, useless and burdensome; that Faithful Friend's Papers which
We TESTIFY, have been given forth by the Spirit and Power of God, are Men's
Edicts or Canons; or Embracing them, Bowing to Men, Elders in the Service of
the Church, Popes, and Bishops, with sueh scornful Sayings, be permitted among
them; but let God's Power be set upon the top of that Unsavory Spirit that
uses them.

Subscribed by us, W. Penn, Steph. Crisp, Tho. Salthouse, Jo. Bunyeat, G.
Whitehead, Alex. Parker, etc.


Thirdly and Lastly, Let me apply what has been said.

Friends, I am now come to the last thing proposed to speak to on this solemn
Occasion, and it shall be by way of Use and Application, for your Comfort and
Consolation, and that by way of Inference, drawn from the foregoing Two Heads:
And,

First, Respecting Confession of Sin; showing your Exaltation above the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Primitive Christians, Saints and Martyrs, and
all the Christian Churches, to this Day.

Secondly, Respecting the Observation of the Ten Commandments; which are not
binding to you, unless you receive them anew, as the Inspired Prophets and
Apostles did. Edward Burrough's Works, p. 47. Quakerism a New Nickname, etc.
p. 71.

Thirdly, Respecting the Ordinances of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper. And,

First, You being the true Ancient Apostolic Church of Christ, and as Quakers
elected thereto; and that the Quakers are in the Truth, and none but they, as
our Brother Sol. Eccles from the Spirit of Truth has written; See the Quakers
Challenge, etc. p. 3. has no need to make any Confession of Sin in our Prayers
to God, as our Practice for near Fifty Years do confirm; nay, nor all the
Apostates that ever went from us; nor all the Priests, our Adversaries, cannot
prove from any one of our Books, wrote by my self, G. Fox, Ed. Borough, Fr.
Howgill, Father Penn, Sam. Fisher, W. Smith, W. Baily, Richard Hubberthorn, and
others of our Friends in the Unity, that ever we made Confession of Sins to
God, and asked Pardon for Christ's sake; nor that ever we recommended such a
Practice to our Disciples, notwithstanding our Books wrote by our Friends
abovenamed, contain more than 5555555 Pages, in Folio, Quarto, and Octavo.
Now, Friends, What cause have we to Rejoice, and to Magnify our Light within,
which has led us to such a State of sinless Perfection? And therefore I exhort
you to keep up our Ancient Testimony, in all its Parts; of which this is not
the least: For let me tell you, that Jacob, that worthy and godly Patriarch, he
was so sensible of his sinful Imperfections, that when he prayed to God, he
acknowledged himself unworthy of the least of God's Mercies, Genesis 32.10. And
Isaiah the Prophet said, But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our
Righteousness are as filthy Rags, and we all do fade as a Leaf, and our
Iniquities like the Wind, have taken us away, Isa. 64.6. And Jeremiah the
Prophet cried under a sense of his Sins, We have Transgressed and Rebelled,
Lam. 3.41. Yea, Job, that Man of God, said, I have sinned; what shall I do unto
thee, O thou Preserver of Men? Job 7.20. Yea, David, a Man after God's own
Heart, said, For I will declare mine Iniquity; I will be sorry for my Sin: --
Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy Loving Kindness; according unto the
Multitude of thy tender Mercies, blot out my Transgressions; wash me thoroughly
from mine Iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin; for I acknowledge my
Transgressions, and my Sin is ever before me; against thee, thee only, have I
sinned, and done this Evil in thy sight; that thou might be justified when
thou speak, and be clear when thou judge; behold I was shapen in Iniquity,
and in Sin did my Mother conceive me, etc. Psalm. 38.18. and 51.1,2,3,4,5.

Again, Solomon said, For there is not a just Man upon Earth, that does Good,
AND SINS NOT, Eccles. 7.20. Prove. 20.9. adding by way of Interrogation, Who
can say, I have made my Heart clean, I am pure from my Sin Besides the Quakers
and the Gnostics.
? Yea, that good Man Nehemiah Fasted, Prayed, and Wept before the Lord God of
Israel, saying, O Lord God of Heaven, the great and terrible God, that keeps
Covenant and Mercy for them that love him, and observe his Commandments Not G.
Fox's Commandments.
: Let thine Ear now be attentive, and thine Eyes open, that thou may hear
the Prayer of thy Servant, which I pray before thee now, Day and Night, for the
Children of Israel, thy Servants; and confess the Sins of the Children of
Israel which we have sinned against thee; I and my Father's House have sinned:
Nehem. 1.5,6,11. Yea, Daniel, that Beloved of the Lord, he said, And I prayed
unto the Lord my God, and made my Confession, and said, O Lord, the great and
dreadful God, keeping the Covenant and Mercy to them that love him, and to them
that keep his Commandments: WE have sinned, and committed Iniquity, and have
done Wickedly, and have Rebelled, even by Departing from thy Precepts, and from
thy Judgments; and whilst I was Speaking, and Praying, and Confessing my Sins,
and the Sins of my People Israel, and presenting my Supplication before the
Lord my God, etc. Dan. 9.4,5,20. Yea, John the Evangelist said, If we say, that
we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8.
Moreover, St. Paul himself cried out of a Body of Sin, saying, For the Good
that I would do, I do not, but the Evil which I would not, that I do: I find
then a Law, that when I would do Good, Evil is present with me: O wretched Man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? This is a faithful
Saying, and worthy of all Acceptance, That Christ Jesus came into the World,
to save Sinners, of whom I am Chief, Romans 7.19,21,24. 1 Timothy 1.15. All which
Practice is according to Christ's Command and Precept, Matthew. 6. Luke 11. who
said, Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you, John
6.23. And when our Brethren, the Donatists and Pelagians, who professed a
sinless Perfection, as we do, told the Ancient Christians, that a constant
Practice of Confession, implied a constant Course of Sinning: St. Augustine
replied to them, saying, Confess always, for thou have Matter always to
confess. Augustine in p. 99. Tho. Bilney confessed, that he was a miserable
Sinner; And (said he) therefore with all my Power I teach, that all Men should
first acknowledge their Sins. Fox's Acts and Mon. Ps. 467, 468. Dr. Robert
Barnes said, The whole Church prays, Lord forgive us our Sins: Wherefore she
has Spots and Wrinkles; but by acknowleding them, (through the Merits of Christ)
her Wrinkles be scratched out. See his Works, p. 254. Martin Luther says, But
thou will say, the Church is Holy; the Fathers are Holy; it is true,
notwithstanding albeit the Church is Holy, yet is she compelled to pray,
Forgive us our Trespasses: So, though the Fathers are Holy, yet are they saved
through the Forgiveness of Sins. See Luther's Commentary upon Gal. p. 36. Next
hear what Humble Bradford said to his London Friends: John Bradford, an
Unworthy Servant of the Lord, be merciful to our Sins, for they are great. --
Let us heartily bewail our Sins; repent us of our former Evil Life, etc.

Fox's Acts and Mon. p. 1167.
Thus, my Well-beloved Friends and Brethren, I have showed you many Instances,
both of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Primitive Christians, and Martyrs,
who have all along confessed their Sins to God, and begged Pardon for Jesus
Christ's sake; and go you but to the Windows or Doors of the Churches, and
other Christian Assemblies, (but besure you go no further) and you may still
hear them, i. e. Episcopal, Presbyterians, Independants, and Baptists, crying
out of a Body of Sin, saying, They have erred and strayed from the Ways of God,
(from Seven to Seventy, as our Brother, Father Penn, has well observed) we have
done Despite to the Spirit of Grace, we have broke thy Commandments, we have
added to the Guilt of Original Sin, by our many and repeated Actual Sins; and
therefore we prostrate our selves, and humbly beg thy Pardon, for the alone
sake of thy dear Son, and our blessed Redeemer, Jesus Christ, our only Advocate
and Mediator; to whom, with thee, and thy blessed Spirit, be all Honor, Glory
and Dominion for ever, Amen. Truth exalted in a Short, but Sure Testimony, etc.
p. 9.

Now, Friends, what a happy thing is this, that you need not trouble your
selves with any Confession of Sins, since you are not like other Men, nor like
these Publicans? And therefore I exhort you to keep to your Ancient Testimony
in all the Parts of it, make no Confession of Sins, nor besure you do not
recommend the Practice of it, by Word or Writing, but keep to our Ancient
Practice; nor is there any need for our Hearers to follow those Christian
Precepts, viz. And whatsoever you do in Word or Deed, do all in the NAME of the
LORD JESUS; giving Thanks to God the Father BY HIM; whether therefore ye EAT or
DRINK, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God, Col. 3.17. 1 Cor.
10.31. Matthew. 15.36. First, Because the Name Jesus belongs to every Believer,
(I should say Quaker) as well as to him that suffered at Jerusalem, according
to our Ancient Testimony. A Question to Professors, etc. p. 20, 27, 33.
Secondly, Because you know that we our selves, to be seen of Men, do make a
kind of a Prayer to our Light within, when we are at their Tables, when Company
is present; but if alone, either at Home or Abroad, we seldom give Thanks for
our Food, and seldomer with our Eyes toward Heaven, as Christ did, as Stephen
did, or as the Martyrs did: No, you know we are of another, yea, of a different
Faith and Practice from all the Ancient Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, and Holy Confessors, and all Christian Churches to this Day, being
exalted above them; for we sit in Heavenly Places, singing the Songs of Sion,
in the Beauty of Holiness, without Sin, or any Imperfection, which all the
Recited were chargeable with, as implied by their Confessions, and their
relying upon the Merits of another, to wit, The Man Christ Jesus, as believing
they shall one Day appear before his Tribunal, and be judged by the Law of God,
recorded in their Scriptures; but for our parts, we differ from them in all
Respects, having our whole God within us, as safely as the Papists have their
Crucifixes in their Pockets. And thus much to show you the great Happiness and
Excellency of our Dispensation, so no need of Confession, according to our
Ancient Testimony.

The Second Inference, i. e. The Ten Commandments.
And, Friends, whereas the Christians propose to us (sometimes) the Use of the
Ten Commandments; whether we own them as a Rule to a Christian Life, look into
one of my Gospels, and you will find it thus written: Thou may as well ask
if the Moral Law (or Ten Commandments) be a Rule for Christ, etc. Truth
defending the Quakers, etc. p. 18.

Again, Ed. Borough, one of our Prophets, said, That is no Command from God to
me, what he commands to another; neither did any of the Saints, which we read
of in Scripture, act by the Command which was to another, not having the
Command to themselves: I challenge to find an Example for it; they obeyed every
one their own Command. Borough 's Works, p. 47.

And in Defense of this Position, hear what Father Penn says, i. e. No Command
in the Scripture is any further obliging upon any Man, than as he finds a
Conviction upon his Conscience, otherwise Men should be engaged without, if not
against Conviction; a thing unreasonable in a Man. Quakerism a new Nickname,
etc. p. 71. And now that none of you may think that these Doctrines of ours
point to, or aim only at extraordinary Commands, as Moses going to Pharaoh,
with some other Temporary Commands, my very Doctrine show it to be the Ten
Commandments. First, By telling the Priest they might as well carry the Ten
Commandments to Christ; the Consequence of which is, that Christ had as much
need to learn them as we have. Secondly, in that we never Recommended the Ten
Commandments to our Hearers, that they should teach them to their Children, and
so from Age to Age, one Generation after another, as the Churches do, and ever
did, both Jewish and Christian. Thirdly, Because we never read them in our
Meetings, nor in any one of our Books Recommend them to be so read: This
therefore may confirm you in our Ancient Testimony, which have been to lay them
by, as a dead Letter, Dust, Death, Serpents Food, and Beastly Ware, etc. and I
exhort you to be Bold and Valiant, to maintain our Ancient Testimonies; and
this leads me to the third and last Inference, namely,

Touching Baptism, and the Lord's Supper.
Dear Friends, I am now come to give you the Arguments of the Christians for
Baptism, and the Supper, which is founded upon the Letter, which our Apostle,
G. Fox, said was Dust, and Death, viz. Their Sacrament is Carnal; their
Communion is Carnal; a little Bread and Wine; so Dust is the Serpent's Meat.
Their Original is but Dust, which is but the Letter, which is Death; and their
Gospel is Dust; Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, which is the Letter. Again, p.
35. A Word to all you Deceivers, who deceive the People; and Blasphemers, who
utter forth your Blasphemy and Hypocrisy; That tell the People of a Sacrament,
and tell that it is the Ordinance of God: Blush, blush, and tremble before the
Lord God Almighty, for dreadful is he that will pour forth his Vengeance upon
you: -- You who live in the Witchery, and bewitch the People, etc. News coming
up out of the North, etc. p. 14, 35.

Dear Lambs, I first told you, that the Authority the Christians make use of,
for these Two Ordinances, is bottomed upon the Letter. I have now showed you a
greater Authority for the disannulling them; namely, what is said by the Spirit
of Truth through our Second Moses: And to prove it, read the Gospel wrote by
me, 1659. viz. Truth defending the Quakers, etc. p. 7.
That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any (then to be sure in Geo.
Fox) is of as Great Authority as the Scriptures or Chapters are, and Greater.
Thus, Friends, I first told you what Authority the Christians pleaded for these
two Institutions, of Baptism, and the Supper; namely, the Scriptures: I have
likewise told you by what Authority we have laid them aside; but lest all of
you should not remember the Words the Christians quote, not being much used to
Scripture, they are these.

Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: And lo I am with you always, even to
the end of the World, Matthew. 28.19,20. Again, And he (Christ) took Bread, and
gave Thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is my Body, which
is given for you: THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME. Likewise also the Cup after
Supper, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for
you, Luke 22.19,20. Again, Matthew has it: And as they were eating, Jesus took
Bread, and blessed it, and brake it; and gave to the Disciples, and said, Take,
eat, this is my Body: And he took the Cup, and gave Thanks, and gave it to
them, saying, Drink ye all of it, for this is my Blood of the New Testament,
which is shed for many for the Remission of Sins, Matthew. 26.26,27,28. Again,
Paul has it: For I received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you:
That the Lord Jesus, the same Night in which he was betrayed, took Bread: And
when he had given Thanks, he broke it, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body,
which is broken for you; THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME. After the same manner
also, he took the Cup; when he had supped, saying, This Cup is the
New Testament in my Blood: THIS DO YE, as often as ye drink it, IN REMEMBRANCE OF
ME, 1 Cor. 11.23,24,25.

Beloved, I cannot but allow, that if the Letter, viz. the Scriptures, were of
greater Authority than our Sayings, or that the Words of Matthew, Luke and
Paul, were of greater Authority than our Sayings, I should be of the Christians
side; for nothing in the World is plainer said, nor more possitively commanded:
But, Friends, in the beginning we were convinced by G. Fox, that Matthew, Mark,
Luke and John were Death, Dust, and Serpents Meat; that the Scriptures were
Beastly Ware; that all that preached out of them were Conjurers; that the
Letter of the Scripture is Carnal, Death, and Kills; that such as once told
the People of a Sacrament were Witches. News coming up, etc. p. 14, 35. Printed
1655. A brief Discovery of a Threefold State, etc. p. 9. Printed 1653. Saul 's
Errand to Damascus, etc. p. 7. Printed 1654. And that therefore they ought not
only to blush, but tremble; that such as preached Christ without, and bid
People believe in him, as he is in Heaven above, were false Ministers, Witches,
Devils, etc. Smith's Primer, p. 8. That it was Blasphemy to call the Scriptures
the Word of God. Fox's Great Mystery, p. 240. Printed 1659. That Circumcision
is as much of Force as Water Baptism, and the Paschal-Lamb as Bread and Wine,
for says my dear Brother W. Penn, the Continuance (of those Two Ordinances as
the Lord's Supper and Baptism) would have been a Judaizing of the Evangelical
Worship; and to assert their Continuance, would be as much as in us lies, to
pluck up the Gospel by the Roots: Hence (says our dear Brother) that
Appellation Ordinances of Christ, I do renounce as Unscriptural and
Unevangelical, and can testify from the same Spirit, by which Paul Renounced
Circumcision, that they (to wit, Water Baptism and the Supper) are to be
rejected as not now required, etc. W. Penn's Reason against Railing, etc. p.
108, 109. And therefore I warn you all to take heed of Apostatizing from our
Ancient Testimony, as you have it in my Text; for what we were convinced of by
our Light in the beginning, to be Evil, to be Death, Dust, Serpents Meat, it is
so still; to be Beastly Ware, and Conjuration, it is so still; and therefore
keep up to your Ancient Testimony, my dear Lambs, in all the Parts of it; Ha,
ha, ha; hme, hme, hme; silent.

After a little Silence, Will. Bingley, etc.
Friends, Friends, I am filled, I am filled as with new Wine; I am ready to
burst at the joyful News I have heard to Day, respecting our Ancient Testimony:
And oh! magnified be our Light within, which has thus exalted us above the
Prophets, above the Apostles, above the Martyrs, and above all Christians, as
our dear Brother G. W. has most excellently made it out: First, In opening his
Text, and also in the two Branches proceeding from it, but more especially in
the Use and Application, where he has confirmed me, in not making Confession
of Sin, nor regarding the Ten Commandments, nor those two Ordinances of Baptism
and Supper, all which is ratified and confirmed by G. Fox's Journal, laying
there on the Table: But yet I have a short Testimony to bring in, touching the
Priests, which I think our Friend G. W. left out unawares, for I take it to be
as necessary an Ancient Testimony, to be kept up, as any other, only a little
more Privately and Prudently; for they are as great Enemies to our Design of
Supplanting Christianity, as any the World afford: But however, though we are
the same we were, and are not changed, yet besure you do not admit, that we are
the first Challengers, or that we begin with the Priests: But to show you in
private that we were always the Beginners of all Controversies, and what Cause
we had for it, I therefore bring in my Testimony; and my Proof for the
Antiquity of my Testimony shall be out of Edw. Burrough's Epistle to G. F.'s
Great Mystery, Printed 1658. viz. And the Word of the Lord we sounded, and did
not spare, and caused the Deaf to hear, and the Blind to see, and the Dread of
the Lord went before us, and behind us, and Terror took hold on our Enemies.
And first of all, our Mouths were Opened Then the Quakers began.
, and our Spirits Filled with Indignation against the Priests and Teachers True
every Word.
, and with them, and against them, we first began to War, as being the Causers
of the People to err, and the Blind Leaders, that carried the Blind into the
Ditch; and against them, as the Fountain of all Wickedness, abounding in the
Nations, and as being the Issue of Profaneness; and against them we cried,
showing unto all these People, that they were not Lawful Ministers of Christ,
but Deceivers and Antichrists; and we spared not Publicly Then why should you
be spared?
, and at all Seasons, to utter forth the Judgments of the Lord against them,
and their Ways, and their Churches, and Worships, and Practices; and this was
our first Work So it was my first Work to thresh down the Quaker Deceivers.
we entered upon, to Thresh down the Deceivers, and lay them open, that all
People may see their Shame, and come and turn from them; neither can we pray
for the Priests, but for their Destruction, etc. And this Testimony lay upon me
to bear, which is in all Parts according to our Ancient Testimony. Truth's
Defense, etc. by G. Fox and Rich. Hubberthorn, p. 15. Printed 1653. For, my
Dear Friends and Brethren, read our great Apostle G. Fox's Primer, W. Smith's
Primer, in which there is not a Verse of Scripture quoted, by which you may be
sure it is agreeable to our Ancient Testimony. Again, read Readiness Errand to
Damascus; and, A Threefold Estate of Antichrist; The Quakers Challenge: And
from all these Books you may gather, that by the false Ministry, we mean such
as Preach out of the Scripture, such as Preach a Christ without, and bid People
believe on him, as he is in Heaven above: And you will see first by Reprinting
Edw. Burrough's Epistle, 1672. and by W. Smith's Works, which render the
Bishops Monsters, and the Clergy Witches, Devils, Sorcerers, Jesuits,
Blasphemers, Bloodhounds, Antichrists, Sodomites, and an Hundred such Names.
This, Beloved, is according to our Ancient Testimony, only let us word the
Matter so now, as to make them believe we mean not the present Clergy, but
those in former Days.

Benjamin Bealing, Clerk. Let us sing an Hymn of Praise, and Self-Exaltation,
and to the Confusion of our Adversaries; as you will find it written in the
Epistle General of that Son of Thunder, Edw. Borough, prefixed to our Apostle
George Fox's Great Mystery, Printed 1658.

The Waters have I seen dried up, the Seat of that great Whore,
Who has made all Nations drunk with her enticing Power;
And caused the whole Earth, She has, Her Fornication Cup to take,
Whereby Nations have long time erred, on whom She long has sat:
But now her Miseries are seen, Her Witchcrafts are discovered,
And She no more shall Men deceive, for Daylight is appeared;
And the Bed woeful I have seen, of Torments great prepared,
Whereon She must be cast, and Plagues must not be spared:
But Woe to Her, the Cup of Wrath is filled, Her to receive,
And as to others she has done, the same She shall now have;
And Drink She must of that full Cup, of God's fierce Indignation,
And then shall all Her Lovers mourn, and make great Lamentation:
For Fire in Her is kindled, which must Her all consume;
Behold Her Smoke ascends Day and Night up to Heaven:
The Antichrists, who has put on, and covered with Sheeps clothing,
And long-rul'd King, on Nations Inwardly Ravening;
Who has devoured God's Heritage, and had a Kingdom great;
I have seen Him made War against, and Truth give Him Defeat.
Behold the Whore, Her Flesh is burnt, Her Beauty does now fall;
She that is all Harlots great Mother, whose Daughters are Whores all.
The Close of the Meeting, by George Whitehead.
Friends, I have still one Word of Exhortation, as you will find it in the
Prophecy of our deceased Brother, Samuel Fisher, touching Magistracy and
Government; which being according to our Ancient Testimony, I could not well
omit, viz.

Sam. Fisher's Works, p. 19, 20. observed by Mr. Boothhouse.
I will hold my Peace no longer, says the Lord, as concerning this Evil, which
they so profanely commit, and do daily against my Chosen; but will utterly
subvert and overturn them, and bring the Kingdoms and Dominions, and the
Greatness of the Kingdom, under the whole Heaven, into the Hands of the Holy
Ones Meaning the Quakers.
of the most High, and give unto my Son, and his Saints, to reign over all the
Earth: And take ALL the RULE, and AUTHORITY, and POWER, that shall stand up
against my Son in his Saints; and put it down among all the rest, as one of his
greatest Enemies, under his Feet, says the Lord. For though the World take no
Delight in them, yet I take Pleasure in my People, says the Lord: And I will
beautify my Meek Ones Meek Quakers.
with Salvation, and I will put my high Praise into their Mouths, and a
Two-edged Sword into their Hands Mark, this is your Ancient Testimony as well
as Prophecy, writ 1656.
; and they shall execute Vengeance upon the Heathen, and Punishments upon the
People, and shall bind their Kings in Chains, and Nobles in Fetters of Iron,
and execute upon them the Judgment that is written in my Eternal Decree, and
Unchangeable Council, says the Lord. This Honor have all my Saints; this is
the Heritage of my Servants, says the Lord: And their Righteousness, and their
Reign, their Salvation and Redemption, and all their Dignity, is of me only;
and of me only, and not of themselves, shall they acknowledgee it to be, Says
the Lord God Almighty, who is now doing all this his Holy Will and good
Pleasure; and who is he that shall ever Disannul it?

Given forth under my Hand, as the Lord himself gave it into my Heart to see,
and into my Mouth to speak, and unto my Hand, thus at large, to write it, the
25th. of the 7th. Month, 1656. Samuel Fisher.

Pray is not this a Fifth-Monarchy Sermon? No, it is a Quaker Sermon, but it is
all one Doctrine, and may become one Practice, p. 102. Ibid. i. e. The Quakers
are the truest Catholic Church in the World, etc. If so, then your Saints are
intended for this Holy War.
Friends, I am the longer in this Sermon, because my Text requires it; namely,
To show you our Ancient Testimony in all the Parts of it: And if any of the
World's People at any time should understand this Discourse, for it is much if
it do not come abroad, then tell them we mean all within, we are an Inward
People: And whether we mention War and Fighting, Swords and Spears, Ox or Ass,
Kill, Cut off, Destroy, take Vengeance of the Heathen, Subvert and Overturn
Nations, Kingdoms, etc. all this we mean within, and this have, and this
peradventure will satisfy them. And now, Friends, I shall instance but one
Proof more, to evince what our Ancient Testimony was, and is in all its Parts,
and then I shall with Prayer conclude; and it is in an Epistle, entitled, This
is only to go amongst Friends Writ by Fr. Howgill, (whose Daughter was in
Bridewell, London,) and Edw. Borough in Dublin, Printed Anno 1656.
. Which Epistle contains great part of our Ancient Testimony; for it answers to
George Fox's Title Page, News coming up, etc. and it answers to Josiah Coale's
Letter, where he says, Dear G. Fox, who art the Father of many Nations; whose
Life has reached through us thy Children; whose Being and Habitation is in the
Power of the Highest, in which thou [George] Rulest and Governs in
Righteousness: And Thy Kingdom is Established in Peace, and the Increase
thereof is Without End Josiah Coale's Letter from Barbados, recorded in the
Book of Outlandish Letters, and by W. Penn vindicated in Judas and the Jews,
etc. p. 44.
. It answers also our Brother Solomon Eccles, who said, It might be said of G.
Fox, as it was of Christ, that he was in the World, and the World was made by
him, and yet the World knew him not. The Quakers Challenge, etc. p. 6. For if
he was a King, and had a Kingdom, and such a Kingdom, as of the Increase
thereof, there was never to be an end; then you may conclude, Friends, that he
was the Branch, the Star, the Son of Righteousness, spoken of in Scripture; but
mark, This (Epistle) is only to go amongst Friends Indeed it was fit to go
amongst none but Quakers and Fifth Monarchy-Men, so very well entitled.
, viz.

And O thou North of England! who art counted as Desolate and Barren, and
reckoned the least of the Nation; yet out of thee did the Branch Viz. Geo. Fox,
which was prophesied of, and now is fulfilled, etc. his News out of the North,
Title Page, Printed 1655.
spring, and the Star arise, which gives Light unto all the Regions round
about, in Thee (i. e. the North) the Son of Righteousness appeared with
Wounding, and with Healing; and out of Thee the Terrors of the Lord proceeded,
which makes the Earth to tremble, and be removed; out of Thee i. e. Out of the
North, came Geo. Fox, James Naylor, R. Hubberthorn, Geo. Whitehead, Edw.
Borough, etc.
Kings, Priests, and Prophets, did come forth in the Name and Power of the most
High, which uttered their Voices as Thunders, and laid their Swords on the
Necks of their Enemies, and never returned empty from the Slaughter i. e. When
they were in Oliver's Army.
. -- Lift up your Voice; blow the Trumpet; sound an Alarm out of the Holy
Mountain; proclaim the Acceptable Year, and the Day of Vengeance of our God;
gird on your Sword upon your Loins, put on the Tried Armor, and follow him for
ever, who rides on the white Horse, and is clothed with the same, and makes
War in Righteousness. Ride on, ride on, my beloved Brethren, and
Fellow Soldiers; make all plain before you; thresh on with the new Threshing
Instrument, which has Teeth; beat the Mountains to Dust, and let the Breath of
the Lord scatter it; make the the Heathen i. e. All the Christians.
tremble, and the Uncircumcised fall by the Sword; the Lord of Hosts is with
us, and goes before us; spare none, neither Ox nor Ass, neither Old nor Young
No, where the Quakers have Power, expect no Quarter.
, Kill, Cut off, Destroy, Bathe your Sword in the Blood of Amaleck The Quaker's
own Writings are their best Construing Books, and will best Interpret their
Meaning who this Amaleck is, viz. Geo. Bishop in his Warnings of the Lord, p.
19. Printed 1660. i. e. he cries out to the Officers of the Army, Remember
Amaleck (says he) the Soul-Murdering, and Conscience-Binding Clergyman; blot
out the Remembrance of Amaleck from under Heaven. News out of the North, etc.
p. 27. Proclaim thus; Slay Baal; Baalam must be slain, and all the Hirelings
must be turned out of the Kingdom, p. 18.
, and all the Egyptians and Philistines, and all the Uncircumcised, and hew
Agag to pieces Dreadful is the Lord, who is coming to change all your Laws, ye
Kings, p. 20. The Government shall be taken from you Rulers; this Tree (of
Government) must be cut down, and Jesus Christ (in us) will Rule alone.
, break the Rocks in pieces, cut down the Cedars, and strong Oaks, make the
Devils subject, cast out the Unclean Spirits, raise the Dead, shut up in
Prison, bring out of Prison, cast in your Nets, launch into the Deep, divide
the Fish, bind the Tares in Bundles, cast them into the Fire, -- put on your
Armor, and gird on your Sword, and lay hold on the Spear, and march into the
Field, and prepare your selves to Battle; for the Nations does defy our God,
and says in their Hearts, who is the God of the Quakers A proper Question; f^r
few (if any) know.
? That we should fear him, and obey his Voice. Arise, arise, and sound forth
the Everlasting Word of War and Judgment in the Ears of all the Nations, sound
an Alarm, and make their Ears to tingle; our Enemies are whole Nations, and
Multitudes in number; a Rebellious People, that will not come under Our Law
Meaning Geo. Fox's Ten Commandments.
; which arises up against us, and will not have our King to Reign See Sam.
Fisher's Prophecy.
, but tramples his Honor under Foot, and despise his Law, and his Statutes,
and accounts his Subjects as Slaves and Bondmen; stand upon your Feet, and
appear in your Terror, as an Army with Banners; and let the Nations know your
Power, and the Stroke of your Hands; cut down on the Right Hand, and slay on
the Left; and let not your Eye pity, nor your Hand spare, but wound the Lofty,
and tread down the Honorable of the Earth; and give unto the great Whore
double, and give her no Rest Day nor Night; but as she has done, so let it be
done unto her, and give her double into her Bosom: The first Reformers did so;
and I am giving the little young Whore a double Cup.
As she has loved Blood, so give her Blood; and dash her Children against the
Stones; and let none of the Heathen Nations, nor their Gods, escape out of your
Hands, nor their Images, nor Idols; but lay waste Fenced Cities Hark! Are not
these Fifth Monarchymen?
, and tread down the High Walls; for we have proclaimed open War; your Captains
are Mighty Men, and your Leaders are well skilled to handle the Sword This
cannot be meant within. What, Leaders and Captains within!
; and they are Riding on before you -- against the Beast, and the false
Prophet; and Cursed be every one, that rises not up to the Help of the Lord
against the Mighty: The Beast is Mighty i. e. The King and Parliament
, and the false Prophet is Great i. e. The Clergy.
, and they keep the Nation under their Power: But, O thou Beast, and thou false
Prophet! You shall be Tormented together; thou Beast, upon which the false
Prophet sits You Would fain Ride too; but I hope she will throw you off, unless you
Retract these Bloody Books, and Horrid Principles.
, whom thou upholds by a Law, and defends by thy unrighteous Power; -- and into
the Pit and Lake shall you be turned, to have your Resting Place: And thou
false Prophet, which has deceived the Natitions, the Decree of our God is
sealed against thee No marvel then they cannot pray for them, unless for their
Destruction, as Fox said. See Truth's Defense, etc. p. 15.
, thy Smoke shall ascend for ever and ever; and of thy Sin there is No
Forgiveness; nor of thy Torment No Remission; over you do we, and shall for
ever, rejoice and fing; and over your God, and your King; the Dragon, that Old
Serpent, cursed be he and his Memorial for ever.

Written in Ireland, 1655. by Edw. Borough, and Fr. Howgill Note, This was to
go only amongst the Friends.
; and Printed in Quarto, with this Title, This is only to go amongst Friends.

Thus, Friends, have I showed you our Ancient Testimony in all the Parts of it.
First, Touching the World's Peoples Mistake in the Scriptures, for a Rule to
Walk by. Secondly, Of the Certainty of our own Papers and Epistles, which are
the Word of God, and a certain Rule to Walk by. Thirdly, And in the Application
I have showed, how our Light has exalted you above the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, and Holy Confessors, and all Christian Churches to this Day.
Fourthly, Our dear Brother William Bingly, has well remembered our Ancient
Testimony, against the Hireling Priests; for with them, and against them, we
began to War, and that with Indignation too. Fifthly, He has also showed you
who we account false Ministers, and what they are, and the very Names by which
they are described, both in Oliver's time, and since. Sixthly, Ben. Bealing
has found out a very suitable Hymn of Praise, even a melodious Song of
Triumph; setting forth our Exaltation, and the Downfall of the Christian
Churches, under the Notion of the false Church, the Mother of Harlots, Mystery
of Babylon; in which my Heart was, and still is refreshed, as with new Wine.
Seventhly, I have also closed my Discourse with the Prophecy of Sam. Fisher,
which you need not doubt but will come to pass; it may be sooner than you are
aware of If the Six-Week Meeting mind their Business every Session of
Parliament.
; for he gave it forth as it came to him from the Lord, and no otherwise, the
25th Day of the Seventh Month, which the World's People call September, Anno
1656. so that it cannot, it cannot miss; only for the present, we must be
content to stay, and patiently bear for the present; for as yet, we cannot
think we shall be made to handle the Sword; but when the time does come, I have
showed you the Testimony of two of our Prophets, and early Champions, what we
shall Do, how we shall Kill, Cut off, and Destroy, and Bathe our Swords in the
Blood of Amaleck Viz. The Priests and Rulers, as in the large Marginal Note.
, and lay waste Fenced Cities, and tread down the Honorable of the Earth, and
spare neither Old nor Young, Ox nor Ass, Male nor Female, that will not come
under our Law, and Worship our God.

And now I shall conclude with a Prayer, and that also, without any Confession
of Sin, for all my Sins were pardoned in Oliver's time. For the Prince of this
World was cast out of me, 1652. and Hell was conquered, and Death and the Grave
overcome, and the Kingdom that cannot be removed was given ME; and this the
Lord did do for ME, from his Foreknowledge of ME; and the Lord then brought ME
into Sion, which I then did Witness. See his Book, Truth defending the Quakers,
p. 8. Moreover I was then moved to witness against the Priests and Hirelings,
Diviners and Deceivers, and to judge the Whore, with her Enchantments; and to
torment the Beast i. e. The Governors.
, and plague the false Prophet, whose Judgment torment, and Misery was then
begun, and will never have end, which I Witness, whom God has set to root out,
and pull down. Jacob found in a Desert Land, etc. p. 7, 8. And thus much shall
suffice at this time, to show you our Ancient Testimony in many Particulars,
which you are exhorted to Maintain, Defend, and to Vindicate; and not at any
time to Retract any one Syllable of it, for the Government of our Church, even
Men and Women's Meettings were Ordained The Quakers Ordinances, as in Sol.
Eccles Prophecy.
by Christ within, Geo. Fox, as at large in my Book, Judgment fixed, etc. p.
317, 318. is made clearly out; and out of which Book, p. 354. I shall use this
short Form of Prayer, because the Day is far spent, viz.

Let us Pray.
O God, I make my Appeal and Supplication against this Jealous, Dividing, and
Rending Spirit, that has appeared in Strise and open Contention against thy
Servants: Thou know the Integrity of my Soul Compare G. W.'s Ser. Apol. p.
4, 5. with the Epistle, and Page 19, 317, 357. of his Judgment fixed, etc. and
it will show this Prayer not only Pharisaical, but deep Hypocrisy; especially,
adding p. 72. of his Coun^. Conv. etc. where he tells you, He can see Cause
otherwise to word the Matter, and yet mean the same thing, etc.
; Thou have endued me with a Christian Spirit, with Faith, Patience and
Rejoicing under all my Sufferings; yet thou have endued me also with the Spirit
of Righteous Judgment, Understanding and Zeal; and have raised me up As he did
Pharaoh.
, in Defense of thy Gospel: So I recommend all to thee, to manifest the end of
all, and to plead and justify my Cause; it being thy own Cause. Amen, Amen,
says my Soul.

Geo. Whitehead.

CHAP. XIV.
The Cage of Unclean Birds opened; the Idolatrous Practices, Blasphemous
Principles, and Vicious Enormities of the Quakers laid open; which may be
compared with Pope Leo X.

Reader,
BY the foregoing Chapter, you have a View of the high Value the Quakers set
upon themselves, and their Ancient Testimony, and how they Debase all Christian
Churches, as the Whore, the false Church, the Mother of Harlots, even all:
First, All that Sprinkle Children, and tell People it is Baptism, and thereby
an Ordinance of Christ. G. Fox's Primer, p. 48. Secondly, All that Preach
Christ without, as he is in Heaven at God's Right Hand. Smith's Primer, etc. p.
8. Thirdly, All that do Study the Scriptures, and Preach out of them. Readiness
Errand, etc. p. 7. Fourthly, All that will not Fast with the Quakers, who are
in the Truth, (says Solomon Eccles,) and that none are in the Truth but they.
The Quakers Challenge, etc. p. 3, 6. Fifthly, All that pay or receive Tithes.
An Antidote, etc. p. 78. Sixthly, All that take Matthew, Mark, Luke and John
for the Gospel, viz. Glad Tidings, and the Scriptures for their Rule. G. Fox's
Epistle, to be read in Steeple Houses, etc. p. 2, 3, 4, 5.

Nay, W. Penn and Whitehead adds, That a Mountebank is an honest Man to a
Parson; that such Wickedness (as Debauchery, Drunkenness and Whoredom,) more
suiteth the Spirits of his ( i. e. Priests) own Fraternity; the Priests, both
Episcopal and Presbyterian, whose known Drunkenness and Whoredoms, etc. would
fill Volumes to describe. Hear W. Penn again, p. 165. Had James Nayler's Words
been Ten Thousand times more significant, earnest and sharp, against that
cursed bitter Stock of Hirelings, they had been but enough, and I would then
say not enough; but that the Reverence I bear to the Holy Spirit would oblige
me to acquiesce in whatever he should utter, through any Prophet or Servant of
the Lord This Jam. Naylor, W. Penn's Prophet, is the Person that was Hosanna'd
into Bristol; and Sam. Cater, now a Preacher amongst them, then leading his
Horse.
; and we have nothing for them but Woes and Plagues, who have made drunk the
Nations, and laid them to Sleep on the Downey Beds of soft sin-pleasing
Principles, whilst they have cut their Purses, and picked their Pockets;
Tophet's prepared for them to act their Eternal Tragedy upon, whose Scenes will
be renewed, direful anguishing Woes of an Eternal Irreconcilable Justice, etc.
Ser. Apol. Dedicated to the King's Lieutenant in Ireland, etc. p. 2, 22, 127,
156.

Again, says the same W. Penn, in his Book, The Guide Mistaken, etc. p. 18.
And whilst the Idle, Gormandizing Priests of England, run away with above
Fifteen Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year, under Pretense of being God's
Ministers; and that no sort of People have been so universally, through Ages, the
very Bane of Soul and Body to the Universe, as that abominable Tribe; for whom
the Theater of God's most Dreadful Vengeance wait to act their Eternal Tragedy
upon.

Well, let us hear W. Penn once more what he says of the Teachers of the
Presbyterians, Independants, Baptists, etc. Quakerism a New Nickname, etc. p.
165. viz. An Illbred, and Pedantick Crew; the Bane of Reason, and Pest of the
World; the old Incendiaries to Mischief, and the best to be spared of Mankind;
against whom the Boiling of an irritated God is ready to be poured out, to the
Destruction of such, if they repent not, etc. Quakerism a New Nickname, etc.
p. 165.

Reader, You see here is nothing but Hell and Damnation for the Ministers of
all Christian Societies: Pray let us hear their Opinion of the Church of
England in general, and that may give their Sense of all other Churches, since
I see they make little (if any) Difference of their Teachers, viz. And as for
the Purity of the Church of England, it is out of our Sight; we can see a great
deal of Impurity, Corruption, and Soulsickness in it: Indeed, they say enough
of themselves, to cause all wholesome, sound, understanding People, to shun
them, and their Church and Worship, as Men shun a Contagious Disease or
Infection, etc. The Innocence and Conscientiousness of the Quakers, etc. p. 7.
Printed 1664. To which let me add but one Passage more, (though I might One
Hundred) of Mr. Penn's, who can express himself as well, and as much according
to the Quakers Ancient Testimony, as any Man amongst thern: And briefly thus,
viz. Come tell me, ye of the Church of England, whence came your Forms of
Prayer and Church Government? Are they not the Offspring of that Idolatrous
Popish Generation By this, who would have thought Mr. Penn had been so near of
Kin to them, as his latter Writings set forth. See A Brief Hist. of Quakerism,
etc. p. 44, to 58, 103, to 120.
, which is abominable to the God of Heaven? Are you not at, Have mercy upon us,
miserable Sinners? There is no Health in us from Seven to Seventy. Truth
Exalted, etc. p. 9.

Reader, W. Penn tells his Reader, in his Ser. Apol. etc. p. 79. That his
designed Method in his Answer, is not the common Road of Printing his
Adversaries Words at large, on all Occasions; so I tell thee, yet in many Cases
I recite the whole: However, by this time, you have not only an Account of the
high Value the Quakers set upon themselves, as in the former Chapter, but of
their debasing the Protestant Ministers and Churches, as a pack of Drunkards,
Whoremongers, with an Et-caetera, worse than Mountebanks; a cursed bitter Stock
of Hirelings, a Pedantick Crew, the best to be spared of Mankind; against whom
the Boiling Vengeance of God is reserved, etc. and who deserve nothing but
Plagues and Woes, Hell and Damnation; yea, Pick-pockets, Cut-purses, etc. that
the People ought to shun as a Pesthouse, with too much of that Nature to be
here inserted; especially, adding what in The Picture of Quakerism, etc. is set
forthron this Head: And does it not amount to a just Provocation to any Child,
to see such foul Aspersions, and horrible Slanders, cast upon his Mother, from
whose Breasts of Consolation he has received great Consolation and Comfort,
both to vindicate her, and to set forth what manner of Men they are, that thus
scandalize his Mother Church, not only privately in their Chimney Corners, but
in their Meetings; yea, in Print, in all Cities, Towns and Villages? etc. G.
Whitehead said, That God laid a Necessity upon him to write his Book, Judgment
fixed, etc. where he called me and others Apostate Informers, Treacherous
Hypocrites, False Brethren, Deceitful Workers, Betraying. Judas 's, Devils
Incarnate, Dogs, Wolves, Raging Waves, etc. And his God laying such a Necessity
upon him thus to Write and Rail, in Vindication of Quakerism, he adds, And in
the discharging: my Duty, I neither consult Events, nor fear Effects. Now in
Answer, I cannot pretend to such an immediate Motion as the Quakers do; but I
do really think my self in point of Duty and Conscience, to bear these
Testimonies against the foul Aspersions of these railing Rabsheka's, and have
both consulted and considered the Events that may ensue, and hope well of the
Effects that may follow, even the Confutation of their Teachers, and Conviction
of their Hearers; and I hope the Conversion of the Sincere amongst them. And
now to the Men, and what manner of Men they are, that thus undermine the
Christian Religion, Ministry and Worship. And thus much by way of Introduction
to the Cage of Unclean Birds.

POSTSCRIPT.
Note, Reader, That George Fox (the first Bird in the Cage) did cause John
Fretwell, Christ. Gilhorn, Ja. Nayler, and others, to go down upon their Knees
before him, publicly before Friends, (which is Idolatry) and then and there,
upon their Knees, to make their Confession, and own Judgment upon what he
charged them with, before he would own them, or receive them into the Unity
amongst Friends, etc. To all People professing the Eternal Truth, etc. p. 6.
per John Harwood, one of G. W. 's Fellow-Preachers.

Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and is become the Habitation of Devils, and the
Hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage of every Unclean and Hateful Bird.

For her Sins have reached unto Heaven, and God bath remembered her Iniquity,
Rev. 18.2,5.

Reward Her even as She has Rewarded you, and double unto Her double,
according to Her Works: In the Cup which She has filled, fill to Her double.

Rejoice over Her, thou Heaven, and ye Holy Apostles and Prophets; for God has
avenged you on Her, Ver. 6, 20.

diagrammatic list of Quakers A Cage of Unclean Birds.
GEORGE FOX. John Harwood, George Smith, Edw. Borough, Samuel Fisher, Stephen
Crisp, Will. Warwick, Jos. Helling, Samuel Cater, Thomas Leacock, Allelujah
Fisher, Solomon Eccles, John Audland, Jofiah Coal, T. Thurston, George
Whitehead.
Thomas Ell -- Rich. Hubberthorn, William Gosnell, Thomas Biddle, William
Gibson, John Whitehead, Sam. Newton Christ. Atkinson, Daniel Wills, Immanuel D
-- Jo. Swinton, Sen. Tho. Rudiard. John Blaikling, John Ty --, Ezekiel Wooley,
John Moon, Francis Howgill, Isaac Pennington.




Reader, I am now about opening the Cage, and shall take out Twelve of the
Birds, and open their Wings, and spread their Feathers, to the Intent thou
may view them, and note their Features, and observe their Natures and
Dispositions; and George Fox the Cage-Keeper shall be over and above, with some
little Observations upon him; and the rather, because G. Whitehead has denied,
That the Quakers call him their Branch, their Star, their Son of Righteousness,
etc. in his Sober Expost. etc. p. 55, 58. I remember, that about the Year 1662.
Geo. Fox came into the Isle of Ely, and at his Meetings great part of his
Discourse was about the Cage of Unclean Birds, saying, The Church of England,
(as in his Epistle to be read in Churches) and the Professors, were a Cage of
Unclean Birds; and the Note he made them sing was thus, Come ye Episcopals, How
do you sing in the Cage? Answ. No Perfection here, no Perfection here. Well,
come you Presbyterians, Independants, and Baptists, what say you? How do you
sing? Let us hear your Note. Answ. No Perfection here, no Perfection here. Then
said George, Come out of the Cage, in a very comical Manner. Thus did he deride
the Professors of Christianity, exalting themselves; a Figure of which, you
have in Geo. Whitehead's Sermon in the Thirteenth Chapter: And now you shall
hear how his Birds chirrup, and what Note they sing to his Lute. But to
understand this rightly, I think it necessary to give you a brief Description
of Geo. Fox; that so, when you hear Six of the Birds of one sort sing to his
Tune, and dance after his Pipe, you may the better understand whether they do
not call him their Branch, etc.

First, He (G. Fox) a great Liar, like Mahomet; a great Seducer, like Simon
Magus, a vain Boaster, like Ignatius Loyold, saying, That neither he nor his
Name was known in the World; Several Petitions Answered, etc. p. 60. when there
was not Ten Men in the whole Nation more universally known.

Secondly, In that he taught, That he that has the same Spirit that raised up
Jesus Christ, is equal with God; that he was before Languages were, and that he
was come to the end of Languages. Readiness Errand, etc. p. 8. His Battledoor, the
Introduction, etc.

Thirdly, In that he taught, That he was come to such a Fullness of Glory, as
that his Head and Ears was filled full of Glory; yea, that a Thundering Voice
answered him, saying, I have glorified thee, and will glorify thee again;
alluding to John 12.28,29. The Examination and Trial of G. Fox at Lancaster
Assize, etc. p. 21.

Fourthly, In that he said, David's Sepulcher was with the Quakers, and that
they had seen it. Truth's Defense, etc. p. 56. An abominable Lie, like that of
Mahomet's Journey up to Heaven upon an Ass.

Fifthly, In saying, That if every People own the Prophets and Apostles
Writings, they will own the Writings of the Quakers; and that they may as well
condemn the Scriptures to the Fire, as their Papers and Queries, etc. Several
Petitions Answered, etc. p. 38. Truth's Defense, p. 2, 104.

Sixthly, In that he taught, That he wrought Miracles, Fox 's Journal, the
Third Index; and yet never wrought a Miracle, in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth,
all his Days; (only some Lying Wonders, forged out of his Luciferian Brain,
without any Attestation, like Simon Magus.)

Seventhly, In that he taught, That the Breach of the Eighth Commandment, Thou
shall not steal, was no Sin, if moved thereto by the Spirit of the Lord. G. Fox
's Great Mystery, etc. p. 77. In this, Fox, if not a Ranter, yet joined with
them; and so are all that own his Doctrine.

Eighthly, In that he taught, That to call the Scriptures the Word of God was
Blasphemy; whilst that he, yea, even he, called his own Writings the Word of
God; and frequently, the Word of the Lord. Way to the Kingdom, etc. p. 4.
Several Papers given out for spreading Truth, etc.

Ninthly, In teaching, That if Christ that is Crucified be not within, and that
Christ that is Risen be not within, I say, that ye are Reprobates. -- Now, I
say, that if there be any other Christ than he that is Crucified within, he is a
false Christ; and he that has not this Christ that was Risen and Crucified
within, is a Reprobate. Though Devils and Reprobates make a Talk of him without,
God's Christ is not Distinct from his Saints, nor his Body, (the Church;) for
he is within them, not Distinct from their Spirits: And thou say, thou art
saved by Christ without thee, and so has recorded thy self a Reprobate; and
they that profess Christ without them, and another Christ within them, here is
two Christ's. G. Fox 's Great Mystery, etc. p. 206, 207, 250, 254.

And to confirm this false Doctrine, see Edw. Burrough's Answer to a Question,
and William Smith's to his Child; which are as follows.

Query, Is that very Man (said the Minister to Borough,) with that very Body,
within you? Yea, or Nay.

Borough Answers, The very Christ of God is within us; we dare not deny him.
Burtongh 's Works, p. 149.

Query, How may I know when Christ is truly Preached?

W. Smith's Answer. They that are false (Ministers) Preach Christ without, and
bid People believe in him, as he is in Heaven above: But they that are Christ's
Ministers Preach Christ within, etc. Smith 's Primer, etc. p. 8.

Now, Reader, if this Doctrine be sound and Orthodox, then were all the
Apostles, Martyrs, and all Christian Ministers, false Teachers and Deceivers;
but if this Doctrine be Heterodox, then the Quakers only are the false
Teachers, Deceivers, and Antichrists. W. Penn also is one with Fox, Borough
and Smith. See his Christian Quaker, and Div. Test. p. 97, 98. and his Sandy
Foundation, p. 21.

Tenthly, G. Fox speaking of his own Rise out of the North, gives his Book this
Title; News coming up out of the North, sounding toward the South; written (by
Fox) from the Mouth of the Lord, from one who is Naked, and stands Naked before
the Lord, clothed with Righteousness, whose Name is not known in the World,
risen out of the North, which was prophesied of Query, by what Prophet?
, and now fulfilled.

Thus much briefly touching this Blasphemous Bird; which being the Master of
the Assembly, and first Founder of this Sect, he shall not be of the Number of
the Twelve intended, viz. Six of each sort, which now shall follow in their
Order, the first Six being of the same Feather, witnessing to their Forerunner,
and great Apostle; who though he once said he had a Celestial Body Before two
credible Witnesses, one being still alive.
; that he had Power to bind and loose whom he pleased, yet his Body proved an
Earthly one, and is dead and gone; and for some Years, whilst living amongst
them, was like a Statue, or an insensible Image, which could scarce see or
understand, being grown Corpulent, and in bulk of two or three Men; and so
dosed away his time with strong Liquors and Brandy, who left these Words for W.
Rogers, John Raunce, Anne Docwra, and others, who had opposed his Tyranny and
Usurpation, viz. And as for this Spirit of Rebellion and Opposition that has
risen formerly and lately, it is out of the Kingdom of God, and Heavenly
Jerusalem, and is for Judgment and Condemnation; with all its Books, Words and
Works. This was Printed in their Yearly Epistle, 1691. and Reprinted in Fox's
Journal, 1694. p. 616.


Now observe how this Fox is adored, Borough, the First Bird of the
Blasphemous Six. See their Book, This is only to go amongst Friends, p. 19.
viz. Oh thou North of England, who art counted as Desolate and Barren, and
reckoned the least of the Nations; yet out of thee did the Branch (Fox) spring,
and the Star (Fox) arise, which gives Light unto all the Regions round about;
in thee the Son of Righteousness (Fox) appeared; out of thee Kings, Priests,
and Prophets, did come forth in the Name and Power of the most High, (meaning
Hubberthorn, Howgil, Borough, Farnsworth, Nayler, Atkinson, Whitehead, etc.)
which uttered their Voices as Thunders, etc.

Thus has Borough ecchoed back, and confirmed Fox his Imposture, saying Amen
to his Blasphemy, alluding to Micah 5.2. to Matthew. 2.5,6. as more largely
handled in my Book, New Rome Unmasked, etc. p. 79, to 88. and New Rome
Arraigned, etc. p. 5, 6, 7. And I marvel at Whitehead's Impudence to deny it,
In his Sober Exp. p. 57, 58. but to make it clear, and past his Exception, if
possible, let us take out more Birds; but he that will deny Burrough's Book to
have this Title, This is only to go amongst Friends, which is the only, and all
the Title; and which Book I have by me; what will not such a Fellow deny?

Jos. Coal, the Second Bird.
Dear Geo. Fox, who art the Father of many Nations; whose Life has reached
through us thy Children, even to the Isles afar off, to the begetting many
again to a lively Hope; for which Generations to come shall call thee Blessed,
whose Being and Habitation is in the Power of the Highest, in which thou (Geo.
Fox) Rulest and Governs in Righteousness: And Thy Kingdom is Established in
Peace; and the Increase thereof is without End. Read Numb 24.17,19. Zech. 3.8.
cap. 6. v. 12. Malachi 4.2. Luke 1.32,33. Isai. 9.6,7.

Thus then it is plain, That both Borough and Coal called G. Fox,
comparatively, the Branch, the Son of Righteousness; yea, Christ.

Sol. Eccles, the Third Bird. Several Petitions Answered, etc. p. 60.
Stand up Muggleton, thou Sorcerer, whose Mouth is full of Cursing, Lies and
Blasphemy; who calls thy last Book a Looking-Glass for Geo. Fox, whose NAME
thou art not worthy to take into thy Mouth; who is a Prophet indeed, and has
been faithful in the Lord's Business from the beginning: It was said of Christ,
that he was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him
not, John 1.10. So it may be said of this true Prophet, (Geo. Fox) whom John
said he was not; Several Petitions Answered, etc. p. 60.
but thou will feel this Prophet one Day as heavy as a Millstone upon thee; and
although the World knows him not See the first Instance of the Ten, about Fox.
, yet he is known, etc. The Quak. Chal. p. 6.

Thus do they all agree, that Fox is their Star, their Branch, etc. For if he
be Christ, as Eccles says; if he had a Kingdom established, of whose Increase
there never was to be an end, as Coal said; then he was Christ; and so the
Branch, the Star, etc. as Borough said, and indeed as they all mean, else they
would condemn these Blasphemous Books; but instead thereof, this Letter of
Coale's is vindicated in their Book, Judas and the Jews, p. 44. in all its
Parts. A small Treatise, wrote in Alisbury Prison the 3d. Month, 1661. by J.
Whitehead, Jo. Whitehead, the Fourth Bird.
where he says, In the Year 1648. God, who had Compassion on his People, did
cause a Branch to spring forth of the Root of David, which was filled with
Virtues, for the Covenant of Life and Peace was in him: Jo. Whitehead, the
Fourth Bird. It Is well Calculated; for about 1648. Fox first rose in the North,
only did not spread forth his Branches till about 1650.
And he (Fox) spread, and shot forth many Branches, which did partake of the
Fatness of the Root, and the Weary came to Rest under his (Fox 's) Branches;
and in him (Fox) was also the Word of Reconciliation, which turned the Hearts
of the Fathers to the Children, and the Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just.
And in the Year 1652. I (John Whitehead) being a Branch of this Tree, (Fox) the
Life of its Root caused me to Blossom, and bring forth Fruit for the Spirit, as
a Key opened his (Fox 's) Treasure, and showed me (for he was before Languages
were) that which was from the beginning. Read p. 4, 5. of the same Treatise.

Thus then has this J. Whitehead put all out of Doubt, and quite confuted G.
Whitehead, and overthrown all his Arguments, by confessing Matter of Fact. If I
have made Whitehead oppose Whitehead, it is no more than in other Cases I have
done; for the Quakers having no Bottom, no Solid Foundation, but all speaking
as their Light move them, it is casie to see how they interfere and jarr; only
G. W. has this Faculty, he can otherwife word his Matter, and yet mean the
same: A right Jesuit, a Doctrine first coined in their Mint, and only serve to
their Ends; whose Work has been to sow Divisions, make Rents, and beget
Schisms, etc. The next Bird shall be John Audland, in a Letter of his to G. Fox
from the West of England; an Abstract thereof is as follows, viz.

John Audland, the Fifth Bird.
Dear and Precious one, in whom my Life is bound up, and my Strength in thee
stands; by thy Breathings I am nourished; by thee my Strength is renewed;
Blessed art thou for evermore, and Blessed are all that enjoy thee: Life and
Strength comes from thee, Holy one; -- daily do I find thy Presence with me,
which does exceedingly preserve me, for I cannot reign but in thy Presence
(Fox) and Power: Pray for me, that I may stand in thy Dread (Fox) for evermore
-- I am thine, (Fox) Begotten and Nourished by thee; and in thy Power (Fox) am
I preserved; Glory unto thee (Fox) Holy One for ever.

Reader, These are the Birds in the Cage; tell me, are they not all of a
Feather? Do they not all agree in the main, That G. Fox was the Quakers Branch
and Star; yea, their All in All; the Bottom, and Corner, and Top-Stone of their
Building? Pray spare me the Pains of a large Comment; I think there is no need;
he that runs may read, and he that reads may understand the Foundation of
Quakerism; no marvel then if it wither, no marvel: if it fall like a Millstone
into the Bottom of the Sea, never more to rise. But let me add another Bird,
since I have Plenty, etc.

Jo. Blaikling, the Sixth Bird.
Here follows the Testimony and Certificate of John Blaikling, to the
clearing of the Aspersions that William Rogers, etc. cast upon G. Fox, --
that is blessed with Honor above many Brethren; and that Thousands will stand
by him in a Heavenly Record unto the Integrity of his Soul to Truth, that still
lives with him: That his Life Reigns, and is Spotless, Innocent, and still
retains his Integrity, whose Eternal Honor and Blessed Renown shall remain;
yea, his Presence, and the dropping of his Tender Words in the Lord's Love was
my Soul's Nourishment, etc. The Christ. Quaker disting. etc. 5th Part, p. 77.

Come George Whitehead, give me thy Hand, I Will take thee out of the Cage, and
do thee this Honor, not to be a Partner with the last Six Blasphemous Birds,
but as a Witness for them, that we may hear what thou can say on their
Behalf: But I Will put thee in again, and keep thee there, lest thou flyest up
and down the Nation, and do more Mischief. Oh George! thou art a plump Bird,
you are grown fat I find; well, what can thou say?

I affirm, that G. Fox does deny the same (i. e. these Divine Attributes) in
reference to himself, as a particular Man or Person, whose Days and Years are
limited; only the Truth of the Immortal Seed Christ in him, he stands to
maintain against all Opposers and Apostates: Judgment fixed, etc. p. 19. And as
to his (Francis Bugg 's) Charge of Idolatry, if not Blasphemous Names and
Titles given to Geo. Fox in certain Letters -- how proves he (Francis Bugg)
that they gave and intended those Titles to the Person of Geo. Fox, and not to
the Life of Christ in him? Innocence against Envy, etc. p. 18.

How, George! I Will tell thee how, because Josiah Coal said, Dear G. Fox, etc.
by this I know they intended G. Fox; for if they had intended those Titles to
the Life of Christ in him, they would have directed their Letters suitably;
saying, Dear Life of Christ in G. Fox, etc. This I hope will satisfy thee, if
Reason could take place; if not, I despair of giving thee or thy Friends
Satisfaction. But George, for thy Comfort, if thou will mean as thou say,
according to the Import of thy Words; and on that Foot retract and condemn
these thy Fallacious Covers and Excuses, and thy own apparent Errors; and the
Errors in thy Friends Books, which thou have most impudently glossed over; with
thy Hypocritical Paint, I will take thee out of the Cage; if not, there lie for
ever, singing, Here is Perfection, here is Perfection, etc. Thus much shall
serve in answer to G. W.'s Book, entitled, A Sober Expostulation, etc. p. 54,
55, 56. as well as to show what manner of Birds are in the Cage of this sort,
namely, Blasphemers and Idolaters; and next, let me take out Six of the other
sort, namely, of their Vicious Teachers, against whom G. Whitehead would not
write a Book for the World. No, seriously, I believe him, his Sincerity is so
true to their Ancient Testimony; besides, if he should, there being so few of
them clear, that here would be Hell broke loose; for if they should write one
against another, all would come out, and then they would appear a dark sort of
Quakers indeed.

Christopher Atkinson, the Seventh Bird, but the first of the last Six
beforementioned; who was since hanged for Felony.
And Christ. Atkinson was G. Whitehead's Fellow-Traveller, Fellow-Sufferer,
Fellow-Writer, and Fellow-Preacher: But so it was, that he got Ursula, the
Maidservant of Tho. Symonds, with Child, when he was a Sufferer for their
Ancient Testimony in Norwich-Goal; but this was not all, for he broke Prison,
stole Goods, and run away; I have his Confession in Print, Signed by John
Stubbs, William Cotton, and Thomas Symonds: And it is worth noticing, to see
what Grief Atkinson was in, because it dishonored the Cause of Quakerism, in
that it could not be kept private from the Knowledge of the World's People: But
not a Word of Confession of Sin to God, nor asking his Pardon for Christ's
sake. But to the second,

Stephen Crisp, the Eighth Bird.
Stephen Crisp, in his Circuit, going to Norwich, by Mendlesham in Suffolk,
Robert Duncon advised him to carry it wisely at Norwich; for (said he) my
Kinsman, Sam. Duncon, is a Man of a Timorous (or Brittle) Disposition. Well,
away goes St. Crisp to Norwich, sets up his Horse at the Place allotted for
their Teachers Horses, and then goes to Samuel Duncon's House; but Samuel not
being at home, Stephen takes up Samuel's Wife into the Chamber: Anon Samuel
comes home, where is my Wife? (says he to the Maid) She Is gone up the Chamber,
(said she) with Stephen Crisp. Well, Samuel walks up and down the House; he
rubs his Elbows, scratches his Head, and very melancholy he was; so between
Nine and Ten of the Clock (as I was told by some Quakers that knew it) down
came Stephen and Sam's Wife: And this bred great Discontent between Sam. and
his Wife She was a very handsome Woman, and 'twas thought too yielding.
, but Stephen wanted no Boldness to carry it off. Many such Stories we had of
him, knowing he was Light and Airy, and a great Lover of strong Wines, and
Waters of 8 s. a Pint, and many of us looked upon him little better than a
Ranter, if not an Atheist: W. C. can enlarge on this Subject no doubt. If any
question the Truth of this, let them go to Joseph Carver, Tho. Budderyw, if
living, and other Ancient Quakers in Norwich, and they can tell you more of
this. As also of Tho. Murford, another of G. Fox's Preachers, who used to lay
Plasters to some Parts of Samuel's Wife, which oft-times did Incommode her
Husband. This is so well known at Norwich, that none but G. W. will have the
Face to deny it: But if he do, I will set W. I. and W. Mires to talk with him
about that and some other things.

Tho. Leacock, the Ninth Bird.
Tho. Leacock lived at Emny in Norfolk, two Miles distance from Wisbech, is the
Bird I am now taking out of the Cage; his Forepart is like a Rook, but his
Claws like a Kite, or some Bird of Prey: He was one of Geo. Whitehead's great
Assistants, both in Preaching and Disputing, and whom George mentions as such
in his Serious Apology, p. 3. This Leacock was a notorious Drunkard, only (like
some others of their Teachers, as well as Hearers, of the Epicurean sort) a
private one: But to be short, so it fell out, that upon a time, being at a
Neighbor's House, where Drink was free; he was so drunken, that going out to
make Water, he staggered, and fell backward into a Cistern, made to catch
Rainwater; that had they not from within heard him fall like a Millstone, he
had been drowned in that little Sea; but from that he was by strong Hands
saved, yet he broke his Bladder, and was forced to wear a Dish in his Breeches,
to catch his Water, to his dying Day: And his Wife still continued the same
Trade (if not dead within these two Years) who will sit and drink Brandy till
she is so drunken, that she will p -- ss as she sits. Let her then be hereby
cautioned to take warning by the Misfortune of her Sister Quaker-VVoman in
London, who about a Year and a half ago, being drunken with Brandy, and alone,
the Fire by Accident, if not in Judgment, took hold of her Clothes, and (as I
am credibly informed) was burnt alive in her drunken Fit: But let it be noted,
that the said Leacock was a Man extreme zealous against Ribbons and Laces; in a
word, for every Commandment of G. Fox, And moreover, as a Work of
Super-errogation, he was excellent to convey away a Female Sister, if things
fell out cross, that so Truth might not be dishonored by the World's People
knowing of it. I remember well, that about the Year 1662. there was a noted
Quaker got his Maid with Child, and Tho. Leacock took her into Norfolk, and
acted so wisely in it, that I do think it never was heard of by the World's
People, and for which he has had many a hot buttered Loaf: I will not say what
else; Money answers all things.

John Moon, the Tenth Bird.
John Moon is the Tenth in number: He was an excellent Orator, a great
traveling Preacher, and of great Fame amongst the Quakers; of which I need not
say much in this place; if the Reader be pleased to turn back to the Fourth
Chapter, he shall see him amongst the Worthies one of the Eleven Elders to
govern the Church, one half of them Cage-Birds; pray observe from thence what
Judges and Elders the Quakers Body is, to which the poor Hearers must submit;
it is well worthy thy notice. However, after many Years Preaching, and suffering
Imprisonment for G. Fox's Cause in England, he went into Pensilvania, and was a
great Preacher there, and a Justice of Peace forsooth under the Honorable W.
Penn: But he could not leave his Vicious Habit, for he first got his Maid with
Child, and so pursued that Course of Life until he died of the foul Disease: I
would have the Quakers look into G. Whitehead's Sermon, and compare it with the
Cage of their unclean Birds, all VVriters and Preachers, and I hope it will
humble them, though my Verses did not, which yet were intelligible to them; for I
was loath to expose them, because I do believe, that amongst the Hearers there
are many honest-minded People; but I verily believe, that according to the
number of the Quaker-Teachers, compared with the Multitude of the Clergy, and
other Protestant Teachers: I say, where there is one of the last mentioned
chargeable with Vicious Immoralities, there is a Hundred of the
Quaker-Teachers, yet how impudently have W. Penn and the rest of that Gang
bespattered the Clergy, Ut supra: And particularly W. Penn, viz. But to excuse
this Brazen Impudence and Hypocrisy -- his Hackney Mercenary Spirit -- He
(Jonathan Clapham) boldly calls Christ his Redeemer, not observing how
unsuitable his Life and Doctrine is with the Redeemed of the World: For
whosoever is Redeemed by Christ, is perfectly so, in as much as all his Works
are perfect: But as this Guide (Mr. Clapham 's) Conversation manifests the
contrary, by his Very Great Miscarriages A base Suggestion. I am told by many
worthy and good Men, that Mr. Clapham was a Pious Man, and a good Liver.
-- Nor is there any thing so much stumble Infidels, and brings a Reproach upon
the Christian Religion, as Priests and People Writing, Talking, and Fighting
hard for Christ, as Redeemer, whilst every Eye finds them as Polluted, and
deeply Engaged in Dishonest and Immoral Practices, as those against whom they
contend, etc. See his Book, The Guide mistaken, etc. p. 28, 29, 53, 55. Indeed
I do not think the Quaker Teachers great Miscarriages are so visible to every
Eye, as the Failings and Imperfections of Mr. Clapham's, etc. were. But let the
Quakers first pluck out the Beam out of their own Eye, and then they shall see
the more clearly how to remove the Mote out of another's Eye: But to proceed to
discover this Beam, let me take out another Bird; namely,

Tho. Thurston, the Eleventh Bird.
Thomas Thurston is the Eleventh Bird, was an eminent Preacher up of G. Fox's
Orders, Laws and Commandments, and a great Favorite of Fox's, who lived in
America; who in his Travels to spread their Truth, pretended to the
Deputy-Governor's Wife, that he (Tho. Thurston) had a Motion from the Spirit
to get her with Child Come, W. Venn, was not this a great Miscarriage? Was it
not visible to the Eye of the Deputy Governor?
, she believing him, submits to a Trial of Skill, and it proved so infallibly,
the Woman's Husband being then in Old-England, where he stayed about a Year or
more; but at length he came home, and finding things bad, he examined his Wife
strictly how it came to pass: She confessed, that such a Friend (Tho. Thurston)
told her, that he had a Motion from God to get her with Child, and she was
overcome by him. Well, (said her Husband) if you will do one thing, I will
forgive you; which is, To go to the Quakers-Meeting, and declare openly how you
were deluded by this Preaching Quaker. She did so, and he forgave her, and as I
am credibly informed, many of the Quakers thought his Motion was true, he was
so eminent an Orator, and he still kept on some time a Preacher: And why might
not G. Fox allow of the Breach of this Seventh Commandment, given forth by
Moses, as well as he did of the Breach of the Eighth Commandment, viz. And as
for any being moved of the Lord to take away your Hourglass from you, by the
Eternal Power it is owned, etc. G. Fox's Great Mystery, etc. p. 77. Such
Influence had Fox's Doctrine, as you may see in these two Cases, and a Hundred
more I could mention; but enough of this Bird.

Come, George, what think thou of thy Brother Preacher, Tho. Thurston? He
Preached amongst the Infidels; and if he had been a Christian Minister, I do
agree it might have stumbled them; but being a Quaker, and led thereto by the
Spirit, it did confirm Quakerism. George, I could be more particular, I could
tell you of several pretty Stories, and W. Ingram and Walter Myres should
evidence it. I could tell you of a Cannonstreet Story, but you know that and
many others; I could tell you of a She-Preacher, who went from her Husband,
Geo. Knight, so long holding forth, that her Husband got a By-Child or two, and
at last married another Wife: But since that your She-Preachers kept more at
home. I could tell you a Story of your Meeting, to cleanse the Camp, about John
Swinton, and others, and of Rebecca Travers her Testimony, which would make you
look more like the Synagogue of Satan, than the Church of the Firstborn, as
you boast; but I delight not in it, were it not to humble you: So that I shall
only mention one Bird more at present, he being a Favorite of yours, and your
Brother Cater, who notwithstanding his gross Immoralities, yet you both wrote
in Favor of him in these Words; viz. George Smith, a poor wellmeaning Man,
that has been convinced about 13 or 14 Years, and ever since he came amongst
us, has walked uprightly according to his Measure, and has been of a
blameless Conversation amongst Men from his Youth up, etc. Judgment fixed, etc.
p. 207. The Lib. of an Apost. Consc. etc. p. 18, 19.

Come, G. Whitehead, this is high Commendation; but he was a Man for your turn,
one strict for G. Fox's Commandments, and was not ungrateful to you for your
high Praise and Commendation: For as one good Deed requires another, as the
Proverb is, so he, Geo. Smith, says in The Lib. of an Apost. etc. p. 29. I
have Cause to believe better things of them all, (i. e. the Quakers;) and for
Sam. Cater, whom thou (Fran. Bugg) so much abusest, I know his Conversation
has been such amongst us, as becomes a Man that fears God, that it is not thy
Lies that can hurt him; for he has a Witness in our Consciences Thus they
witness one for another, excuse and justify each other.
, for his faithful Service, and upright Conversation amongst us.

Come, George, here is hiding, here is excusing, nay, justifying each other in
your Abominations, like the two wicked Elders in the Story of Susanna, saying,
Tush, God sees us not, nor the World's People do not know it: And G. Smith
standing Suit with the Minister of Littleport, about Tithes, As in the Year
1697. he did.
he is faithful to G. Fox's Commandments, and is a true Son of our Church, a
well-meaning Man, one that has lived uprightly ever since he came amongst us,
even from his Youth up. Oh George! your Hypocrisy must come out; and
therefore, and for that Reason only, I shall take out of the CAGE this your
well-meaning, upright Bird, namely, George Smith: But first let me acquaint the
Reader, that since I came to London this August 1699. I have seen a Letter from
a Quaker in Huntingtonshire to his Friend in London; giving a Narrative of Sam.
Cater's Vicious Behavior to several Women in Huntingtonshire, (A. W. for one)
in Cambridge, and in Suffolk, about which Richard Jobson called him in
Question, and at a Meeting at St. Ives, at Tobias Hardmeat's House; and in the
Presence of him, his Wife, John Everard, and some few others, where R. Jobson
charged poor Sam. very home; but he as stoutly denied it at first, being (as
his Sister Anne Docwra said) a confident Liar: But A. W. the Woman with whom he
had to do being present, Sam. at last confessed the Fact, and was sorry he had
dishonored the Truth, i. e. Quakerism.

But to the Matter, which is a Narrative of the Proceedings of this
well-meaning Man, G. Smith, who both G. Whitehead and Sam. Cater commend as an
upright Man, a wellmeaning Man, and that from his Youth up. As for Sam. Cater,
I shall let his Narrative alone at present, only to show the Affinity of the
Birds, and how they will commend each other to the Skies, whilst they condemn all
beside themselves. Reader, These are their Infallible Doctors; these are their
Sinless (alias Senseless) Saints, and the Perfectionests of our Age; viz.

George Smith, the Twelfth Bird.
George Smith of Littleport, having a Wife of his own, being a Bailiff for a
Gentleman of the same Town, (whose Wife was a handsome young Woman) G. Smith in
time grew very kind to his Wife; the Gentleman falling sick, gave his Wife
warning of G. Smith: But he dying, there was room for him to accomplish his
Design; and so it came to pass, that he got her with Child: And the time of her
Delivery drawing near, George takes his Horse, and carries the Widow forth,
designing such a Journey, as that her Child should not be heard to cry in
Littleport, nor Tales thereof be told to the World's People. Well, away they
rode together lovingly, as if they had been acquainted; but ever they got two
Miles, the good Woman had a Fit of the Belly-ake; and riding past a lone House,
called Woodhouse, standing between Littleport and Ely, G. Smith knocks at the
Door, the 10th or 12th Day of September, 1684. upon which came out the good
Man, i. e. William Pooley, (still living:) What would you have, Neighbor
Smith? (says Pooley) I desire to come in, (said George) my Friend behind me is
not well. Upon which, out comes the good Woman of the House, saying, We are
preparing our Cheese for Sturbech-Fair: Oh! (said George) Pray Neighbor Pooley
let us come in, I will give you any Content. Upon which the Man took down the
Woman, who asked, saying, Have you not a private Room? Yes, said the good Woman
of the House, a Parlour; none like it, thought the Sick Woman. So in they went,
the Sick Woman, Goody Pooley, and her Maid, and in half an Hour's time was born
to G. Smith a Son; George praying Secrecy Pray mind the Quaker's Method; keep
things private, and all is well.
, and he would pay them well. So away goes G. Smith home to his old Wife, and
all things were hush and still as Heart could wish, and about a Week or Ten
Days after home goes the Woman as sound as a Roach; and at the Months end, when
the Babe had gotten a little Strength, G. Smith comes again to Goodman Pooley
and his Wife, and begs heartily for their Assistance, and no doubt, with this
Nod, as their usual way is, I pray for Truth's sake be private, lest it get
Air, for the Apostate Christians will make a mock at it. Well, G. Smith agrees
to give them Five Pound to carry it 20 Miles, namely, to Great Saxum, within
two Miles of Bury St. Edmunds in Suffolk: Content, said they; so away they went
by Ely, Soham, and so to Deasnidge-Lodge, where they stayed one Night or two,
whilst G. Smith went before to provide a Nurse, which he soon did at Saxum
aforesaid: For Money answers all things.

Well, the place being prepared, and notice of it, away goes Pooley and his
Wife with the Child, and delivered it to the Wife of John Chapman of Saxum
aforesaid, as the Act and Deed of G. Smith. But as soon as Pooley and his Wife
had eat and drank, though wet and weary, G. Smith packed them away, lest the old
and new Nurse should have a little Tittle Tattle together: But Goodman Chapman
being not yet come from Bury with the Writings, which were made in the Name of
one Mr. Turner of Wretham in Norfolk Forgery; for I went to both the Wrethams,
and there is not a Man lives there of that Name.
, as Father of the Child, who was called by G. Smith, Robert Turner; but said
the new Nurse, Is the Child Baptized? Ay, ay, says George, all is done, all is
done. So G. Smith himself stayed; and having dispatched away Pooley and his
Wife, he bought Nuts, and cracked, and at last came Goodman Chapman with the
said Writings; which, upon his paying 40 l Though he fell short about 10 s. which
he promised to send, but did not.
. were sealed, and away goes George jogging home as merry as a Cricket.

This is G. Whithead's well-meaning Man, etc. Indeed, the said G. Smith's Boy
is with honest People; I saw him; he will be 16 Years old next September, Anno
1700. and as like his Father, NOT Turner, BUT Smith, as you shall see a Lad;
and is now called Robert Smith, and has been for some Years, since they
understood things.

And Secondly, Since all now is settled, and well, and private, that the
World's People do not know of it, (for that with them, in all the like Cases,
is the Principal Verb,) George and his Widow grew kind again, following the
same Conversation as formerly, at last she Conceives, and grew big G. Smith's
Second Child by the same Woman.
: However, the Woman would not venture out again, but relied on her Neighbor's
Fidelity: The time of her Travel comes on away goes George in all haste for
Eleanor Hall, Wife of S. Hall, and another faithful Friend; and the time being
come, to work they went, and in a little time she was delivered of a Daughter:
And when the Child attained to the Age of about half an Hour, being a little
dressed up, G. Smith the Father, and Eleanor Hall the Midwife, carried the Child
at the Age aforesaid to a lone House, standing in the Field, called the
Brick-Kill-House, a frequent Harbor for Beggars, since out of use; and in goes
the Woman Eleanor with this Infant, under the faithful Promise of George to
gratify her for all her Trouble, Care and Pains, and to send her and his Child
Sustenance: Ay, ay, that he would; having already sent out G. Washington to
provide a Nurse for it; and for whose return the poor Woman, Eleanor Hall, with
the Child, waited in that Den two Days and Nights; in which place she was
sorely affrighted; for in the Dead of the Night something came and smote her on
the Shoulder, that she was lame of it many Weeks, (as she told me her self:)
Moreover, she told me she would not do the like again for 100 l.

Well, at last G. Washington came, and with him his Housekeeper This Washington
married Anne his Housekeeper soon after, but is now dead; and Tho. Cook of
Littleport, has married her; and she is ready to Depose it, if need be.
, and G. Smith gave him a Bag of Money, viz. 5 l. for his own Care and Pains,
and 40 l. to perform the Contract, which the said Washington had a few Days
before made with Goodman Owers of Barrow, within about five Miles of Bury,
aforesaid.

Well, this Female Child was born to G. Smith by the VVidow aforesaid, the
28th or 29th of July, 1688. being Wednesday; and by Monday this Washington and
his Housekeeper, (whom he afterward married) carried this Child to the Sign of
the Harrow in Fordham, and then away goes Washington to Barrow with his 40 l.
to Goodman Owers, (leaving the said Child and Housekeeper to nurse it:) The
next Day came Goodman Owers and his Wife with Washington, and then there was
nothing but Merriment, Brother and Sister at every Word Viz. Between G.
Washington, Goodman Owers and his Wife, to blind the People of the House, etc.
. This Child was put out by the Order, and with the Money of G. Smith, in the
Name of one Mr. Scott, a Linnen-Draper in London Lying and Forgery meet in this
Upright and Well-meaning Quaker; as Geo. Whitehead and Sam. Cater wrote of him.
, for 40 l. but I forget something which is remarkable; of this 40 l. there
wanted 15 s. which Washington promised to send, as also to find it Linen for a
Year or more; all which is forgot, as Goodwife Owers averrs; and she is a
Woman of good Repute, and the Child lives well, and looks well; this Child was
put to Goodman Owers under the Name of Mary Scott, but they have Baptized the
Child, and called it Mary Smith; Goodman Owers is dead, but his VVidow is
alive, and lives at Risby, within three Miles of Bury, and six Miles of
Barton-Mills, and two small Miles distance from Great-Saxum, where the Boy
lives; and this Boy and Girl often visits each other: And if their Father had
but that Grace to take Care of them, it might mitigate his Crime; I am sure it
would have abated the Edge of my Pen, for he is my Kinsman: And were it not to
discover the Quakers VVays, I should not have been so large, and sent him a
Letter to that Purpose. A Copy of it follows For I was advised by a Gentleman
in Risby to take some Care about it, etc.
.

Cousin George,
I was requested by a Gentleman in our Country to use some Means, that your
By-Children, which are put out to Nurse in our Country, may have something
settled upon them for their future Maintenance; and pursuant thereunto, I do
desire it of you, in regard it is but reasonable and just that you should do
it: Wherefore I make Application to you in this private Way, as most suitable,
and it may make some. Amends for your Crime, and extenuate the Heinousness of
your Offense; for it seems to me a most horrible Crime, besides the Sin; and as
an Aggravation thereof, to beget Children, and send them into the World as
Vagrants, they being from under the Verge of the Law, and can be Heirs of
nothing but the Shame of their Parents; which although they cannot help it, yet
must they wear the Badge and Livery thereof as long as they live. If you answer
my Expectation in this Matter, as I have hitherto been sparing of you, so I
shall make no Complaint to any Justice of the Peace; if not, you may depend on
it; if God give me length of Days, I shall do what I legally can, to have
something settled on them: And therefore let me have your Answer.

I am your Friend and Kinsman, Fran. Bugg, Sen.
Aug. 30. 1697.

But no Answer have I received since.

Come, George Whitehead, What think you of these Things? Where is your
Seriousness? Where is your Sincerity? You told me that your God laid a
Necessity upon you to write against me and others, wherein you called me
Apostate Informer, Devil Incarnate, Beast, Dog, Wolf, etc. Epistle to Judgment
fixed.
But the beforementioned you sooth up, as well-meaning and upright Lambs, and
never writ a Book against them, yet three Books against me in Nine Months time:
And, George, then you were Rampant; you neither studied Events, nor feared
Effects; you were resolved to go on, come what will come; you were resolved to
Unchristian all that opposed you, and separated from you; you were resolved to
ruin them, if possible, both in Name, Reputation and Estate; I have felt the
weight of your Hand, and the Strength of your Indignation, and implacable
Malice; but blessed be the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
amongst his manifold Mercies to me, that he has vouchsafed to give me Time and
Ability to return your sharp Arrows back into your own Bosoms; and I let them
fly freely, I am not sparing; for as Jeremiah said, The Lord has opened his
Armory, and has brought forth the Weapons of his Indignation, Jer. 50.24. And,
George, they will light on the Skirts of this Painted Harlot, and all thy
Jesuitical Craft cannot throw it off; for your Cause is drooping. I have given
you the Key of the Cage, look into it, and you may see the Abominations of the
Earth, even the Mystery of Iniquity. Well, George, after it came into my Heart
to write this Book, I said, Shall I spare them any longer? Concluding, No: But
give this Harlot a double Cup, and make her drink the very Dregs of it: And
having laid fast hold of the two main Pillars, upon which your Building stands,
viz. INFALLIBILITY and PERFECTION, I did with all my Might shake, Judges 26.29.
and behold it begins to tumble: For, George, the time is come, that one shall
chase a Thousand, and two shall put Ten Thousand to flight, Deuteronomy. 32.30. And
art thou so blind, George, that thou can not see it? Do thou not see thy
self and thy Brethren ready to fall upon your own Spears, for very Anguish and
Vexation of Spirit? Art thou so ignorant, George, that thou can not perceive
thy self, calling to the Hills to hide thee, and the Mountains to cover and
excuse thee? Sober Expostulation, First and Second Chapter. But, George, thou
have no more Answer than Baal's Priests had, 2 Kings 18.26. though you call from
Morning to Evening, and thump your Breasts, and leap and jump from one end of
your Wooden Pulpits to the other, stamping like the Friars, yet there is no
Answer, there is none to Pity you, none to Mourn for you; no Advocate to Plead,
for the stopping the Pens that are employed against Quakerism; no, Babylon is
falling, is falling, and great will be the Fall thereof, even like a Millstone
into the Sea; so falls Quakerism, never more to rise again. Amen. Amen.
Alleluja.

CHAP. XV.
Shows the Enmity of the Quakers against me, for my Testimony against their
Errors; and the Providence of God supporting me under my Sufferings.

IT is not unknown to many of the Quakers still alive, with what Zeal and Care,
with what Sufferings, by Fines and Imprisonments, with what Pains and Charge I
was in diverse Kinds exercised whilst I was a Quaker, and that for the carrying
on the Cause of Quakerism; nothing seemed dear to me to part withal, or to
spend, for the Advancement thereof: But when I came to see them walk contrary
to what they pretended, and that their seeming Sincerity was real Hypocrisy, I
then began to look into things, that there might be a Reformation; and the
first thing that gave me occasion was, see Innocence vindicated, etc. p. 8.
That of forcing Apprentices to stand bareheaded in their Houses and Shops, and
yet at the same time pretended they could not put off their Hats in respect to
Persons. This looked so bad, i. e. to receive, nay, exact Respect from our
Inferiors, and not to give it to our Superiors, that I wrote a Letter to the
Yearly Meeting, in May 1675. as a Testimony against it, which gave great
Offense.

The next which gave Offense to me and others, was our Teachers, who would
exhort us to be bold, to give up all, telling us, The Fleece would grow again;
who themselves at the same time would give up nothing, nay, not set themselves
in a like suffering Capacity with the Hearers, insomuch, as that in the Loss of
13550 l. our Teachers never lost 50 l. but the Hearers suffered for them, as
also for themselves. See Painted Harlot, etc. p. 5. And this I saw, and spoke
against some Months before it fell to my turn to be Fined for our Preachers:
But at last I was sined 15 l. for Sam. Cater, for that he did not declare his
Name and Habitation, and thereby put himself in a like Suffering Capacity with
us the Hearers, as I showed at large; see Reason against Railing, etc. p. 73,
to 80. and how I prosecuted the Restitution of the said Fine of 15 l. and had
it again, though with great Loss, by Charges, Interest, etc.

The third thing which gave me Offense, was G. Fox's setting up a Female
Government, by VVomen's Meeting Monthly, etc. This I opposed vigorously; and to
be short, I do think I gave (by my Book) that Image a deadly Blow: De Chris.
Lib. etc. Part 2d. But by this time, G. Whitehead, Sam. Cater, R. S. and
others, wrote several Books against me, wherein they called me, A Child of the
Devil, Enemy of all Righteousness, an Apostate, a Betraying Judas, a
Treacherous Hypocrite, a Dog, a Wolf, a Beast, an Informer, 18 or 20 times in
one Book, entitled, Judgment fixed, etc. The Lib. of an Apost. Cons. etc.
Righteous Judgment placed, etc. with abundance more such Stuff. Well, upon
this I applied my self to our Milden-Hall Meeting, for a Certificate against
these scandalous Detractions, (which they not only Printed, but sent up and
down into all Counties where I dealt, particularly into Leicestershire, in
order to ruin my Reputation Which then was a most hateful Name amongst
Tradesmen.
.) Well, Twenty-seven Members of this Meeting gave me a Certificate, many of
them still alive; and both then and still the chief Men of the Meeting. See New
Rome Unmasked, etc. Epist. to the Bereans, and Introd. See The Picture of
Quakerism, etc. 2d. Part, p. 146. These Books they still sent into every
County, which did me much hurt in my Trade.
And this Certificate, with the several Books I wrote, so mauled them, that
Sam. Cater, and his Assistants, gave over: But G. Whitehead he still goes on,
he wrote sometimes three Books in less than a Year against me, calling me,
Self-condemned Apostate, Counterfeit Convert, a Scandal to Christianity, a
Fool, and Novice, etc.

And when this would not effect their manifest Design, then they sent Letters
about against me, and raised all manner of Lies and Stories; and by Post, sent
me not only Books wrote against Francis Spira, but Letters also. A Relish of
which is as follows, viz.

Francis Bugg, such as is thy Name, such thy Nature, the darkest of the
creeping Things in the whole Earth; they love the Night, feeding upon Filth and
Dung; Night is thy Habitation; the Earth has received thee; Night and Darkness
is come upon thee: Thy Father is shut out of Heaven, and thou also; that makes
ye Howl and Roar. Woe hastens, and the Eternal Night is come, and coming upon
thee. Woe, and Alas! poor Night-Bugg, etc.

3d. 1st. Month, 1690.

This Letter sent me, without any Name to it, I sent a Copy of it the next Post
to Geo. Whitehead, to know if he was the Author of it, but he sent me word he
was not, nor did he know who was; whether he said true or false therein I
cannot tell. But the 14th of the same Month I received another Not of the same
Handwriting, but the same Man, which was Ste. Crisp; for I know his Hand, and
have showed it to others that do.
from the same Man, though of a different Hand; but the last I know to be Stephen
Crisp's. And thus he wrote.

Francis, I am not Geo. Whitehead: Alas for Thee, and Hogg, and Pennyman, the
Arrows from Heaven shall stick fast in your Consciences, when thou have found
me, O Galilean! And thou may hear more from me, etc.


Then in Verse thus:

Indeed, to Vaunt, and proudly Bragg,
Does not become a feeble Night-Bugg.
I Prophecy the Hour is near, O Bugg! unclean,
With wicked Julian shall cry, thou have found me, O Galilean!
As vile an Apostate as ever was wicked Julian;
A wicked Pharisee, no Penitent Publican, etc.

Reader, here is enough to show the Quakers Spirit; and besides, my Knowledge
of its being Stephen Crisp's, by his Hand-VVriting, it is to be observed, that
(as above) he said, I might hear further from him; for about three Months after
came out another Book, entitled, Innocence against Envy, Signed by G. W. and
St. Crisp; besides his usual Expression, I Prophecy, etc. by which, if
Whitehead did not know of his first, yet he knew of his second Letter; and the
Matter being the same in Substance, I am satisfied it was his. I am likewise to
let you know, that notwithstanding they pretended to the Parliament, that they
cannot seek Revenge for themselves, and thereupon could not Sign the
Association, yet they Indicted me for Printing Unlicensed, (whilst it is their
own frequent Practice) in the Old Bailey, London, which put me to great Charge;
insomuch as one way or other, by my attending this Controversy, by Writing and
Printing; first, by opposing their Errors; next, by vindicating my self from
their repeated Abuses, both Publicly and Privately, both as a Man and
Christian, I did come by great Loss in my outward Estate; and when Men
perceived it, they came so fast upon me, as that I could not bear up. See The
Picture of Quakerism, p. 79. I do not in all Cases justify my self, in the too
much neglecting my Business, to attend the Motion of the Quakers, who are a
compacted Corporation, and my self a single Person, there was too much odds:
But I met with such Provocations, which would fill a Volume to relate; and
thereupon I came to see my Fall by the Hand of Saul; for the Sons of Zerviah
were too hard for me: For I had maintained the Contest without the Help of the
Clergy from 1675, to the Year 1697. and in all that time, I never received of
any one, or more of them, Ten Shillings, nor Ten Nights Lodgings: And whereas
they now call me Mercenary, because I have accepted of the Clergy's Kindness,
which has been very Bountiful; let any Quaker of them all show me that he have
waged War at his own Charge and Cost, so long, and at so much Expense, Cost,
Labor, Pains, Charge and Trouble, and I will not from henceforth call him
Mercenary; but their Tongue is no Slander; and now I shall show somewhat of the
wonderful Providence of God, in my Preservation to this Day. For when I found
how the Case stood with me, I waited Two or Three Months under some Heaviness
and Concern, hearing from all Quarters how the Quakers gloried over me;
notwithstanding they were the chief Cause of my Misfortune, not only with
respect to the Controversy, but by Six or Eight of them breaking in my Debt:
Upon which I went to visit Mr. Erasmus Warren, a neighboring Minister, and
told him my Condition; and he spoke comfortably to me, and bad me not be
discouraged, for God was All-sufficient, and that the Earth was the Lord's, and
the Fullness thereof, or to this purpose; and told me, that if I would write a
Letter of Request to my Lord Bishop of Norwich, he and some others would sign
it. I did so, and it was signed by himself, Mr. Archer, Mr. Davis, etc. So I
went to Norwich, and did, with no little Heaviness, presume to go with it to my
Lord Bishop, of whom I did rather expect some little chiding, (being sensible
of my own Fault) than to be so kindly received: But when I came to him, he
examined me about my Condition, and pressed me to be honest, and to pay as far
as I was able. For (said he) our Religion teaches us to do Right and Justly by
all Men; and when you have done, rest upon God's Providence; it is not your
Case alone; Times have been hard, and Disappointments many: And then asked me
what I would have him do for me; I told him, that if his Lordship would please
to give me a Certificate of his Thoughts of me; Iw as minded to make
Application to my Lords, the Bishops of the Church of England, the two
Universities, and to some particular Clergymen. All which I no sooner asked
than he granted me; and it pleased God so to open the Hearts of my Lords, the
Bishops, and Reveread Clergy, that I found Help in time of Need; and when it
was in my Heart to write this Book, I asked one of my Lords, the Bishops,
Leave, to give some Public Acknowledgment of their Kindness; but he answered
me, No, go thy ways home, and be thankful, we desire no such thing: But reading
the Scriptures, and finding in St. Mark's Gospel, Chap. 1. 44, 55. that when
Christ healed the Leper, he charged him, saying, See thou say nothing to any
Man, etc. But he (the Leper, being cured) went out, and began to publish it
much, and to blaze abroad the Matter; and I never read that Christ blamed the
Man for his Gratitude; and I trust, no more will his Ministers and Servants,
for this my Presumption: For how can I receive such unexpected and unmerited
Favors, and not blaze it abroad? I, that for about Twenty Years Persecuted the
Church, and drew Disciples after me I know of no one Man drew more.
, into the Schism of Quakerism, and yet upon my Return met with no upbraiding,
but rather, like the returning Prodigal, am met half way, and laden with
Kindnesses. Surely this is of the Lord's doing, (and it is mavelous in my
Eye) to whom be the Praise of all his Mercies and Providence, now, and for
ever. Amen.

A Copy of my Lord Bishop of Norwich's Certificate is as follows.
THese are to certify, That I have known Francis Bugg some Years, and that he
has appeared to me a Sober, Honest, and Industrious Man, and to have taken much
Pains to Undeceive and Convert the Quakers, by Publishing useful Books, and
that not without Success; but by the Hardness of Times, several Losses, and the
Charge of Printing the Books he writ, he is reduced to great Difficulties:
Wherefore I apprehend him a real Object of Charity; and that he does truly
deserve the Bounty of well disposed Persons, unto whom I recommend him.

John Norwich.
Oct. 22. 1697.
And having obtained this Favor, together with his Bounty, which was very
considerable, I took my Leave of him with many Thanks for his Kindness and
Liberality.

First, That I might take care not only to do what was just to others, but to
take care of my Family also; for he that does not is worse than an Infidel.
Secondly, That I might not lie under the Contempts and Insultings of the
Quakers; who, as they have for many Years sought my Ruin As they do all that
oppose their Errors and Immoralities.
, by all Ways and Methods they could devise, both in Person, Name, and Estate,
so they have been observed like the Philistines, Judges 16.24,25. to glory in
my Misfortunes, as thinking they had accomplished their Ends: But
notwithstanding all their Rejoicing, I had a secret Hope, that my Strength
would be renewed, and that God would enable me to lay hold of their two main
Pillars, Ver. 29. ( i. e. Perfection and Infallibility) and putting thereto all
my Might, I should yet be able to shake their Building, as at this Day, Blessed
be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has so wrought my
Deliverance, as to bring things thus far to pass. Thirdly, That thereby I might
be enabled to grapple with the Quaker's Goliath, that Uncircumcised Philistine,
Geo. Whitehead by Name; who, together with his Brethren, have defied the Armies
of Israel, even all the Professors of the Christian Faith, under every
Denomination: And not only so, but Excuse, Justify, Vindicate, and Defend all
the Idolatrous Practices, Blasphemous Principles, and Damnable Errors, Said,
Wrote, and Printed, Broached, and Spread by the Quaker Teachers, enough to
Infect the Nations, if God had not put it into the Hearts of some Instruments
to discover the same; and thanks be to God, who from the beginning of my
Discovery of their Errors, has given me Strength, Ability and Courage to go
on, and not to turn to the Right Hand, nor to the Left, in my Pursuit after
Sheba, the Son of Bichri, that Man of Beliel, 2 Samuel 20.21,22. (i. e. Geo.
Whitehead) until I have hemmed him in on every side, although I have been hard
beset, and gone through many Difficulties and Streights Which few know but my
self.
, and have been forced to climb up the Hill upon my Hands and Feet, like
Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14.13. yet as he slew Twenty upon the spot, so have I
discomfited Twelve of their principal Men, and mauled Doeg the Edomite, alias
Jos. Wyeth; [see my Sober Expostulation with the Hearers of the Quakers against
the Mercenary Teachers, etc. p. 1. to the 15.] that Pupil of W. Penn's, who, as
I am informed, was equally unbelieving with Mr. Penn touching the late happy
Peace, without a Restau -- such Hopes had they of extirpating the Protestant
Interest, etc. for the time is come, that One shall chase a Thousand, and Two
shall put Ten Thousand of them to flight; and thus does God bring to pass his
Acts, his strange Acts, by weak Instruments; to whom over all be the Glory,
together with the Son, and Blessed Spirit, Three Persons, and One God, now,
henceforth, and for evermore. Amen.

And therefore in the Words of David I will praise the Lord, saying, O Lord,
with my whole Heart I will show forth all thy mavelous Works: I will be glad,
and rejoice in thee. I will sing Praise to thy Name, O thou most High, for thou
have maintained my Right, and my Cause; thou sit on the Throne, judging
Right. The Lord also will be a Refuge for the Oppressed, a Refuge in Times of
Trouble; and they that know thy Name will put their Trust in thee? for thou,
Lord, bast not forsaken them that seek thee. Sing Praises to the Lord which
dwells in Sion; declare among the People his Doings. The Heathen i. e. The
Quakers, who denies Jesus of Nazareth.
are sunk down in the Pit that they made: in the Net which they hid, is their
own Foot taken, etc. Psalm. 9.1,2,3,9,11.

But to proceed, having the recited Certificate of my Lord Bishop of Norwich, I
presented it to several of my Lords, the Bishops, both the Universities, as
well as to diverse Particulars of the Clergy of the Church of England; and I
humbly thank them, they were very kind to me, notwithstanding all the
Endeavors of the Quakers, to represent me unworthy of their Notice;
particularly at Cambridge, where they carried to the Colleges Books against
me, which I had answered and refuted Ten or Fifteen Years since; insomuch that
some of the Heads of the Colleges took special Notice of the Quakers Malice,
and thereupon I do believe were the more kind. Thus does God bring Good out of
Evil; nay, should I relate all the particular Methods the Quakers used in all
Places where I came, to prevent me of their Kindness, and the Aboundings of the
Favors I received, it would seem almost incredible, I being but a single
Person, and known but to a few; the Quakers numerous, and (like the Followers
of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16.2.) Men of Fame in some Cases. But so it
was they did not prevail; but God in his Providence made way for my
Deliverance, beyond my Expectation, and in him do I trust, who takes Care of
the Sparrows, Matthew. 10.29,30,31. and this puts me in Mind of the Widow,
recorded in the Holy Scriptures, 2 Kings 4. whose Husband died, and left her in
Debt, and not Effects to answer, insomuch that the Creditor was come to take
away her two Sons. This poor Woman was no doubt in Distress enough; but yet she
neither exclaimed of her Husband, nor yet murmured at the Dispensation of
Providence which befell; neither did she sit still, and use no Means: But
hearing that Elisha the Prophet was come to Town, she resolves to make
Application to him; he could but deny her; she knew the worst, and hoped the
best; and therefore in Faith, and full Assurance of the Mercy of God to them
that trust in him; and not doubting but the Inspired Prophet knew her Inside,
even the Sincerity of her Heart; and that notwithstanding this Calamity, she
could appeal to him, that her Husband was an honest Man, a Man that feared God,
and served him in Uprightness; and thereupon she puts on Courage, and goes to
him, saying, Thy Servant, my Husband, is dead, and thou know that thy
Servant did fear the Lord, and the Creditor is come to take unto him my two
Sons to be Bondsmen.

This was sorrowful News (no doubt) to the Prophet, to hear that one of the
Sons of the Prophets, that professed Faith in the God of Israel should so fail,
as not to be able to pay his Debts. Well, the Prophet quickly understood the
Widow, and as quickly replied, saying, What shall I do for thee? tell me: What
have thou in the House? Here is two notable Questions, and so quickly proposed,
that he did not give the Widow leave to answer to the first, but added, What
have thou in the House? As if he should have said, Why should I ask this humble
Petitioner, what she would have me to do? It Is plain, she would willingly be
enabled to pay her Debts, rescue her two Sons, and have something to live on;
she then replied, saying, Thine Handmaid has nothing at home, save a Pitcher
of Oil. Upon which the Prophet (as God would have it) wrought a Miracle,
saying, Go borrow the Vessels of all thy Neighbors, even empty Vessels; borrow
not a few; and when thou art come into thy House, shut the Door upon thee, and
upon thy Sons, and pour out into all these Vessels, and set aside that which is
full. She did so, and was thereby enabled to pay her Debts, redeem her Sons,
and had left wherewithal to live upon. O the wonderful Works of God! who thus
instructs his to depend upon his Providence; for the Scriptures are written for
our Learning; and truly, when I consider my own Case, I think it falls not much
short of this Miracle; I am sure I have met with a wonderful Providence in my
Deliverance, considering I had no such inspired Prophet to appeal to, nor such
an Evidence to vouch on my part: I had nothing but Reason and Demonstration to
offer, having prayed to God to incline the Hearts of his Servants to a
Charitable Consideration of Things past, present, and to come: Nay, my Case
seemed worse than the Widow's; for I do not read that she had any Enemies to
Interpose, but I had many. The Quakers no sooner understood that the Clergy
took my Case into their Pious Confideration, but they sent their Emissaries
with Books after me, both to the Colleges, and particular Persons; wherein I
was represented an Enemy of all Righteousness, a Child of the Devil; yea, a
Devil Incarnate, a Wolf, a Dog, a Beast, etc. Judgment fixed, etc. by G. W. And
when this would not prevail against me, they then made Personal Complaints,
that I was a Counterfeit Convert As G. W. had Printed me to be. See his Book, A
Counterfeit Convert, a Scandal to Christianity, etc.
; and to make this out, they told some of the Reverend Clergy in Norfolk, that
though Francis Bugg pretended to be a Member of the Church of England, yet he
never received the Communion with you. See what a Convert you have; what Reason
is there then for you to assist and support him so as you do? Upon which this
Minister writes to Mr. Archer our Minister, to know the Truth of it; he sends
him an Answer by Letter, assuring him, that in Anno 1688. I received the
Sacrament, and (if at home) ever since at the usual times. But when this would
not do, they would try another Project; for John Hubbard, of Stoake An eminent
Quaker in Norfolk; and one of the twelve mentioned in my Sober Expostulation,
p. 1. Printed School.
, told Mr. Meriton, Minister of Oxborow, near him, that I was drunk the last
time was in London, in March School. who sent me a Letter thereof, which
providentially came into my Son's Hand in my Absence: An Abstract of it is as
follows.

SIR,
I gave your Book the other Day to John Hubbard, who received it with a
Scornful Smile; I discoursed with him upon the Subject of it, which he heard
with much Impatience, yet at last he promised to read it; he could not forbear
Invectives against the Author of it; the usual Courtship of that sort of People
to every one that would convince them of their Errors, it is the Sibboleth of
the Party; indeed they may very well challenge to themselves the sole
Privilege of exercising the black Art of Railing, because they are the only
Men that I know of, that can rail by Inspiration: One Mouthful of Dirt I
remember he squirted upon you, i. e. He said you were drunk the last time you
were in London. Sir, I doubt not in the least your Innocence, but they must
Calumniate still, or how shall they prove themselves right-bred Children of the
Accuser of the Brethren: God Almighty assist and strengthen you to break the
Brood of that Viperous Generation, that has so poisoned our Nation; that at
last you may triumph over that old Serpent, that has commenced so Bloody a War
against them that keep the Testimony of Jesus; you must expect he will be
filled with great Wrath; that he will both Hiss, and Sting, and pour out Water
as a Flood after you, his time being short, etc.

Hen. Meriton.
April 11. School.

Upon my receiving this Letter I went to Stoake, and asked John Hubbard what
Ground he had to raise this false Accusation; (I told him that I did not
remember that I spent a Groat at a time all the time I was in London Which was
more than a Month.
: He told me he heard so: Pray tell me your Author; at last he told me T. Belch
A Quaker in London.
, at the Ship in Cheapside, Linnen-Draper. When I came to London, I got Mr. Law
rence of St. Gregory's Parish, to go with me to him, to whom I said, Sir, do
you know me? No, said Tho. Belch: I told him that my Name was Francis Bugg, and
that I understood he had raised a Report of me, viz. That I was drunk in London
March last: I heard so, said Belch, if that be thy Name: Who is your Author?
said I: He is not in Town, said he: I replied, What is his Name? and insisted
on it a good while, but could not prevail with him to tell me. To the Truth of
this Mr. Lawrence subscribed his Name, John Lawrence.

Reader, When I saw my self thus attacked from all Quarters, by Books, by
Letters, by Reports; sometimes, that I was a Drunkard, as you have heard;
sometimes, that I was distracted, and so discomposed, as not able to rest Night
nor Day, occasioned by writing against the Quakers; sometimes, that I left my
Wife and Son in their Society, to introduce me again into their Community, and
Twenty Lies more, I went to the Quakers-Meeting in Milden-Hall, on Sunday the
First of May 1687. as the most probable Raisers of these, or some of these
Stories, and spoke to them after this manner.

Friends, This is the 15th. Year since I came to this Meeting for a Certificate
on my Behalf again the Suggestions of S. Cater and Geo. Whitehead, etc. which
were, That I was an Informer; which at that time was a hateful Name to a
Tradesman, and very Prejudicial to my Reputation, as well as diverse other False
and Scandalous Detractions in their Books. And this Meeting (at least the Major
part of it, Twenty-seven in number) gave me ONE As in The Picture of Quakerism,
Part 2. p. 146.
with great Courage and Freedom, which at that time was very useful; and I now
come to you for a Testification against my self, and ask no Favor at your
Hands, touching several Reports raised on me, Ut supra; and upon your signing
it with your Names, I promise to print it; and what I cannot justly deny, I
will fairly confess.

But several answered me, (and not opposed by the rest, or any of them) That
they never heard any such Report, nor knew any cause why there should be such
Reports.

But for the farther clearing the Matter, and removing Stumbling Blocks out of
the way, I shall recite the Substance of several Certificates, which I took
FROM my Son, (who, though one of them, yet I hope he is sincere; for I have heard
him say, and that before some Quakers, Come, what is Wrong is Wrong, whether it
be in Geo. Fox, or my Father, and I will no more stand by what is wrong is the
one, than I will in the other.) FROM Philip Craniss, who was my Servant near 20
Years He came to me in 1676. and has not been from me Three Years.
, and as familiarly concerned in all my Concerns in Trade, both Buying and
Selling; having taken in and delivered out many Thousand Pounds worth of Goods,
and is still living, and of known Reputation. FROM William Belsham, who was my
Servant 15 or 16 Years, and is a Quaker, and one that handed my Certificate
abovementioned in 1683. a Man of known Reputation. FROM Matthew Belsham, his
Brother, both living well, each having some Estate of their own: He was my
Servant about 16 Years, though none of them at this time; who, if I were such a
Person as some would represent me to be, some, if not all of these, must know
something of it. Nay, I do believe I could have had a Hundred of my Neighbors
to avouch the same, so far as my Actions have come under their Cognizance: But
these being Persons of Credit, and that have had Experience of my manner of
Life, may (I think) balance those Reports, whose Authors cannot be found out:
And indeed, were it not for the sake of my Testimony, which the Quakers would
wound through my Sides, I should not have said so much on this Subject, but
rather have taken David's Patience for my Example; who, when Shimei cursed and
reproached him in the Day of his Affliction, yet he bore all patiently, 2 Samuel
16.6,7,8. And though its true, I am now made to Unmask this Painted Harlot,
(which will still more enrage her) thereby endeavoring, if possible, that she
may see her self, and repent in Dust and Ashes, and be humbled before the Lord;
that so she may be Converted and Healed; at least, that hereby others may be
cautioned not to embrace her Pernicious Errors, yet in all this 20 Years time
Though about Four Years thereof I was in their Community, laboring for a
Reformation, not then understanding their grossest Errors.
of my Controversing with the Heads of this Sect, I never rendered Railing for
Railing, (nor do I now) neither have I taken Advantage at their Miscarriages,
(a small Sample whereof I have now set forth in the former Chapter) as my Books
do manifest, but have handled those Errors which they taught in their Books,
which indeed open the Floodgates to all their Viciousness, [see a Paper from
Pensilvania, entitled, A Brief Admonition to the Elders and Ministers of the
People called Quakers.] and with which they are so tainted, as put all
Christian Societies together, (their Number considered) there is not so much
Viciousness in any one Society. Though if Christ had one amongst twelve, it
cannot but be supposed there is in every Society too many that do not, in Life
and Conversation, answer their Holy Profession; neither do I bring these
Testimonies to excuse my self from my own Infirmities; I am not without Sinful
Imperfections I do acknowledge.

Here follows the Contents of the several Certificates abovementioned, Viz.

First, That he (Fr. Bugg) neither is, nor never was distracted or discomposed,
since any of us can remember him, or that ever we heard of.

Secondly, That in all his Time he has been moderate, both in his Meat, Drink,
and Apparel; and never by any of us known to be Drunk, as is reported, nor yet
inclined to Drinking in Excess.

Thirdly, That he ever was a good Provider for his Family, a Lover of his Wife,
an Indulgent Father to his Children; forcing none (farther than Persuasion) to
a Comformity to his way of Worship.

Fourthly, That we believe he never left his Wife and Son amongst the Quakers,
to introduce him to them again; this is a Malicious Report, to render him a
Hypocrite, which his whole Life and Conversation has declared the contrary, to
his Cost.

Fifthly, The Press being open, and both Parties having equal Privileges, we
look upon it utterly wrong to make use of such Indirect Methods: And some of us
are sorry we have no better way to confute his Arguments.

Sixthly, That we are ready to enlarge on any of these Heads to any Man's Face
that shall question the Truth hereof.

Subscribed by William Belsham, Matthew Belsham, Philip Cranniss, Fran. Bugg,
Junior.


Reader, As I could not pass by such Public Mercies and Benefits as I have
received, without some Public Acknowledgment, without great Ingratitude both
to God and Man, so would I not be too particular, lest thereby I do offend; yet
with St. Paul I can say, That as Sufferings and hard Usage formy Testimony-sake
abound, so do not only Inward Consolation, but Outward Benefits abound also, 2
Cor. 1.5. and as a Proof thereof, I shall add but one Instance more, which is,
That since I came to London, an Ancient Friend of mine, to whom I did owe a
certain Debt upon Bond, who considering the hard Usages I have received from
the Quakers, (in which he himself has had a deep share) and finding me still
conscientiously concerned, without my asking, or once thinking of, or
expecting, brought me the Bond, and forgave me the Debt resting due to him upon
it, without any Covenant or Promise on my part. Thus has God opened the Hearts
of his Servants, and moved them to Compassion; Blessed be his Holy Name for
ever, and Humble Thanks to all, unto whom I have been obliged.

CHAP. XVI.
A Word of Encouragement to all who are Sincere amongst the Hearers of the
People, called Quakers, who begin to be weary of the Yoke of Quakerism, and are
willing to embrace the Christian Faith.

FRIENDS,
HAving given you a Brief Account of my Travel in this Pilgrimage, and showed
you the many Turnings and Windings which I have gone through, and the many
Quicksands and Quagmires that I have passed without sinking, though oft-times in
great Danger; what by Enemies within, and Enemies without, as also in some
Places pointed to Israel's Rock, the Man Christ Jesus, I am now come to remove
one Stumbling Block, which Solomon Eccles has laid in your way, namely, That
there is as great a Gulf fixed between you and the Christians, as there was
between Dives and Abraham, insomuch, that if you would come from them, i. e.
Quakers, you cannot; his Words are these, Viz.

I testify in the Spirit of Truth Viz. By Authority greater than the
Scripture. Truth defending the Quakers, etc. p. 7. by G. W.
, that there is as great a Gulf between the Baptists (and consequently other
Christians) that are NOT in Christ; (that is, NOT in the Quakers Light) and
those (Quakers) that are in the Truth, as there was between Abraham and Dives.
See his Music Lecture, etc. p. 23.

Again, as an Explanation of this Doctrine, he says, Come Protestants,
Presbyterians, Independants and Baptists, the Quakers deny you all: -- The
Quakers are in the Truth, and none but they, etc. The Quakers Challenge, etc.
p. 2, 3.

And from this, and the like Doctrine, spring that Aversion in you, that it is
impossible to prevail with many of you, either to hear a Sermon, preached by
the Public Ministers, or to read their Sermons: So that when the Quakers once
catch any in their Cobweb, it is very hard and difficult to get you out, unless
here and there one, that is resolved to observe the Apostle's Advice, who said,
Prove all things, holdfast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. And I am not
doubtful, but that as there has been a Remnant that has taken this Advice, and
has forsaken the Quakers Errors, so will there many more follow their Example:
For this Doctrine of theirs, which alludes to Christ's Parable, is falsely
applied; for that Parable relates to the Final Estate of the Blessed, and the
Damned, after this Life, as you may read at large, Luke 16. And as for the
Quakers denying all the Professors of Christianity, affirming themselves to be
in the Truth Only, or the Only Church of Christ, as in my former Writings, viz.
The Picture of Quakerism, etc. Part first. I have made to appear from their
Books, this is all Pride, yea, Spiritual Pride, and Self-Conceit, and ought not
to be any Hindrance to you in your Examination and Trial of your selves; but
rather, as a Spur to your Zeal, lest you should be in the Wrong: And if you
come once sincerely so to do, I no way doubt but you will soon forsake
Quakerism. I well remember, that when I first heard it Rumored, that G. Fox
was looked upon as a second Moses, to give forth Laws and Orders for us to walk
by, and Methods and Forms of Church Government, I presently wrote Six Queries
touching Church Government, in the Year 1678 22 Years since.
. which went in Manuscript far and near, as Printed in my Book, entitled, De
Chris. Lib. Part 2. Page 72, 80. the Tenor of which was.

Query 1. Whether Jesus Christ be Head of the Church, or George Fox?

Query 2. If you say Christ; then whether he be not Lawgiver to his Church?

Query 3. If you say, that Christ is both Head and Lawgiver to his Church; then
whether we ought not to Follow and Obey the Commands and Precepts of Christ,
which are laid down in the Scripture by the four Evangelists, and his Apostles,
rather than the Commands and Precepts of G. Fox?

Query 4. If you say, that the Commands and Precepts of Christ ought rather to
be obeyed, than those of Geo. Fox; then I further Query, whether Christ, or any
of his Apostles, ever commanded the Observation of Women's Meetings, apart and
distinct from the Men?

Query 5. If you say, that neither Christ nor his Apostles commanded nor left
any Example or President for Women's Distinct Meetings, to be set up Monthly,
any way to intermeddle with the Government of the Church; then I further Query,
where have George Fox or you your Power and Authority, to Institute and Ordain
such a way of Government? And in whose Name do you compel to a Conformity, and
thus to impose your Ceremonies? etc.

Query 6. Whether were not the Bereans accounted noble, in that they searched
the Scriptures, to see whether what St. Paul taught did accord therewith? And
will it not become us to do the like, to see whether what George Fox imposes on
us, accord with the Scripture? If not, whether we are obliged to observe his
Dictates and Prescriptions, Yea or Nay? etc. To which Queries I never received
any Answer.

And thus it pleased God of his Infinite Mercy, to give me Courage and Boldness
22 Years since, (for it was some Years before Yea, it was May 17. 1675. See
Innocence Vindicated, etc. p. 8.
, that I wrote to their Yearly Meeting, about their forcing their Apprentices
to stand bareheaded before them, whilst they refuse that Respect to their
Superiors) to appear against what I saw to be wrong in them, even whilst
amongst them; equally (according to my Understanding) to what I have done
since; and methinks I desire no more in the Quakers than to be sincere, and
that for their own Good too: I mean, to put on Courage, and say, What do you
tell me of G. Fox, or G. Whitehead, or any other Man? I will stand by no Man,
nor no Principle, nor no People Such a Man I have not found amongst their
Teachers. Tho. Vpshot came nearest; but when I came to ask him, whether he
would justify their Books? He flew off, saying, No, he would not meddle.
, farther than they are right; at least, in my Apprehension, no farther than
they agree with the Holy Scriptures: No, I am not yet Ear-bored to this nor the
other Man, Form or Society, for Self Ends, for Advantage in Trade, for a Name
among Men; no, I am for Truth and Righteousness, so far as I know it. I thank
God thus it was with me, when I was as Famous amongst them, as since they have
endeavored to render me Infamous; and I desire no more of the Quakers than
this, let their Errors be never so great, and their Understanding never so
clouded, if they be Sincere, and willing to be informed, I could heartily
embrace them, and for which I have great Reason; for I was as erroneous in many
things as the most of them: But when I find that G. Whitehead teach them,
first, That the Quakers are the true Church; next, That they are to believe as
this true Church believes; [See his Apost. Incend. etc. p. 3, 16.] and that the
People love to have it so, i. e. like Teacher, like People, the Blind to lead
the Blind, till both fall into the Ditch of Error and Heresy together; this is
sad.

But says Geo. Whitehead, No such Matter; I challenge Francis Bugg, and his
Teachers, Abettors, and Congratulators, to produce those Books of the Quakers,
with the Pages and Words, wherein we deny the same Jesus that was Born of the
Virgin Mary, otherwise Retract and Condemn this Calumnious Aspersion. A Sober
Expostulation with some of the Clergy, etc. p. 46.

This bold Challenge has been often Answered in The Snake in the Grass, 3d.
Edit. p. 129, to 145. Satan Disrobed, etc. p. 8, 9, 13, 14. Gleanings, p. 2.
and so fully, as I cannot pretend to; yet since this Error of the Quakers
denying Christ seems to be the Mother of all their other Errors, I shall for
this Challenge sake, that so his Disciples may see his Impudence, herein also
prove, that they (i. e. Quakers) do deny the same Jesus that was Born of that
Virgin Mary: And if I do so, I think he is obliged to Retract his Errors, and
Condemn the Quakers Books, which so teach, by the same Rule of Arguing, viz.
That both I and my Abettors ought to condemn the Calumny cast on the Quakers,
by such a Charge, if not true. And now to the Matter: When Jesus came into the
Coast of Cesarea Philippi, he asked his Disciples, saying, whom do Men say that
I THE SON OF MAN am? Matthew. 16.13.

Simon Peter answered and said, THOU art CHRIST, the SON of the LIVING GOD,
Verse 16. Again, And WE believe, and ARE SURE, that thou art THAT CHRIST, the
SON of the LIVING GOD, John 6.69. That the outward Person that suffered was
properly the Son of God, we utterly deny. A Body have thou prepared me, said
the Son. Then the Son was not the Body, though the Body was the Son's. A Serious
Apol. etc. by Will. Penn, p. 146. Here you have the Question proposed by Christ
himself, Whom do Men say that I the SON OF MAN AM? You also hear St. Peter's
Answer, which is as plain, and as home to the Purpose as can be; and now you
shall hear Christ's Approbation and Confirmation thereof: But you see the
Quakers Answer is point blank contrary; yea, Will. Penn does utterly deny, That
Person who suffered at Jerusalem to be the SON OF GOD. Mark, Reader, Christ's
Reply to St. Peter's Answer to his most Gracious Question, viz. And Jesus
answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona, for Flesh and
Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven, Matthew.
16.17. and 17.5.

I think I need say no more, especially since this Point is so largely handled,
and so fully proved upon the Quakers by that Reverend Author, in the Books
above-quoted: Only thus much I may add, That if St. Peter be Orthodox in this
Point, then are the Quakers Heterodox; and that herein their utter Testimony is
levelled, and strikes at the very Foundation of Christianity; and as a Reply to
G. W. I do offer De Novo, to prove the same; and I do now affirm, That the
Quakers by their Books do deny the same Jesus that was Born of the Virgin Mary;
The Same Jesus, to whom the Voice came from the excellent Glory, saying, This
is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him: The Same Jesus that
St. Paul preached, Acts 17. The Same Jesus that St. Peter testified, saying,
Let the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that Same Jesus whom
ye have Crucified, both Lord and Christ. And this I offer to prove to G.
Whitehead Vive Voce, at any convenient time, on Condition he will under his
Hand covenant to condemn the Quakers Books, which so Teach, when proved upon
him, as by his own Argumentation (in the Challenge above-recited) he is in
Equity obliged too: And if I do not prove it, I will burn my Books, that so
charge the Quakers; and let this be the Touchstone, to try us both; in the mean
time, any Quaker that thinks I am in the Wrong, let them look first on W.
Penn's Book, by me heretofore quoted, as well as this before me; and the
Scriptures following, viz. Luke 1.26,31,32,33,35, 2.10,11,12,13. Matthew.
16.13,16,17,20,27. cap. 17.5,9,12,13,26,29. cap. 26,27,38,50,67. cap. 28.6.
Mark 9.7. John 5.22,27. cap. 6.69. Acts 1.10,11. cap. 5.30,31. cap. 2.36. Heb.
5.9. cap. 12.2. Romans 8.34. 1 Cor. 15.15. Acts 7.35,36. cap. 10.38, to 44. cap.
17.3,31. cap. 18.5. John 20.31. which I have taken Pains to collect, and he
will then certainly find, that I have on my Side the Testimony of the Glorious
Angels, Holy Apostles, Blessed Martyrs; yea, the whole Tenor of the Scriptures,
and beside all this, a Cloud of Witnesses, viz. the Concurrent Testimony of the
Ancient Fathers, and all the present Christian Churches to this Day, and that
G. Whitehead will have none of his Side, but W. Penn, and a few of his
Brethren, and the Writings of Isaac Pennington, W. Bailey, W. Smith, Edw.
Borough, Geo. Fox, Ja. Nayler, Christ. Atkinson, etc. But I knowing, that so
soon as your Teachers once espy your looking toward Christianity, they will
not only hinder you from reading such Books, that are or shall be wrote against
Quakerism, but refuse you the Sight of such Books of theirs as we quote; for so
long as they can keep you in Ignorance, so long they may keep you Quakers, I
shall therefore give you the same Quotations out of some of their Books, which
I shall in this Book let you know where to have the most of them, viz. William
Penn's Serious Apology, etc. p. 146. W. Smith's Catechism, etc. p. 57. W.
Smith's Primer, etc. p. 8. W. Shewen's Treatise of Thoughts, etc. p. 35. Jos.
Coale's Works, etc. p. 93. News coming up, etc. p. 33. The Teachers of the
World Unvailed, etc. p. 35. The Sword of the Lord drawn, etc. p. 5. Edw.
Burrough's Works, p. 149, 273. Geo. Fox's Great Mystery, p. 206, 207, 210, 211,
250, 254. The Quakers Challenge, p. 6. Readiness Errand to Damascus, p. 7, 8. Some
Principles of the Elect People of God, called Quakers, p. 126. A Question to
Professors, etc. by Isaac Pennington, p. 25, 27, 33. The Capital Principles of
the People called Quakers; Sol. Eccles's Testimony, p. 24, 25, 41. Will. Penn's
Part in The Christian Quaker, etc. p. 97, 98, W. Penn's Sandy Foundation, etc.
p. 10, to 30.

I shall now add something out of a Book, entitled, News of a Trumpet sounding
in the Wilderness, etc. Wrote by Dan. Leeds, who has been a Quaker about 22
Years.
which is come lately out of Pensilvania, Printed 1697. and for the Usefulness
of it I could be glad that it was reprinted, with this Title, A Trumpet
sounding from Pensilvania, giving an Alarm to the Magistrates and People of
England to beware of Quakerism: That so, not only the Justices of the Peace,
but even our Honorable Patriots, might have one put into their Hands: But all
things in their Season; Quakerism had a time to advance, and it must have a
time to fall: But as no Heresy since the Days of Christ ever rose so fast,
prevailed so much, nor carried on with so much Craft, and curious Paint, so
none ever fell so fast (as I am persuaded this of Quakerism will do) insomuch,
as that in a few Years it will be a Shame for any Man of Sense to appear in the
Streets, who owns the Principles and Practice of the Quakers, according to
their Ancient Testimony.

And now a Hint out of the Pensilvanian Book aforesaid, entitled, News of a
Trumpet sounding, etc. p. 21. viz. Though they (i. e. Quakers) clash between
their Old and New Testimonies, yet we see (says D. Leeds) that they have in
their late Books dropped here and there some Christian Expressions, more than
formerly: And what may we think they intend thereby? Why, Geo. Whitehead in his
Counterfeit Convert, p. 72. says, I may see Cause otherwise to word the Matter,
and yet our Intentions be the same. Now is it not admirable that a Man of Geo.
Whitehead 's Pretenses To Seriousness, to Sincerity, to Reality, to Fidelity,
to Constancy, to Infallibility, to Perfection, to Plainness, etc. Ib. 42.
, should be grown so bold in Crafty and Deceivable Glosses, to deceive his
Readers? Is this like the Ancient Simplicity of the Quakers, to say, I may see
Cause otherwise to word the Matter, and yet intend the same? Pray who knows
then when such a Man is sincere, or bow to believe him in what he says; that
thus hides his Meanings, says one thing, and means another? etc. And now I
cannot but expect (says Daniel, p. 42.) that there will be great Devising,
Pulling and Drawing, (Painting and Glossing) rather than make Confession of
their Errors, Confusion, and Contradictions herein Manifested and Charged, (as
also in other Books, by Geo. Keith, Tho. Crisp, Fr. Bugg, and others) because
they have so much accused their Opponents for the same things, (themselves are
now justly charged with) surely some curious Wire-drawing, Mincing, Mangling,
otherwise Wording and Equivocating G. W. You must now call your Brother
Ellwood, and your whole Society of Jesuitical Scribes, for the Alarm is
sounded in your Pope's Borders.
, we must expect; but they having caught themselves in this Net, the more they
flutter, the more they will fetter, ensnare, and entangle themselves; for they
cannot thus dance in a Net, but some Body will see them: For they are now as
easily seen thorough (God be thanked) as they pretend to see through others;
yea, this will certainly be the Consequence, till they use the only Christian
Means to get out of this Net, which is by Humbly Confessing and Condemning
their Errors in their Books, as Geo. Keith has done, etc.

To all which I cannot but join, and wish for their own sakes it may be so;
adding, that if ever it so come to pass, then I shall see a great Truth in what
Tho. Ellwood wrote in his Epistle to Friends, p. 72. viz. The way to recover
the Deceived, is to discover and lay open the Deceivers. In the mean time,
taking it to be a sound Truth, I have adventured to put his Doctrine in
Practice, and so I conclude this Passage out of that Useful and Compendious
Book from Pensilvania; which had that People received my Advice in my
Postscript to my Book, entitled, De Christianae Liberate, etc. Printed 1682.
p. 214. viz. To frequent the Holy Scriptures, and read them diligently, etc.
this might have been prevented.

And now, to conclude my Advice, lest any should prevent you taking the Advice
I gave the Pensilvanians, 18 Years ago, as above I shall, according to my
further Experience in this Pilgrimage, tell you, that it was the Practice both
of the Church of the Jews, and the Christians, (which for Substance are one) to
read and expound the Scriptures in their Assemblies, (which the Quakers call
Conjuration) from Morning to Midday, and to give the Meaning thereof to the
People, out of the Law of God, given forth by Moses, 1 Chronicles. 34.18,19,35.
Nehem. 8.1,2. Ezra 1.10,11. and Christ himself went into their Synagogue, as
his Custom was, where he stood up for to read: And when the Book of Isaiah the
Prophet was given to him, he found (which argues he sought for) a proper place
of Scripture; and when he had read, he then, in a friendly manner, gave the
Minister his Book again, and did not fall upon him, and call him Conjurer,
Beast, Dog, Witch, Devil, Bloodhound, etc As the Quakers does our Ministers.
, but preached out of what he read, and expounded it to the People; insomuch,
that the Eyes of all the Assembly were fastened on him when they heard his
Gracious Sayings, Luke 14.14,16,17,18,19,20,21. and at another time, suitable
to his own Example, he bade the Jews search the Scriptures, for they are them
which testify of me, John 5.39. And after he was risen from the Dead, how did
he appear to his Disciples, and reasoned out of the Scriptures? Beginning at
Moses, and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the
things concerning himself, saying unto them, These are the Words which I spoke
unto you, whilst I was with you; that all things must be fulfilled which are
written in the Law, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning me, John
24.27,44. Thus did he confirm the Scriptures by his Holy Example, both before
and after his Crucifixion; he did not question whether Moses or Hermes were the
first Penman thereof; or whether either or neither, as the Quakers do, in order
to invalidate it, and to overthrow the Divine Authority of it; [ The Quakers
Refuge fixed, etc. p. 17.] no, no, he confirmed them, saying, The Scripture
cannot be broken, John 10.35. Think not (said he) that I am come to destroy the
Law, or the Prophets: No, no, it is (said he) easier for Heaven and Earth to
pass, than for one tittle of the Law to fail, till all be fulfilled, Matthew.
5.17,18. Joh. 16.7. And St. Paul said, The Law is our Schoolmaster to bring us
to Christ, Gal. 3.24. And it was his manner to go into the Jews Synagogue, to
Reason with them out of the Scriptures; opening and alleging, that Christ must
needs have Suffered and Risen from the Dead; proving out of the Scriptures,
that the same Jesus which he Preached (who was Prophesied of, and in due time
was Born of the Virgin Mary) was the Christ. Read Acts 17. Micah 5.2. Psalm.
2.2.22.18. Isa. 61.1.9,7. Deuteronomy. 18.15. Jer. 23.5. Exodus 12.46. Numb. 9.12.21.9.
Read New Rome Arraigned, etc. page 55, to 58. etc.

Here we may see, that neither the Ministers of the Church of the Jews, nor
Christ, nor his Apostles, called the Scriptures Death, Dust, Beastly Wares, the
Husk, Carnal, Serpent's Food, etc. as the Profane Quakers Blasphemously do; as
appears from the Books of their Prophets, of greatest Note, Fox, Whitehead,
etc. See the Quakers Plainness, etc. p. And if you will look into the Apology
of Justin Martyr, and the Writings of the Fathers; as St. Cyprian, St.
Augustine, Origin, Chrysostom, Isidorus, Tertullian, etc. and into the Practice
of our present Church of England, you will find the same: But for your further
Instruction in these Matters, I rather refer you to our Reverend Bishops and
Clergy, who can better inform you.

Thus having kept nothing back from you, which I think may make a Discovery of
the Quakers Faith, Doctrine, and Practice, to be contrary to the Faith,
Doctrine and Practice of the Jewish, as well as the Christian Church, to that
of the Apostles, Primitive Christians, Saints and Martyrs, in all Ages, I shall
conclude this Chapter, begging of God to bless my Labors, to those Ends by me
designed, which are best known to him, and my own Conscience; which, whether
you believe it or not, is, That you may thereby be helped to understand your
Errors; that thereby you may be prevailed upon to beg God's Assistance to help
you out of them, and receive the Benefit of it. Amen.

Fran. Bugg.
July 30. School.
To write no more, I long since did intend,
But now, I hope, that Work is near an end:
For abler Men do daily now come in,
To finish what I think I did begin Respecting some particular Discoveries, not
but there were earlier Pens at work against Quakerism.
.

AN APPENDIX: DISCOVERING A most Damnable PLOT, by a United Confederacy,
carried on by the chief Emissaries of New-Rome, against the Christian Religion,
and Christian Reputation of the Professors thereof; with a Remedy against it,
both Easy and Safe.
READER,
HAving gone through many things, (though briefly) I do now say, that it was not of
my seeking, nor my Choice; I could have been glad to have seen the Quakers to
have Retracted their Gross Errors, and thereby remove the Cause; but they have
slighted all due Methods that are consistent with a Reformation Observe what
Proposals I and others have made in our Books.
: For when G. Whitehead gave forth a Sheet, Entitled, The Quakers Vindication,
etc. saying, Col. 2. P. 3, 4. I G. W. freely offer, and am willing to make it
plainly appear before ANY Six, Ten, or Twelve Competent Witnesses, who are
moderate Men, of common Sense and Reason, That Francis Bugg has grossly wronged
the Quakers, both in Charge, Citation, and Observation, etc. I then did meet
him, and we agreed upon the Preliminaries upon which we were to debate; but
when I came to name Persons, he flew off. Now, by the Contents of his Offer, I
had my Liberty to choose any; yea, all the Men, provided they were moderate Men,
of common Sense and Reason. But, to avoid his Charge of Partiality, I admitted,
that he should have his equal Choice of one part of the Men: And that he might
see I would take no Advantage at his Word any, whereby I was left free where to
make my Choice, as well as who, I offered to choose out of the Ministers of the
Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Independants, or Baptists I mention this here,
because it is Rumored in Town, that he offered to meet me with the Baptists; a
horrible Lie.
; but none would down with him but Quakers: Nay, to choose our Men out of any,
or of all those Four Christian Societies; which had he been sincere, he could
not have denied, since it was his own voluntary Offer: Nay, when he refused to
close on this Bottom, as if he feared he could not choose Six moderate Men of
common Sense in all those Societies, I then offered him to choose each of us
Three Members of the Honorable House of Commons, and to them we would leave
our Matter in contest Viz. Whether I had wronged them in Charge, Quotation, or
Citation, etc. Febr. 1693.
: But this he refused also; and there being some Gentlemen present, they
advised me to send him a Letter to that end, and they would subscribe it, which
I did; their Names are as follows, viz.

Samuel Grove, Samuel Plaice, Henry Symons, John Fenn, and also Danil Hassel.
But this Offer G. W. also rejected, which the Gentlemen abovenamed, as well
as to my self, (and indeed to all that have since understood it) was, and is a
Sign of great Guilt and Insincerity in him, which indeed is manifest in most of
his Answers to several Opposers.

Well, I was not yet willing to give over this Meeting, but I offered him to
lay aside these Men, and the Advantages I had thereby, and to have a Public
Meeting with him, provided he would first engage, under his Hand, to retract
and condemn what I proved Erroneous, Blasphemous, and Idolatrous, in the
Quakers Books; but this he also refused: As at large in my Book, Quakerism
Withering, etc. page 5, 6, 7, 8. Which to me is a sufficient Evidence, that he
is Self-condemned, and Conscious to himself, of the Quakers Manifest and
Apparent Errors, which he is not able to Vindicate, as in an hundred Instances
I might mention, but I will only name one in this place; viz. W. Rogers having
wrote, That the Quakers looked upon George Fox to be in that Place amongst the
Children of Light in this our Day, as Moses was amongst the Children of Israel
in his Day, to set forth the Methods of Church Government, etc. The Christian
Quaker Distin. Part 1. p. 9 Part 4. p. 3. To this Geo. Whitehead replied,
saying, And for Geo. Fox, to be in this our Day in that VERY Place amongst the
Children of Light, as Moses was amongst the Children of Israel in his Day, this
Comparison we own not, etc.

Now there was no Body said, that he was in the VERY Place, upon the VERY Spot
of Ground, on which Moses stood at Mount Sinai: No, but that George Fox was,
with respect to his Power and Authority, to give forth Laws, Statutes and
Ordinances, in the same Place; that is, endued with the like Authority: And in
this Sense, G. W. did not deny, but only that he might quibble it off, as his
manner has been, and thereby blind the People, for which he has a sore Cup to
drink. Read Burrough's Works, page 515. and G. W.'s Serious Search, page 51,
52, 53. and Third Part of the Quakers Quibbles, p. 33, to 44. 85, to 95. and
Dan. Leed's Voice of a Trumpet, page 4, to 40. He that deceives willingly, and
of set purpose, as I am certain has been his Custom, What shall we say to such
a one, but must leave him to God, the Righteous Judge.

G. Fox, Jun. speaking in the Person of the Quakers Light, viz. You have in
your Imaginations put me afar off, and will not own me the Light and Life in
you: -- I the Light will overturn Kingdoms, Nations, and gathered Churches,
which will not own me the Light in them: I will make you know, that I the Light
which lights every Man that comes into the World, am the true Eternal God,
etc. This Whitehead vindicates: The Light and Life of Christ within, etc. p.
11. Yea, if we may consider what Titles G. Fox puts upon himself, as Dan. Leeds
says, News of a Trumpet sounded, etc. page 109, 110. Professing Equality with
God. A brief Relation, etc. p. 2, 3. Gr. Mist. page 67. 127. Readiness Errand,
page 6, 7, 8. News coming up, etc. p. 1. Quakers Challenge, etc. p. 6. And G.
Whitehead and W. Penn's Vindication of those Divine Attributes, given to G.
Fox, in their Books, A Serious Search, p. 58. Judas and the Jews, etc. p. 44.
Judgment fixed, etc. p. 19, 20. Innocence against Envy, etc. p. 18. The Accuser
of our Brethren, etc. page 40, 41. together with Fox's being set up a Worker of
Miracles too: I say, (says D. L.) should the Jews give equal Credit to the
things contained in their Books, with the History of St. Luke, how shall they
know who is the Messiah, G. Fox. or JESUS of Nazareth; especially, since W.
Penn denies that outward Person to be the Son of God, which suffered at
Jerusalem, who was called JESUS of Nazareth? See his Ser. Apol. etc. page 146.
Good Christian Reader, (says D. Leeds, yea, and Fr. Bugg) consider the Event
and Effects of these things; be (we entreat you) otherwise minded, than G.
Whitehead is, who says, he neither consults Events, nor fears Effects in what
he writes. See his Judgment Fixed, etc. Introd.

Thus then does it appear, not only by what is here quoted, but by what is
taken from the Quakers Books, in this, and other of my Books; in D. Leed's
Books, in G. Keith's Books, in Th. Crisp's Books, and others; that Quakerism is
a Plot against Christianity, and strikes at its Root and Branch.

I cannot but foresee, that my old Friends will be half angry with me, for
mentioning W. Penn's Plotting to Subvert the Government: But this I can tell
them honestly, that since the Danger of that is over, and His Majesty has, out
of his Gracious Favor, pardoned them, I should not speak a Word of it, did I
not see, that he and his Brethren are in a most Damnable Plot against the
Christian Religion, of which I gave Notice in The Pict. of Quak. p. 72, to 102.
But since that Alarm did not sound loud enough, I have already, and shall yet
sound a little louder, so that all Ears may tingle, and Hearts may lament, when
they see the Honor of our Christian Religion defamed, and the Holy Profession
thereof invaded by these Impostors. But why should they be angry? W. Penn has
given me a Challenge to it, saying, This open Challenge I make, That if amongst
the many Plots that have been spoken of, and several have been hanged for, that
there has been one known Quaker found amongst them: I confess, that the
Magistrate is excusable in his Discreet Jealousy over Us, etc. But then if one
Instance of a Quaker-Traytor is sufficient to justify the Discreet Jealousy
of the Magistrates over the Quakers, as William Penn truly says; then to make
up a Pair, I may give a second Instance; namely, John Yates, a Quaker, who
lived at Hull, a Master of a Ship, who for carrying Lead into France in the
time of the late War, had his Estate seized; but himself fled from his
Dwelling, and was forced to hide, as his Partner did, or else in all
probability he might have been Hanged; for though they cannot Fight, (as they
say) yet they can carry Lead to make Bullets for the French to kill the English
with. All which shows, that the Magistrates Discreet Jealousy over the
Quakers, is excusable by W. Penn's Allowance, and truly I am of that Opinion
too; and not only in that Case, but in their most Horrible Plot against
Christianity, which tends directly to subvert the Faith in the Crucified Jesus,
and therewith the Foundation of Christianity; and I pray God to give the
Magistracy a due Sense hereof, and then to inspire them with an Holy Zeal, to
find out a Remedy.

For I do say, that to me it does plainly appear, (and to as many as of late
have been conversant in their Writings, and who have observed the Tendency of
them, together with the whole Frame and Model of their Church Government) that
Quakerism is a most Formidable Plot, and a United Confederacy, both against the
Christian Religion, the Professors thereof; together with the Holy Scriptures,
and Ordinances of Baptism and Supper, instituted by Christ Jesus; also his
Death and Sufferings; and that in order to exalt their own Laws and Ordinances,
set up amongst them by their second Moses, whom they said was raised up to be
amongst them in the same place that Moses was amongst the Israelites, though not
in the very same Place, respecting Mount Sinai, where Moses's Feet stood, as
above observed. But that I may not impose upon my Reader, I will yet give some
other, or more Instances, than I have given Though I think I have given
sufficient Reasons already.
. Read W. Penn's Apol. etc. p. 150. where he says, We have a Red Catalogue,
that shall stand recorded against our Presbyterian and Independent Persecutors,
that their Names and Natures too may stink to Posterity, etc. Read also the
Books referred to, viz. Judas and the Jews, etc. p. 41. A Rejoinder, etc. p.
410. The Anarchy of Ranters, etc. p. 42. A Ser. Apol. p. 150. The Picture of
Quakerism, etc. page 102, 103. has them at large.

Reader, This is the fourth Warning we have had from the Quakers themselves of
this Plot, which they are laying, and which they are preparing for future Ages
against the Christian Name and Reputation of the English Magistrate. And that
the Quakers Plot is against the value of the Death of Christ; the Exemplary
Suffering of the Apostles, and Martyrs, read Burrough's Works, p. 273. where
they say, That the Sufferings of the People of God (called Quakers) in this
Age, is a greater Suffering, and more Unjust, than in the Days of Christ, or
his Apostles, or in any time since Here you see, that the Ten Persecutions, the
Bloody Massacres, and Queen Mary's Reign, are all less than the Sufferings of
the Quakers in seven Years time. Oh Monstrous! Oh Horrible!
. What was done to Christ and the Apostles, was chiefly done by a Law, and in
great part by the due Execution of a Law: And hereby it appears, the Suffering
to be more Unjust, because what the Persecutors of old time did to the People
of God, they did by a Law, and by the due Execution of a Law.

Now, Reader, consider what these new Prophets say; and if thou art a
Christian, I do solemnly appeal to thee, whether this Doctrine of the Quakers,
has not a Tendency to cause the Names of the Martyrs to stink, in regard it
implies they were Criminals, and suffered under the Emperors by a Law, and the
due Execution of their Law; for it could not be a just or due Execution, unless
the Law were Just. Do they not hereby, what in them lies, acquit the
hard-hearted Jews, the Barbarous Emperors, and Bloody Papists, of their Bloody
Cruelties, and Implicitly Charge both Christ, and his Apostles, and Martyrs,
with the Breach of some Just Laws; for which, their Penalties (say they) were
duly Executed? And if so, is not this a Damnable Plot? Not to name other
Blasphemies, which lie Couched under this Doctrine; as also, the Quakers Pride
and Arrogance, thus to exalt their Sufferings, from 1650, to 1657. to be
greater than the Sufferings of Christ, his Apostles, and Martyrs: And this Plot
is still carrying on with Vigor, not only against the Presbyterians,
Independants, and Baptists, to make their Names and Natures stink in the
Nostrils of future Generations, when the surviving Quakers bring out their
Books of Sufferings, alias Martyrdom. But behold this Book of theirs, with the
said great Sufferings, greater than that of Christ, and all his Martyrs, since
was reprinted Anno 1672. and Witnessed to by the Approbation of Geo. Fox, Geo.
Whitehead, Josiah Coal, Francis Howgill, and their Hireling Ellis Hooks For
what one writ, the other avouch; they speak all one Thing, are of one Mind.
; so that when they have gathered up all their Sufferings in the Reign of K.
Chapter II. K. J. II. and K. William III. (for they are still collecting all their
Sufferings complete and full, as in Page 84. herein) no doubt but they will
make them to exceed all the Sufferings of the Patriarchs, and Prophets, from
the Blood of Righteous Abel, to the Days of Christ, and from thence to the end
of the Chapter, ad infinitum. O rare! This will be according to their Ancient
Testimony in G. Whitehead's Sermon; insomuch, that this Hellish and Damnable
Plot is against the Patriarchs, Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, Saints, and
Martyrs, in all Ages and Generations. And this is the main Business of their
whole Body, in their Convocations, both in their Monthly, Quarterly, Six Week,
Second Day, and Yearly Meetings; which ought to be taken Care of, at least
Inspected, though they have their Liberty of Meeting in those Houses, Licensed to
Preach and Pray; for at those Meetings there are so many Spectators, that they
cannot do that Hurt and Damage to the Christian Religion, they do in these
Private, Locked, and Barr'd-up Private Conventicles. Thus then it appears, that
this Plot is carrying on against King, Lords, and Commons; against Judges,
Counselors, and Lawyers, against the Reverend Bishops, Clergy, and all
Protestant Ministers; against Sheriffs, Constables, and Headboroughs; and
indeed against the whole Race of Mankind, that profess Faith in Jesus Christ:
And therefore how does it concern all Christians, that have any Love to, and
Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, that have any Respect to our Martyred
Ancestors, who suffered in the Flames for our Holy Religion, to take Care of
the Growth of Quakerism, as they will answer the Neglect of it at the Great and
Notable Day of the Lord.

Objection I. By this time some may be ready to object, saying, Francis, Does
not thy Zeal exceed thy Judgment? What, would thou have Fire come down from
Heaven, and consume them, as Elias did? 2 Kings 1.10. Luke 9.54. Would thou
have the Government fall upon them, and destroy them?

Answer. No, by no means I would not be understood so; for this I solemnly
declare, in the Fear of God, as I hope for Mercy at the Great Day of Account,
when both they and I shall appear before his Great Tribunal, I do desire
neither; I would not have a Hair of their Head hurt: Besides, if I did desire
the Growth of Quakerism, that is the ready way to increase them; for they glory
in nothing more, than to be thought great Sufferers: No; let them have Liberty
in their Licensed Meeting Houses, to Preach, Pray, and Exercise their Talent,
equal with others, if the Government think fit: And as this is all that other
Dissenters desire or expect, so if they had not a further Design, this would
content them, being that which answers the Substance of all their Petitions and
Addresses to the Parliament, from one Reign to another, together with not being
compelled to go to any other Worship: And they having both granted, I think
it is all that is necessary to answer the Ends of all their frequent and endless
Solicitations: And nothing of this do I desire them to be debarred of.

Object. II. But then some may say, What other Way is there to put a Stop to
the Growth of Quakerism, if they have this Liberty? Such an Expedient would be
requisite, if such an one were to be found.

Answ. I have once offered my Thoughts in this Case, and shall now enlarge
thereon: For as I then said, so I still believe, that the main Requisite to
work a Cure, is to know the Disease, which, when found out, an ordinary
Practitioner may prescribe a Remedy, sooner than an able Physician, who knows
not the Disease. Besides this, I have heard, that when a Bill for the
well-Tanning of Leather was brought into the House of Parliament, one of the
Honorable House of Lords being willing to inform himself into the Nature of
that Affair, he applied himself to a Cobbler, discourses with him about this,
that, and the other Default in Leather, and what VVays might be found to remedy
the Abuses thereof, for the Public Good. The Cobbler tells his Honor what he
knew, by many Years Experience, and told his Lordship how it might with Ease be
remedied; insomuch, that when the said Bill came under Debate in the House, his
Lordship was so well skilled, not only in the Means to be used, but in the
Terms of Art, that his Lordship spoke like some experienced Tanner, who by his
Discourse gave Light to the whole House. Now whether this was so or no, I will
not determine, but it is not improbable, since the wisest of Men may sometimes
improve by such weak Helps, as in other Cases it is frequent; such a Virtue is
Humility: And thereupon, in answer to the Objection, I shall say thus much.

I. Let G. Whitehead, and some others of the Quakers chief Leaders, and Fr.
Bugg, etc. be summoned by Authority to appear: And whereas G. Whitehead, etc.
has given in a Sheet to the Parliament, Anno 1693. suggesting, that Fran. Bugg,
etc. has wronged the Quakers in Charge, Citation, and Observation; and if G. W.
can make it appear so, (for our Law judges no Man before it hears him) let
Fran. Bugg, etc. be made an Example. Again, on the other Hand, if it appear
that Fran. Bugg, etc. has not wronged the Quakers, nor falsely charged them,
either in Book or Page; and that those Points of Doctrine objected against the
Quakers by F. B. etc. be found to strike at the Foundation of the Christian
Religion, and to subvert the Faith, then let the Quakers be obliged to renounce
them, and condemn those Books which so teach: This, yea this, would strike
Quakerism to the Heart This is the thing feared by G. W. etc. when they cry
out, Fran. Bugg would stir up Persecution.
, and give it a Mortal VVound, and preserve the Quakers too; and the Books
being condemned to be burnt, as it would remove the Scandal brought upon the
Christian Religion, so would it be a Means to rescue their Wives and Children
from the Jaws of Quakerism, that Fatal Mischief to Mankind, and preserve others
from falling into it. For now many of them think their Teachers write and speak
from the Eternal Spirit; whose so speaking is of greater Authority than the
Bible: Truth defending the Quakers, etc. page 7. And that it is as lawful to
burn the Bible, as their Books, Papers, and Queries: Truth's Defense, etc. p.
2.104. Then would those, who are now Tinctured with the Leaven of Quakerism,
vomit it up, and forsake their Errors. This I take to be one proper Remedy, and
possibly might effect the Cure: If not,

II. If the Quakers would Apologize, That now they Believe otherwise than they
did formerly; then, as a Proof of their Sincerity and Conversion, let them
(having first condemned their Books as aforesaid) set out certain Articles of
their Faith, in Plain, Clear, and Positive Words, agreeable to Scripture,
(since of late they have so much pretended to be Orthodox therein) and at the
Close of them condemn all their other Books, which teach the contrary,
particularly by Name.

III. The next thing requisite, (to make a firm and lasting Cure to them, their
Heirs, and Successors) is, to admit each Congregation of Quakers to have their
Teacher, (or two, if one will not do:) And likewise, that thse Teachers may
attend only their own Flock, and not to range all the World over; at most, not
above Five or Ten Miles, to Hold-forth; lest this Putrified Sore break out
again, and the last end be worse than their beginning: And as this, thus
granted, is, what other Professors, Dissenters from the Church of England, are
content with, so will it answer all the just Ends of that Liberty of
Conscience, so much by them solicited for, and so graciously already granted
by the Government.

IV. Let them not be permitted to hold Yearly Convocations with Doors Locked,
Barred, or Guarded by Men, on Purpose to prevent Inspection, in order to make
Laws against the Laws of the Land; and with respect to their Subjects, to
repeal such Laws as suite not their Design; which shows, that they are a
Government within the Government: Whose Laws thus made, they keep private, even
from many of their own People.
For as this Practice no Dissenters ( Quakers only excepted) do desire, (and
indeed without His Majesty's License, more than the Bishops of the Established
Church can Legally do) so would it be a Means to work a perfect Cure of this
(so much to be lamented) Gangrene of Quakerism.

V. Lastly, That they may not be permitted to Teach School Publicly; for
thereby they corrupt the Youth, and lay a Foundation for the next Age, for the
Seeds of Quakerism to spring, and put forth again; for they teach G. Fox's
Journal, which contains such Doctrine as tends to undermine the Christian
Religion.

Object. III. G. W. in his late Book, Truth and Innocence, etc. p. 41. objects,
Our Adversaries would make as if we promoted Regnum in Regno, not only
independent, but opposite to the Civil Government, which none of our Meetings
are; being to promote real Practice of Piety, Christianity, and true Religion
among us, as a People, and to prevent the contrary. -- We know of no such
Supreme Assemblies among us, as gives Laws, and makes Orders for the Government
of our People, suppressing Books, etc.

Answ. This is all fallacious; he knows they do, and I can prove it: And not
only make Laws for their People, but make Laws or Orders contrary to the Laws
of the Land. And as for his Pretense, that at these Meetings they do not
promote Regnum in Regno, since their Meetings are, to promote real Piety, etc.
1. When the Bishops and Clergy meet, do they not promote the real Practice of
Piety, as much as the Quakers pretend to? Yet if they should meet, as do the
Quakers, without License from His Majesty, it would (as Lawyers say) be against
these Statutes, 28 Hen. 8. c. 19, 21. 27 Hen. 8. c. 15. 3 Ed. 6. c. 10, 11. 1
Eliz. c. 12. Magna Charta, c. 29. Pet. of R. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. 37
Hen. 8. c. 17. 8 Eliz. c. 1. 1 K. W. and Q. M. N. 307. And such Meetings, let
the Pretense be never so seemingly good, are interpreted to be Regnum in Regno;
viz. not only independent, but opposite to the Civil Government; and should the
Bishops and Clergy so meet, with never so real a Purpose to promote real Piety
and Christianity, (of which the Quakers is but a Counterfeit) they thereby
would (as the Learned in the Law say) run themselves into a Praemunire. Neither
do, or are any People in England so bold, so to Meet, in Contempt of the Laws
of the Land, expressly against the King's Prerogative, the Rights of
Parliaments, and the Liberty and Property of the Subject, the Quakers only
excepted, whose Principles are Extrajudicial and Antimagistratical, and of how
dangerous a Consequence, Time will best demonstrate; for hitherto they have not
been able to do Hurt, as to the Government.

But see one of their own Books before they got to this Height, in Oliver
Cromwell's Days, entitled, The West answering to the North, etc. by G. Fox and
others of them, p. 80. viz. Any Party of Men under a Government, to make Laws,
not being Authorized so to do, for the Binding of others, and thereunto require
Obedience, is the setting up of themselves above the Law, and treading it under
their Feet; and rendering of them, whom they so Bind, their Slaves and Vassals,
and so is TREASON.

Object. IV. As for what is Collected, (which they call a Fund) is not for
Stipends for our Teachers; we have no Mercenary Teachers, nor among us
Attendants on both Houses of Parliament, etc.

Answ. This is all false in Fact: 1. I do affirm, and offer to prove it, That
their Teachers have Stipends, and great Sums of Money out of the Money
collected; if I do not, (let but my Superiors give me the Opportunity) I will
engage to forfeit my Life; yea, as clearly as Daniel proved to the King the
Fraud of Bell's Priests: And also will show the private Entrance or Passage,
which the Quakers Mercenary Teachers go in and out to this Fund, or Bank, or
Common Stock, or Collection, (let it have a Name of the Quakers own giving, if
that will please them) without strewing Ashes: If I do not do this, let me
suffer; if I do, and that I also show, that the Charges Attending the
Parliament come out thereof, then let this Fund, Stock, or Bank, together with
their Yearly Meeting, and all other their Monthly, Quarterly, Six-Week and
Second-Day's Meetings, which are not designed for Worship, but for Government,
be suppressed; and let them be content with their Meetings on Sundays for Public
Worship, with their Doors open, as other Dissenters have. Now if they be but as
Confident as Bell's Priests were, let them try the Experiment; I am ready to
engage them, when the Government shall call me to it; and by no other Methods
than is usual oft-times with the Members of the House of Commons to use, when
they would find out a hidden Secret, which they fear tends to subvert the
Government.

Object. V. G. Whitehead, in Excuse of the Quakers, recording their Sufferings,
as only to have have recourse to, and not designed to render the Government
odious to Posterity.

Answ. I answer; this is such a fallacious Evasion, that it serves only to show
their Hypocrisy. Read but The Picture of Quakerism drawn to the Life, etc. p.
102, to 106. and The Pilgrim's Progress, etc. first Edition, p. 167. where five
Quotations are at large taken out of their Prints, written by W. Penn, R.
Barkley, and others of Note amongst the Quakers; and they afford a
Demonstration, and Proof sufficient; and which they never yet gainsaid, by
Answer thereunto.

Object. VI. G. W. page 69. of his Truth and Innocence Vindicated, etc. says,
Let their Books and ours be compared, to clear our Innocence from their
Adversaries gross Calumnies, Perversions, Misrepresentations, etc.

Answ. Content, with all their Hearts. But though I am no Prophet, nor the Son of
a Prophet, yet I dare venture to say, that Geo. will not be so willing to put
their Cause upon this Issue, as the Priests of Bell and the Dragon were to put
their Fraud to the Test: No, theirs was a sufficient Example to their Followers
in Deceit and Falsehood: And I marvel G. W. should have the Face to propose a
Thing which they have these Fifteen Years to my knowledge always refused; and
when any one proposes it, they fly off, and cry out Persecution, Persecution:
For he knew both many of his own Books, as well as Fox's, Burrough's, and their
Chieftains, are well fraught with Errors, Blasphemy, Seditious, and Bloody
Treasonable Principles: And that they stood in as much need of an Act of
Oblivion, as any People upon English Ground; and with which all their Crimes,
might for all me have been buried, had they not revived them, and told us over
and over, That their Principles are now no other than what they were in the
Beginning.

Thus having answered these Objections, I shall add no more on this Head, only
referr to my former Book, entitled, The Picture of Quakerism, Part 2. page
121, to 128. for more of this Nature; which probably may be of good Use, if the
Poor Man's Counsel be taken, Eccles. 9.14,15,16. Read the Ninth Chapter of
Joshua at your leisure.

And now to conclude, with a Word of Encouragement to such who are concerned in
the Discovery of Quakerism: Do you not remember the Day, (I am sure I do) how
the Quaker-Teachers went into Churches, and disturbed the Established
Ministers? But now none must disturb them, if they do, the Officer is called
for, and the Offender prosecuted: Witness Geo. Keith did but desire to go into
the Quakers Meeting at Bristol this present August, and they refused his going
in, though he promised not to disturb them; but threatened him with executing the
Law against him; as in his printed Relation appears more at large: This is a
certain Sign of what they would do in other Cases, had they Power. I say, do
you not remember how they challenged the Public Ministers to dispute, to
answer their Queries, etc. It would make a Volume to handle this Matter
thoroughly. But behold! here is a Change with them; you may challenge them long
enough, but cannot get them out of their Holes; they see and know they are
discovered; this makes them Timorous, and as the Scriptures say, Fearfulness
surprise the Hypocrites. They see this, that, and the other Book come out
against them, which they cannot answer, nor are they able to defend themselves;
and now they call out for a Cessation of Arms, and are for an Amicable
Conversation; yea, for Peace and Quietness; and it is Seditious to challenge
them, and remind them of their Errors; this is against Magna Charta, say they.
Geo. Keith has three times called them out, and challenged them, but they dare
not appear, but like selfcondemn'd Apostates, lie mute; whereby it is manifest,
their Innocence so much boasted of, is not Triumphant, as G. W. says in his
Book, Innocence Triumphant, etc. And therefore the way to deal with these
cunning Sophisters, G. W. etc. is still to pursue them with Challenges, to call
them into the Field; and thereupon I will pitch my Standard here, on Behalf of
the Christian Religion, and Protestant Profession, against Quakerism, Head and
Tail, and once more challenge G. Whitehead to appear on his own Proposition to
the Parliament, viz. For each of us to choose four or six moderate Men of common
Sense and Reason, out of the Professors I call it his, because he did
voluntarily offer to meet me before any Six, Ten, or Twelve moderate Men, etc.
of the Christian Faith, and let us dispute it out fairly, and above-board: And
thereupon I shall renew my Challenge, and let it stand here as a Monument of
the Quakers Cowardice, and Self-Condemnation, if they would rather lie under this
heavy Charge following, than to come out and make their Defense, viz.

First, That they deny Jesus of Nazareth, who was Born of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, who suffered without the Gates of Jerusalem, to be Christ, the Son of the
Living God.

Secondly, That they deny the Scriptures, by their speaking contemptuously of
them; calling them Carnal, Death, Dust, Beastly Ware, Serpent's Meat, etc. and
that Preaching out of them, is Conjuration.

Thirdly, That they exalt their own Sayings and Writings above the Scriptures,
as being of greater Authority, and more Certainty; not only in Words, but in
Practice.

Fourthly, That they undervalued the Death and Sufferings of Christ Jesus, by
granting, they were inflicted by, or for the Transgression of a Law, and
executed in a great Measure (at least) by the due Execution of a Law.

Fifthly, That they exalt their own Sufferings, as greater, and more unjust,
than the Sufferings of Christ, his Apostles, and Martyrs; yea, even than all
the Persecutions, from the Days of Christ, to the Year of their Rise, namely,
1650.

Sixthly, And that (for these and the like Reasons) the Quakers Books (which
thus teach) are Blasphemous; and their Practices (in their Adorations) are
Idolatrous.

This is my Charge, which I have often laid down, and which I now renew, and
offer to make good upon them, if he will choose his Men, and meet me according
to his own voluntary Offer, and my Acceptance thereof; or otherwise, because I
will give him his Choice of two Methods, viz. or on Condition At Oxford I
offered Sylas Norton to prove the same Charge against the Quakers, and their
Doctrine.
that he, George Whitehead, will engage under his Hand to Retract their Errors,
if proved upon them, out of the Quakers Books, wrote by their approved Authors,
and condemn the Books which teach this Horrible Doctrine, promising my self
also to Engage under my Hand, to Retract what he shall prove Erroneous in my
Books, or False in Fact, relating to my Charging the Quakers, thereby making
them public Satisfaction; and to Burn my Books, if found Guilty, as a
Testimony of my Injustice A Sign of my not being Conscious of Guilt herein.
: And to this I subscribe my my Name, Aug. 3. School. Francis Bugg.

This then is my Flag of Defiance, which I hold out to G. Whitehead, etc. this
is my Standard, which I have pitched ON Behalf of my Savior JESUS CHRIST,
which the Quakers have Contemned, Disowned, and Denied to be the SON of GOD; ON
the Behalf of the Scriptures, which the Quakers say are Dust, Death, Beastly
Ware, Serpents Meat, etc. ON the Behalf of the Holy Ordinances of Baptism and
the Lord's Supper, which Christ Instituted; ON the Behalf of the Church of
ENGLAND, both Magistrates and Ministers, which the Quakers have most wickedly
Traduced and Abused, as Intolerable to bear, and Seditious in its own Nature.
Let them come forth out of their Dens and Holes, and acquit themselves like
Men, if they think I wrong them, or else be content to lie under my Charge, as
self-condemned Persons; and let them also know, that my Book, New Rome
Arraigned, etc. stands unshaken, and that George Whitehead is not Triumphant,
but forced by the Guilt of his Conscience, to submit to the Charge above
exhibited, which is Ignoble and Base, on his Part, and will lower his Topsail,
to his great Abasement, Shame, and Confusion of Face, in the Eyes of all sorts
of Intelligent Persons.

Thus having stated the Contest between G. W. and me, and advised my Friends
and Fellow Laborers, not so much to Answer the Quakers Books, as to Charge and
Recharge them again and again, till they at last, (being confounded with Shame,
Horror and Confusion,) be forced to come out: But I shall show Whitehead's
Fallacy in his way of answering Books, only by one Instance; for I having in my
Book, New Rome Arraigned, etc. page 47. by way of Retaliation upon the Quakers,
who call the Public Ministers, Antichrists, and Deceivers, and the World's
Teachers, given Fifteen Instances, why the Quakers are the World's Teachers and
Deceivers; the second of which was this: The Quakers, who teach, that the Name
JESUS and CHRIST belongs to the whole Body, and every Member in the Body, as
well, and as amply, as to Christ the Head; are of the World, and Deceivers: New
Rome Arraigned, etc. page 47. Now this was no Quotation, but a Charge, which
rests for me to prove. I grant the Word amply is by me added by way of
Illustration; but the Words as well, that G. W. neither mentions, nor disowns.
Isaac Pennington's Words are, Does not the Name (Jesus and Christ) belong to
the whole Body, and every Member in the Body, as well as to the Head? -- So
that the Name is not given to the Vessel, but to the Nature in the Vessel. A
Question to Professors, by Isaac Pennington, etc. p. 27. P. 33. The Scripture
does expressly distinguish between Christ, and the Garment which he wore;
between Him that came, and the Body in which he came; between the Substance
which was veiled, and the Vail which veiled it. Lo I come; a Body have thou
prepared me; there is plainly He, and the Body in which He came; there was the
Outward Vessel, and the Inward Life; this we certainly know, (says Isaac) and
can never call the Bodily Garment, Christ, etc. And whoever read the
Scriptures, may clearly see that the Quakers are False Teachers, in that they
first teach, that the Name JESUS and CHRIST belongs to every Believer, as well
as to CHRIST the Head; since they can first call him, as you have heard, A
Garment, a Vessel, a Vail, a Body; but in express Words they say, they cannot
call Him Christ; but whoever read the Scriptures by me quoted, in the Sixteenth
Chapter, I hope they will be convinced. And St. John says, Then Pilate
therefore took Jesus, and scourged him. Then came Jesus forth, wearing a Crown
of Thorns: Then the Soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, they took his
Garments; but one of the Soldiers with a Spear pierced his Side: She turned her
self back, and saw Jesus; Jesus says unto her, touch me not, for I am not yet
ascended: Thomas said, except I shall see in his Hands the Print of the Nails,
and put my Finger into the Print of the Nails, and thrust my Hand into his
Side, I will not believe. Then says he (Jesus) to Thomas, reach hither thy
Finger, and behold my Hands; and reach hither thy Hand, and thrust it into my
Side, and be not faithless, but believing. And Thomas answered unto him, my
Lord, and my God. And many other Signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his
Disciples, which are not written in this Book; but these are written, that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing, you
might have Life through His Name, John. 1.5,23,34. 20.14,17,25,27,28,30,31.

Thus then it is evident, That the same Jesus that was Born of the Virgin Mary,
the same Jesus which Suffered at Jerusalem, is the Christ which the Apostles
preached, and which all true Christians believe in; yet as evident, That the
Quakers do not own him, nor believe in him: For, as above noted, Isaac
Pennington says, there was the Outward Body, which they can never call Christ;
Isaac Pennington's Question to Professors, etc. p. 27, 33. G. W.'s Judgment
fixed, etc. p. 336. W. Penn, he says, But that the Outward Person which
suffered was properly the Son of God, We utterly deny; W. Penn 's Ser. Apol.
etc. p. 146. Well, but let us hear this George Whitehead, who thus replied,
saying, I deny that the Quakers teach, that the Name Jesus and Christ belongs
to every Member in the Body, as amply as to the Head: Where proves he (Fran.
Bugg) as amply? Says Geo. Whitehead. W. Baily's Works, p. 229, 230, 307. The
Sword of the Lord drawn, etc. page 5.

Mark, Reader, here is a Tacit Confession of the Words as well, though he carps
at my Word amply, which I put in for Illustration sake; it not being a
Quotation, but a Charge, which I still offer to make good, if he will meet me
on his own Proposition; for I take the Word amply to mean no more, but as
Plainly, as Evidently, as Apparently; and the Quakers say, that the Name Jesus
and Christ belongs to every Believer, as well as to the Head. This Whitehead
denies not, this he disowns not, only carps at the Word amply.

And therefore my Advice to all my Fellow Laborers is, to take this my Method,
give New-Rome Charge after Charge, as Geo. Keith has done; see his Three
Narratives; as Daniel Leeds is a doing A Trumpet sounded out of the Wilderness,
etc. p. 141.
; who has been a Quaker about 20 Years; and let this be the Test between
Christianity and Quakerism; If the Quakers be Innocent and Sincere, (though
mistaken through Error) they will come out; if Insincere, and Self-conscious of
their Hypocrisy, they will not appear, but Rave and Rail like Rabshekah, at a
distance; by this Test shall the Plot be discovered, and the Conspirators be
made manifest: And I am not without Hopes, but that what I have said, in
Conjunction with my Fellow-Travailers, will be a Means to preserve some from
running Headlong (as the Swine did) into the deep Lake of Quakerism, and and to
convert others that are misled, as well as be useful to the Church of God in
general. Which God of his Mercy grant, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Fran. Bugg.
August 25. 1699.
FINIS.
A COLLECTION OF Some Passages (Touching those called QVAKERS) Which were Writ
(with much more of the same tendency) by several that were, or still are,
amongst that People. WHEREBY The Reader may plainly see and perceive what
Spirit it is that Acts their Preachers and Leaders; and how they have been
foretold and faithfully warned of the Day of Perplexity, Reproach, and
Ignominy, that is come and coming upon them.

O thou Sword of the Lord, how long will it be e're thou be quiet? Put up thy
self into thy Scabbard, rest, and be still. How can it be quiet, seeing the
Lord has given it a Charge? I cannot hold my Peace, because thou have heard, O
my Soul, the Sound of the Trumpet, the Alarm of War. Reader,
THese Passages in this Page of Ann Docwra and Robert Sandiland's Writing, I
have added since I had a Proof from the Printer of those Collections following.

He (i. e. S. Cater, a great Preacher) has written more than is true concerning
me, -- he is very Bold, and the most Confident Liar that ever I met with; I
laid the Record against J. Ainsloe before him, -- also G. W's False Certificate
about the (said) Record In his Book, Judgment Fixed, etc.
; it is an abuseful Forgery; for some of those whose Names are to the
Certificate, absolutely disowns it, and say, they set their Hands to none; it
is very sad (said she) that Men should be so Bold in their Wickedness A. D's
Letter to Mr. Crisp, March 25. 1684.
.

I know it is common (says she) with some of them in their Books of
Controversy, to put the Names of such Persons as they account their Vassals,
both to Certificates and Books, sometimes without the Consent of the Parties
whose Names are Inserted, and sometimes with their Consent, through slavish
Fear of having their Trades obstructed, and thereby Ruined See A. D's Printed
Broadside, i. e. The New Projecting Formalist Uncharacterized, etc.
.

Which Impious Practice of theirs is confirmed in their shameful Forgery in R.
S's Book Righteous Judgment, etc.
, as at large in a Letter of his to me, printed in my Modest Defense, etc. p.
20. may be seen: And as to splitting Sentences, mincing and mangling, and
thereby marring the Sense of their Opponents, no People so False, so
Perfidious, and so Deceitful, that I know of.

F. B.

A COLLECTION OF Some Passages (Touching those called QUAKERS) etc.
I Have long seen (says R. R.) the Abomination that makes Desolate, standing
amongst the Quakers: Wherefore hear the Word of the Lord, ye Rulers of Sodom,
and People of Gomorrah, it is this Spirit that has encompassed your Jerusalem
about, as with Armies, by which we know the Destruction thereof draws nigh.
Finally, it is that Spirit of Wickedness in the form of Righteousness, that has
already torn your Crown from off your Head, and discovered your Secret Parts;
so that the Scab of Contention and Strife is seen, that will never leave nor
cease to Divide you, till the Name of Quaker become an Hiss and a Scorn amongst
the Nations. This Witness is true. And you that, for the vast number of your
Tribes, have seemed to magnify your selves in your increase of Children; Woe be
to you that now give Suck, (and take so much pains to add to your Sect) for
behold in one Day, loss of Children and Widowhood shall come upon you. This
Witness is true. Of this I am most certain, that a Bitter, Lying, and
Persecuting, Proud Spirit inhabits your Tents; which Babylonish Garment has
long been seen to lie hid amongst that Tribe, called the Ministry, the Teachers
and Leaders of the Quakers; even such Spiritual Wickedness, which if practiced
amongst Presbyterians, Independents, or others, (whom ye disown, and can see
nothing in them that is good) they would abhor themselves therein; which you,
as with a Whore's Forehead, boldly maintain and defend. You are, in truth,
those that justify your selves before Men, but God knows your Hearts; and
the Day is at Hand, even at your very Door, which will Discover, Reveal, and
Preach as upon the House-tops, many and great Abominations which yet lie hid
amongst you, that so you may be judged according to your Deeds. This Witness is
true, as St. Paul said, Tit. 1.12,13. I am constrained (contrary to my Nature)
to plead like a Man of Contention against this Proud, Pharisaical and Perverse
Generation; this Leviathan and Crooked Serpent, in whose Nostrils (unless a
Hook be put) would swallow not only the Rivers, but also the very Sea into
himself, viz. Receive all (though never so unclean in Heart and Spirit, if
outwardly they will but own him, receive his Mark Of Thee, and Thou, and the
Hat.
and walk in outward Observation and Show conformable to them; who while they
profess themselves free from Sin, and being the only Children of GOD, are
notwithstanding found bitter Persecutors of the Truth, and Enemies to the
Unction the Anointed One, in whomsoever he does appear; thereby rendering
themselves guilty of all the Innocent Blood which has been spilt, from the
Blood of Righteous Abel, even to this Day: All which Blood cries aloud for
Vengeance upon the well-favoured Harlot (Mystery Babylon) who in the Golden
Cups, and goodly Show of an outward Profession, has inwardly (with a bitter,
ravening and devouring Spirit) made her self Drunk with the Blood of the Saints
and Martyrs of Jesus. This Witness is true. I have observed, that those that
forsake Father and Mother, (the Sect that nourished and brought them forth) to
follow the Lord fully and Holy (as did Caleb, Joshua, and Jesus, etc.) not
minding their own Reputations, or Fame, not loving their Lives to the Death;
such, I say, have been accounted, as in all Ages, so by this Hypocritical,
Proud, Self-righteous Generation, as the worst of Men; calling them Ranters,
Atheists, Blasphemers, Devils, any thing, even all manner of Evil, so they may
wound the Truth, and slay the Innocent Defenders thereof; whose harmless Souls
I see lying under the Altar of Truth, sorely oppressed for their Testimony
thereunto; and crying out, How long, Lord God, Holy and True, (will it be) e're
thou do Judge and Revenge our Blood? For whose Elect sake, the God of my
Salvation will suddenly arise, and behold Enmity, Lies, and Falsehood, etc.
(even all that Spirit of Wickedness) will surely fly, hide it self, and sink
again into the bottomless Pit from whence it came. They care not whom they
slander, or what Lies they tell, so they may Advance, Strengthen, and increase
their Party and Sect. By all which it evidently appears, that the Spirit of
Deceit and Falsehood is crept in, and does inhabit amongst this People. You are
now like that Evil Spirit cast out, running to and fro, walking in the dry
places of your Elders Traditions, those you call good Old Friends; seeking
rest, but never shall find any, so long as Balack and Balaam, that bitter
Spirit, leads to Curse whom God will surely Bless, and bring over you; for ye
must fall, and (with Haman, Saul, and Herod) be ensnared and taken even in the
same Pit of cruel Deceit, which you have dug for your Innocent Brethren; and
herein (for some time) will the Faith and Patience of the Saints be exercised.
Thus am I clear from the Blood of all Men, in that I have not ceased, both by
Words and Writing, to forewarn of the coming of this Antichrist among the
Quakers, who for more than Ten Years last past, have been that poor Ass,
speaking as with Man's Voice, reproving and withstanding the Madness of this
Lying, Wrathful, Bitter, Persecuting Spirit, knowing right well when it entered,
and You thereby came to reject the Lord, that he should not Reign over You by
his Spirit of Light and Love; but rather chose to your selves a King for to
Judge and Rule You, who was not the Unction nor the Anointed of the Lord; nor
yet the Olive, Fig, nor Vine, that could heal, rejoice, or bind you up; but the
Bramble, and King of the bottomless Pit, that shall so Rend, Tear and Devour
you, till not one Stone shall be left upon another, which thing tell G. F. that
Fox, your King. By what is written, you may see how this high and Luciferian
People the Quakers, who for their Show and Numbers have been as the Stars of
Heaven, and who for their Pride and Enmity are to be cast down, whose fall is
the Riches of the World. So that the first in Profession, are now become the
last in Possession of the Kingdom, which stands, not in Words, nor yet in
Outward Appearances, but in Humility, and Love unfeigned, yea, in
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy, etc. The foregoing Passages are taken out of
Robert Riche's Letters which were Printed 1669, and Reprinted 1676/7: He was a
Merchant, and was one of the Eminentest and Ancientest Quaker that Lived in
London. I know (says R. R.) G. F. is raised up of God for this very end, to
Try, Refine, and Purify many, as Pharaoh was; and though many fall in the Trial
under his Power, yet many will be delivered into the Glorious Liberty of the
Sons of God. I likewise see, that daily more and more will fall off from that
Body, and that some that separate from them, will with Daniel stand in their
Lot, and follow the Lord in the Spirit of the Lamb more fully than they have
done. These two last Paragraphs was Printed in 1680.
P. 19. II.
HOW low and humble were they (i. e. Quakers) in their Spirits (in the
beginning)? How few were they in Words? Their Yea, was Yea, and their Nay, Nay.
Ah! let me take up a Lamentation! How are the Mighty fallen? How have the Stars
ceased to give their Light? How are the Poor distressed, and the Young Ones
bruised, by the high Mountains and lofty Cedars, whose Habitations were once in
Heaven, but now upon the high Places of the Earth, to impose upon the
Conscience, and to establish an Arbitrary Power by a Law: These are the Armed
Beasts, and the many Antichrists, which break the Unity in Spirit, and the Bond
of Peace. P. 10. The Foxonian-Unity is to yield Subjection to the Order of the
Body (so called) though no manifestation within. And this Unity they glory in,
by this is their Kingdom upheld, from this they are able to boast, Who is able
to make War with us? Who can stand before us? Do not all fall that are risen up
against us? Are not these the high-swelling words of Proud Babel, whose
towering Thoughts must be abased? Whose practice has been to crush the tender
Ones in their Bodies, Souls and Spirits. This Language has mine Ears heard,
this Practice has mine Eyes seen, to the grief and wounding of my Soul. P. 11,
12, etc. This Witness is true. This Spirit of Antichrist in G. Fox, etc. would
wrest from me what I am not willing to part withal, to wit, my Conscience,
under no less Penalty than Excommunication, etc. P. 16. This Witness is true.
These ill Ministers (i. e. G. Fox, etc.) conjoin together to subvert our Laws
and Liberties given by the Great Je^ovah -- And assuredly, though they are
lifted up as it were into Heaven, in their Proud Imaginations, the Righteous
God will Blast all their Exalted Expectations, and they shall Die and Perish in
the General Dissolution, because they have not regarded the Fatherless, nor
pitied the poor in Spirit, nor compassionated the tender Conscience which
feared to Sin against the Lord, but Crushed, Spoiled, and Oppressed (without
Bowels of Mercy) those that had little strength to help themselves; invaded
their Rights, violated their Liberties, and endeavored to take the Meat from
the Children, and give it unto Dogs. P. 26. This Witness is true. And although
they daily exercise the Oppressions beforementioned, yet by their deceitful
Flatteries they make People believe that they are a Harmless, Innocent, and
Peaceable People, suffering and bearing wrong, but not doing any: Or if any
Persons write or speak their Grief, that the Public take notice of, they will
represent them under such terms as may render them odious; and the more
effectually to weaken their Testimonies, they will fix upon them scurrilous and
contemptible Appellations, as Scotch-men, Welch-men, Tinker, Tailor, etc. some
of them utterly untrue; and to prevent an Inquisition into the Truth of the
matter, they would make People believe that they are Envious, Malicious, and
Discomposed Spirits, Bad, Dirty, Factious, and Ranting Spirits, who are gone
from Truth, and are out of Truth. This Witness is true. Such is the Portion of
those that appear in the least against their Imperious, Tyrannical, and
Lascivious Actions; and whatever Man detected the Fallacies and destructive
Cheats of Imperious and Disdainful Men, but was thus reproached? Must it be
Justice in them to complain of their Oppressions, and Envy, and Malice, etc. in
us to complain of ours? Their Years are but few, yet verily they have been
exceeding expert in learning of the Papists Subtilties, P. 36, 37. This Witness
is true. It appears plainly unto the Just and Righteous Man, that G. Fox, and
the rest of his Counsel, have endeavored to subvert the Royal Law of Liberty,
and to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government over the Consciences of
the Flock of God. These are the Ravening Wolves which Prey upon the little Ones
in a Lordly Spirit. This is that envenomed Spirit which has tainted their
Judgments, poisoned their Hearts, and blinded their Eyes. P. 38. And I affirm
the Lord did not raise them up to bring us off from the Barren Mountains, to
feed upon them who are now become a Desert; nor from under our Oppressors, to
turn Oppressors themselves. Let them remember the Army, it is their Figure
; And if the Lord's Anger waxed hot against them for their unfaithfulness, what
will be the Portion of these who have so deeply Apostatized from clearer
Manifestations. P. 41. Dear Friend, It has pleased the Lord to raise thee up,
to bear a Testimony against an Adulterous, Tyrannical, and an Hypocritical
Generation. P. 44. W. Mucklowe, (an Eminent and Ingenious Quaker) in a large
Letter (with abundance more to the same effect) Printed 1673. Entitled, The
Spirit of the Hat, etc. and is Reprinted this Year 1700. Titled, A Bemoaning
Letter, etc. III.
THE Day is come, that as they have laid open the Deceit, Wickedness and
Hypocrisy of other Professors that went before them, so must their Deceit,
Wickedness and Hypocrisy be also laid open; for the Lord whom I serve is no
respecter of Persons. This Witness is true. Printed 1671. in a Letter to G. F.
by J. P. IV.
YOur Day into Darkness is turned, the Sun is gone down over you: You have had
a large Day and Power given you to have done the Will of God, but you have
abused the Power, and slighted your Day, and have refused to do the Lord's
Work, and have sought your selves, and not the Lord; Therefore in Justice and
Righteousness is the Day wherein you might have wrought for God taken from you,
and the thick Dark Night of Confusion is come upon you, wherein you are
groping, and stumbling, and cannot Work: The Decree is gone out and sealed
against you, and it cannot be recalled; you are not the Men (as ye stand) in
whom God will appear to work deliverance for his People; (and yet deliverance
shall come) but as for you, ye have rejected the Counsel of the Lord, and
grieved his Spirit; and he has long born you; yea, you are departed from the
Lord, and his presence is departed from you: Indeed he has Hewed with you,
(and if you had been faithful to the end, he would have honored and prospered
you, and have been your sufficient reward) ye were his Ax, but ye have boasted
your selves against him; therefore as you have Hewed and Broken others, even so
must you be Hewed and Broken. This was Printed 1673. and Reprinted 1677/8,
1692, and 1696. directed for the Preachers and Leaders of the People called
Quakers. By J. P. V.
WHat will you do? You Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites; you that have been long
making clean the outside of the Cup and Platter, but inwardly are as Ravening
Wolves; your Fruits will make you manifest: You Hypocrites, your Name will be a
stink among the Heathen, for the Lord will find you out, whose Glory he will
not give to any other, nor his Honor to any of your Graven Images; my Soul
loathes all your false Covers, I cannot but declare against all your false Ways.
M. D. an Ancient Quaker, and is Printed in a Letter to G. F. 1682. VI.
I Being engaged as well as some others to manifest and lay open deceitful
Workers and Hypocrites, I am farther to appear to manifest thee to be one of
the greatest Hypocrites and Deceivers in this Nation; and until thou own thy
Condemnation, and leave off Deceiving the People, assuredly the Sword that is
now drawn is not to be, nor must not be sheathed, till thou, and such Deceivers
as thou art, be brought down. This Witness is true. In a large Letter to G. F.
by J. P. 1674/5. and Printed 1682, 1691, and 1696. VII.
THe Day is come, and now is, that the hidden things of Esau's Nature are to
be, and must be brought to Light. See Quakers Unmasked, etc. Title Page, writ
to G. Fox, G. Whitehead, etc. 1677. and Printed 1682, and 1691. VIII.
AND let G. Fox, and those that uphold him, remember that it was Jeroboam the
Son of Nebat that caused Israel to Sin; and as his Name was Branded to
Posterity, so shall theirs be. This Witness is true. Printed 1678. in the Book,
A Sensible Cry, etc. p. 6. A. M. IX.
BEhold, you Great Goliahs! your strength is in an Arm of Flesh, but mine is
only in the Living God; before whom all your deceitful covers are manifest,
which will stand you in little stead in the Day of Distress that is coming upon
you: For he will certainly plead with you for all your Abominations: You are
full of Designs to keep up your Esteem among the People, but the Lord, (by
whose Power I am raised up against you) will bring you low, and utter disgrace
will come upon you, because you have not sought his Glory so much as your own.
Quakers unmasked, etc. Preface By J. P. Printed 1682, and 1691. X.
A Day of Trouble, Anguish, and Disappointment, is come and coming upon You,
which you can neither escape, nor prevent: You must reap the fruit of your own
doings; for as you have sowed the Wind, you must expect to reap the Whirlwind,
wherein is nothing but Confusion, Darkness, Blackness and Tempest: And this is
the Portion of all the Builders of Babel, or Babylonish Builders. And though you
may think that you have built the highest and fairest Structure of any, yet
know, and that for a truth, that not one Stone thereof shall be left upon
another; and all your Buildings, your Inventions, your Imaginations, and
Conceivings about your Forms, your Proud Self-conceited Modes, your
Impositions, your Prescriptions, Laws, and Comely Orders (as you in your fallen
Wisdom call them) must all be thrown down, laid waste, and become as a Byword
or Proverb of Reproach to the very Heathen, and not only to them, but also to
those whom you have defamed and stigmatized with the blackest of Names; and for
no other cause, but only for their Faithfulness in Discharging a good
Conscience toward their God, toward You, and toward all Men. These are
faithful and true Sayings, if thou can receive them thou may. Printed
1680, in a Letter to G. F. by J. P. a Person well known, and of an unspotted
Reputation. Behold that which you have Built must be Broken down, and that
which you have Planted must be Plucked up. This Witness is true. It may be they
will present their Supplications before the Lord, and will turn every one from
his Evil Way: For great is the Anger and the Fury that the Lord has pronounced
against this People. THE END.
Advertisement.
IF any Person be desirous to have this Book and my former Books, Bound, either
them in Quarto, or them in Octavo, or Single, Stitcht; they may be furnished
with all (except them of those Impressions wholly Sold off) at Mr. Janeway's a
Bookbinder in St. Paul's Churchyard, next Door to Child's Coffee-house, London.
And,

Likewise, if any Abler Men (for of such there is very great need) be disposed
farther to unmask the Leaders of this Heresy; this is to give notice, that in
the Library of Christ-Church College in Oxford, there is, by a Worthy
Gentleman, a Divine of the Church of England, Bought of me, and Given by him
for the Service of the Church, of Quakers Books, wrote by the most Approved
Authors of that Sect, which I think are thus Chained up, (from doing any more
hurt), First, G. Fox's Journal, next to it Muggleton's Journal or Works,
(containing more than 1000 Pages Quarto); and I think the best Quaker of the
two; next to that G. Fox's Great Mystery, etc. Fol. with near Twenty more of
his Books; next the Works of Edw. Buroughs, Francis Howgill, Will. Smith, Sam.
Fisher; all in great Folio's; next the Works of Jos. Coal, Steph. Smith, R.
Hubberthorn, Will. Bailey, Is. Pennington, G. Fox, Junior, in Quarto; next
diverse Books wrote by James Naylor, Will. Penn, Christ. Atkinson, G. Whitehead,
Sol. Eccles, Tho. Lawson, Christ. Tailor, R. Farnsworth, Geo. Bishop, and
diverse others; in all near the Number of Four Hundred, bearing distinct Titles,
which may furnish any Person sufficiently with Matter of Fact.

A Catalogue of Books Wrote by Fran. Bugg.
1 DE Christiana Liberate, etc. in 8 vo. Bound. 2 The Painted Harlot stripped
and whipped, etc. 4 to. 3 Reason against Railing, etc. 4 to. 4 Innocence
Vindicated, etc. 4 to. never Answered. 5 The Quakers Detected, and their Errors
Confuted, etc. 4 to. 6 A Letter to the Quakers, showing their frequent
Addresses to, and Prayers for the late K. J. II. and not to King William III. 7
Battering Rams against New Rome, etc. 4 to. 8 One Blow more at New Rome, etc. 4
to. 9 New Rome Unmasked, and her Foundation Shaken, etc. 4 to. 10 New Rome
Arraigned, and out of her own Mouth Condemned, etc. 4 to. 11 A Sheet Presented
to the Parliament, 1693. in Answer to the Quakers Allegations, etc. 12
Quakerism Withering, and Christianity Reviving, etc. 8 vo. 13 Quakerism
Anatomized, etc. 4 to. never Answered. 14 A Second Summons to the City Abel (by
way of Metaphor) to deliver up Sheba the Son of Bichri, namely, Geo. Whitehead,
2 Samuel 21. 15 The Quakers Yearly Meeting Impeached on the behalf of the Commons
of England, etc. 16 The Quakers set in their true Light, etc. Presented to the
House of Lords, 1696. never Answered. 17 A Brief Reply to the Quakers Ancient
Testimony, presented to the House of Lords, 1696. never Answered. 18 A Brief
History of the Rise, Growth, and Progress of Quakerism, 8 vo. never Answered.
19 The Picture of Quakerism drawn to the Life, 8 vo. never Answered. 20 A Sober
Expostulation with their Hearers touching the Mercinary Teachers, never
Answered. 21 The Pilgrim's Progress from Quakerism to Christianity, etc.
Printed in 4 to. and Reprinted in 8 vo. 22 Seventy Queries to several Quakers,
etc. never Answered. 23 A Broad Sheet with a Scheme of the Quakers Synod,
presented to the Parl. 1699. 24 Jezebel Withstood, and her Daughter Anne Docwra
publicly Reproved, never Answered. 25 Quakerism Exposed to public Censure,
etc. 8 vo. 26 The Christian Ministry of the Church of England Vindicated, etc.
8 vo. never Ans. 27 A Modest Defense, etc. presented to the Parliament. 28 The
Quakers Anguis Flagellatus Examined and Refuted. 29 A Brief Reply to G.
Whitehead's Book, Styled, A Rambling Pilgrim, etc. in Answer to my Pilgrim's
Progress from Quakerism to Christianity, presented to the Parliament 1700. 30 A
Just Rebuke to the Quakers Insolent Behavior in their Two Books, i. e. A Just
Censure, etc. the other, A Sober Reply, etc. presented to the Parl. 1700.
Besides Three Books I Wrote part of. 31 W. Rogers his Seventh Part of the
Christian Quaker distinguished, etc. about 1682. 32 A Looking-glass for the
Quakers, in Two Columns. 33 A Postscript to the Norfolk Clergies Book, i. e. A
Brief Discovery of some of the Quakers Blasphemous and Seditious Principles,
etc.
FINIS.

