A short View of the ANTINOMIAN ERROVRS: With a Brief and plain Answer to
them, As the Heads of them lie in order in the next Page of this Book.

Being a nest of cursed Errors hatched by Heretics, fed and nourished by their
Proselites; being taken as they were flying abroad were brought as the Eagle
does her young ones to see if they could endure to look upon the Sunbeams of
truth with fixed eyes, the which they could not; were presently adjudged to be
a Bastard-brood, and the^^ necks chopped off, and their carcasses thrown to the
Dunghill.

Imprimatur Ja. Cranford.

Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing; but inwardly
are ravening Wolves,

Mat. 7.15. There are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old
ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men turning the grace of our God into
lasciviousness,

Jude 4. For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure
through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were
clean escaped from them who live in error; for while they promise them
liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption,

2 Pet. 2, 18.19. London, Printed by T. B. for Ed. Blakmore and Tho. Banks,
and are to be sold at the Angel in Paul's Churchyard and upon the top of
Bridewell-staires, 1643.

1 THey hold that a man is justified as soon as he has a being in the sight of
God, before they have any faith or calling.

2 Then they say, God cannot see their sin, for they are as perfectly
righteous even as Christ himself, as soon as they have any being, and faith
does but declare to them what was done in them before they had it, even as
soon as they were borne.

3 This they know by revelation, or a bare Testimony, or suggestion, they say,
from the Spirit of God, when as they deny the operation or the sanctifying
work of the Spirit of God, to be any means whereby they may come to know
their justification; for so to do, they say is the doctrine of our legal
Teachers, which go by marks and signs.

4 Then they being as righteous as Christ, they say, God does not correct them
for sin, neither can he do it, but only to exercise their faith.

5 They are freed they say, by the free grace of Christ, from the commanding
power of the law of God, and they are discharged from all duty or obedience to
it, and now the law is no rule to them, but what they do is only out of love
unrequired, not as any duty, for they are freed from all by their free grace.

These things I have gathered both from their Sermons, and by conference with
them? as also out of their books, which have passed privately amongst
themselves.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, now in these last and perilous days, the devil is very
busy to sow the Tares of Heresies even in the Corn-field of Christ,
especially when men sleep and heed him not; and therefore Christians had need
to be circumspect and watchful, because their adversary the devil as a roaring
lion walks about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pe. 5.8. Then be no more
tossed too and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine by the
sleight of men and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive,
Ephe. 4.14. I say be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines, for
it is good that the heart be established with grace, Heb. 13.9. Watch ye, stand
fast in the faith, quit ye like men, and be strong, take unto you the whole
Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand; stand therefore having your loins
girt about with truth, Ephe. 6. and having laid the true foundation, which is
Christ Jesus, be ye rooted and built up in him, and established in the faith,
as ye have been taught, Col. 2.7. if so be ye have been taught by him as the
truth is in Jesus, Ephe. 4. I write unto you and exhort you, that you would
earnestly contend for the faith, that was once delivered unto the Saints, Jude
3. only let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ, and that
ye stand fast in one spirit with one mind, striving together for the faith of
the Gospel, Phil. 2.27. and the gates of hell shall not prevail against you.
They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot be moved but
abides for ever, Psalm. 125. it is true that offenses must needs come, but woe
be to that man by whom they come, Mat. 18.7. for there must be also heresies
among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest, 1 Cor. 11.9. then
seek no novelties or new doctrines, but rather stand in the ways, and see and
ask for the old paths, where is the good way and walk ye in it, and ye shall
find rest for your souls, Jer. 6.16. think of no other way to heaven, but
that which our fathers have gone in before you, for the time is come that men
will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts they will heap up
to themselves teachers, having itching ears they will turn away their ears
from the truth and shall be turned unto fables, but watch you in all things, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether
they be of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world 1 John
4.1. follow Paul but as he follows Christ, and be ye like the noble Bereans,
who searched the Scriptures daily to see whether those things were so, Acts
17.11. affect neither Paul, nor Apollos, nor Cephas, nor any other, but as they
ground their doctrine on the clear word of God, for seducers will labor to
steal away your affections and your money also, as Absalom by flattery stole
away the hearts of the men of Israel, 2. Sam. 15.6. they will teach for hire
and divine for money, Micah 3.11. but says Paul, I seek not yours but you, 2
Cor. 12.14. but seducers will creep into houses about Moor-fields and other
places, and lead captive silly women laden with their lusts, they will set upon
those that are led away with their lusts, who are ever learning, and never able
to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7. let no man deceive you,
for with fair speeches they will deceive the hearts of the simple, who believe
every thing, but the wise looks well to his going, Prove. 14.15. thus through
covetousness, they will with feigned words make merchandise of you, 2 Pet.
2.3. then hear those that have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, and
do not walk in craftiness nor handle the word of God deceitfully, but by
manifestation of the truth, do commend themselves to every man's conscience in
the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4.2. who are not as many, who corrupt the Word of God,
but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, so speak they in
Christ, 2 Cor. 2.17. says Paul, though we or an Angel of Heaven shall preach
unto you any other Gospel then that which we have preached unto you, let him
be accursed: I say again, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9. then take heed of
the Antinomians new Gospel, who have cast off all obedience to the law of God,
who desire to live without rule like sons of Belial, that they may take their
full swing in sin under their damnable pretense, that they have gotten free
grace that has freed them from all obedience to the law of God; but for thy
information I have written this little book, read it, and if thou receive any
benefit or satisfaction, give God the praise and me the benefit of thy prayers,
now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultlesse before the presence of his glory, with exceeding joy, to the only
wise God our Savior, be glory and Majesty, dominion and power, now and
evermore, Amen.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, Thomas Bakewell.

A short view of the Antinomean Errors, with a Brief Answer to them.
They hold, that a man is justified as soon as he has a being in the sight of
God, before faith or calling.
TO this I answer, leaving the decrees and purposes of God to himself as
secret things, not belonging to us till we have faith and calling but to speak
as it is revealed, and according to our apprehension, both of the causes and
time of a sinners actual justification, as it is revealed unto us in the
Scripture.

First, we are said to be justified by the blood of Christ, Romans 5.9. this is
done by Christ as the meriting cause of our justification; He has purchased
his Church with his own blood, Acts 20.28.

Secondly, we are said to be justified by the righteousness of Christ, Romans
5.18. Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
unto juctification of life: this is the formal cause of our justification;
this righteousness of Christ is not that Inherent righteousness or
sanctification that is wrought in us by the Spirit of God, but it is that
without us, which remains in Christ himself that justifies us, for they are
two distinct thing, it is called the righteousness of God. Romans 1.17. Then
they are very ignorant of Gods righteousness that go about to establish their
own righteousness, and have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of
God, Romans 10.3. Paul desired not to be found in his own righteousness, but in
that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness of God by faith,
Phil. 3.9. This righteousness without us being imputed to us, makes us just
and righteous in the sight of God. by this alone we are counted worthy of the
Kingdom of God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5. and accounted worthy to obtain that world. and
the resurrection from the dead Luke 20.35. see 21.36. and says Paul, David
also describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works: and Abraham by the hand of Faith as an
instrument, whereby he took fast hold of the righteousness of Christ. giving
glory to God, and staggered not through unbeleefe, it was counted, reckoned, or
imputed unto him for righteousness; now it was not written for his sake alone,
that it was imputed unto him, but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed if
we believe on him, who raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, Romans 4.6 20, 21,
22, 23, 24. Thus we become righteous in the sight of God, and although we were
borne in the guilt of original sin, yet now it is done away by Christ, for
he has laid on him the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.6. so then Blessed is the
man whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered; and Blessed is he
to whom the Lord will not impute sin, Romans 4.7. Psalm. 32.1. God was in
Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses, 2
Cor. 5.19. thus our sins were imputed to Christ, but not infused into him,
for still he was the Lamb without blemish and without spot, who did no sin
neither was guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 1.19.2.22.

Yet he that knew no sin was made sin for us by imputation, they were
accounted and reckoned to be his, and so Christ has once suffered for sins,
the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. That we might be made the righteousness
of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. But this was not done by infusing his
righteousness into us to make us just, for we are sinful creatures, still we
are all as an unclean thing; and all our righteousness are as filthy rags,
Isa. 64.6. So then we are justified by the righteousness of Christ without us
imputed or reckoned to be ours, for we are made the righteousness of God in
him and not in our selves; this rightly observed might convince them of their
proud boasting, that they are as righteous as Christ, when as the
righteousness of Christ that makes us just remains in him and not in us.

Thirdly, we are said to be justified by faith, Romans 3.28.5.1. This is done
when we take or receive the righteousness of Christ, being purchased by the
blood of Christ, and so imputed and reckoned to be ours, being reached forth
unto us by the spirit of God and received by the hand of our faith, and so we
come to have a true title to it; yet not by infusion but by imputation and
faith for as many as received him he gave power to become the sons of God,
even to them that believe on his Name, John 1.12. To him that works not, but
beleveth on him, that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness, Romans 4.5. Not having mine own righteousness which is of the
Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is
of God by faith, Phil. 3.9. Israel has not attained to the law of
righteousness: wherefore, because they sought it not by faith but by the
works of the law; therefore they stumbled at that stumbling stone; but
whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed, Romans 9.31.32.33. Faith
applying makes Christ ours, as Thomas believing said, my God and my Lord, John
20.27, 28. Then I conclude this third cause of our justification being the
isntrumental cause of it, with that saying of Paul, God justifies the
circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through faith; Romans 3.30. but I never
read of any that were justified without faith, or before faith or calling, let
the Antenomeans prove the contrary if they can.

Fourthly, we are said to be justified freely by his grace, Romans 3.24. that is,
when God the Father does freely accept of the righteousness purchased by the
blood of Christ, and accounts and imputes it unto us as ours, and reaches it
our unto us by his spirit, and we take and receive it by faith; thus to
justify us is freely of his grace; and this deserves the title of free grace;
For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life, John
3.16. He spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall
he not with him freely give us all things? Romans 8.32. then is not this of free
grace, and Christ gave his life a ransom for all the Elect, 1 Timothy 2.6. he
gave himself for his Church, Ephe. 5.25. he gave his life a ransom for many
Matt. 20 28. he gave himself for us to redeem us from all iniquity, and to
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Titus 2.14.
says he, I lay down my life, no man takes it from me, I lay it down of my
self, I have power to lay it down and I have power to take it up again,
John. 10.17.18. and then is not this out of free grace, and the spirit of God
works where it lists, John 3.8. then if the spirit of God reach out unto us
the righteousness of Christ, is it not of free grace, and out hand of faith by
which we receive the righteousness of Christ? this faith is the gift of God
Ephe. 2.8. then is not this also out of free grace: thus by grace ye are saved
through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, Ephe. 2.8.
then let us speak of this, to the praise of the glory of his grace wherein he
has made us accepted in the beloved, Ephe. 1.6.

And thus far of the causes of our justification in the sight of God, being
all that are mentioned in the Scripture except that of works, which justifies
our faith and persons in the sight of men, as James speaks, James 2.24. but
this we are not to speak of at this time.

From these caules we may easily see when we are justified in the sight of God;
I grant in the decree of God this righteousness of Christ was purchased
vertually for all the Elect a^ well before his coming in the flesh as
afterward, for he was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World, Rev.
13.8. Again, I grant that this purchase was actually paid above sixteen
hundred years agon when Christ in our nature died actually and really on the
Cross for believers; but to say that the righteousness of Christ is really
ours before that the spirit of God does reach it forth unto us, or before we
have any faith or calling; that is, before that we have either eye to see it,
or hand of faith to receive and take it; this I say is a cursed error suggested
by the father of lies, into those that are led by him to believe lies. For was
that man in the Gospel who had a legion of devils within him, justified when
as the presence of Christ was a torment to him, and he cried out Jesus thou
son of God most high, I beseech thee torment me not; I must needs confess in
one thing he was like our Antenomeans for no bonds could hold him: but when the
devils were cast out the man was in another mind, he that could not abide the
presence of Christ before, now he can beseech Christ that he might be with him,
Luke 8.18.38.

Then shall we be so foolish to think that the holy spirit of Christ will
dwell in that foul and filthy heart, where the devil reigns and leads them
captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. but such are all the Elect, before they be
recovered out of the snare of the devil; shall we think that the holy spirit
of Christ was in Mary Magdalen when those seven devils kept their randevouse
within her? What agreement has Christ with the devil, that he should be as an
underling in that soul where the devil reigns? Does Christ come to justify
such a soul, and not to sanctify it at the same time? Does he not say come
out of Babylon and be not partaker of her sins, that ye receive not of her
plagues, Rev. 18.4. Come out from among them and be ye separate, says the
Lord, touch not the unclean thing and I will receive you and I will dwell in
you 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. but will Christ come into the strong man's house and not
bind him nor spoil his goods, is not Christ stronger then he? Luke 11.21, 22.
Why then will Christ live in that soul that Satan has in possession, it may
be twenty or forty years togther, before faith or effectual calling be truly
wrought in it? If ye be the Temple of God and his spirit dwell in you, if any
man desile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy -- let no man deceive
himself, 1 Cor. 3.16.17. Does Christ say this, and will he himself live and
dwell among devils, especially where they rule and reign; I hope no Christian
truly justified will harbor such blasphemous thoughts within him, lest they
should say, he has an unclean spirit, Mark 3.^0.

Secondly, But will they yield and say, God forbid that we should think that
the holy Spirit of God should dwell and live in that soul that the devil has
in possession: then I reply and say, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
he is for the present none of his; Ye are not in the flesh but on the spirit,
if so be the Spirit of God dwell in you, Romans 8.9. There shall no flesh be
justified in his sight, Romans 3.20. but says Paul. You in times pasted were
Gentles in the flesh, at that time ye were without Christ and without God in
the world, but now in Christ Jesus: ye who were sometimes afar off are made
nigh by the blood of Christ, Ephe. 2.12.13. Then is the righteousness of
Christ wrought in us by the Spirit of Christ, that makes us clean temples for
his Spirit to dwell in; and will not his holy Spirit live among devils in a
cage together of unclean and filthy lusts? and are they for the present
without Christ and without God in the world, and in the flesh? when as no flesh
living shall be justified in the fight of God; and having not the Spirit of
God, they for the present are none of his: then how dare any man say that they
are justified in the sight of God, as soon as they had any being in this
world? O horrible and blasphemous doctrine! that makes the pure and holy Spirit
of God, to be a companion, yea a very band to cursed devils, and filthy lusts
else how can he live where the devils reign: but thou O blessed Spirit of
God, art of purer cyes then to behold evil; and can not look on iniquity
with approbation, Hab. 1.13. But ye in time past walked according to the course
of the world, and according to the prince of the air that rules in the
children of disobedience says Paul, we all had our conversation in time past
in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the
mind, and were by nature children of wrath even as others, Ephe. 3 2, 3. but
were they justified as soon as they had any being, when they lived in all
manner of sin whatsoever, the devil having their souls in full possession,
But such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, and then
it follows, that they were justified, 1. Cor. 6.11. does God charge us not to
cast pearls before swine, nor to give that which is holy to dogs; and will he
give his chiefest benefits to them that remain dogs and swine many years
before they are effectually called, and have any true faith wrought in them;
this is very pleasing doctrine I must needs confess for dogs and swine, but
let the true Children of God take heed of it, least they suck too much of
their honey-combe, and so they poison their souls, and perish eternally: but
the righteousness of Christ is received of us, by the hand of our faith, and
so becomes ours, and you see that the Scripture is clear for it. But they will
needs be justified in the sight of God without faith or calling; and I find
their reason to be this, because that Christ took our nature upon him, and
suffered in it, therefore by the human nature of Christ they are truly made
the sons of God by adoption, and justified without any faith or calling; they
say that they need make no application of it to themselves by faith, but
without faith it is unpossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. and whatsoever is not
of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. therefore the truth is, as mary as received him,
he gave power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his
name, John 1.12. God the Father signed and sealed his Son to the office of
Mediatorship, but who has any part in him: I ans. He that receives his
testimony has set too his seal that God is true, John 3.35. He that believes
is not condemned, but he that believes not is damned already, because he has
not believed on the name of the only begotten Son of God, he that believes
on the Son has life, and he that believes not the Son, shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides on him, John 3.18.36. He that believes on
the Son of God, has the witness in himself, and he that believes not God,
has made him a liar, because he believes not the record that God gave of his
Son, John 3.10.

Then are such as these unbeleevers uncalled, that make God a liar, that are in
a damnable estate, and the wrath of God abiding on them; are these justified in
the sight of God? let such doctrine be damned to the pit of hell; yet such are
the Elect as well as the Reprobate before their calling and conversion, as they
came into the world until they have justifying says wrought in them, there
was no difference between us and them, till our hearts were spirifiedly ^aith,
Romans 15.^.2.22. The Scripture has concluded all under (...) at ^he promise by
faith in Jesus Christ, may be given to them that believe, Gal. 3.22.

But they say that faith is imperfect, therefore it cannot take hold
sufficiently on Christ to justify them. I answer, if the beggar can but reach
out his hand, although it be weak or lame, to take his alms, yet it is his
when he has received it sure enough, as if he had received it by a stronger
hand, and it were folly to say that his alms is not his, because his hand is
weak or lame that received it: so he that by faith takes the righteousness of
Christ, it is his sure enough, although his faith were never so weak, if it be
true faith, and it were folly to say that the righteousness of Christ is none
of his, because he had not a stronger faith to receive it; but mark their
folly, they say that a man may be justified without faith and yet not by faith
because it is too weak; but must we believe their errors, or the Spirit of God
that cannot lie, Romans 3.28.4.5.5.1. but they say faith will not endure for
ever, therefore it cannot justify us, as a hand or instrument.

I answer, from the former simily, that when the beggar has received his
alms, if he should bethink himself then and say, this alms is not mine
because the hand that took it must perish and rot in the grave; should we not
think it gross folly in him, and so to say that the righteousness of Christ
is not mine, because my faith must end with my body; but if the beggars hand
were afterward cut off, yet the alms is his for all that, and so let faith dye
with us, yet having received the righteousness of Christ, that is really ours
to all eternity, and the Lord looks upon his people as they are clothed with
the righteousness of Christ being received by faith, and not so much upon the
hand that received it, whether it be weak or strong so it be in truth, and then
he esteems us as perfectly justified, and shall abide so for ever.

The next gross errors are these, they being justified as soon as they have
any being, then God cannot see their sin, for they are perfectly righteous,
even as righteous as Christ, ass^one as they have any being; and faith does but
declare to them what was done before.

To speak of them that are elected before they have faith or calling, when thou
wast naked and bare, I saw thee polluted ^n thine own blood, then I looked
upon thee, Eze. 16.6.8. shall we think that God did not see that catalogue of
sins in Manasseh before his conversion when as the penmen of the Scripture
wrote as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1.21. The Lord turned not
from the fierceness of his wrath wherewith his anger was kindled against
Judah, because of all the provocation that Manasseh had provoked him withal, 2
Kings 14.26. I will cause them to be removed into all kingdoms of the earth,
because of Manasseh, Jer. 15.4. then did not God see his sins, although
afterward he repented, and prayed, and the Lord was entreated of him 2. Chron.
33.13. and says Peter, ye denied the Holy One and the Just, and defired a
murderer to be granted unto you, and killed the Prince of life, Acts 14.15.
Jesus whom ye have crucified: now they were pricked at the heart, and three
thousand of them converted, Acts 2.36.37.41. then did Peter see their sins, and
did not God see them, when as he spoke but as he was moved by the Holy Ghost;
says Paul, no thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards shall inherit the kingdom
of God, and such were some of you, but ye are washed; does Paul see them, and
does not the Spirit of God see them. In time past ye walked according to the
course of the world, according to the prince of the power of the air that
works in the children of disobedience, we all had our conversation in times
past, in the lusts of our flesh fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and were
by nature children of wrath even as others. Ephe. 2.2, 3. did Paul see this,
and did not God see it, at that time they were without Christ, and without God
in the world, ver. 12. and did not God see them; says Paul, I was before a
blasphomer and a persecuter, and injurious, 1. Tim. 1.13. did he see this and
did not God see it? does not Christ say, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, I
am Jesus whom thou persecutest, Acts 9.4.5. did not Christ then see his sin,
although he was a chosen vessel? ver. 15. but so much before says or calling.

But after conversion, did not God see Lots incest, and Noah drunk, and Moses
and Aarons unbelief, which barred them out of the land of Canaan; the Lord
sent Nathan to David to convince him of his sin, 2. Sam. 12. and he
confesses saying against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy
sight, Psalm. 51.4. and says Moses thou have set our iniquities before thee,
and our secret sins in the light of thy countenance, Ps. 90.8. and says the
Lord) the high places were not taken away out of Israel; nevertheless the
heart of Asa was perfect all his days 2. Chro. 15.17. yet he was wroth with
him that told him of his sin, and put him in person and oppressed some of the
people at the same time, chap. 16.10. and trusted in the Physician more then
God ver. 12. then did not God see this, how should the Prophet have known it if
God had not told him? (says the Lord) among my people are found wicked men
they lay wait as he that sets snares, they set a tra^ they catch men, they
overpasse the deeds of the wicked they judge not the cause of the fatherless,
yet they prosper, Jer. 5.26.28. the sin of Judah is written with a pen of
Iron and with the point of a Diamond it is graven upon their heart. Jer. 17.1.
(says Paul) Peter and the other Jews desembled, insomuch that Barnabas also
was carried away with their dissimulation, Gal. 2.13. Did Paul see this and did
not God see it? when Peter denied Christ, did not he see him the Lord turned
and looked upon him, and Peter remembered the words of the Lord, and Peter went
out and wept bitterly, Luke 32.61.62. Ye fools, when will ye be wise, he that
planted the care shall not he bear? and he that formed the eye shall not he
see? Psalm. 94.8 9. the Lord knows the thoughts of men; then I conclude, that a
man may build upon the true foundation, hay, wood, or stubble, and he may
suffer loss, but himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire, 1. Cor.
3.11.12.15. therefore God sees all the sins of his justified children, both
before and after conversion.

And although it be said, He beheld no iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness in
Israel, Number. 23.21. yet he saw it although he would pass by their
transgressions, Micah 7.18. and would not suffer Balaam to curse them, neither
would he forsake them, but correct them as he saw good and not according to
their enemies rage which has no mercy. And although it be said that they
cannot sin, 1 John 3.9. yet says the same John, if we say that we have no
sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8. but yet they
do not sin that sin unto death, 1 John 5.16. neither with that whole swing
as wicked men do: but the spirit striveth against the flesh, that they cannot
do the things that they would, Gal. 5.17. yet how can he be clean that is
borne of a woman? who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Job 14.1.
how can man be justified with God, or how can he be clean that is borne of a
woman? Job 25.4. Who can say I have made my heart clean, Pro. 20.7. there is
no man living that sins not, 1 Kings 8.46. 2 Chronicles. 6.^6. Eccle. 7.20. Then
are we perfectly righteous; I mean in respect of degrees in this life; if this
were so, how can there be any degrees of grace, as a strong faith in some and a
little faith in others? Or how can there be any groth in grace, if we had
already attained, or were already perfect in degrees? but perfection in this
world consists not in the absence of sin, but in the sight of sin, and
fighting against sin, and groaning under the burden of sin: and because we
sin daily, we must ask forgiveness daily, and to be kept from temptation
daily, Matthew. 6. we are not perfect in degrees of grace here, therefore the
Sacrament was ordained to strengthen our faith and to increase our holiness;
but they that say that they are as perfect as Christ, what makes them to
receive the Sacrament which is only to strengthen their faith? let the
subtellest of them make answer if he can; but says Paul, as ye abound in every
thing, in faith, and utterance, and knowledge, and in all diligence, and in
your love to us, so abound in this grace also, 2 Cor. 8.7. and says John, I
pray God thou may prosper even as thy soul prospers, 3 John 2.

Yet I grant that we are perfectly justified at once, but we are not perfectly
sanctified in this life, I mean in respect of degrees, although we be
perfectly sanctified in respect of parts, as a child has all the parts of a
man, but he must grow up unto the degrees of a man; then what bold presumption
is this, to say we are perfectly righteous as Christ, when as he neither wants
parts nor degrees; and besides, it is in him as in the Fountain, and in us but
as the Cesterne, out of his fullness we receive grace for grace, John 1.17.
again, he wa^ never desiled with sin as we are and we have no more of his
righteousness then our weak faith is able to receive; yet I grant he that
has little shall have no lack; yet there is degrees of grace here, and of
glory hereafter; God gave not the spirit to Christ by measure. John 3.34. but
unto every one of us is give grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ, Ephe. 4.7.16.13. the let us take heed lest we offend Christ in boasting
of our righteousness, when we have nothing but what we have received, then why
should we boast as if we received it not, 1 Cor. 6.7. and take heed lest you
say God cannot see your sin, for be sure your sin will find you out, Number.
32.23. the Lord commended Job for a perfect man, upright, and one that feared
God and eschewed evil, Job 1.1. yet Job sinned not only in his passion, chap.
3. but afterward when he says, the Lord breaks me with a tempest, and
multiplieth my wounds without cause, chap. 9.17. he says, I am righteous, and
God has taken away my judgment, my wound is incurable without transgression,
chap. 34 5, 6. he says I am clean without transgression, I am innocent,
neither is there iniquity in me, behold he finds out occasions against me,
chap. 33.9, 10. he has said, I am more righteous then God, chap. 35.2. But did
not God see all this? The Lord answered Job and said, shall he that contendeth
with the Almighty instruct him, he that reproves God let him answer it; will thou dis^null my judgment? will thou condemn me that thou may be
righteous? chap. 40.2.8. then how dare these men say, that they are as
righteous as Christ, and that God can see no sin in them; but the truth is,
they are sick of Jobs disease, and it were good for them if with him they
would repent of their pride, and abhor themselves in dust and ashes, Job
42.6. then should they see the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful
and of tender mercy, James 5.11. but it may be they will catch at those words,
when the Lord said to satan, thou mouest me against him to destroy him without
cause. Job 2.3. I answ. That the devil that accuser of the brethren, could not
tax him of any foul or scandelous sin, yet Job had his failings as well as
other men; as he says, when his passion is over that if he should contend with
God, he cannot answer one of a thousand, then how shall man be just with God?
Job 9.23. and says David, O God thou know my foolishness, and my sin is
not hid from thee, Psalm. 69.5. Then whether shall I go from thy presence, thou
know my down-sitting and my up-rising and understandest my thoughts a far
off, thou know my paths, and art acquainted with all my ways, Psalm. 139.2,
3. we hear of none that have learned the language of Canna^, that pure
language, that call on the name of the Lord and serve him with one consent,
Zeph. 3.9. in all the book of God, saving, I am perfect, I am pure, I cannot
sin if I would, or if I did, God cannot see my sin, I am as righteous as
Christ, I need not grieve for my sin nor pray for pardon; but contrary says
Peter, I am a sinful man O Lord; and says Paul, I am the least of all Saints
Ephe. 3.8. and the chiefest of all sinners, 1 Timothy ^.15. and says David pardon
my sin for it is great Psalm. 25.11. and in humility says Abraham, I am but
dust and ashes; and says Jacob, I am the least of all thy mercies; and says
John Baptist, I am not worthy to loose the latchet of his shoe; and says the
Centurian, I am not worthy thou should come under my Roof; then where did
these men learn this their proud boasting of their holiness, which the Lord
says is a stink in my wrath and a fire that burns all the day, Isa. 65.5.

In the next place, they tell us that they are assured of this their happy
condition only from a verbal testimony, they say from the spirit of God; yet
they deny the operation or sanctifying work of the same spirit of God to be
any means whereby they may come to know their justification, for this they say
is the doctrine of our legal teachers that go by marks and signs.

But here they deny one of the witnesses, whereby we should come to know our
condition as we stand in the fight of God; for says Paul, the spirit it self
bears witness with our spirit that we are the sons of God, Romans 8.16. when
Christ comes into the soul, he brings both water to sanctify and blood to
justify us; This is he that came by water and blood, not by water only, but
by water and blood, then the spirit bears witness because the spirit is
truth; then the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, will bear Record with
our spirit here on earth, when our spirit with the witness of water does
sanctify us, and that other witness from the blood of Chist does justify us,
then are we really the sons of God, 1 John 5.6, 7, 8. the spirit of God first
convinces the heart of sin, and then subjecteth the heart to his will, and
then gives testimony by a divine reasoning on this manner saying, He that
believes shall be saved; then cut spirit or conscience makes answer, saying, I
believe; then the conclusion arises from both these witnesses, that I am the
child of God.

For it is not enough to have a persuasion that we are the children of God,
except with that persuasion the gift of faith be wrought in us with all the
qualifications of a child of God; as the grace of fear, not a slavish but a
filial fear, wrought in our hearts that we may not depart from him, Jer.
32.40. by neglecting of any duty commanded, or committing any sin forbidden,
my son fear thou the Lord Prove. 24.21, that is fear to offend him, and be
careful to please him in all things, John, 8.29. and to love and delight in
his presence, Psalm. 73.28. to honor and reverence his name, Mal. 1.6. Psalm.
111.9. and to serve and obey him in all things, John 5.30. Mat. 26.39. he that
finds an inward desire and an outward endeavor to do these things is
certainly the child of God; but a bare persuasion without any opperation or
sanctifying work of the spirit of God in the soul, is the suggestion of the
devil, who would persuade them that kill you that they do God service, John
16.2. whose possessors slay them and hold themselves not guilty, Zac. 11.5. The
devil can easily turn himself into an Angel of light, to deceive those that
deny all marks and signs of grace in them; but can the spirit of God come
into the soul where the devil dwells in full possession, and bind him and cast
him out, and change the will and affections from the service of the devil to
serve himself? can the strong holds of the devil be cast down, and the
Throne of Christ set up without any noise or stir in that soul? it is rather
an evidence that soul was never changed, then not to be senceable of it any
otherwise but only by a bare testimony, not looking what work the Lord has
wrought in it, nor knowing any thing by experience but by hear say, or a
testimony of the devil, or some lying spirit which has told him so.

But what says the Apostle John, Ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye
know all things; the anointing which ye have received abides in you, and ye
need not that any man teach you but as the same anointing teaches you of all
things, and is truth and is no lie; and even as it has taught you, ye shall
abide in him; if ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that
does righteousness is borne of him, 1 John 2.20.27.29. sometimes the spirit
of God cease to give testimony a long time together; then our spirit or
conscience witnesses from the work wrought by the spirit of God, this
anointing abides in us, and teaches when the verbal voice or testimony is
gone or cease; for says Paul, our rejoicing is the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom
but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, 2 Cor.
1.12. I have lived in all good conscience before God to this day. Act. 23.1. I
say the truth in Christ I lie not, my conscience bears me witness in the
Holy Ghost, To. 9.1. Thus you see that we must not content our selves with a
bare testimony, but we must labor to see the work wrought in us, let but thy
conscience bring thee to thy trial and thou shall easily see how it is with
thee; and do not say that this is legal teaching, lest thou be filled with
fancies and no real work of grace be wrought as yet in thee, and do not
think that the spirit of God will work when thou lie still and remainest an
empty trunk or a dead stone; no thou must be made a living stone, and must
work actively by the movings of the spirit of God in thee: draw me, and we
will run after thee, Cant. 1.3. I shall run the ways of thy Commandments
when thou do enlarge my heart, Psalm. 119.32. but this they condemn as
legal teaching, because spiritual sloathfulnesse has so possessed them, that
they will make no other trial, but rest upon a bare idle persuasion or
testimony, but whether it came from God or the devil they know not.

Well, they say they are justified as soon as they were borne, and then as
righteous as Christ, and this they know from a bare testimony; now it follows
say they, that God cannot correct them, neither does he correct for their
sin, but only to exercise their faith.

I grant that God does not punish his children in wrath and fury, with plagues
and vengeance, but as gentle corrections from a loving father for their good,
yet still sin was the cause of it; says David, there is no soundness in my
flesh nor rest in my bones, because of my sin, Psalm. 38.3, 4, 5. why does the
living man complain? man is punished for his sin, Lam. 3.39. then art thou
made whole, sin no more lest a worse thing come unto thee, John 5.14. if
David a man after Gods own heart sin scandalously, the sword shall never
depart from his house, 2 Samuel 12 10. God is not partial in his corrections,
though Coniah were as the signet upon my right hand, yet would I plucks him
thence, Ier. 22.24. that soul that sins it shall dye, Ezekiel. 18. all things
come alike to all; there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked,
Eccles. 9.2. the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. And every sickness or
inward griese or sorrow or outward hurts, or maladies, all are but parts and
parcels of this wages that we receive from the service of sin, and we receive
this wages by parts and parsels daily; for as Adam in the day that he sinned he
began to dye, he received some part of that wages of sin, death seized upon
him and slew him by degrees; and so we as soon as we were borne began to dye,
and all those afflictions and sorrows that do befall us do but hallen us to
our end; but who is freed from these things? what man is he that lives and
shall not see death, Ps. 89.41. our Prophets are dead, and our fathers are
fallen asleep; wise men dye as well as fools, for all must dye, and be as
water spile upon the ground 2 Samuel 14.14. then God does correct and that
heavily for sin; yet his corrections are sweetened to his people, the sting or
bitterness of them is taken out; yet we shall not be freed from corrections
nor death, so long as we carry a body of sin daily about with us; death is
passed upon all men; for that all have sinned Romans 5.12. but will they say that
death is not a correction? it is the king of terrors, Job 18.14. will they say
death is but to exercise their faith; but suppose one of them were shot with a
bullet, how would he exercise his faith? or can they exercise their faith to
prevent a sin, when they are corrected for their sin already committed;
says David, before J was afflicted J went astray, Psalm. 119.67. and Manasseh
was converted in the furnace of afflictions, which was the means to beget his
faith, and not to exercise it before he had it: it is manifest enough that God
does correct his people for sin; if thy children forsake my law, and if they
break my statutes, then J will visit their transgressions with a rod and their
iniquity with stripes; nevertheless J will not take away my mercy from him.
Psalm. 89.30. then let not the Antonomeans forsake Gods law, lest they feel the
weight of his correcting hand, you have I known of all the families of the
earth, therefore I will punish you for your iniquities, Amos 3.2. then let them
take heed how they say when they sin, tush, God sees not, God is not like to
themselves; he will reprove them, and set their sins in order before them,
consider th^^ ye that forget God lest he tear you in ^^eces and there be none
to deliver you Psalm. 50.21. God will correct Jacob in measure, and will not
leave him altogethen unpunished, Jer. 10.24.20.11. for the transgression of
Jacob is all this, Micah 1.5. Zachariah and Elizabeth are as famous as any in
all the Scripture, for being both just and righteous before God and walking in
all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless; yet says the
Angel to him thou shall be dumb and not able to speak (which was a sore
correction) because thou beleevest not my words, Luke 1.6.20. and Jehosaohat
was a good man, yet if he help the ungodly and love them that hate the Lord;
there shall wrath from the Lord be upon him, nevertheles there are good things
found in him, 2 Chr. 19.23. and Miriam was a good woman yet if she speak
against Moses the anger of the Lord is kindled, and behold Miriam became
leprous white as snow, Number. 12.1.9, 10. for whom the Lord loves he chasteneth,
and scourges every son that he receives; if ye endnre chastening whereof
all are partakers, then are ye sons and not bastards, Heb. 12.6, 7, 8.
Ephraim bemoaned himself thus, Thou have chast^sed me; yet says the Lord,
Ephraim is my dear son, he is a pleasant child, I do earnestly remember him
still, my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy on him, says
the Lord, Jer. 31.18.20. it is a sign of a humble heart, when the Land is
scourged for sin, to acknowledge our sins to be the cause of it, as David
did, saying to the Lord, I even I only have sinned and done evil indeed, but
as for these sheep what have they done? 1 Chronicles. 21.17. see 2 Samuel 24.10.
Again, when Nathan came to him, he said, I have sinned against the Lord, 2 Samuel 12.13. Again, it is the brand of a reprobate, when God cease to correct
him for his sin, I will no more punish your daughters when they commit
whoredom, nor your spouses when they commit adultery: Ephraim is joined to
Idols, let him alone. Hosea 4.14.17. so when the L^^d smote Uzzah for his
error that he dyed, David was afraid of the Lord t^^t day, 2 Samuel 6.7.8. when
Christ said to his Apostles, one of you shall betray me, every one suspected
his own heart saying, Lord is it I, Mat. 26. then let not us say, God cannot
correct us, nor any other for our sins; which is one maine cause why they
refuse the covenant; but let them know if God have forgiven them, yet he will
take vengeance on their inventions, Psalm. 99.8. then if God send Jonah to cry
against the wickedness of Niniveh, and he go to Tarshesh from the presence of
the Lord, God will send a great and mighty wind and tempest, so that the ship
was like to be broken, and Jonah forced to confess and say, for my sake this
great tempest is come upon you, Jonah 1.2.12. the judge of all the earth will
do right, Genesis 18. and ye shall know that I have not done without cause all
that I have done, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 14.23. and when some received the
Sacrament unworthily, for this cause many were sick and weak and many dead, 1
Cor. 11. then does not God correct his people for sin, or will they say they
dye only for ^ryall, for these men were some of them Gods people which shall
not be condemned with the world, ver. 32. judgment begins at the house of
God, 1 Pet. 4.17. which makes David say, my flesh trembles for fear of thee,
and I am afraid of thy judgments, Psalm. 119.120. Hab. 3.15. but these people
are so full of mirth from those following grounds, that they brake out into
laughter saying, they cannot sin being in Christ, and if they should yet God
cannot see it, or if he should chance to see it, he cannot be displeased with
it or if he should be displea^ed, his hands are bound that he cannot correct
them for it; then they must neither repent, nor be sorry, nor pray for the
pardon of any sin, neither past, present, nor to come; neither must they
hear of their sins any more; this fills their faces full of comfort, when
their hearts have cause enough to be heavy; says Solomon, he is the happy man
that fears always. Prove. 28.14. when this fear stirs up watchfulness and
diligence, to please God with reverence and godly fear, H^b. 12.28, a child
may fear his fathers rod, although he fear not to be disinherited, even the
reghteous shall see and fear, Psalm 52.6. legal threatenings cannot hurt the
righteous; says David, let the righteous smite me it shall be a kindness; and
let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil which shall not break mine
head, Psalm. 141.6. these lower herbs will make us relish promises the better,
and stick faster to them and it will inflame our love to God more deeper, for
saving us from those dangers threatened, and it will stir up compassion in us
toward our brethren, to help them out of those dangers, and to work out our
own salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.11.

Thus they being justified as soon as they are borne, and then as righteous as
Christ; this they know from a bare testimony, or revelation, or suggeestion,
then God cannot correct nor punish them for sin: now it follows, that they are
freed from the commanding power of the law of God, by their free grace they are
discharged from all duty or obedience to it, now the law of God is no rule for
them, but wh^^ they do is only out of love and courtesy, for they owe God
nothing at all.

Here I grant that the Juditiall law was not made for us, and the ceremonial
law was ended in Christ, but the morrall law abides for ever; I mean the
commanding and discovering power of it remains as a glass to believers, and
as a rule or a bridle to keep them in continual obedience to the Lord.

And whereas it is said, If ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the law,
but under grace, Gal. 5.18. it is to be understood, you do obey the law freely
without the lashing or constraining power of the law, and where it is said, sin
shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under the law, but under
grace, Romans 3.13. this is plain, that if sin have dominion over you, you are
under the curse and condemning power of the law; but from the reign of sin
and from the curse of the law, you are freed by Christ, Romans 8.1. Gal. 3.13,
This curse and condemning power of the law, is not made for a righteous man but
for the ungodly, for sinners, and unholy, for murderers, and whoremongers,
thieves, and liars, and perjured persons, or any other sin that is contrary
to sound doctrine, 1. Tim. 1.9.10. Wherefore the law is holy, and the
commandment holy, just, and good, Romans 7.12. but they will have the commanding
power of the law, to last but till John the Batpist, because it is said, the
law and the Prophets were until John. Luke 16.16. and the law was added for
transgressors till the seed should come, Gal. 3.19. I answer, they prophesied
of Christ till John, Mat. 11.13. but when John showed them the Messiah, and
poynted to him with his finger, saying, Behold the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world, John 1.29. then they ceased to prophecy, or to
foretell of his coming when they saw him; but to say that the law should la^^
but till John is yet to prove, and cannot be gathered from this place; For til^
the law, sin was in the world, Romans 5.13. but will they gather from hence
that there was no sin in the world after that the law was given; if Mical be
childlesse till her death, she must needs be so for ever; and Paul says to
Timothy, Till I come give attendance to reading, exhortation, and doctrine,
neglect not the gift that is in thee, 1. Tim. 4.13.14. but after that Paul is
come, must he neglect these duties, because it is said, do them till I come;
thus they force the Scriptures to favor their errors. Then they say Christ is
the end of the law for righteousness, so I say too, for he has put an end to
all types and shadows of the Ceremonial law, and he has put an end to the
curse and bondage of the moral law; Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. and from the condemning power of
it, Romans 8.1. but if we speak of obedience to the commanding power of the law,
Christ is the scop and end to which all our obedience tends, and he is the end
for whose sake all the promises are made good unto us, and not for our
obedience, and he alone gives being and performance to them all, 2 Cor. 1.20.
and he is the end of the law for righteousness, that is, the law brings us to
Christ for righteousness, and in him we have righteousness ^^ fulfill the
laws, not inherent but by imputation? Then are we freed from the law, no, then
are we tied faster in obedience to it, forasmuch as we had no power before to
do it, but now through Christ we can do all things. Again, they say they have
the spirit of God for their rule, and they do all by a free spirit, and need
not the law to rule them; for they are like unto trees that bring forth fruit
of themselves without any teaching. But let them know that trees although they
were never so rooted in the earth, yet they would never bring forth fruit of
themselves, but by the means of outward helps, as the Sun and the rain and
other helps, and besides, the spirit of God brings them to the rule of the
law, to square and try all their actions by it, and shows us wherein we fail,
and when we do that which is required of us.

But sure these men think that our Fathers went to Heaven by one means, and
we must go thither by another means; but says the Apostle, we write unto you
no new commandment but the old, which ye have had from the beginning, then
there is but one way, Ier. 32.39. for them and us; had they the law? so have
we; and if we have the Gospel, so had they, and the law and the gospel
command the same virtues, and both forbid the same vices: then what a cursed
error is this to think that God the son should free believers from all
obedience to God the Father; but we know that he who honors the son must needs
honor the Father, John 5.23. the son speaks not of himself but from the
Father, ver. 16. then he that says he abides in him, ought himself also to
walk even as he walked, 1 John 2.6. but how was that says he, Lo I come! in
the volume of thy book it is written of me to do thy will O God: then said I,
lo! I come to do thy will O God; Heb. 10.7.9. and says he, I seek not mine
own will, but the will of the Father that sent me, John 5.30. Mat. 26.39. my
doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me, John 7.16. he was subject to his
Parents, Luke 2.51. and says Paul, let the same mind be in you that was in
Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5. and Christ says, learn of me, Mat. 11.29. I have
given you an example that ye should do as I have done to you; if ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them, Ioh. 13.15.17. and for suffering he left us
an example that we should follow his steps, 1. Pet. 2.21. then did Christ free
us from the law, or did he not rather by his own example show us how to obey
the law more exactly, and says David, thy law endures for ever in heaven, Psa.
119.89. and the Angels do the commandments of God, and hearken to the voice of
his word Psalm. 10.3. and do not the Saints liev there by the same rule, have
they not all one charter, why does Christ teach us to pray, that we may do the
will of God on earth as it is done in heaven, Mat. 6. are we on earth more
perfect then they, or more sanctified then they, or has Christ done more for
us then for them? if not, why then should we forsake that rule that must be for
Saints and Angels for ever? they boast of their justification, but says
Ambrose how can they be justified that are not friends with the law of God? and
Luther whom they chall^nge for their own friend he rangeth them among the
unjustified, and by his c^nsure rejects them among the unregenerate; for says
he, Paul said, I delight in the law of God, in the inward man, and I serve the
law of God in my mind, Romans 7.22.25. and says David, O how I love thy law!
Psalm. 119.97. and the blessed man delights in the law of the Lord, and in his
law does he meditate day and night, Psalm. 1.2. then were Christ and his
Apostles and the faithful Ministers that succeed them all legal Preachers,
for urging the law and pressing on believers the obedience of the law; yea; to
the law more strictly, expounded by Christ, as you shall see anon, then it was
by the Scribes and Pharisees. Then he that neglects the Commandments and shall
teach men so, shall, be least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does them
and teaches men so, shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
5.19. again, how can a man teach obedience of faith, but he must needs teach
obedience to the law, for if faith bear no fruits it is a dead faith, James
2.17, 18. and if those works or fruits be not regulated by the law, they are
but grapes of gall which grows on the vine of Sodom, and their clusters are
bitter Deuteronomy. 32.32. the works of the law and the works of faith are the same
thing, they may be distinguished but not divided; and says Christ to the
Lawyer, what is written in the law? how read thou? and he answered, thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul; and
with all thy strength, and thy neighbor as thy self; and Christ said unto
him, thou have answered right, this do and thou shall live, Luke 10.26, 27,
28. and does not faith work by love? Gal. 5.6. again, how can a man believe
that God will show mercy to thousands of them that love him and keep his
commandments, Exodus 20.6. when they show no endeavor at all to keep or obey
them, but scornfully term them legal teachers that call for any obedience
from them; but what makes them to love God, if the commanding power of his law
does not? or if they yield to this command of the law, why not as well to
another? b^t if they love God, and not as a duty to his law that commands it,
it is bottomless, groundless, and in the end will be comfortless; and why
do they believe in Christ but to fulfill the Fathers commandment? for this is
his commandment, that we should believe on the name of his son Jesus Christ,
and love one another as he the father gave us commandment, 1 John 3.23. this
is the work of God to believe on him whom he has sent. John 6.29.

Then do we make void the law through faith, God forbid; y^a we establish the
law Romans 3.31. being not without the law to God, but under the law to Christ 1
Cor. 9.^1. He that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God and
approved of men, Romans 14.18. He th^^ speaks evil of his brother and judges
his brother, speaks evil of the law and judges the law, but if thou judge
the law, thou art not a doer of the law but a judge, Jam. 4.11. If ye have
respect to persons ye commit sin, and are convinced of the law as
transgressors; whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point,
he is guilty of all; for he that said thou shall not commit adultery, said also
thou shall not kill; now if thou do not commit adultery, yet if thou kill thou
art a transgressour of the law, Jam. 2.9.10.11. Then bear one another burden,
and so fulfill the law of Christ, Gal. 6.2, here Christ claims the law to be
his, There is one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy, Iam. 4.12. the
Prophets came all saying, Thus says the Lord; but when Christ came and cleared
the law from those false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, which say, thou
shall not kill; but I say whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause,
is in danger of judgment. Mat. 5. and ye have heard say, thou shall not commit
adultery; but I say, whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her has
committed adultery already in his heart, and so of the rest; therefore obey it
and so fulfill the law of Christ; for he says I am not come to destroy the law
till Heaven and earth pass away, not one tittle or jot shall in no wise pass
from the law, Mat. 5.17.18. now when Christ has claimed the law to be his, and
cleared it from their false glosses, then there comes a young man to him
saying, Master, what good thing shall I do to inherit eternal life? then
Christ answers him directly saying ^f thou will enter into life keep the
Commandments; he says unto him, which? Christ answered him, thou shall not
commit adultery, nor murder, nor steal, nor bear false witness, honor thy
father and mother, and love thy neighbor as thy self, Mat. 19.16, 17. and
although outwardly he had been doing something for which Christ loved him, yet
there was that inward lust of covetousness stuck fast in his heart; therefore
Christ sends him back to the law to be humbled for it, this one thing thou
lackest, Mark 10.21. before thou art fit for faith or to have treasure in
heaven, go to the law and see thy sin, for by the law is the knowledge of
sin, Romans 3.20. then is the law sin nay I had not known sin but by the
law, I had not known lust except the law had said, thou shall not lust, Romans
7.7. and the law shows us our failings when we are in the state of grace, for
it we should cast off the law from being a rule to us, we should neither know
when we sin nor how to recover our selves, for where no law is there is no
transgression, Romans 4.15. for whosoever sins transgresses the law, for
sin is the transgression of the law, 1 Ioh. 3.4. then it is time Lord to
work, when they have made void thy law, Psalm. 119.126. rivers of tears run
down mine eyes because they keep not thy law, ver. 136. so then they that are
in the flesh cannot please God, for the carnal mind is enmity against God, it
is not subject the law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8.7.

Then what shall we say to those sons of Beliall, that are so weary of the
law, that as much as in them lies they seek to make it void, both in the
commanding duties and forbidding of vices, but cursed be such tenets; has the
devil so prevailed with them as to make them take counsel against the Lord
and against his Anointed, saying, let us break their cords and cast away their
bonds from us, Psalm. 2.2, 3.

How dare they say, that Christ has freed them from all duty, and that they
owe the Lord no obedience at all, so that what they do is out of their free
love and courtesy, and not from any duty or obedience to his law, which is no
rule for believers: But do they make void the law, God forbid, Romans 3.31.
faith should be employed to fetch power from Christ to enable us to obey the
law, we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. but we can do all things through
Christ strengthening us, Phil. 4.13. then faith does not free us of our duty,
but makes us more able to perform our duty to the law of God, and therefore it
is called the obedience of faith, Romans 1.5. it stands not with true faith, to
call them legal divines by way of scorn and dirision, that call upon us and
put us in mind of our duty to the Lord, because say they, we owe him none; but
let them know and be sure that their sins will find them out, Numb. 32.23.
let them take heed how they say that God is like to themselves, lest he reprove
them and set their sins in order before them; now consider this ye that
forget God lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psalm.
50.21.22. certainly that man was never justified from his sin, that thinks
it not his duty to mortify it, and does not grieve and mourn for want of
strength to subdue it, and his duty to pray against it, which our Antinomeans
renounce, saying, this is legal teaching, and they will try their condition,
only from a bare testimony as I said before; although it be a suggestion of
the devil, it may serve their turn well enough, while they despise the
operation of the spirit of God sanctifying and changing them, and setting up
his own Image in them, giving them grace for grace with Christ; they say if we
look upon these marks and signs to know our condition, this is legal; this
will not stand with their free grace, which frees them of that labor which
should search and try them, they take all from a testimony without
examination; but this building will not endure the storm of persecution.

Then they say that they love God terribly, and this frees them from their
duty: they say, the love of Christ constraines them, but they will not tell us
to what, for they flatly deny all duty to the Law of God: but says Christ,
when ye have done all that ye can you have but done your duty, Luke 17.10. and
says Christ, ye call me Lord and Master, and ye say well, for so I am, but
then ye ought to wash one another feet, for the servant is not above the
Master: if ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them, John 13.15.16.
if the young man call him Master, presently he sends him to his work and duty
of obedience, Mat. 19.17. if I be your Master where is my fear? Mat. 1.6. It
is not enough to call him Lord and Master, and then to deny all duty of
obedience to him; this was the love of Judas who cried, Hale Master, when he
betrayed him: so these men say that they love him dearly, but they defy all
duty to him, for they owe him none; but time will come when they that say Lord,
Lord, shall not come to heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which
is in heaven, Mat. 7.21. But their true love frees them from all duty: but what
love they have I know not, for this is the law of God, that we keep his
Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3. But if they
love God, why do they despise his Law, which says Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might:
these words I command thee this day, Deuteronomy. 6.5.6. and where is their love to
Christ they boast so much of; for he says these words in answer to the Lawyer,
This is the first and great Commandment in the Law, to love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul and with all thy mind, and the
second is like unto it, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, on these
two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 22.37.38. And Moses
spoke the same words of the second Table, saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self Levit. 19.18. so that you see the sweet harmony between Christ and
Moses; and the same was with Paul, who says, Thou shall not commit adultery,
kill nor steal, nor bear false witness, nor covet: love works no ill to
his neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.9, 10. then
does love drive them from the law: says David, Oh how I love thy law; and
what follows? it is my meditation all the day, Psalm. 119.97. thy testimonies
are my delight, and what follows? and my councillors, ver. 24. Unless thy
law had been my delight, I had perished in mine affliction: I will never
forget thy precepts, for with them thou have quickened me ver. 92.93. tha^ is,
the showing him his duty revived his dull spirits that began to flagge and
faint: but these men despise the Law of God, because it is sent by Moses; but
says Christ, had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of
me; and if ye will not believe his writings, how shall ye believe my words,
John 5.46.47. Moses told them that the seed of ^he woman should break the
serpents head, Genesis 3.15, and that the Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a
Prophet from the midst of thee of thy brethren like unto me; unto him shall
ye hearken, and he shall speak unto them all that I command him, Deuteronomy. 18.18.
and says the Lord, This is my beloved Son, hear him, Mat. 17.5. the Apostle
to set forth the faithfulness of Christ, compares him with faithful Moses;
for says he, Christ was faithful to him that appointed him; as also Moses was
faithful in all his house, Heb. 3.2. then why must Moses be so despised, who
was as faithful to the Lord as ever man was, but yet the message was the
Lords? then why must Gods law be despised? because you like not the messenger
that brings it. Again, Christ cleares the law of Moses from their false
glosses: but it seems in their conceit that Moses has so defiled it, that
Christ is not able to clear it again except he take it quite away; for they
are not minded to make it a rule to believers although they perish by swarving
from it; as that cursed Whoremonger that is so busy to broach those sweet
tolerations for his own vilany, and for such as he, who esteem the law of
God as a heavy burden to them, and as a bridle to restrain them from their
sweet pleasures in sin, but if they leave this rule, they must needs offer
polluted bread to the Lord, and the blind and the lame. and the sick, in their
offering, which is evil; that their governor would not be pleased with nor
accept their persons then cursed be that deceiver that has in his flock a
male and offers unto the Lord a corrupt thing, Mal. 1.7 8 9, 14. if the Lord
write unto you the great things of his law and you count them as a strange
thing Hosea 8.12. If you do not make the law of God your guide you must needs
bring strange fire to the Lord, as the Sons of Aaron did and perished for
their presumption, Levit. 10.12. for who required these things at your hands,
to tread my Courts? to what purpose is all that ye do? bring no more vain
oblations, it is iniquity, my soul hates them, they are a trouble to me, I
cannot bear them, Isa. 1.11.12.13.14. see Amos 5.25.26. He that kills an ox
is as if he slew a man and he that sacrifices a lamb as if he cut off a
dogs neck; he that offers an oblation as if he offered swines blood; and
he that burns Incense as if he blessed an Idol; the reason is because they
have chosen their own vvayes Isa. 66.3. thus says the Lord stand in the way
and see, ask for the old paths where is the good way, and walk therein
and ye shall find rest for your souls; but they laid we will not walk
therein: Hear O earth I will bring evil upon this people, the fruit of their
own thoughts, because they have not harkened to my law but rejected it, then
it follows, to what purpose comes their incense to me from, Sheba, your
offerings are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet unto me Jer.
6.16.19.20. these people are like unto King Saul, who for^ooke the
commandment of the Lord and then would go offer the sacrifice of his own
devising; but to obey had been better then sacrifice, and to harken then the
fat of Rams, 1 Samuel 15.22. so these men forsake the law of God, and say that it
is no rule for believers; and then they say that love will move them to
something unrequired, not as any duty nor done in obedience to the Lord, but
out of free love and mere good will and curtisie; but I say, if it be not done
by the rule, and weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, but only of their
own head, God will say of them as he said of Saul, Rebellion is as the sin
of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry, because thou have
rejected the word of the Lord, he also has rejected thee from being King, 1 Samuel 15.23. and now O Israel, what does the Lord require of thee, but to fear
the Lord thy God, and to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve
him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul and to keep the Commandments of
the Lord and his statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good? Deuteronomy.
10.12, 13. but they will answer that their free grace has freed them from all
duties, so that they do not stand in fear to oftend the Lord, neither are
they bound to walk in all his ways nor to serve the Lord with all their heart
and soul, nor to endeavor to keep his laws and statutes for their good, this
they say is legal, and but the words of Moses, and they can love God; and this
they can show sufficiently from their free will unrequired of God, or done in
obedience to his law, for it is no rule for them, neither do they acknowledge
any duty to it. Again they are not acquainted with the graces of Gods spirit
that are wrought in his people; I mean such as these, 2 Cor. 7.11. tell them
what carfulness godly sorrow has wrought in you, and they will answer, that
their care is taken; and what a clearing of your selves, and they will say that
they are as clear from sin as Christ; and of anger for sin, and they will
say, that they have none to be angry at; and of fear to offend God, and they
will say, that they cannot sin to offend him; tell them of a desire to please
God, and they will say, that Christ has done that already and what need they
to trouble themselves; tell them of a zeal for Gods glory and revenge on
sin, and they will say, these are legal things which they are freed from,
and so of all other graces they know not what we mean: But they have faith to
see that all is done by Christ without faith or application, only when faith
is come by it, they can see what was done in them before and without it; they
say Christ lives in them, and acts and moves them as we move a stone; and they
are still as an empty trunk for his spirit to move in, so that nothing is
required of them, but only to let the spirit of God-doe his own work in
them and by them; and they remain still but dead stones; they are not
acquainted with that principle of life that is put into Gods people; they are
not as yet made living stones, but they like Balaams Ass remain as they were,
a though she speak with man's voice yet an Ass still, and so are they; but
the child of God is quickened that was dead in trespasses and sins, Ephe.
2.1. says Christ, ^he that hears my word and believes on him that sent me,
has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from
death to life, Joh. 5.24. from all this we may clearly see, that duties of
obedience are required of believers, and they will be easily convinced of it,
that are living members of the mystical body of Christ, and living stones in
his spiritual building; but for dead stones and empty trunkes, we wonder not
much at their folly, which breaks out into all licentiousness and abominable
practices; as for example, a woman prostrating her self to uncleanness, said,
you think that you should sin if you should lie with me; but what law does
forbid it unto us; O horrible practice of lawless people! but when they see
any to live as near the rule of Gods law as they can, those they reproach with
such names as these, duty-mongers, duty-doers, followers of legal preachers,
scorning that word of God which condemns their sinful courses; and to
express their dislike of the duties of holiness, they say, What have we to
do with the dungie durty duties of sanctification, we thank God through Jesus
Christ we have nothing to do with them; these they say are works for
home-booke Christians; they tell us that believers do duties only in respect
of men, for God requires none at their hands; they are so deluded that a woman
said, Jesus Christ came and took her by the hand and asked her why she was so
sad, and bad her leave off her mourning for sin and be cheerful, for she
greatly dishonored the Gospel in being troubled for her sins: another, as
she was sitting by the fire, Christ came to her and bad her pray for such a
one of her acquaintance, that she may have assurance, which she did, and
presently the party received by a light from Heaven full assurance: and another
said, nothing troubled her so much as the time she had spent in prayer and
other duties, which held her so long from her comfort: these are they that will
not be guided by the law of God, who are given up to strong delusions to
believe lies, that they may be damned who believe not the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11,
12. But when these men with their owl eyes cannot abide the Sunbeams of
clear Scripture against them, they would hide themselves with some humane
testimonies, wrested and distorted from the true meaning and intention of their
alleged Authors. First, they boast highly that Master Luther is theirs
wholly, and they hold nothing in this point, but what they sucked from his
breasts; but by this instance you may see how they serve the rest, for Master
Luther was so far from being an Antinomean, that no man does more expressly
and soundly overthrow and contradict this wicked opinion then he, neither can
any man desire a stronger humane witness against them then Master Luther, read
his words with a pause and judge; satan says he stirs up daily new Sects,
and now he has raised up a sect of such as teach that the ten Commandments
are to be taken out of the Church, and that men should not be terrified with
the law; see this in Luthers Preface to his Commentary on the Gal. and in page
171. he speaks of three sorts of men that abuse the law; first, those that
seek justification by the law; secondly, those that will utterly exempt a
Christian man from the law; and on page 153. he admonishes all those that
fear God, that they would learn out of Paul to understand the true and proper
use of the law, which I fear says he, after our time will be trodden under
foot and abolished by the enemies of the truth; but if Master Luther thought
that Christ had abolished the law, he would never desire men fearing God to
learn the true use of it, and if he feared that men would abolish it, then
sure he thought in his judgment, that it ought not to be abolished; and if he
esteem them that would abolish it to be enemies to the truth, then sure he is
not their Patron, and in page 154. he says, we do plainly testify that we
reject not the law nor works, as our adversaries do falsely accuse us, but we
do altogether establish the law and require the works thereof, and we say the
law is good and profitable, and chap. 5.14. page 154. says he, it is necessary
that godly Preachers should as diligently teach the doctrine of good works as
the doctrine of faith; for satan is a deadly enemy of both; but then is Luther
an Antinomean? does he not directly contradict your foolish tenants, and
disclaim you as adversaries and false accusers: you reject the law and works,
but he rejects neither; you abolish the whole law, but he establishes it;
you reject them for legal preachers, that teach not Christ aright who urge men
to the duties of the law, but he imposes it as a necessary part of their
office to urge the law, as to teach the doctrine of faith: for shame never
claim Luther more.

But they object to small purpose that Luther should say, Christ has abolished
all the law of Moses; so I say too, that he has abolished all the ceremonial
law of Moses; but they say he says, page 177. man is not justified by Gods law,
nor man's law, but by Christ-alone, so I say too; but will it follow hence, that
because the law does not justify a sinner therefore it is void, it is like as
if a man should say, that because he cannot hear with his eyes, nor see with
his ears, therefore they are all void and of no use to him; this is Antinomean
divinity.

And so because the terrors and torments of the law are taken off to
believers, therefore the law is void to Antinomeans; if this be so, then if the
sting of death be taken off to believers, by their divinity they must not dye
nor be ^courged for their sin; but as the sting of death and afflictions is
taken away to believers, and so they are sweetened unto them, but not taken
away, so the ^urse or sting of the law is taken away, yet the law is not made
void; and so ^ne of Luthers Scholars says, the Regenerate are not under the
law, in respect ^f justification, accusation, condemnation or coaction; but he
affirms a ^^reefold use of the law to the Regenerate: First, as a doctrine to
direct in du^es: Secondly, as a glass to see the defects of them: Thirdly, to
restrain cor^^ption that is in them. And Master Calvin in his second book of
Institutions, ^^ap. 7. sect. 12. speaks of the moral law as it concerns the
faithful, how ^^ey should use it; namely, to know the will of God, and by the
fervent meditation of it, they should be excited to the obedience of it, and
strengthened in their obedience of it, and restrained from the offenses of it;
in the 13. sect. Libertines deny the law because it is the ministration of
death; but far be it from us says he to hold such a profane opinion; he
says, it has an excellent use, namely, to be a perperuall rule of life, and
so in the 14. and 15. sect. and in the third book 19. chap. sect. 2. he says,
although Christians must lift themselves above the law, and forget the
righteousness of the law; yet says he, we must not conclude the law as
needless, for it does not cease to teach, to exhort, and to incite to good,
though before Gods Tribunal, it has no place in our consciences; the law
therefore by Master Calvin's doctrine and determination, abides by Christ an
unviolable doctrine.

I might mention many famous Divines, that have confuted this cursed heresy in
their several ages, but I will only here mention one more to these two of
famous memory in the Church of God because their books are all extant and
easy to be had, without much trouble to the Reader, it is that judicious Mr.
Perkins, in his fruitful writings appears every where as in his Golden-cheyn
chap. 31. having set down the use of the moral law in the unregenerate he
concludes, that the use of the law in the Regenerate is far otherwise, for
it guides them to new obedience, which may be acceptable to God through
Christ; and in his Commentary on the Gall. page 172. line 6. he shows, that
still the Lord repeateth his law in his old tenure: First, to teach us that the
law is of a constant and unchangeable nature: Secondly, to advertise us of our
weakness, and to show us what we cannot do: Thirdly, to put us in mind still
to humble us, after we have begun by grace to obey the law, because even then
we came far short in doing the things which the law requires a^ our hands;
and on page 119. line 35. he enquireth, now faith is come, what i^ the guard
whereby we are now kept from sin? he answers the moral law which is as
stakes and nails fastened to range men in the compass of their own duties,
Eccles. 12.11. and upon page 201. line ^4. he puts forth this question, how
far the moral law is abrogated; his answer is three ways: First in respect
of justification: Secondly, of maladiction: Thirdly, in respect ^^ rigor; for
them that are in Christ, God accepts their endeavors to obe^ for obedience
it self, nevertheless says he, the law as it is a rule of good li^^ is
unchangeable and admits no abrogation, and Christ in this regard, did (...)
his death establish it, Romans 3.31. and page 253. li. 35. he says; the law must
(...) considered two ways: First, as a rule of life; thus Angels are under the
la^ and Adam before his fall, and the Saints in Heaven and none yield more
^^^jection to the law then they, and this subjection is their liberty,; but
wh^^ did the Antinomeans learn this divinity? that Christ came to abrogate ^^^
law of Innocency, which Adam had before his fall, or the eternal law of Sai^^^
and Angels glorified; also in his Treatise of conscience, chap. 2. he says;
(...) moral law binds the consciences of all men and at all times to
obedience. Now good Reader get these books, Calvin's Institutions and Luther,
and Perkins on the Galla. and see these things that thou may be satisfied,
and shake off these seducers, as Paul shook off the Viper, Acts 28.5. lest thou
perish eternally by them.

Well, thus we have driven them from their strong holds, the Scripture is
against them, and good men forsake them, for they have made lies their refuge,
and under falsehood have they hid themselves; but the hail shall sweep away
their refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow their hiding place, Isa.
28.15.17.

But when thou art spoiled, what will thou do? though thou cloathest thy self
with Crimson, though thou deckest thy self with Ornaments of gold, though thou
paintest thy face with painting, in vain shall thou make thy self fair, thy
lovers will despise thee, Jer. 4.30. Thou art called to give an account of thy
Stewardship, art thou resolved what to do? that when thou art put out, thy
Antinomean proselites may receive thee into their houses, Luke 16.2.4. thou
have but one shift more, that when thy Masters debtors are called, to deny half
their debt, to take their bill and presently discharge them of all their debt
written in the old Testament; and if this will not please them to receive thee,
when God and good men have cast thee off, then take thy bill and write
presently scriptum est, any thing is scripture, and of an equal vallue with
it, if it be but written in a play book or ballad, if this will not do to be
maintained privately amongst them, tell them that thou know no word of God,
but Christ and this word is in thee, and therefore thou need no other help
without thou art so full of light within; these things comes next to be
answered.

They deny utterly the authority of the old Testament; yet this need not to
trouble us, when as it is so abundantly confirmed both by Christ and his
Apostles in the new, not only by coating of it, but giving it the name and
title of Scripture; Paul speaking of Genesis, says, What says the scripture?
Abraham believed God, Romans 4.3. and of Exodus, The Scripture says unto
Pharaoh, Romans 9.17. and of Numbers, that the scripture might be fulfilled, John
19.36. and of Deuteronomie, as the scripture has said, John 7.38. and of
Isaiah, the scripture says, Romans 10.11. and of the Psalms, that the scripture
might be fulfilled, and of Zechariah, another scripture says, John
19.24.28.47. what shall I say? Christ beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets,
expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself, then
opened he their understanding that they may know the Scriptures, what was
written in the law of Moses, in the Prophets and Psalms concerning himself,
Luke 24.27.44, 45. says Christ, search the Scriptures for they testify of me,
John 3.39. now I demand what Scriptures these were, if not the old Testament,
for the new was not yet written? and so Apollos mighty in Scripture convinced
the Jews, showing by the seripture that Jesus was Christ, Acts 18.24.28. and
all that was written aforetime was for our learning that we through patience
and comfort of the scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4. then how dare these
men deny the old Testament that is so confirmed both by Christ and his Apostles
in the new, which is the language of their Honey-combe.

Some Errors that are in a little book called the Tree of Knowledge of Good
and Evil, discovered and answered.
IN that Book they make any humane writings to be Scripture, and make no
difference between play-bookes and the Scripture of truth, Dan. 10.21. but all
Scripture is given by anspiration, and is profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, and the Scripture
is able to make thee wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. then are the
writings of men such a Scripture? Again, the Scripture is of no private
interpretation, For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of men, but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.20.21.
then is men's writings Scripture? He that shall add to this Book, God will
add to him all the plagues that are written in this Book; or if any man shall
take away any thing from the words of this Book. God shall take away his part
out of the Book of life, Rev. 22.18, 19. then surely the two Testaments with
all their several Chapters, contained in them, are the Scripture, and not any
humane writings whatsoever.

But I fear any Scripture may serve them that regard none at all, for they say,
that they are led only by an inward Principle, so that they need no other help
at all; but the noble Bereans did search the Scripture daily to see whither
those things were so, Act. 17.11. the Scriptures should be the sole Judge of
all controversies and that by which we should try all our thoughts, words, and
actions; therefore says Christ search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. To the law,
and to the test: money, if they speak not according to that, it is because there
is no light in them, Is. 8.20. for the Penmen of it could not err in writing
of it, the Apostles were filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spoke as the
Spirit gave them utterance, Act. 2.4 and when they mention that which is
written in the old Testament, they say, thus says the Holy Ghost, Heb. 3.7.
and well spoke the Holy Ghost, Act. 28.5. He spoke by the mouth of his holy
Prophets since the world began, Luke 1.70. therefore when these men say the law
is written in their hearts, and they need not the law in the letter of it, they
do err not knowing the Scriptures, Mat. 22.29. they think because they see the
act of murder and theft are sins, therefore they see enough, but so much a
carnal man may see with that remainder or relics of the law that was in
Adams heart, and many do by nature the things contained in the law, which show
the work of the law written in their hearts, Romans 2.14.15. but yet. Paul did
not see the lust of heart to be a sin, but by the written law, Romans 7.7. we
know but in part, and we see but darkly as through a glass, 1 Cor. 13.12. we
see Christ but through the lettice, Cant. 2.9. and when we see our sins by
the law, if we do not continue therein, we soon forget what manner of men we
were, James 1.24.25. then let us obey that command, and write us a copy of the
law, and read therein all the days of our life, Deuteronomy. 17.18.19. and the heart
of man is deceitful above all things, and who can know it? Jer. 17.9. then we
had need to try our selves daily by the written law of God, that we turn not
aside from it, and says Paul, not as though I had already attained or were
already perfect; but I follow after brethren, I count not my self to have
apprehended but I forget these things behind, and press toward the mark;
nevertheless whereunto we have attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us
mind the same thing, Phil. 3.12, 13, 14, 15. and as many as obey this rule,
peace be on them and mercy, Gal. 6.16.

Again, they say there is no other word of God but Christ, because in the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, and
the word was made flesh, John 1.1.14. but Christ is in them and so the Word is
perfectly in them, and they neither know nor need any other: It is true Christ
is the essential word of God, being the second person in Trinity, but he is
not the written word of God contained in letters and sillables, which are Gods
own words, although many of them were spoken by men: for it is said, God spoke
all these words and said, Exodus 20.1. then blessed are they that hear the word
of God and keep it, Luke 11.28. and again Christ said, you are clean through
the word that I have spoken unto you, John 15.3. and Christ will sanctify his
Church by the washing of water with the word, Ephe. 5.26. but neither water nor
word were his person, it were folly to think so, then let the word of Christ
dwell in you richly, Col. 3.16. he that hears my word and believes in him
that sent me, has everlasting life, John 5.24. his sheep hear his voice and
follow him; they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them, for they all
spoke, Thus says the Lord; and the word of the Lord came unto me saying, but
if they will not hear Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rose from the dead. Luke 16.29.31.

Some other Errors I find in a little Book Entitled, Christ's counsel to the
Angel of the Church of Laodicea, discovered and answered: they say that legal
teachers say, God will not save us without faith, and repentance, humility,
self denial, fasting, mourning, and prayer, and the use of the Ordinances, as
hearing, reading, and receiving the Sacraments, and observing the Sabbath, and
doing as we would be done by, and a desire to keep all Gods Commandments, and
yielding universal obedience thereto, and to hate all sin.
THe Antinomeans say, that they are bewitched that hold a man cannot be saved
without faith, and wishes them cut off that so trouble them; they say it is
the envious man that has sowed those Tares, but here he calls the Spirit of God
that envious man, because he has told us, that without faith it is unpossible
to please God, Heb. 11.16. and whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23.
and he that believes not is damned already, and the wrath of God abides on
him, John 3.18.36.

Then what a bold blasphemer is this, to call the holy Spirit of God the
envious man, because he contradicts their cursed Errors: They say, why should
Christ put them upon the performance of conditions, they having no life but are
stone-dead in sin? so I say too; but when Christ gives us a hand, and life,
and motion in it too, it is no hard condition to put it out to receive so great
a Benefit. He says, for God to put us upon such a work supernatural as faith
is, and to have no part in Christ without it, seems very difficult and unlike
his Fatherly affections toward us: I answ. but Gods people do not think so
whatever he thinks; when God has given them faith they must use it, and
cannot do otherwise, they find so much profit and comfort by implying that
Tallent of faith.

He says, to say faith is a condition without which we cannot be saved, does
perplex the conscience, and denies our mercies and resists the spirit of God,
and does not consist with the right end; for which faith was wrought in us; he
says, Christ died for the ungodly to purchase remission of sins, and to
reconcile them to God; and so I say too, so it be understood out of the number
of the Elect, but when he says this was done without any condition or
application on our parts; we remaining ungodly still, and going on in a course
of sins is a foul error; but I have answered it already: and he says,
faith was given that we might see what was wrought in and upon us, before we
had either faith or calling; that is says he, to see our remission of sins,
and reconciliation with God, and how we are made righteous in the sight of God,
justified and saved; all this as soon as we have our being in this life, and
faith is but a declarative grace to show us these things that were all done
before, but only we did not see them, and so faith comforts us, says he; and
when the law clamours for obedience, faith answers, we are not under the law
but under grace, and therefore they owe no obedience to it; it is true, they
will do some things unrequired, as to break out into exaltations and
thankfulness, but not as any duty they owe to the Lord, but upon free will and
as a curtisie, what they please unrequired; this is their free grace, but it is
of the devils making to damn their souls; but Paul says, Christ was revealed
for the obedience of faith, Romans 16.26. and he received grace and Apostleship
for the obedience of faith, Romans 1.5. they say that their love makes them do
great matters unrequired; but let them take heed how they bring strange fire or
any thing, before they have tried it in the balance of the Sanctuary, for God
will not be served by their devisings, but by his own directions made known
to us in his law, He that looks into the perfect law of liberty and
continues therein, not being a forgetful hearer but a doer of the work, this
man is blessed in the deed, James 1.25. we must bring that worship and service
that God requires in his law for substance, and in the same manner it must be
done in faith, and time, and place considered; and to the same end, that God
has appointed, which is, his glory; but their faith shows them a Christ that
requires no duty of them, but what they please out of free love and curtisie,
for all was done before they had faith or calling; and he says, children when
they dye are saved without faith; but I suppose that to be more then he can
prove, because without faith it is unpossible to please God, and he that
believes not is damned already, and ^he wrath of God abides on him; but that
wrath must be removed, and they must please God before they can be saved,
although we cannot conceive the manner how it is wrought in them, therefore
when Christ came to heal any ^iseases, if he perceived they had faith to be
healed, then he cured them, and commonly he said, according to thy faith be it
unto thee, all things are possible to him that believes: he says, they that
mix the Law and the Gospel together are false teachers; and so I say too, and
to make redemption conditional ^o depend on duties as causes, I say the same;
but to say these duties are not ^equired as the way to salvation, is a gross
error, that beats off all obedience ^o the law of God; but they say, the state
of a Christian is most free in this respect, because nothing at all is required
of him; and he says, they are deceivers that teach otherwise, so that their
free grace they boast so much of, is nothing but a freedom from all obedience
to the law of God.

I find in that book of theirs, that they say, legal Teachers say, that
repentance, ^umiliation, self-denial, weeping, mourning, fasting and praying,
and the use of ^he Sacraments, the observing of the Sabbath, and doing as one
would be done unto, and the rest, must be done as duties, but are palpable
mistakings, for they ^re made as duties by almost all Teachers.

But here they show their sin as Sodom, and bewray what they mean by ^^eir
free grace; yet I say again, that we deny that duties are any causes of ^ur
salvation, but they are the way appointed by the Lord to attain that end, and
must be done in obedience to Gods command, and not left for us to do, (...)
not to do at our pleasure; these ought to be pressed as duties, so long as we
^^rry about with us daily a body of sin; which is as a heavy weight upon us;
^^d being always with us, and makes us fail in all our duties; we then had
^^ed to be stirred up daily to weeping and mourning and to repent of our
fail^^gs; nay, although we know nothing by our selves, yet are we not hereby
justified, 1 Cor. 4.4. because there be many secret sins in us that we cannot
find out, O Lord forgive our secret sins, Psalm. 19. he says, fear has
torment; so I say that slavish fear has torment, and is not made perfect in
love, 1 John 4.18. but filial fear is a companion of all joy and comfort,
Psalm. 2.11.56.6. he says, it is in vain to bid a believer humble himself,
for there is none so humble as he. But is this an argument sufficient, why
believers should not be called upon to humble themselves, because others are
not humbled? and because they see others are worse then themselves? but this is
their folly; who have left the law of God which is the true rule, and make
sinful men their rule, and so the blind lead the blind, till both fall into
the ditch. But we must not follow the Antinomeans rule, so long as we have the
true rule to walk by, which is the perfect and eternal law of God, this
glass of Gods law will show us our sins; I had not known sin but by the
law, Romans 7.7. for by the law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. and it was
after Paul's conversion, that he looked upon the law and came to know his sin,
which shows that he had not done with it when he believed, and are we more
perfect then he?

Although a believer comes to see his own vileness, and therefore denies
himself, and no man more, yet he is but part spirit and part flesh, and these
two are fighting continually in him, and we see the often falls of the best of
Gods people, which should be a warning to us to walk circumspectly, not as
fools but as wise, Ephe. 4.15. we had need be ready and willing both to give
counsel and to receive counsel, to walk watchfully and humbly, let us
consider on^ another, and provoke unto love and to good works, Heb. 10.24.
Paul bids Timothy to stir up that gift that was given him, 2 Timothy 1.6. and
Paul with stood Peter to his face, because he was to be blamed; and Barnabas
was carrie^ away also with their dissimulation, Gal. 2.11.13.

Then sure Paul was no Antinomean, that stirs up their dull spirits to their
duties of obedience and watchfulness; neither was Barnabas, nor Timothy, no^
the rest Antinomeans, that stood in need of the help of others, when one o^
them his graces seemed to dye within him, and the other almost lost, till Pau^
roused them up again; then take notice of this profane man, how his fre^
grace gives way freely to all manner of sins in believers, when he says, yo^
need not bid them to humble themselves; what is this but to make void a^^
Christian duties, and for mourning for sin and fasting? when the Bride groom
seems to be taken away from them, and his faith is clouded, you nee^ not to
bid them fast and mourn, for (says he) they are too apt and too pro^^ to
wrong themselves thereby; and so in the matter of repentance.

Therefore rather reprove them that do so for their weakness; but mu^^ we
believe this Antinomean, rather then the Bridegroom himself? wh^ says, the
days will come, when the Bridegroom shall be taken away from them and then
shall they fast in those days, Luke 5.35, surely if this man had known what it
had been to have his faith clouded, and the loving countenance of God hidden
from him, it would make him fast, and mourn, and weep, to have those joys
restored again, that the broken bones may rejoice, Psalm. 51.8.12. and although
this man would have them reproved that do so, yet Christ bids them ask and ye
shall have, seek and ye shall find, k^o^ke and it shall be opened; hitherto ye
have asked nothing, ask that your joy may be full, John 16.24. he says, a
child that knows that his Father loves him, shall you need to tell him that he
ought in duty to ask it of his Father; as much need says he, is there to
preach prayer as a duty; but cursed be he that denies that prayer to God, both
for himself and others to be a duty; says Samuel, God forbid that J should
sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you, 1 Samuel 12.23. and how
frequent have the Saints in all ages been in this duty, both for themselves
and others; but yet I confess that such as they are, who turn away their care
from hearing the law, their prayer is abomination, Prove. 28.9. now if they be
so sensible of this heavy sentence, they are wiser then I took them to be, to
save themselves that labor, when their prayer is nothing worth, because they
forsake the law of God.

But they say, a believer cannot want much nor many things, therefore they need
not pray: I answ. Although a believer be rich, yet he has it not in his own
keeping; he has exceeding great and precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. but we must
fetch out these things, as we have occasion by the prayer of faith; thus says
the Lord God, Yet I will be sought for of the house of Israel, Ezekiel. 36.37.
ask of me and I will give thee, Psalm. 2.8. and sometimes Dives has his good
things; and Lazarus his evil things, Luke 16.25. because God loves to hear his
people pray, Prove. 15.8. But then says this man, if they do pray, sure a very
short prayer may serve their turn, as our Savior well knew when he taught us
how to pray, and reproved long prayer; here this man shows all his heart,
then see how he suckes poison out of the sweetest Flowers, as the Rose of
Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valleys, Cant. 2.1. he turns the meaning of
Christ himself to his own corrupted humor, as all Heretics use to do.

For Christ did but teach them the ground of all prayer, but when he set
himself to pray, he continued all night in prayer to God, Luke 6.12. When
Peter was in prison, prayer was made without ceasing to God for him, Acts 12.5.
men ought always to pray and not faint, Luke 18.1. Cornelius prayed always,
Acts 10.2. Then did all these say nothing but that we call the Lords Prayer,
and then cease, or did they say it over as many times as a Friar will tie his
whore to say it, to satisfy for her whoredom; which is their folly.

Neither did Christ intend to reprove long prayers, but when they asked vain
petitions, or when they stand in the street to be seen of men, or when they
are large in their own suits, and will not hear the complaint of poor
Widows, but are ready to devour them, these shall receive greater damnation
Mat. 23.14.

But this Antinomean says, if we ask any thing it is a vain petition,
because we believe that we have it already; as to ask for remission of sin,
and crying out of the burden of sin, when we believe that Christ has bourne
our sins in his body on the Tree, and that his blood cleanses us from all
sin.

I answer; although we believe that all our sins past are remitted, yet we
sin daily, therefore Christ has taught us daily to ask forgiveness.
Again, a man sometimes has some one sin that troubles him, that he has no
certain assurance of the pardon of it at the present; as David after the sin
of murder, prays the Lord to take away blood guiltiness from him, Ps. 51.14.
although Nathan had told him before that it was forgiven, 2 Samuel 12.13.

But he says, he that prays for the pardon of his sin, is like a man
afrighted with sin, and at the same time giving thanks for the r^mision of
sin, and of a man that is afraid of the sins of his present prayers, and of
one that has victory over sin, death, and hell.

I answer; although our sins be pardoned and the guilt taken away, yet the
being of sin is not taken away; and although we are justified from all sin,
yet we are not sanctified from all sin; so that we ought to be humbled for
our filthiness for want of sanctification when we come into the presence of
God; and because that sin is in us, we may well fear that we shall not carry
our selves so holy, as becomes such a presence, as the men of Beth-shemish
said, Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God? 1 Samuel 6.20. and yet not
so despair as to leave off the duty, but to pray still; and as sanctification
increases, we come into the presence of God with more cheerfulness, and as
our assurance increases, we shall be less in our petitions and more in
thanksgiving and praising God for his mercies to us.

He says, we present a man that is delivered from the law, into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God, and yet puts himself under the law.

I answer; we are delivered from the curses of the law, and the threatenings of
the law, and from the condemning power of it, and from the constraining
power of it, but we are not delivered from the commanding power of it, the
free grace of Christ did not deliver us from our obedience to the law of God;
but in giving us the eye of faith we see our duty more clearly that is
written in the law of God, and by our hand of faith we fetch more strength
from Christ to enable us to perform our duty to the law of God, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. but if our eye of
faith were never so clear to see our duty, yet if we will not look upon
the law of God but count it as a strange thing, Hosea 8.12. it is all one to
them, as if the book of the law were sealed up; and he that has no faith, is
like a man to whom the book of the law is open, but the man cannot read for he
is not learned, Isa. 29.11, 12. so then the eye of faith is the Organ, and our
duty is the object, and the written law of God is the Medium by which we see
our duty; but when the law is taken from us, or if we cast away the commanding
power of it, which is all one we can see our duty no more then a man can see in
a dungeon; then well may the Antinomians be so blind concerning their duty,
when as they cast away that light that should show it unto them, thy law is a
lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths, Psalm. 119.105.

But then faith has another property, when it sees the greatness of the work
to be done, and the weakness of the doer of it, that it sees help in another
which is Christ, and presently fetches it to help him, this honor have all
the Saints, Psalm. 149.9.

He says, we need not to tell a healthful man that it is his duty to feed
himself, even so is it needful to tell a believer that it is his duty to hear
Sermons, read the Scripture, and frequent the Lords Table, these are his proper
and his natural food, by which his faith is strengthened and increased; yet
(says he) in what a sad and fearful manner are these pressed upon men's
consciences, upon pain of having no part in Christ, and of everlasting
damnation in hell for ever.

I answer; first, if one should tell a healthful man that it is his duty to
feed himself, I hope it would not make him leave feeding and go about to
starve himself, because he is told that he must do it as a duty; and so for
spiritual duties to be told of them is rather an encouragement to go on
still, because it is their duty; and what if he know it before? he need not be
offended at the love of his friend, for telling him that which he knew before;
but I smell wherein lies the venom of this man, he has free grace bestowed
on him which has freed him from all duties of obedience to the Lord, so that
what he does, is only out of free love; for he thinks to be tied by way of
duty will not stand with his free grace; but I say again, we trust in no duty
as causes of our salvation, but we obey and do these duties as the way to
salvation; neither did they ever hear those worthy Divines, whom they villefie
with the terms of legal Teachers, press any duties to merit salvation for
the doing of them; but let the sons of Belial know, that if they slight their
duties to the law of God, they may purchase damnation by it; neither can there
be any salvation for that man till he humble himself, and freely yield to the
commanding power of the law of God, and count it his duty to give all the power
of body and soul in obedience to it; but this yoke is too heavy for the sons
of Belial, they will be tied to nothing but upon free love and currisie, that
they may leave it when they list; they have gotten free grace.

He says, they put us upon these duties to try and to prove our selves by the
performance of them, as by marks and signs of grace within.

I answer; if Christ be in the soul, there must needs be fignes of his
presence; we need not go by hearsay or from a bare Testimony or suggestion;
they told Jacob that Joseph was alive, but that did not satisfy him till he
saw the Wagons, Genesis 45.27.28. so now if the eyes of the soul be opened to see
our duty written in the law, it is Christ that has done it, Acts 16.14. whose
heart the Lord opened: Do ye ask whence he is? and yet he has opened mine
eyes, John 9.30. Acts 26.17, 18. Secondly, the work must arise from a true
justifying faith, that knits them to Christ and makes their person accepted,
Romans 5.1. Genesis 4.4. this faith must take hold of that promise that is made to
them that do this duty, Exodus 20.6. Thirdly, in our duties we must aim at
Gods glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. thus by any duty we may try our selves whether we do
it by virtue of Gods command without us, and whether it be acted by an inward
principle of faith within us, and whether it tend to Gods glory as the utmost
end of it; he that has thesemarkes and signs the Spirit of God is in him,
this faith works by love and obedience, Romans 1.5.1 John 5.3. neither can he
say, what a fearful thing it is to press these things as duties upon our
consciences, that belongs to the sons of Belial, that cannot abide the yoke of
Gods saw, that requires those duties of them.

He says, the true believer submits himself to every Ordinance of man; mark a
little the reasoning of this misguided man; he that said before, that believers
must not submit to the laws of God, now he says they must sub^it to the laws
of man; and he that denied obedience to Gods laws, was any mark or sign of a
believer; yet he says, he that submits to man's Ordinance is a true believer:
but yet here is more venom behind in this argument, for what is this Ordinance
of man? He says it is the observation of the Sabbath so exceedingly preached
and pressed as a duty, to be exactly performed in the exercise only of the
worship and service of God; thus casting aspersion upon the Lords day, and upon
his worship and service, calling it man's ordinance, because he would overthrow
the Sabbath of the Lord, and then he goes about to set up his own invention;
in the next words saying, all days are to him, this Sabbath, for he lives in
that rest that was tipified out of the old Sabbath; he says, he will take care
to keep faith in heart, and breath, and faith will make every day a Sabbath,
now he has Christ, for the shadow is gone, the body is Christ, his free grace
has freed him from keeping a sabbath, for it is but the Ordinance of man: here
he contradicts his own Character of a true believer, which was to submit to
man's Ordinance; but here is a true Character of one, swarving from the true
rule, which is the law of God, and now he walks in crooked paths of his own
invention, playing the hipocrit^, saying, although he submit the outward man,
the inward man cannot be beguiled: here you see as rotten a heart discovered,
as ever lived in man, some heretics deny one Commandment, some another, but
never any denied them all, till this cursed heresy sprung up; but let them
read the judgments of God on Sabbath breakers, and the Practice of Piety, the
one to whip them, and the other to show them their duty, if perhaps the
thoughts of their heart may be forgiven them; take heed, lest you with the
Papists deny the Lordship of Christ, who cleared the law from all false
glosses, and gave it them in his own name, showing the strictness of it,
reaching not only to the outward man, but rectifying the soul and inward
parts of man, and so to bring all parts of body and soul in obedience and free
subjection to it, and that for ever.

In the entrance of any answer to the first error in this book, I left the
decree of God till faith and calling, because I would bar them from flying
thither; but i^ may be they will want courage, to face the Canon of Gods Word,
and (...) for shelter to the dec^ees of God; and say God has decreed to
justify them before faith or calling; but these sigge leaves will not cover
their nakedness, for did God decree to ju^^ifie them, and then decree to give
them faith and to call them? this is but another error; for doubtless God
decreed to give his people faith, and to call them at the same time when he
decreed to justify them, and all with one simple act from all eternity; but
what means those other words? they are justified as soon as they have any
being; will they say the child must first be borne before God decree to save
it? and if they say by this word being, they mean in the decree of God, then I
demand, what they mean by those words, as soon as they had any, etc. will
they say, there was time beyond the decree of God, thus they are in a circle
not knowing where to get out. This should have been inserted at the end of the
answer to the first Error, Page 6.

Good Reader, I pray thee correct such faults in this Book, as by oversight
has escaped the Press; as page 2. line 17. for righteousness, read
righteousnesses, and for the Title on certain pages, a brief Answer, read a
brief and plain Answer; and for the names of those that profess this heresy
here condemned, for Antenomeans and Antinomeans, read Antinomians.

FINIS.

