BATTERING RAMS AGAINST NEW ROME: CONTAINING A FARTHER DISCOVERY OF The Grand
Hypocrisy OF THE LEADERS and TEACHERS Of the PEOPLE Called QUAKERS. TOGETHER
WITH A Public Challenge to meet G. Fox, G. Whitehead, W. Penn, and S. Cater,
to prove Matters of Fact. To which are Added Some QUERIES propounded to their
PROTESTANT HEARERS, Who are not of G. F's PARTY.

By FRANCIS BUGG.

I have laid a Snare for thee, and thou art taken, O BABYLON, and thou wast not
aware: Thou art found, and also caught, because thou have striven against the
LORD. Put your selves in Array against BABYLON round about: All ye that bend
the Bow, shoot at her, spare no Arrows. The LORD has opened his Armory, and
has brought forth the Weapons of his Indignation; for this is the Work of the
LORD GOD of Hosts. Jer. 50.14, 24, 25. LICENSED,

December. 3. 1690.


LONDON, Printed for Joh. Gwillim, Bookseller, in Bishops-gatestreet, over
against the Great James, Jan. 12. 1690/1.

BATTERING RAMS AGAINST NEW ROME, etc.
The INTRODUCTION.
Friendly Reader,
I Thought long since, that my self and others had writ sufficiently against
the Errors of the Teachers and Leaders of this People, and that I should be no
farther concerned with them; but having seen their Answer to a Letter lately
sent to them, wherein they pretend sincerely to deny the Guilt of Hypocrisy,
wherewith they, in the said Letter, are charged; and I being sensible that many
unacquainted with their Wiles, and subtle way of Writing, may be ready to
believe them what they say themselves to be; I thought it my Duty to make good
the said Charge, and farther to unmask them, that so they may appear what they
really are; and to show them in their true and proper Colors, to the intent
they may no longer deceive the Simple. And in the Discharge thereof I shall
say, as Geo. Whitehead says in his Epistle to his Book styled Judgment fixed,
etc. I neither consult Events, nor fear Effects; but leave all to GOD.

It is not my present purpose to meddle much with the Frame and Method of their
Church Government, their General Councils, their Zeal for their Unwritten
Traditions above the Scriptures, or the Mischief of their Impositions amongst
their own People; that not being, at this time, so immediately under my
Consideration; and also having, by my Book, De Christiana Liberate, etc.
printed 1682. treated largely thereof, wherein their said Errors are fully
detected, etc.

Neither shall I much concern my self with their Laws, or Edicts, they made at
their Yearly Meeting, or General Council, held at London, May 1675. subscribed
by W. Penn, Geo. Whitehead, Steph. Crisp, and others; whereby they strictly
require their Hearers neither to Forsake, Decline, nor Remove their Meetings,
like Worlely, Fearful, and Politic Professors; and yet they themselves refused
to stand in a like suffering Capacity with them: Insomuch as that, in the Loss
of Thirteen Thousand five Hundred Fifty and odd Pounds, by Fines and
Distresses, their Ministers, where Strangers, never lost Fifty Pounds; as at
large is set forth in my Book entitled, The Painted Harlot both stripped and
whipped, etc. and that entitled, Reason against Railing, etc. both printed
1683. whereby their Usurpation, Dominion, and Lordship over the Consciences of
their Hearers, was sufficiently manifested; together with their illegal and
arbitrary Proceedings in their Courts of Judicature, or Quarterly Meetings
about Meum and Tuum All which are largely handled in the said two Books, to
which I refer the Reader for farther Satisfaction.

Neither shall I here give a distinct and particular Account of their several
Orders for Marriage, set forth by Geo. Fox, and his Party; viz. Sometimes they
might marry at the Market Cross, sometimes at a General Meeting, sometimes in
private, where Twelve or more were assembled, as their Freedom was; and lastly,
they came to this, That none were either permitted or suffered to marry, unless
the Parties published their Intensions before two Meetings of Men, and two
Meetings of Women, they being distinct and apart, each from other; and all this
by the Order of Geo. Fox, etc. who pretended his Commission from Divine
Revelation; as set forth in De Chr. Lib. p. 33. I say, as to their several
Orders, and their Censures thereupon, they are particularly examined, and set
forth, in my Book, Innocence vindicated, and Envy rebuked, etc. printed 1684.

Neither shall I here give a particular Account, how I came to be of their
Society; how I came to see and perceive their Errors, and leave them; and how
I came to be satisifed in the Lawfulness of my going to the public Worship:
all which are treated on in my Book entitled, The Quakers detected, and their
Errors confuted, etc. printed 1686. to which, for farther Satisfaction, I
refer the Reader.

Thus have I traced them step by step, and followed them in all their Turnings
and Windings, Year after Year; showing the Vanity of their Pretenses to
Infallibility, and that Unchangeableness which they pretend to, above all other
People. And what I have thus writ, I have offered to prove, and that on the
penalty of an Hundred Pounds, but could never get them out of their Holes, and
Dens, and Lurking Places, (as G. F. formerly said to others.) But now, at last,
in their Answer to the Letter before mentioned, they pretend a Willingness to
meet the Author of the said Letter, and Looking-Glass, and that they are ready
to come forth, as if indeed, they would show themselves Men of some Conscience;
viz. own what they write, and prove what they say to be true; as every honest
Man ought to do, and more especially they, who pretend that they are
Conscientiously concerned, and that a Necessity from the LORD is upon them, and
that they write for the Glory of GOD, and moved thereto by His Eternal Spirit,
and the like high Pretenses. But, alas! it is quite otherwise; for they are so
guilty of the Things charged against them, and of writing so many Lies, and
scandalous Defamations, under a pretense of the Spirit's Motion; and so
conscious to themselves thereof, that, I am persuaded, all that we can say or
do, in order to bring them out of their Holes, and Dens, and Lurking Places, is
in vain, otherwise than that thereby they will more and more discover their own
Guilt, and deep Hypocrisy; which to manifest, and make appear, I shall produce
Ten Instances to the Consideration of the judicious Readers. And thus much by
way of Introduction.

November. 5. 1690. Franc. Bugg.

The I. Instance of their Hypocrisy.
Letter to the Quakers. One While for, Another While against Fighting, etc.

The Quakers Answer. This Charge is false, and unjustly stated. -- And if any
have written what the old Army might, or should have done; this we may
charitably suppose, was Ad Hominem, upon Their own Pretensions, etc.

Reply. MAY you charitably suppose so? I confess, How little Charity soever you
have for others, yet I have always observed you to have a great Stock for your
selves: But let me a little examine this Charity of yours, and see upon what
Bottom it stands. You say, you have declared against Fighting; and that the
Kingdom of Christ does not allow His Servants to fight; and that you do not
look upon it lawful for Christians, in this Gospel Dispensation, to fight with
a Carnal Weapon, in any Case whatsoever. But as for the Encouragement you have
given others to fight, you do that Ad Hominem, Upon their own Pretensions, viz.
Oliver Cromwell, his Army, and Officers, pretending it lawful to fight,
therefore, and thereupon you encourage them to fight; saying, O. C. Thou
should have invited all Nations upon Earth, that are against Popery, to come
in, and join with thee against Popery; for thou have had Authority: Stand to
it, lose it not, nor abuse it, nor let any other take thy Crown. -- Let thy
Soldiers go forth with a free, willing Heart, that thou may rock Nations as
a Cradle, etc. Counsel and Advice rejected, p. 36, 37. Geo. Fox.

Also see Geo. Roff's Book, entitled The Righteousness of GOD, etc. p. 11. a
few Words to O. C. To thee, Oliver Cromwell, thus says the LORD, I have chosen
thee amongst the Thousands of the Nations, to execute My Wrath upon My Enemies,
and gave them to thy Sword, with which I fought for the Zeal of My own Name;
and gave thee the Enemies of My own Seed, to be a Curse, and a Reproach for
ever; and made thee an Instrument against them. -- And many have I cut down by
My Sword in thy Hand, that My Wrath might be executed upon them to the utmost.
Geo. Roff.

What! Could you thus write, and thus encourage O. C. his Army, and Officers,
to fight, and that from the Word of the LORD, and at the same time believe it
to be unlawful for Christians to fight with a Carnal Weapon in any Case
whatsoever? O gross Hypocrisy! What! Does the Word of the LORD contradict the
Kingdom of Christ? Are they divided? You say, the Kingdom of Christ does not
allow His Servants to fight, and you believe it utterly unlawful for Christians
to fight, yet you say to O. C. Let thy Soldiers go forth with a free, willing
Heart, that thou may rock Nations as a Cradle. Again you say, Thus says the
Lord, I have chosen thee, [O. C.] amongst the Thousands of the Nations, to
execute My Wrath upon My Enemies, and gave them to thy Sword, with which I
fought for the Zeal of My own Name, etc.

Also in another Letter of Geo. Fox's, to O. C. it is thus said, O Oliver!
had thou been faithful, and thundered down Deceit, the Hollanders had been
thy Subjects and Tributaries, and Germany had given up to do thy Will, and the
Spaniard had quiver'd like a dry Leaf, -- the King of France should have bowed
under thee his Neck; the Pope should have withered, as in Winter; the Turk, in
all his Fatness, should have smoked. Thou should not have stood trifling
about small things, but minded the Work of the LORD: As He began with thee at
first, sober Men, and true Hearts took part with thee: Oh! take heed, and do
not slight such, lest thou weaken thy self; and not disown such as the LORD
has owned: Thy Dread is not yet all gone, nor thy Amazement. Arise, and come
forth; for had thou been faithful, thou should have crumbled Nations to
Dust, etc. Geo. Fox. With much more to the same purpose.

I say, What! Do you thus write, thus encourage, and thus stir up and rouse
your then dear Friend O. C. his Army, and Officers, to that which you believe
to be utterly unlawful? Here is Deceit with a witness: What! Did sober Men, and
true Hearts take part with O. C. and you advised him not to slight such, nor
discourage them from fighting; and yet you say, the Kingdom of Christ does not
allow of Fighting, and you believe it unlawful to fight as aforesaid? Here is
Hocos Pocos indeed, and such Legerdemain as I am sure your serious Geo.
Whitehead, as he would be esteemed, never found in W. Rogers's Writings; yea,
such Legerdemain, as few Conjurers have the face to venture upon. Here you have
exceeded the whole Four Hundred of Ahab's False Prophets, 1 King. 22. for they
prophesied falsely, in saying to the King, Go up to Ramoth Gilead, and prosper;
for the LORD will deliver it into thy Hands, etc. yet all this while they did
not believe it utterly unlawful for the Jews to fight.

In short, You either believe it lawful to fight, or you do Not: If you do Not,
then did you greatly dissemble with your then dear Friend, and noble Champion,
as you elsewhere call him: If you Did, then have you played the Hypocrites with
your People, and that greatly too, for many Years, in telling them it is not
lawful to fight; and yet, at the same time, believe it lawful, and encourage
sober Men, and true Hearts to fight, and that from the Word of the LORD. Surely
I need go no farther to prove you guilty of as manifest Hypocrisy, as the
World can produce.

But, for a Salvo, you now tell us, you gave this Advice Ad Hominem, Upon their
own Pretensions; not that you either believed or thought it lawful to fight.
But then you should have been plain and sincere with O. C. etc. and said, We
indeed stir you up to fight, advise and counsel you to fight, If, after this,
their Hearers will go to Gaol, before they will pay two Pence toward Drums and
Colors, or pay the Trained Soldiers their Wages, I pity their wilful Blindness
and Ignorance.
and that from the Word of the LORD, etc. But withal, mark well what we have to
say; we do all this upon your own Pretensions: You pretend it lawful to fight,
and thereupon we thus encourage you; for, to be plain with you, we believe it
utterly unlawful for you to fight at all with a Carnal Weapon; for the Kingdom
of Christ does not allow of it, but utterly forbids Fighting in any Case
whatever.

Oh! Blush, and be ashamed, ye Hypocrites! Yea, be confounded for ever, ye
gross Dissemblers! What! Did you give this Advice, and this Counsel, and that
from the Word of the LORD, to such a Practice, and such a Work, as you knew was
not lawful? So take it which way you will, and it carries two Faces: For if
Fighting in any Case be unlawful, as you seem sometimes to believe, (and to be
sure you have made your Disciples so to believe it, as that they are not only
for the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, but also for your Doctrine of
Non-Assistance,) then you ought not to have advised others to Fighting. Again,
If you believe it is lawful to fight, then, if you would be Constant, as you
would be thought to be, why do not you advise King William to invite all
Nations upon Earth that are against Popery, to come and join with him against
Popery, that he may rock Ireland and France as a Cradle? But you say, you gave
that Advice to O. C. upon his own Pretensions; not that you believed it lawful.
I answer, King William also pretends it lawful: And since you then played the
Hypocrite, why not now? And so ad infinitum.

The II. Instance of their Hypocrisy.
Letter to the Quakers. One While against, Another While for Kingly Government.

The Quakers Answer. The First Part of this Charge is false.

Reply. FOR a full Reply to this their Answer, I refer the Reader to the
Quakers unmasked, etc. But so much thereof as may show that the Charge is not
false, unless they be lately amended, (which if they be, they ought to retract
and condemn their former Writings, But if so, then they would appear fallible
Men, and, as such, be mistaken, and do some things whereof they ought to
repent. But this they cannot admit of, for it would spoil the fashion of their
Infallibility, and mar the Beauty of their Perfection.
) I shall recite out of a Paper writ to the Presbyterians, by Geo. Fox, a
little before the Restoration, so much as shall justify the Charge against
them, etc. See page 1. To all you that desire an Earthly King in England, --
who profess your selves Christians, whether Presbyterians or others: -- Do not
the Priests, Presbyterians, and others, cry for an Earthly King? And is not
this the same Nature the Jews were in? And do not they, in this, crucify
Jesus? In another Paper of his, page 15. The Word of the LORD GOD to you who
are called Presbyterians. -- You are wholly in Darkness, given up to it; -- and
such would have a King to reign; -- for there is that Nature that would have an
Earthly King to reign, in which Nature lodges the Murderer, said your chief
Prophet. Geo. Fox.

Thus have I given a short hint, that you were once against Kingly Government;
being loath to mention over much, in hopes, as to that, you are somewhat
amended, for you soon turned with the Times; which shows your Inconstancy, and
that you are no more infallible than others; (which is the main Reason why I
mention it.) And for Example, see your Declaration you gave forth, soon after
the Restoration of King Charles II. saying, We do declare that we do love, own,
and honor the King, and the present Government. Again, in another Book, you
say to the King, If thou take some speedy Course for the repealing and making
void those cruel Laws, -- happily thou may be as Moses, to stand in the Gap
betwixt GOD and thy People, etc. Visitation to the King, page 7. Again, in the
Trial of Geo. Fox, 1664. page 8, 10. he says, (the Oath of Allegiance being
tendered him,) viz. If I could take any Oath at all, upon any Occasion, I
should take this Oath; for I honor all Men, much more the King, etc.

Now Geo. Fox, Geo. Whitehead, etc. Where is the Constancy you boast of? What
is become of your Unchangeableness, who one Year say, and the next Year unsay;
for this to day, and for that to morrow; facing about like the Weathercock, as
in the Case forementioned? And yet it is a common Maxim with you, that if any
write against you, they write against Truth; and if any see your Hypocrisy,
and leave and forsake you, that they are gone from Truth; and that if any come
to you, and join with you, they then presently are reputed to own Truth, etc.

I will conclude this Second Instance with the Words of W. Penn, the
Parenthesis excepted, to Mr. Doelittle, Mr. Manton, Mr. Baxter, and Eighteen
more, both Presbyterians and Independants, in his Book entitled, A just Rebuke
to Twenty one Divines, page 25. I could set out this part of your Story to the
Life, but at this time shall forbear; n^^ do I delight in this: But since I
must needs mention (your Hypocrisy, and your base Temporizing,) can I do it
more heartily, than in your own Words; I wish there had been no need for it.

The III. Instance of their Hypocrisy.
Letter to the Quakers. One While against, Another while for Popery, etc.

The Quakers Answer. This is false, etc.

Reply. FAlse! How can you say it is false, and not blush? Were you not against
Popery, when you wrote, and said, as follows, viz. To all you, called
Papists; to your whole Body, and Head at Rome, the Word of the LORD reaches:
Thus assuredly says the LORD, My Controversy is against you; and My
Vengeance, and Wrath, and Fury shall for ever, World without End, be upon you:
And though you pardon one another, yet will not I pardon any One of you. And,
says W. Penn, in his Caveat against Popery: Let the Papist first recant his
voluminous Errors; but above all, let us have good Testimony of his hearty
Sorrow for that Sea of Blood shed in England, France, Holland, Ireland, Spain,
Italy, Savoy, Switzerland, and Germany, of many Thousands of poor Protestants,
that for pure Conscience could not conform, etc. and to this purpose in many
other Books. But these Two Passages are enough to show that you were once
against Popery; and that since you have been as much for the Papists: See your
Book, Entitled, A Defense of the D. of Buck. etc. 1685. in Reply to a Church
of Eng. Man; who answered the said Book: And your Book, called, A Reply to the
Answer of the Man of no Name, to the D. of Buck, etc. p. 22, 23. Also another,
called A Persuasive to Moderation, submitted to the late King, 1686. And
another of your Books, called, Good Advice to the Church of England, etc.
Another, Advice to the Protestant Dissenters: showing it, their Interest to
repeal the Tests. By all which said Books, and diverse others, spread up and
down the Nation in the late King James's Reign, were the Papists vindicated;
and contrary to your former Writings, said to be loyal in England and Holland;
charging the Protestants with being the Cause of Burning poor Joan of Kent, a
famous Woman; and that Merely, as you said, for Religion; and by that Example
Taught the Romanists, etc. A few more Instances I may recite, (and so refer the
Reader to the Looking-Glass for the Quakers, etc. viz. The Church of England-
Man.
Where the said Books are more largely recited,) viz. I cannot admire his
Wisdom, Manners, or Justice, in his Reflections upon the Roman Catholics, after
the Assurance of so great an One of that Communion, has given him and his
Friends of their Security and Protection; -- for the late occasion he takes;
let him be just, and he will find the Excluders almost every Sunday at their
Parish-Churches: And if three quarters of them were to pray for their Lives, it
may be they could better read their Clergy viz. Their Neck-Verse.
, than say their Prayers without the public Liturgy. One thing I must say, the
Roman Catholics have been Loyal in England and Holland. It happens now that
GOD and Caesar are both of a Mind; which perhaps does not always fall out, at
least about the point in hand. Edward VI. by Archbishop Cranmer was Compelled
to sign a Warrant to Burn poor Joan of Kent, a famous Woman, but counted an
Enthusiast; thus even Protestants began with Brood for Mere Religion, and
Taught the Romanists in succeeding times how to deal with them.

Come on, ye infallible Doctors, Is not this for, and in favor of the Papists
and Popery; and to the purpose against the Protestants; and at such a juncture
too, whenas the Protestant Cause lay a bleeding? And notwithstanding your
former writings against Popery when Protestants flourished; yet in the Reign of
K. J. II. at that season, how did your Books and Papers in favor of the Popish
Interest, fly about, Book after Book, Letter after Letter, Address upon
Address; with Public Prayers for K. J. II? See the Looking-Glass, etc. Which
discover your profound Politics: And also the Letter to the Quakers, etc.
Which justly and seasonably reproves your then Extravagance, and your late
Silence.

The IV. Instance of their Hypocrisy.
Letter to the Quckers. Why do you not pray for, and address your selves to
King William and Queen Mary, as heartily, and as publicly as you did to King
James II?

The Quakers Answer. This is false; though for some Reasons we have not been
forward to sound a Trumpet of our Gratitude, etc.

Reply. ARE you not ashamed to say it is false? When did you ever pray for, and
Address your selves to K. W. and Q. M. as publicly as you did to the late K.
J. II? And is it not as commendable a thing to sound a Trumpet of the Fame and
Noble Acts of a Protestant Prince, who has ventured his Life, and all that is,
or can be dear to him in this World, in defense of our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, as it was to sound a Trumpet from England to Scotland, and from
Scotland to England, and through each Kingdom, of his Fame, who, upon his own
Principles, could not so much as give Liberty to Protestants; though in Policy
he did: And because you say, it is false; I may recite part of your Addresses
and Prayers for K. J. II. (and do you make it appear when you did the like, and
as publicly for K. W. and Q M.) viz. We pray GOD to bless the King, viz [ King
J. II.] his Royal Femily, and People, with Grace and Peace; and that after a
long and prosperous Reign here, he may receive a better Crown amongst the
Blessed; which is the Pre yer of, etc. London, April 1687.

Again, We cannot but with grateful Hearts both admire and acknowledge the
Providence of GOD, that made the King's retiring into our Country, [i. e.
Scotland, 1679.] give a happy turn to his Affairs, to the defeating and
disappointing the Defigns of his Enemies: -- We do justly conceive our selves
obliged by a special Tie, to praise GOD for His Goodness, in carrying the King
through, and over all his Troubles; since by the same Providence, and at the
same time, by which the LORD began in that more observable manner, to evidence
His Care of him; He made him the happy Instrument to deliver us from our
Troubles; so that the prosperity of his Affairs, and our peaceable fruition of
the exercise of our Consciences, bears the same Date, etc. June 1687.

But now in your Answer to the Letter, you say, Good Kings and Governments you
never opposed; though you liked not bad ones: Pray how shall we know which you
account good Kings, and good Governments, but by your Words and Carriage
toward them, and by your public Acknowledgments of the Benefits you receive
by them? But your Hypocrisy is manifest: And I may say to you, as you once
said to the Paesbyterians, and others, in your Book styled, Truth's Character
of Professors, viz. Your-own Character.
etc. And know assuredly, that if you come to be dealt withal, as you have
dealt with others; then shall those things which you have done to the Innocent
become your Burden. -- And as you have sought to make others ridiculous; even
so shall you become contemptible in the eyes of those, which you by your
Flatteries have fawned upon, etc.

The V. Instance of their Hypoctisie.
Letter to the Quakers. And then you branded the Presbyterians, and others,
with Fighting Principles, etc.

The Quakers Answer. His unjust Reflections about the Presbyterians.

Reply. TO reflect on you about the Presbyterians was not unjust, neither did
the Author of the said Letter do you any Wrong in that matter; for I well
remember the Sale of that Book, and the Juncture of Time in which it was
exposed; even when the great Talk was of a Protestant Plot. It Is true, your
Book had, by the Title of it, the Face of a Lamb, viz. Plain and peaceable
Advice to the Presbyterians; but in page 1. you say, that Their Principle was,
to fight for their Religion, and to promote their pretended Religion by the
power of the Sword; and that their Ministers always labored to persuade them
to it, etc. Again, see your Answer to John Faldo, in your Book, Quakerism a new
Nickname, etc. printed, 1673. page 109. And why poor Nonconformists, after all
their preached up Battles, Spoils, Plunders, Sacrileges, Decimations, etc.
Again, page 119. These are true Gospel Ministers, whose Gospel is Peace on
Earth, and Good Will toward Men; and Not Garments rolled in the Blood of
Rings, and Princes, and Rulers, and People: No worldly Armies, Battles, and
Victories; Trophies, Spoils, Sequestrations, Decimations, and the like
Blood-thirsty and Tyrannical Projects, in which John Faldoe and his poor
Nonconforming Ministers have had their Hands almost over Head and Ears, till
they had well nigh lost their Ears and Heads too, etc. And for more of this
nature, see your Book styled The Way cast up, page 52, 53, 54, 23. All which
considered, and compared with your Advice to Oliver Cromwell, his Army, and
Officers, render you both perfidious and treacherous; inasmuch as you, with
them, were engaged in the same Cause and Quarrel, and stood in as much need of
an Act of Oblivion as they.

The VI. Instance of their Hypocrisy.
It Is a shame for any Bookseller to promote [i. e. The Quakers Answer.
their Books,] without discovering the Author ^ that to get a Farthing, or an
Halfpeny by any such lying Libels, they should thus sell or expose the
Reputation of their honest Neighbors to Reproach and Infamy.

Reply. I Cannot but take notice of this Passage, and how the Author of it
resembles Cuthbert Tonstal, once Bishop of London; as may be seen in my Book,
De Christiana Liberate, page 203, to page 206. where I have at large set forth
what Enemies the then Papists were to the Printing, and to the Spreaders and
Promoters of such Books as the Protestants writ against them, and their
Errors; discovering their Hypocrisies, and holy Cheats; and wherein Geo.
Whitehead, and his Brethren, follow their Steps directly. And as one Instance
thereof, I have at large recited your Excommunication of J. Bernard, Merchant,
for disposing of William Rogers his Book, entitled, The Christian Quaker
distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator, in five Parts, etc. And, for a
tuller Discovery of the Teachers and Leaders of the Quakers resembling their
elder Brethren the Papists, I have also therein showed, that Benjamin Clark,
their Bookseller, might sell Ballads, Play-Books, Papist-Books, Gipsie-Books,
yea, Ba -- Books, and yet not be excommunicated, etc. And many other things I
have therein recited, to show how their Carriage to William Rogers, my self,
and others, bear the same Complexion with the Popish Bishops to the then
Protestants; which is too large here to insert, etc.

And Geo. Whitehead, etc. Do you think to affright the London Booksellers? No,
no; they do not fear your Excommunication, they are not terrified at your
Censures; for they know (or may do, at least) that there are none like you for
exposing the Reputation of your honest Neighbors to Shame and Infamy; as your
Books, Judgment fixed, etc. and S. Cater's Narrative, etc. do sufficiently
demonstrate, as well as diverse others of your malicious Books, and lying
Pamphlets; insomuch as that some of you have been ashamed to own your own
Writings. And for full Discovery thereof, I refer the Reader to my Book before
mentioned, etc.

The VII. Instance of their Hypocrtsie.
IN your Book, Judas and the Jews, etc. you say, None need to give us
Discerning, or Judgment: Christ has furnished us already, and does on All
Occasions, etc. And in Geo. Fox his Book, The great Mystery, etc. page 89. you
say, that The Quakers have a Spirit given to them, beyond all the Forefathers;
and they can discern who are Saints, who are Devils, and who are Apostates,
without speaking ever a Word, etc.

Now this is either True or False: You are either thus qualified with this
infallible Judgment, or you are not. If True, How comes it to pass that you
have printed, Geo. Smith is a well meaning Man: That he has lived a blameless
Conversation from his Youth: That ever since he has been convinced, which is
thirteen or fourteen Years, he has lived uprightly, according to his Measure?
And why have you vindicated Tho. Rudyard, and reserred the Readers to your
Brother Robert Sandiland's Book? I say, If you be thus qualified with such
Discerning, as to know who are Saints, and who are Devils, and who Apostates,
without speaking a Word, and that at all Times too, and on all Occasions; I
say, if it be thus, what grand Hypocrites are you to canonise such as these for
Saints; saying, they are well-meaning Men, walk uprightly thirteen or fourteen
Years together; and yet at the same time know, upon this your infallible
Principle, that there is not a Word true in all you write of them? But if
False, and that you are not thus qualified, but as fallible, and as subject to
be mistaken, as other Men, Which is manifest, or else you would not make Saints
of Geo. Smith, Rob. Sandiland, Tho. Rudyard, John Tysoe; and say they are well
meaning Men, have walked uprightly thirteen or fourteen Years together, etc.
unless you be arrant Cheats indeed.
then what Hypocrites are you, thus to pretend to be endued with such an
infallible Judgment, at all Times, and on All Occasions, as to know who are
Saints, and who are Devils, etc. and not a Word of Truth in all your Pretenses?
O gross Dissemblers! yea, Impostors! and such a Generation of self-conceited
Pharisees, as no Age before this ever produced.

However, thus much may be learned from hence, that you exactly resemble your
infallible Sister, who will saint any, let them be never so notoriously wicked,
if they do but some notable meritorious Work for Holy Church, some notable
Project, though it be as grand a Cheat as ever was; when, at the same time,
such as oppose her, and write against her, and discover her Errors, she will
slander, abuse, yea, call them Devils, and at last persecute them them to
death: And it is only in the last that she exceeds you; and of that there can be
no Trial, since you never yet had Power: And GOD grant you never may have Power
put into your Hands; for you that are thus deceitful, thus treacherous, thus
infamously slanderous, as your said two Books, Judgment fixed, etc. and S.
Cater's Narrative, etc. declare you to be; Sainting Geo. Smith, Tho. Rudyard,
Rob. Sandiland, John Tysoe, and the rest of your Tools, that act for you, and
do your Drudgery, how wicked soever they be: And such as oppose you, and cannot
submit themselves to your Tyranny; them you call Beasts, Dogs, Wolves, Enemies
of all Righteousness, Children of the Devil, yea, Devils Incarnate. And that
your Distiples may believe it, and take all you say for Truth, you tell them,
If their Hearers believe their Pretensions, then they are leavened with the
Leaven of the Pharisees indeed.
that you are endued with infallible Judgment, and can tell who are Saints, and
who are Devils, without speaking ever a Word. O dreadful Hypocrisy!

The VIII. Instance of their Hypocrisy.
THE next Thing that I shall observe, wherein you deceive your People, is, your
Pretense to preach and suffer, record Marriages, and other public Offices,
freely, without Money, Gifts, or Rewards: And by reason of this fair Pretense,
how have you not only deceived the Simple, but also taken Occasion thereby to
vilify, and so speak Contemptuously of all other public Preachers? First, The
National, for taking Tithes, and other Dues, as a settled Maintenance by Law
established; which is not so burdensome as you are to many of your Hearers.
And Fext, The Presbyterians and Independents See G. F's Epistle to your Book
entitled, The Divinity of Christ, etc.
, whom you bespatter about their Basin and Platter, wherein perhaps their
Hearers put their free Contribution for their Ministers, as a necessary
Subsistence for them, according to their Ability, and their Ministers
Necessity. And all this while, value your selves upon your free Preaching, free
Suffering, free Writing, and free Recording; when, at the same time, you know
it is common for all these Church Officers amongst you to take Money; Which I
have long since, offered to prove to your Faces.
Some Ten Pounds at a time, some Three Pounds at a time, some Fifty Pounds per
Annum; As set forth in the Painted Harlot, p. 47. printed, 1682. and reprinted
in the Quakers detected, etc. p. 23. printed, 1686.
some Thirty Pounds for writing five or six Sheets, to teach Children in the
Ways of GOD, as you pretend, and Twelve Pence for writing of
Marriage-Certificates, being ten or twelve Lines, etc.

And Geo. Fox himself, who before he was a Preacher, was but a poor Journey-man
Shoemaker with George Gee of Manchester, had no less than Twelve or Thirteen
Hundred Pounds, as William Rogers relates in his Christian Quaker
distinguished, etc. Part V. page 48, 49. and by Geo. Fox never denied, that I
have heard of: Yea, and S. C. and many others that I can name, who have by
Preaching, risen to great Fortune, etc.

Object. But some may object, That when they have charged some of your
Preachers and Hearers with your Taking Money, they have denied it.

Answ. Deny! That is very common with you; at least, say they, as stated: But
produce your Books of Accounts touching these Matters, and I will make appear
much more than I have said; and yet so cunning are you, that such as
contribute, do not know it. This is a Mystery, I confess; but you know, thus it
is. And your Way is, when Cash grows low, to issue out (I do not say a
Proclamation, but) a General Epistle for the Service of such as you pretend;
(but being rightly and truly interpreted, your own Service;) for as Money is
said to be the Sinews of War, so your Experience tells you, it is a great
Encouragement to your Preachers and Parasites. And this General Epistle, thus
sent through England and Wales; and when this general Collection is made for
the Service of Truth, as you speak, and as your Hearers believe, it is then
transmitted to London; where Geo. Fox, and a few of his Party, dispose of it as
they see meet: And no doubt but much, if not most of it, is given to such as
are for carrying on your Designs; but no Account returned to the Donors and
Givers of this Money; which, if there was, and that you did not exclaim against
all other Preachers, who should have any thing to do or say against this your
Method, though indeed it is a cunning one? But your grand Hypocrisy stands
chiefly in this, That you take Money, Gifts, and Rewards, for Preaching,
Teaching, Writing, and Suffering; and at the same time pretend to do all these
things freely, without Money, and without Price. Herein stands your Deceit.

Object. Perhaps some may object, and say; Surely, if these free Gospellers do
take Money, some others have taken notice of it as well as you; and at one time
or other, some of themselves will disclose their Secrets.

Answ. Yes: And as an Instance thereof, I shall recite William Rogers against
them; who, in his Second Scourge for Geo. Whitehead, page 3, 4, 5. shows great
part of their Intrigues; for which Tho. Ellwood makes an Apology for his
Brethren taking Money for Preaching, etc. See 1st W. R.

If any ask what City sits as Queen
Within her Circuit, since it is plainly seen
She Is high and proud: Meaning your Yearly, and Second Day Meetings in London;
and taking themselves to be Christ's only Church, etc.
Proud London is the place
That sits as Queen, where Pride seems no Disgrace.
And yet when she Rome's Sister is but called,
She winces like touched Horses that are galled.
Confusion her attends, next follows Woe;
For thus she whirls, but GOD knows where she will go.
Who, when they wanted Money to proceed,
The Church her Cash then did supply her Need;
And therefore, when her Cash was emptied, she
Craved Money, for to serve the Ministry.
At length her Papers, like to Briefs, did cry
For Monyn, Moner, for the Ministry.
And when that Practice was disliked by some,
She seemed like one whose Downfall's near to come.
This Church will fall, her Load will be her Guile,
If you, O Flock, keep Purse strings fast a while:
When that Spring fails, by her you will not be prized;
Usurpers then over you you will see despised.
And Woes may long attend such Pranting Preachers,
As for Preferment turned deceitful Teachers:
Fox is termed Head, yet Whitehead steered the Course,
Till both were scorned, and they grew worse and worse.
Thus the Reader may perceive that I am not alone in this Discovery; and that
W. Rogers, my self, and others, have for some Years very well understood their
Walking contrary to their Pretenses, and have sufficiently withstood them,
sometimes to their Faces, and at other times publicly by Writing; offering to
prove the Truth of what we have asserted. The next thing I have to mention, is
Thomas Ellwood's Apology for his Brethren Hirelings taking Money for Preaching;
by which we may know what Herd His own Word to Will Rogers, etc.
he belongs to: For Will. Rogers had so scourged Geo. Whitehead, with such deep
Lashes of plain Truth, as that his Pen was not able to defend him from that
grand Hypocrisy wherewith Will. Rogers justly charged him, and his Fraternity.
And thereupon this conceited Scribe, and proud Pharisee, Tho. Ellwood, to
rescue the decaying Reputation of his two Peers, G. F. and G. W. came in to
their Assistance, and in Verse makes an Apology for his Brethren taking Money
for Preaching; confessing what I have often charged them with, and knew them
guilty of. Not that I reckon Ministers guilty of a Criminal Offense in taking
Money, or other things, for and toward their Maintenance, of such as they
preach unto; but I mean guilty, in that they always pretended to Preach, Teach,
Write, Suffer, and Record things freely; but yet, contrary to all these their
Pretensions, have all along taken Money for the same. Whereby it plainly
appears, that all their Pretensions were but to cast a Mist before their
Hearers, and blind their Proselites; for W. Rogers's Scourge has whipped out
the Matter, and made them speak the Truth. I say, This I call their Guilt, to
pretend one thing, and act contrary to it, though, like some sullen and
stiff-necked Boys, they would not tell the Truth, until W. R. by his Scourge of
small Cords, was forced to whip it out of them. And now all is come out; yea,
Tho. Ellwood has in that point told the Truth, as Fools and Children will
sometimes do, when they are soundly whipped to it by a good Scourge, and
skilful Chastiser, as W. R. has proved himself to be. Pray, now hear what Tho.
Ellwood says in his Book, Rogero Mastix, etc.

But that Christ's Ministers should be supplied Here is a Confession that their
Ministers are supplied. Then, it seems, they do not go a Warfare at their own
Charge, as you to your Hearers have pretended, etc.

With Necessaries by the Church, (his Bride,)
Is such a known and certain Truth as none
Perhaps has ever opposed but thou Yes, you have frequently denied that
Ministers should have Money to supply their Necessities; calling them
Hirelings, and Followers of Baalam for Reward, etc.
alone. -- l. 18.
That it is the Churches Duty to supply
The needful Wants of all her Ministry. --
And Truth it is, too plain to be denied,
Christ's Church should for Christ's Ministers provide.
What carp'st thou at then, William? would thy Muse
Plead that St. Paul did not this Priv'lege use? -- No; St. Paul did use that
Privilege; it is you that pretended not to use it, nor no such Reward should be
found amongst you; for, said you, FREELY we have received, and FREELY we give;
until William Rogers had whipped you with his Scourge, and forced you to speak
a little Truth, which is scarce enough with you, etc.

That what was lacking to him, privately, No; the Apostle did not pretend to be
against necessary Supplies, so he needed not be ashamed, and so take the
Believers Benevolence privately: For it is you who pretend to take no Money for
Preaching, that take it privately; yea, even so privately, that the very Donors
do not know that you take Money for Preaching. Thus, Jesuite-like, have you
blinded your People, etc.

The Macedonian Brethren did supply.
Thus it appears the Apostle did partake
Of that Provision which the Church did make. -- p. 19.
Christ's Ministers to furnish, and their Need
Supply, when they want Moneys to proceed -- Then it seems, you confess you
supply them with Money to proceed; but it is to whom, and when G. F. G. W. etc.
think it fit and expedient.

Pretend thou can not, that the Stock is given
To such as have no need No! What need was there to send S. Cater Ten Pounds,
when he was fined Twenty Pounds for preaching at Phakenham in Norfolk, since he
neither paid the Fine, nor his Goods sold, nor did not lose Ten Shillings by
the said Meeting? Nay, if he had suffered the loss of that Fine, which he did
not; yet, he being a Man worth some Hundreds of Pounds, he would not have had
any need of that Ten Pounds you sent him; part of it perhaps given by Men not
worth Twenty Shillings. But he was a current Man for your purpose, and one that
would preach up G. F's Orders, and exclaim against the public Ministry, etc.
And hereupon you thought he deserved a piece of Money, and so sent him Ten
Pounds; which Gift was designed to be given him privately, as you would seem to
suggest the Apostles received the Supply they had from the Churches privately,
which is false; for Paul was so far from that, that he said plainly, that he
robbed, viz. took of other Churches, etc. But as private as this Ten Pound was
given, it came to be known; and that is the thing which disturbed the poor Man,
the discovery of it has vexed him and his Brethren, more than ever it did him
good; for he always pretended to be against Taking Money for Preaching, when
alas, I have offered to prove that, and several other Sums.
thereof; but even --
Thy Flurt at Richardson for taking Pay
For what, as Clerk, he writes, does much bewray
Thy Folly and Injustice. Is It not fit,
Who works for others, should be paid for it;
And that by them who him to work desire?
The Labourer is worthy of his Hire. So, now you begin to say, the Labourer is
worthy of his Hire: Sure you will forbear to call others Hirelings, now you
have Hirelings amongst your selves; for as you have pretended to preach, teach,
and suffer freely, so you have pretended to write as Clerk freely: See my Book,
Innocence vindicated, and Envy rebuked, etc. page 3. where I have quoted Geo.
Fox's Order for Marriage, and other things; where he thus speaks, AND THAT
NOTHING BE RECORDED FOR MONEY IN THESE THINGS, BUT FREELY, A FREE PEOPLE, AND
IN LOVE SERVE ONE ANOTHER, etc. And for my part, I was Clerk to the Isle of Ely
Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, about sixteen or eighten Years; and to the
nearest of them I rid fourteen Miles, and to the farthest eighteen Miles
Monthly, and I never took a Penny of Money, and indeed thought you had meant as
you spoke; but now all is come out, and it is time for your Hearers to look
about them, since their Money is given to such as Sam Cater, who is a rich Man,
and a great Trader. All which manifests your deep Hypocrisy.
p. 21.
The IX. Instance of their hypocrisy.
THE next Proof of your Hypocrisy, that I shall mention, is, First, Your
decrying all Learning; and next, Your assuming to your selves such Learning as
you never had, nor do at all understand: The first Instance of these, is that
remarkable Book, viz. George Fox's, Printed 1659. Entitled, A Primer for the
Doctors and Scholars of Europe, etc. Behold how contemptuously there he speaks
both of Learning, and the Learned; wherein is contained 2434 Queries, proposed
to the Doctors and Scholars of Europe, but more particularly to the two English
Universities; which are such idle, impertinent, and unnecessary Queries, that
his Design could be nothing else, but to bring both Learning, and the Learned
into Contempt, and to magnify his own Parts and Abilities; as that Geo. Fox,
who but a little before sat upon is Shoemakers Seat, working Journey-work at
Manchester, for his Master Geo. Gee, who could hardly write his Name, or read a
Chapter without spelling; and that he of a sudden should be such a profound
Scholar, as to propose 2434 Queries to all the Doctors and Scholars of Europe,
and challenge them out into the Field, bids them come out of their Holes and
Dens; bids them draw their Weapons; for the little David's were risen, who had
the Ba^s, the Slings, and the Stones, etc. I say, for him thus to challenge all
the Doctors and Scholars in Europe, at this rate, must needs design to render
himself a Man of wonderful Parts to the Ignorant, and such as believed him to
be led and guided by an infallible Spirit, as that he could discern who are
Saints, and who are Devils, and that without speaking ever a As he said in his
Book Entitled, The Great Mystery, page 89.
word: But had he proposed this multitude of Queries to all the Doctors and
Scholars in Europe, Africa, and America; I suppose they could not have answered
them; which put me in mind of an old Proverb, That one Fool may ask more
Questions than an hundred Wise and Learned Men can answer. And if Geo. Fox,
etc. will not now come out, and make good his own Queries, and show his
Learning, and meet me and others at a convenient place, to clear himself of
these, and many other things I have against him; it will appear that he is
guilty; and that he has not the power he pretends to, and that he dares not
come into the Field, and draw his Weapon, if he have any. And what a shame is
this, for such an able Doctor, yea, such a profound Scholar, as once he thought
himself able to deal with all the Doctors and Scholars in Europe; and that
after all this Brag, and monstrous Boast, dare not now come forth, dare not now
show his Head; but hip and skip up and down, hide himself in Holes, Dens, and
Lurking Places; surely this will greatly redound to his Dis-repute and Infamy,
in the eyes of all sorts of intelligent Persons; and will tend to his great
Abasement, Shame, and Confusion of Face.

For if he will come forth of his Den, and meet me; I offer to make it appear,
That of the 2434 Queries he has proposed in the said Primer to all the Doctors
and Scholars in Europe, that he cannot answer 200 of them himself; which is
such a piece of Hypocrisy as can scarce meet with a Parallel.

Next, That you assume to your selves such Learning as you never had, nor do at
all understand; I shall prove from another Book put forth by Geo. Fox, your
great Doctor; Entitled, A Battledoor for Teachers, and Professors to learn
Plural and Singular, etc. For if I prove these things upon your Head-man, your
principal Projector; and by you owned to be led by an infallible Spirit, that
cannot err, I prove it against you all; until you disown these his vain Boasts,
and dissembling Pretenses, by which he has deceived Multitudes, and through
which he has so highly exalted himself: But to proceed;

This Geo. Fox, who a little before asked what a Genitive Case was; what a
Vowel was; what a Verb was; what an Adverb was; what a Noun was; and what a
Pronoun was; in this Battledoor, set his Hand, and affixed his Name to six
several foreign Languages, (of which, he is not Master of one;) that it might
go for current that he was inspired with the Gift of I do remember, that for 20
years together it was generally believed by many of us, that Geo. Fox had 24
Languages given him by divine Inspiration in one night; nay, I lately spoke
with one, still eminent amongst them, who said he ever believed it, until the
sat Divisions; so that it was time to discover these Juggles; or else we
should have had in a little time a heap of feigned Miracles, and perhaps
outdone the Papists Legend.
Tongues, (for that he had any other Reason, I cannot understand;) which was
such a piece of Presumption, as no Age can parallel. The Languages to which his
Name in the said Battledoor is affixed, are, the Latin, the Italian, the Greek,
the Hebrew, the Chaldee, the Syriack; and if upon examination, he be found
ignorant of the Grounds and Rules of these Languages, as he certainly is, it
will appear that he never was the Author of that Learned Piece: And if so; how
have that People been cheated and deceived, who believed that Geo. For was led
by an infallible Spirit; that he (as they pretend,) had been so endued with
Discerning and Judgment; and that On all Occasions; (as this of writing the
Battledoor, was one Occasion;) as that none need to give him discerning into
Tongues, or Languages: But that what his Name was to, must needs be his own; I
say, when they come to see that Geo. For, who for many years has gone for a
learned Antiquary, a profound Projector, a notable Queriest, to be manifested
to be ignorant of these Languages, and not the Author of the Battledoor,
ignorant of the Queries, and not able to answer 200 of the 2434; when they come
to see that all along he has used these Tricks and Projects, only for a Name,
and to raise himself into Greatness and Splendour; when they come to see that he
is thus deceitful, and thereby manifested to be led by a fallible, deluding
Spirit, What will they say? Nay, What can they say? Nay, What Excuse can they
make for themselves, who thus have suffered themselves to be cheated, deluded,
and deceived by these his Pretenses, in that they have not all this while
examined things, but taken all on Trust, believe implicitly, as the Church [ i.
e. G. F. G. Whitehead, and a few like them,] believe? Oh shameful Hypocrisy!
If this be on examination found in G. Fox, their Head; what are the inferior
Sort? That a Man who is no Scholar, should offer to entitle himself Author of a
Learned Piece, as that, whoever writ it must be knowing in six Foreign
Languages, is such a Piece of Impudence, as I want Words to set forth.

Well, To the Primer again: And that the Reader may observe the Author's
Design, in proposing these Queries, could be nothing else, but to bring the
Learned, and Learning it self into contempt; as I have already showed; and to
raise his own Fame, and Fortune by such Shams and Tricks; I will recite a few
of them, as they lie compact together; lest they should say I mangle them into
Bits and Scraps, and so spoil the Sense, etc, which indeed is utterly
impossible to do; for they are all Nonsense: And my way to show them to be
Nonsense, is to take them entire, as they I Will folded together, viz.

What is a Participle? and what is it in it self; and by whom come; and out of
what Ground? And, why are these Declined? and why is the Word called Declined?
who was the first Rise and Author of it; and by whom it came? And, why is the
Word called Adverb? and what is an Adverb? the word it self; and who was its
rise? And, why do you call the Word Conjunction? and who was its rise? And, why
the Word Preposition; and who was its rise? And, who was the Author of the Word
Interjection? And what are these two words in themselves? and whether or no
these are not come up by the Art of Men, and Invention?

Behold these Learned Queries! And let W. P. and all Learned Rabbis amongst
the Quakers, answer them if they can: for I profess ingenuously, I cannot tell
who was the first Author of these Words, and a Thousand more, which are
Queried; nor who spoke them first; nor by whom they first came, no more than I
can tell who spoke the Word [Of] first: and who was its Rise; and who was the
Author of the Word [To,] and many others of our English Words; which to know,
is as unnecessary, as it is ridiculous to Query, etc. But if G. F^x had asked
me, Who taught me to understand what a Genitive Case, an Adverb, a Conjunction,
and an Interjection means? I could have told him, it was my Uncle Thomas
Holeman; but to tell him who spoke these Words first, and who was the Author of
all these Words, and by whom they came, and what Ground they came out of, yea,
and who was the Father that begat them, and the Mother that bare them; as Geo.
Fox elsewhere has it; I profess, I cannot tell; neither do I understand his
Riddles, they are so dark, so mysterious, and so full of Nonsense.

Well, Reader, Take a few more of these Queries, and still as they lie entire,
by all means, lest they say I spoil the Sense, and wrong the Author, etc. when,
alas! they are as great Nonsense as I can possibly make them, if I should take
them all to pieces, viz.

What is the Word Vowel in it self? And what was the Word As if it was not what
it Now is, viz. A Vowel.
Vowel? And what is the Word Diphthong? and who was the Author of these? and
where are they called by any such Names in Scripture? So, who was the Author of
these Names? and who gave them? And what are these Names in themselves, and of
themselves? And came they not from the Art of Men, yea, or nay?

Thus, Reader, I have given thee a Hint, a Taste, or Relish of Geo. Fox's
Queries to the Doctors and Scholars of Europe; by which thou may see how
learnedly George Fox Catechizes them. I shall now only add a few of them, as
they lie scattered up and down the said Primer, etc. and so leave him in his
Thicket of Brambles, or confused Nonsense.

What is a Major? What is a Minor? What is Extraction? What is Geometry? What
is a Point? What is an Angle? What is a Plain Angle? What is an Obtuse Angle?
What is an Acute Angle? What is Wolf-Madness? What is Dog Madness? What is
Badger-Madness? etc.

Having given this additional Hint of these mad, distracted or distracting
Queries, I shall only add a few of his Manly Expressions, in his Challenge to to
the Doctors, to come out of their Holes and Dens; to the end, That he, and the
rest may come forth, and draw their Weapons, and show their Cunning, when they
see how they are challenged, as they challenged others, etc. See these Pages in
the said Primer; page 4, 19, 21, 30, 36, 41, 55. Where are these Words, viz.
These Queries are to call them out into the Field; -- Let them come out now to
little Children. -- Little David's are risen; who have the Bags, and the Sings,
and the Srones; -- Ye that profess your selves to be Wise, and Learned Men, and
Scholars, and are Novices, and Fools; answer me: -- Draw out your Weapon, if
you have any, and answer me these things; come out of your Holes; do not Hip
nor Skip from them: Answer every word in particular; -- for you have Tongue
enough sometimes; let us see now if it can wagg.

These are your Words to the Scholars, etc. Now, if when you are called into
the Field your selves, and to come out of your Dens, we shall see whether you
can draw your Weapon; whether you have the Bags, the Sling, and Stones, you,
like Goliath, boast of; and whether he and you can so wagg your Tongue, as to
clear you from this Ninth Instance of Hypocrisy, with which he and you stand
charged.

The X. Instance of their Hypocrisy.
THis I know for a certain Truth, that when they write the most notorious Lies,
and scandalous Defamations against such as they account their Adversaries; (and
like the false Prophets of old, cry Peace to the wicked, and justify the
ungodly, who put into their Mouths:) yet this they have the impudence to father
upon the Spirit of the holy and just GOD: Witness Geo. Whitehead's Book,
Styled, Judgment fixed, etc. And S. Cater's Narrative, etc.

And therefore, that I may not be like you, in saying, and not prove what I say
to be true, I do hereby challenge George Fox, Geo. Whitehead, William Pen, and
Sam. Cater, to meet me any day next March, (giving me a Month's Notice,) at any
Public House in Bishop-Stortford, (being about the halfway from my
Habitation;) where I offer to prove the Truth of what you deny, according to
the Terms proposed in the foresaid Letter to the Quakers, etc.

Now therefore, if your Cause be good, you Notable Champions, come forth; you
that have challenged all the Doctors, Scholars, and Professors in Europe; come
out of your Holes, and Dens, and Lurking-Places, and meet me: If you have the
Bags, and the Slings, and the Stones you boast of; come forth of your Holes,
and Dens, and Lurking-Places, yea, come into the Field, and draw your Weapons,
if you have any worth the drawing; you know you have Tongue enough sometimes;
come, let us see if it can wagg; and whether you be able with all your Stones,
and Bags, and Slings, and Weapons (you so much boast of,) to clear your selves
from the guilt of Hypocrisy: For,

The Day is come, O Babylon! that thou must be tried; and thy Mask must be
taken off, thou Painted-Harlot; Thou ^hast long deceived the Nations by thy
fine outside Deckings, and Pharisaical Attire; but thy Fruit makes thee
manifest; and by that we know thee to be the Harlot, and not the Spouse of
Christ, nor true Bride: Men do not gather Figs of Thorns, nor Grapes of
Thistles.

Mildenhall, November. 5th. 1690. Francis Bugg.

Here follow Twenty four Queries propounded to your Protestant Hearers; who
have begun to throw off the Yoke, which Geo. Fox, G. W. etc. have for many
Years laden you with: And first, a few Words to you by way of Exhortation.
FRIENDS,
IT was Christ's frequent Counsel to his Disciples, to beware of the Leaven of
the Pharisees; which, said he, is Hypocrisy: I know no one thing that He took
more care to preserve his Disciples from, than that of Hypocrisy; with which
the Pharisees were very apt to leaven their Proselytes: No doubt but much of
their Doctrine was sound; or else Christ would not have said, They sat in
Moses 's Seat: Therefore whatsoever (said he) they bid you do, that observe,
and do: But (mark) do not after their Works; for they say, and do not. That is
to say, they spoke some sound Truths, they carried it fair to their Proselytes,
they were very precise in washing the Cup and Platter, in an Outside
Righteousness, to be seen of Men; but inwardly they were rotten, inwardly they
were proud, and disdained others, who, in GOD's Esteem, stood justified rather
than they. And how far your Teachers are guilty of deep Hypocrisy, I have in
part discovered, and doubt not but to make it yet more evident if they will
meet me; which if they refuse, being four such Champions, as they doubtless,
account themselves, then I will appeal to you, whether it be not a Token of
their Guilt: I mean, such of you as still retain the Protestant Principles, and
are not of G. Fox his Party.

Query 1. Whether it was not great Hypocrisy in Geo. Fox, to stir up, counsel,
and encourage Oliver Cromwell, his Officers, and Army, to fight with carnal
Weapons; when, at the same time he did believe it utterly unlawful for a
Christian Man so to do? Answer.

Query 2. Whether it was not great Hypocrisy in Geo. Fox, and others, to
vilify, bespatter, and expose the Presbyterians, Independents, etc. as being
of fighting Principles, and dangerous to the Government, in K. C. II's time;
thereby rendering them obnoxious to Sufferings, whenas they themselves, by their
Advice, Counsel, and Encouragement to Oliver Cromwell, etc. (and that from the
Word of the LORD:) were equally concerned in the same Cause and Quarrel?

Query 3. Do you believe that Archbishop Cranmer compelled Edward VI. to sign
a Warrant to Burn poor Joan of Kent, for Were Religion-sake; and that by this
their Practice they Taught the Roman Catholics the way of Persecution? Answer.

Query 4. If not; Then, Whether or no such of your Leaders, as have so writ,
have not given away the Cause of Protestantism what in them lie; and abetted,
vindicated, and asserted the Popish Cause; charging the Protestants with the
original guilt of Persecution? Answer.

Query 5. Whether Geo. Whitehead's calling the Doctrine of Doctor Robert Barns,
who suffered Martyrdom for the Cause of Christ, Corrupt Doctrine; tending to
practical Ranterism it self; yea, sordid Ranterism See p 259. of G, W's
Judgment fixed, etc, against the 222, 223 Pages of my Book, De Chr. Lib. etc.
Which are the Words of Dr. Barns. See the 298 Page in his Book, entiluled, Men's
Constitutions not grounded on Scripture, bind not the Conscience, etc. verbatim,
, etc. be not a sign that he is Popishly affected? etc. And whether G. W. do
not herein appear like his Brother Deceased, viz Bloody Bonner? Who frequently
charged the Martyrs with such Doctrine; as I could show, were it pertinent: I
say, in this do they not resemble each other, as if they were Twins?

Query 6. Whether it be not as commendable to Address King William and Queen
Mary, who are by all Men acknowledged true Protestants, as it was to Address
the late King, who acknowledged himself a Roman Catholic?

Query 7. Whether it be not as lawful for Booksellers to sell
Protestant-Books; even such as discover the Hypocrisy of the Teachers and
Leaders of Geo. Fox, and his Party, as for Benj. Clark (their Bookseller,) to
sell Play-Books, Ballads, Papist-Books, Gypsy-Books, yea, and Ba -- Books?
Answer.

Query 8. Whether it be not great Hypocrisy to pretend to Preach, Teach,
Suffer, Write, and Record Marriages, and other things freely, and under color
thereof condemn all other Churches and Societies, as Hirelings, Lovers of
filthy Lucre, Followers of Balaam for Reward, etc. and yet at the same time,
take Money, Gifts, and Rewards themselves, for doing the same things, etc?
Answer.

Query 9. Whether it was not great Hypocrisy in Geo. Fox, etc. to write
Queries to all Doctors and Scholars in Europe; and yet when Queries are
propounded to them, they will not answer? If they tell you, they are as ready
to Answer Queries, as to ask; then let them Answer my 15 Queries proposed in De
Christ. Lib. p. 72, to p. 78. p. 154, to p. 163. and in Paint. Harlot, p. 40,
41. if they can.

Query 10. Whether it be not great Deceit for Men to write a Book, and pretend
a Concern of Conscience; that they do it for GOD's Glory, and as moved
thereunto by the Eternal Spirit; and yet, to write such abominable Lies,
Slanders, and scandalous Defamations, as that they dare not, or are ashamed to
own their said Books?

Query 11. Whether it was not great Presumption in Geo. Fox, and a Badge of
intolerable Pride, to put forth a Book with 2434 Queries in it; when he himself
cannot answer the odd 34 of them?

Query 12. Whether it was not great Impudene in Geo. Fox, in his Battledoor, to
set his Hand, and affix his Name to six or more Foreign Languages; as, Latin,
Greek, Hebrew, Italian, Chaldee, Syriack, etc. and yet understand not one of
them?

Query 13. Whether it was not great Hypocrisy for Geo. Whitehead, Stephen
Crisp, William Penn, etc. to make a Law or Edict at their General Meeting at
London, May 75. That their Hearers should constantly meet, and not Decline,
Forsake, nor Remove their Meetings, like Worldly, Fearful, and Politic
Professors; and yet themselves refused to stand in a like suffering capacity,
relating to Sufferings with them? Answer.

Query 14. Whether it be not great Hypocrisy in Geo. Fox, and his Party, to
say, That GOD respects neither Time, Place, nor Persons; and thereupon pretend,
That for Conscience Sake they cannot give respect to their Superiors, by
putting off their Hats; when at the same time they themselves compel their
Apprentices to stand bareheaded before them This Piece of Hypocrisy I
testified against more than Fifteen Years since, by a Letter to the then Yearly
Meeting; which was before S. Cater and I had any Controversy; See my Book,
Entitled, Innocence Vindicated, and Envy rebuked, etc. p. 8.
: nay in their very Shops, as if it were the Presence Chamber.

Query 15. Did not Christ, when he Taught his Disciples to pray, Mat. 6.9. say,
After this manner, therefore Pray ye; Our Father, etc. -- And forgive us our
Sins, as we also forgive them that trespass against us. Now such as do not pray
after this manner, are they not manifest Transgressors of this Precept of our
LORD Jesus Christ, and found in the steps of the proud Pharisee, who thinks
himself so righteous, as that he need neither make confession of his Sins, nor
ask forgiveness for Christ Jesus sake, in whose Name alone is Remission of Sins?

Query 16. If you grant, that a neglect, or Refusal of performing this part of
Christian Duty, be a sign of a Pharisaical Pride See my Book, Entitled, The
Quakers detected, etc. p. 12, 13, 14. Where I have enlarged upon this their
grand Error. To what I have writ in that Book, let the Reader observe W.
Tindal, who says in his Works, entitled The Exposition of the 6th Chapter of
Matthew, page 222, 223. Because he knows that our Nature is so weak, (and
inclinable to Sin,) therefore he teaches us, daily to repent, -- and daily to
ask GOD Forgiveness: Seeing He commands us to ask, we may be bold so to do,
and to believe He will FORGIVE us: No Man therefore needs to despair. I hope
they will not rail on this blessed Martyr, W. Tindal, (who suffered in the
Flames,) as Geo. Whitehead did of the Doctrine of Dr. Rob. Barns; who called it
corrupt Doctrine, tending to Ranterism; yea, sordid Ranterism.
; then I do farther Query, What is the Reason that Geo. Fox, Geo. Whitehead,
and the rest of their Preachers, in their public Prayers in your Assembly, do
not pray after the manner that Christ has prescribed; though not in the very
Form of Words; yet after His Precept; so, as to confess their Sins to GOD, and
ask Forgiveness for Christ's sake; which they do not.

Query 17. Seeing Edward Buroughs, in his Epistle writ at Dublin, To the Camp
of the LORD in England, p. 2. [ This is to go amongst Friends, printed 1656.]
says, You who are called Quakers, -- above all the Families of the Earth: The
Tabernacle of GOD is with you, and his Dwelling Place is among you, And only
among you is God known, etc. Now if so, that GOD be known Only by you, then the
Query is, Whether all that be called Quakers, know the LORD? And whether none
but the Quakers know the Lord? Answer to this, etc. The Answer to this Question
will resolve, Whether Geo. Fox, who said, in his Book The Great Mystery, etc.
and Solomon Eccles his Affirmation, in The Quaker's Challenge, page 6. that
you, and you Only, are GOD's People. I say, whether you all be (as John Field,
one of your Preachers, says you are) of One Mind and Judgment, in this, and all
other Matters?

Query 18. Whether there did not a strong Delusion enter many about the Year
1659. As that Geo. Fox was inspired with the Gift of Tongues; and whether the
recited Battledoor and Primer was not the Reason of that Opinion; and if it
come to be made appear (as that it will, if he will meet at the place
aforesaid) that he is ignorant of the principal things contained in the said
Books, then whether it will not appear as great a Juggle, Trick, and Sham, to
raise his Name and Fame, as ever was used by Mahomet, or amongst the Papists
about their feigned Miracles?

Query 19. Since they have told us by their Book, Judas and the Jews, page 41.
viz. Our faithful Chronicles of the bloody Tragedies of that professing
Generation will tell future Ages other things, etc. What is the reason they do
not bring out this their holy Chronicle they so much boast of? Or do they
intend to follow the Steps of the Papists, and bring it forth when every Man is
dead that remember those Transactions; and that then it may pass for an holy
Cheat, or like one of their feigned Miracles? etc.

Query 20. Whether do you believe the Teachers and Preachers amongst you be so
qualified as they pretend in their Book, Judas and the Jews, page 58. viz. We
need none to give us Discerning or Judgment; Christ has furnished us already,
and does on all Occasions: And as Geo. Fox pretends, in his Book styled The
Mystery of the great Whore, etc. page 89. where he says, They can discern who
are Saints, who are Devils, and who are Apostates, without speaking ever a
Word? etc. I say, if you think them so qualified, then bid them show in which
of them three States are Geo. Smith, Tho. Rudyard, Rob. Sandiland, and John
Tysoe, since none need to give them Discerning or Judgment, for that they, at
all Times, and on all Occasions, are so plentifully endued, as to know who are
Devils, who are Saints, and who are Apostates, etc. And if they fail in their
Judgment, and chance to call an Apostate a Saint, I hope you will then begin to
see they are got a good Stride to Rome, by their feigned Miracles, and
pretended Infallibility.

Query 21. Geo. Fox says, in his Book, The great Mystery, etc. The Work of the
Ministers of the Gospel was not to reflect upon Persons. -- And this Reflecting
upon Persons was never the way to beget to GOD -- is a Mark of a False Prophet,
etc. Now if this be true, what do you think of George Whitehead, who in his
Letter to me, printed in his Judgment fixed, etc. calls me ten or twelve times
Informer, when the Name was so odious at that time, that, in some parts of the
Kingdom, he that was known to be an Informer, could hardly pass without danger
of his Life; and yet this meek, serious, and sincere Geo. Whitehead, as
sometimes he pretends to be, had the Impudence thus to call me, and expose me
in print, through the Nation; besides abundance of other bad Names, as Wolf,
Dog, Beast, Child of the Devil, Enemy of all Righteousness, and the like. I
say, besides these, and many more, yet Informer was the frequent Epithet he
gave me in almost every Page, on purpose to inculcate and leaven the People,
and yet at the same time knew that I was no such manner of Person, but had
suffered more by Informers For besides more than three Years Imprisonment for
Meetings, Isuffered the loss or three Ten Pound Fines for the Nonability of
Geo. Thorowgood, at Ely, in the Isle of Ely; for which they took near Fifty
Pounds worth of Goods. And a Ten Pound Fine for the Nonability of Ja. Webb: And
a Fine of Tw^^ty Pounds for William Benet having a Meeting at my House; besides
six or eight small Ten Shilling Fines: For all which I made no Complaint. But
indeed, when a Fifteen Pound Fine came on me for Sam. Cater, through his not
telling his Name and Habitation, I was not willing to pay that; and I am glad I
was not so tame as to be Priest-ridden by S. Cater. And for this matter I refer
the Reader to my Book entitled, The painted Harlot both stripped and whipped,
page 39. nay, the whole Book, etc.
than any one, if not all that had wrote against me had done. I say, if Geo.
Fox his Judgment in the place aforesaid be of Credit, then I can prove G. W. as
false a Propet as Muggleton ever was; and, I am satisfied, a Man full of Malice
and Revenge, or else he could never have writ so wrongfully of me and others,
as he has done.

Query 22. Whether, in your Opinion, a Man may not go to the public Worship
established by Law, and yet be a Christian, and in the state of Salvation? I
ask you this Question, who, I hope, do not think Salvation entailed only to you
under the Denomination of Quakers, as your Leaders have declared.

Query 23. Whether the treacherous Practice of Geo. Whitehead, Sam. Cater, etc.
did not resemble the Practice of Thomas Becket, that Popish Prelate, in King
Henry the Second's Time, upon that Popish Principle of not keeping Faith with
Heretics, compared with their Practice in not keeping that Covenant and
Agreement they both made and recorded in their Quarterly Book, at Hadenham in
the Isle of Ely, the 1st of December, 1680. as at large is recited in my Book,
Painted Harlot, etc. page 51, to 64. And then tell me,

Query 24. Whether you do not believe that they, in the Breach of that their
Covenant, did not run parallel with the said T. Becket; and thereby declare to
all the World, that even so early they did espouse that grand, treacherous,
Popish Principle of not keeping Faith with such as they account Heretics?

November. 25. 1690. Fra. Bugg.

Put your selves in Array against BABYLON round about: All ye that bend the
Bow, shoot at her, spare no Arrows. The LORD has opened His ARMORY, and has
brought forth the Weapons of his Indignation; for this is the Work of the LORD
GOD of Hosts.
A POSTSCRIPT TO New Rome.
1. ROME'S SISTER thou art rightly styled,
And with her may compare:
The Innocent thou have beguiled,
Under Pretenses fair.
2. Hypocrisy in thee is found,
Thy Leaven is not good:
Thy deep Deceit, thy Wit profound,
In which thy Confidence stood,
3. Is now come forth to open View,
That all may plainly see
Thy Art, thy Craft; and well perceive
Thy deep Hypocrisy.
4. How proud, like to the Pharisee,
Thy Countenance appear:
And how like to the Romish See,
Thou do thy Fabric rear?
5. Thy Errors, which but few did see,
Are now become thy Crime;
And loaded therewith thou shall be,
And that from Time to Time:
6. A Crime from which thou can not,
With all thy Subtilty,
Clear thy self; it is such a Blot
That on thy Face does lie,
7. As ROME, thy SISTER, never had,
At thy Age, charged on her;
Nor any Crimes half so bad,
At twice thy Age, upon her:
8. Though she at length, as Age grew on,
Through her vile Imposition,
Abhorred became, and grew a Scorn
To every Christian Nation.
9. And do thou think for to escape,
With thy UNWRIT TRADITIONS,
The Strokes which Protestants do make
Against thy Superstitions?
10. Against thy Errors, and thy Pride;
Against thy Hypocrisies:
Against thy Turning with the Tide,
And other Enormities?
11. No, no, I say; as thou art found
Treading the Papists Path,
True Protestants will thy Pride wound,
As Luther, and others, has
12. Thy Elder SISTER's Tripple Crown;
Whose Pride does not exceed
The Pride of thee, which does abound,
Exceeding her indeed.
13. Wherefore, ye skilful Archers bold,
Come forth, and bend the Bow:
Let none escape, as has been told
Of Babel, High nor Low.
14. But do to her as she to others have,
As a just Recompense:
She has been proud, against the LORD,
And used Violence. Jer. 50.2.
Fra. Bugg.

The Author being informed of G. Fox's Death, writ this in Answer; and desired
it might be here inserted.
Dear Sir,
YOurs of the 15th. instant, I received; wherein, you tell me Geo. Fox is dead,
and that my Book is not yet finished; and that you would know my Mind about it,
etc. In Answer to which, I say, that Pope Adrian is dead, Pope Leo is dead,
Pope Gregory is dead, and abundance more of other Popes are dead; What then?
Did Luther, Frith, Barns, Tyndal, and the Protestant Party let fall their
Testimonies because the Popes were dead? No such Matter: Popery is Popery
still, and Error is Error still; and in like manner so it will be with this New
Rome; for though George Fox be dead, yet Geo. Whitehead, his Successor, is
alive, and as cunning, as crafty, and as politic in erecting their New
Church Government, and imposing upon those, who for Conscience sake could not
submit to it, as ever Geo. Fox was; and therefore as much reason now to
manifest his, and their Errors, Innovations, and grand Hypocrisies as ever.

And that it may farther appear, that there is just Cause for that Zeal that
has been raised up in several others, as well as in my self, against G. F. and
the Leaders of this People, I shall cite some Passages writ by Three of his
Preachers; (in which he was too much adored and idolized, and no doubt will be
so now he is dead.)

First, That of Josiah Coal, in a Letter from Barbados.

Dear G. Fox, who art the Father of many Nations; whose Life has reached
through us thy Children even to the Isles afar off, to the begetting many again
to a lively Hope; for which Generations to come shall call thee Blessed; whose
Being and Habitation is in the Power of the Highest, in which thou rules and
governs in Righteousness, and thy Kingdom is established in Peace, and the
increase thereof is without end.

Next, That of S. Eccles Quakers Challenge. p. 6.
, who writ of G. F. these Words, (which were not fit to be said of any Mortal;)
viz, A Prophet indeed; -- It was said of Christ, That He was in the World, and
the World was made by him, and the World knew him not; SO it may be said of
this true Prophet, whom John said he was not; but thou shall feel this Prophet
one day as heavy as a Millstone upon thee: and though the World knows him not,
yet he is known.

And next, that of John Audland, in a Letter of his to G. F. from the West of
England. Dear, and precious one, in whom my Life is bound up; and my strength
in thee stands; by thy Breathings I am nourished; by thee my strength is
renewed; Blessed art thou for evermore; and blessed are all they that enjoy
thee; Life and Strength comes from thee, Holy One. -- Daily do I find thy
Presence with me, which does exceedingly preserve me; for I cannot reign but in
thy Presence and Power. Pray for me, that I may stand in thy Dread for
evermore. -- Pray for us all, that in thy Power we may abide for evermore: I am
thine, begotten, and nourished by thee, and in thy Power am I preserved. Glory
unto thee, Holy One, for ever. These, and many other Idolatrous, if not
Blasphemous Names and Titles, have been given and attributed to G. F. See Tho.
Crisp's first Part of Babel's Builders, etc, p. 7. and his 5th Part, p. 16. And
W. Roger's 5th par. Christ. Quaker, etc. p. 77. And Painted Harlot, etc.
Preface, p. 6. And The Quakers Unmasked, p. 15. The Spirit of the Hat, etc, p.
27, 28. And, Tyranny and Hypocrisy, etc. p. 19.
which I never heard that ever he disowned, or testified against; but instead
thereof, was a great Countenancer and Encourager of such Elatterers, and a
great Boaster of his own State, etc. And therefore it lies now upon his
Successor and Successors, to justify, excuse, or condemn these Errors, and
others, in my Book set forth. And seeing G. F. is dead, I do hereby challenge
Stephen Crisp to meet me (with the rest beforementioned, p. 19.) since Geo.
Whitehead has a mind he should be his Partner, (which is more than Rob. and S.
Duncon would have desired (if they had heen alive,) for Reasons they knew;) so
let it be hastened: What I writ, I writ when he was living; and now he is gone,
there are enough to Answer for him, and themselves, if they be able.

January 18; 1690/1 Sir, I am yours in Sincerity, Fra. Bugg.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 12. l. 28. for such read Truth. p. 15. l. last, for is read his. p. 17.
l. last, for lle read lie. p. 18. l. 1. for come read it came. p. 22. l. 9. for
Impudene, read Impudence.

Advertisements of Books sold by J. Gwillim, in Bishopsgate-street, over
against the Great James, Bookseller.
1. THE Painted Harlot both stripped and whipped, etc. By Fra. Bugg. 2. Reason
against Railing, and Truth against Falsehood; being a Conclusive Postscript to
be annexed to the Book entitled The painted Harlot, etc. By Fra. Bugg. 3.
Innocence Vindicated, and Envy Rebuked; being a brief Answer to Geo. Whitehead,
and John Tysoe, etc. By Fra. Bugg. 4. The Quakers detected, their Errors
confuted, and their Hypocrisy discovered, etc. By Fra. Bugg. 5. Battering Rams
against New Rome, etc. By Fra. Bugg. All five in Quarto; with other Books wrote
by diverse Authors on the same Subject, bound together, as well as sold
severally, etc. De Christiana Liberate; or Liberty of Conscience upon its true
and proper Grounds, Asserted and Vindicated, and the Mischiefs of Imposition
amongst the People called Quakers made manifest. In two Parts: The First -- by
a nameless, yet an approved Author. The Second -- by Fra. Bugg. In Octavo,
Bound. The Quakers unmasked, [i.e. Geo. Fox, and his Party,] Their Double
Dealing, and False-heartedness discovered, etc. Folio. A Looking-Glass for the
Quakers, in two Columns; wherein they may in part see themselves, and may be
seen by others. In Folio.

