Something in ANSWER TO THE Allegations of the QUAKERS, IN THEIR Printed CASE
presented to the House of Commons, December. 1693. The INTRODUCTION.
HAVING seen one of your Papers wherein you prayed That your Word may be taken
instead of an Oath, and humbly entreat them tenderly to demonstrate their
Christian Charity, reminding them, that being merciful, they may obtain mercy,
etc. I know it is written, The merciful shall obtain mercy, and consequently
the charitable shall be charitably dealt by; but contrariwise, what shall the
unmerciful and uncharitable meet with? and that you are those very Men, your
Principles and Doctrine laid down by your most Authentic Authors, have mo^e
then sufficiently manifested. You know your Books are of two sorts; the one to
the World, or the Worlds People; the other to go only amongst your Disciples,
directed to be read in your Meetings. In the first you frequently pretend to
Charity, Tenderness and Meekness; this I call your Light side; this you turn to
the Parliament: the other I call your Dark side, which is so deformed, that you
are loath to have it viewed: And yet by the last, I mean by your uncharitable
Names and reproachful Term^, you have added more to your Flock, then by your
former; for whoever believes that the Public Ministers, the Sacraments, the
Scriptures, and P^otestant Religion to be what you say them to be, are mad if
they do not reject them all, and turn Quakers; especially if they also believe
you to be what you say your selves to be, viz. the only People of God. And
thereupon I shall recite some few Passages out of your Books wrote by your
chief Ministers, particularly G. Fox and Edw. Buroughs, two great Prophets in
O. C's time; the memorable Works of the last you have reprinted in Folio, and
on the Title Page published him to be A true Prophet, a Son of Thunder, a
faithful Servant of God, etc. And the Works of the other, some say, are ready
to appear in the World. I shall not now recite the Prophesies of G. Fox in his
Book styled, News coming up out of the North, p. 20. nor E. Burrough's in his
Works, p. 203, 244. but rather those Passages relating to Scripture,
Ordinances, Public Ministry, and Parliaments, with some few Observations and
Queries. In which I shall deal first fairly in citing, and modestly in my
Observations and Queries, so that I hope there will not be a hard word in the
whole Sheet, unless it be your own. And in regard you pretend to write by an
Infallible Spirit, equivolent to Scripture, I hope you will not find fault with
your own; nor me, I hope, for calling a Spade, a Spade. But if you do, it is all
one; I am resolved, God assisting, to go on, concluding that it is as laudable
for me to vindicate the Christian Religion in print, as for you in print to
undermine it, and if it were possible to overthrow it: but of this I will not
be my own Judge, but appeal to every Christian Reader, and before ten or twelve
impartial Men, offer to produce every Book and Page which I quote. Thus much by
way of Introduction.

THEIR CONTEMPT OF SCRIPTURE AND ORDINANCES.
NEws coming up out of the North, etc. p. 14. Their Original is carnal, and
their Communion is carnal, a little Bread and Wine; so Dust is the Serpent
meat; their Original is but Dust, which is but the Letter, which is Death, so
the Serpent feeds upon Dust; and their Gospel is Dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John, which is the Letter. Page 34. A voice and a word to all you Deceivers,
who deceive the People, and Blasphemers, who utter forth your Blasphemy and
Hypocrisy, that tell People of a Sacrament, and tell them it is the Ordinance
of God: Blush, blush and tremble you who live in the witchery, and bewitch the
People.

Truths Defense, etc. p. 101. The Letter which kills is dangerous, and the
Ministers of the Letter are Ministers of Death, to you, it is dangerous to read
or speak of it.

Saul 's Errand, etc. p. 7. All that do study to raise a living thing out of a
dead, to raise the Spirit out of the Letter, are Conjurers, and their preaching
is from Conjuration, which is not spoken from the mouth of the Lord.

David 's Enemies discovered, etc. p. 7. And these (i. e. Quakers) do not call
the Letter the Rule, and the four Books Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the New
Testament and Gospel, as thou (i. e. Public Minister) and thy Generation do;
thy Ministry is in the Letter, which kills.

Geo. Whitehead. Christoph. Atkinson.
Several Petitions answered, etc. p. 30. But if ever you own the Prophets,
Christ, or the Apostles, you will own our Writings which are given forth by the
same Spirit and Power.

Truths Defense, etc. p. 2, 104. You might have as well condemned the
Scriptures to the fire, as our Books; for our giving forth Papers, or printed
Books, it is from the immediate Eternal Spirit of God.

Edw. Borough 's Works, p. 518. about Water Baptism and the Sacrament; hear
him what he says, viz. We do utterly deny, and do say, it is no Ordinance of
God, but is an Institution of the Whore of Rome, and England received it by a
Popish Institution; and your Practice of it is Idolatry, and no part of the
Worship of God.

William Smith's Primer, etc. p. 36. Quest. How is it concerning these things
called Ordinances, as Baptism, and Bread and Wine?

Answ. As to those things, they arose from the Pope's Invention, who has had
power in the night of Apostasy, and has set up his Devices, which are yet
continued in England, though he seemingly is denied; and the whole practice of
those things, as they use them, had their Institution by the Pope, and were
never so ordained of Christ.

Edw. Borough 's Works, p. 51. Herein have you been bewitched from the
obedience of the Truth within, to obey the Letter without. See p. 58. for more
of this nature.

Observation and Query.
Let the Reader observe, and see what grounds of Hope you can possibly have to
be so tenderly and charitably received and embraced, who thus contemn the
Scripture, profane the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, and exalt your own
Writings, yea make void the Sufferings of the Martyrs, and reject the Practice
of the Churches of Christ in all Ages, who received the Sacrament, and were
Baptized, and yet had the Spirit as much as you can pretend to have So that as
you confess your selves, you were raised contrary to all men, so are your
Principles and Practices contrary to all the Churches of Christ since the
Apostles days.

And thereupon I Query,

Query 1. Why do you not first Retract and Condemn these erroneous Books, if
you be now of another mind; if not, with what Face can you appear to beg the
Favor of such whose Christian Principles you are undermining?

THEIR CONTEMPT OF THE PUBLIC MINISTRY.
A Brief Discovery, etc. p. 7, 8, 9, 10. The Priests of the World are
Conjurers, Thieves, Robbers, Antichrist's, Witches, Devils, Vipers, Serpents,
scarlet colored Beasts, Merchants of Babylon, selling beastly Wares, the
Letter, which is Dust and Death, greedy Dogs, really they are Bloodhounds,
still hunting and gasping after their prey like the mouth of Hell, ambitious
Pharisees, laying heavy Burdens on men's shoulders; Woe, woe, woe, was the Portion
of those Pharisees then, and woe, woe, woe is their portion now: And Woe and Misery
is the Portion of the Vpholders of that treacherous Crew and deceitful
Generation, who are the only Maintainers of the Seven Heads and Ten-horn'd
Beast, etc.

The Guide mistaken, etc. p. 18. And whilst the idle Gormondizing Priests of
England, run away with above fifteen hundred thousand pounds a year, under
pretense of being God's Ministers, and that no sort of People have been so
universally through Ages the bane of Soul and Body of the Universe, as that
abominable Tribe, for whom the Theater of God's most dreadful Vengeance is
reserved to act their Eternal Tragedy upon, etc. per William Penn.

An Antidote against the Venom, etc. p. 78. Truth allows no payment of Tithes
at all under the New Covenant; they who pay Tithes uphold a Legal Ceremony
abrogated by Christ, and thereby deny Christ to be come in the flesh, which is
a Mark of Antichrist.

Observation and Query.
Reader, Note their uncharitable Sentance of the Public Ministry, as Gor
nondizing Priests, Witches, Devils, Bloodhounds, etc. upon whom God's dreadful
Vengeance is to fall; but above all, that such as pay Tithes deny Christ come
in the Flesh, and are therefore so many Antichrists; by this they have
condemned the Martyrs, and all Christians, yea Kings, Parliaments and People
who pay or take Tithes, etc. and thereupon I Query of you Quakers, who say you
are raised contrary to all men:

Query 2. Whether you be of the same mind still? if you are, how then can you
have the Face to ask any Favor at the Hands of such who not only pay Tithes,
but receive Tithes; nay not only so, but make L^ws that Tithes shall be paid;
and consequently by your Doctrine are Antichrist's, and deny Christ come in the
flesh; if you say No, your Minds are altered. Then ^o make them believe so,
there is two things requisite: first condemn your Books that so teach, and let
your Sincerity be confirmed by your paying them, as the Law directs: for if you
say we never so said, so writ, nor so affirmed, remember the P -- for I have
the Books by me; and let your Brother Jacob Baker be a warning to you.

THEY DENY JESUS OF NAZARETH.
William Smith 's Primer, etc. p. 1. How shall I know God?

Answ. Thou must wait to know something of God in thee, which in thy own
Conscience he makes manifest.

Quest. P. 8. How may I know when Christ is truly preached?

Answ. They that are false (Ministers) preach Christ without, and bid People
believe in him as he is in Heaven above; but they that are Christ's Ministers
preach Christ within.

Quest. P. 9. Here is then great difference in their Doctrine?

Answ. Yes; and no more fellowship then East with West.

W. Smith's Catechism. Quest. p. 57. And is that which is within you the only
Foundation upon which you stand and the Principle of your Religion?

Answ. That of God within us is so; for we know it is Christ; and being Christ,
it must needs be only and principal; for that which is only admits not of
another, and that which is principal is greatest in being: And thus we know
Christ in us to be unto us the only and principal.

Quest. 64. What is your Faith concerning Christ in you, as a Mediator?

Answ. We believe that Christ in us does offer up himself a living Sacrifice
unto God for us, by which the Wrath and Justice of God is appeased toward us.

Quest. What is your Faith concerning Christ in you as an Intercessor?

Answ. We believe that Christ in us does intercede the Father on our behalf.

Edw. Burrough's Works, p. 149. Is that very Man, with that very Body, within
you, yea or nay?

Answ. The very Christ of God is within us; we dare not deny him.

Saul 's Errand, etc. p. 32. Did not thou write a Paper, that he who thinks
to be saved by that Christ who suffered at Jerusalem, would be deceived.

Answ. If I cannot witness Christ nearer then Jerusalem, I shall have no
benefit by him; but I own no other Christ but that who witnessed a good
Confession before Pilate, which Christ, I witness, suffering in me now.

REMARK.
The that which they mean that made this Confession, was the Life or Spirit, or
Substance which spoke through him, and not Jesus of Nazareth, which was born of
the blessed Virgin, who sat on Jacob's Well, who was smote with the Palms of
their Hands, run through with a Spear, died, rose again, and in the same Body
ascended up into Heaven in the sight of the Galaleans, and there sits at the
right hand of God, making Intercession for us, and shall come again in like
manner at the last Day to Judge both Quick and Dead: I say, the that which they
mean was not this Jesus of Nazareth, but the Light, Spirit, and something in
that Body: And this I shall prove by a Text of their own Scriptures, which they
call the Word of God, which Term they will not allow the Bible, etc.

A Question to Professors, etc. p. 33. Now the Scriptures do expressly
distinguish between Christ and the Garment which he wore; between him that
came, and the Body in which he came, between the Substance which was veiled,
and the Vail which veiled it: There is plainly he, and the Body in which he
came; there was the outward Vessel and the inward Life; this we certainly know,
and can never call the Bodily Garment Christ, but that which appeared and dwelt
in the Body.

Observation and Query.
Now since it is evident (as heretofore I have from Scripture proved) they deny
Jesus of Nazareth, and the Testimony of God, Angels and Men, I Query thereupon,

Query 3. How can you seek to Authority, until you have, under your Hands,
condemned these erroneous Books, with any hopes of a tender acceptance? or can
you rationally think they will take no notice of these ^our Antichristian
Principles which you slily insinuate into the Minds of the People, under the
Notion of a New Gospel, and a New Religion.

THEIR CONTEMPT OF GOVERNORS.
Edward Burrough's Works, p. 507. But as for this People (the Quakers) they are
raised of the Lord, and established by him, even contrary to all men: and they
have given their power only to God, and they cannot give their power to any
mortal men, to stand or fall by any outward Authority, and to that they cannot
seek. P. 501. We stand Witnesses against Parliaments, Councils, Judges,
Justices, who make and execute Laws in their Wills over the Consciences of Men,
or punish for Conscience sake; to such Laws, Customs, Courts, or Arbitrary
usurped Dominion, we cannot yield obedience. P. 621. Nay, their (the Quakers)
Kingdom is from above, and they reject the Countenance of the Beasts Authority;
and they rej^^^ any confidence that the Draggon and unjust Power can repose in
th^^. P. 53. For we are gathered up into the Life which the holy men ^f God
lived in, and are fallen from the World, and its Ways and Nature. P. 50. For
even the Father bears Witness of us, and therefore our Witness is true. P. 522.
-- A running to the Powers of the Earth, what have you Ministers lost the Lord
to be your strength, that you must flee for help to Men? Must they make Laws to
establish you, and set you up? Is not this the Whore that rode upon the Beast,
and that the Beast carried? And p. 524. to the Parliament thus, viz. You do but
cause People to drink of the Whores Cup; and you are but them which carry the
Whore, viz. the false Church: and this is plain dealing to tell you the Truth,
etc.

Observation and Query.
Reader, Note they say they were raised contrary to all men, (and indeed so I
think, in that their Principles are contrary to all men's) but to reject the
Countenance of Men, and yet seek it, and condemn others for seeking to men, and
yet do the same, what Contradiction is here? But if they say, they are of
another Opinion and Judgment, as that they should be by their Practice, why do
they not condemn these erroneous Books: for it was W. Penn's way with the
Papists, in his Book, A seasonable Caveat, etc. p. 35. To conclude (says W.
P.) if we would not receive a Thief until he has repented, let the Papists
first recant of his voluminous Errors. So say I, let the Quakers first recant
of their Errors, condemn their Books, and make a Confession of the Christian
Faith, and all under their Hands; and then, and not whilst then, let Compassion
be showed to them. To which let me add a Query:

Query 4. Whether it is not the Fruit of this Spirit that thus slights
Authority, which has lead you these two Summers, that when Episcopalians,
Presbyterians, Independants and Baptists, [who in obedience to their Majesty's
Proclamation for the keeping a strict Fast] humbled themselves in Fasting and
Prayer for their Sins, and the Sins of the Nation, praying for his Majesty's
good Success and safe Return; that you (being as you say raised contrary to all
men) took no notice of it, but one at Plow, another at Cart, and others with
their Shop Windows open.

Query 5. Whether was the Sufferings of Christ, or the Sufferings of the
Quakers greatest?

Answ. See Edw. Burrough's Works, etc. p. 273. And this is to go abroad in the
Nation, and in the World, That the Sufferings of the People of God (called
Quakers) in this Age is greater Sufferings, and more unjust, than in the days
of Christ, or any time since: what was done to Christ and his Apostles, was
chiefly done by a Law, and in great part by the due Execution of a Law.

Query 6. If it be Criminal to conceal Treason against my Natural Prince, what
is it to conceal these horrible Blasphemies of these wretched Imp -- rs, who
undervalue the Death and Sufferings of Christ, contemn his Laws, despise his
Ordinances, revile his Magistrates, reproach his Ministers? which to set forth,
with the Fruits of it, require a Brief History of the Rise, Growth, and
Progress of Quakerism, which in time possibly you may see: not only manifesting
your Principles to be Antichristian, Anti-Scriptural, Anti-Magistratical,
unreasonable, and irrational, from the day of your Date, viz. 1650. to 1693.
but also your delusive Arts whereby you have multiplied your Proselytes, and
advanced your worldly Interest. And that a Spirit of Persecution has been
amongst you from the beginning, is manifest in their Trial of G. Keith, etc.
who are Quakers, for matter of Conscience, and saying, That no such damnable
Heresies and Doctrines of Devils were tolerated in any Protestant Society
besides the Quakers, before a Court of Quakers (being Justices of the Peace) at
a Quarter Sessions held at Philadelphia, December 1692. and were fined and
imprisoned, as appears by their Trial, A seasonable Caution against the
prevalency of Quakerism.

Francis Bugg.


