A SERMON PREACHED AT THE CATHEDRAL-CHURCH OF HEREFORD, On May the 29th 1684.
Being the Anniversary Day of His late MAJESTY'S Birth, and happy Restoration,
at a Feast then first instituted by some of the Loyal Inhabitants of that
County.

By Richard Bulkeley, M. A. and Prebendary of that Church.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar,
near Devereux-Court. 1685.

To the truly Honored Sir John Morgan, Baronet, and Sir John Ernle, Knight,
the Stewards of this Loyal Feast.
Gentlemen,
NOthing but a deep sense, and just consciousness of my own Inabilities, could
have rendered me so pertinaciously backward, even to a rudeness almost
unpardonable, in no sooner gratifying your repeated Commands, for the
Publication of this mean, but well-intended Discourse: which appearing in the
World (though after his Demise) upon the Nativity and happy Restoration of a
Prince, who can no more dye in his Sacred Memory amongst us, than an English
Monarch in his Politic State, makes it (if ever at all) now also equally
seasonable. And since I publish this Performance under your Patronage, and with
the License of my highly Honored and Right Reverend Diocesan, tho I need as
many as any one that ever appeared in Print, yet I shall make no Apologies for
it. God grant that all the Parts and Inhabitants of this Nation may, by the
knowledge of your most generous Example, your most conspicuous, steady, and
signalized Loyalty to his late, be emulously influenced to their bounden Duty
and Obedience to his present Majesty, whom the God by whose especial Providence
he rules over us, long and happily continue unto us. May He never want such
Loyal Subjects as your selves, nor such Loyal Subjects so Gracious a Prince,
who has given us his Royal Word to assure us, that he will stand by and defend
us both in Church and State, and who never yet did, and indeed (which must
needs conquer our Fears, and remove our Jealousies) knows not how, and is yet
to learn, to recede from it; may we never forget such unparalleled Goodness;
may we in Gratitude comply with Him, and readily satisfy him in every Demand
we in Conscience can; May every Feast celebrated throughout his Dominions, like
this of ours, regularly end with Loyalty to our King, with Charity to our
Neighbor, and with Piety to our God; and, in a word, may every one of us (as
we are in Conscience bound) endeavor to beget and propagate in all men, The
Fear of God, and the Honor of the King, on which two Foundations the Happiness
and Welfare of our Kingdom is superstructed. Which, as it is the fervent
Prayer, so shall it ever be the constant and incessant Endeavor, in his Sphere
and Station, of,

Gentlemen, Your most Devoted, most Obedient and Humble Servant, Richard
Bulkeley.

PSALM. 126. v. 3. The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad.
--


WHen God ever signally appeared in the behalf of his People the Jews, to
relieve them in their Wants, to assist them in the day of their Distress, and
so exerted his Almighty, interposed his own Sovereign Power for their
Deliverance; when ever he wonderfully preserved them from any Danger that did
beset, any Calamity that did befall them, we still, we as constantly find them
(tho a stubborn and headstrong People) making their solemn and grateful
Returns, paying their most enlarged Thanks, and just retribution of Praises.
Thus, when the Depths of the Sea overwhelmed Pharaoh and his whole Host, Exodus
1 Ver. 6.
so that they sunk into the bottom as a Stone, and as Lead into the mighty
Waters; when the right hand of the Lord became glorious in Power, dashed their
Enemies into pieces, and might have involved them in the same Ruin and fatal
overthrow, but yet miraculously preserved them, Ver. 19.
so that they went on dry Land, even in the midst of the Sea, we have Moses
composing his (...), his triumphant Song of Thanksgiving, and in a most devout,
most dutiful manner, landing and praising his God, and acknowledging him, v.
11. glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders. And thus also, not
to mention any more instances, when the Children of Israel were delivered and
freed from twenty years Slavery and Servitude, which they had suffered under
Jabin King of Canaan, we find Deborah, and Barach the Son of Abinoam, as you
may read in the fifth Chapter of Judges, magnifying God the Author of their
Liberty. And as this was their constant, their general Practice, so likewise in
particular this Psalm (as a Reverend Divine of our Church in his Argument upon
it observes) is universally thought to be a joyful Song composed by Ezra, Dr.
Patrick.
or some such good man, wherein he celebrates the Jews happy deliverance out of
Babylon, a City to which they were carried Captives for their Sins; wherein he
ascribes the mighty, the unexpected great things, of their return to their
Country, of their restitution to their Laws, Liberty, and Worship, wholly to
the Lord, looking upon this happy turn, this Revolution of Affairs (as well he
might) as a thing too great to be effected by bare Humane Power, so wonderful,
so incomprehensible, that it was judged impossible to be performed. Insomuch
that when the Lord stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus King of Persia to issue out
his Royal Proclamation for their Return to Jerusalem, Ezra 1. v. 2, 3.
we read in the first Verse of this Psalm, that they were like unto them that
dream, that they could scarce be wrought into a belief of their Happiness, and
that they looked upon themselves under some soft delusion, some kinder
Deception, only in a Dream, an imaginary fancy of such unhop'd for, unexpected
Felicity; but then, when they met with no obstruction or impediment, when they
clearly perceived, and had sufficient demonstration and Conviction that God had
wrought this for them, and that the men of the place not only permitted them,
but also helped them, forwarded them to go; when, I say, the truth and
certainty of this appeared, beyond denial or contradiction, then (as became
them) were their Mouths filled with Laughter, and their Countenances with Joy,
their Tongues employed in singing, and their Breaths in fashioning Hymns to
their God, who had magnified his Power in their Deliverance, which justly
filled them with Joy and Triumph, so that they expressed themselves in the
words of my Text, The Lord has done great things, etc.

And sure, if ever any People under the Copes of Heaven had cause to bless God
for any Mercies conferred upon them, then certainly we of this Nation have, for
those of this days Commemoration. A day, whereon we celebrate a double
Blessing; an Anniversary, whereon we repeat our continued Thanks to Almighty
God for the Birth, and for the Return of our present Sacred Majesty; A Birth,
next to that of our B. Savior's, the most beneficial, most advantageous to us,
being the Nativity of the best of Princes; A Return, the greatest and most
signalized Mercy, next to that of our Redemption, being ransomed thereby from
the greatest Tyranny but that of Hell, and restored to our Sovereign, and in
him to the greatest of Earthly and Temporal Blessings, and therefore have all
the reason imaginable to break forth into this grateful recognition of the
Psalmists, The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad.

In the prosecution of which words, (which I hope may suit with the serious
business of the day) I shall endeavor these three things.

1. I shall observe unto you the great things that God has done for us; the
signal Mercies he has vouchsafed unto us in this days Dispensation.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to show, (since there is no good Christian, or
good Subject, which are reciprocal and convertible terms, but will one way or
other be glad, and rejoice in this day which the Lord has made) which way, and
by what means, we may best and most acceptably express our Joys of it.

Thirdly, and lastly, I shall make some brief Application to the whole, with
reference to this Solemn, this Loyal Appearance.

First then, I shall observe unto you the great things that God has done for
us, the signal Mercies he has vouchsafed unto us in this days Dispensation.

Both which Topics, if taken together, will try the utmost stretch of Thought
and Contemplation; will amount to a Subject that can never be exhausted; such
that Language it self, cannot, with all its copiousness, sufficiently express.
So that when we have used all our Faculties to utter our Praises, and bespeak
our Gratitude, when we have been swallowed up in the deep contemplation of the
Divine Goodness and Protection to which we owe our present Stabiliment and
Continuance; when we have almost breathed out our very Souls into Ecstasies of
Joy, and pious Raptures of Thanksgiving; and, in a word, have with the best
expressions of exalted Gladness, with Acclamations loud as Thunder, and
Hallelujahs like the roarings of the Sea, manifested our deep, our profound
sense of His Majesty's miraculous Restoration from the miseries and hardships
of a cruel Exile and unnatural Banishment; when we have done this and more, we
shall still find matter of wonder before us, to silently admire, when we can no
longer express the immense Goodness, and stupendous Bounty of Heaven, extended
unto us in these two instances of the Day, the Nativity of our Sovereign, and
his Accession to the Throne. And though we may well expatiate on both, and have
as great reason to bless and praise God for the one as well as the other; to
bless God, that he who rules over us, rules by undoubted Succession, that he is
our Natural Lord, and born Prince, that he sways the Scepter, not by Violence
and Usurpation, as the late infamous Protector, not by Adoption, as Tiberius,
not by Election, as Vespasian, heretofore amongst the Romans, but by an
uninterrupted Lineal Descent, but by an unalterable Right of Inheritance; a
Right, that cannot be alienated without the highest violation of Justice,
Oaths, and Laws National, Natural, and Sacred; tho, I say, these are Blessings
(if any can be) equal with those of His Majesty's happy, thrice happy
Restoration, yet I shall forbear the consideration of them at present, and
speak to the latter chiefly, wherein we have sufficient to exert our wonder,
and to make us conclude with the Psalmist, Psalm. 59. ver. 10.
that God has showed us his goodness plenteously.

For, when we were void even of all other help, and quite destitute of hope
from Men, from the Arm of Flesh, when we groaned, sighed, and languished, and
were ready to expire under the heavy Oppressions of Tyrannical and Arbitrary
Government, when we had utterly lost, and were totally deprived of that we now
to the full enjoy, viz. our Liberty, Property, and Religion; when we were
consumed even from Morning till Evening, all the day long, our Houses
plundered, our Wives violated, our Virgins raped, and our Churches too, without
any respect had to the Sacredness of Temples, sacriledg'd and profaned; when
All but Rebels and Traitors were reduced to Cain's sad, Cain's disconsolate
condition, to dread every one they met to be their Executioners; and, to
consummate our Miseries, and complete our Infelicity (that our better Parts
might not escape Phanatick Rage and Tyranny) when we were denied our religious,
and well-digested Forms of Prayer, and our Souls almost poisoned with the
blasphemous and fulsome stench of Extempore Nonsense; when the Pulpits were
usurped by Jeroboam's Priests, the Beasts of the People, the lowest, and
vilest, and most contemptible Mechanics, and the revered Name and Sacred Word
of God abused and prostituted by Enthusiastic Canting and unintelligible
Babble; and, in a word, when all the Miseries that can be thought of, by the
loss and most savage Murder of the best of Kings, and by the outrageous cruelty
of the worst of Traitors, had sadly, had lamentably befallen and consumed the
Nation; then, even then, did it please Almighty God to come in to our Aid and
Succor, to free us, by this days Blessing, from all the Insolences, and
Spoils, and Devastations of an Army, from all the direful Issues of a Civil and
Intestine War, and (for nothing else, nothing less than our Sovereign's Return
would have put the period) from all the different Competitions and variety of
endless Claims, which would have been still started up, and so consequently
begot and bred everlasting Disturbances, circular, eternal Fears: So that a
bare exemption from such a long Train, such a complicated Series of Miseries
which must have unavoidably ensued such Confusion in the Government; had no
other Blessings (which, God be praised, we abound with) been superadded, must
have put us upon declaring our grateful Resentments; but then, if to this we
add the miraculous manner of his Majesty's Return, it must needs excite our
wonder and admiration.

For He was restored to Us, after some Men, some Potent men, had arrived to
that Audacious degree, that high pitch of Impudence, as to form and pass an
Illegal and Diabolical Act, Sir R. Bakers Chron. page 588.
for the Exheredation of the Royal Line, for the utter Extirpation and
Abolishing of Monarchy it self, the best of Governments; He was restored after
a Proclamation issued forth, that none should presume not only to declare and
publish, nay, Ibid. p. 587.
even to breathe or whisper him, or, to express it in their own terms, any ways
to promote him to be King. He was restored by General Monk, p. 693.
to whom they had offered the Government, and so, one would have thought,
should not have proved so industriously instrumental in bringing the Lawful
Heir to it; Nay farther yet, to our greater Astonishment, He was restored, when
there was a well formed, well disciplined Army on foot against him; when his
own Friends were low and poor, harrassed and oppressed, but his Enemies strong
and powerful; when it was their Interest, as well as Principles, to keep him,
now they had him out; And lastly, for all this, He was restored (which must
needs convince even the Rebels themselves, that God was in it) without
Opposition or Resistance, without a Hand lifted up, or a Blow struck, tho, had
a thousand Lives been sacrificed, had whole Rivers of Blood been shed, it had
proved but a small Offering for so great a good; but a poor Victim, and slender
Oblation for so great a Prince; To see, I say, such an Universal Concurrence
among so many different Parties and distinct Interests, to see such general and
united Joys, such miraculous Circumstances, attending and waiting upon the
Return, must make the most bigoted Phanatick either renounce his Reason, or
else confess, that this was the Lord's doing; and from hence know and learn,
that the Lord saves his Anointed, and will hear him from his holy Heaven, with
the saving strength of his right hand; as heretofore, when he was driven from
his own Kingdom to another People, so likewise now, being seated on his Fathers
Throne. For which great and transcendent Mercy let us never cease to bless and
praise God, and with our purest Acclamations of Joy and Triumph, clap our
hands, and cry, God save the King: 2 Kin. 11.12.
which in the Hebrew Phrase, as is observed in the Marginal Note of our
Translalation, is, Let the King live, outlive all his Foes; let him receive
fresh and new accessions of strength and splendor, and let him now at the
last, be amply and largely recompensed for the times wherein he has suffered
Adversity; for the times wherein he fled before, and was glad to escape his
own, but rebellious Subjects; for the times wherein he was reduced almost to
Lazarus his poor and necessitous condition, and forced for his own Concealment
and Security, in an adjacent County, and a little Village, Madely by name, Bak.
Chro. p. 609.
to take up with no better an Apartment than a Barn; for the times wherein
(like our Blessed Savior) with Reverence and Submission do I speak it, He took
upon him the form of a Servant, nay, and was put about Servile and Culinary
Emyloys. Now let the World judge, Was there ever Prince so Great, Just, and
Good, exposed to such Hardships, put upon such Indignities as these?
Indignities that he never would have been driven to, but by two sorts of men,
since the beginning of the World, namely, the Crucifiers of our Lord, the Jews,
and the Murderers of our late King of blessed Memory, the Presbyterians and
Independants; but I shall forbear entering any farther on this black and dismal
scene of Affairs, out of the pure respect I have for the Day, and not for them,
because I am not willing to overcast the brighter rays of it with such thick
and Egyptian darkness, which many of us have too sadly felt, and therefore pass
to my second undertaking, which is, to show how we may best and most acceptably
express our Joys of so comprehensive a Mercy we this day commemorate.

(2.) This I shall perform these two ways; First, Negatively. Secondly,
Positively.

First, Negatively. Not by any sinful Methods of Excess and Intemperance; not
by any irregular or exorbitant Excursions, for these will rather call down,
than appease God's Judgments, these will engage him not for, but against us,
and make us at enmity and variance, and set us at distance with Heaven it self;
nay, and will render us (which we should be loath to be accounted) the worst
Subjects and greatest Rebels; for every Vice carries something of Treason along
with it; each fit of Drunkenness (especially if a National Sin, as in this of
ours) damms up to deluge the Land, and each Lust serves to scorch and fire the
place of its Inhabitants, and proves the most fatal Conspiracy, arming God
against it; for, as Solomon expresses it, Prove. 1.32. Even the prosperity of
such Fools shall destroy them. So that if we should thus sinfully Congratulate
the Safety of our King, that very act would contribute toward his Ruin; and in
real truth, though we should ever so heartily rejoice for him in such a manner,
yet, the best that can be said of it, would be, that it was a Loyal way of
destroying him; 2 Kin. 9.22.
for as, Jehu answered Joram, What Peace so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother
Jesabel, and her Witcherafts are so many? So likewise, what Protection, what
Assistance can we expect from the Powers above, so long as Vice and Wickedness
abounds, and is encouraged among us? I speak not this (for I would not be
misunderstood) to disrepute our intended Festival; I acknowledge with the
devout Salvian, Salv. de gub. l. 6.
Rideamus quamlibet immensuratim, laetemur quamlibet jugiter dummodo
innocenter, We may be glad without measure, we may rejoice continually,
provided it be done innocently and inoffensively; nor do I speak it, that I in
the least doubt, or any ways suspect, but that the whole Action will be
performed with Sobriety equal to its Loyalty, which is primitively pure; but
only in general, because at such times such Sins are too frequently transacted
amongst men: and withal, I affirm, that as long as there is such open and
unpunished neglect of Gods Worship, Word, and Sacraments, as long as there is
such Contempt of his Sacred Laws, and holy Institutions, such horrid
Profanation of the Lord's Day, and such promiscuous Incontinence, even from
the Cottage to the Palace, that unless a more than ordinary Piety stand in the
gap, the Event and Issue of these things will be desolation and ruin, the bane
and consumption of our King and our selves; it will happen unto us, 1 Samuel
12.15.
as the Lord spoke unto Israel, If ye do wickedly, ye shall be destroyed, both
ye and your King. If so be therefore we will not conspire against our selves
and Prince, if we will not put helping and assisting hands to our own
Misfortunes and Calamities; if we will not be instrumental to effect that which
the Papists and Phanaticks are both industriously endeavoring to do for us,
let us, as one expresses it in words to this effect, Mistake not Debauchery for
Joy and Merriment, Dr. Spark 29 May.
nor drown our Reason, to manifest our Loyalty, but pray for the Kings Health,
and drink only for our own; and this will be good and acceptable to God and our
King, and will bring us under, and recommend us to the Divine Favor and
Protection.

Secondly, Let us express our Joys and thankfulness Pofitively; by doing those
Duties, by making such proportionable returns as become good Christrans, that
have a through sense and conviction of so miraculous and stupendous a
Providence as ours of this Day; which may be best performed,

First, By an utter abhorrence; and hearty detestation of all such abominable
Practices, and Disloyal, Anti-monarchical Principles, that naturally lead,
dispose and debauch the minds of men into such bold, daring, and unlawful
Attempts, as to fight against, and drive out of his own Territories the Lords
Anointed, which are such as these and the like: Namely, That Princes, for just
causes (as if there could be any such, when they sin only against God) may be
deprived. Psalm.
That the People taken collectively, are better than the King, and of greater
Authority. That they may Arraign their Prince, and they might with as much
Justice and Equity on their sides, have said, Murdered him too, as they once
did; that it is not sufficient for Subjects not to obey the wicked Commandments
of their Prince, (which we are like to have none of) but they must resest them
also, and deliver the Children of God (which by a strange kind of Baptism they
Christen themselves) from the hands of their Enemies, as we would deliver a
Sheep that is in danger to be devoured by a Wolf. Which wicked and damnable
Doctrines, with many more of the same leven and stamp, which for the imbittered
poison they carry along with them, I shall forbear to mention, and are at large
recited out of Knox and Buchanan, two factious and rebellious Teachers, Book 1.
Chapter 4.
by Bishop Bancroft, in his most useful Book of dangerous Positions. Now, I
say, if we have a hearty and sincere joy and rejoicing, that the King, and in
him Monarchy, is restored, we must abhor, dread, and abominate these and such
like pernicious Principles, which have seduced men from their bounden Duty and
Deference to their Prince, by which they have endeavored, (though with all the
Wit and Malice they had they never could) to justify and maintain their
rebellious Commotions against him; otherwise we can have no share or
partnership, no communion or fellowship, with those that offer up their
Hosannas and Hallelujahs to him that sits in the Heavens, laughs our Enemies
to scorn, and protects us and our Anointed.

Next, Let this our just Joy suggest unto us an important Duty incumbent upon
all good Christians and good Subjects, which shall be this; Not only to offer
up unto God our devoutest Praises for this and all other his Benefits conferred
upon us, but our earnest, our incessant Prayers also, that He (for unless God
keep the City the Watchman waketh but in vain) would continue his hedge of
Protection about us, and defend us and our Religion, the best and purest in the
World, from all the continued Assaults and Batteries that are made and raised
against us; and this not only by his Universal Power, as the common Preserver
of men, but also, by his more immediate and especial Care, but by his
particular Providence, without which, like disagreeing Elements, we shall prey
upon, and devour each other. Farther, let us beseech Almighty God (for there
never was more need) that He would depute a Guard of Holy Angels, those
ministering Spirits, to defend our King and his Royal Brother from all the Plots
and Machinations, not only that are, but also that shall ever be formed or
managed against them; that he would scatter all their Enemies that delight in
Blood, as Dust and Chaff before the Wind; that he would confound their Counsels
and defeat their Stratagems, that, like the untimely fruit of the Womb, they
might prove abortive, and never see the Sun, never behold the Light; and, in
fine, that he will suffer no Weapon forged against them to prosper, though
never so often consecrated to such impious and unhallowed purposes.

Last of all. After we have unanimously sent up our Petitions, with all the
Purity we are able, to Almighty God, who is a Defender of All them who repose
their trust and confidence in him; let us also add our own earnest and honest
Endeavors to suppress all malevolent and disaffected Persons and Parties, and
so bring, as much as in us lies, all sactious disturbers of the Peace, and
fomenters of Discord, to their condign and deserved punishment; let us suffer
no reproach, we can prevent, to befall, no Dirt to be cast upon the Government;
let us suppress all Conventicles and Meeting Houses, the very Nurseries and
Seminaries of Rebellion; and, in a word, let us put all the wholesome Penal Laws
in Execution (for nothing less will prevail upon our obstinate Dissenters)
whose pernicious Doctrines and impious Positions, whose Midnight Plots and
Noontide Contrivances, we have good reason, not only to dread and fear, but
also, as much as by Law and Honesty we can, to provide against; especially
since we see by their late, that they do not repent them of their former
Practices; especially since we see they are so inured to, so fond of their old
Forty Eight Republican Principles, that we find by their often, tho not
successful Attempts (thanks to Heaven alone, not to them for it) that no
Indulgences will win them, nor a thousand Acts of Oblivion make them forget
their Villainy; Villainy that caused all that did but dare to be more honest than
their wicked selves, to live such Lives, and be subject to such Tyranny, that,
like some of the persecuted Christians of old, they would have embraced Death
as a kind and friendly deliverer, that they complained of Life, because of its
trouble, Chapter 3. v. 10.
and might have cried out with Job, Wherefore is light given to us that are in
misery, and life unto the bitter in soul? But because, by the blessing of God,
and the endeavors of honest men, things are brought to a more promising
Crisis, and favorable prospect, I shall insist no longer on this point, but
shall conclude it with the ingenious Prefacer to the excellent Treatise of
Toleration and Comprehension discussed; That it is too sadly apparent, from the
late Books and Pamphlets of these kind of men, (speaking of the Dissenters) and
against the Church and State of England, that they endeavor to do that work
which Jesuits, and Jesuited Papists, do most heartily wish were accomplished.
And I will add, that if ever Popery breaks in upon us, as a severe Scourge and
Judgment for our sins, which God avert, that notwithstanding their outcries and
clamours against it, yet they will be, in all humane probability, the unhappy
Instruments to introduce it; which I wish they may seriously and in time
consider, and by an honest Conformity to our Church, (for there is no other
way) endeavor to prevent and remedy, that our Land may not again be
overwhelmed with Cruelty; that our Church, now purified and refined, may not
once more be run over with Idolatry and Superstition; that our Souls may not be
enslaved, and our Consciences enthralled; and, that we may not be brought to
this sad Dilemma, either to dye barbarously, or to live wickedly, either to
resign up our Lives, which is a hard case, or else, that which is far harder
yet, to worship a true, living God, after a dead and false manner, which
Considerations I leave to them with all the earnestness imaginable, begging
them to look into the causless grounds of their Separation from us, and so
weigh these and such like consequences which may fatally ensue, and to repent
and amend before it be too late; which if they will not, let me tell them,
this, and many more Discourses extant in the World of this nature, will leave
them without excuse at the great day of retrubution of all things. And so I
pass to my third and last undertaking, to make some brief Application to the
whole, with reference to this Solemn, this Loyal Appearance.

Has Almighty God done such great things for us? Has he been exceedingly
gracious to this Land wherein we live? And has he by his miraculous Providence
and wonderful Preservation of him, after the fatigue and toil of a savage War,
and tedious Exile, at last brought back, at last restored our most gracious
Sovereign to his own, and most undoubted Rights? Then let this engage us (in
return to such rich and tender Mercies) to do something for his Honor, and to
his Glory; and the best we can do, do all we can, is to leave off our Sins, and
to repent us of our Vices; that Gods Hand may not as visibly be stretched out
against our Sovereign, as it was this day remarkably seen in his Deliverance,
that he might be at Peace with and reconciled unto us, and still continue what
he hitherto has been, Bp. Piers. Ann. Cyp.
our Tutelar God, our Protector and Defender: For as St. Cyprian answered
Demetrius the then Proconsul of Africa, who objected against the Christians,
that they were the cause of all the Evils that did befall them: No, said he,
the true reason why so many Calamities happen unto you, is not because the
Christians are among you, but rather, Quod a vobis non colitur Deus, because
God is not worshipped amongst you. So as truly may we assign the cause of our
Fears and Dangers to our manifold Wickednesses, to our gross Impieties; for
could we be but persuaded to be truly Religious, To worship God in Spirit and
Truth, which he indispensibly requires of us, and but lead lives answerable to
our Vows and Obligations, we might be secure and safe; we might enjoy Wealth
and Plenty to the full, like Solomon's Peace, on all sides round about us, and
we need not fear (for God would be on our side who is greater than they) though
all the Devils in Hell, and Presbyterians on Earth, rise up and conspire
together against us.

Secondly, Are we, we the Inhabitants, tho not Natives of the County, assembled
together, to give our best Testimonies and largest Attestations of our hearty
Affection to the Government we so happily live under, and are Subjects of? And
have we erected a Feast (the usual and ancient way of Commemorating Mercies) to
render our Congratulations for his most gracious Majesty's Birth and
Restoration? Let us then answer the design and intent (which can be nothing
less in the worthy and honorable Founders of it then truly good and loyal) by
a regular performance and due execution. Let us crown our meeting, as with
Loyalty and Sobriety, so with Bounty and Charity, Heb. 13.16.
for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. Let our abundance, as the
Apostle speaks, be a supply to the wants of the Poor; and then will our Feast
be acceptable to God and Man, then will it procure a Blessing for our selves,
and the County we are planted in; Nusquam Dominus meritis nostris ad Praemium
deerit. Cyp. de Op. and Eleemosynis.
God is never wanting, always ready to reward our good Deeds. Then will it give
a Credit, and conciliate repute to the Institution of it; and then, to say no
more, will it bear a Suitableness and Correspondency with the primitive,
purest, and most ancient Feasts, in which, the Money that was collected, as
Tertullian informs us, was not expended in eating and drinking to excess, was
not consumed in foul Epicurism and filthy Gluttony, but was laid out and
employed, Tert. Ap. cap. 39.
Egenis alendis humandisque, and Pueris, and Puellis re ac Parentibus
destitutis, and so on; in feeding the Poor, and burying them, in comforting
Children that were destitute of Parents and Patrimony, and in helping old and
decrepit Men that had spent the Vigor and Prime of their Youth, and the best
of their days in the Service of the Faithful.

To incite and stir us up to such good Duties, I might propose several
Instances of this kind, I might propose several Objects of this degree and
nature; As our care of some poor, and fatherless, and helpless Children; As our
freeing and enlarging some necessitous, and indigent, insolvent Debtors and
Prisoners, or, As (which would be a very agreeable Constitution) our
establishing a Fund for the Relief of some poor Veterane Soldiers, who had
almost lost their Lives, but altogether their Fortunes, in the Service of our
King and his Martyred Father, in our late unhappy Wars and Contentions; but I
shall commit this to our further consideration, and shall bespeak you once more
(for I never can too often) that you would continually implore the Divine
Majesty in the behalf of our Earthly one, and beg of him who is the Fountain
and Source of all good gifts, that he would make his Reign to come prosperous,
safe, and easy, and his Days many, that he would make him a King in the Wise
man's Phrase, Prove. 30.31.
against whom there may be no rising up; and influence with his heavenly
benediction and blessing, all his Affairs, all his Counsels, and all his
Undertakings, through the whole course of his Reign over us. And lastly, Let
every one of us present, as it is expressed in the Panegyric spoken to
Paulinus Bishop of Tire, upon the building of Churches, With one Spirit and one
Soul, Eusebius. Ecc. Hist. li. 10. cap. 4.
never cease to give thanks and praise to the Author of these our so great good
things; keeping them fresh in our Memories both now and throughout all
succeeding times; and moreover, setting before the Eyes of our Minds God, the
Cause of this present Day's joyful Solemnity, and the Master of this Feast;
both by Day and Night, every Hour, and as (I may say) every Moment wherein we
fetch our Breath; let us love him, and worship him, with all the strength of
our Souls. And let us now rise up, and with the loud voice of our Affections
beseech him, that he would continually save and defend us within his
Sheepfold, and that he would afford us his everlasting Peace entire and
inviolable in JESUS CHRIST our Savior, by whom be Glory to him throughout all
Ages. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by William Crook, 1685.
Divinity.
1. BRevis Demonstratio, being the truth of the Christian Religion, proved by
Reason. 12o. price bound 10 d.

2. The Primitive Institution, showing the antiquity and usefulness of
Catechizing, together with its suitableness to heal the distempers of the
Church, by L. Addison, D. D. price 1 s. 6 d.

3. Mr. Howel's Visitation Sermon before the Bishop of Chichester. quarto.
price 6 d.

4. Dr. Hascard's two Sermons, one on the 5th of November, and the other before
the Lord Mayor of London. In quarto.

5. Mr. Manningham's two Sermons, one before the Lord Mayor, the other at St.
Mary's in Oxford. In quarto.

6. A Sermon preached at the Savoy in French, and since printed in French and
English. twelves. price bound 8 d.

7. A Modest Plea for the Clergy, wherein is considered the Reasons why the
Clergy are so contemned and neglected, by L. A. D.D. price 1 s. 6 d.

8. Hugo Grotius, his Catechism, Greek, Latin, and English, with a Praxis of
all the Greek Words therein contained. In octavo. price bound 2 s.

9. The Spirit of Prophecy, proving, that Christ and his Apostles were
Prophets: written by the directions of, and recommended to the Press, by the
Right Reverend Father in God, Peter, Lord Bishop of Ely. In octavo. price 3 s.

10. The King-killing Doctrine of the Jesuits, in sincere discourse to the
French King: written by a Roman Catholic. In quarto. price 1 s.

11. Justifying Faith; or the Faith by which the Just do live, together with
the excellency of the Common Prayer Book. In octavo. price bound 1 s.

12. Mercy Triumphant, or the Kingdom of Christ enlarged beyond the narrow
bounds which have been wont to be set to it: by Ed. Lane.

13. Du Moulin's Reflections reverberated, being a full Answer to the damning
Doctrine of Dr. Lewis Du Moulin: also, a Confutation of Edmund Hickeringill's
railing against the Ecclesiastical Courts. by Ed. Lane. In quarto. price 1 s. 6
d.

14. Responsio Valedictoria ad secundum Sandii Epistolam, etc. per Sam.
Gardener, S. T. D. In octavo. price 1 s. 6 d.

15. The Book of Psalms paraphrased, with Arguments to each Psalm, in 2 Vol. by
S. Patrick, D. D. and Dean of Peterburgh, in octavo, price 10 s.

16. The Works of the pious, and profoundly learned Joseph Mede, B. D. some
time Fellow of Christ's Church, Cambridge, corrected and enlarged according to
the Author's own Manuscripts. In Folio.

17. A Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature, and of the
Christian Religion; in two parts, by Sam. Parker. D. D. in quarto.

18. Godliness no friend to Rebellion; a Sermon. quarto.

19. A Thanksgiving Sermon preached by Dr. Harrison, Rector of Pulborrow.
quarto.

20. An Introduction to the Sacrament, or a short, plain, and safe way to the
Communion Table, being an Instruction for the worthy receiving the Lord's
Supper, collected for, and familiarly addressed to every particular
Communicant. by L. Addison, D. D. Dean of Litchfield, and Archdeacon of
Coventry. in 12o and 24o.

21. The Case of Resistance of Supreme Powers, stated and resolved. by W.
Sherlock, D. D. 8o

22. The Protestant Religion, the safe way to Salvation; or, an Answer to a
Book entitled Mercy and Truth, or Charity maintained by Catholics, which
pretend to prove the contrary, together with the Apostolical Institution of
Episcopacy, as also nine Sermons on special Occasions; by W. Chillingworth, M.
A. of Oxford: the fifth Edition, to which is now added Mr. Chillingworth's
Reasons against Popery, to persuade Mr. L. to return to the Church of England.
in fol. price 14 s.

23. Dr. Isaac Barrow's two Sermons on the Passion, and at the Spittle, before
the Lord Mayor, in Easter Week. In 8o.

24. Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity. In octavo.

25. Dr. Sherlock's Continuation and Vindication of Dr. Stillingfleet of
Separation.

26. Moral Instructions of a Father to his Son, upon his departure on a long
Voyage, or an easy way to guide a man toward all sorts of Virtues, with 100
maxims Christian and Moral. 8o.

27. A Discourse about Conscience, relating to the present Differences among
us, in opposition to both the extremes of Popery and Fanaticism. In 4o. price 6
d.

28. The Doctrine of Passive Obedience, in a Sermon preached January 30. 1684.
by J. Ellesby, Vicar of Chiswick, in Middlesex. 4o. price 6 d.

29. Contemplations Moral and Divine, in two parts, by Sir Matthew Hales, late
Chief Justice of England. In 8o.

30. The Soul's Communion with her Savior, or the History of our Lord Jesus
Christ, written by the four Evangelists, in Devotional Meditations. In 12o.
price bound 1 s. 6 s.

Law.
1. THE Jurisdiction of the Authority of Court-Leets, Court-Barons,
Court-Marshalsea, etc. Together with the most necessary learning of Tenures,
and all their Incidents of Essoyns, etc. With the Return and Forms of several
Original and Judicial Writs, now in use, relating to Writs of Error, Writs of
false Judgment, and other Proceedings of frequent use in the Courts of
Westminster, by J. Kitchen, of Gray's Inn Esquire; To which is added, Brevia
selecta, being a choice Collection of Special Writs; the fifth Edition. in 8o.
price 7 s.

2. Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae, Author Francis Clarke. in twelves.
price 1 s.

3. The Reports of Sir Henry Hobart, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. folio.
price 10 s.

4. The second Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, containing the
Expositions of the Statutes, by Sir Ed. Coke, folio. price 15 s.

5. The third Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the
Pleas of the Crown, by Sir Edward Coke. folio. price 6 s.

6. The fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts, by Sir Edward Coke. in folio. price 10 s.

7. The Law of charitable Uses revised, and much enlarged, with many cases in
Law, both Ancient and Modern; with the Readings of Sir Francis Moor upon the
Statute of the 43 of Eliz. digested by G. Duke, Esquire; folio.

8. Officina brevium, select and approved Forms of Judicial Writs, and other
Process, with their Returns and Entries in the Court of Common Pleas: as also
special pleading to Writs. folio.

9. Young Clerk's Guide, in four Parts, or an exact Collection of choice
English Presidents. 8o.

10. A Dialogue betwixt a Student and a Philosopher, about the Common Law of
England, by Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury. in 8o.

11. Several Statutes of Bankrupt, with the Judges Resolution thereon. in 8o.
price 1 s. 6 d.

12. Les Reports destres Honorable Edward Seigneur Littleton, Baron de
Mounslow, Custos de la Grand Seal d' Angleterre, and de ses Majesty pluis
Honorable Privy Council en le Courts del Common Bank and Exchequer ans del
Reign de Roy Charles, etc. fol.

13. The Complete Clerk, containing the best Forms of all sorts of Precedents
for Conveyances now in Use, etc. with Alphabetical Tables of the whole Contents
of the Book. in quarto. price 12 s.

14. The Complete Solicitor, Entering Clerk and Attorney, fully instructed in
the Practices, and Methods, and Clerkship of all his Majesty's Courts of Equity
and Common Law-Precedents, etc. of Mr. J. Hansard, Mr. Leake, etc. of
Clements-Inn: now printing, in folio.

15. The Reports with all the Pleadings of the late Lord Chief Justice
Saunders, in two Vol. in folio. printing.

16. Pleas of the Crown, by Sir Matthew Hales, late Chief Justice of England.
in octavo.

History.
1. AN Institution of general History, or the History of the World; being a
complete Body thereof, in two Volumes, by W. Howel, late Chancellor of Lincoln.
in fol.

2. Historical Collections, being an account of the Proceedings of the four
last Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth, by H. Townsend Esquire; in folio.

3. Clelia, the whole Work, in five parts; written in French, now put into
English, in folio.

4. Scarron 's Comical Romance, being an Historical account of a company of
Stage Players, full of variety of Novels, rare Adventures, amorous Intreagues,
etc. being both witty and pleasant, in folio.

5. Popish Cruelties, being an account of the Treasons of Dr. Parry against
Queen Elizabeth, with his Confession of it at his Trial, and his Denial at his
Execution, folio, price 1 s.

6. The Life of Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury, written by himself in Latin, since
translated into English, in folio, price 6 d.

7. An Historical Narration of Heresy, with an account of the Punishments
thereof, by Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, in folio, price 6 d.

8. Megalopsichy, being a particular and exact account of the last seventeen
years of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, both Military and Civil, the first written by
Sir W. Monson, one of the said Queens Admirals; the second written by H.
Townsend Esquire; a Member of her last Parliament. Wherein is a true and faithful
Relation of all the expeditious Attempts, Designs, Successes, and Errors, both
of the English and Spanish, in the Wars from the Year 1585. to the said Queens
Death, With a full account of the Eminent Speeches and Debates, etc. in the
said time. To which is added, Dr. Parry's Trial in the Year 1584. All written
at the time of their Actions, by Persons that were eminently acting therein.
folio. price bound 10 s.

9. A Voyage into the Levant, being a Relation of a Journey lately performed
from England to Grand Cairo, by Sir Hen. Blunt. twelves. price 1 s.

10. A Description of Candia, with an exact account of the last Siege and
Surrender of it to the Turks. in octavo. price bound 1 s.

11. A Discourse of the Dukedom of Modena, containing the Original, Antiquity,
etc. of that Dukedom. in quarto. price 6 d.

12. The Travels of Ulysses, how he went to Hell and came back again, etc. by
Tho. Hobbs. price 1 s.

13. The present state of London, containing the Antiquity, Fame, Walls,
Rivers, Gates, Churches, Bridge, with the Customs and Infranchizements, by J.
Bridal, Esquire. price 1 s.

14. The Wonders of the Peak in Darby-shire, commonly called the Devils Arse of
Peak, by Tho. Hobbs. oct. price 1 s.

15. The Life and Death of Mahomet, being the first estate of Mahometism,
showing all the designs that that Impostor Mahomet had to carry on and settle
the Turkish Religion. Written by L. Addison D. D. price 1 s. 6 d.

16. The Historians Guide, or Brittain's Remembrancer, being a summary account
of all the Actions, Exploits, Sieges, Battles, Designs, Attempts, etc. taking
notice of the Year, Month, and day of the Month, all eminent Passages have been
for 85 years last past. A portable Book, printing to 1685.

17. The Connection, being Collections of some principal Matters in the Reign of
King James, being the time that nothing of this nature is printed, being
betwixt the end of Megalopsichy, or the last seventeen years of Queen
Elizabeth, and the beginnings of Mr. Rushworth, Heath, Nalson, Whitlock, and
others, price 1 s. 6 d.

18. The Moors baffled, being a discourse of the Government of Tangier, under
the Earl of Tiviot, showing the Subtilty and Policies of both Parties. Written
by Dr. Addison, who lived there many years, price 6 d. quarto.

19. All the Works of Homer, both Illiads and Oddyses, translated out of Greek
into English, by Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, price 5 s. 6 d.

20. Considerations on the Loyalty, Religion, Manners, and Reputation of Tho.
Hobbs, octavo, price bound 1 s.

21. The Memoires, and rare Adventures of Henrietta Sylvia Moliere, a great
Lady in France, now living, written by her self, in six parts in French, and
now translated into English, price 4 s.

22. Tho. Hobb's Angli Malmsb. Vita, being an account of Mr. Hobbs, of the
Books he wrote, of the times when, and the occasion thereof, of the Books and
Authors against him, of his Conversation, Acquaintance, etc. Part wrote by
himself, the rest by Dr. B. in octavo, printed 1681.

23. Behemoth, being the History of the Civil Wars of England, and the Counsels
and Artifices, by which they were carried on, from 1640, to 1660, printed now
from his own perfect Copy, in which is many pages more then was in the former
Counterfeit Editions, none of which Editions before this, had less then a
thousand Faults in them, whole Lines left out in a hundred Places, which did
extremely prevert the sense of the Author, Tho. Hobbs.

24. The Tracts of Mr. Tho. Hobbs of Malmsb. in two Vol. in octavo, gathering
Nine of his Treatises together, which are also to be had single, viz. 1. His
Life, in Latin. 2. His Considerations on his Loyalty, Religion, etc. 3. His Art
of Rhetoric in English. 4. His Dialogue about the Common Law of England. 5.
His ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy. 6. His Civil Wars of England, the
perfect Edition. 7. His Historical Narration of Heresy. 8. His Answer to
Bishop Bramhal in defense of his Leviathan. 9. His seven Problems, with an
Apology for his Writings, to the King, price bound 9 s.

25. A New Survey of the Present State of Europe, newly written in French, and
now translated into English, in octavo.

26. Compendium Geographicum, or a more exact, plain and easy Introduction to
all Geography than yet extant, after the latest Discoveries and new
Alterations, with two Geographical Dictionaries, the one of Ancient, the other
of the Modern Names of Towns, Places, etc. very useful for all Gentlemen, the
like not done in English before. by P. Chamberlain of the Inner Temple Gent.
The second Edition with Additions, in twelves, price bound 1 s. portable.

27. The present State of the Jews, wherein is contained an exact Account of
their Rites Secular, and Religious; to which is added a summary Discourse of
the Misna, Talmud, and Gemara. by L. Addison, D. D. Dean of Lichfeild, in
twelves, price bound 1 s. 6 d.

28. The Bucaniers of America; or, a true account of the most remarkable
Assaults committed of late years upon the Coasts of the West Indies, by the
Bucaniers of Jamaica and Tortuga, by the English, French, Dutch, etc. against
the Spaniards in those parts; written in Dutch, translated into Spanish, and
now into English, with many Copper Cuts. The second Edition, with the Addition
of Captain Cooks, etc. in quarto, price bound 5 s.

29. The Bucaniers of America, the second Volume, containing the dangerous
Voyage and bold Attempts of Captain Bartholomew Sharp, Captain Coxon, Captain
Harris, Captain Sawkins, Captain Row, Captain Macket, etc. performed on the
Coasts of the South-Seas for the space of two years, etc. from the original
Journal of the said Voyage, by Mr. Bazill Ringross Gent. who was all along
present at those Transactions. in quarto, price bound 6 s.

30. The History of the Charter House, being once a Carthusian-Order, setting
out the Gift of Mr. Sutton, etc. with all the Laws and Institutions of it, etc.
octavo.

31. The French Intrigues; or, the History of their delusory Promises, since
the Pyrenaean Treaty; printed in French at Cologne, and now made English,
twelves, price bound 1 s.

32. The Memoires of the Duke de la Roche Foucault, being private Intrigues of
France, etc. octavo.

33. Boccace de Cameron his Tales, in folio.

34. The Gretian Story, by J. H. Esquire; in quarto, price 4 s.

Plays and Poetry.
1. HOmer's Works in English, by Tho. Hobbs, in twelves.

2. A Poem on the Life of Mr. Hobbs, written by himself.

3. Melpomene, or the Muses Delight, being a Collection of new Songs and Poems,
by several of the present Wits, in 8o.

4. A Poem Latin and English on the Devils Arse of Peak, by Tho: Hobbs.

5. Hug. Grotius's Catechism in Greek, Latin, and English, in a Poem.

6. The Confinement, a Poem, with Annotations on it, in 8o.

7. Vittoria Corombona, or the White Devil, a Tragedy, 4o.

8. Catalines Conspiracy, a Tragedy, quarto.

9. Rival Kings, or the Loves of Oroondates, a Tragedy, in quarto.

10. The Old Troop, or Monsieur Raggou, a Comedy, 4o.

11. The Amorous Gallant, or Love in Fashion, a Comedy, quarto.

12. The Mock-Duellist, a Comedy, quarto.

13. Wrangling Lovers, a Comedy, quarto.

14. Tom Essence, a Comedy, quarto.

15. The Wits led by the Nose, a Comedy, quarto.

16. The French Conjurer, a Comedy, quarto.

17. Counterfeit Bridegroom, a Comedy, quarto.

18. Tunbridge Wells, a Comedy, quarto.

19. The Man of New Market, a Comedy, quarto.

20. The Constant Nymph, a Pastoral, quarto.

21. Carolina, being Loyal Poems by Thomas Shipman Esquire; published by Tho.
Flatman, price bound 2 s. 6 d.

22. The Grecian Story, being an Historical Poem in five Books; to which is
annexed the Grove, consisting of diverse shorter Poems upon several Subjects, by
J. H. Esquire; in 4o.

23. The Odes and Epidon of Horace in five Books, translated into English by J.
H. Esquire; octavo.

Miscellanies.
1. THE deaf and dumb Man's Discourse; being a Discourse to show how the deaf
and dumb do understand one another, with a Tract of inanimate Creatures,
octavo, price bound 1 s.

2. The Complete Measurer; or a new and exact way of Mensuration, by Tho.
Hammond, octavo, price 1 s.

3. Camera Regis; or, the present State of London, by J. B. Esquire; octavo.

4. The American Physician, treating of all the Roots, Trees, Herbs, Shrubs,
Fruits, etc. in his Majesty's Plantations in the West Indies, by William
Hughes, in twelves, price bound 1 s. To which is added the ways in Jamaica for
making of all sorts of Chocolate.

5. Lord Bacon's Apothegms, or witty Sayings, in twelves, price bound 6 d.

6. A Letter about Liberty and Necessity, written by Thomas Hobbs to the Duke
of Newcastle, with Bishop Lany's Answer to it, in twelves, price bound 10 d.

7. Reflections on the Philosophy and Philosophers of the ancient and the
modern Times, by M. Rapine, in octavo, price bound 2 s.

8. Ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy, by Tho. Hobbs, in octavo, price bound
2 s.

9. Quinquina; a Discourse of curing Agues and Fevers by the Quinquina Bark,
commonly called the Jesuits Powder, in twelves, price bound 1 s.

10. A Sermon preached at S. P. T. by the late Usurper Oliver Cromwell, quarto,
price 3 d.

11. A Treatise of Usury, by Sir Rob. Filmer.

FINIS.

